Licensed,

Jan. 5. 1693/4.
A DISCOURSE OF Government, As Examined by Reason, Scripture, AND Law of the
Land. OR True Weights and Measures BETWEEN Sovereignty and Liberty.

Written in the Year 1678. By Sir PHILIP WARWICK Knight.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Lowndes, over against Exeter-Exchange in the
Strand. 1694.

THE Publisher TO THE READER.
AFter so many pamphlets of false and impious Politics, which have poisoned
the minds of people with evil notions of government, tending to the overthrow
of all established rules and orders of justice, equity, and common honesty, in
the acknowledgment and practice of which the happiness of a nation does
consist, the heat and violence of passion being now somewhat abated, and
persons more at leisure to attend to the sober counsels and dictates of reason,
it will not, I hope, be judged an ill grounded presumption, to suppose, that
this discourse written with great strength of reason and argument, after long
and serious deliberation, and a deep research into the fundamental and
essential laws of humane nature, and the constitution of the English
government, and done several years since, without any prejudice, or partiality,
or design to gratify a private passion or interest, will meet with a reception
and entertainment, suitable to the great name of the Author, and the excellency
of the performance among all such, as have learning and skill to judge, and
candor and honesty to submit to the power and convictions of truth. For as to
the disciples and followers of Buchanan, Hobbs, and Milton, who have exceeded
their Masters in downright impudence, scurrility, and lying, and the new
modellers of Commonwealths, who under a zealous pretense of securing the rights
of a fansied original contract against the encroachments of Monarchs, are
sowing the seeds of eternal disagreements, confusions, and bloody wars
throughout the world (for the influence of evil principles has no bounds, but
like infectious air spreads every where) the peaceable, sober, truly Christian,
and Church-of-England-Doctrine, contained in this book, being so directly
contrary to their furious, mad, unchristian, and fanatical maxims, it cannot
otherwise be expected, but that they will soon be alarmed, and betake
themselves to their usual arts of slander and reviling, and grow very fierce
and clamorous upon it. Whatever shall happen, it is not out of a design to
caress and flatter one Party, or to provoke and exasperate another, that this
book is at this time published, but to do service unto truth, and to restore it
to its native beauty, by taking off those masks and disguises, with which it
has of late been disfigured, and to settle men's minds with true notions of the
original of government. For discourses of this nature, founded upon law and
reason, will hold at all times, and will never be unseasonable.

I shall not run out into any unnecessary or excessive commendation and praise
of the Author, nor do I now pretend to write his just and full character; it
may suffice to say in short, that he was a Gentleman of sincere piety, of
strict morals, of a great and vast understanding, and of a very solid judgment;
a true Son of the Church of England, and consequently a zealous asserter and
defender of the truly Christian and Apostolical doctrine of non-resistence;
always loyal and faithful to the King, his Master, in the worst of times, whose
fortunes he steadily followed, and upon whom he had the honor to attend in
several places, during the course of the wars, particularly at Edgehill,
Oxford, and at the treaty in the isle of Wight; and who by his wise conduct,
and faithful advice and behavior, gained a good esteem in his royal judgment:
and yet at the same time he was a true hearted Englishman; a great lover of
his Country; and one, who wished as well to the constitution, and to the
established religion and laws, as any of those demure Pretenders, who sat in
the same Parliament of forty one with him, and raised that rebellion against
their rightful Sovereign, as he openly called it in the House of Commons after
the restoration, when some were making excuses for it, from which we are to
date all the miseries and confusions, which we have undergone, and do still
labor under. A reflection upon those sad times, and the villainous principles,
upon which they then acted, put him upon writing this compendious discourse, in
which he has marked out a plain and certain way to preserve, and, when lost by
fatal miscarriages, to recover our peace and happiness together with the
honor, the strength, the riches, the trade of the Nation. The notions here
laid down, are true and just, and tend to the quiet and advantage of mankind in
general, and have their weight and use in all Countries, where the laws of
natural and civil justice prevail. It is an exact Scheme or Idea of government,
derived from its first principles, in which he sets forth the necessary and
essential powers of Sovereignty, the virtues of a Prince, the indispensable
duty of Subjects, the qualifications of a Counselor of State, and the method
of a wise administration and conduct in all emergencies, whether in relation to
domestic or foreign affairs, or to the various conditions and professions of
men in a well constituted kingdom. This great Man, after his retiring into the
Country, where he seemed to live above the world, and to be no way affected
with the glittering pomp and glory of it, which he with a true greatness of
mind despised, addicted himself to reading, study, and meditation: and that so
many serious and wise thoughts, as his certainly were, might not be wholly
lost, he put them down in writing, for his own private satisfaction, in a due
method and order, one depending upon another, to give them greater strength and
beauty: and being very assiduous in his contemplations (if not diverted by the
necessary business of life, by visits of friends, by journies to town, for two
or three months in the year, to attend upon a place, which was his first
preferment in the Court, and by the exercises of an undissembled piety and
devotion) he had an opportunity of writing several quires of paper upon various
subjects, (for his admirable and inquisitive genius was not confined to any one
particular study and learning) as Divinity, Philosophy, History, especially
that of England, Practical Devotion, and the like. This I now publish, was
written in the year 1678, (and designed as an appendix to his Memoires of the
reign of King Charles the first, of most blessed memory, which hereafter may
see the light, when more auspicious times shall encourage and favor the
publication) which he, being very exact and curious in his compositions, did
often refine upon. Yet notwithstanding this care, there seems to be a defect,
page 13, which he designed to fill up, and questionless did it, as I find by a
reference made there to some loose paper, which I could never meet with. But
however as it is, I doubt not, but that this discourse will be highly
instructive and useful to the young Sons of the Nobility and Gentry, the
growing hopes of their Country, and who one day by their virtue, courage,
loyalty, wisdom, and learning, befitting their birth and quality, will make a
great figure in it: for the seasoning of whose minds, capable of the highest
and noblest impressions, with virtuous and true notions of Policy, and for
their direction and service, it is chiefly published, and to whom therefore it
is humbly dedicated.

The Reader is desired to correct the following errata, which have escaped the
diligence of the Corrector.
Page 29. l. 29. Person. p. 89. l. 29. make, is p. 80. l. 23. were. p. 121. l.
13. reckoned. 139. l. 21. recommend. 149. l. 12. justice is. 146. l. ult.
prescribe. 154. l. 7. condition: for. 164. l. 1. prompter. 172. l. that is a.
in the margin there for civil read single. 193. l. 13. take. 206. l. 20. for
too read two.

OF Government; As examined by Reason, Scripture, AND Law of the Land.
GOD and nature made men sociable creatures, Government as examined by reason.
which appears by this, that every man affects a companion; which arises from
this, that every single man stands in need of another help. Men could not have
lived together in a body politic, if God had not disposed the natural
inclinations of their minds for such a society; and the same reason, that leads
them to co-habit together, exacted from them the preferring public good before
private interest, or the whole before any part; so as government is an
ordinance of God, and not an invention of man, and arises not, as Mr. Hobbs
would make it, from the passion of fear, which one man had of another, but from
the moral virtue of justice, to do as one would be done unto.

This makes the politic body so much to resemble the natural. The brain must
be distinguished from the heart, and the heart from the liver. If one part give
life, another must sense, and a third nutrition. The understanding, or Prince,
(or sovereign power) must give the law, and the animal spirits (or Nobility)
must influence the nerves or instruments of motion through the whole body or
subordinate Officers, to set on work the muscles or organical members, or
Commonalty, to perform the several offices, which belong to the several
faculties of the soul of government. But we will not follow affectedly
metaphors or resemblances, which only serve for illustration, but not for proof.

The Object of Government stands in. Persons Ruling, are Either Supreme,
Whether supremacy lies in one or more persons. Here rule or government is
absolute, arbitrary, and uncontrollable, yet with an eye and duty to
publick-weal, or salus populi, and an accountableness to God. Or Subordinate,
Magistrates, under him or them, in whom the supremacy is lodged.These do rule
by the Sovereigns commission, the powers whereof they are not to exceed, and
they are accountable for the execution thereof, not to God only, but man
likewise.
Ruled, are the People in general, viz. 1. Nobility, Ecclesiastical, Civil.
2. Gentry, 3. Commons.
The three states of men, which among us make up a Parliament, and are united
to the King or Supreme, as members with their head. They represent the whole
body of that people unto the King, but the King is the true representative of
the people to all the world. The Sovereign the Virtual, Body of the Nation. The
three Estates the Representative Body of the Nation. The People themselves the
Essential Body of the Nation.
Things Prerogatives are in defense of the Government it self, and of the
Sovereign Person, and to be made use of in both cases. Laws, Civil or
Municipal, for securing the Lives, Liberties, Properties, etc.
of the Subject. Matters Thus, Ad Caesarem potestas omnium pertiner, ad
singulos proprietas. Divine, Civil, as 1 Religion. 2 Justice. 3 Council. 4
Commerce. 5 Confederation. 6 Treasure. 7 Arms by Sea and Land.

The seven great sinews, or pillars, or nerves of Government. Military,




Government and Governors.
Government and Governors are both Gods ordinances: for though He himself was
the sole Legislator in all those matters, which concerned man's ultimate
happiness; yet he left men by the light of their own natural reason, to make
such laws, as concerned their civil interests, or their concerns of this life,
as natural reason dictated unto them. And because no society could be formed
and kept together, but by equal and just laws, nor those laws executed but by
some Persons, therefore both laws and Governors were made sacred; the one to be
observed, and the other to be reverenced; and therefore God owns both, and puts
an impression of part of his own honor, both on humane laws and Sovereign
Persons, though both these may be infirm and failing; for Princes or Sovereigns
may err, as well in making laws, (or in their judgments about them) as in the
execution of them, or in their own manners. And therefore God obliged Princes
to be well advised about making laws, and as nigh as they could, to follow
sound reason, and the best precedents, and to do all with deliberation and good
advice, and with an eye to public utility.

Nevertheless, because these concerns were but about matters of an indifferent
nature, and that coming under so many diverse circumstances, it often puzzled a
sincere and a wise Governor what to ordain, and the narrowness of men's
understandings often making that (whilst the business was in council or
agitation) appear best, which as soon as perfected, was often discerned not to
be so, and so wisdom and sincerity (though not likely so grossly, or so often)
might fail in council, as well as folly and negligence: therefore he stamped his
own authority both upon human laws and Governors, The reverence due unto
authority.
thereby to keep them both from being disputed. And upon this ground it was,
that laws were by the same authority that made them, to be revoked or repealed.
Thus the human authority, from whence these laws flowed, silenced all private
judgment, and became indisputable, there being nothing to be put in the
balance with it: it being only the prerogative of God's Laws to be entertained
for their own excellency, men's for the authority or station they were in.
Otherwise all Government had been precarious, or subjected so to change, as to
be unsteady or endless, and so useless. This every master of a family shall
find, if he give way to his wife, children, and servants to dispute his
commands, much more then a Lord or Sovereign over a whole nation. And this
should make every master of a family as careful to keep up the honor of his
Prince in his great family, as he would his own in his little family.

Sovereignty must be absolute and arbitrary.
Sovereignty therefore was by divine ordinance made both arbitrary and
unquestionable; else it could never have answered the true ends of government.
Divine wisdom therefore necessarily armed (even in behalf of the governed) the
supreme Governors with these powers following.

The powers of sovereignty, or the prerogatives of it.
First, A power, though not to prescribe a religion, (for God had done that)
yet to protect it, and to look unto the good administration of it: so as
natural piety were cherisht, and God's word or revelations (such as every
nation esteemed so at least) were reverenced, and by public authority
maintained: and thus far every state or government, as well Gentile as Jew,
have interested themselves in matters of religion.

Secondly, A power to make laws, or such as related to the civil concerns, or
good and safety of that people.

Thirdly, A power to maintain all sovereign prerogatives, which were
necessarily lodged in the Sovereign, in maintenance of his own authority: for
in vain had been the first two, if there had been no provision made for the
last. For if Innovators and Conspirators might act securely, and Government be
undermined, and Governors exposed, private men's peace would soon be overthrown,
and new laws, and new governors frequently obtruded upon them: therefore every
one was bound with life and fortune, to defend the prerogatives of the
Government he lived under, as much as the municipal laws, by which he was
maintained in his life, liberty, and property.

Fourthly, A power to pardon the breach of laws; since mercy adorns the throne
as well as justice, and no hand is to hold forth this scepter, but his, who
holds the sword, that so the Sovereign might be as well loved as feared.

Fifthly, A power to execute the penalties of the laws: that thus authority
might be feared for its power, as it was to be beloved for its clemency.

And the forfeiture or advantage, that accrued by the penalty, (if pecuniary)
was answerable to the Exchequer, since the offense was against the Government.

Sixthly, A power to dispense with laws: for circumstances often make this
power equitable, in relation to times as well as persons, who may stand in need
of, or merit such dispensations.

Seventhly, A power of equity was necessarily entrusted with Sovereigns,
because there would be often occasion to abate the severity of laws; for if
extremities in contracts and penalties in laws should be always taken, laws
would often be snares, and often too burdensome to be born.

Eighthly, A power to stamp moneys, or to appoint some one thing, which should
be the standard unto all Commodities, or which should equal the value of them.

Which is a great evidence of Sovereignty; since here is a power, that in a
Prince's own dominions (and upon such conjunctures of times, as may be, when
such a power, even for want of treasure, and for common safety, may require it)
he can appoint this standard to be of an inferior value to the thing it is
changed for; the authority of the Prince making that valuable among buyers and
sellers at home, (though not abroad) which answers not to the intrinsic value
of the thing bought.

Ninthly, A power to raise tribute, customs, and taxes for the support of the
government, viz. the expenses and splendour of a Court, the guards of a Prince,
the fortifications by land, and navies by sea, and expenses of Ambassadors etc.
For all these must be maintained by a public treasure, which must arise from
single men's private wealth, which proves property; for if single men had no
property, there could be no such distinction, as private wealth and public
treasure.

Tenthly, A power to call together Assemblies and Synods, and to dissolve them;
so as no men in numbers (because danger may arise to the peace thereby) have in
any well ordered State liberty to meet together, but as warranted thereunto by
authority, least multitudes should tumultuate or innovate, and bring petitions
on their spears head, or make private judgment stand in competition with
public authority.

Eleventhly, A power to create a Nobility, the Prince being the fountain of all
honor; as likewise to make all Ministers of State at home, as great Officers,
Judges, Counselors, and all subordinate Magistrates; for supreme power must be
the root of all other powers and of all titles. And it must be but one in it
self; for power, that is to preserve peace, is capable of no rivalship or
co-ordination; for that would distract obedience at home and abroad; for no
foreign nation can entertain treaties with any other nation, whole sovereignty
or singleness of power appears with uncertainty, where it is lodged. So as
co-ordination is inconsistent with all kinds of Government; for two of equal
powers, since they may be of diverse minds, must distract, cannot settle, or
make peaceable any government.

Twelfthly, A power of sending Ambassadors unto foreign Princes; the
Ambassadors office being to represent the Prince, as the Prince does his whole
nation. And by this means commerce about trade, leagues offensive and defensive
are made with other nations.

Lastly, A power of making war and peace; for it is fit, that none judge of the
proper reasons and seasons for these great engagements, but that Person, (or
those persons) in whom the supremacy and sovereignty is lodged. Princes are
prudent, when they observe the bent and inclination of their people, in affairs
even of this great consequence: but subjects invade the Princes right, when
they intermingle herein more than humbly showing their sentiment of it.

These are the necessary qualifications of all kind of Sovereignty, and these
are called prerogatives, or regal powers; for no Kingdom, Commonweal, or State
can want these; and these powers must be lodged in one, or select persons, and
so the Government and the Governors stand both by the order of God, or by his
divine institution.

Now to acknowledge supreme Governors, and yet to undermine them in these
rights, is a subtle part of disloyalty; for give them a great title, and no
power to determine the most important concerns of it, or not to dispense
rewards and punishments, and they will soon be reputed but as idols, be first
despised, and then dethroned. How they may herein be limited, unto the end,
that he or they may the more deliberately execute these powers, shall be showed
hereafter.

These powers the Prince or State (nay the people) if they understood their own
concern, are as much bound to defend, as they are the municipal laws of the
land, made in behalf of themselves: for prerogatives are to be kept as sacred
as laws. One is to defend the government, the other the subjects under the
government. One ought to be as truly made use of for the safety and utility of
the whole body of the people, as the other for particular men; for true public
safety was the mother of all royal prerogative, and Salus populi suprema lex.

Thus we see these powers, to the end they may be executed, Sovereign persons.
must be lodged in persons; and no Government can want these powers or persons:
so as whoever invades either of them, overthrows all government, or disables it
to provide for the safety of the people, or body politic.

If the powers be lodged in one person, then the form of Government is called
Monarchy.

If in a few chief or choice men Aristocracy.

If in all the people, it is a Democracy.

Deviations from these are termed Tyranny. Oligarchy. Ochlocracy.


For my own part, I cannot believe that there can be any such kind of
government as pure Democracy; for if the supreme power be lodged in the whole
people, then they are both governors and governed, and many absurdities will
follow, as will be showed hereafter.



Hence it is, Paternal power.
that God made paternal power the foundation of all civil government. And hence
it is, that most reasoning men agree, that Monarchical government is best
suiting with God's ordinance, and the benefit of society; for even Aristotle,
bred in and amongst Republics, allows Monarchy, Monarchy the best form of
government.
as the fittest organ for the soul of government to work by, as through its
unity less subject to divisions, and as fittest for secrecy and expedition:
and being hereditary, not elective, it is agreed freest from faction, or laying
wait for changes, or bribing for voices, which are unavoidable and dangerous in
all popular elections; so as it may be said, by all these natural advantages,
God instituted Monarchy, and permits only the other forms.

When paternal government ceas't, How paternal government ceast, and the people
to have a hand in the election.
that is to say, when the Communis stirps, or first parent, was grown through
collateral lines not to be readily known, or to be come at; and that
genealogies and relations were not exactly kept, and that mixed Families were
numerously joined together, and when large Colonies were sent to plant void
countries, then choice was made of some eminent man to be a Leader, or Duke, or
Guide, or Prince, or whatever they would call him; (or of some Optimates, or
chief men, or Sanhedrim, or what form best pleased) to go in and out before
this people, or to exercise sovereign power. Thus the people, who had no hand
in the government (for that was purely God's ordinance) came at last, when
paternal government ceast, to have a power of consent in the disposing and
lodging the Government by one or more persons. Hence it is, that government is
called by one Apostle, the ordinance of God, and by another, the ordinance of
man; for power is originally from God in the abstract and substance of it;
though in the concrete or specification, or in respect of circumstances
thereunto belonging, (as whether the title be King or commonweal, the
jurisdiction limited or absolute) from men; which in effect is the true
exposition or reconciliation of the two great Apostles. But be the form what it
will, the last appeal must be sovereign, and must have power to exercise all
the beforementioned marks of sovereignty: or else the government must be
imperfect; for government must be absolute, and the quality of absolute rule is
such, says Tacitus, that it can stand but in one alone.

However, though he, that assumed this power without consent, was an Usurper,
yet when the power was once lodged or disposed by consent or submission, it
could not be reassumed; for though the people submitted their own necks, yet they
gave not the government: for the government by an undiscernible providence,
when the form is agreed on, is to be assigned to God. And it appears to belong
to him, Why Princes were not questionable.
since the essential part of it, viz. the power of life and death belongs
singly to him; for no man has power over his own life, and therefore he cannot
give it to another. His wisdom therefore thought not fit to trust the giddiness
of the people in general, with a matter of such concern, even unto their own
peace and welfare; for often changes, which they would have affected, would
have been more pernicious to the good of society than moderate, nay, immoderate
pressures. Hence it was even in order to publick-weal, that sovereign
authority, and his, or their Persons, that execute it, was set above all
private judgment to avoid disputes.

The sovereign power, by consent once lodged in one or many, for the same
reason is not reassumable; for we see originally, that power was never, or
could ever be, lodged in the diffusive body of the people, who had not a power
over their own lives, and so could less have it over others; for government was
no humane invention, but Gods ordinance. When people first elected their
Governor, we may say it answered unto Gods providence; when by rebellion or
defection they changed him, it was his permission; for when a people demerit of
him, he withstands not their intangling themselves, and scratching themselves
with their own briars. So as when the form of government is once settled, the
posterity or successors of that People are bound by the consent and choice of
their Forefathers, because they are reputed to live in their Predecessors, and
their Predecessors are said to be alive in them. And thus, when providence, in
the place of natural governors or parents, introduced civil, A people under
government are in the state of Wives Wards.

the whole diffusive body of the governed were to be (in this respect of change
of their form of government) reputed in the state of wives or of children, or
minors; for though the one might have chosen, whether she would have disposed
her self to such a man to be her husband, yet having done it, she was always
under his Subjection, as the Heir is during his minority to his Guardian. Yet
both husband and guardian, ought to do all right to their charge, and Courts
there are to relieve both, as God's throne or court is to relieve Subjects.

Hence likewise it is, that Princes are not to be resisted by Subjects, and
both Philosophical light and Politic serve to discern this as well as Divine
light; for says moral Epictetus, We are not tied to Parents and Governors, as
they are good, but as they are Parents ana Governors; and deep sighted Tacitus
says, good Princes are to be wished and prayed for, bad (or whatever they
proved) to be endured; and he gives the reason for it; for ill Princes are to
be endured as we do storms and tempests, which are showred down upon us from
above, or from Providence which has an hand in giving, and an eye to observe,
how we entertain his providence. Thus God required non-resistance in order to
Subjects own good; for anarchy was worse than tyranny; and yet at the same
time, if the Princes command was immoral, he enjoined non-obedience, that men
might prefer the eternal law, which flowed from Gods goodness before the
positive or temporary command, which flowed from man's unreasonableness.

Whose Trustees Sov^raigns are.
Hence likewise it appears, that men are not to think, because Princes or States
are trusted for them, or appointed for their good, therefore they are
conditional Trustees to them: for those, in whom the Sovereign power is lodged,
are Gods Trustees, and therefore to God only they are to answer for their trust.

Nor is a Prince less than his people, because he was trusted either by or for
them, and even by Gods appointment is to minister to them for their good; for
the same reason would make Angels lesser than men, because Angels are Gods
Ministers for the good of men.

However, primarily the Prince or State are trusted for the good of Subjects;
for they are set over men, as the Sun is over the world, to enlighten and
influence it, and they shall be accountable for it; but secondarily, they are
entrusted to maintain the dignity and rights of their own Regal power, and not
to let every humor of the people disable them to govern, by pulling from them
the feathers of their prerogatives.

This subjection, which God requires, is no unreasonable thing; for we
perceive, it is but a suffering in matters of men's external concerns; for as
has been said, Governors authorities extend but unto matters of an indifferent
nature, and it is often pride and impatience, which produce complaints. Which
may appear by this, that most commonly, when the times are most plentiful, and
the grievances very tolerable, then delicacy of sense renders men most
querulous, and their sufferings are begot more from their inferences and
reasonings of what may follow, than what they feel; so as they must be
beholding to their wit, before they can justify their complaints. Reflect on
the reign of Charles the First, as I have impartially made some Memoires upon
it, and this will be found true. Thus much for the singleness of Government,
and the non-resistance of Governors.

But it is objected, Is it not more reasonable to have a coordinate power
joined with that of the Prince?

No sure; for no Government can admit a distinct equal power within it self;
for this is but like the doctrine of Polytheism; for making many Gods and many
Sovereigns, are equally absurd. Co-ordination considered.
Co-ordination is like to prove the mother of a civil War. However, limitation
of Sovereignty is agreed on by all Politicians and Civilians, to be consistent
even with Sovereignty it self; Limitation of Sovereignty expounded.
for hereby Sovereignty is not taken from the Person or Persons governing, though
to him or them the absoluteness of the execution for some time, or in some part
of their Sovereign power (as not to make Laws without their three States or
Orders of Subjects, viz. Nobility, Clergy, and Commons consent) be suspended;
for hereby the power is not transferred unto any other. So he or they remain
absolute, though limited; for thus as he or they cannot make laws without
another, so no other body can make them without him or them. And when a law is
made, it is made singly by the Prince, if it be in a Monarchy; or by the State,
if it be in an Aristocracy; for a limited (which we call a mixed) Monarchy, or a
mixed commonweal, is, in such cases, but like a man, that is bound, or a man
that is sleeping; he has temporarily lost his motion, but not his strength;
for as soon as he has the concurrence of those, whose consent he stipulated to
take, then he is unbound or awakened, and then he or they, not the Concurrers,
are said to act solely and soveraignly; for the power is virtually in his or
their persons in whom the sovereignty lies; for it is the Monarchs or the
States affirmative voice, that makes the law or sanction, though it is his or
their negative voice, that rejects it. Thus the Sovereign Person or Persons, is
the single soul of the law, and all this to avoid the ill consequences of
co-ordination. And hence it is, that the true Representative of any people is
the Prince in a Monarchy, or the States in a Commonweal; and from him or them
there is no appeal but unto God, and wherever the last appeal is, there is the
Sovereignty. And therefore the people abate of their own greatness, when they
think any represent them, but their Prince or State. Others may represent them,
in order to represent their condition good or bad to the Prince, as a
looking-glass does represent the body to the heads view; but as bearing their
image both at home and abroad, the Prince only represents the State of that
people. An unequal league with the Foreigner takes not off supreme power.
Thucydides says, Colonies were as free as Mother cities, though not so reverently
mentioned, because of their dependence. The same may be said of paying tribute,
because that may be for redeeming an injury, or for some acknowledgment of a
deliverance, but that paid, it is all that can be demanded. Neither is feudal
obligation any deprivation of Sovereignty, since that is but a personal
obligation or service, but gives no right to his Government who is bound to
this observance. Thus careful Civilians and Politicians are to keep Sovereignty
sacred, though by such ties, as these, it may appear restrained.

But least some should grumble at God for giving these great powers unto
Princes and States, who are but frail men, in Gods behalf we will sum up the
reasons usually given for it. 1. God requires the Princes to rule for the good
of their Subjects. 2. If they do not, he denounces himself a Revenger. 3. He
requires obedience and non-resistance, to prevent Civil dissentions, which are
usually worse than tyranny; for Tyrants usually extend not their oppression
upon a whole Nation, but upon some particular persons they are displeased with,
whilst Civil war, or popular commotions, spread over the whole land, and
amongst nigh Relations. And if Subjects may resist for any one reason, from a
parity of reason, which they will allege, they will never want a reason. 4.
That God often experiments, whether Subjects will depend upon his promises, to
restrain the fierceness of Princes, or on their own impatient humors and
violences; or whether by an humble patience, they will wait his time for
redress; since what men cannot resist at one time, they find they may divert at
another. 5. He subjects People to those pressures, because they deserve such a
scourge, as an ill Prince, for being themselves so disobedient to himself; or,
6thly, because very often they force a well natured Prince to be an ill one: as
Boccalini says, the sheep getting into their own mouths to the danger of the
Shepherd the dogs teeth, or because like the Neapolitan horse, if they be well
dressed and fed, they will endure no Rider. Lastly, because a Princes tyranny can
but reach unto the outward man, and to the outward things of the man, which
Gods wise Providence in this world often exposes to wean men from it, and to
draw them to expect their ultimate happiness or rest in another World.

Thus though a bad as well as a good Prince be thus secured by God, To whose
tribunal he stands bound.
God has not assured him, but he will punish him, even by permitting an ill
Spirit to rise betwixt him and his People, and so it is Gods sentence on the
Prince, though a judgment or punishment on them both; on him, for violating the
natural rights of his subjects, Why God often permits subjects to be rebellious.
and for breach of his obligation or oath unto them, that he would govern them
by their laws, and be careful of them both in their lives and liberties. For,
says Boccalini, God made not Princes and Subjects as he did cats and mice, one
to catch the other, and for a time to play with them, and then to eat them up;
for natural, civil, and divine right, teaches the head to consult for the good
of the body, and the body readily to obey the head. In a word, though oppression
makes a wise man mad, yet no provocation can warrant a Christian subject to be
a rebel.

Thus far we may say, this Question about Government and the nature and end of
Sovereignty, is examined singly by natural reason or reasoning. Next, let us
enquire after it by the word of God, and after that particularly by our own
National laws.

The same things examined by Scripture or Gods word, and as expounded by our
own Church.
NO constitution of Government can be so happily framed, Sovereignty and
Non-resistance proved by Scripture.
as by its single fabric, to secure the peace of a Nation; else surely God's
Theocracy among the Jews, and paternal Government among the Patriarchs, and
Kings of Judah, would have prevented all complaints. When divine as well as
profane History shall be consulted, it will be found, Policy is like Morality,
and may be much improved by these two words and precepts, Sustinc and abstine.
For the Prince must abstain from violence and rapine, and neither for his
pleasures nor ambition, may he suffer himself to prey on his people. And often
he must bear with, or sustain their perverse or froward humors, lest
unseasonably stirring them, he make a fermentation he cannot quiet. And
subjects will find, that the blessing of Government flows more from their
passive obedience, than from any over nice care of their liberties; for
impatience of Subjects has overthrown more States than the Tyranny of Princes,
as will be touched on hereafter; and most commonly God will not send a people
good Governors, when they will not fit themselves to bear ill ones. It was
therefore not only the wisdom, but the goodness of God toward Subjects, that
he made Sovereign Persons only answerable to himself. All other ways are (as
Hosea says) setting up of Kings, but not by him; or his Economy pleases them
not; and therefore they eat sour grapes (or frame to themselves false
principles) and their teeth are set on edge, or they destroy the peace they
hunt after; for the Politic body like the Natural, that will endure no ail,
but have recourse to physic, will soon purge it self out of the world. But
nothing of this, that is said, infers, that men should not defend the rights of
free born Subjects, but that they defend them in their proper place or
judicatures of the land, and not by the sword.

But he that gave a law to every species of creatures, gave one to mankind,
which man less exactly observes, by reason of the freedom of his will, and by
reason of his lapst nature. But from the law of his nature, or from the Moral
law, the best Judicial law is framed, which may be found by observing, how this
law among Gods own people, the Israelites, suits with the Moral law, given to,
or for all Mankind; but at present we will extend this no further, than to
persons ruling or Legislators, and observe, what characters God in his Word
puts upon them, and how he fences them from resistance, and how he ties all
Commonalties to them by obedience; for throughout all Scripture, Kings are said
not to reign over persons but Nations; therefore called King of Israel, Judah,
etc. and Head of the Tribes of Israel, so of all States under him.

Scripture sets forth, Paternal Government.
how the first man was born under Government as God's Subject; how all his
posterity were under him, and consequently how Paternal Government was the
original of all Government, and so all Mankind born under Government; and
therefore the precept of honoring Fathers (or Parents) being a Moral precept,
it is a proof, that Government is founded in nature, and was by extraction, and
not consent. How paternal Government ceast, has been already set forth. Nimrod
by Sir Water Rawleigh is esteemed a Hunter or Usurper, because he took upon him
the Government over others without their consent or voluntary submission or
choice; not that he was an ill Prince.

And in Scripture the sanction or reward, that is proposed for performing this
duty, shows the benefit of obedience; for it is, that thy days may be long in
the land, which the Lord thy God shall give thee; for obedience of inferiors
(as has been likewise observed) is the most probable way to peace, and peace
unto a Societies welfare. Hence it is, that men are so strictly charged to
reverence their Governors, and Governors to look upon themselves as Ministers
of God for good, and as Revengers to execute wrath upon him that does evil; so
as his power must be no terror to good works, but employed for the good and
praise (or encouragement) of those that do well.

When the Governor was not a natural Father, to the end that he might not want
natural affection unto his people, if the people wanted one, they were not to
choose a Stranger; but such a one, as Moses and Joshua, Samuel and Saul, and
David, or whom God appointed. See Deuteronomy. 17. where the promise of a Prince and
virtues of a Prince are set forth, and so Kingly rule a blessing, and promise
of God to his People from the beginning.

The Prince must have humility, Scripture directions for a King.
that his heart be not lifted up above his brethren. He must not multiply to
himself horses, least power incline him to be oppressive. He must not give his
strength to women; for effeminacy abates courage and industry, and softens and
destroys him. And Solomon adds another caution, Let him not drink wine, (i. e.
to excess) lest he forget Gods law, or neglect Religion, and pervert judgment;
for both these make him lither or wretchless, and unfit for the hardships and
difficulties of Government. Nor must he increase Riches, i. e. for his own
private treasure, or by the making his People miserable and poor, make himself
opulent, that he may the more securely tyrannize. But rich he must be, since
the ambition of Neighbors is at one time or another likely to disturb his
Peace; and since the constant charge, and contingent expenses of Governors is
like to be so great, therefore a full Exchequer becomes a good, as well as a
wise and a politic Prince. Lastly, Though human Policy must be used in human
affairs, and that it appears too too hard, to expect the same strictness of
morality in a King's Office, which belongs to his persons, as a man, (which is
too hard a task for one no better verst in both these two Sciences than my
self, to give the limits unto) this may be said, that the Prince is obliged,
since Politics flow from Ethics, as nigh as possibly he can, to suit his
Policies with good Morals, or rather, that he frame them out of (at least never
contrary unto) the Word of God; for this will make him truly worship his God,
and best teach him how to demean himself with men, or how to govern himself,
either in relation to his foreign or home Affairs. Not that there are such
rules given in God's Word, but that a Prince's Policies should not warrant any
thing that Word forbids, but rather cast himself on Providence.

Such delineations of a Prince, as these are, will convince men, that not only
Government, but Governors are the ordinance of God; for by me, says God, Kings
reign, which Nebuchadnezzar acknowledges, when he says to Daniel, Your God is a
God of Gods, and a Lord of Kings, and he rules in the Kingdoms of the earth,
and gives it to whomsoever he will, and sets up over it (i. e. whenever a
people provoke him to send them that curse) the basest of men; or as Hosea may
seem to explain it, they cast off his Government for Governments that men have
framed, for, say they, give us a King like the other Nations, or let us cast
off King Charles the first for a Cromwell, or Christ for a Barrabbas. Thus
people will sometimes set up a King, but not by God; yea, and pull down a King
to their own confusion: which God divert them from doing any more.

But that they may not thus mischief themselves, God's Word describes a King's
power by his character. A King, against whom there is no rising. And what is
said of a King, is said of all Sovereign Persons, be they one or more, a
Monarchy, or an Aristocracy, a Kingdom or a Commonweal; for if Subjects, upon
discontents and dissatisfactions, might change their settled form of Government,
the politic Body, like his Natural, that is always giving Physic to himself,
would be surely purged out of its settled peace, and probably into its grave: so
as Solomon was very wise, and spoke as well to the States of a Land, as unto
particular persons, when he said, Meddle not with those, who are given to
change, etc.

Fear God therefore, and honor the King, and curse not the King, i. e. speak
not evil of him, or in discourse revile him. Remember, he is thy Politic
Parent; go backward therefore, and cover his nakedness. Shimei's cursing was
but revilings. Cut not off so much as the lap of his garment, or approach him
not with a profane tongue, or hand, as if he were not the Lord's Anointed, for
he cannot be innocent, that lessens his dignity, or clouds his Majesty. No, do
not this in thine heart, or in thy bedchamber; no, nor mingle with those, that
are given to changes; for their calamities shall rise suddenly, or a Bird, some
small or unlook'd-for accident, shall betray thy conspiracy, or, who knows the
ruin of them? or it shall fall upon them by some providential accident, and
their ruin shall be as swift, as their plots were secret: for if God's Word,
in case of oppression, direct men to cry unto him for relief, and not to cry,
unto your Tents, O Israel; what is our resistance, but to cast off our
dependence on God's providence, and to have recourse unto the Witch of Endor,
or our own impatience: or like an injured man, that will not let the Judge give
sentence, nor the Hangman execute him, that robbed him, but he will do both
offices himself? Rebellion therefore is like the sin of Witchcraft: it removes
its dependence on God's Providence, and flies, as has been said, to an ill
Spirit, or its own disobedient and vindicative humor.

There is no distinction between the King's person and his power.
Nor must men subtilize by distinguishing betwixt the power and the person; for
that Apostle, who says, Be not afraid of the Power, expounds it by the Person,
for he is appointed by God, etc. Thus a King's Person and his Power cannot be
separate, though they may be distinguished; or his authority may be, where his
Person is not, but never his authority can be wanting, where his Person is.
Whoever therefore will not do the law of God, (written in God's book, nor of
the King, written in his statutes) let Judgment be executed upon him, whither
it be unto death, or banishment, or confiscation, or imprisonment. And if this
command comes from Artaxerxes by Ezra, he would not have set it down, but as it
was warrantable to execute. Nay, the people of Israel themselves say as much to
Joshuah, Whosoever resists thy commandments, and will not hearken to thy word,
(or Legislative power) he shall be put to death; for whatever thou command,
we will do, and wherever thou sendest us, we will go. Only the Lord thy God
be with thee, as he was with Moses; or be careful to rule thy self by God's
law, as we will be to rule our selves by thine, or contrary not thou thy will
established by a law, by some sudden or passionate resolve.

Yet, as has been observed before, God, who is the single punisher of Prince's
faults, yet permits as a scourge of his Subjects, and Subjects sometimes to be
a scourge to their Prince.
though God has reserved Princes for his own Tribunal, yet he has shown by
several instances in Scripture, very particularly in that of Abimelech, and the
men of Shechem, that he often makes Subjects (by permitting it, for it is ever
evil in the Subject) to become scourges to their Princes, and both to work each
others ruin. As a scourge to David, he lets the greatest part of Israel rise
against him, and follow his rebellious son Absalom; and it was of the Lord, (by
his permission) that nine Tribes and a half forsook Rehoboam, and followed
Jeroboam for Solomon's idolatry.

However, our great Master, born King of the world, acknowledges himself in
his humanity, born a Subject to Augustus and Tiberius, and does a miracle to
pay a tribute, and gives to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, (outward
obedience and observance in matters of a secular and indifferent nature) and
acknowledges the power of Pontius Pilate over his life, and will not call for
the Legions of Angels, as he could, to defend him: nor does his Apostles tread
in other steps, or teach other doctrine. Yet does not all this security
authorize a Prince to be arbitrary or tyrannous; for God proclaims himself an
Avenger; nor does his Word afford such Princes any other appellation, than that
of a Bear, or of a Lion.

When Nebuchadnezzar would have had his golden Image worshipped, what is the
answer, Not, let us resist, but, Pardon us in this, O king. Non est nostri
juris peccare, pati est. Tyrannus cum titulo is, or may be God's Anointed;
Tyrannus sine titulo is an Usurper, and is to be looked on so, by all those,
who were born under, or had taken oaths of allegiance to a dethroned Prince.
Thus Athaliah was destroyed to restore Joash, and personally Joash proved
afterward not much better than she was; however, in him was preserved the seed
of David.

Now Princes in their state of Sovereignty (as our Prince in Parliament) are
said to be above the laws, because they may change, abrogate, and dispense with
them, not, because when it pleases them, they may violate them. If they judge
the change conduces unto public good, they are superior to their laws: but if
they remove a law to satisfy a passion, or take off a restraint from
themselves, or like Nebuchadnezzar, will be deifying themselves, they may
punish their Subjects for not obeying those laws, but God will punish them, for
abuse of their office; and other remedy the Subjects, by the law of God, have
none; but by the false reasonings of a Junius Brutus, and a Buchanan, they have
many. So as Subjects adventure not only their peace, but their salvation for
their rebellion. Rebellion is not a single sin, but complicates them. It
disquiets a whole Nation, makes great thoughts of heart; no man sits under his
own vine. It involves the innocent in the misery, though not in the guilt, and
tyrannizes over Fellow Subjects, over whom they have no just power or right.
The Ship Money, determined by law, (though probably with all its circumstances
not warranted so) was far from a justification of arms; but rather than endure
a Monopoly or a Loan, a Civil War must give license for plunder unto the
Soldiers of both parties. With so Christian a King, as Charles the first was,
had his two Houses been of the same temper; or had they not had a malicious and
short-sighted policy to alter the whole frame of Government; how easily, both
before the war was begun, and after the sword was blooded, might they have
composed all things suitable to God's laws, and the laws of the Nation? But
these men made themselves Slaves to their Slaves, because they would not be
loyal Subjects to their Prince. It is one thing for a Senate (and certainly an
honest one, and a dutiful one) to represent grievances, and to withhold
Supplies upon no redress of grievances, (but there is nothing a grievance
properly, which violates no law in being) but it is rebellion to take up Arms
upon such pretenses.

As Moses and Christ taught this subjection, How ruinous to a people affecting
new forms of Government is.
so we see both their doctrines differed not from what right reason makes true
Policy; for observe, whether the Graecians casting off the tyranny of Monarchy,
or undermining an Aristocracy to set up a Democracy, or supplanting that with
an Oligarchy, or casting off all these for a select 400, or an usurping 30
Tyrants, bettered their condition, or whether it was not more fatal to them,
than the arbitrariness of any one, or any few select persons.

Hence Moses, Christ, and reason, must needs have prevailed with the Apostles,
rather to endure the tyranny of the worst of Princes, under whom they lived,
(even Nero) than have quitted their sound doctrine, Let every soul be subject
to the higher Powers.

And as the Apostles did, How loyal the primitive Christians were.
so did their Successors, the primitive Bishops, who willingly became Martyrs
rather than rebels He that would satisfy himself herein, let him but read
Tertullian's Apology, and he will find, it was not weakness, or want of
courage, but strength of faith, that kept the primitive Christians quiet under
the persecution of the most bloody Heathen Emperors.

But we have lived to read false Teachers, that make the doctrine of resistance
a new light; which light, is a light that leads to darkness, setting up the
passions of the multitude to be their own guides, and their own ruin.

The Romish doctrine of subjection.
Our great Adversary, the present Church of Rome, contrary to St. Paul's
doctrine to the same, Romans the thirteenth, makes Princes hold their scepters
of, and Subjects their allegiance to her. And the Scotch Presbytery, with their
Lay-interpreter Buchanan, De Jure regni apud Scotos, and Junius Brutus subject
Princes to the People; (for which there is as much warrant in Scripture, for
Presbyters to Lord it over Princes, as for the Pope.) And so these serpents,
casting their tails into their mouths, make extremes meet.

Calvin's.
But judicious Calvin, however biassed, was convinced of the unwarrantableness
by Scripture of such doctrines; therefore about the latter end of his
Institutions, determines against resistance of Sovereign Princes: though he
leaves a gap in his strong hedge, limiting what he had laid down, rather to
every single man in a State, than to such orders of men, as are called the
States of a Kingdom; for unto these he will neither give warrant (because in no
Christian State now is there such a constitution as were those of the Ephori,
Demarchi, or Tribunes of the People in Athens, Sparta, and Rome) nor yet does
he make a resolution against them.

Luther, Luther.
who when the Boors or Peasants in Germany were tumultuously reforming
themselves, and casting off their Prince's authority, disclaims their
proceedings; I have ever, says he, from the beginning, taught subjection,
Sleidans Commentaries.
and abhorred all sedition, exhorted to obedience to the higher Powers. Yea,
even to bear with tyranny and wicked government; though I perceive, that the
war is managed on both sides with an evil conscience, as Governors to settle
tyranny, and People to gain their desires by sedition. Yet even this happy
Instrument of Reformation made this faint reply to some Lawyers, who pressed upon
him, that the laws of the Nation in some cases permitted of resistance, that he
would not say, that the Gospel did impugn or dissolve, or abolish the politic
laws of the Land. Which certainly it does not; for the Gospel at the same time
obliges the King, when it restrains the Subjects from resistance, but still it
warrants not resistance.

Whilst the Church of England, The Church of England.
with Moses, Christ, the Apostles, and the primitive Church, countenances no
tyranny in the Prince, nor allows any resistance in the Subject; nor recommends
any stupid insensibility to them; for she allows their orderly and not
terrifying way of petitioning; nay, in the Courts, and before the Judges
appointed for it, she bids them defend themselves; she bids them not give up
their right, but she forbids them to maintain it by force. She secures not the
Prince, the subject will not rise against him, since God, being singly and
properly his Revenger, may, and often does make the subjects disloyalty his rod
for tyranny; and so as both offend, he will punish both, viz. the one by the
other. This Church with what sound reason does, (on which all sound Politics
are built) and what our own Laws assert, resolves, all single persons are
forbid resistance; and then farther resolves all Orders or States of men in a
Politic body, be the Government Monarchical or Aristocratical, etc. are but as
single men in respect of the Head or Sovereign power, for even these in respect
of him or them are to be reputed, even in their Politic Body, but as single or
private men, so can no more resist the sovereign person or persons than a
private man. This I believe to be Apostolic doctrine. And this the
Recognitions made to our own Kings in Acts of Parliament warrant us to say.

Now a Prince, that is thus secured in his Temporals by his own Church, or by
the Christian faith in relation to this doctrine, had need give some very good
account of the advantage he makes in his Spirituals by removing from this
communion: but I am assured his loss is equal in both.

Government examined by the Law of the Land.
IF this be the nature of Government in general, and of Sovereign Persons, What
the law of England requires about subjection.
to whom Government is entrusted, let us in the next place examine, how the
Laws of this our own Nation determine the cases.

We all know, that our Government is a mixed Monarchy, and yet by all Foreigners
(as Bodin, Grotius, and others) is reputed an absolute Monarchy; for
limitations, which transfer not the power unto any other, but require only the
consent of some other, divest it not of the title of Monarchy, or of the Kings
being an absolute, though not an arbitrary Monarch, as has been endeavored to
be proved in the foregoing sheets.

Our Laws say then, that Axioms of Law.
All Persons are under the King, and the King under none; or omnis sub Rege, and
ipse sub nullo.

He has no Peer in his Kingdom, nor any Superior but God; or, Satis ei erit,
quod Dominum habet ultorem; then no Judge over him.



Allegiance sworn to him, not only by single men, but by the three Estates.
Allegiance is to be sworn to him, and homage paid, not only by every single
person through the Kingdom, but by every single member of his two Houses of
Parliament; for not one of them can sit there, before he has taken the oaths
of Allegiance and Supremacy; and he that reads either of these oaths, needs not
seek, where the Sovereignty is lodged. And though these oaths were formed
principally to disclaim Papal jurisdiction, yet that abated, they are but the
old Legal oath of obedience. Nay, the three States of Subjects in the Kingdom,
viz. Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons, as a politic body, make the
same recognition. See the recognitions made to the ancient Kings; even the
Saxons, and those to Edward 4. Henry 7. and Henry 8. Q. Elisabeth, and
especially to King James.

Great (say they to him in an Act of Parliament) are our blessings by uniting
the two ancient Kingdoms, or rather the two Imperial crowns, etc. and upon the
knees of our hearts we agnize our most constant faith, obedience, and loyalty,
to your Majesty and your Royal Progeny. And in this high Court of Parliament,
where all the whole body of the Realm, and every particular member thereof,
either in person or by representation, (upon their own elections) are by the
laws of this Realm deemed to be personally present.

Sir Edward Coke observes by the laws of King Alfred, as well as by those of
the Conqueror, the ancient Kings, who were Saxons, had all the lands of England
in demeasnes; ( Inst. fol. 58.) and the Barons and Lords of Manors were by the
Conqueror enfeoft with all, which the King held not, but they held it for
defense of the Realm under the King, and consequently, they were to support it
in time of danger. This evidenced the Conqueror had seized the whole land by
way of conquest. So as the King was the grand Lord, or Lord paramount, and the
Nobility and Gentry but the mean Lords, and all the rest held in vassalage
under the King or them. Freeholders came in by the Nobilities ill husbandry,
and by their selling part of their land, and enfranchizing of it. But still the
land was held by some tenure, which obliged the Owner, Lord, or Commoner, more
or less, (as in Capite or free Soccage after the conquest) for the defense of
the land; for indeed that is the groundwork of all society. For every man is
naturally bound with his All to defend the body Politic, and the constitution
of the Government; though the quotum, and the manner of the raising it, had the
Subjects consent, that it might be the more equally laid, and the more
cheerfully paid, and the more orderly levied, and as an evidence, the
Government was not despotical, but the people free, and yet thus under
subjection.

The limitations of the Kings prerogative.
The raising of money or taxes is one of those particulars, wherein our Monarch
is limited, for he cannot raise money upon the Subject, but by his Commons, and
with the consent of the Lords, or by concurrence of them both; yet the Commons
can raise no money but to give unto the King, or as the King accepts it for
such a use.

Which is conviction enough, that all the taxes of the long Parliament were
illegal, and their power an usurpation.

Many other instances there are of the Kings single Supremacy; but without
mentioning more, (for all are embowell'd in these few) we will conclude with
Sir H. Spelmans assertion in his Glossarium, Omnis Regni justitia solius Regis
est.

In the next place, The Monarchy absolute in Parliament.
we will consider him in a Parliament, and here his prerogative is unlimited,
or he is in his Zenith, or he is entirely Sovereign; for here the purse and the
sword are joined together. Here, or with consent of his Lords and Commons, he
makes what laws he finds necessary for public weal; which are the two great
cases, wherein Monarchical prerogative is limited; for lives and liberties are
secured to Subjects by the Common and Statute Laws of the Realm; for we are a
free People, or we know the Law we walk by. And yet in Parliament, (in matters
wherein the public safety is concerned, or the Princes Person) a new Law may
declare, that a treason, which before that new law was not so. But complication
of Acts, which were known before, and acknowledged of an inferior species to
treason, before the making such a law, cannot be made treason by that law, though
the person for them may suffer as a Traitor.

The great Act of Treason says, nothing should be accounted treason, which was
not therein particularly named; yet all this caution was to exclude inferior
Courts from so denominating it, but not the King in Parliament. Indeed here
prerogative is unlimited, because here whatever is determined, may justly be
supposed well weighed, and so provided, as it may not entrench upon liberty in
general; though for example sake, it fall severe on an individual Person. But if
a Prince be here importuned, nay violated, or his Houses advices be pressed upon
him by rabbles or multitudes of Plebeians, this is as great a crime in that
Body toward him, as any fault could be in the person thus brought to judgment,
because of the danger in its precedent; since a Prince may as well force the
consent of his two Houses by an Army, to declare whom he pleases a Traitor, as
they can him by multitudes and numbers of the meanest Tradesmen, to make laws
of any kind. This was a case, which God grant may never be drawn into example;
for our judicious Historian Daniel says, Where the Prince and States of a
Kingdom watch the necessities of each other, that they may obtain their several
ends, and make advantages, the true interest of the Nation is lost; and as this
proceeding is unjust, and not sincere, so it is ever unsuccessful. The Praetors
edict says, Quod vi factum est, ratum non habebo. And Bartolus hereupon says,
Spiritus Sanctus posuit hec verba in ore Praetoris.

Parliaments are called by the Kings Writ, and are adjourned, prorogued, or
dissolved at the Kings pleasure: and his death dissolves them without any
further signification. Which shows, how entirely they depend on his
Sovereignty, and on his Person.

No Member of it has privilege of Parliament for treason, felony, or breach
of peace.

The two Houses are to act suitable to the call of his Writ. The Commons are
called ad faciendum or cons^ntiendum, or to perform and consent; the Nobles to
treat and give counsel, or colloquium and tractatum habere; and they are
called, not for all, but for some (or such as he shall please to communicate to
them) of his affairs; though when they meet, they have liberty to represent any
grievance, which properly is a violation of any law; for that cannot properly
be called a grievance, which is no breach of a law in being. And here they may
represent, what they suppose would tend to public utility, submitting it to
the Royal pleasure. In a word, the Houses may propose, but it is the King, that
determines; for he accepts or rejects, and what he accepts is only a law, and
his law only; for his Houses pray a law, but he enacts it; for authority must
be single, and therefore our laws call him the beginning, head, and end of a
Parliament, which surely excludes all pretense to co-ordination.

It is never called the high Court of Parliament, but with reference to his
Royal presence. It is true, it is the highest Court of Judicature, because
hither men may appeal from all inferior Courts of Westminster Hall; but whether
they may here begin original process, is inquirable. In this sense it is called
the Court of Parliament, but not the high Court of Parliament; for the Lords
House is a Court of Record, and can administer oaths and fine, etc. And it is
called the Court of Parliament, when the Lords and Commons join in an order;
but thus never to the House of Commons singly, for they can administer no oath,
nor fine, nor imprison, but their own Members, or they may for violation of
their own privileges, commit to their own Sergeant a Forreigner, who has
violated their privileges. This is said not to diminish their ancient and just
jurisdiction, nor to lessen the great use of them, but to keep each Court
within its bounds, which is truly to preserve the general peace and welfare of
the Nation.

In this high Court of Parliament the King meets with his three States of the
Realm. viz. Lords Spiritual, Temporal,
and Commons.


To have a good intelligence with this Body of men, The necessity of a good
intelligence betwixt the King and his two houses of Parliament.
surely is one of the greatest policies a Prince can show; for by them he is
best represented unto his people. The supplies they give Him, are best paid,
when granted by them. Here appears the good constitution of Government, or that
harmonious Justice (as Bodin calls it) of a State, where every order of men see
themselves represented, as members of the Politic Body, or have a value put on
them; or thus, they are not excluded from having an interest in the State.
These are the men who walk the perambulations of the Government, and part of
whose charge is to keep the true and old boundaries and landmarks of the
State, and not to set up new; or who are to guard prerogative, privilege, and
liberty; so as none of them entrench upon the other; for Subjects wound
themselves as much as they do their Prince, when they invade his prerogatives.
And if the people were capable of judging, they would find, as the Government
cannot want in some measure, and in some things an arbitrary Power, so when
this for some time has been wrested out of the Prince's hand, it has been
more oppressive upon them in their hands than His.

The usefulness and unavoidableness of arbitrary prerogative.
It is a piece of ignorance to think, because a decision is arbitrary, therefore
it is unjust; for cases, that cannot be foreseen, or that come seldom, and
clothed with diverse circumstances, or fall under no certain rule, or are of
great import or danger, and can stay for no formal council (all these) must
have an expedite determination, but still as just a one, and as conform to
right reason as may be; for reason of State is to warrant no injustice. Nor can
it be limited unto strict forms or process of Law; therefore say the Civilians,
Jus privatum vocatur, quia reddendo cuique quod suum est versatur, and eo quod
normae aequalitatis and justitiae congruat. This therefore must be steady and
unalterable, and where it is so preserved, Subjects are happy; for the known
laws preserve their own lives, liberties and properties; Wherein prerogative is
exercised.
and the written and known laws are the Standards of all these. But to prevent
attempts against the Government and Governors, and in order to the safety of
the people, prerogatives or extraordinary powers were never wanting, and for
these reasons only, laws were subjected to prerogative; and no wise people ever
grudged it: for treasonable attempts are often perfected, or a Prince
assassinated, or a State everted, before formalities of law can be pursued or
satisfied; the Government therefore and the Governors must have their security,
as well as private men. And better men be terrified from coming nigh the bounds
of this mount, than admitted with safety to approach it so nigh, that they may
project a hope to perfect that, which they would venture lives, and all they
had, if they saw but a fair possibility to effect. Hence it is, that we say,
Jus publicum legum convenientiam and aptitudinem semper expedit, sed non semper
aquitatem; but this is not to be wrested, or made a patronage for any
tyrannical action. Princes ought to be as morally just as private men, but
under another law; for what will protect one, will not the other; reason of
State should never be made a pretense. Thus we see private Law moves by a
standing and formal rule of strict justice, public by a rule of reason and
equity: neither by injustice, oppression, or passion, or ill design, or revenge
against any particular man. In Subjects therefore, especially in those
Representatives of the Subjects in general, there ought not to be an
indifferency to uphold the State and the chief Governor: for attempts upon
these are like some diseases in the natural body, they must be early suspected,
and soon taken in hand; for if deferred until an ordinary judgment can discern
them, the wisest Physician will not be able to cure them. Suetonius, in the
life of Domitian bewails Princes condition, Quibus de conjuratione comperta,
non creditur nisi occisis. A State may die of an apoplexy as well as a private
man. Government, like a tortoise, must keep its constituent parts under its
hard shell, or every child's foot (or the most inconsiderable body) will hurt
its render limbs.

The choice of Parliament men.
Persons therefore sent as the Peoples Representatives, ought to be chosen out
of that number of men, which understand and love the Government settled, or as
Aristotle says, Ut ea pars sit potior, quae rempublicam sanam esse vellet, quam
ea, quae nollet, or who affect not changes, or who are not popular Orators,
with ambitious hearts, designing brains, and smooth tongues, and who would be
Ephori, Curators, or Tridunes, or King-Controulers: who are apt to propose
violent remedies, or make physic more pernicious than the disease; of whom it
may be said, as was said of Sylla, Patriam durioribus remediis quam pericula
erant sanavit. Such men as these are apter to make remonstrances to the People,
than reasonable representations to a Prince. And our late History of Charles
the first will show their temper; for they, even after they were victorious
over the King, upon the stairs of their own Senate House, wounded and bruised
their Soldiers, many of their fellow Subjects, and those who lived in their own
quarters, for no other reason, than that they petitioned them to make a peace
with him. Examine their own Records, what prerogatives these men used over
their fellow Subjects, and there will be little occasion to complain of the
cruelty, even of a Henry 8. They that teach a multitude to resort to their own
strength against their Prince, will live (as London did) to see their own
cannon or ordnance by their own Army, turned upon themselves, which they
mounted to keep out their Prince. But this sad example terrifies neither side,
not the one, from occasions of jealousy about religion or property, nor the
other, from entertaining again the the spirit of schism and rebellion. But
arise, O Lord, and compose our distractions. Thus if you ask what is a wise man
(or a people) without liberty, or quid Cato sine liberate? You may live to
answer, What is liberty without a Cato, or quid libertas sine Catone. Tacitus
makes mention of a Sect, who brought forth the Tuberones and the Favonians,
unpleasing names to the ancient Commonweal, who to overthrow the State (says
he) pretended Liberty; but if they had overthrown it, they would have given an
assault to have overthrown liberty likewise. And he commends in another place
the good counsel of Sanguinius Maximus, a Consul, who desired the Senators not
to increase the Emperor's cares, by hunting after matters of dislike. The
wisdom of our Government makes it an axiom, The King can do no injury,
therefore no provocation justifies force against him. His Ministers are
answerable to the laws; He is exempt, and all this for the Subjects peace. The
states of a land should never represent the grievances of the land by
Microscopes; for such magnifying glasses do but exasperate the humors of the
whole body, and discourage the Prince from giving remedies; for when a Prince
discerns a willingness in such a body not to misunderstand him, it is the best
way to procure a good understanding with him. Wise men should reflect on the
unavoidable errors or disorders in their own families, before they should
aggravate or lay too naked (especially to those that cannot cure them) the
failures of a Government. Nor is it excuse for these Zealot-Statesmen to say,
they act with good intentions to the public; for mistakes of judgment may
plead both with God and man for a mitigation of the punishment of the offense,
but never for a justification of an evil or illegal act. Thus Nations are often
overthrown by impatience; so dangerous is an overdoing Reformation: but a wise
Senate makes a happy people, and a glorious Prince, by considering States, like
as they do men, or that they are best, not who have no failures, but who have
fewest.

There are times, when men are more willing to cast off the form of Government,
than the Governor: and such designs are with most difficulty withstood.

Thus we see Government (or rather the justice of it) is founded upon the law
of Nature, secured by the Word of God, Government how founded.
and defended by the Laws of the land. But we have a great Apostle of this Age,
Mr. Hobbs considered.
or a learned and strong presumptuous brained Leviathan, who not founding it
upon nature, makes it arise from necessity and fear: thus making the Government
and the Governor rather the brat of a miserable and frighted people, than the
ordinance of God; so weakening the nature or original of Government, and yet one
while making the Governor such a Leviathan, that no single Person, or body of
men, is to resist him; for he so exalts him, that he may set up what Idol or
vain opinions he will for a Religion, and all his Subjects are bound to
entertain it, and no other: and no man upon any occasion to rise against him.
And yet at last if they do, and preuail, he finds means to justify them. Thus
he can blow hot and cold, and we must all submit to his dogma's, or be a
foolish generation But many good pens have made remarks upon him, that were it
not to frame a little Scheme, principally for my self, I would not meddle with
him at all.

How Mr. Hobbs makes the passions, and not the moral virtues the foundation of
Government.
His Arguments run thus. Government arose upon necessity, and upon the fear one
man had of another's power, every man by birth having an equal right unto every
thing. So the natural condition of mankind was a State of war or hostility with
one another. Now this is very strange, that this learned man should not
consider, if wolves and vultures (the fiercest beasts and birds of prey) will
not act thus upon their own kind; if nature, (which we may believe is this
Gentleman's God) framed these wild creatures calm to one another; how she
should come to be such a Step-dame to mankind. And if this Gentleman perceives
man's soul endued with moral virtues, as well as natural passions, why should
he make Government arise from the concupiscible passion of desire, and the
irascible of fear, and not from the cardinal virtues of prudence, temperance,
justice and fortitude, with humanity and veracity? Do not these moral virtues
evidence, that men were created not only for a harmless, but a beneficial
Society? And does not the necessity, which man has of help, in relation to his
body, show he was not framed to live alone? And in relation to his mind, does
not temperance restrain desire, and fortitude repress fear? How does temperance
fit him to be contented with a little, and so make needless the invading the
rights of others? How does justice regulate his actions toward other men, and
so secure them from any violence from Him? How does humanity make him apt to
relieve another necessities, as justice did to preserve his rights? How does
his veracity secure another in his conversation with him? Nor did art or policy
beget these virtues in mankind or nature, but a God of nature implanted it in
humane nature. And can this Gentleman believe, that the disorders that flowed
from injustice, were the mother of justice? though it was often the mother of
good civil laws against particularized acts of injustice. Injustice would not
have been perceived, but as it was a deflection from natural justice; or why
does he say, every man naturally, upon the fear he had of every other man, was
against every other man? which made it reasonable for every man to secure
himself by way of anticipation (i. e. as I conceive, without any other
provocation or injury, but his own fear) by force and wiles to master all
others, till he saw no other power great enough to endanger him. His Master
Thucydides sets forth much of this, but allows not the practice. If this be not
prodigy, I know not what is; for if this be true, we will repeat it again. What
a stepmother is Nature, (for we will not now talk of a God, or intelligent
mind distinct from, and antecedent to all visible beings, or of invisible
powers, which seem to him but as scarr-crows set up to fright fearful and
ignorant men) who made this kind of creature, Man, miserable, by its, primier
designation and yet by or upon experience of his own misery, If Mr. Hobbs way
of stating this question be true, the creature is wiser than the Creator.
how came a man reasonable enough by law and penalties to find a means lodged
in himself to divert the evil, which nature had subjected him unto. Thus the
effect seems superior to the cause; for if man can thus excel his own nature,
how comes it about, that other creatures cannot do the like? or how comes man
to be wiser by submitting his own understanding and strength to a Governors, to
provide better for himself than Nature did? Did Nature produce him to a state
of war, and he find out the benefit of Society in peace? Pray then, why should
not a horse do the like, and find he was turned out of the orchyard, where was
long grass, into the barren Common, for cropping the trees? Or why should not
bees and wasps make leagues together, and one give some of their honey to avoid
hostility? By all this we see how fatal it is for men of strong natural parts
and good literature, to entertain false principles; and how false principles
about Nature produce falser about policy. Judge Hales has convinced this
Gentleman in his Origination of Mankind in point of natural Philosophy; and the
Lord Chancellor Hyde has done it as well about his Politics; and Dr. Parker
in his Ecclesiastical Policy, has showed the absurdity of this Gentleman's
opinion about Religion and Civil Policy; and therefore I will rather give men
warning of him than enter farther the lists; or I would not farther fall upon
one, whom so many others have attackt so masterfully, and with success.

God made Government his own ordinance, and made Governors owe their Authority
to him; for it is by him that Princes reign; for Promotion neither comes from
the East, nor from the West, for it is God that sets up one, and pulls down
another. He clothed them with power and majesty, God vested Government with
power and majesty.
as the necessary supports of all Government; for without these no personal
virtues of the Prince would be able to support him, or with a heady and
mistaking multitude to gain that obedience, which Government cannot be without.

Power.
Power therefore is singly lodged in him, (or them,) in whom the Sovereignty is
lodged. And if there be no Sovereignty, or a power, from which there is no
appeal, there is no Government; for the rights of Sovereignty must be
uncontrollable. If God himself were not omnipotent, men would not be guided by
his wisdom; for we see men questioning his decrees every day, not content with
his justice; for how many disrelish his determination of not resisting evil
Governors, though it were made in behalf of themselves, as the best means to
secure their common peace and public interest? A great part of the office of a
Governor is to reward and punish; yet herein, if power fenced it not, every one
would share with his Prince, or dispense these themselves, and become Judges,
or give sentence (nay be Executioners too) in their own cases. Where rewards
and punishments are not well dispensed, loyalty and faithfulness will both quit
a Court. And Boccalini makes those virtues rather to retire to a Dog-kennel,
than return thither; for that creature, says he, has some gratitude and sense
of being well used; and therefore these virtues quitted the Court, and went
thither. Thus the dispensing rewards and punishments being so eminent a branch
of a Princes power, he should trust it in no hand to distribute but his own.
All natures, (but Gods) wanting somewhat, are moved or attracted by rewards,
and deterred by punishments; for punishments were added unto laws, that whom
conscience would not restrain, present pain and loss might.

Multitude of subjects in some one, or some nigh Countries, is a foundation of
greater greatness than largeness of dispersed dominion. This has enabled France
to ruin Spain.

Majesty.
Majesty is but the glory of power reflected, or it is a result of the amplitude
of greatness, directed to bring awe and reverence toward authority; for
Majesty is but a seeming pageantry, when power upholds it not, and where every
one can approach it without respect; for, says the Politicians, Majestas major
e longinquo; for when a Prince by some unseeming familiarity of some Favorite
abates or lets fall his own Majesty, every one that thinks as well of himself,
as the Prince does of the Favorite, forgets duty and becomes saucy. And thus
when a Prince abates of the reverence, which ought to be paid to his person, he
seldom finds it paid unto his affairs. It is good for a Prince, by a reputation
of mildness lodged in him, rather by his discretion, than natural temper, to
abate in his subjects in general the fear of his power; for that will be
thought the juster, when he is sharp upon a particular man, that demerits; but
to let fall his Majesty, warrants low thoughts of him among the generality.
Thus Princes, though as men, they must live as men; yet by reason of the dignity
of their office, they must either abstain from, or use these familiarities in
private, or be prejudiced in their regal station. And the person, to whom the
Prince communicates these favors, if he be either vain or insolent upon them,
(which is a hard task not to be) he draws upon himself an insupportable envy,
and on his Masters reputation a great diminution.

The full glory of a Nation (or its majesty) is drawn, as in a burning glass,
The Prince the true representative of a Nation.
into one point, in the person of the King; and therefore if he let it fall
himself, or any subject by abuse of his favor darken it, it is an offense
against the public.

The office of a King or supreme Governor is to govern multitudes of people;
and they are heady, refractory, and unsteady, like horses, apt to be resty,
without they find their Rider fast in the saddle, and themselves commanded by
the bit and spur, or under a power; How his power and majesty are necessary.
and thus power is necessary. And common people like children, are delighted
with glorious and gay things; and thus Majesty is necessary; so as the
reverence of civil Government is upheld much by the splendour of Majesty; for
without this popular fancy will not be pleased nor satisfied; for which reason
greatness ever stands in need of some sensible luster. Thus, as there is a real
necessity of power, so considering how strong fancy is in multitudes, there is
a necessity, that Majesty be as little neglected as Power.

The personal virtues of a Prince.
Power and Majesty are the two great supports of Sovereignty, but they are best
upheld by two personal virtues, viz. that of Piety, and that of Justice.

Piety.
Piety leads a Prince to believe, that he is accountable unto God for the
administration of his high office, and it leads the subject to believe, that
that prince, who acknowledges a greater power than his own, and that a divine
power, is like to use his own unto good ends. It bows his own heart unto God,
and his subjects unto himself; or it disposes him to live well, and his
subjects to obey willingly. It makes him watchful in the discharge of his own
office, and resolute against those, who invade him in it. It is the best
directress both of his Power and Majesty; for it keeps power from cruelty, and
majesty from disdaining of others. It makes a Prince value the divine
Providence, that watches over him more than his Guards; knowing, without this,
civil wisdom or military power very often miscarry. Indeed, the vices of
Princes always turn unto their own punishment; for they, that imitate them in
their vice, are aptest to disquiet them in their Government; and thus they
dishearten good subjects to uphold them, and encourage ill to rebel against
themselves.

Justice, as it flows from piety, Justice.
so it is upheld by power. Justice must appear, or be known to be armed; or it
is too like to be disputed in its execution. Men entered into Society, that they
might enjoy the benefit of it; and when it is obstructed a Commonweal is sick,
if generally not administered, the band of Society is dissolved: the execution
of it is the life of the laws. No arbitrary power, or decision, or reason of
state must want justice, for the standing laws, and the arbitrary
determinations of Sovereignty must both be reasonable and just; the one may
want the formalities or forms of process, which the other is tied unto; but
justice must be the life and spirit of them both. And therefore they are narrow
thoughts, that think, what is arbitrary is unjust; for when it is the
determination of a good and a wise man, it is very often more perfect than the
law it self, because made a rule after the inconvenience of the law is
perceived; or wise men would make it a law, or give it a sanction as soon as
proposed. So as I ever thought the binding the Judges, or their binding
themselves too strictly unto the letter of the law, and formality of words, and
spellings, in pleadings, was like strait ligatures, which hinder just
circulation of humors; for it is one thing to leave the Judge too loose, but it
is another (more nocent) to tie him up too strait. This sets up distinct Courts
of Equity, and that multiplies suits, and many other inconveniences. Keep an
ill or corrupt man from being a Judge, soon remove him, when it is perceived;
nay, severely punish him, but pinion him not so, as he must sit and see the
craft of a Solicitor, or an Attorney, evade the true meaning of the law; in
such a case let him (as well as the party pincht by the subtilty of the plea)
have the liberty to put the case to a summary decision of all the Benches,
which he finds not fit to determine in his own Court.

Faithfulness.
Faithfulness in a Prince is but a part of his justice. Lying lips, says
Solomon, become not a Prince; and the reason is, that he that has a generous
heart, will not stand in need of a false mouth. A Prince ought to be clothed
with reputation, which no man inwardly can render to him, on whom he cannot
depend; or whose word he cannot rely on.

But because necessarily there must be granted unto men in civil affairs, and
in Kingly Policies a greater latitude, than ought to be allowed in common
conversation, not of dealing falsely, but of demeaning a man's self sagaciously,
therefore Princes and Ambassadors, who know what weights are used, seldom
expect other coin, than that which is mixed with an alloy, which though it
debaseth the metal, yet makes it work the better. Chancellor Bacon
distinguishes well betwixt dissimulation and simulation (indeed the distinction
is Cicero's in his Offices l. 3.) making the first but an art of State, or an
art of life, as Tacitus calls it, i. e. an art of living among men, that
dissemble: the other a false profession, by which (I think) he means falsity,
when he professes sincerity; which surely is a false Policy, and no ways
allowable; the first he assigns unto Augustus, the second unto Tiberius. The
first is but the art of a well managed horse, who observing the hand, knows how
to stop on a sudden. Undoubtedly where a Prince believes he is clearly dealt
with, he should be as clear in his dealing: for though their condition exempts
them from that openness and round dealing, which is the honor of a private
man's nature: yet the importance of their obligations reaching unto the good or
harm of so many private men, they are admitted to have more of the serpentine
windings than would become a private man. Equivocations must necessarily be
disallowed by all men in Treaties; but reservedness in speech, or diversion in
discourse, which otherwise would disclose a meaning too soon, a speaking that
for his own opinion, which he avers not to be his Master's instruction, a
subtilty of extracting the others thoughts, and yet concealing his own, to be
cautious in the beginning of a Treaty, so he be sincere and open in the
conclusion of it; all these are seemly in an Ambassador, which would be very
blameable among private men, especially Friends. The best composition, says a
great man, is openness in fame, secrecy in habit; for nakedness, says he, as
little becomes a mind, as a body. Histories and Civilians give greater latitude
unto Princes to discharge themselves of the obligation of their Treaties than
exact Morality will allow of. I remember several instances in Dr. Zouch's
writings, and particularly of Queen Elisabeth, who said plainly, she meant
sincerely, when she treated; but having promised an assistance, further than
would stand with her own treasure and her Peoples safety, she could not bind
her self unto the extremity of her Articles. She was ready to show, she meant
not in her Treaty to deceive, nor did she then, to bear the ill consequences,
which she now discerned. This I relate, this I justify not; but if frequent
examples do justify it, then we may say, Princes are not deceived, because
they expect not the exactness of private men, whose damages reach further than
their Persons or private concern. And in Treaties it is now sometimes made an
article to make a retrait upon such discoveries.

Clemency is a chief part of humanity, Clemency.
and should ever be found in a Prince, because most men at one time or other
stand in need of a Prince's goodness. But to make it valuable, this virtue
should proceed from generosity, not facility of his nature. And he must be
careful, that his natural good temper, no, nor his moral clemency, appear to
take off the terror of his politic justice. His clemency will sufficiently
appear, if it restrain him from frequent severities: for it is neither for the
honor of the Prince, nor the Physician, when their Patients are sent in numbers
to the burial-places. Clemency withstands not severity, though she endeavors to
use it seldom; for a Prince may be very clement in his disposition, nay, in his
judgment and usual practice, and yet be very severe upon provocations, that
warrant the same; for such a well used severity the better illustrates his
clemency. But it is much better for a Prince to pardon an offense against his
Person, than against his Government, or against a private Subject's interest or
right And nothing can worse become a Prince's bounty or clemency than to grant
pardons to offenders, as donatives or rewards to Servants. It is much better to
give them the forfeiture of an Offender's estate, for that is an Escheat to
himself, than a pardon to the Offender, for that is a selling of justice. A
pardon is fit not to be given at all, or to be done freely, that so it may be a
real act of clemency, and make the Offender grateful, or upon a second fault
more guilty.

Modesty.
Modesty is a virtue of so mean a sound, that it may seem derogatory to
attribute it unto a Prince, but if well interpreted, it is a flower in his
Crown; for it is a high spirited virtue, tempering greatness or power toward
men of inferior condition, or it is a generous disposition in a Prince, not to
dazzle a private man with the glory of his Majesty, nor to create in him fear by
the terror of his power. So it must needs be attractive both of love and
reverence, rendering the Prince accessible, and making him unapt to put a
neglect or affront upon the meanest man; since the meanest may do the greatest
a shrewd turn; for nihil tam firmum est, cui periculum non sit etiam ab
invalido.

Besides, Modesty is a great antidote against flattery, the common bane of
Princes, and the flattery, that is made unto their business and affairs, is
often greater and more pernicious than that which is made unto their Persons;
for the one is but scratching an itch of a prurient temper or blood, but the
other is endangering the public peace or security. Flattery of a Prince's
Person is but like a painted flower, that pleases the eye, but offends the
smell; but flattery of his business is like a chemical vapor, that stupifies
the brain. But in both kinds Princes love to draw it upon themselves; for such
as seem to admire their persons, and applaud or concur in their counsels, they
take to be their friends; and the reason of it is, they love rather to have
their hopes fortified, than their dangers awak't; for they affect to cherish
hope, and stifle fear, and are not patient of deliberating or examining a
matter by contrary judgments, or of men of several conceptions, or diverse
tempers and educations or interests; for opposite opinions are like the teeth
of a file, it must scrape off, before it can smooth an affair, whilst several
concording judgments too often make an affair pleasant and hopeful in the
beginning, though more commonly irksome and shameful ar the latter end of it.
Xerxes never knew the value of his Councellor Demaratus, until he had made his
shameful retreat out of Greece: then he found what the other had told him, that
there was much difference between a great multitude and a well disciplined
army, whether it were to sight or to subsist; and then he knew the accidents,
that attended upon the one, in marching through straights, and finding
provision, and the usefulness and services of the other. And for the honor of
this great King it is, that he valued this single man, more than he did all his
other Counselors, when he returned home. But when observations of this kind
are never so much multiplied, Princes Courts will never be cured of this
King's Evil, but will favor those, who counsel toward what they love, and
never have in esteem those, who by projecting the worst, and by foreseeing ill
consequences, or cautioning against dangers, evidence, that they love their
Master's honor and success in affairs, better than they do their own
preferments. Fot flattery is the best Court-picklock, and plainness of speech
the surest bar against a man's own preferment. Modesty has this farther good
operation upon a Prince, that it minds him of the incertainty of events in the
best laid and prosecuted designs; there being a common vicissitude or change
of fortune, which wise men, like Porus, will discern and laugh at even in their
captivity, because thereby they discern, quam caduca sit felicitas humana, as
Curtius expresses it, or how fading and falling a leaf prosperity is.

Liberality or bounty is much cried up in a Prince, Liberality
and is very becoming greatness or Majesty; for men would not love the sun or
heavenly bodies for their own glory and heat, if they conveyed not unto them
and other creatures cheering light and benign influence. But it requires
prudence in a high measure to guide it; for if it run into the intrinsic
estate of a Prince, or make him poor, that others may be vainly rich, it
discredits him more, than it honors him, and looses its name, for it is termed
prodigality. Even he, that is benefitted by it, despises him for it, looking
rather on it as a weakness of mind than a greatness. And it obliges unto no
thankfulness, if what is loosely or inconsiderately given, obliges to such
expenses or splendid course of life, (which some Princes affect from those they
are thus bountiful unto) that they can lay up nothing for themselves and
children. Money being like meat; if a man must eat or swallow till he regorge
it, he will find a Philosopher's supper better than a Prince's feast. If
Favorites of pleasure be the objects of bounty, then the Subjects shut their
purse from supplying him, who feeds so many vermin, and on whom such vermin
hang. Let their food be never so good, their mein or countenance never is
florid; or if excessive bounty unto some few make Servants loose their small
pensions, wages, or diets, it aliens the affections, and chils the duty of
those other many attendants toward their Master. Indeed bounty unto such men
should be only wast water; when the Exchequer can supply the ordinary expenses,
bounty is then and not until then seemly. Nor should bounty unto Favorites, or
expenses of pleasure deprive deserving Servants or Subjects of rewards, such as
have merited of the State in home or foraign affairs; for for these a Prince
may laudably appear rather poor than not bountiful. Yet for these he must not
weaken the public revenue, which in all Nations is reputed Sacred. But the
casual revenue, and the offices in the gift of the Crown, the leases even of
the Demeasnes, and things of this nature are wisely here disposed: but giving
honors and estates in perpetuity, if any one made his reflections, how many
Noble families owed both to the Crown, and yet in this last age have
contributed much to pull it down, one would put no great price upon gratitude,
or Princes might well think it fit, to put some new rules unto their bounties.
Rewards unto some persons, which far exceed the merit of the person, makes
others much undervalue what they receive, though they receive with an
overmeasure. And if their reward come unto them more from the interposition of
a great man, than the Prince's own disposition, the former will have the
thanks: and thus a Prince buys but a Servant for a great man. Sir Dudley Digges
in his Preface to Secretary Walsingham's Letters observes, that Queen Elisabeth
was better served for a Pension of forty pounds per annum, than King James for
an annuity of four hundred pounds.

Frugality in a Prince is an universal bounty to all his People; Frugality.
for it enables a Prince to live without, or at least to crave less aids, and a
Prince's care to promote trade, manufactures, husbandry, etc. or prevent
confederacy among men of a trade, as Grasiers, Butchers, etc. or Monopolizers,
who set the price or dice, as we call it, upon all buyers, is to be numbered
among bounties, which reach unto the whole body of the People. So as the Kingly
Office is an instrument of bounty and of frugality both; for by one and the
same means he inriches his People, and saves his own treasure. Men of this
temper are least pressed upon, for no man judges better, when, and unto whom it
is fit to give, than that Prince, that seeks to make his People rich rather by
his providence, and by their own industries and frugalities, than by his
coffers; for it is a very ill symptom in a State, when every broken fortune
hopes to make it self up from a King's Exchequer. Thus frugality is a key unto
the Subjects treasure; for the people willingly lend the key of theirs unto a
Prince, that keeps the lock of his own: and as unwillingly to one, who spends
upon his Favorites what is his own, or what his Subjects supply him with; since
the humor of such times and expenses infects the Country, as well as the Court,
and so they will rail against the vices, that are so costly unto them, though
they imitate them. And if such an expensiveness lead toward a general poverty,
it will in a short time draw on a general defection.

Yet Courts must not want their splendour: for that is a part of the Prince's
majesty, and the very silks and fine linen of it, the back and the board of a
few Courtiers feed the belly, and set on work the hands of many Vulgars. It was
observed to be impolitick in the Emperor Julian (and accordingly complained of)
that he affected to appear in his Court more a Philosopher than a Prince,
banishing the Officers of shows and vanity, and of Cooks and Barbers and
Tailors, etc.

Love of fame was implanted in men unto the end they might love virtue; Love of
Fame.
since there is no greater evidence than that where the one is despised, the
other is neglected; for though the person of the man in a short time will be
forgot, his deeds with reflection on him will be remembered. Hence it is too
many men had rather wound their consciences than their fame; yet many make it
the cheapest thing they are concerned in. Neglect of fame begets remissness in
Government; for he that cares little, how men look upon him, cares less what he
does: says that witty and pleasant, and yet often serious Spaniard, Quevedo; if
Christ himself thought fit to ask his Disciples, what say men of me? nay, unto
his Apostle St. Peter, what say you of me? it may become the wisdom of the
greatest Prince to make the same enquiries. It is disagreeable unto nature to
be unconcerned in fame; since the God of nature made it a restraint upon a
vicious course of life, or a means to keep men out of bad company, out of those
courses, which expose him to be undervalued; for not only looseness of life, but
remissness in affairs, or rash entering upon important actions, and faintly
prosecuting them, or uncertainty of mind and unevenness of councels (all which
usually are attended with unsuccessfulness) draw down infamy upon a great man.
And when a Prince has lost the inward reverence, which is due unto the
generosity of his mind, the outward, which is paid unto his person, will soon
appear a shadow, which forsakes the dyal with the sunshine. It is unloosing the
girdle of Government (solvere cingulum regum) to withdraw an inward esteem from
a Prince. Shall jealousy of a Subject's reputation awaken a Prince? Shall he
think it his concern, that this man be not overprized, and yet be unconcerned,
that he himself is reputed no way valuable? Since no men are concerned for a
Prince they value not, how insecure does contempt of Fame render him?

Yet Princes or Great men are not to think a lasting fame is a good fame; since
the word Famous is an equivocal word, and men may be famous for bad as well as
good actions. Judas is as well recorded as St. Peter, and Herostratus, who
burnt Diana's Temple only to keep up his name, lost his esteem among men, and
had almost lost his name likewise, Alexander the great, and Julius Caesar, and
the great and prosperous neighbor Prince of our times affected fame, but they
understood it not; for her Trumpet sounds and recommends heroic, noble, and
virtuous actions, or actions, that benefited mankind, not such, whose effects
and prosperity, were only like a storm at sea, or a plaguey year, which are
registered in the Calendar, for the destruction they made and the harm they did.
How much more has a private man to thank God for, that he made him an
instrument of a little good unto a few men, than the greatest Prince in the
world has, that he was an universal Pest, and that upon his own choice. The
folly of such a conceit appears in this, that he thinks he shall preserve the
memory of his person (unto which he is fondly indulgent) by it; when fame
reaches (as that great Boethius says) no farther than unto his actions: so as
if they be not beautiful and shapely, though he were another Absalom, fame will
but set him out as a Traitor. Boccalini has a good representation of the shame
and infamy of black successful deeds, when he represents Duke Sforza of Milan
demanding a triumph of Apollo, and it being granted him upon the condition,
that the families he had unjustly betrayed and tyrannically ruined, should be
placed about the wheels of his Chariot, the shame thereof cured this itch of
vanity, and he declined his triumph, that he might conceal the way or means,
that enabled him to pretend unto it. This may be a true reason, why God removed
the representations of men's persons from fame, and by it engraved only their
actions; for it was the virtues of the mind, which he took care to recommend to
posterity, and he designed nothing to be memorable and renowned, but what was
fit to be imitated. So as fame, by God's appointment, was to preserve the
memory of his great and good deeds, unto whose person God designed a reward
from himself in another world, if not in this likewise. And yet a good fame
makes a man live after his death; for the honor other men pay unto his memory,
whose person they have no notion of, renders him to them, as if he was still a
living example of virtue. The appetite of honor is rooted even in nature it
self, and therefore if men be careful, how they get it, they may be sollicitous
to get it; because alive and dead it benefits others as well as themselves, and
because it is observable, that those men, who care not what others think of
them, care as little what they do themselves.

Prudence is a Prince's Master-virtue, Prudence.
indeed it is a private man's chief honor. In all Civil, Military, and
Ecclesiastical affairs it is the great directress. It weighs all circumstances,
and foresees the most probable events; for where there is the most of prudence,
there is the least of chance: for summa ratione gesta fortuna sequitur.

It is the distraction of a man's mind, that he has so many several
representations of one and the same thing, like a picture if he look upon it by
one light, it seems one thing unto him, if by another light, it seems to vary
its figure. In its self an affair may be one thing, but clothed in its various
circumstances it is another: so as many ways seem to lead unto it, and yet
really there is but one: and this path Prudence only can walk in; for the
prudent man, like the Chemist, can separate bodies, that are mixed and
incorporate together, and which are indiscernible unto a vulgar eye. In Civil
affairs, he is the best Chemist, who has most experience; for though men may
be ingenious without it, yet seldom solid or expedite, and yet all the sciences
serve him much; for the prudent Prince will stand in need of natural
Philosophy, to judge of the natural constitutions and tempers of men, as well
as moral, to know how to improve, govern, or restrain the tempers of those,
whom he trusts with his affairs; else an impetuosity of temper will blind
reason, and transport him, who discerns his own infirmities, and yet has not
been accustomed to bridle them. An eloquent and designing man will be followed
by multitudes, when a sober and well weighing judgment will too often want a
companion. A prudent man is apter to suspect his own advice, than another
man's, of whose integrity he is satisfied; since he may with reason suspect his
own judgment, because every one needs to see his own thoughts through some
other medium, than his own way of reasoning; the fancy and the judgment being
too nigh of kin to be severe upon each other. Which made Balsac determine, that
it was too often the shame and reproach of human wisdom, that the greatest
minds, being wholly left unto themselves, in the greatest affairs were
likeliest to commit the greatest errors. And therefore the prudent man is far
from being an overweaning or overcautious man, and thus prudence recommends
modesty.

Choice of Officers.
Nothing therefore more manifests the prudence of a Prince than the choice of
his Counselors and subordinate Ministers of State, and Domestic Servants and
Favorites; for the office of the Prince is well performed in his Person, when
he has chosen good Ministers and Servants; for as has been said already, He
is not the worst Prince, who is the worst man, but he that has the worst
instruments to work by; for the tools usually show the artist. For a Prince for
money or favor to bring undeserving men into offices of great trust, is to
gratify the desire of his enemies; for they wish nothing more.

It is a great evidence of a Prince's own abilities to be able to choose a good
Councellor, and of his virtue, Of choice of Counselors about a Prince.
not to render such a Counselor useless unto himself; for he that will receive
Counsel, must have no pretincture or preingagement, or no bias, which may draw
him off from judging what is said unto him. He must have no petty Counselors
or Favorites of pleasure, to stagger his resolutions by whispers. He must shut
his ears unto flatterers; for if he once believe that sort of men in what they
say in commendation of himself, he will soon believe them in what they say
against others. So as Julians reply to a man, that highly commended him, was
very remarkable, When, Sir, says he, you have told me as freely of my faults,
as you have of the excellencies you pretend to see in me, then I will give
belief to what you say now. And Aristotle's epistle unto Alexander is most
remarkable, wherein he told him, he was most glad to understand, that he was
not, as too many Princes were, so scornful and so unreasonable, as to make good
advice ridiculous. This was worthy of so great a man's taking notice of; for
nothing makes serious men sooner desert a Prince's interest, than to be under a
slighted character; for Cicero in his Offices observes, many men will lose
their lives for a Prince, who will not lose their reputations. I once heard
these Buffoons, that thus pleased a Prince, called by a serious Gentleman, the
Petards of a Court; for, said he, by representing any man in a disguise or
masquerade, they will blow up his credit presently.

If a Prince have a known bias, he will too soon be observed, and a common
understanding at Court will make that appear wisdom, which really is but
flattery; for there is scarce any one maxim in Policy, which is not combated by
some other; therefore they that study their own preferment or security, not
their Princes establishment or honor, will soon find, that the weaker reason,
that gratifies the stronger passion of a Prince, is ever acceptable and
rewarded; whilst the stronger reason is mis-interpreted as a disaffection.
Princes therefore must discountenance no man's advice: for a wife Prince, like
a good Huntsman, must encourage the dog, that hunts for the sents, as well as
he that hits it. And Counsel, that is sincere, must be grateful, and the
Counselor if he speak in private, his Counsel must be kept private: for if the
Prince expose him unto a contrary faction, it will create that caution, that he
will want freedom of advice, when the other wants his security in advising.
Thus Princes must not call their Counselors to advise, as Xerxes did, and then
tell them, he called them to bring obedient minds, not troublesome debates. And
if a Prince would be well advised, he must advise early; for there is no
comfort to say, Sir, the time is past, or it is too late now to think on it. A
Prince should have no Councellor to be so mean, as to be a reproach unto him,
nor so lofty, as to reproach him; for the very errors of a Prince are to be
concealed, or respectfully laid open before him, and to be, as much as may be,
concealed from others.

My Lord Bacon says, a Prince should have but few, and those well chosen
Counselors, that they may carry on his business with one spirit of direction;
therefore he observes wise Henry the seventh made use only of Bishop Morton and
Bishop Fox. Over greatness in one, or over strict combination in a few, may be
both dangerous to him. He may keep his ear open unto many, but he must not let
them run into factions against one another, if he hope to be served by any; for
they will reak their spite against one another at the price of his disservice.
If both concur not in his business, he deceives himself, if he thinks he has
use of either. If he carry himself with indifference unto their particular
concerns, he may make use both of their advices and interest unto his own
service. And any other way of managing factions, or keeping them at odds, unto
my observation, was never useful unto any Prince. If either of them have a
predominancy with him, at least so by turns, as one checks the other, both
disserve him.

The best way of a Prince to know the nature of him he would make a Counselor
of, is to know him by domestics, and neighbors, and general vogue; for from
these no man can long conceal himself or his natural inclinations. Enemies will
traduce him, friends over value him; but these (if what they say flow naturally
from themselves) best discover him. And the Counsellor's nature is as much to
be considered, as his abilities: for though Princes most commonly best esteem
of subtle men, it is moral good men, who best advance their service; for a mind
not seasoned with morality, like the delicatest wines, will best please the
taste for a time, but soon grow pricked or sour, or some trick they will play
at last, harms more than any of their services do good.

When piety therefore is joined unto natural abilities, ripeness of age,
Characters of a Councellor.
and good experience, (as early having entered into business) then a Prince may
expect not only an able, but a faithful Councellor. If piety be wanting,
abilities will turn but unto compliances, and self ends, or serving some
faction rather than the Prince; for moral virtue is the only restraint upon
self-interest. Abilities destitute of piety, seldom advance a Princes service,
and he is likeliest best to serve his Prince on earth, who serves his God in
heaven; for piety only can restrain the ill effects of ambition or
covetousness, or lead a man to prefer his masters service, more than any
provision for wise or children. It is the honor of Cardinal Toledo, that he
refused to be of the Kings Council, without he might declare Gods will in
opposition unto the impiety of modern policies. Without natural abilities in a
Councellor, men expect a harvest, without having sowed the field; or if it were
sowed, and the seed corn not good, (viz. sowed with principles Epicurean,
Machiavilian, or Hobbian they will never serve to govern a free people; they
may to render men slaves. If Counselors be not grave and aged persons, they
that are to obey their counsels will not reverence them, or cheerfully submit;
for young men must necessarily want experience, and without experience the best
abilities will be subject unto gross errors. A Statesman, or indeed, any man in
any course of life, must be broken unto business (rompu aux affairs) before
any other man can confidently depend on him; for he is not to be depended on to
guide an affair, that has not seen both sides of fortune, or met with
disasters as well as good successes, or observed them carefully in History.
When young men give the counsel, the matter of it is most commonly violent; for
their temper leads either unto rash and daring things, such as may endanger the
settlement of the present state, (which no wise Prince for increase of
jurisdiction or prerogative should ever adventure) or unto wit and repartees,
which are proper for discourses at a table, but not for the gravity of a
Council Board: for commonly they gain their esteem by judgments they make on
things past, or by reflections on an affair in general, not by councils or
determinations on somewhat that is present and particular. Indeed, it is a
great mistake to think men of wit, with some mixture of Latin and Greek, or
foreign languages, make the properest persons for business. A great man both of
wit and learning, Thucydides, determines against it, Hebetiores, quam viri
acutiores, melius Rem-publ. administrant. Young and witty men have too much
fancy to examine their own judgments, and their warm temper makes them
prosecute an affair with eagerness at first, and remisness toward the end,
acribus initiis, sed incurioso fine, and they are too likely rashly to run into
errors, and by unseasonable remedies to endeavor their cure, or intempestivis
remediis delicta accendunt. I use the Authors words, (though the method of
writing be out of fashion) because I would strengthen my self with their
authorities. Besides, young and witty men value themselves much by being not
restrained by ancient forms of business; for usually they find some way more
expedite, and seemingly more reasonable, which usually upon trial is found
otherwise; for they argue their own change, or what they make it is a state of
melioration, but they foresee not the inconveniences, which attend upon their
own project: whilst Thucydides observes, the Nations, which were less prone to
change their customs, were most commonly esteemed the wisest. Besides, men of
this age and temper, as they are most inclined to be vain glorious, so less
capable of secrecy, whilst age and experience render men apter to give wholesome
than complying counsel; and as not to be too strictly tied unto old forms and
customs, so not to part with them but upon great examination. All which is the
evidence of a judicious mind.

Nothing therefore characters a Councellor better, than that it may be truly
said of him, He is a sincere man, or, as we say of a good Commonwealths man,
he is one that prefers the Publicks concern before his own private interest; so
a good Councellor will in affairs, that are important, rather consider his
Masters service than his Masters inclination. And that I may set down all the
extremities of integrity at once, (but I am afraid I am describing rara avis in
terris) a man that will lose his place, or fortune, or favor, rather than not
plainly, and without artifice, tell his Master betwixt them two, what is his
opinion. Afterward, though his Masters judgment be like to be his Masters
prejudice, (because Counselors are not Preceptors) that will as industriously
obey his Masters commands, as he would have done, if his Masters commands had
been grounded upon his own counsel; for he ought to think, that his Masters
opinion or inclination may be better than his own. When the Prince cannot admit
this freedom, nor the Councellor (in case there be nothing immoral in it) make
this submission, neither of them is fit for the other. If the Princes own
counsels cast what is settled into danger, or make it to be obtained by
extremities (though not illegalities) upon his own Subjects, a good man would
rather make his retreat, and dye obscurely, than see his Master or his Country
run a great risque; for it was Callisthenes great honor, not that he is said
never to have betrayed his Prince unto others, but because he would never
condescend to betray him to himself, as most Flatterers do, or concur with him
when his opinion differed. Thus it is one thing to obey a Prince, another to
counsel him.

This imaginary sincerity (for we may rather describe it than hope to meet with
it) in a Princes Councellor will incline him, that thus values simplicity of
mind, to avoid all subtle and underhand ways; for a man of this temper is a
judging or thinking person, and he knows humane actions are best managed by
familiar and easy means; for the plain hearted man, who resolves singly to
have his eye upon the nature of the business he is to act in, (and he cannot
understand well the nature of an affair, if he totally forgot the conjuncture
of the times and persons engaged about it) he will discard subtilty, and not
super-refine upon that, which may end well, if he make not new adventures, that
it might conclude better; since, as Cardinal Mazarine observed, the faisons
mieux spoiled more business than ever it advanced; for subtilty commonly fews
thorns, and often is forced to walk over them. Machiavels Borgia thus pricked
his own feet, and so did Pope Clement VII. And d'Avila observes, Henry the 3d
grew weary of the intrigues his Secretary Villeroy had entangled him in; and
Bentivoglio shows Cardinal Granvils dexterities proved Philip the Seconds
intanglements. A Prince or Councellor therefore must not consider the
advantages the end he proposes will get him, and forget, that the complexion of
the times, and the humors of Subjects may be indomitable, or superable with so
much hazard, that it will be no wisdom to put a Princes fortune upon the chance
of a die. A Princes greatness should rise like a vegetable, indiscernibly; for
hasting to be rich, and hasting to be great or absolute, are both alike
dangerous.

No man will be long thus sincere or honest, who has not courage; for it is an
act of bravery to seek his Masters advantage before his own; for courage frees
him from the solicitude of diving into his Masters inclinations, or scrutining
abditos sensus Principis, or being concerned what party stands in opposition
unto him, or what harm they can do him; which thoughts take up the whole time
of a timorous Councellor, who prostitutes both his Masters and his own honor
for a little security. This temper is ever reclaiming rebellions by caresses,
or expedients, and they, who are of it, spend most of their advice in shoring
up the house they plainly see will fall, but hope it will last their time.
Their trade is how to observe, which party in a Court prevail, and to be
officious toward it, and they care not in what languishing condition their
Masters affairs are, so their own post be safe. With the Amsterdam dog, they
will at best defend their shoulder of mutton for a time, but when they see the
other dogs have pulled it out of the basket, they will go in for their share.
It was faintness in council, that lost both Rome and Constantinople, and I may
say England or the Monarchy in King Charles the first's time; his armies
discipline rendered them not formidable unto the Rebels, and yet the
Counselors were afraid of their too great prosperity.

A good Councellor should be steady in his advice, but steadiness differs much
from inflexibility. He that adheres to principles is reckoned steady; yet when
the conjuncture of affairs requires it, he must strike sail, and he can own it;
for says Cicero, as affairs submit themselves often to me, so must I sometimes
unto them; Ut mihi res, sic me rebus submittere cogor. And Cato, had he been
less positive, had preserved Rome's or the Senates freedom longer. Cato optime
sentit, sed saepe Reipubl. nocebat. Probity may be impetuous, and so
consequently nocent. Flexibility may suit with judgment, because forced by
necessity, but instability can no way be justified, because it is a natural
inconstancy of mind, or weakness of reasoning.

A wise Councellor will not engross too many affairs into his own hands, nor
incroach upon other men's offices; nor be apt to undervalue them in it; or be
apt to raise his own credit by the loss of other men's; for he that does good
offices unto others, is in the best way to make hearty friends for himself. And
he must be patient to hear other men's advices; nay, with some respectfulness
bear their follies; and he must be unconcerned, even when his own councels are
not complied with, or are laid aside. Above all, a Privy Councellor should be
secret, for without secrecy neither arms nor council are like to be
successful. Augustus valued Mecoenas for his secrecy; Agrippa for his
laborious patience; and Virgil for his pleasurable and learned conversation. If
there be a chink in a Council Chamger, it discovers, or gives as much light, as
a window does in another room. Our great Chancellor Bacon recommends it unto
Princes, to beware that they themselves unsecret not their own affairs; for
crafty men will lay trains by discourses of one kind, to find the secret
resolutions of another kind; so it is dangerous for Princes personally to treat
with foreign Ambassadors.

But lest this should seem a Platonic Republic, or rather a speculation, How
much it is in the power of a Prince to make good Counc^llors for himself.
than any thing, that was probably practical, or might dishearten Princes from
looking after such men to make Counselors of; we will only say, if custom and
habits can change nature, Princes can do as much; for if the Prince will
chiefly favor men of good natural endowments, and of a moral honesty, (which
will soon turn into piety) and if he encourage industry, and let young men
perceive, that they must walk up unto preferment by stairs and degrees, and
begin with the lower offices, before they can hopefully pretend unto the
highest; if he find not good men to serve him, he will make men fit to serve
him. So as it is much the Princes own fault, when he thinks a Favorite of
pleasure or sports, conversation and divertisement, must presently be fit to be
made a guide in business; (for he can give the place, but he has not
omnipotency to give the abilities) or when he will look upon no man himself,
but through the glass, or as the image of a man is reflected unto him from a
Favorite, or some great Officer; for this is to strengthen their root, and to
weaken his own. For here, though the gift is his, the obligation is another;
this makes him have many attendants but few servants; for servants placed about
him by great men, are rather their spies than his servants. Such an
unconcernedness as this, who is about him, makes him appear like a town blocked
up, he can freely receive no provisions he stands in need of; and his own
servants are disheartened, by perceiving great men's friends and servants every
day preferred or gratified before them. This course chills all public
spiritedness, for men introduced by Favorites think, they shall last no longer
than their Patrons, who are often changed or in the wain; and so they come unto
a Court like harvest men, who serve only in a short time to reap that which
others ploughed, sowed, and harrowed for; or they work only in fair weather,
and when the corn is carrying into the barn. If a Prince therefore have ill
servants, he owes much of it unto his own negligence, or not valuing that which
he stands most in need of.

And thus from his great Counselors and Ministers of State, A Princes menial
Servants or small family.
we will come to reflect upon his menial Servants, and say a little of his
little Family or Court, and then of his great Family or Commonweal, or the
several orders of men in the Commonweal, each of them being to be a part of
his Regal study, for by them he may be served, or he may be endangered; and
neither Servant nor Subject will be long useful, when he observes there is no
observation of what he does. And nothing may show a Prince more his declension,
than when both these sorts of men are unconcerned, whether he be pleased or
displeased with their service. And very often the irreverence, that is paid him
in his own Court, is the mother of the neglect of his commands out of it, or
that the discontents of the one breed the malevolence of the other; yet it is a
great evidence, that a Government is off its hinges, when a few forward and
daring men openly oppose his affairs, and many cautious ill willers are pleased
at it, and scarce any ready to assert his rights; or rather, as Tacitus
expresses it in his terms, Is habitus animorum fuit, ut pessimum facinus
auderent pauci, plures vellent, omnes paterentur.

Libels and licentious discourses are ill Symptoms, and false news easily
spread; and when men in place speak fearfully, and those that invade the
Government boldly, it is a sign reverence is lost. Tacitus expresses it, when
they speak, liberius quam ut Imperantium meminissent; or, quando mallent
mandata Imperantium interpretari quam exequi. Discontents among the Vulgars,
and broken estates among the great ones, or if there be other combustible
matter, no man knows how small a spark, or from whence it may come, that will
set all on fire. When fear is greater than feeling, jealousies will admit of no
reasoning. And when there is a general dissolution of manners, there is seldom
found authority enough to reclaim that people; but some notable change follows;
for there is in a State in some conjuncture of time as discernible a public
madness, as there is in private men; and perchance I have lived to see it
abroad, or at home, I think more than once.

A Princes Court is a little Republic, and it is a great sign, that the Prince
is in the affection of his people, when his servants are respected through his
whole Kingdom for the reverence they bear him. Which if it be paid by some few
great men of the place, where they come, it is soon imitated by all the rest of
the Country; therefore his Servants usually called Courtiers, must be as
courteous and civil in their sphere, as they are willing to be kindly treated,
when they are in other men's. So as a Princes family ought to be of persons well
chosen, and of good reputation and behavior; and the nigher in relation or
service the person is unto the King, the more humanity and kindness he should
show to those who come to Court; especially those who come rather to pay a
duty, than make a suit; for this last sort are to be answered friendly, but
still according unto the nature of their request. Access ought to be easy, and
answers made with gentleness as well as reasonableness; for the hand of
haughtiness is not to reach even a courtesy; for where the receiver is
discontented in the manner of it, the favor conferred is never half
acknowledged.

A Prince should not admit about his Person men of bold tempers, and who dare
openly avow immoral tenants or principles, for these men will soon call that
which is good indifferent, and then they will not be long before they will call
that which is vicious reasonable; and artificially insinuating into his favor
by keeping intelligence with his passions, they will endeavor to lead him from
vanity unto vice; and the fouler the latter is, if they be but an instrument or
companion in it, the securer they are in his grace; for there is at a Court no
so ready way unto gain and preferment, as that which is got by some shameful
service; and such men being privy unto a Princes clandestine vices, they will
never be quiet until they be admitted unto his public concerns. Scire volunt
secreta domus indeque timeri. Such trivial Servants, or smaller sort of
Favorites as these, have politics sitted to secure themselves. There is
nothing (say they) so safe for a Prince, as to make new creatures of his own. A
Prince must be constant, and adhere even unto his errors, rather than be
lightly carried over unto other men's Judgments, lest he seem to live upon a
borrowed reason. Hence it is, or from such small Favorites as these it is, that
some Historians have observed, that when the spring-heads of some Princes
councils have been discovered, they are small even to contempt. Darius's
expedition into Greece, arose either from a Physician unto himself, who told
him, what excellent figs grew there, or from his Wives maid, who told her, if
the King made a war upon that land, she would have the great Ladies of Greece
her slaves. Varro has the like observation, and Monsieur de Plessis assigns
much of the miseries that befell the French Nation upon the Catholic League,
unto the Duke of Guises cheating Monsieur d'Espernon of a Miss. And thus often
a Favorites passion begins a war, as well as a Princes public interest. On the
smaller sort of smaller Favorites Boccalini puts a high contempt, when he says,
all the money in a Princes treasure will not buy sugar enough to candy or
sweeten them. The Abbot D'Escallie, I remember, long since at Brussels told me
a very pleasant story, how his wise Master, the Duke of Savoy, (Le viel Renard
des montaignes) took from him an elegant Barber that he had, who grew so great
a Favorite, that he trusted him in some of his most important Services; in
which miscarrying, he complained unto the Abbot; Sir, (says the Abbot) concern
not me herein, for I put him unto the outside of your head, you put him into
the inside. A Prince therefore must be very careful in the choice of his
Servants, that they be men equal unto their business, and not above it, or
under it, and honest minded as well as strong brained; for to serve faithfully
is as necessary as to serve ably; since abilities seldom make recompenses for
frauds, and since honest men in favor will seldom want the parts of able men,
not yet admitted thereunto. Balzac says truly, the greatness of a Prince must
not rob him of the pleasantest part of human passion, i. e. the free and kind
conversation of some person, A Favorite of pleasure allowable, but not to be
made a Favorite of business.
whom by some secret and unaccountable motion he likes in conversarion; for
neither moral virtue nor policy puts any such restraint upon nature; these
correct the imperfections of sensual appetites, but gratify both great and
small inclinations in natural and not immoral contentments. But public
Ministers, or such as privately are employed about public affairs, are to be
chosen by reason, not affection. Such choices, as has been already observed,
Augustus made, when he drew into his affection and service Mecenas, Horace, and
Virgil, who were qualified as well to be Counselors as Companions. Besides, an
ill Favorite is often a necessary instrument or skreen unto a worse Prince; for
Tacitus observes, Tiberius was worse without Sejanus than with him. Tiberius
(says he) vixit obtectis libidinibus, dum Sejanum dilexit and timuit, sed in
scelera simul and dedecora prorupit, postquam remoto pudore and metu, suo
tantum ingenio utebatur. And people reake their ill will rather upon these than
on their Prince.

Nothing is meant more here, than that a Favorite of pleasure should not be
made a Favorite of business. A Prince should be the Master of the springhead
himself, that he may water whom he pleases; for if he suffer himself to be
engrossed, and passes his influences by another unto all his Dependants, he may
have outward reverence but never inward esteem; for such uncontrollable
Favorites for the most part, as they are very expensive in themselves, so they
are very insolent unto others, and therefore upright and able men will not
serve under them, Thus they are like Beacons or Lighthouses at sea, which old
Sailers know are to be avoided; but young make toward them in the night, and
endanger a shipwreck.

A Princes great family, or orders of men in his nation.
These and many more troublesome considerations a Prince has about his
Domestics or little Family. Many more then he must have about his great Family
or Commonweal. For as individuals or single men are to be considered, so every
rank or profession of men are to be weighed by him, since his security or his
danger has in several periods of times arisen, as his Nobility or Commons,
nay, as his Clergy have been affected and predominant. Nay, he is to observe
even the natural and constant clime of his Country, for that will learn him
much of the temper of his Subjects in general; for as Barclay says, Haeret
quaedam vis inconcussa hominibus pro condition terrarum. And some ages run
unto arms, others unto learning; some unto trade, some unto superstition in
their Religion, A spirit of government necessary to a Governor.
or Phanaticism. With all these difficulties his spirit of Government must
grapple, and without a spirit of Government he will miscarry; or if he please
not himself in the affairs of his Government; or if it be his task, not part of
his pleasure. A Princes Politics will be as improsperous as his Oeconomicks
are, who loves to spend freely, and yet never to look upon an account; but
every one meets not with a Richelieu, and a Mazarine, or Colbert; nor with a
Master, who will so treat them.

Come we now unto his great Family, which consists of the Orders or Tribes
among his Subjects, viz.

1. Clergy. 2. Nobility. 3. Gentry
Or his three States made up of these three Orders. and Commons.
Next of the Professions, viz.

1. Divines. 2. Lawyers. 3. Physicians. 4. Soldiers. 5. Merchants. 6. Seamen.
7. Tradesmen. 8. Artificers. 9. Husbandmen. And 10. Vulgars or Multitudes.
Wise States encourage not Bookmen in great numbers: for they oftener, both
Divines and Lawyers, especially Atturneys, rather raise quarrels, than either
prevent or compose them. Literas, says an Historian, ad usus saltem discebant,
etc. reliqua omnis disciplina erat, ut pulchre parerent, ut labores perferrent,
ut in pugna vincerent.
A Government (says Bodin) is made up of an harmonick justice, i. e. of such a
structure; that the meanest tribes or profession of men find, that they are
considered, and in some measure considerable in the Government: even the
Multitude or Vulgar, or lowest sort of men being very considerable, in respect
of their very number.

The Clergy are an order of men set apart among all Nations for the divine
services of the God of the land; Clergy.
for the Gentile and Barbarians never wanted their Brachmans or their Druides,
and every where they were men of prime rank; for the natural reverence, that
was due to their calling, gave such an authority to their persons, that most
commonly they were conversant in the most important affairs of the Nation; (for
here we mention them only in relation to the Civil society) none being fitter
to interpose betwixt Prince and People, than those that interceed with God for
both. And the respect that is paid to them, is a reverence paid to God; for
upon the same ground Princes Ambassadors are treated with those observances
they meet with; upon the same are God's Ministers. In this order of men God
becomes in a manner visible unto us; for when we find he has Servants peculiar
to himself, a Court, or Temple, and revenues appropriate for maintenance of
both, we straight conclude, of a surety God is in this place, or he is the Lord
of this people. So as there is no greater evidence, that piety decays in a
Nation, than that they are apt to contest or disrespect their Priests or
Ministers.

Now as this is a valuation due to the Minister of God's word, so he himself is
to pay a respect unto his own calling, and to appear worthy of it, and fitted
for it; for duties are reciprocal, and he is God's husbandman, and therefore
must cultivate his People; and if he truly discharge his office, in fitting
them for another world, he fits them best for society in this world, and for
subjection to the Prince: and there is no such way for him to procure the
dignity, that is due to himself, as to exercise the proper virtues of his
calling. Other ties or compliances with the humors and manners of a People: or
becoming like them with them in common conversation begets familiarities, but
not reverence. Piety in themselves, and endeavors to make their flock pious, or
of orderly lives, discretion in being friendly and helpful, or ready to advise
and do good offices, a private information or admonition at home, or a
conversation, which recommends that unto particular men out of the pulpit,
which is preached unto them in it; this attracts their good will, whilst being
unconcerned with, or conforming their company to the irregular or negligent
habit or custom of others, removes the inward esteem they should labor for.
This ought to be very sincerely Pursued; I will no be so uncharitable, as to
say, it is artificially so done by some of the Romanists, and by some of the
Presbyterians, (though I believe one gains much of his authority by his
indulgences and easy absolutions, and the other by his assurances, that they
carry God's brand to mark the elect with:) only I wish our Country Clergy would
be more strict to follow the rules they receive, and I have often heard given
them by their Bishops in their visitations: for when they influence their flock
toward God's service, they lead them the easier to be subject cheerfully to
their Prince's laws and commands. And if this Order of men will expect (as
justly they may) the Prince's protection for themselves, they owe it him as a
duty, to keep themselves so in esteem and friendship with their congregations,
as they may dispose them to his service; for if they fall into the envy or
disesteem of their Parishioners, they who should be an ease and coadjutors of
their Prince, make their protection a burden to him, or they become as an
useless body. In this quarrelling and examining age the Governors of the Church
should endeavor to make matters of faith treated on with plainness, and not
mingled with too many distinctions: that matters of good life be taught as much
by the example of the teachers, as his expositions or precepts: that their
Visitations and Courts of Jurisdiction be not only formal, or in maintenance of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction or gain, or rather for showing their Orders, and
paying for it, (as I have heard no mean men among themselves say) than for
keeping them in good order; especially that their excommunications be upon
weighty matters, and somewhat that is purely Christian. For though contumacy to
a Court be a great fault, and that this Ecclesiastic Court have no other penal
or legal censure: yet when the subject matter, on which the excommunication is
grounded, is some civil or mixed concern, then this being a spiritual punishment
seems so remote, that it makes excommunication seem light, and draws neglect
rather than respect or obedience to the Jurisdiction. These good Fathers should
be known to be forward to divert a Prince from laying great or unnecessary
burdens on their Subjects; which if it be perceived by the Subject, then this
temper in the Clergy will get such a disposition in the Layety, as will lead
them respectfully to hearken to such doctrines, as invite them patiently to
bear grievances or pressures; since it is an eminent virtue in a Christian
Subject to bear with the errors of a remiss Government. Thus a Clergy must make
themselves as useful as they can in secular affairs both to Prince and People,
if they would gain upon them in their spiritual concerns; and this we may say,
is an incumbent duty upon them, as they are members of a Politic body. And in
this sense it is, that nothing more concerns a Prince, in respect of the
influence this order of men have on his Subjects, than that he provide, (as God
has done for him) that his Clergy depend on no body but himself; for if either
in the Prince's Ecclesiastical affairs, they pretend a Superior authority to
his, as making themselves depend on a Pope, and thereby exempting themselves
from the Prince's jurisdiction, or that they can wrest themselves into his
secular affairs, as they have some relation to Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
concerns (which even Presbytery has set up a claim unto) then this Prince's
State, and his Subjects obedience will be very precarious and dangerous: and
his condition not much bettered, if Junius Brutus and Buchanan, or the
Schoolmen and Jesuits be the Interpreters of St. Paul's thirteenth Chapter to
the Romans, or of St. Peter's 1. Ep. 2. chapter v. 13. And the like he may expect
from an Enthusiastical Teacher, who will be but binding him in chains, and his
Nobles in links of iron. He must not be ignorant therefore, that his office
supervises theirs, and when he has not encroached upon that spiritual part of
their office, to which they are properly said to be set apart and consecrated,
(as administering the public Offices of the Church, of praying for, and
preaching unto, and administering the Sacraments) then to oversee these
Overseers in the good or maladministration of their Offices is his duty and
his security. And in this kind, how far an Episcopal Clergy (as acknowledged
and settled here in England) exceeds all others through the whole world, as best
agreeing with Christ's institution, and the Apostles practice, judicious,
learned, and Christian Examiners will best and soonest find out. And we will
conclude our remarks upon this Order of men with this experiment, that in the
year 1640, nothing raised so much the Rabble, as did the Nonconformist Clergy,
who from all parts of the Kingdom came most up to the City, and filled most of
the pulpits, and the Lecturers residing there; and in this present year 1678,
nothing so much secured the peace of that place (nay, we may say of the whole
Nation, for Whitehall had one kind of Guards, and the Citizens, true it is, by
the King's leave, were their own Guards) as did the Orthodoxy of the Clergy,
and the satisfactions the better sort of Citizens took in their own Ministers,
who so prudently preached down the then suspected designs against the Religion
established and secured loyalty by Christian principles.

Nobility is (or of old was) usually the offspring of virtue, or valor, or
industry, Nobility.
now it is more commonly the creature of the Prince; for he is the fountain of
honor. Their order is like the lesser or planetary lights in the firmament,
which attend upon the sun; they are to set forth the splendour or majesty of the
sovereign throne, yet sometimes they eclipse it. If they withdraw their banks,
they often let in an inundation of Populacy, and endanger the throne; if they
interpose their bodies, they sometimes skreen the Populacy from the scorching
heat of Sovereignty; but they prey often upon both; for as they are sometimes a
restraint upon the Tyrant-Prince, so they are often an encouragement to the
giddy multitude, to be contumacious and refractory: and sometimes they have
been so unnatural, as to draw over the fickle multitude, and to join themselves
unto a foreign Prince, against their true Sovereign, as in the time of King
John. Which evidences, that the body Politic like the Natural, when the humors
and gall overflow, and the parts lose their temperament, the whole looses its
health. If the Nobility be few and great, they too often turn the scale of
Government, which they should keep upright; if they be many or necessitous,
they first peel the Court, and then are Court instruments to peel the people.
Nobility is a plant, that will degenerate; and though they often owe their
fortunes as well as their qualities unto the Crown; yet we have too many
examples among us, that the Sons and posterity of those Families, which were
wholly raised by the Prince, employed themselves most to pull down the cloth of
State. Thus the noblest of men, if they may but gratify some violent passion,
or compass some present advantage, they desert their station, and the meanest
things will be done by the greatest men. When their numbers are many, they
appear but like a more splendid Gentry. Henry the seventh did as it were
undermine their greatness, which in so mixed a Monarchy as ours is, was not very
compatible with Sovereignty in so few hands. From that time this order of men
in our Government has not only been in the wain, but may be supposed much to
have degenerated; for the ancient Nobility have much lessened their Estates and
have made way for the principles of Oceana; for cutting off the dependencies
from themselves, they made the Yeomanry free, which bred our multitude of
Freeholders, who (says Mr. Harrington) have now the balance of our land or
land-rents, and consequently, in his opinion, of our wealth, and by his
arguments, consequently of our power: but consult Mr. Wrenn, and Oceana is
drowned. And our Reformation did as much for our Church Lands, which seemed a
fifth or sixth of the Kingdom. All which contributed unto the late temporary
subversion of our Government in our late good, but unfortunate Prince's reign,
Charles the first. God did restore us from this captivity, but whether he be
not drawing upon us, for the abuse of that mercy, the judgment we generally
deserved as Regicides, he knows, whose ways are in the depth, and past finding
out. This change had never been effected, had not the Nobility forsaken that
cloth of State, they owed their dignity unto, and ought to have protected: but
infirm must that palace be, whose main beams shrink from the walls; but down
will those beams fall, which are withdrawn from what ought to support them. And
when our Gentry do the like, our very Sovereignty will fall to be among
Mechanics; and not long after, the vulgar Rabble will have a prospect for
their ambition, and when paltry Players (both Clerical and Lay) have got the
habits of King, and Priest, and Nobles, and Gentry, the mock Comedy for some
time will pass for a good form of Government. But he that rules in heaven can
only predict, whilst an honest and condoling, not upbraiding, spirit may
inoffensively, because rationally, forewarn.

Nobility in all nations, as they have had more honor deferred unto them than
other ranks of men, so they have had more privileges and immunities.
Boccalini, I am sure, has the reflection: but I remember not whether I follow
him step by step; he resembles (as I think) Princes unto shepherds, the
Commonalty unto the sheep, and the Nobility (for Nobility were originally
Soldiery) unto the dogs. (This is not a derogatory term, for it is but to
follow a Metaphor.) So as, says he, if these be overawed, that they may not
bark and fight for their charge (for they are to defend the shepherd as well as
the sheep) or, if they be not armed with an iron collar of Generosity, (some
extraordinary pre-eminence or privilege) but be awed and cowed by the
shepherds boys, or the rams of the flock, both shepherd and sheep in a time of
need, or when some wolfish conquering King shall invade, or a Home. Usurper
undermine both; I say then, such a sort of generous daring Spirits will be
wanting, and a bold Fellow, that has followed a laden horse on foot, will
think, he is as fit to ride on horseback, (and probably he may be so) as the
greatest Lord: for a crab-wine is preferred to support the stomach before
vinegar, that sprang from a generous grape, because turned. If Nobility
degenerate, Princes should employ men, who have the virtues, not the titles of
great men. But if Nobles have both, they are the sit men to be employed for
their extraction; and their already being masters of moderate fortunes makes
them have great advantages over men of natural and acquired parts, though never
so well exercised or experimented, if new men; for the tree is less envied,
that grows from a root, and has been long in growing, than the mushroom, that
was not at night, and shows a head in the morning. Henry the seventh supposed
he had strengthened the Crown, when he cut the wings of the Nobility; Henry the
eighth vindicated the just rights of the Crown, from the usurpations of a
foreign usurping Bishop; both which acts made great changes in the state of our
Government. Queen Elisabeth both unto Bishop and Nobleman allowed a due honor:
but in her time, a novel Schismatical Presbyterian humor crept into the veins
of some of all orders; so as too many Presbyters designed to level the Bishops
with themselves, and too many Nobles, Gentry, and Commons found fair hopes to
set up a real Aristocracy with an insignificant or titular Monarchy. And thus
was made an inundation in Charles the first's time, which swept away the
scepter, and the sword, and the miter; and though the waters are fallen again
into their banks, there is yet much slime left behind, and the ill vapor, that
not long since gave the Commonweal a syncope, may turn into an apoplexy, if
the three Estates be not apt to do right unto one another, and all unto their
Prince.

Soldiery.
Soldiery may be accounted a lesser sort of Nobility; for arms raised in the
first times private men into the rank of Nobles, as usually favor of Princes,
and management of affairs, or the penny does now; but honor lost its spirit, or
luster, or esteem among men, since flattery or a sum of money became the
current price for it. No man can properly be accounted a Soldier: though he may
be a stout and valiant man, who has not been frequent in dangers, and served
some time at the trade.

Gentry are the lesser Nobility, Gentry.
and did usually influence the Commons, as the Nobility did usually them: but
as they emancipated themselves from dependence on the Lords, so among us the
Freeholders have withdrawn much of their respect from them. For that last rank
of men, since the sale of Church Lands since Henry the eighth's time, and of
the Crowns parting with much of its desmeasnes, and the Nobility and Gentry
both making great sales unto men of professions, of what was theirs, Lawyers,
Merchants, and great Traders being now great purchasers, we may justly say the
balance of the Kingdom in our age is much changed from what it was in former
ages. And our young Nobles, both of the greater and lesser rank, having rather
a forward and a sinical education, viz. rather hastening timely or early to
appear superficially men, than ripely and thoroughly to be so, they often run
out of their estates, before consideratively they know they are in them. And by
these often changes, which the ancient Families of most Counties undergo in
their estates, the public concerns or form of Government is less steady than
it ought to be in a well constituted Commonweal. And if a Prince made this a
part of the care of his Government, to preserve and countenance the ancient
Families both of his Nobility and Gentry, and to discountenance such as neither
took into arms, nor civil employments: if he obliged them sometimes with
offices freely given, or disobliged them not, by conferring dignities upon some
new Upstarts, who purchase in their Counties, and overtop them at first coming,
which their wives cannot bear, being to lose their precedence, these sort of
men keeping their residence among their neighbors would prove the best security
both of a Prince's person and Government, and their loyalty in the last King's
time was most examplary: whilst the men of profession, the Lawyers, and the
Merchants were as remiss (to say no more) in their duty. For from men of
pleasure may be expected more loyalty, than from men of gain, who are ever apt
to follow the tide, which usually turns into profit, whilst the other, content
with their own estates, affect securing the present Government or state of
things. Great Ministers of State heretofore were not ashamed to keep a good
correspondence with the most considerable and judicious persons of this rank in
every County; for they are not only valuable in their Country, but fill up many
of those places, which serve in Parliament, and the Commonweal must be best
advanced, when it is served by men, who are best affected unto the established
Government. And it must needs be a general comfort unto the Subject, when a
Prince desires to be served by Persons, that are neither mercenary nor
factious. These are the men, that in their Countries keep up good order and
industry; so as to have a good regard unto them, may not only be reckon among a
Prince's policies, but among his virtues. If they find themselves neglected,
whether the disorder arise from the great men, or the storm from the multitude,
they are not like seasonably to interpose: for though duty oblige all men in
the politic body, as in the natural, when a vein is opened, to endeavor to
stop it, by running toward it, yet the wise Historian has observed, too many
men choose their own security, rather than with hazard to obviate the danger of
the Commonweal. Tuta and presentia, quam vetera and periculosa mallent. But
this I conceive is, when the State wants noble and generous Persons to depend
on: for when men of eminency are not on the stage to defend laws, men of
loyalty will not be much concerned under what laws they live, and thus most
commonly innovations are admitted.

Commonalty.
Commonalty, if a man draw the lines of their picture from Scripture, or the
best Historians, he will Scarce be able to give them a good epithet. Bishop
Andrews observes, besides the word, My People, there was nothing but a crooked,
a perverse, a stiff-necked, a gainsaying People; and Thucydides shows their
rashness and temerity; says he, quicquid modestum, ignaviae speciem habet; quod
circumspectum and providum, segnitiae, quicquid abruptum and praeceps, id forte
and virile censetur; for they have no leisure or art to study or think, and
therefore act as they are driven or prevailed on, or according unto example or
custom. They therefore are resembled unto waters, which are still and quiet in
themselves, if not agitated by winds or popular Orators; or if the Government
be weak and declining, they fall from it as waters do, that fall from a
descent, and by an irregular motion soon make a torrent, and sweep away all
that should bound them, or is before them; the rage of the sea, and the noise
of the waves, and the madness or irrationality of the people are joined
together. And no character better fits them than the great Historians, i. e.
They either humbly serve or proudly domineer; aut humiliter serviunt, aut
superbe dominantur. They run among rocks, and over shelves and shallows, and
therefore he need be a good and experienced Pilot, that conducts the ship of
Government when they are raised into a storm. Their passions being strong, and
their judgments weak, they are more seducible unto a false religion, than apt
to be settled or fixed in a true, because the one is founded on reason, which
they have no measures of, and the other is laid on principles, which relate
unto fables and prodigies, or any crafty or obscure notions of some designing
person. Now there is no way sooner discovers the nature of principles, than the
end they serve unto. If they serve not unto the virtues of the mind, you may
justly doubt them; If they advance the triumvirate of the world, pleasure,
profit, and ambition, by other means than virtue, (for there is a virtuous
pleasure, profit, and ambition, as they suit with reason, as well as they suit
with sense) they are false. But this sort of men having not busied their
understandings about such distinctions, they are too too often the unhappy
instruments to beat down truth in all kinds, and set up error; for they are not
more fickle in their Religion, than they are unto their Government, or rather
Governors, from whom they are apt to be seduced. It is the wisdom of a State in
these last ages of the world, not to trouble them with unrevealed niceties of
Religion, or to oblige them unto many rites and ceremonies, the use whereof
they cannot penetrate into; for this age, like the former will not take all on
trust, but to keep them in employment, and out of necessity by securing their
trades and manufactures, the most probable way to make them good Sons of the
Church, and Subjects of the State. And let them find they are not despised, but
that the Prince sometimes communicates himself unto them in splendid shows;
(for panem and Circenses the Romans found great use of in pleasing, and by
pleasing, in governing their multitudes) for as has been said, multitudes are
valuable for their number, and Princes ought to think them very valuable,
because if the Prince has their affection, he is surely safe. Neither great
Nobles nor popular Commoners are able to effect any considerable thing without
Briareus's hands. But says Cicero, as they have little judgment, so they seldom
follow verity: and thus being too prone to suspect their Governors, they are
too easily wrought on by popular Officers, or Tribunes, who represent them; and
being of a mutinous disposition, they brutishly nourish factions in a State,
for things they do not understand, till they pay the price of it, with their
own blood and ruin: not knowing the Demarchi of Athens, and the Ephori of
Sparta, and the Tribunes of Rome were set up as the Conservators of the peoples
liberty, but were truly the overthrow of them all. In a word, the worst men are
aptest to dispute their Governors: for pessimus quisque asperrime Rectorem
patitur: and moral and religious men make the best subjects, as being the best
judges of the blessings men enjoy under a well ordered Government.

Having said thus much of the before mentioned several ranks and orders of men,
whereof their States are made up, it may not be amiss to mention the several
professions and their ends, The several professions in a Nation.
and how they are of advantage, and how they may be of danger unto a
Government; that so the Prince's wisdom may make the true use of them all, and
divert the ill consequences of their abuses in their callings.

Of the Divine we have said much already, therefore shall only say here, that
he manages the opinions about celestial and moral truths, or the state of men
after this life. The Physician is to preserve the health of the body. The
Lawyer the concerns of a man's estate. The Soldier is to see justice may be
executed. The Merchant exports the staple, and imports the foreign
commodities: and the Tradesman vents both by retail. The Artificer manufactures
all, and the Husbandman provides food for all, for the King himself lives by
the field.

In no profession can any man be truly a good Citizen, that is transported
either with pleasure or covetousness. It is a great sentence of Salust's, Nec
quisquam extollere se, aut divina attingere potest, nisi omissis pecuniae aut
corporis gaudiis; for with neither of these two taints or corruptions can the
Divine ever be believed, that he means as he says. And with them the Physician
and Lawyer will either neglect or beggar their Patients and Clients. The
Soldier grows cruel and rapacious, if these vices seize on him, and will sooner
lose or sell the place he is to defend and maintain, than keep it. And the
Merchant, Tradesman, and Artificer trade unfairly, and not unto their own
Countries advantage by covetousness; the one bringing in commodities, which
serve only unto sensual appetites and vanity, or to please the fancy; the
other either adulterating, or working so slightly his wares, that Foreigners
decline the trade; so as all these inconveniences, and the prevention of them,
fall under the Prince's care and policies, or art of Government. Indeed in the
body politic, as in the natural, there not being the least thing done, but
requires an influence of the Governors. He must inspirit every profession, or
they stagnate.

None of these professions are superfluous; for there must be a Divine, No
profession superfluous.
though every man were so knowing, as not to need instruction: since his Office
is to be the mouth of the Congregation unto God. A Lawyer cannot be wanting,
because two men may mean very justly and sincerely, and yet not know how to
assure one another in legal terms. A Physician cannot be wanting, because
health will impair, and sickness ought to be considered by a man, that is in a
state of health: upon which reason a man safely cannot be his own Physician;
for sickness often deprives a man of sense, and disables him to judge his own
case. One man's necessaries must be supplied from various trades, and that
makes necessary all the other distinct callings. And thus the wisdom of God,
that designed men for society, ordered it, that men could not live with one
another, if they had not likewise been to have lived by one another. True it
is, the Soldier is but a necessary evil in a Commonweal; for would all men
observe justice, there would need to be no force; for force is never to be
used, but when reason and law are by violence withstood. It is depraved, not
sincere, nature makes this profession necessary; but that necessity makes it
very honorable and useful; and as it requires a great courage to execute it,
and a great presence of mind: so this is hardly attained without a profession
accustomed unto danger. It likewise requires great natural strength of body,
and moral virtue of the mind; for no order of Theologues, no, nor of Penitents,
undergo those hardships, which the fatigues of war bring with them; nor have
they frequenter occasion of moral virtue, to restrain ferocity, and to exercise
humanity.

The great extent of government.
If all this providence and care belongs unto the Regal office in relation to
the choice of persons, and the administration of professions, how much further
must this providence extend, when it is to weigh such numberless particulars of
business, where every case differs almost from another; falling under various
circumstances, which requires a particular act of prudence to determine, and
which are too too numerous to prescribe rules for.

It is no marvel then, that God, who has made Princes provinces thus large,
has afforded them his own title of Gods among men: for their providence
resembles his, in a shadow of the extent of it; and in the various affairs it
provides for, they stand in need of an universal wisdom, like his, and of an
ability of turning evil to good, i. e. that that which damnifies private men,
may be made use of, or conduce unto public advantage. Wisdom therefore built
her a house, and fixed it on seven firm pillars, or mankind, who found a natural
disposition to live ia society, as well as a natural necessity, in respect of
the mutual aid one man gives unto another, discerned, that the strongest tie to
fasten them unto one another, was the same band or religion, which tied them
unto their God.

Some learned men make this house to be the body natural of man, and the five
outward senses to be five pillars of it, and the two inward, fancy and memory,
to make up the seven. I shall not presume to say, the Text warrants my
application; but in relation unto this discourse I shall make the house to be a
body politic, or civil Government, which may be said to be upheld by these
seven underwritten pillars, viz.

1. Religion. 2. Justice. 3. Council. 4. Confederation. 5. Commerce. 6.
Treasure. 7. Arms.
Religion.
Religion, as it is a pillar by it self to support Government, so it is the
basis of all the six other pillars; for as the word imports, it is a tie or
band betwixt the divine and the human nature; and no ligament would have held
men together, but that which linked God and man together. Which commerce or
intercourse is the great proof of an intellectual world, God's Spirit here
influencing this intellectual world, as the sun does the elementary.

Natural. Instituted.
It is usually divided into natural and instituted, or what God writ by
creation, in the heart or understanding of man, and so natural religion was
essential to man by creation, as instituted, was given by, or written in his
Word for man, and principally designed for the manifestation of that
revelation, which relates to redemption. Man naturally capable of immediate
revelation from God.
Man was naturally capable of revelation from or by an intercourse with God, by
such means as his divine wisdom thought fit to communicate himself: for we see
before man's fall he received a revelation in that positive prohibition of
eating the forbidden fruit; for positive laws, relating only unto things of an
indifferent nature, are every one of them so many immediate revelations from
God. Hence may be observed, how extensive natural religion is; showing the
human dependence on the divine nature, adoring that majesty and goodness, and
evidencing its own gratitude by its obedience, expressed by the exercise of those
moral virtues, viz. piety, justice, The extent of natural religion reaching
unto that, which is usually accounted ^nstitut^d religion.
and sobriety engraven in its own nature; and evidenced by that natural
conscience, which will disturb even the mightiest Princes, when all the world
else flatters and secures their vices: which proves, that men have a prospect
of comfort or fear beyond this world. The same natural re igion (or that
reasonableness it is grounded upon) shows, why men, who thus admitted a God,
thought, that God designed for himself peculiar and separate servants, temples,
sacrifices, etc. and all these to be of the choicest persons and things, that
were among the sons of men, because they were dedicated unto the supreamest
essence. Hence it is we may conceive, that all the religion of the Heathen
world was natural; for it was so necessary for man to depend upon a superior
nature, that otherwise (as the Lord Bacon says) he would not have been able to
have supported the frailty of his own nature. The Heathens care of religion.
Man admitted therefore many Gods, rather than he would be without one; and
what were all the opinions of fate and destiny, and Elyzium fields, but an
acknowedgment of providence and immortality? and what were all the Philosophers
grave precepts about morality, but a groping after the Decalogue, and the
dispersed Ethics in Scripture? How careful was this blind world of their
Dianas, and Palladiums, and topical Gods; for herein they thought lay their
hope and their strength, and expected not a victory, till they could enchant or
draw over to themselves the God of the place. Plutarch could say, depraved
nature runs into superstition or atheism, and then sound reason led unto true
religion, which is but an obedience unto God's laws written in man's heart, upon
the ground of piety and gratitude.

No nation would ever allow atheism among them, nor let the divinity of their
Gods (though false ones) be invaded; for this among the Athenians cstl Socrates
his life, and Diagoras was banished by them for but speaking doubtfully of
them; and Marcus Tullius, one of the two Library-keepers of the Sybills books,
was sewn into a sack, and flung into the sea, but for making an imbezlement or
a rasure. Lucius Albinus flying from the Galls, with his wife and children,
seeing the Vestal Virgins on foot, descended from his chariot to save and ease
them; and they all agreed in this, that sacrilege was much more heinous than
theft, and that though Dionysius the Syracusian prided himself in his
prosperity, even by this sin, yet the direful vengeances, which befell his son,
were assigned to be judgments on the sacrilege of the father. It is well
known, how erroneous the Heathen Divinity was; and yet we cannot but think,
that these reverences to false Gods were acceptable to the true. It was the
lapse of nature, and the seduction of the evil spirit, and inadvertence and
habit in evil, that made men thus grossly mistake the object of their belief;
but it was natural reason and religion, that made them determine, there was
somewhat in this kind to be believed; and their immoral actions (especially as
they were nocent to civil society) fell under the correction of those laws,
which were framed to make society beneficial.

This is enough to show us, how even by the light of nature men made civil
society to be supported by religion: Religion a (...) of civil society.
for it is not only the cause of good order, but of good success or blessing.
For in Vitellius's time, when the Capitol, wherein was the Temple of their
Gods, was burnt, they deplored themselves much more than they did, when the
Galls took their city; for then they said, the seat of Jupiter was unshaken,
and their Capitol preserved. All this considered, we, cannot wonder, why the
wise men of those ages with Aristotle determined, that the first care of every
State should be that of religion; and with Dion Cassius, that the religion of
every country should be but one.

The care of religion.
Now the first reason for the first proposition is, that religion neglected or
despised weakens all other parts of government. Religio neglecta aut spreta
trahit secum rempublicam; for where there is but an indifferency to it, or a
want of devotion and inward esteem of it, the soul of moral virtue is lost; for
men will be rather temporate for health, than for the peace of society, or to
have a fitness by piety to have an intercourse with their God; and justice will
be observed rather as an outward compliance with laws, than an inward esteem of
such a beneficial tie, in relation to society. For it is the love of justice,
which flows from religion, not the fear of its punishments, that inspirits
government; for this values the Legislators authority and wisdom, the other
dreads only the Lictor's rods. Secondly, Government is never freely and
cheerfully obeyed, but when it is supposed God's ordinance, and that it is
accounted a part of religion so to esteem it; else obedience will be more
precarious, than the nature of it will admit. The commission of government
therefore issues out of God's Chancery, and directs the Prince to direct his
government to the benefit of the subject; and yet when he fails therein, leaves
no appeal to the subject, but unto his providence, who prescribes to both; for
Nero's vices were not half so pernicious to the empire (no, nor to particular
men) as were the revolts even from that monster, and from his Successors,
Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, who were but pestilential breaths of the same ill
vapor. When conspiracy had cast out Kings, the Consul's rule seemed so
majestic and arbitrary, that the Commonalty must needs be tempering it by
Tribunitial power; so as Livy observes, that the cord of government was so
strongly haled at each end, (or extremity) that there was no strength left in
the midst; and that strife was more for the management and rule, than for the
safety and preservation of the State, and all these revolutions, because
government was not supposed God's ordinance, but the peoples choice. Thus we
see it is religion, that only makes Sovereignty and liberty sociable, or sets
such bounds to majesty in the Prince, as may advance concord among the
Citizens. Cast off this temper, and every mistaken judgment will produce such
angry humors, as will neither endure the ordinary evils or sores of government,
nor the common remedies or salves for its cure. Thirdly, the highest throne,
though never so wise, powerful, or sincere, depends upon Providence, which can
either by natural or moral causes disappoint all its best laid designs. An
earthquake, a storm, or a treachery frustrates all man can do, whilst nothing
can withstand heavenly benedictions; and the very opinion men have, that the
Gods are propitious to them, gives diligence and courage in all attempts.

These are the reasons, and many more, why government must be supported by
religion. Next we will offer a few, why the religion of every Nation should be
but one. Religion should be but one.
First, Religion is the highest, as well as the strongest obligation upon the
mind of man; so as if that admit any principles of liberty, or exemption from
Civil authority, disobedience shelters it self, and replies, it is fit to serve
God before man, and so grows incorrigible, because reasonably it may justify
it self: (though that be an error as will be soon proved.) Secondly, Men of a
superstitious temper either infect one another, or are misled by some subtle
knaves, who make good gain of men, who are of a superstitious devotion, and who
make conscience of every little thing, and are apt to believe vain and foolish
prophesies, or interpret revelations. And thus says Livy in his fourth book,
they became a public offense, insomuch as the Aediles had in charge, that no
other Gods should be worshipped, but those of the Romans; nor after any other
manner, than had been usual in their native Country,

Indeed if it were rightly considered, the religion of all Nations should be
but one, because all should serve but one God, and he by the tradition unto the
Patriarchs before the Law, and by his divine prescripts under the Law, and by
the revelation of his will by the Messiah and his Apostles after the
Mosaic-Law, made his will known in all necessary, natural, moral, and divine
truths, tending unto salvation, whereof Kings and Priests were the guardians,
but not the parents; for they were to deliver in matters, immediately relating
to salvation, nothing but what they had received, though in matters relating to
decency and order in his service, or in matters of civil concern, they were
authorized to give the law suitable to their own best judgments, and all
subordinate to them were thus to seek an unity in the faith, and a common
utility in the State in the band of peace. Thus God is a God of order and not
of confusion; and if he made religion a support to government, private men, by
framing new axioms of their own, to exempt themselves from odedience, or to
weaken the sinews of government, must not distract it. For if a Sovereign may
command one thing, which God has not forbidden, and a high Priest another,
which God has not revealed, or a private person contradict both in those
things, which are both true and suitable to their distinct authorities, then
the reins or girdle of all authority, divine, ecclesiastical or civil, is
dissolved.

Among the Gentile world instituted religion was no disturber of government,
because it consisted principally in outward rites, ceremonies, and observances.
But in the Christian religion, God being a jealous God of his honor and truth,
it has great influence on government, because the main end of it, Instituted
Religion was to restore natural.
as it was to make reconciliation, and clear the intercourse betwixt the divine
and the intellectual nature; so it was to restore natural religion, and to
cleanse that polluted stream. Therefore that Church, which upon false glosses
on instituted religion introduces corruptions in natural, and weakens civil
Sovereignty, that it may usurp Ecclesiastical, or dispences with moral duties,
that men may be the more observant of their ceremonial laws, makes the
buttress, which was to support the wall, thrust it down. And those Princes,
whom God bridled by his moral law, in the exercise of their Sovereignty, weaken
but their own Governments, when they decline those laws, natural religion and
common justice recommended unto them, as to be the basis of all their civil,
municipal, and human laws. Nor does any spirit more weaken government by
pretense of religion, than those Enthusiastical persons, who upon pretense of
particular impulses, respect neither human nor divine laws; The ill influences
on Government by several phanatick principles.
for these can fall in love with their own selves and their tribe, and broach
doctrines, that we may say turn the world topsie turvy; for one says, 1.
Dominion is founded in grace, and thereby is all Sovereignty overthrown; though
the same men at the same time read, that Cyrus was Gods Anointed as well as
David. Another sort of them say, 2. None have right unto the creature, but the
godly; though God makes his sun to shine, and his rain to fall on the bad as
well as the good: and they will judge likewise, who are those; and then what
becomes of the property of their fellow subjects, whom they account usurpers
thereof. 3. An impulse of a brainsick or vindicative spirit must be by a third
sort a command from God, and who then is secure of life? Neither does there
want those, who would be as holy in other men's opinions, as they are are in
their own: and therefore their words must be accepted as an oath, and so
government lamed in a principal sinew, and the reverence and awe, which mankind
has ever expressed of God's name to extract truth, must be laid aside, that
their sanctity might be justified. But such men as these by their superstitions
may contradict sense, philosophy, natural and instituted religion, and fall so
low in their very demeanors, (as are our Quakers and Seekers outward carriage)
that that which is ridiculous and irrational must be accounted religious, or
the government must be overthrown. 4. Nay, a soberer sort of men will so
venerate their own interpretations and dogma's, that if Civil or Ecclesiastical
authority restrained the divulging their opinions, though contrary to that of
their national Church, their petty and small truths, if truths, must be
justifications to them to disquiet the peace of the government. Upon this whole
representation, (besides condolement) which might lead all these sorts of men
unto some modesty, what have we to say, but that all this is contradictory unto
that Gospel Spirit, most of these men pretend unto? for if Christ in his own
person, and his Apostles in theirs, would not resist secular Governors, (for
that great truth, on which all other Evangelical truths depend, i. e. that God
was reconciled unto the world by his Son Jesus Christ) but cheerfully submit
themselves unto authority, and undergo the punishent that was laid on them:
then if Pope, Presbyter, or Phanatick would now think themselves bound to the
same submission, it might be well thought, it would prove the best cure for the
two first's usurpations, and the last's delusion. But in order to a remedy, if
we will hear a wise man's opinion, there is no better way to stop the rising of
new Sects, than to reform (I have forgot his words) gross and known abuses, or
troublesome niceties, and to compound smaller differences, and to proceed
mildly, rather by gentleness than violence, and to convert or win over the
principal Authors by some countenance or preferment, than to imbitter them by
scorns. But all this is to be meant toward modest Dissenters, and such as
revile neither governments; for if God lead his people by the hand of Moses and
Aaron, and have tied men to them by religion, or religious observances of them,
and any sort of men in matters that are not immoral, may rise up against them,
and say, ye take too much upon you, ye sons of Levy, or what have we to do with
Moses? all government is at at end. And when the religion established in a land
is rent by discords, and the holiness of the Professors of that religion is
much abated and grown hypocritical, and so to honest minds scandalous (as it
was about Mahomet's time, for then the Nestorian and Arian heresies much
abounded both in Asia and Africa) then says this great Chancellor, you may
look, not only for a new Sect, but possibly for a new religion. And no
disobediences to government are so dangerous, as those that are grounded upon
religion, nor no Sect so likely to prevail, as those, who complain of the
present management of affairs, and promise great liberties and exemptions.

I am far from believing, The mind cannot be forced, yet it may be restrained.
there is any power in a Prince or a Church to force a man to believe; for no
man can force himself but in civil or ceremonial concerns: if a Prince or a
Priest require that, which another thinks not prudent, or is of an indifferent
nature in it self, Subjects are bound to nothing, or they are bound in matter
of this nature to submission; for such compliance can never truly wound
conscience. A Prince may make a civil law about Husbandry, which an experienced
Husbandman may know will not work its end; and yet he is bound to an obedience;
and the Church may enjoin an imprudent rite, and Christian liberty may censure
it so; and nevertheless it requires an outward conformity. And thus we see, how
religion conduces to civil quiet, by admitting a liberty in judging the
injunctions of authority, and yet making innocent the obedience thereunto. For
if God, in things relating to his own honor, exempted not the subject from the
civil authority, but submitted him to a passive obedience, then it is
reasonable to judge, he does it much more in all things, which concern only
men's sociable and civil concerns. And this is enough to prove, how strong a
pillar religion is unto the house of government.

It is a great observation of Valerius Maximus's, whatever the Augurs declared
from the Gods, the Senate determined not against, Religionique summum imperium
cessit; omnia namque post religionem nostra civitas duxit, etiam in quibus
summae majestatis conspici decus voluit. And they took care religion should be
truly taught amongst them: insomuch that they gave to the foreign cities under
their government Sons of their Prophets to instruct them; says this good
Author, December filii singulis Etruriae populis percipiendae sacrorum disciplinae
gratia, etc.

Scipio Africanus is said never to have gone about any business, but first he
went to the temple.

Governments or bodies politic are as subject to diseases, as bodies natural
are; for a State may be free from violent convulsive fits, and yet may fall
into a paralytick or hectic distemper, or an atrophy; for it is an ill sign in
a State, when subjects dare not rebel, and yet grow sullen; for such mutinies
make no noise, and yet loosen all the joints and ligaments of policy. Besides
these hardly to be discerned sicknesses of State, there are periods of times
and revolution of things, which have ripened a State for a death, even when it
seems in a good condition of health, or whilst it has marrow in its bones, or
a good condition of plenty and peace; for so was the time of our late change
begun in 1640, when we saw in few years after, that there was but one step
betwixt the highest and the lowest condition. So as unless Providence keep the
City, the Watchman waketh but in vain; and nothing keeps Subjects out of the
way of rebellion, nor Princes in the way of justice, as does religion.

Justice the next pillar of Government; Justice.
religion and justice both spring immediately from God; for it was the eternal
wisdom that formed the ligament or bond, which we call religion, which should
tie, as by a law, every rational creature to perform the justice of his nature,
which other creatures observe by instinction, man by choice. So as a law is but
a rule what things the creature should follow, and what fly. Thus the eternal
Wisdom wrote natural laws in the very essence or rationality of man, and by
this rationality this creature was capacitated to receive from him positive
laws. When man offends against the natural law, his conscience checks him, and
when he offends against the positive, some known revelation, or unquestioned
tradition, or written word of God, must be his accuser. Hence laws usually are
divided into Moral, which are those, which flow from the law of nature, or
ceremonial, which are those, which flow from some positive law of God, or
judicial, which should imitate the justice of Natural laws, and were given to
some men, as unto the Jews, by God himself, or from the law of Nature, and the
rationality of man, unto all others, and are framed by men in order to the
exercise of justice among themselves, and are made as conformable, as may be,
unto the law natural and eternal, and have for their end the common good of
that society, which is under the authority of the Head or Sovereign of that
society. So as every such law ought to be honest, and possible to be kept;
every such law containing in it two powers, viz. directive in what it
prescribes, and coactive in punishing offenders against it.

Justice, natural and civil.
Now justice is but a performance of some act, which some law requires. And as
we said on the former head, religion was either natural or instituted; so we
must say on this, it is either natural or civil. Indeed, natural justice is an
essential part of natural religion, and so is inbred in man; Why natural
justice so far exceeds civil.
and that is the reason natural justice so far exceeds civil, or what human
laws prescribes. For human laws cannot extend their sanction, or rewards and
punishments unto desires and concupiscences, out of which all civil injustices
arise; and some offenses or injustices seem unto Legislators so trivial, that
there is no law or sanction against them. Yet natural justice prohibits even
such offenses, which made the great Naturalist and Statesman Cicero say, It was
a narrow, or a mean thing, to be just only as far as civil law required; quam
angusta est innocentia ad legem bonum esse; or quanto latius officiorum patet,
quam juris regula; for humanity and liberality etc. are left out of the public
Tables of the Romans. Indeed both Tables of the Decalogue are but parts of
natural justice: so as a man may be a good Citizen, Vir bonus est is, qui
consulta Patrum, etc. when he is not a good man, or when he narrows that
justice, which he owes to men, unto civil sanctions.

Justice is concerned in making, executing, obeying,
laws.

1st. In making them; Justice in making.
for the Legislator must sincerely be convinced, the law is beneficial for the
Government and for the Governed; for if it serve only personal ends, as that
the Prince and Governors by it singly reap the advantage, and that it conduce
not to common good, it wants the best character of a law. The like it does, if
an unruly multitude force a law from him, in prejudice of the good constitution
and strength of the Government or Royalty. Secondly, if laws be made unto good
ends, Executing.
and not executed, they become a snare; for usually the breach of a civil law
carries with it some profit and advantage, and so one man to his loss observes
that law, which another through his disobedience gains by. And non-execution of
laws leads men to the neglect of the Government; for they think it a foolish
thing to be tied by that cord, Obeying Laws.
which others so easily break. Thirdly, therefore when laws are made, subjects
must make a conscience to obey them; for it is a debt they owe unto their
Prince, and unto the whole society, and to every particular man of it. So as a
Legislator must make a law no snare; a Magistrate must impartially execute it,
and a Subject conscientiously obey it.

The law of nature is the rule of all human and civil laws; Tully could say,
Nos legem bonam a mala nulla alia ratione, nisi Natura norma dividere possumus.
And Baldus, Imbecillitas est humani intellectus in quacunque causa legem
quaerere, ubi rationem naturalem invenires. A law therefore must be suitable to
religion, agreeable to the natural (not humorous) disposition of the people,
and must tend unto public good. And thus civil and judicial laws made by men
are manifest proofs of moral laws written by God in man; for they ever confirm
those laws, and conform themselves thereunto, and are adapted to civil cases
only.

Laws therefore are made both in defense of the Government and Governors, Laws
in defense of the Government and Subject.
as well as of the Governed in their several concerns of life, liberty,
property and good name, fame or reputation; and the breach of these laws falls
under several penalties, higher or lower, Penalties.
as the offense is; for it is treason and misprision of treason to offend
against the Government or Prince; and it is excommunication to offend against
Ecclesiastical authority; and it is murder and felony, or a capital
punishment, to take away a man's life, or rob him of his goods; and he falls
under a pecuniary or corporal punishment, that robs a man of his liberty or
good name. Thus justice, whether it be political or private, is the defense of
the Head and Body in society, How laws oblige the Prince, and how the Subject.
and obliges the Prince by the directive part of the law, though not the
coactive; (for therein he is subject only unto God) to be just unto, and tender
of the subject; and by the directive and coactive part of it, obliges the
Subject uniformly and impartially to honor, aid, and obey him in his
government. Nay, a man by it is defended from himself, as well as from others;
for men by excesses and penury are often unjust unto themselves, and unto their
relations. And this restrains a man from using even his own to his own private
detriment, as well as unto the publicks; for the public has a right both in
his person and private possessions, and all this, ne Respublica capiat aliquid
detrimenti.

This virtue guides men in peace, and regulates them in war, and frames all
sound council. It is that in the Politic Body, which consent of parts makes in
the Natural: for it gives amongst the members thereof a fellow-feeling of each
others state. It makes the foot content to support the body, and the body the
head, and the head to influence by its animal spirits all the members. It
admonishes the stomach, not wilfully to send up fumes and jealousies to annoy
the head, and supplicates the head, not to cast down rheumes and catarrhs upon
the lungs, least the State be short breathed, and so short lived; whilst mutual
justice and love, like the harmony and good temper of humors, begets peace,
which we may call public health. Justice distributes rewards and punishments
equally.
And thus it becomes the best stay of a common weal, when it distributes justly
rewards and punishments, chasing partiality from the dispensation of rewards,
and passion or severity from that of punishment. We may say of it, it was
implanted by nature, and cultivated by natural religion, and revived by
instituted. Christianity, being it self famous for making this a radical
principle, that men should do to others as they would be done unto themselves;
obliging men under any kind of government, and in any state, bond or free, to
observe their own laws, and not to violate those, by which they held commerce
with any foreigners: Princes even to be content with their own bounds, knowing
the possession of a real virtue was much more than the possession of an usurped
dominion; since no one person is able to influence the dominion of the whole
earth, but he that made it. And even he as man refused it, probably because he
would wean the most aspiring minds, and powerfullest Princes from affecting it.
Thus making justice a guide to modesty, leaving sovereignty to him, who made
the whole, and distributes it by parcels to whomsoever he pleases.

Council.
Council is a deliberate considering of a particular affair by a man's self,
with the help of some other. Every council ought to arise from some knowledge
of that affair, or of the nature of it, and be grounded on experience, and
managed by prudence with an unbyassed mind: so as truly an ignorant and
unexperienced and injudicious person is not fit either to give or receive
council. He that is to receive it, be he Prince or private man, must have
weighed and deliberated the matter he takes council upon within himself, or
else he will not be capacitated to judge of the advice given him. So as men
must habituate themselves in their own affairs, that they may render themselves
capable of council; What fits a Prince for Council.
especially a Prince, whose education, and his own contemplation should have
verst him in some general knowledges, before he can be fit to receive
particular advices upon particular affairs. For unless he have considered or
studied the nature of mankind, the constitution of his own Government, the
genius and inclination of his own people, the power and interest of his
neighboring Princes, and such like general heads, (unto which all
determinations of particular affairs should be squared) he himself cannot
properly be said to be fit to take council. Besides, (as has been observed
before upon the head of Counselors) if he have not judged of persons, as well
as things, his policies will be weakened. Nor will any thing so probably render
counsel useless to him, as a conversation with those, who being not able to
give counsel, through the familiarity of their Prince, usually deride council.
Princes therefore (who need council most) ought to be most careful with whom
they converse; for conversation insensibly insinuates it self, and a Favorite's
folly either becomes a council, as given by him, or makes a Prince disrelish a
sound council given by another; so as few Princes thrive by council, who are
misled by conversation. Hence we see, that Princes should busy their minds
about determining within themselves their own affairs, that from without
themselves they might receive advice; for men most carefully advise them, whom
they know to be habited to weigh their own affairs: for if the vessel be empty,
they are less careful to consider, what liquor they pour into it. It is too
hard a task for any man to give rules, how to give, or how to take council;
since affairs are so various, and particulars depend so much upon their
circumstances, no better rule can be given, than not to remove a present evil
at the price of a future lasting inconvenience; for it never fares well with
those Princes, who conceive, The difference between an Expedient and a Council.
that an Expedient fills up the place of a council; for such palliate cures are
but temporary satisfactions, and bring a State into a friable or crumbling
condition for nothing, which wounds the constituent parts of a government, or
shakes its foundation, or transfers power from a Prince to any other order of
men, is rccompenced by any ingenious Expedients. Belluarum est (says Cicero)
vivere in diem, nostra concilia ad sempiternitatem tendunt. Wise men foresee
remote consequences, and weak men live from hand to mouth. Salust, like a wise
Physician of State, The declenfion of a State.
discerned, how the Government fell into a hectic; Ego (says he) ita comperi
omnia Regna, etc. or I never observed Kingdom, City, or Nation long prosper,
whose councils were not sound; (or deep, or steady:) for when partiality or
favor, fear or pleasure has corrupted counsel, wealth first decays, then
empire weakens, then follows change of Government, then servitude. Thus by the
first step the Government is weakened by it self, afterward it is fitted to be
a prey unto a Forreigner. Great necessity therefore there is, that the pillars
of Government be often surveyed; for it serves little to repair the
pent-houses, if the beams of the house shrink.

Of the qualifications of a Councellor we have largely spoken already. The wise
Chancellor Bacon makes the very modes of consultation advance much the consult,
and so neglects not set times, place, as a Council Chamger, the figure of a
council board, whereby men may conveniently hear and be heard, that the state
of the question or proposition debated be put up in writing; least Rhetorical
speeches lose the question, and so the resolve differ from the matter first
proposed. He seems therefore to disallow such figures of speech, as too
popular, and unbecoming a Council Board, or looking upon eloquence and
rhetoric, as too amusing and deceitful, and not allowing it, but in order to
remove from the mind of the auditors some prejudice they are prepossessed off;
for, says he, sometimes there is a necessity of a fomentation, or warm hand to
chafe in the oil; yet he likewise allows, so they will hold to the question,
that a matter may be debated, that is fit to be rejected, so it be in order to
find out somewhat, that may be fit upon the first proposition to be agreed
unto; and he gives an ingenious, philosophical, or chemical and logical
illustration thereof, saying, a negative is more pregnant of direction than an
indefinite; as ashes are more generative than dust. Thus council should neither
be given nor taken in haste; deliberation being essential thereunto, if the
affair will any ways permit it; otherwise courage must supply council; for no
fruit requires more time for ripeness, than does council. Precipitation like
the warmth of a chimney, that has a tree behind it, makes the fruit forward
and soft, but not mellow and well tasted. And thus it fares with all other
matters; for a forced ripeness prejudices both a good taste and nourishment.
Council is no where better set forth than in Ecclesiasticus, chapter 22. v. 16. and
17. It settles the heart upon a thought of understanding, (or weighs
consequences) for, says he, as timber girt and bound together in a building
cannot be loosed with shaking, so the heart, that is stablished by advised
council, shall fear at no time.

Confederations.
A principal work of Council is the deliberating about confederations, which are
leagues made between several Sovereign Princes, independent one on the other.
The law of human nature obliges all nations to be just and kind unto one
another, so as when ever they have intercourse with one another, they are tied
unto each other by natural justice, as being of one kind or species; so as
though they never know one another, yet they are thus bound to one another, if
ever they have intercourse or commerce. And then all their leagues are but
political results of natural justice and wisdom: for justice examines the
principles of their confederation, and wisdom the end of it* viz. that it be
really for reciprocal and mutual good, or that it be just in the beginning, and
wise in the end. And thus from home-affairs we must now transport our selves
unto foreign, and weigh those things, which concern peace and war between
several Nations. On which subject Grotius has erected an everlasting monument:
so as this small and fresh stream is but to lead a Novice unto the mouth of the
arm of that sea.

Nations stood in need of one another help, Nations benefited thereby.
and were benefitted by one another assistance, and interchange of native
commodities, as much as private men of one and the same Nation and City do of
one another helps in their several trades and professions; for reciprocal
advantages are the grounds of all common societies.

Treaties of Peace and War.
This is the root of all Treaties, viz. those of 1. peace or commerce. 2. war
offensive, defensive,
or both by land and Sea.
3. and of all other constitutions, and agreements.


All Treaties depend on veracity and sincerity.
If veracity and sincerity, and openness of dealing, and plain heartedness
planted in man by his Creator, for the security of society, had not
degenerated, and been vitiated by covetousness, ambition, envy, and self-love,
the benefits of society had been the chief comforts of man's life, and the
whole world had appeared, but as the Creator's great family. But now nighest
relations being apt to deceive one another, it is no marvel, that foreign
Treaties are for the most part deceitful; so as a modern, learned, and good
Statesman, the Lord Cherbury gives it for a rule, that in foreign Treaties,
where a present advantage is but little, and a future great, it is the wisest
thing to take the less, because too probably, before the time come about,
wherein the future and greater advantage is to be reaped, the face of affairs
may be so changed, that the stipulated future advantage will be lost. I have
forgot his words, but his sense I think I have not altered. Somewhat must be in
the matter, when Marcus Aurelius (I may say the best moral heathen Prince)
allows in such cases a Prince to be (...) or semi-malus; The difficulty of
making and keeping leagues
and as Cicero says, Nec possunt aliter ii, quibus commissa est tota
Respublica. And yet this good man says in another place, Ne quid insidiose, ne
quid simulate, ne quid fallaciter: so as treachery and fallacy, and simulation
are absolutely rejected, whilst dissimulation or a concealing a matter, or
using worldly prudence or disguise seems allowable, because unavoidable; for,
says another, Non regent, qui non tegent. It is one thing, if a State be so
foolish, like an Indian, to part with his gold for a bead, because he is
pleased with it, and another, if the Merchant should aver, his bead was of an
intrinsic value through the whole world with the others gold. Sure I am,
injustice and breach of faith agrees not with humanity; less than will it
square with Christianity; the root of man's misery is in not daring to trust
himself unto the law of his own nature, and the providence of his Maker.

Equivocal words in Treaties have been very pleasant to the palate of those,
Equivocal words.
that first gave them, but have been very bitter in the stomach afterward.
Charles the fifth for pressing upon the Landgrave of Hesse an exposition, which
suited not with the Duke of Saxe's promise to his Father-in-law, the Landgrave,
(though Saxe was made Elector by the same Emperor) yet made such a
confederation against him, as drove the Emperor out of Germany.

If a Prince ignorantly or passionately wave the true interest of his Nation,
or too strongly stem the tide of his Peoples inclination, such Treaties never
last long; and yet a wise Prince may rather give way unto the torrent of some
prosperous Prince, and bow to his fortune, than put matters to the hazard of a
doubtful war. Thus such as are drawn from their proper interest by an
unavoidable necessity, are pardoned for making such abrupt changes, or giving
such assistances, as Boccalini says, the smaller Princes of Italy were by
Apollo; since men of their small interest in the world, though it be an
indecent thing, (says he) must chew their meat on both sides their chops. Thus
Italy did betwixt Charles the eighth and Ferdinand, and Charles the fifth and
Francis the first. But it is the dishonor of Christianity that Treaties are so
solemnly made, nay, and sworn unto, and yet so easily broken, and so (...) by
that high Priest, who pretends to be the Vicar of the man (nay, of the God) of
truth, dispensed with. And therefore after all these ceremonies, sometimes
Princes are forced to give hostages, and (...) giving hostages, sometimes we
find a Prince rather abate of his natural affection, than prejudice his affairs
of State. So as Francis the first chose rather to give his Sons for hostages,
th^^ twelve of his principal Ministers of State.

Hence it is, The difficulties that attend upon Treaties.
there is no profession has more need of artifices, than that of an Ambassador
or Secretary of State. The very preliminaries to a Treaty have oftentimes as
much picking work and thorny circumstances, as the Treaty it self; for when two
Princes in difference are both weary of their distances or contention, and so
both affected toward a reconciliation, some punctilio arises, how they may
have a right intelligence, and yet neither seem forwarder to a peace than the
other. For then a third Prince must make that to be an act of his good
affection, which is a strong desire of them both; and he must make way for some
Minister to be admitted by either Party al' incognito, and a Cardinal de
Riche^ieu will have a Pere Joseph, that shall turn the scale wherever he
comes. And in these disguises the Popish Princes have more advantage than any
Protestant, though they sometimes find out a Soldier or a Merchant, that
usually frequented that Court, and so can personate a man of one profession,
and act, as of another. By such clandestine means as these, a Treaty is often
ended, before it is known to be begun; and then the real Ambassador is a man
rather of pomp than of business. Nay, when Princes find the inconveniences of
former Treaties, as if it were by way of super-fetation, they are kindling of a
new Treaty before they are delivered of an old. Thus our Henry the eighth found
the French and Spaniard proclaiming a league against him, when at the same time
his Ambassador entered..... to demand the performance of a former Treaty then in
being. And Philip Comines lay at Venice to make a league for Lewis the eleventh
with that State, when, whilst he lay there, and perceived it not, the Venetians
and Spaniards made a league against his Master. And so were the Venetians
themselves served at Cambray, where most of the States of Christendom united
against them, and they discovered it not, but it was like to have proved very
fatal and ruinous to them; and yet it is observed, that this grave and wise
Nation usually recover by Treaties of peace that which they often lose by
misadventures of war; whilst the same Comines gives the reverse of this medal
to us English men, when he says, We were never happy in our quill, when it was
made into a pen; but when the feather was fixed to an arrow. The very manner of
treating carries with it a great difficulty, and a Master of Ceremonies, who
usually is, and ought to be a man of good literature, as well as languages,
has a large province, even in adjusting the ceremonies, that belong unto the
Ambassadors, in relation to their Masters, and in relation to other Princes
Ambassadors, resient upon the place. He that inspects our Sir John Finett's
observations or memorials, and Sir Charles Cotterell's explanations or
additions thereunto, not published yet, and he that knew both the men, may
justly say, they filled their places; and a late Hollander, Monsieur Wickefort,
has written a serious tract, and a necessary upon this subject, and of the
privileges of Ambassadors, as there are many more, who have written large and
wise Tracts upon their offices.

When Princes begin Treaties themselves by interviews, they are seldom (and yet
sometimes) prosperous; for one appears a comlier person than the other, or is
prompt in discourse, more magnificent, less affable, or has somewhat, which
the other wants, which raises emulation or envy, or else their train disagree,
and breed ill will betwixt the Masters: and yet Lewis the twelfth and Ferdinand
of Arragon, and Charles the fifth and Pope Clement the seventh interviewed and
parted fairly.

Great caution is to be used, how Princes entertain motions of Treaties, even
by themselves or by their Allies, whilst they are in the heat of action; for
thus Pope Julio the second, under pretense of a Treaty with the Duke of
Ferrara, chilled Lewis the twelfth, or diverted him from those assistances,
which he meant to give that Duke, upon supposal they would not have been
needful. Therefore in such conjunctures, it is more needful for Princes to
strengthen, than lessen their forces.

Arbitration is sometimes a useful, often a frivolous cement of peace; for
after much time has been spent therein, some pretty fetch will make the whole
labor insignificant; as when the Venetians delivered up their sentence betwixt
the Pope and Maximilian with a proviso, that if both parties would not ratify
it, neither should be obliged by it.

A Prince Arbitrator ought to be unbyast, and equal in judgment toward both;
but to become a party, whilst he is an Arbitrator, darkens his honor and his
justice very much. And a Northern Prince lately paid dear for it, being driven
out of all those Countries, which his Predecessors had not long before by
victories gained, and by Treaties had confirmed unto them, though the
prosperity of the Prince, whose party they joined themselves unto, to his great
honor (for there is nothing more honorable fot a Prince, than expencefully
and hazardously to be concerned for an Ally) procured them a restitution of
all, and yet removed not a dependence upon himself. How it will fare with that
State, that in the apprehension they had of their own concerns, made and joined
themselves to a declining Monarchy, (at least declining in their vicinity) and
in that attempt lost almost all they had, and then upon the like politic
consideration, drew in other great Princes to succor them, which entirely drew
from them the whole power they lay subjugated unto; so as their overflown
inland, like their seacoasts, had that tide of fortune drawn from their low
grounds, which soon overflowed their higher countries; how these will fare in
necessitating the others, to make a very disadvantageous peace, time will
manifest, not my spirit of prophecy foretell.

Trade.
Trade or commerce is the offspring of confederation, and flows from council,
and is to be managed by justice, which is guided by religion. Thus religion is
the foundation of all other pillars, and reaches to confederation and trade;
for both confederation and trade require great care and judgment in making the
articles concerning them, and religion in observing them: for Princes or States
confederate for security, and trade for gain; so as trade is a most natural
root for raising treasure, as treasure is a most natural food for arms. And
this is the reason, why in erecting these pillars of Government, this order of
placing them is observed. And indeed the pillars are but so many Professins in
a Commonweal, which have been touched on before, viz. The Divine, the Lawyer,
Statesman, the Merchant, the Monnoier, and the Soldier.

Trade is either Home or Foreign.


Home trade is of things men buy, Home trade
because they have need of them, or of things they sell, because they have
plenty of them, and subsist by them. So as in Oeconomicks it is usually said, a
Master of a family should endeavor to make himself a seller, not a buyer, for
usually men buy to loss, sell to gain.

Foreign trade is but the same thing in a market more remote, Foreign trade.
and under the laws of another Sovereign.

Every County at home and Country abroad abounds in some one commodity or
other, which others want, for venting whereof they have proper markets and
seasons, which must be observed, or the gain of the trade is usually lost. The
want in one place in the ground of trading with another.
The product and fruits of the earth are better in some places than in others;
even by reason of the clime, or by reason of the husbandry; and may be assorded
cheaper from one part than another, by reason of the multitude of laborers or
artists, and the little wages is given in one part of a Country in proportion
to another, or by reason of the convenience of carriage. The King lives by the
field, as was said before, therefore husbandry is to be as much cherished, as
any trade, for it breeds healthy and strong men, and sit for arms, and so in an
island Mariners ought to be a principal care of the State. Every Government
has an interest in the labors, and in the manner of laboring of their
people, and therefore they are to be drawn off from ill customs; or from
deceitful working, as the Irish were from fixing their plough to the horse
tail, or the Clothiers from so working their cloths, as they shrink too much,
or over-tenter them, etc. Voiture or making carriage easy by cutting rivers,
providing highways to be well kept and pastable, nay, providing they be secure
against the thieves, ought to be a care of the State, in relation even unto
trade; for the industrious man must be secured by the State in his habitation,
The things which secure trade.
and in his passages from place to place with his commodity, least the wasps
and drones prey on the hive, and drive the be from her industry; therefore
easy pardons to thieves and highway-men is a destruction to trade. Monopolers
are another sort of thieves, for they impose what rates they please upon a
necessary commodity, and rob the buyer as well as the labourer, whom they force
to work at their own rates, when they have engrossed a commodity into their own
hands. A State must therefore secure the Subjects property, and endeavor to
raise his industry, and to countenance his ingenuity in any thing, that
promotes trade, as framing engines, or any thing that furthers it. It must
provide against the rich oppressing the poor Tradesman, that too often must
borrow, by not taking too great or biting usury, or such broakage as makes the
poor laborious honest man or trader only work for the wealthy idle hard hearted
person. It must give immunities, privileges, and encouragements to all kind of
industry. It must in some sort force men to promote public good; as to
prohibit men not to turn their tillage too much into pasturage, for that will
depopulate. It may require them to plant woods, and hemp, and flax, or what
else may become materials for a manufactury; for wherever there are most
manufacturies, there will be most people; and a multitude of people is not only
the honor of a Prince, and the security of his land, but his wealth. To look
after confederacies of men of a trade, as the Grazier by combination not to
impose prizes on the Butcher, nor the Butcher by arts and wiles, in taking most
of the pasturage about a great market town, to cut the grass under the
Grazier's foot, or becoming of two trades, (or both Grazier and Butchers) or by
confederacy of these two, both to set the dice on the buyer. The same we may
say of Colliers and Wood-men, and such other trades the Commonweal cannot be
without; for a confederation among Tradesmen must not enhance the prices on the
Gentry and Nobility, as little as the Tradesman must confederate against the
Handycraftsman or Manufacturer.

Foreign trade.
All the former considerations, and many more than I can think of, belong to
home trade. But foreign trade is more nighly to be considered, because if that
be not well balanced, the profit runs to another Nation. Deceits of home trade
impoverish particular men, but the treasure remains in the Kingdom. These have
their inconveniences great enough; for when parts are unequally strong, the
whole body is the weaker; for break the order of any thing, and you break its
strength; for here is not the overflowing of an humor, but the cutting of a
joint or limb. Most immediately belonging unto the Sovereign's care.
Unto the Sovereign therefore belongs the consideration and regulation more
immediately of this trade. He therefore makes leagues of commerce with foreign
Princes; and Treaties of Maritime affairs, or how his subjects shall be used in
trade, and on the sea, and reciprocally, how he shall use others: therefore the
ports of the sea are his, that he may let in, and let out such commodities
only, as he finds benefits his People. The customs, impositions, and rates of
commodities are set by him, and are alterable, that trade in general and
particular commodities may be balanced with those carried out; for if the
subjects of one Prince have his gain in trading eaten out by the impositions of
the other, or if one Nation furnishes commodities of necessity for the other,
and the other for luxury for them, it is soon determined, who will gain by the
trade, or who will eat out the other; and the subject is not to be trusted,
though it be his own concern in this, but restrained, because few men will
avoid those expenses, which gratify their lusts. Our French trade for wines,
our Canary trade, which formerly was driven by commodities, and now by money,
and so our trade to Zant for currants demonstrates this. It is not so with our
India trade: though we carry out even gold and silver for it, because our
revending those commodities in other parts brings us as much back in specie, or
bills of exchange. What is a thriving trade to a nation.
Trade therefore is not to be cherished, as it enriches the Merchant, or as it
increases the Sovereign's revenue, but as it brings wealth (and a wealth that
will remain and stay amongst us) unto the Nation, or as it passes into the
habit of the body, not strengthens particularly the head or some member. The
trade, that brings in more wealth to stay in the Kingdom, than it carries out,
that which having repaid its charges, and leaves a surplusage, that is, a
thriving trade to a Nation, or that which brings into it treasure, and no
other; for neither Princes nor Merchants gain can compensate the loss of the
Nations stock; that is properly called the overballance, which thus inriches
the Nation.

Neither the nation nor civil men should ingross trade, or work deceitfully.
There are few trades in any Nation, but some Forreigner is his rival in them;
and therefore if one work his commodity deceitfully, and the other
substantially (which the wearing will show) the market will assuredly run to
them. Nothing better secures trade, than the true manufacturing of its
commodities. It is part therefore of the care of a State, that no person or
company employ ill or raw workmen: for a pound of wool, which may cost six or
eight pence, if it be well wrought, may be worth two shillings or half a crown;
but if ill wrought, not scarce one. Besides, when this is once discerned, the
credit of the Nation, as well as of the manufactury decreases. He therefore
rightly determined, that said, Better feed your poor, and let them be idle,
than permit them slightly to work any manufactury. Neither must the Merchant be
permitted to adulterate or sophisticate his commodity. Nor should any office be
set up under pretense of visiting the commodity, and discovering the abuse, (as
with us is the Aulnage) and exercises it self in tolerating it; for it is
pernicious, unless the true end of it be preserved, and then it is of good use:
for the public not only in the dishonor, but in the vent of the commodity
pays dearly the price of such a Patent. There are too too many more instances
to be found; but I fell upon this, because it wounds us in our chief staple
commodity. Our State should be more careful of this than other States; for to
our shame we must confess it, our Nation in its genius (at least in individual
persons) is too much given to laziness, and to affect a sudden gain and return,
and not to affect public works, or such as require time to ripen; or such as
relate to posterity, or such as conduce to the honor of the Nation, and not
present and personal profit. This humor the Physicians of our State, by laws
and rules of Government, which should be obeyed, should purge out, and
endeavor to raise a public mindedness in particular men. If Holland had had
this humor, it had never been rich, but their public spirit, with their
frugality and industry, has made them valuable in the opinion of a
Philosopher, as well as considerable in the eye of the whole world.

Had they had our situation. many and safe harbors. shipping, of such timber,
and so well built. such staple commodities, as Cloths, Stuffs, Bays, etc. Tin,
Lead, and Leather. Corn, Fishing, Saffron:

or, such means to have made free ports or magazines for all Nations upon small
customs to have waited for their markets: too too probably they would have eat
us out of our Trade; as we, for these last two Kings (the Fathers and the Sons)
great care and encouragement of Trade, and by many worthy, knowing, and wealthy
Merchants, who have corrected much of our ill National genius, have born up
with, and overborn them therein: The advantages of trade, manufacturies, and
shipping.
for the trade of England is great and highly valuable; for few rightly
consider, how many live on the land by those few, who swim on the sea. How many
Factories are employed about building but one ship? The Timber Merchant, the
Ironmonger, the Carpenter, the Smith, the Ropemaker, etc. Navigation begets
many manufacturies, and is not only a wealth but a security unto a Nation: for
the plough or keel at sea breeds as many lusty Lads, and more daring, than
those at land. It Is a part of the care and wisdom of a State, that their
subjects be bred laboriously; especially the poor Lads, that are put out to
apprentiships, by the charity of Parishes, that they be kept to the plough, or
to the keel, and not made Footboys, or idle Tapsters, etc. or multiply small
trades, etc. I believe the present great King of the world, who had never been
considederable at sea, but as he fomented jealousies betwixt us and Holland,
who like the acorn, covered his first growth under this shrub, till he thrust
out his head above it, and then dropped so fast, that he by his own power and
ours (craftily managed) endangered both of us: I say, Navigation too likely to
set up the greatness of France.
I believe he had never affected to have been an East and West Indian Merchant,
but as he foresaw with old Rome, in vain it was to affect the universal
European land (or Monarchy) without he became considerable at Sea. So as though
he sails unto both Indies, yet thereby he hopes to fall upon Holland and
England. Nor had he become considerable, but as the jealousies of Holland
toward us shrouded him, till he thrust forth a top, that will shade us both,
unless we hold a stricter correspondence and confidence in each other, than
hitherto we have done: and we have sufficiently smarted for the deceitful
assistance he gave us, and they, by the invasion he made upon them, may think,
what he then regorged, he may hereafter retain. But he that sets bounds to the
sea, can to his prosperity; otherwise, humanly speaking, and considering his
policies to divide confederates, and the untempered mortar they have to hold
themselves together, we may prophecy hard things without the spirit of
prophecy. But upon this subject of Navigation, he came so strongly into my
fancy, that I could not decline the folly of saying thus much, because of the
future danger.

But to revert to our proper subject matter, trade. No nation can be great or
rich, that abounds not in some part of his dominions in shipping, or who
neglects trade, and who has not in his own dominions, or imports not materials
for manufacturies. Yet it is no policy to think to engross it, or be monarchs
of it, as Holland has for a time affected and pursued that sea-monarchy, as
eagerly as Charles the fifth, or Francis the first did the land monarchy: but
it is wisdom to divide the profit with neighbor Nations amicably. We throve
not, when we could not content our selves with the manufactory of our cloths,
but must prohibit the transporting white and undy'd. Merchandising, like the
sea shore, is made smooth and even both among our selves and Foreigners,
Companies, or trade managed by them under a regulation.
not by governing all parts of it by Companies, or wholly excluding Neighbors.
Companies for home and nigh trades are not very advantageous. They are always
of most use, when they exclude no private traders; and yet they cannot subsist,
if all Interlopers be under no restraint; therefore it may be well thought,
that no man should be permitted freely to trade, where Companies are erected,
but under the regulation of that Company, nor that Company make such chargeable
bylaws, as should discourage young and free traders; therefore Companies may
by a Council of State or Parliaments be well countenanced, if regulated; so as
they should admit private Traders upon such rules, as the Council of State, not
themselves, should set down as equal betwixt both. Two Companies we have, viz.
that of the East Indies, and the Turkey, which trades would soon fall to
irreparable disorder, if they were not supported by such pillars. The great
covetous rapacious Statesmen in either of these Countries and places, would
soon dash private Merchants against one another, and one Nations bribes would
eat their Neighbors out, if the wisdom of such societies prevented it not.

The East India Company in Holland is a little monarchy, Amsterdam has a half,
Middlebrough and Zealand a fourth, Horn and Enchuysen a sixth, and the small
remain we may say serves to gratify such interloping persons or places, as
they will admit of. The sovereignty of this trade is in the States General, who
renew the Charter upon a considerable fine to this Company, usually once in --
years.

Had we not a trade in India, and a Company to govern that trade, the Pepper
and Callicoes we bring home for nine pence would cost us two shillings or half
a crown, if brought us by the Hollanders. And this is proved too clearly unto
us, by the Spice trade they have engrossed, and cast us out of, at the price of
so much infidelity and blood. And our East India and Turkey Ships, besides the
Mariners, wherewith they must be manned, are a great security to the Nation.

The standard of Coin.
A Prince never loses either in his revenue or trade, in keeping up the standard
of his money; for flutter as much as they will, all trade is reduced to the
intrinsic value of the coin. To cry it up in those conjunctures of ^^^e, when
a Prince is to pay, and to decry it, when he is to receive, is a kind of
robbing his own Bankers or Subjects; but it is a short lived policy, and
Strangers will retort it upon himself. But nothing can be more fatal to a
State, than to break assignments made on public faith. It must be the child of
some such folly I would not describe. It looks like the despair of some young
Gamster, that sets all he is worth upon one hazard.

To get advantages by exchanges of money, Exchange of money or bills.
and bills of credit is a politic prudence; for if France overballance us in
their particular trade, they will get by us likewise in their exchange of
money. Which concerns Ambassadors and Gentlemen traveling as well as Merchants
to observe.

Government is upheld by treasure, Treasure.
and therefore treasure has many swollen titles given to it, as that it is the
sinew both of war and peace, the ornament of the one, and the strength of the
other: or the organ of motion and action unto both. Neither greatness, nor
honor, nor security will be maintained without it. It is like food unto the
body, when it fails, sttrength soon does so, and weakness appears: for, says
Tacitus, Diminutionem imperii doces, si fructus, quibus Respublica sustinetur,
diminuantur. If neither family nor city can be maintained without it, much less
sovereignty over a whole people. The father of every family, the chief
Magistrate of every town must in his person, attendance, habitation, and diet,
appear distinguishable from others by those sensible ensigns of honor, which
beget awe and reverence. Princes therefore were Lords paramount of the land
they governed, which made the Kings of Israel so great Herdsmen, and to have
occasion of so many men to reap their harvest. Not only William the Conqueror,
but says Sir Edward Cook, by the laws of King Alfred, the ancient Kings, who
were Saxons, Patrimonial.
had all the Lands of England in demeasnes. Princes therefore never more
wounded their government, nor lessened their reverence, than when they parted
with their Patrimonial estates, and depended on subsidiary aids (even for their
own subsistence) of their subjects; Subsidiary.
for that lessened their honor, and raised the pride, and consequently begot
contumacy in their people; for it is natural for men to think, whom they freely
give unto, they oblige; not considering, that the same duty belongs unto the
Politic Body, as unto the Natural, where every member must send somewhat unto
that, which we call the habit of the body, (or the sovereignty) or else the
members themselves will dwindle away.

Prerogatives of Princes were a kind of treasure to them: Prerogatives a kind
of treasure.
for Tenures and Services, Wardships, Purveyances, and Carriages, etc. were in
nature of a revenue, and set forth their honor, eased their charge, and
preserved the dependancies of subjects on them. If we would look back into our
own History, and consider how either the neglect, or some forced necessity, or
some false policy have wrung these from our Princes, we may discern in a great
measure our own present distempers. The Conqueror brought in with him great and
independent Lords, Lords assistant to the Conqueror.
rather as assistants than subjects; or as men to divide the prey with him; and
therefore unto many of these, he gave large territories, with that, which the
French call Basse Justice; so as their Tenants depended in a manner as much on
them, as they did on the King, as Lord paramount. This bred the Barons wars;
Barons wars.
for though the Barons would tyrannize over their vassals, yet they agreed, the
sovereign Prince must be made as weak and limited, as possibly they could. Then
to weaken this crown, unfortunately rises a dispute of Regal title, even in the
Royal family, The dispute of title betwixt the two Royal families.
and the red Rose and the white become ensigns of a long and bloody civil war.
And as men took part with either of these, upon successes, they were to be
rewarded, and by the various changes the crown, even by its prosperities, was
rather weakened than strengthened. These Lay-quarrels begat a harvest for the
then ambitious and gripple Clergy: so as the Crown both by its Lords Spiritual
and Temporal was in a great measure lorded over. This made that deep sighted
Prince, Henry 7.
Henry the seventh, (brought to the crown by these Powers, who vindicated his
Wife's title from an usurping and bloody Uncle, Richard the third) to dread
even that power, that had set him up, and so as subtly as he could, by
cherishing the Commons against them, to undermine it: and he foreseeing the
necessity of treasure to strengthen the crown, grew a legal Tyrant. For he then
showed the subject, what a severe rod the penalties of necessary and wholesome
laws were in the hands of the Prince, if used without clemency. And could he
have renewed his age, or that his long reign had been by time doubled, most
probably he would have made the crown a substantive. Henry 8.
His son Henry the eighth, though he was of as great understanding and greater
literature, yet not being equal in King-craft, but transported with vanity and
popular glory, whether by accident and passion (which abounded in him) or by
design, it is unknown; he fell upon the State Spiritual, as his Father had done
on the Temporal, and with more violence shook their greatness, and invaded
their revenues in the Abbots or the Monasteries and Convents, which had he
converted to the maintenance of the crown, as he did by profusely giving away
their Lands, unto the maintenance of the acts he had done, or in casting off
Papal supremacy: the Father and the Son, we may probably say, would have made
the crown for ever stood less in need of the subjects extraordinary supplies,
which are seldom free bounties, but often hard bargains through the diminution
of prerogative. The succeeding Princes, Edward 6. Q. Mary. Q. Elisabeth.
the one a Minor, the other two under disputable titles, because condemned even
by the Father, and that in the height of his power, by the consent of his two
Houses of Parliament; and the one of these Ladies being to restore the religion
ejected, and the other to replant that, which was before so excellently
reformed, K. James.
and the next Successor being a learned and pacifick Prince, and withal
addicted much to ease and pleasure, and not a native but a forreigner. All
these concussions cast the crown, as we may say, chiefly into the hands of the
Commons, the third State of this Realm; and the Lords, who were blinded with
the hope of an Aristocracy, or at least some addition of power, which they
seemed now to want, so joined with the Commons, as that the usual failures of
Government in Charles the first's time became the overthrow both of King and
Lords. Charles 1.
Such is the destructive torrent of Populacy; and such are the sad consequences
of Princes negligently parting with their own patrimonial revenues, and as
unadvisedly, for a temporary supply, divesting themselves of those
prerogatives, which serve both for their own and subjects security. And such is
the degeneracy of Nobility, that when servilely they have served to pull down
the crown, they have for their reward a vote of being an useless State.

Thus we see a State loses its health and strength by affecting some unwholsom
diet; but it is an irrational thing in a Subject to expect safety and
protection, and yet to have an unwillingness in a Despotical Government, as
France is almost now, arbitrarily to be taxed, (for that unwillingness or
sullen murmuring does but beget a sharper tyranny) or in a limited and mixed
Monarchy, as England is, to be ever selling their aids; for that is but
crumbling the power of Sovereignty, and often making it more severe to the
Subject in the hand of some inferiors. For as no Government can want an
arbitrary power, so this is most severely executed, where it is done by a
numerous and inferior body. Witness the long Parliament of 1640. when taxes
were so multiplied, and various charges laid on the Subject (which Tacitus
observes and calls, varia praedandi vocabula) that we had monthly taxes,
contributions, loanes, fifth and twentieth parts, new ordinances for weekly
taxes for the British army in Ireland, for reducing Oxford, (the Sanctuary and
place of the Kings residence) distinct taxes for an Eastern and Western
Association, and for particular places, as Newark, etc. and for buying in and
(as we may call it) selling, or sending out the Scotch army. I dare not look
forward, but I pray unto Providence to divert real provocations, if imaginary
or light could bring on us so much misery, and that those whom it concerns, may
consider how much treasure they have spent of the Nations (besides other sad
consequences) by their impatience, and not freely giving a little, when a
little would have served, as all King Charles the first's time it would have
done. What it cost afterward, through the whole Parliamentary Reign or
Protectorship, the beforementioned taxes are proof enough.

I that vent rather strong desires and wishes than write Politics, would be
glad that the Crowns desmeasnes were both plentiful and unalienable, further
than for a lease of 40 or 50 years, to reward deserving Ministers of State, and
good Servants; for tho there must be an overflow for some Favorites, (for
Princes are but men) yet those fall not under my thoughts to provide for, but
that the magnificence and splendour of a Court, and the hospitality of a
Household, and the ordinary and necessary expenses of Guards, Garrisons, and
standing and usual Navies for the defense of the Channel, or conduct of the
Merchant, should not be precarious, probably would conduce more unto the safety
and peace of the Nation, and prosperity of the Subject, than unto the Princes;
but this is not fit for me to descant upon. I would never rob the people by the
plenty of a Princes constant revenue, of having the means of showing their good
affection and loyalty by their bounty to their Prince; for it is an evidence
they are under a free Government, that they are not necessitated to give, as it
is an evidence that they are under an unsafe Government, that the Prince must
be often forced, for the necessary expenses of the Government, to depend on the
good will or humor of his People; for these have their vicissitudes. Res
angusta domi will make a Prince often so jealous of his affairs at home, that
he will not dare to seek occasion to promote them abroad. I shall harp too
often upon that string; but I believe neither French nor Dutch had been able to
have changed the balance of Christendom (as notoriously it is since) if such a
good intelligence as I wish, had been kept betwixt the Prince and his three
Estates. What 100000 l. per annum would have done in those days in respect of
military expenses, 500000 l. will not do now; and I believe our Neighbors feel
it as well as our selves.

Home taxes or subsidies, freely and voluntarily given in Parliament, are the
fittest supports for all extraordinary expenses; but then these should be
endeavored to be laid equally; for Livie calls a Doomsday book (or equal tax)
res saluberrima, magno futura imperio, and it is much better for a Prince, that
his Nobles and Commons should give, or lay the tax, by virtue of their liberty,
than he receive or take it by virtue of his own Prerogative. For, says
Chancellor Bacon, there is a great difference betwixt a tax raised or given by
the Representatives of the People, and one taken by the absoluteness of the
Prince; for tho it be all one in the purse, yet it is diverse in the payment; or
it works diversely on the courage and affections of the People. One needs
Themistocles's two Goddesses to raise it, power and persuasion, the other
disputes it, or would cast it off, by two as forcible Goddesses, necessity and
poverty.

Arms.
Arms is as considerable and necessary a pillar of Government, as any of the
former, and I have cast it in the last place, because if men would be just, it
would be unnecessary; for the primary laws of justice are built or implanted in
sincere nature, and are sufficient for the discharge of all public and
reciprocal duties, if they were observed. But arms or force are but secondary
instruments of justice, and are grounded upon depraved nature; for they are
never to be used, but when the Government cannot reduce the Governed unto the
obedience of justice, but by them. We usually therefore say, they are properly
to determine the controversies of beasts, not men; so as among men there ought
to be no recourse unto one, until the other is disobeyed; for force is rightly
termed ultima ratio Regum, or the last thing a Prince should make use of. This
is the irascible faculty in the soul of Government; or that which resists the
ataxia or disorder in the politic Body, or in some member of it; or which
gains that by fear, which ought to have been performed by love.

This is that, At home.
which fortifies justice at home, by seeing executed the penalties of the Laws,
the process of the several Courts, and their sentences and judgments upon the
cases before them, whether those sentences be capital, pecuniary, or corporal.
This is that, which is to reduce the refractory to the common justice and laws
of the land, to quell insurrections, and to suppress rebellions. And when
disobedience comes to any of these heights, every Court of justice has its
proper officers to see its sentences and decrees executed; so in cases of riot,
or contumacy backed by numbers, an obligation lies upon a whole County, by the
Posse Comitatus or power of that County, which the Sheriff has the conduct of,
to subdue such persons. And in cases of rebellion or insurrections at home, or
invasion of Foreigners from abroad, every subject is bound to repress the same
at the hazard of his life. Rebellion, though it bring on a civil war, is not
properly a war.


Arms are the proper instruments of war, but insurrection or rebellion of
Subjects is not properly to be called a war, though it be a use of force; for war
must be made amongst equals, which no persons, nor order of subjects can be to
their Sovereign, as has been proved already. So as all well constituted
Governments reject coordination as the distracter of all obedience, and the
justification of a civil war; therefore the resistance of Subjects is
rebellion, not war. Yet because sometimes the Rebels power is equal with the
Princes, such contests have got the name of a civil war.

Civil war.
This, of all wars, is most detestable, and it must needs be hateful, where
victory it self is odious, and where cruelty is exercised upon consanguinity
and affinity, or nighest relations. So as Lucan expresses it well, when he
says, Bella..... nullos habitura triumphos.

Remedies on the subjects part against a Civil war.
It is much better to give remedies how to prevent it, than rules how to manage
it.

Remedies on the Subjects part are, to remember they are born under subjection,
and are required of God to be subject, and to pay passive obedience, where they
cannot active; therefore to be careful not to multiply grievances by
inferences, or to think all will befall them that may, and to consider, that it
is very often impatience under small grievances, that throws them into the
sufferance of greater. Let the multitude or vulgars consider, without their
many hands no great changes or turmoils could be made; and let other
well-meaning men reflect, how often they are made properties of by cunning
Designers and Disturbers of a well settled Government, whose abilities serve
only to create a misunderstanding between King and People, and to manage the
discontent of the subject to their own advantage, and to set forth all the
failures of a Prince only to cloud the ill consequences of their own
innovations, knowing, The hope of Innovators.
if they can disturb the settled Government, a People cannot be long without
one, and then they, that have been acceptable for the service in pulling down a
building, are like to be employed in that, which is to be set up. This might
keep the silly fish from too greedily swallowing the bait, which will draw him
out of his own proper element. The best Historian describes these disturbers
very naturally, when he says, Honores, quos quieta Republica desperant,
perturbata consequi arbitrantur. And thus the name of Liberty has very often
through the affecting changes brought the subject in general into servitude.
The soberest and wisest men therefore must not be beguiled herein by
indifferency, as are the multitude through giddiness, and the well-meaning
through not discerning consequences to hearken to changes. All these being
often taken in the common snare of Innovators; for there being seldom such a
happy conjuncture of a State, but that somewhat is to be justly condoled, though
at the same time the condition of the Subject is in the general very much to be
thank't God for. Neuters defer their appearance in behalf of the Government so
long, that when they would recover it they cannot, for the malignity of this
humor soon infects the mass of blood, and then these men either engage
unseasonably, and so lose themselves and fortunes, or are looked upon by the
Innovator as suspected persons, and so undergo an equal load with those, who
worthily and stoutly from the beginning withstand the innovation. Cicero's
letters to Pomponius Atticus, and Atticus's life, and Chancellor de Vaire (who
lived in Paris in the time of the French league in Henry the thirds time, and
Sir Walter Rawleigh upon such a conjuncture, when the Romans and Carthaginians
both strove for Sicily) are parts of Story fit to be consulted, to know how a
man should demean himself in such times; which will resolve it self into this,
that men should timely assist the settled Government, as obliged thereunto, and
rather hope in a change of what is amiss from the erring legal Governors, than
expect remedies in the state of the Public by such, who fly to arms to work
reformation. The least any man can do in such a conjuncture, is with Pomponius
Atticus, who took arms with neither side, yet owned Pompey, though not
disobliging Caesar, or rather with Cato, though he suspected Pompeys greatness,
yet engaged with him, who engaged for the present state of Government. But
whoever takes offices or charge with the Innovators, and thereby promotes their
affairs, as Sir Walter Rawleigh concludes, may be reckoned partakers of their
crime. It borders too nigh guilt, to let even the consideration of a man's own
person (I mean an eminent man's) or family, to sway him so much, as to lead him
dully to be passive in such a conjuncture; but it stains both, when the world
knows his judgment is one thing, and his practice another; for there is a time,
when a man may say, Providence calls to Civil martyrdom, which is often in
defending the settled state, never by Civil war in changing it.

Remedies on the Princes part are, Remedies on the Prince's part.
ever to be watchful, that his course of life and councels be not such, as may
make him unvaluable in the eyes of his subjects; that he be not found
necessitous in his treasure: for if in time of civil sedition, he stand in need
of money, in some sort he stands at the courtesy of the subject, whose purse
and body both he should not want at one time; for it was Nero's folly, that he
stood most in need of the Subjects supplies, when he had most need to have
eased them therein; for he that has had no foresight of contingencies, is the
unreadilier aided. A Prince therefore should never want a fit force, to keep
himself from a surprizal, and a fit subsistence for some time for such a body.
And if he be but thus furnished, loyalty will keep them of his party, whom
otherwise despair will drive from him; and false Brethren or Intelligencers
will come over; especially if the Prince's Ministers be men of a good
reputation, so as securely intelligence may be held with them. And by such
means as these, discords may be raised among the rebellious, and they may be
put upon such rash, or such cautious councils, as may ruin them.

Arms in the Politics, is like fortitude in the Morals; it is the guard and
security of all the other virtues. Civil justice grounded on, and managed by
religion, is the soul of Government; but the inseparable prerogatives of it are
treasure and arms; for these are properly the sinews, that make the members of
Government move. As Government is the ordinance of God, these three are
inseparable from sovereignty: therefore none can make laws, but with the
Prince, nor raise treasure, but for the Prince; for common reason shows, men
are bound unto the defense of Government with life and fortune; but experience
shows, when a corrupt degenerate man, (or men) whom Providence has given
sovereignty unto, have both the soul and body (as we may call it) of Government
in his (or their) hands, or arbitrarily at his (or their) dispose, unwholesome
laws may be made, i. e. such as are partial, or ricketed, swelling the head too
big, or a hectic or preternatural heat of the Sovereignty (be it Monarchy or
State) may draw strength too fast from the habit of the body; therefore diverse
mixed Governments reserve a general consent to accompany sovereign authority,
both in making laws and raising moneys: (though in neither of these nothing can
be done by any but the sovereign persons thus assisted.) But arms or the
Militia of the Nation (to show the danger of co-ordination) is every where
singly in the Prince or State; since if any but the Sovereign has the power of
raising the arms, they will be soon supposed to have the power of using them;
and therefore no man, how loyal soever, even for the safety of the Prince's
person, can raise arms without his commission.

These remarks may appear trivial and pedantick, yet for want of such a
foresight, or some grains of such a powder, I have seen the affairs of a great
King in convulsive sits.

Thus much for arms, as they concern the civil administration of justice, and
the repression of rebellion at home, or as these being opposed by subjects,
arise unto a civil war. Foreign war.
Now we will consider arms, as by them one equal (or who has no authority over
the other) endeavors to reduce the other unto justice, i. e. to observe those
laws of Nations which are binding either by the law of Nature or Nations, or
which are obligatory by reason of some league or treaty of commerce, made
between two Nations. Thus by the law of nature, even when both persons are
subjects, and under one and the same law, if one by a sudden assault invade the
other, so as he is in danger of life by him, and cannot have recourse unto that
law, by which both of them are to be judged, nature authorizes the assailed to
use a counter-force against the assailant, and to be his own justiciar: (but
this is but accidental, and may be properly called a natural authority to repel
force by force; or is a private war.) But that which Grotius calls a public
war, O^ public war.
is betwixt two equals, who are both Sovereigns, neither having jurisdiction
over the other. Now all Sovereigns are equals, though the one be never so much
inferior unto the other in territories, wealth, or strength; for where
Sovereignty is unequal in power, it is equal in right: and because these may
injure one another, therefore they have a right to exact justice by arms from
one another, and this is that which we call public war. The root of this war
springs from injustice (...)
The root of war thus springing from injustice, or the lusts of men, it is no
marvel, that the fruit is so barbarous and inhuman; and yet even this monster,
which is too often an offense against justice, cannot be managed but by
justice; for Princes ought never to war one upon another, but upon a belief,
that the ground of their war is just. Nay, Yet the ground of it must be just.
they ought not to begin a war, until sincerely they have endeavored to obtain
a satisfaction by way of peace. Humanity then obliges to avoid it, and
necessity only warrants the undertaking it. Says Moses therefore, When thou
go to war, enquire of the Lord, or go unto his Oracles or Word, or thine own
conscience, and reflect, whether the occasion of the war be just and lawful.
Consult not the pravity of human nature, which would lay land to land, or upon
an unreasonable fear, that others will invade thee, (which has been the
common, but improsperous practice of mankind, (as Mr. Hobbs phrases it.)
Anticipate not, or invade not another's power, who has not wronged thee, for
fear by that power, he may wrong thee, which, as Thucidides sets forth, was
such a justifying argument amongst the Athenians, who warranted themselves
therein, because it was the practice of most men, as if it had been the wisdom
and rectitude of the nature of mankind, though they found both the
Lacedaemonians, and all their smaller Allies confederating against them, because
they made this their boundless ambition to be a child of justice. Since that
could not be the offspring of justice, which by more men than those that used
it, was complained of, as an axiom of injustice. Neither use those modern
Policies, which propose a foreign war, as a Scavingry of the surplus of the
people. Nor let thy plenty arise out of others misery, by keeping two neighbors
in the calamity of war, that thou may enjoy the plenty of peace. But above
all, Several considerations relating unto a war.
let not thy vanity or thy glory prevail to exercise thy strength upon thy
Neighbors, since it is not power, but justice, that makes a Prince truly
glorious. True it is, the luxury of one Prince and the covetousness of another
State, may be scourged by the rapacity and vainglory of a third; but God
permits what he allows not, and Princes are innocent in the acts they do, not
from the suitableness of their deeds with his pleasure, but from the conformity
of them to his law. Neither was one Prince to surprise another, but first to
send his Herald, and denounce hostility, and to use those other ceremonies,
which the uprightness of elder times observed, or condemned, when not observed.
For since the lives and estates of so many innocent persons are involved in a
war, humanity requires, that if possibly it can, it be declined. Since the
villainous nature hereof could not avoid the allowing frauds, ambushes, false
intelligences, and many more stratagems; nay, knew not, how to avoid cruelties
and inhumanities, and conflagrations, which in all other cases would be
abhorred; for the Soldier, like the Huntsman, was allowed his gin as well as
his bow, and might corrupt his enemies men, as well as employ his own. All
which is to be understood, flagrante bello; for in times of truce and cessation
of arms, there ought to be a great restraint upon the former liberty. Methinks,
that God made it a great restraint upon the best and wisest Princes, and even
upon the most injured, not rashly to run into a war; since conquest gave, or
was the mother of a right even unto dominion; so hazardous it was even to
vindicate an injury by this inhuman course; for success did not always attend
upon the best cause. And it is a great evidence a Prince had just thoughts,
when he began his war, if he appeared apt to end it upon moderate and
reasonable conditions, or ne victis quidem praeter injuriae licentiam cripere.
Neither does he grant peace, that grants it not, till he has ruined his enemy;
for that is not, as the Historian says, pacem dare, but solitudinem facere.
Among Christians sure I am, it ought to be begun upon great deliberation, and
to be managed with tenderness and reluctance even upon the considerations of
humanity. And since the event is so uncertain, Moses's council surely is very
reasonable, When thou art to make a war, be sure to keep thy self from every
wicked thing; for the Lord walks in the midst of the camp; and keep it clean
free from dung, that there may be salubrity of body and purity of mind.

Princes are to reason with themselves, whether with 10000 they can meet with
their enemy that has 20000; or whether they be supplied by Confederates or
Mercenaries; for both these are insecure to depend on. For Confederates have
most commonly separate and single interests of their own, and Mercenaries are
without any affection or good will to the cause, having their eye only upon the
pay, and that is very often dazzled, when the enemy can give them a better.
Besides, as they have mercenary bodies, they too often have mercenary minds;
for this sort of men in any extremity (which is usual to befall men in a state
of war) have not that virtue and generosity to undergo the toil and hazard of
their present condition; Besides, this may give Princes caution, how they
engage in a war, since their very prosperity creates them new enemies, and some
neuter Prince rises up in behalf of the conquered, and reduces all to some
nighness of equality or state, which the war at first was begun upon. If choice
or necessity lead them to undertake a war, they can have no wiser council, than
that which the Delphic Oracle gave unto the Lacedaemonians, viz, carry it on
with all their power, or rather to overdo than undergo it; for then there is no
retreat without great loss or great dishonor; so as fitting preparations of all
necessaries are not to be sought for, when they are to be used; for that war is
sure to continue longest, that is least provided for, when it is first begun.
Nor must the Prince forwardly run into it, upon a probability of his enemies
oversight, but upon a confidence of his own foresight. Nor should the
confidence or forwardness of his counselors, (especially if they have
perceived in himself a strong inclination to the engagement) lead him to think,
he shall meet with a constancy of fervor; for difficulties and dangers (which
are the constant companions of a war) in action change those tempers of mind,
which first appeared in council. Safest therefore it is, and most commonly
those Princes thrive best in war, who foresee, and are ablest to digest
improsperities. The Germans never thought the Romans invincible, till they
found no ill success or misfortune could daunt them. This spirit in the
Athenians, after their great losses in Sicily, made the Lacedaemonians and their
Confederates, as much apprehend their stomachfulness, as they had before at any
time apprehended their power.

Many considerations therefore attend upon preparation for a war: Viz. A well
chosen experienced General. Constituent parts of an army.
Officers, who have tasted adverse as well as good fortune. Commissaries,
Providores, Quarter Masters, and Engineers, Chyrurgeons; all expert in their
Offices. Arms, Armor, Horses, Carriages, Tents, and Artillery, not inferior to
the enemies. Treasure, as much as any thing, for all these are necessary to
inspirit the


Common Soldier: since his fighting part is the least part of his duty; it is
the fatigue, or the undergoing the necessary toil and labor, as much as the
danger of his profession, that makes him valuable. To march all day and be
weary, and then to quarter in open field, be the weather never so stormy, and
no sooner in his quarters, but often finding an enemy to disquiet him, or least
he should do so, to be obliged unto a fresh labor, by raising up some works to
secure the same; these are the difficulties of his condition, and the
unavoidable contingences of it; and therefore, as he is to be chosen of an able
body, so he is to be governed by a strict discipline, that he may know it his
duty to undergo these labors and dangers often with scarceness of food, and
with a patience and obedience, that would become a Philosopher. All which he
usually with cheerfulness undergoes, when he has a confidence in his General,
as being an experienced Commander, well versed in stratagems; when he finds his
care prevents his own Officers from preying upon him, and defrauding him of his
pay; for then he is willing to use his hands, and not to use his tongue; or to
be silent in action, that he may the better receive his orders or words of
command, when he finds his belly and his back carefully provided for. When he
is to fight, if he observes his arms are as good as his enemies, and his ground
as well chosen to fight on, at least as well as the place will afford, and if
his difficulties be great, if he perceive good reserves to second him, this
begets that spirit of discipline, which is the true spirit of an army, and
makes them willing to keep their just order and rank, and that with silence,
that they may hearken to what orders are given them, which is the true strength
of an army; and if their pay be not wanting, their duty is seldom.

Men may vulgarly discourse, that a good army in an enemies country will
maintain it self, and so peradventure it may, if the General receive the spoils
in order to distribute among the common Soldiers, or for raising their pay; or
if by strong parties he brings in sufficient provision of food, or
ammunition-bread into their camp; but it never fares worse with an army, than
when by small parties (or straglers) the common Soldier forrages and provides
for himself; for then the spirit of discipline, and consequently the strength
of the army ceases, and all advantageous opportunities for the enemy seem to
begin.

Times there are, when fate and destiny seem plainly to be setting up one
Nation, and pulling down another, as when successes, and that in several places
at one and the same time, and that under no promising circumstances, attend on
one Prince, and fail another, insomuch as more is to be attributed unto
Providence or good fortune, than unto conduct. Such conjunctures as a Prince
cannot foresee, yet when he discerns, may fitly lead him to be less obstinate,
for usually such prosperities are but like a torrent, which carry all before
them, but e're long have their ebb; for fortune usually lets no long leases,
and the greatest potentates are but her Tenants at will.

Martial-law.
Wherever an Army marches, there is a necessity of Martial law; for this is a
body of brush-wood, which one spark sets on fire, and therefore needs such an
arbitrary power, we may say, rather to stifle by a sudden suppressing it, than
to extinguish it by water, or any formal means.

A veterane army; the use and the danger of it.
Few kingdoms or places can be reckoned safe without some standing veterane
army; but this will ever influence the Civil Government; for though armies
should wait on laws, and execute upon disobedience the civil decrees, yet the
robust servant often endangers the weak estate of the Master. Rome was in an
ill case, when this secret was disclosed, that a Prince could be made elsewhere
than within her walls, or that too common Soldiers even within her walls could
transfer her empire, and give her an Otho for a Galba. Thus the sovereign
Person and Government has been changed and endangered by her own Guards.

The conclusion.
Having thus laid the foundation, that all civil power, and the Sovereign
Persons that execute it, are of divine ordinance, and that the prerogatives
belonging to both, are in intuition of the peace and safety of the whole
society, and in honor and security of the head of that Politic Body; and
therefore that they are not to be resisted, but both power and person to be
held sacred, or so set apart, that the power in its prescript or laws be
indisputable, and the person in the execution thereof unquestionable; we may
say, here is firm ground to raise our pillars or vital principles of Government
upon; and on these we may rear the roof of wisdom's house, and assert, that
honesty is the best policy; since by the light of nature or common reason, it
is agreed as Epictetus says, that the Gods justly and wisely administer all
things, and that they have tied children and subjects unto Parents and Princes,
not as they are good, but as they are Parents and Princes; and therefore for
such blessings men are more to depend on their providence, than their own
choice or wisdom. For remove Government and Governors from this divine
ordinance, and the principles of Policy shall, like the atoms of Lucretius,
make mankind of such an unquiet nature, that he shall be governed by his
sensitive appetites and present advantages, rather than by those innate
principles, which by the moral virtues of his mind, have fitted him to exercise
his own goodness, and to bear with other men's (especially Governors) failures,
or vices, and rather to pray for a good Prince, than resist a bad. And the same
virtues will teach Princes, that there are no such policies, as those that are
ethical; others being but like the pleasures of titillation, earnestly sought
for or delightfully used, but soon repented of. Marcus Aurelius's fame will be
desirable by a thinking man, when Alexanders and Julius Caesar's will be
esteemed worthless, and when Neroes and Caligula's will be found ignominious.
And when the ambitions of Charles V. and Philip II. and Francis I. and the
great Henry's and Lewis's are considered, it may be feared, that Asia and
Gentilisme owe more thereunto, than does Christendom or Christianity.
Macchiavilian principles of policy there can be none steady, and yet there may
be many prosperous, because they look after the end and despise the means, and
most unnaturally they do often make prosperous a vice, by the exercise of some
seeming virtue, and thus by some immoral means, drive at some politic end; for
quocunque modo rem is their axiom. Such sort of men as these think it no
dishonor, if they can sweep the stake, though they be found playing with false
dice. Nor have they any remorse, that by treachery they have deceived their
friend or benefactor. Nothing of all this is said to make the Physicians of
State so cautious, as not to know how in composition of a cordial to make use
of the serpents flesh; for a nice piety or a scrupulous policy (I think at
least) is not expected, even by God himself, from men of this condition,
without there were an assurance of a clear openness and integrity on the other
part. Therefore Macchiavel and Tacitus, and men of that form, are excellent
Authors to give caution, when they are dangerous Guides to follow. The honest
man therefore is not the fool, for he can let live in his house the serpent,
but not in his breast; and he can shake off animal policy, to entertain
Ethical. He has these mixed in his own compositum; for as in himself he is both
animal and rational, so in his politic constitution he is made up of the
serpent, or sensitive part, and the rational and dove-like. These are not to be
kept apart in him, but he is to be compounded of; but the dove must be the soul
of his policy.

If we would seek another topic to prove all this, we would have recourse to
the whole Histories of the world; and through all of them we shall find, that
those carnal policies, which are to corrupt men's councels, are very useful to
be known, since it is as necessary for a Traveller to be well hatted, booted,
and coated against foul weather and ways, as to be well horsed, to carry him
his direct road. But observe all Histories, and they do as Comedies do, (or at
least should do) discover many treacheries and vices, but in their conclusion
they make them improsperous, and give the reward to virtue. And this further
light we may borrow from them, that both Greek and Roman, (and if the subtle
wit of the one, and the courage of the other could not, or did not prevent it,
no succeeding nations or times ever did or will attain it) who most opposed
Monarchical Power, never attained their Idol liberty, by manacling of Monarchy.
Disasterous it was to Athens, and it cost more blood, and interrupted more the
prosperity of Rome than any thing else; for both Livie and Tacitus set forth,
how when Kings abused their sovereignty, that people sought to find their
liberty in two Consuls, to whom sovereign authority was necessary to be
entrusted; and these (as no men living ever did, or could make their affairs
ever prosperous) became soon not only to be complained of in improsperous
times, but to be envied, when they had the most success; for inferiors
(especially when they think they create their Superiors) never want their
passion. So as the Consuls fell soon into their displeasure and jealousy, and
a short lived Decemviri must rectify (as they did disorder) this state of
government, and the people, in whom the sovereign power was said to be lodged,
must be protected by Tribunes, chosen from the Commons, and then by Tribunes
Military, that might give check unto the Consulary authority. But all this was
but a rolling of a sick man in his bed, and the best medicin they ever took was
a Dictator, who silenced all other powers, and singly exercised all power; so
as here was Monarchy in its height or achme; for the Dictator was a Prince
bound by no law, nor clogged with any partnership, only it was temporary and
short-lived; which is proof enough, (tho extremity and necessity teach the
doctrine) that all trust is safeliest lodged in one, and that failures in
government will attend the best constitution of government, and that variety of
changes are but so many infirmities of a state, and at last so dishearten all
wise and good men, from depending on a populacy, that a Cinna or a Sylla, a
Pompey, a Crassus, or a Caesar, will in a disguise, (or by a barefaced
challenging it) at last so weary and weaken by civil discords the people, that
they will rather choose the change of their condition with security, than
endeavor to recover their old pretended liberty with danger. It is the want of
good eyes, or the weakness of the Optic nerve, that makes men not perceive the
usefulness of sovereign prerogatives, even in relation to the benefit and well
governing of subjects. For the terror of power often keeps the State quiet and
secure, when the belief of liberty breeds that irreverence unto the wisdom of
Governors, that they kindle those sparks of contumacy, which set all into a
flame. Few men have learnt this lesson, but those, who have lived in times of
civil distraction; and therefore the conclusion shall be, Government is an
ordinance of God; whose wisdom having designed men to live in society, made
politic, like natural, bodies, consist of a head and diverse members, lodging
life in the body, and sense and motion in the head; so as human laws, (grounded
on sound reason and adapted to the genius of the people, and unto the various
public and private concerns, and derived (as nigh as might be) from the moral
virtues, or the equity of them by nature implanted in mankind) were like the
salt in the natural body, which tied all parts together, by prudence promoting
public before private good or interest, and by justice preserving the harmony
of tenderness and beneficence communicated from the head, and of cheerful and
ready obedience yielded from the body; and by patience, a most necessary and
eminent virtue in this corrupted and lapsed state of man, (like mortification,
on which even religion her self is now founded) each bearing the others
infirmities; for without such a temper the public peace or health of state is
lost. Unto which temper, O Lord, restore this poor giddy Nation.

FINIS.

