Philarguromastix.

OR, The Arraignment of Covetousness, and Ambition, in our great and greedy
Cormorants. That retard and hinder Reformation, (All whose reaches, are at
riches:) that make gold their god; and commodity the stern of their
consciences: that hold every thing lawful, if it be gainful: that prefer a
little base pelf, before God, and their own salvations: that being fatted with
Gods blessings; do spurn at his precepts.

Dedicated to all corrupt, cunning, and cruel Governors, Politicians,
Officers, Judges, Lawyers, Projectors, Ingrossers, Gripers, Wasters, etc.


Together with the lively, and lovely Characters, of Justice, Thankfulness,
Contentation, Frugality, Liberality,


Being a subject very seasonable, for these Atheistical, and self-seeking Times.

By Iunius Florilegus.

Imprimatur, Tho. Gataker.

CHAP. I.
HAving felt the Cormorants Pulse, I find it to beat violently after gain. He
were a skillful Physician, that could pick out the greedy ^^m, which makes him
so hungry. I will make the attempt, and leave the issue to him, to whom nothing
is hard. And that I may (if it be possible) pluck up Covetousness by the
roots; I will (as near as I can) imitate our Anatomists, who in desecting of a
Corpse, pass not by the least vein, or artery, without a discovery, and
paraphrase upon the same. And so, that the profit (as I hope) shall recompense
the prolixity.

True, he is such a deep, that one may better tell the hairs of his head, then
the wickedness of his heart. And whereas Many sinners (which in my former
Characters I have pointed out,) have done wickedly; this wretch surpasses them
all. Yea the springs and wards of his deceitful heart, are so diverse and
intricate; that it would be an impossible enterprise to decipher them all.
Nevertheless, I will ( God assisting me) acquaint you with such words,
actions, and cunning devices of his, as are most worth my discovery, and the
Worlds notice: that being known and stigmatized, you may the better beware of
him.

The Covetous Cormorant, Miserly Muckworm, Greedy Griper, or Cunning
Politician; is one that affects no life or quality for it self, but for gain;
all his reaches, are at riches. His Summum bonum is commodity: and gold is the
goddess he adores in every thing. Nor cares he how he gets, but what he gets.
For he not only betters his estate, by making himself worse; and impoverisheth
his soul, to enrich his body: But to purchase a great estate, he will sell both
soul, and body. Nor could he otherwise call his wealth his own: if he did not
thus buy or purchase it with himself. Like Silvester the second, who to get the
Popedom, gave himself to the devil.

If he be a Tradesman, he takes one and the same oath; to be the Cities
Freeman, and moneys bondslave. He shuts the fear of God out of his heart, the
same day he begins the world: and marries his Wife, and the World at once: to
save the Charge of a double Wedding. He bids a good conscience farewell for
thirty years: charging it to meet him again, when he is Alderman. For his
hopes, and desires are as great; as his deserts are mean.

Nor is he any niggard of his labor, or neglecter of time and opportunity. Its
ever Term with him; his business admits of no vacation, no holiday; scarce of
nights, or meal times. For he is so eager on his worldly occasions; that he
seldom feels himself either sleepy, or hungry: nor will they once give him
leave, to think of his conscience. He takes pains, and parboyles himself in
sweat unreasonably: and because all servants (as he thinks) are Thieves: it
much grieves him, he has not an hundredth hands with Briarius; and as many Eyes
with Argus: for he could and would employ them all. Nor is there any end, or
limit to be found in Covetousness. Balaam was so inflamed with the hope of
Balacks gold: that he thought his Ass never went half fast enough to it. Numb.
22. whence it is, that such an one plots, studies, contrives, breaks his peace,
his sleep, his brains to compass his desires. Neither will he spare, to plow
furrows on the backs of the Poor: Or run through the blood of Orphans to
effect the same. For though he ventures his ears, his neck, his soul; he dares
not deny his slave, his dog, his devil avarice. Wind, tide, nor time; but it
shall bring him in profit. Yea he will grow wealthy by Plague, Famine, or War,
(like those fowls that fatten with frosty weather,) And as for these Civil
wars: we know to our cost, that many of them are swollen in their estates, and
minds: from a toade, to an Ox, as in the Fable. What are his several ways to
effect the same, in such times: I dare not tell ye; for fear of teaching them:
and my aim is to profit your souls, not to increase your estates. Neither will
this Discourse permit me, to be prolix. Only this, for matter of conscience, he
is like Dorio the Bawd in Terence: that was not ashamed of the basest actions,
that brought her in benefit. Or Caligula: who could smell no difference,
between gold got by oppression; and that which was honestly come by. And
indeed: how should not that Eye be blind? which the Devil has dawbed up, with
the dirt of this world. The gift blinds the eyes of the wise, says God; and
perverteth the words of the just. Exodus 23.8. Deuteronomy, 16.19.

CHAP. 2.
I Need not tell you of his procuring Monopolies, to rob the Common wealth: a
wicked way to enrich one man, by beggering, or defrauding a multitude. Nor how
politic he is, to ingrosse a Commodity in the plenty, and neglect of it: that
he may enrich himself when a time of dearth shall come. Nor of his hoording up
Corn in a dear year: which is to make a private gain, of Gods Judgments, and to
starve the Poor. For he does what he can to starve them. He curses the
Hollanders, for supplying us in times of scarcity: wishes that Danske were as
far as the Molockoes. And had rather have the frame of the World fall, then the
price of his Corn. And the like in whatsoever this Cormorant deals; For he
will be sure to make the most of it. And not only in the price, but otherwise.
For, for the emptying of other men's purses, and filling of his own: he buys by
one balance, and sells by another. has false weights, false measures, false
wares, false lights, a false finger, a false tongue, a false heart, etc. Nor
can you well make any bargain with him, without being overreached by him. As a
bargain may sometimes be as unmercifull, as a robbery: and hasty selling (which
many poor men are often put unto,) is commonly more disadvantagious, then
interest.

Let him be put in trust; as Joseph was by Potiphar: who committed all he had
to him, Genesis 39.6 to 10. he is so far from dealing faithfully as he did: Or
those mentioned, 2 Kings 22. whom Josiah found so honest, that he would take no
reckoning of them, verse 4. to 8. That he falls short of the unjust steward,
Luke 16. who cheated his Master, but of fifty, in an hundred. verse. 6. For
whatsoever he catches in his claws, he will be sure to hold: like the Fish
Polipus, Or a drowning man; that holds all he can take hold on. And not only
so, but he will laugh in his sleeve, and esteem it a good jest; to see how his
subtilty, has cousened your simplicity in earnest. But he is a fool, in thus
playing the knave: for honesty though it gain but little at once, yet it gains
that little often, and long. whereas nothing but mere necessity, will bring a man
into a Trap; wherein he has once been taken. Nor make him join with a known
thief, in his own robbing. I have known some, that by wronging, and cousening a
Customer of a few shillings: have hindered themselves the taking, of half so
many thousand pounds. And others that by their honest, and square dealing: have
gained such credit; that the mere report thereof, has procured them customars
from all parts of the Land. And certainly a wise man would be honest: if it
were but for his own ends. But God has justly ordained, that he who will be a
knave in one thing: should be a fool in another. But to go on,

Suppose he shall be brought upon his Oath, when his cousening cannot be
proved: as in Israel, when any thing was delivered to a Neighbor in trust; and
he refused to restore the same; pretending it was stolen, Exodus 22.7, 8, 10,
11. he will absolutely forswear himself; rather then acknowledge it, or make
satisfaction. And the like is his dealing with Orphans; if any shall be so
simple, or unhappy; as to put him in trust with their estates; and leave the
care of their children to him: (though the greatest obligation to a good mind,
is another trust: which to disappoint, is matchless perfidiousnesse,) he will
discharge his trust with a witness. Much like that Tailor: who like a Knave as
he was shrunk a Freeze Gown, to three dozen of Buttons. For he has a
Conscience like a Barn Door: and can digest gold, and silver, as the Ostridge
does Iron. Yea so vast is the gorge of his Conscience: that he can swallow the
greatest crimes, and find no strain in the passage. Yea he can carry them as
lightly away, as Sampson did the Gates of the City; and his back never complain
of the burden. Not can you expect he should be faithful to men: that is so
unfaithful to God.

If he be a great dealer, and grows not rich that way: he will effect it
another way. he will study tricks to uphold the credit of his wealth: and still
the nearer he comes to poverty; the more show he will make of sufficiency,
until he has got twenty men's estates, perhaps ten thousand pounds into his
hands; And then in knavery he breaks, and gets more by this one trick, then if
he had thrived never so well in his calling. For he will, if it be possible, so
conceal his estate; that his Creditors shall be glad of two shillings, or ten
groats in the pound.

CHAP. 3.
OR if he likes not such a course, lest it should keep him from ever rising
higher: He will venture all he has, and what more he can procure; to purchase
some office: As well knowing this the speediest way to wealth. And indeed how
many by getting Office, upon Office; Or stepping from one degree of greatness,
to another: have rolled themselves up like a snow ball; from base beggary, to
infinite wealth. Together with right worshipful, and right Honorable Titles;
by unjustly sc^ring themselves, into honors and offices. And Offices were
usually conferred, upon the worst men: because the worst are forwardest to sue
for them. As in Iothams Parable; The Olives, Vines, and Figtrees refused the
honor of governing; but the Bramble, will catch hold of the sleeve for
preferment, Judge. 9.15. They that be worthy must be sued to: as thinking it
better to be worthy of honor, then to have honor: and resolving they will so
be honorable, as they may still be honest. Whereas the unworthy, study more to
be advanced, and grow rich; then to be worthy of that advancement, or wealth;
by doing good in their places. Whence they are as industrious in climing; as
Briarius: who even clambered to reach at the Heavens: and speed thereafter.
Haman was always aspiring, and lifting up his head: till it was lifted up
fifty cubits higher, then he would have had it, Ester 7* And Saul you know in
seeking Asses, found a Kingdom: But Absalom in seeking a Kingdom, found a
Gallows: And indeed how many have we known, like the Frog in AEsop? who
thinking to swell till he was as big as an Ox; burst before he came half way to
it. Or if not so; they have resembled Caninus, who was Consul of Rome but seven
hours. Or the stones on the top of a Pinnacle* which are the last erected, and
the first that fall.

Secondly; the worst men get the best places, and offices; because they are
better verst in the way that leads thereto: And have liberty to use such means;
(viz. flattery, bribery and bloodshed: the usual stayers of the covetous, and
ambitious,) as the deserving dare not. Of the first, Absalom may serve for an
example, 2 Samuel 15.5, 6. Of the second, that Chief Captain, Acts 22.28. Of the
third, Hazael, 2 King. 8.15.

Offices should be given freely, to the most fit and deserving; (As the Stern
is committed to him, that is most expert, and skilful in Navigation,) that is,
to men of courage, fearing God, dealing truly, and hating Covetousness, Exodus
18.21. who will neither grow great by buying offices; nor rich by selling them:
Neither grow rich by others bribes, nor honorable by their own. Nor can an
honest man, buy such bargains: For how can he sell cheap, that buys dear? Only
a Simon Magus; who makes preferment his god, and Mammon his Mediator, can
afford to buy an Apostleship: that he may sell the Holy Ghost, and so get money
by him. And Offices have usually been sold, to such as would give most for
them: whereby all gainful places throughout the Land; were sold to such, as
made prey of the people. And from hence springs all our miseries: For whereas
that Common Wealth is most happy, and best governed; in which wicked men may
bear no sway, nor have any authority; as Pittacus observes. So on the contrary,
that Common wealth is most unhappy; and worst governed; in which wicked men do
bear all the sway, and have the chief authority.

I might heap up instances from the Word, Histories, and Experience of all Ages
of such, as have attained great places; by means of cruelty, and intrusion. And
therein make manifest, that none are so Marble hearted, and savage minded as
the Covetous, and Ambitious. As not caring on whom they tread, so they may
rise. Yea woe to them that lie in the way of their aspiring: Though they be
brothers; yea Fathers (as in the case of Absalom,) they shall bleed: and the
nearer they are, the more sure is their ruin.

CHAP. 4.
AS for the discharge of his place, or office being obtained; it is this. First
he resembles Boniface the ninth: of whom nothing could be demanded, were it
never so unjust, or absurd; but he would grant it for money. But in case no
money comes; He will imitate Caligula: who would deny all men's requests, were
they never so modest, just, and reasonable. For like Felix, when he had to do
with Paul, Acts 24.26, 27, 28. He looks that money should be given him by each
Party. As who will not give him bribes? rather then venture the loss of all:
as the Traveller his purse to the Theef^ rather then venture his life, or limbs.

Or if either Plaintiffs, or Defendants cause be too light, in the Balance of
equity: It is but throwing in a Bribe heavy enough; and that Scale shall weigh
down the other* for as a balance stoopeth to that side, whence it receives
most weight: so he favors that party most, that gives most. And what Court
was there almost, in the Land? where Justice was not bought and sold. Might not
the worst cause? Or the foulest crime find favor? if the parties would be at
the cost to purchase it. As it fared with Claudius, who defiling the fair
Matron Obelina, as he found her praying in the Temple of Minerva: being
condemned for sacrilege, escaped punishment by bribes.

Nor is he any whit ashamed, or afraid to take bribes: For as Custom has
brought that into credit, which otherwise would be set in the Pillory and
stigmatized: so in case any dare question him; he can answer the Supreme
Magistrate in the words of that chief Captain, Acts 22.28. with agreat sum
obtained I this Office, as thou very well know; which is enough. For the one
but sells that by retail, which the other sold him in gross: And so making the
case his own, conscience tells him, that he who has bought his place dear;
cannot sell cheap, Or afford the Clyent a reasonable peniworth of Justice.
Unless he means to live by the loss; and he that so buys, has no such
meaning.

CHAP. 5.
ANd to speak rightly, who but the Supreme Magistrate has been the cause of
all? in selling Offices to such, as would give most. and filling all gainful
places in the Land with such, as sought not the peoples good; but the peoples
goods, Ezekiel. 22.27. The Common wealth (as Plato well observes) like a Fish,
commonly first putrifies, and rots at the head: for as the Governor of the
people is, so are his Officers; and what manner of man the Ruler of the City
is; such are they that dwell therein, Eccl. 10.2. Subjects follow the example
of their Princes, as certain flowers turn according to the Sun. And as all
subordinate greatness flows from the head: so do commonly also their
dispositions. Augustus a learned Prince, filled Rome with Scholars. Tiberius
filled it with dissemblers. Constantine with Christians. Julian with Atheists.
A sick head, makes a distempered body. Of a Prince that hearkeneth to lies, all
his servants are wicked, Prove. 29.12. And for the most part, they that should
lead the way to all virtuous actions: are the Ringleaders of all mischief, and
dissolute courses. Indeed the Kings of the Earth, should be nursing Fathers to
the Church: but both the Word, and experience of most ages show; that they band
themselves, and the Princes assemble together against the Lord, and against his
Christ, Psalm. 2.2. God is so far, from making every one good whom he makes
great: that Not many Noble are called, as Paul speaks, 1 Cor 1.26, 27. and the
Scripture has left it upon Record; that of twenty Kings of Judah, six only
were godly: and of eighteen Kings of Israel, all but two were wicked. and yet
this nation was Gods peculiar, and chosen people out of all the world.

O that they who fit at the Helm! would discharge their parts: and then things
would soon be mended. The way to purge the streams, is to begin at the
Fountain. Let them that govern in chief fear God, and be free from
Covetousness. A King by judgment maintains the Country: but a man receiving
gifts, destroys it. Prove. 29 4. Nor would it be any disparagement to their
greatness; but a geat honor; to follow the examples of Samuel. 1 Samuel 12.3,
4. And Moses Numb. 16.15. And indeed it is too base and sordid for honor to be
covetous. But return we to the Miserly Muckworm; for I may seem to have left
him, and be gone quite out of my way.

CHAP. 6.
THese base, and servile spirits; that love money better then themselves: will
do any thing to please Princes. They will sooner follow the command of their
Lord, or Prince: then the precept of their God. Let Saul but command Doeg, to
murder the Priests: he will run upon them, and quickly dispatch them. 1 Samuel
22.18. Let Iehu but command the Rulers, Elders, and great men of Samaria, to
slay seventy of their Masters sons, off goes their heads, so soon as they
receive the Letter, 2 Kings 10.6, 7. If Nebuchadnezzar charge the Princes, and
Officers, to adore his new erected Idol; when the music gives warning: they
instantly fall down upon their knees. Dan. 3.1. to 8. John shall not want a
Deaths-man; if Herod but send for his head: so not long since, if the King
would have wickedness established for a Law: his Judges, and Officers, (some
of them) were as ready to do it, as he to have them. Cowards, and Covetous men;
are slaves to those above them, Sicophants to those equal with them, Tyrants to
those under them. When the Heart is made Judge, between the Woolf and the Lambs;
as in the Fable: it must needs go on the Wolves side. Cambyses falling in love
with his Sister, asked the Judges; whether it were lawful for him to marry her?
They answered, they had no such law: but they had another, that the King might
do whatsoever liked him; whereupon he married her. Our times have been blessed
with many such Judges, and other Officers.

Nor would these, be swayed by his Majesty only: For when in justice they
could not but punish a malefactor: might not the Protection of some great Lord,
be procured to deliver him? so that the Law might put up his dagger: For by
this means a lewd person needed not fear to offend; that had a great man to his
friend; or had not a great man to his enemy. The Robber rifles a passenger, is
apprehended and indicted: the booty he gives to some mighty one, to procure his
pardon and escapes. Thus the poor traveller is robbed doubly; both of his
money, and all relief of the Law; and the protector of the lewd person is
become the greater thief. A poor sheep-stealer is hanged, for stealing of
victuals; compelled peradventure by necessity of that intolerable cold,
hunger, and thirst, to save himself from starving. But a great man in office,
may securely rob whole Provinces, undo thousands, pill and poll, oppress,
flea, grind, tyrannize, enrich himself by spoils of the Commons; be
uncontroleable in all his actions, and after all be recompensed with turgent
Titles, honored for his good service, and no man dare find fault with him, or
mutter at the matter. much like the justice of Domitius, who always punished
the poor, and those that were of no power: but the rich and mighty he pardoned.
These are thieves, not for taking purses by the high way, but bribes in their
chambers. Hosea 4.18. Their language is give; and the thieves is but deliver:
now what is the difference, betwixt give, and deliver? yet often (give) walks
in Chains of gold, while deliver lies in chains of Iron. These are thieves in
folio; Cathedral, and Metropolitan thieves: loving gifts, and taking bribes to
undo the widow, and fatherless. yea many whole Families, and their posterity.
This made Socrates laugh to see, a Judge severely to punish others; and do
worse himself: to see little thieves, riding in Carts to the Gallows; and
great thieves in Coaches to condemn them. Minuta puniuntur, magna in triumphis
feruntur.

CHAP. 7.
LEt these things be considered, and then tell me, whether we might not
complain of our times, as the Prophets of former times, and say? In their hands
is wickedness, and their right hand is full of bribes. Psalm. 26.10. They are
turned aside after lucre, and take rewards to pervert judgment. 1 Samuel 8.3. Ye
pass over judgment, and the love of God, Luke 11.42. The Prince asks, and
the Judge judges for a reward: therefore the great man speaks out the
corruption of his soul, so they wrap it up. Micha 3.11. and 7.3. Zeph. 1.12.
Thy Princes are rebellious, and companions of thieves: every one loves gifts,
and follows after rewards. They judge not the fatherless, neither does the
widows cause come before them. Esaias 1.23. Her Princes in the midst of her, are
like Wolves, ravening the prey, to shed blood, and to destroy souls for their
own covetous lucre. Ezekiel. 22.27. The best of them is as a bryer, and the most
righteous of them is sharper, then a thorny hedge. Micha 7.4. yea they were so
frozen in their dregs, Zeph. 1.12. that if one were found either in Parliament,
at Council Table, in Star Chamber, High Commission Court, any office in the
Kingdom; or ordinary Court of Judicature; that in the worst and most desperate
times; durst keep a good conscience, and not do as the rest, that would not
upon all occasions speak good of evil, and evil of good, prostitute their
tongues, and pens, and wits, and wills, and consciences, and souls, all that
they had to serve the times, and turns of Princes: That would honor
greatness, but imitate goodness, only: like the Lord Cook, Sir Randal Crew,
Sir John Elliot, and many others: he was wondered at as an Owl among the rest
of the birds. as it fared with those three worthies, Shadrach, Meshach, and
Abednego, when they refused to do, as the rest of the Princes, Governors,
Captains, Judges, Treasurers, Counselors, Sheriffs, and all the Rulers of the
Provinces under Nebuchadnezzar. Dan. 3. Or as it fared with Daniel single; when
of all the hundred and twenty Princes, he refused to obey the King in his
wicked command. Dan. 6. Or as it did with Micha, amongst those four hundred
false Prophets: when he would not speak against his conscience, and flatter the
King to his destruction, as the rest did. 1 King. 22.

But might not our Senators before spoken of, have said to their Soveraign^; as
Socrates said once to this unjust Judges? Surely we deserve recompense, instead
of rage. Yea and I think, we may make application to some Officers, and Judges,
of later times; of what Comincus speaks of the Battle of Montlehery: viz. that
some lost their places, and offices for running away; which were bestowed upon
others, that fled ten Leagues further, for as they say, Never so much bribery
in all sorts of Officers, as now: which is a horrible shame, in such reforming
times.

CHAP. 8.
NOr did their wickedness, confine it self within their own bosoms: but by
their examples, all the people of the Land (except some few despised ones) were
infected: for does not experience show? that the faithful are failed, from
among the children of men. Psalm. 12.1. that none calls for justice, none
contendeth for truth; they conceive mischief, and bring forth iniquity. Isa.
59.4. That all seek their own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's. Phil. 2.21.
That all are gone out of the way, they are all corrupt, and have done
abominable wickedness; there is not one that does good, Psalm 14.1, 2, 3. and
53.1. So that if ever that Counsel of Jeremy, and Micha, Let every one take
heed of his neighbor, and trust ye not in any brother: for every brother will
use deceit, and every friend will deal deceitfully* Jer. the 9.4. Trust ye not
in a friend, neither put ye confidence in a Counselor; keep the doors of thy
mouth, from her that lies in thy bosom. Micha 7.5.) were duly to be observed;
it is in our days. For is not the City, and Country, become as a common prison
of cheates? swarving as much from justice, honesty, and Religion; as a picture
does from a man? though some are worse then others.

And what care men, so they get money, and great places? though they lose their
souls. As these bribe-takers, multiply unjust gain, and grow rich above
measure: even their houses are full, and they are thereby become great, and
waxen rich; they are grown fat and shining; they do overpasse the deeds of the
wicked, they execute no judgment, no not the judgment of the poor and
fatherless: yet they prosper, Jer. 5.27, 28. But what follows in the next
verse? Shall I not visit for these things, says the Lord? Or shall not my
soul be avenged on such a nation as this? verse. 29. Yes: the day of their
visitation comes, now shall be their perplexity, says God. Micha 7.4. I will
ease me of mine adversaries, and avenge me of mine enemies. Isai 1.24. And I
think God has been as good as his word. Our very eyes have seen it, or our
ears heard of it; both in England, Scotland, Wales, and Ireland. True, wilful
and wicked men will not see, what they do and cannot choose but see: How when
God has any exploit to perform, and intends success: he raises up the hearts
of some chosen Instruments, with heroical motions, and resolutions of courage,
with contempt of all danger for achievement. When all hearts are cold, and
dead; it is a sign of intended destruction. But to leave such, until time and
experience has taught them more.

CHAP. 9.
NOw what is the reason of all? but Covetousness. I must do as my Sovereign,
Or such great men will have me, or I shall lose my Place, which I bought so
dear: and so undo my self, and all mine. But the King of kings will one day,
condemn you both: him for commanding, and thee for yielding: And recompense
your obedience with Fire, and brimstone. And not seldom have such, their
deserved recompense; sooner then they expect it. Ferdinando the fourth,
adjudged two Knights to death; more through malice, then out of justice: but
one of them cried out, O unjust King! we cite thee to appear within thirty
days, before the Tribunal feat of Jesus Christ; to receive recompense for
thine injustice: upon the last of which days; he dyed, as Paulus Diaconus
testifies. Demetrius having received many requests, and supplications of his
subjects; threw them all into the water, as he went over the Bridge: whereupon,
his subjects conceived such an hatred against him; that his Army forsook him,
and yielded to Pyrrhus: who drove him out of his Kingdom as Diodorus sets it
down. I confess it is a miserable thing, to fall into such times: in which men
must both speak what they think not, and do what they approve not. As Tacitus
that great Statesman speaks. Yea as wise Plato could say, that Common wealth
is like to go to wrack: where Magistrates rule the Laws, and not the Laws
rule Magistrates. To which accords that of the Oracle: The Sibarites desirous
to know from Apollo, how long their prosperity should last? were answered; that
so soon as they began to prefer men, before God; their state should be
destroyed. And to speak the truth in plain English: (as now we may do blessed
be God.) He is not a King, but a Tyrant: whose will swayes, and not the Law. as
wise States men have been bold to affirm. But what of all this? An honest man
will do nothing to please any, whereby he shall displease God. He will answer
the King, you bound me by oath at my first entrance; that I should in all cases
give judgment, according to law. Agesilaus being requested by his Father, to
give a sentence against equity: graciously denied him, saying: You have taught
me, O Father, from my youth, to obey the Laws: and therefore I will now obey
you therein, in judging nothing against the Laws. And Benevolus, when Iustina
the Arian Empress proffered him great preferments, to have him instrumental in
a service; which could not be done with a good conscience, answered: What do
you promising mean higher degree of preferment, for a reward of impiety; yea
even take this from me, which already I have; so I may keep a good conscience;
And forthwith gave her his Girdle, the Ensign of his Honor. And of such a
spirit, was Sir Thomas Moor: who made great suit to the King, to be discharged
his Lord Chancelorship; that so he might not against his conscience; speak, nor
act any thing, about the Kings marriage with Queen Anne.

A Judge truly fearing God, is in Justice and piety, as immovable as a Rock:
Like Fabricius, of whom Pyrrhus (though his enemy) gave this praise, that a man
might as soon turn the Sun out of his course; as him from truth and honesty. as
Plutarch, and Eutropius report. Or like Aristides, who feared not the King, nor
would favor his own Father; and for his impartial dealing in all matters: was
surnamed the Just. Or Epaminondas, whom all the riches of the world, could not
withdraw from the least duty to his Country. as AElian reports. Or the
Midwives, who (though weak Women) would not do as the King of Egypt commanded
them: but preserved alive the men Children, Exodus 1.17, 20, 21. Or the wise
men, Matthew. 2. 1. to 13. who turned their backs upon Herod; when in his command
he intended mischief. Or the Martyrs, who would burn, rather then turn. Virtue,
and piety is such a thing: that neither power can force her, nor wealth win
her, nor any thing in the whole World corrupt her. One that fears God, and
has a good conscience; is like Fire, that cannot be forced downwards. When
Pyrrhus tempted Fabricius, with money and promises of honor: And seeing that
would not do, threatened him with Elephants and strange things, he answered: I
fear not thy force, and I am too wise for thy fraud. The Prince of Conde being
taken prisoner, by Charles the ninth of France: and put to his choice, whether
he would go to Mass, or be put to death, or suffer perpetual imprisonment?
answered: the former I will never do by Gods grace; as for the two latter, let
the King do with me what he pleases; For God I assure my self will turn all to
the best. When Modestus the Emperors Lieutenant, threatened to kill Bazil, he
answered: if that be all I fear not, yea your Master cannot more pleasure me,
then in sending me unto my heavenly Father; to whom I now live, and to whom I
desire to hasten. And another time being threatened with bonds, banishment,
Confiscation, cruel torture, death, etc. he bad him fright babies with such
bugb^ares; his life might be taken away, but not his comfort; his head, but not
his crown. Yea quoth he, had I a thousand lives, I would lay them all down for
my Saviors sake; who has done abundantly more for me. And when they offered
him money and preferments, to tempt him, he answered: can ye give me money that
can last for ever, and glory that shall eternally flourish? John Ardely professed
to Bonner, when he told him of burning; and how ill he could endure it: that if
he had as many lives, as he had hairs on his head; he would lose them all in
the fire, before he would lose his Christ. Ierom writes of a brave Woman, that
being upon the wrack; had her persecutours do their worst, she was resolved
rather to dye, then lie. They will never fear to be killed, who by killing are
sure to be crowned. Here he that reads, will take occasion to censure me;
(perhaps count me a Fool*) for putting so many plums in the pot of one kind:
But thou may rather think thy self worthy of censure, for I do it only to
show thee thy folly: for ask thee which example thou would have left out?
thou know not. Yea thou would rather have more put in, that thou never
yet heardest. If so, learn to be more wise, or at least more charitable: or
rather confess, that Sloth sits and censures, what the industrious teach:
Foxes love to dispraise the Grapes, they cannot reach.

I desire to imitate those Authors that I like best, and find most efficacious:
And (since nothing will please all) I would please them that are of my own
diet: And those I guess to be the most, and to have the greatest need of such
discourses, as inform the judgment; and are likeliest to work upon the
affections, and save the soul. And to confess that, which some will say is an
error, I would rather (if God so please) be an instrument to convert one soul,
then to build up many: and I wish more of the Ministry, were of my mind. But go
we on:

CHAP. 10.
SUch as fear God, if higher powers enjoin them things against him, who is
highest of all: they will rather obey God then man. Acts 4.19. Yea in this they
are like God himself: who accepts not the persons of Princes, and regards
not the Rich, more then the poor. Job 34.19.

And were Princes so wise as they should be: they would bless God, that they
had such impartial Judges. Henry the fourth of England, when the Prince his
eldest son; was by the Lord Chief Justice for some great misdemeanure,
committed to prison* he thanked God that he had a Son so obedient, and a Judge
of such impartial, and undaunted courage. And when a Judge is once found to be
so impartial: no man will dare, once to solicit him in any dishonest, or
unjust cause. As Cicero writes of Cato Censorius, to his eternal praise. But
for want of such Princes, and Judges: Judgment is turned backward, and justice
stands afar off; For Truth is fallen in the Streets, and equity cannot enter.
As God complains. Isay 59.14. As a roaring Lion, and an hungry Bear: so is a
wicked Ruler, over the poor people. As wise King Solomon makes the resemblance.
Prove. 28.15, 16. And the Prophet Micha, Chap. 3. They eat also the flesh of my
people, and flea off their skins from their bones, verse. 3. But

Thirdly: as these covetous Judges, and Officers will do any wicked act, for
Great ones out of fear: so they will do the same for friends, or Allies out of
love, and to save their own purses: Or against Enemies out of malice. He that
puts on a public Gown, should put off a private person: like Cleon the
Lacedemonian; who when he undertook public affairs; called all his friends
together, and told them: that he now discharged himself of all friendship; in
that it too often caused men to swarve. from Justice and equity. But how common
is it with these corrupt Magistrates, to make a bad cause good, or a good bad;
either to revenge a wrong, or to do a pleasure. To speak, or act partially;
according to the interest he has in the Cause, or the patient. But what says
Solomon? It is not good, to have respect to any person in Judgment: for that
man will transgress for a piece of bread. Prove. 24.23. and 28.21. He that God
has deputed as Umpeer, between party and party: should say to Fathers,
Brethren, and Children; whether Natural, or Political; I know ye not. That is,
neither nighnesse, nor Highness, shall make me play the Huckster, with God,
the Law, or my Conscience. Neighborhood is my friend, Alliance is my friend,
bounty is my friend; But Justice is my friend, a good Conscience is my friend,
and God is my friend above all. Wherefore without respecting the person, Or
expecting the gifts of any: I will do what these friends, would have me. Like
Papinian, who being commanded by the Emperor Caracalla; whose Steward and
familiar he was; to defend him in an unjust cause, would not do it. Or like
Phocion, who refused to help his son in law Carillus in judgment, being accused
for bribery: saying, he had made him his friend and Ally; in all just, and
reasonable matters, and in them only. Or Sir Thomas Moor, who upon the like
occasion told his son in Law: that were he to decide a cause, between his
Father whom he loved dearly; and the Devil whom he hated extremely: he would
deal impartially, and do the Devil right if his cause were good. And when
another of his sons in law, that had a cause depending before him in Chancery;
and presumed too much on his favor: when he would not be persuaded by him, to
agree to any indifferent composition; he made a flat decree against him. Or
Seleucus, who when his son was taken in Adultery; to satisfy Justice, and in
some sort the people who entreated for him: caused one of his sons eyes, and
another of his own to be pulled out. The law requiring both, of the party's
offending. Or Antonius Venerius Duke of Venice; who suffered his son to dye in
prison, because he had ravished a maid. Or Mardus, who sat in judgment upon
his son Cartanes; and would have put him to death: but that Artaxerxes seeing
his Justice, pardoned his son. Or lastly Noah; and Abraham: Abraham would
sacrifice his son, rather then displease God: Noah did curse his own son,
rather then he would displease God. Showing that we should not spare our own
bowels, when God would have them punished. But do as the Fathers, and Mothers
of Idolaters, Drunkards, and Blasphemers did in the Law: who brought the first
stone to put their sons to death. Deuteronomy. 21.18, 19, 20, 21. And indeed he only,
whom neither Clamor, nor Rumor, nor Terror; Neither furious passion, nor
melting compassion, can divert from Justice; is fit to be a Judge. He who
resembles Philip, and Alexander his son: who when any came to complain, stopped
one of their ears; which they reserved for the defendant. As Plutarch affirms.
And such an one in good turns, will not owe more then he must: in evil owe,
and not pay. Yea he hates, and scorns to pay private wrongs; with the advantage
of his Office; and if ever he be partial, it is to his Enemy. Observing well
what God says, Exodus 23.3. Levit. 19.15.

I might in the fourth place be as large, in showing how these Covetous, and
corrupt Judges, and Officers will do any evil, or omit any good in the
discharge of their places: to content (Or for fear of) the People: But I study
brevity. Though what I speak to, I love to prove fully. Because he which
throws his dagger at a Thief, must be sure to hit him home: otherwise he
disarmes himself, and strengthens his Adversary. You may please to read Mark
6.26* 27. and 11.18. and 15.15. Matthew. 14.3, 4, 5. and 21.45, 46. Luke 20.19.
and 22.1, 2. John 19.12. to 17. Act. 25.8, 9. where are notable examples of
Governors; omitting good, and doing mischief to please, or for fear of the
people. Which our own experience at home, may serve to amplify.

CHAP. 11.
NOw besides these, there are many others; that without control rob the Common
wealth, gull the people, and are no whit ashamed of it. I mean Corrupt Lawyers;
who are also Merchants in this Trade of Covetousness, and selling of men. As
come to this Covetous Wretch if he be a Lawyer; He fits in his study like a Fox
in his Borough; glad to spy a Goose that has feathers on his back: declare
unto him your cause, ask him what he thinks of it: he will persuade you it will
bear a strong action, be it never so weak. As he is like to have good counsel,
that fees the Devil. A simple swayne* went to a Lawyer, and told him Sir: And
it shall please your Gentlemanship, I would have process for one, that has
called me a Mechanic fellow: So you shall quoth the Lawyer, for that will bear
a very good action. The Lawyer that cares not to deal unfaithfully: is like
some Crystal Glass, which flatteringly shows every man a fair face, how
ilfavoured soever it be. These are Abettors that set men on; their Cockpit is
Westminster Hall, and while their Clyents peck out each others eyes, they pull
their feathers. Absaloms tongue is in their heads; and as he stole away the
peoples hearts, so these steal their estates. And no cause so bad, but they
will undertake it either for gain, or glory: as he gets most fame, and the
greatest practice; that can make a bad cause good, and a good bad. Whence it is
they bend their tongues, like Bows for lies. As Jeremy has it, Chap. 9.3.
that they may overthrow the right of the poor in his suit. As Moses has it,
Exodus 23.6. see more Esaias 32.7. For they will devise some wicked counsel or
other: (if they be paid thereafter) to undo the adverse party, with lying
words. And commonly, they are like Caelius: that could plead better against a
man, then for him, as Plutarch speaks. Yea some of them fall not far short of
Carneades; of whom wise Cato confessed; that while he disputed; scarce any man
could discern which was the truth. So they turn judgment into wormwood, Amos
5.7. and forge wrong for a Law, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 94.20. Have you
not heard of a Lawyer? that pleaded a case very strongly on the one side; yet
before the Trial of it, being advanced to the Bench; he adjudged it on the
other. But had he been like Joseph the Counselor; whom the Holy Ghost styles a
good man, and a just, Luke 23.50. he would neither refuse to plead a just
cause, (as they will do, when great ones are concerned in it) nor prefer one
that is unjust: Because he that justifies the guilty, or refuses to vindicate
the Innocent in this case; transfers the guilt to himself.

Or if this wretch, finds it more for his profit; he will see an end of the
Clyents money, before the Client shall see an end of his cause. He will delay
the Hearing; until he has enriched himself, and beggered his Clyent:
persuading him his Title is good, till his patrimony be consumed; And he has
spent more in seeking, then the thing is worth, Or the other shall get by the
recovery. One asking, how he should have a Suit last him seven years? was
answered, You may have a Suit in Chancery, that will last you twenty years:
Another delivered in a Petition to King James: I was four years compassing the
World with Sir Francis Drake, and there was an end of that: I was three years
with my Lord of Essex in Ireland Wars, and there was an end of that: I have had
a Suit in Chancery this seventeen years, but I fear I shall never have an end
of that. Which conceit procured him a quick dispatch, but no thanks to the
Lawyers.

He that goes to Law, has a Wolf by the ears: if he prosecute his Cause, he
is consumed; if he surcease his Suit, he loses all: what difference? There are
not a few procrastinating, or rather proterminating Attorneyes, and Advocates;
that like him Prove. 3.28. will say unto a Clyent every day, come again to
morrow: and yet procure his strife from Term to Term; when this Term he might
procure his peace. Because he has an action to his Clyents purse, as his
adversary has to his Land: That can spin one Suit, throughout three
generations; and lengthen the thread of a man's cause; till he shall want weft.
Or if he weave the Web to day, he can by craft like Penelope unweave it as much
to morrow. Dealing with his Clyent, as some Chirurgions do with their patients:
who will keep the wound raw, and open; that they may draw out of it the more
money. So that often the recovery of a man's right by Law, is as dear; as if he
had bought it by purchase.

CHAP. 12.
O The unsufferable knavery, and wickedness of such Lawyers; were I able to
tell it you, (For to me Law latin (a kind of Canting) is more irksome; then
either Irish, or Welsh,) They will sell both their speech and Silence, their
Clients Causes, their own consciences and souls. While the golden stream
runs, the Mill grindeth: when that spring is dry, they advise them to put it
to Compremise, and let their Neighbors end it. The fools might have done so
before, saved so much money, and showed themselves Christians. 1 Cor. 6.5. to
9. For a Christian indeed, is like him that said to a Lawyer, offering to right
his wrongs, and revenge him of his adversary by Law: I am resolved rather to
bear with patience, an hail shower of injuries; then seek shelter at such a
Thicket, where the Brambles shall pluck off my fleece; and do me more hurt by
scratching, and tearing; then the storm would have done by hailing. I care not
for that Physic, where the remedy is worse then the disease.

And yet abundance of men (as if they were bereaved of their very senses,) are
more eager to cast away their money, then Lawyers are to catch it: being like
so many Fishes, that will contend for a Crum; which falls into the water. Nor
will they ever give over, until an empty purse parts the fray. Yea they will
spend their goods, lives, fortunes, friends, and undo one another to in rich an
Harpie Advocate: that preyes upon them both. Or some Corrupt Judge; that is
like the Kite in AEsop: which when the Mouse, and Frog fought, carried them
both away. Which made one Lawyer build an Hospital for Fools, and Madmen,
saying: of such I gat my means, and to such will I give it. And generally,
Lawyers get the greatest Estates (if not the devil and all) of any men in the
Land. They are like the Butlers box, which is sure to get, though all the
gamesters lose. And it were good these earthen boxes were broken: that their
goods got by bribery, wresting the Law, and delaying of suits; might be brought
within a Praemunire, and they made to disgorge themselves. As a Fox, which goes
lank into the Henroost at a little hole: when he has well fed, is forced to
disgorge himself before he can come forth again. Or that they were hanged up,
as Galeaze Duke of Millain, caused a Lawyer to be served, for delaying a Suit
against a manifest and clear debt. Or rather, that the whole Number of such
Lawyers might be pitched over the bar; and turned out of Courts, without hope of
ever returning. And happy it were for the Nation: for were this course taken,
and all contentious Suits spued out, as the surfeit of Courts; it would fare
with us, as it did with Constantinople when Bazil was Emperor; who coming to
the Judgment seat, found neither plaintiff to accuse, nor defendant to answer
for want of suites depending. Or as it did in our Chancery, when Sir Thomas
Moor sat there as Judge: who made such quick dispatch in hearing causes; that
after two years and an half; having one day heard and dispatched the first
cause; calling for the next: answer was made, that there was no more causes to
be heard. As is there upon record, still to be seen. It were well for England,
if it had more Sir Thomas Moors: whom all the riches in the world could not
draw, to do the least piece of injustice. As is recorded of Ep^minondas. And
yet what should hinder? for now great men may be honest if they will; without
hazarding their heads, to the will of a wicked Tyrant.

At Fez in Africa, they have neither Lawyers, nor Advocates: but if there be
any controversies among them: both parties Plaintiff, and Defendant with their
witnesses come to their Alfakins, or Chief Judge; and at once without any
further appeal^ or delays; the Cause is heard and ended. But what multitudes?
what millions of Lawyers, Attorneyes, Advocates, Sollicitors, Paerrators,
Petty-foggers, have we, when there are six thousand Attorneyes, in the Court of
Common Pleas; as some Writers affirm. And how far are we from being blessed, with
such quick dispatch in our Suits, Or trying Causes at so cheap a rate.
Certainly this would be looked into, and some way redrest.

And so you have a twentieth part of The Covetous, Cormorants, Character for a
taste, or pattern: The other Nineteen, when it shall please the Stationer.
Only, to this small cantle or scantling of his Discovery: take the like
Fragment, tending to his Recovery: in The Copy of a Letter, writ to a Factor in
Foreign parts: who ill discharged the trust, and confidence of his deserving
Master.
Kind Sir,
WEre there no other ground of my writing, this were enough: I have a public
spirit, and love to do good offices; though I should purchase ill will for my
pains. But the lively resemblance of my self, which I once saw in you, your
making choice (as I supposed) of those true riches, that being once had, can
never be lost. And your offering to my view those lines of a rare Author (which
did not a little pleasure me) propound themselves to me, as a great engagement.
Besides my love too, and hopes of you formerly were not greater, then is now my
fear. And possible it is, I may prove another Photion unto you, who when a
friend of his would have cast himself away, suffered him not, saying; I was
made thy friend to this purpose. So you have my Apology; or if you shall
further ask why I take this pains? turn to Levit. 19.17. Heb. 3.13. and you
have there both my answer and warrant.

You cannot think much, that Mr. N. should acquaint me (of all others) with
what Moneys you have long ought him; and how little conscience you make of
paying thereof.

But that you should so use so good a Master; to whom also you were once bound
by Oath (if you remember) moves wonder in me to astonishment.

To do unto others, as you would have others do unto you, is a point agreed
upon by all, even infidels that expect not another life; nor once dream that
they have immortal souls. And I need not ask any more, then that you would ask
your own conscience, whether you would be so dealt withal? But here what I
shall speak to you from the mouth of God.

I grant the case is common with Atheists, who believe not that there is a God,
a Heaven, a Hell, a day of judgment: nor that every man shall be rewarded
according to his deeds, be they good or evil. But that you should manifest your
self to be such an one, makes me to cry out, O the depth!

Good sir, bethink your self, for there is not a more infallible Character of a
wicked man, in all the Book of God. The wicked borrows, but pays not again,
Psalm. 37.21. As for a good man, he breaks not his promise, though he be
damnified by the performance, Psalm. 15.4. You cannot be ignorant, that with
what measure ye mete to others here, God will measure it to you again
hereafter, Matthew. 7.2. That the Law of God, under the penalty of his curse,
requires to restore whatsoever has been committed to you in trust, Levit.
6.2, 3. Numb. 5.6, 7, 8. Nor that there is a flying Roll, a winged curse for
him that gets riches by robbery, and oppression: that shall not only pursue
him, but even enter into his house, and consume it with the timber thereof, and
the stones thereof, Zach. 5.3, 4. of which I might heap up instances. As O the
multitude of examples of those, that have miserably perished for their
falsehood, and perfidiousnesse, in betraying the trust that they have
undertaken. And this you may boldly build upon; There is no fruit, but shame
and death to be gathered from the forbidden Tree, whatsoever Satan may seem to
promise.

Nor is it always the lot of those, that care not how they get wealth, to
become rich, Eccl. 9.11. For get men never so much, without Gods blessing, even
all their getting of great wages, is but putting money into a bag with holes,
as the Prophet Haggai speaks, Hag. 1.6. much more, he that gets riches, and
not by right, Jer. 17.11. Except the Lord build the house, they labor in vain
that build it. It is in vain to rise early, and lie down late, and eat the
bread of carfulness, Psalm. 127.1, 2. It Is only the blessing of the Lord,
that makes rich, Prove. 10.22. Yea, have not you found it so? I dare say,
reckon from that very hour, wherein you first resolved to cozen, (if ever you
so resolved) and you will find, that you never since prospered.

Or in case he that resolves to be evil, making no conscience how he comes by
his riches, so he have them; have his hearts desire: his riches prove but the
aggravations of his sin, and additions to judgment. For God does not only
withdraw his blessing from, but even send his curse with the riches he
bestows; so that it becomes their bane. He gives it them in wrath, and for
their hurt: as he did a King, and Quails to the Israelites; for which see Hos.
13.11. Mal. 2.2. Psalm. 69.22. Eccl. 5.13. and 8.11, 12. I pray turn to the
places, for I cannot stand to amplify it.

Nor shall he alone fare the worse; for God has threatened to bring plagues
upon the Children, and childrens children of such an one; unto the fourth
generation, Exodus 25. and more pa^ticularly, that they shall be vagabonds, and
beg their bread; so that none shall extend mercy, or favor unto them, Psalm.
109.7. to 17. God will make those Children beggars, for whose sakes the Father
has made many beggars.

Nor is this all, in any degree: For there is no end of plagues to the wicked
man, Prove. 24.20. Without paying, or restoring (so far as a man is able) there
is no being saved: for as humility is the repentance of pride, abstinence of
surfeit, alms of covetousness, love of malice: so only restitution, is the
repentance of injustice. And he that dies before restitution, dies in his sin;
and he that dies in his sin, cannot be saved. And indeed repentance, without
restitution; is as if a Thief should take away your purse, ask your pardon, say
he is sorry for it; but keeps it still: in which case you would say, he did but
mock you.

Now what shall it profit a man, to gain the whole world, if he gain Hell with
it; and lose both Heaven, and his own soul, Matthew. 16.26. What is it to
flourish for a time, and perish for ever?

A man would think, that Achan paid dear enough for his goodly Babylonish
garment, the two hundred shekels of silver, and his wedge of gold which he
coveted, and took away: when He, his Sons, and Daughters, his Oxen, and Asses;
his Sheep, and Tent; and all that he had, were stoned with stones, and burnt
with fire: if that was all he suffered, Josh. 7.18. to 26. But to be cast into
Hell, to lie for ever in a bed of quenchlesse flames, is a far greater
punishment. For the soul of all sufferings, is the sufferings of the soul; and
in reason, if Dives be tormented in endless flames, for not giving his own
goods to them that needed, Luke 16.21, 23. Matthew. 25.41, to 43. What shall
become of him, that takes away other men's? If that servant in the Gospel, was
bound to an everlasting prison, that only challenged his own debt; for that he
had no pity on his fellow, as his Master had pity on him: whither shall they be
cast, that unjustly vex their Neighbors, quarrel for that which is none of
theirs, and lay title to another man's propreity? If he shall have judgment
without mercy, that shows not mercy, Jam. 2.13. What shall become of
subtraction, and Rapine, Psalm. 109.11. Oh the madness of men! that cannot be
hired to hold their finger for one minute, in the weak flame of a farthing
Candle; knowing it so intolerable: and yet for trifles, will plunge themselves
body and soul, into those endless and everlasting flames of hell fire.

If a King threatens a Malefactor to the Dungeon, to the Rack, to the wheel,
his bones tremble, a terrible palsy runs through all his joints: But let God
threaten the unsufferable tortures of burning Topheth; we stand unmoved,
undaunted. But be not deceived, God is not mocked, Gal. 6.7. And it is a
fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God; who is a consuming
fire, Heb. 12.29.

True, He that makes gain, blesses himself, as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm.
10.3. Yea, if he can, (I mean the cunning Machevilian, whom the Devil and
covetousness has blinded) any way advantage himself, by another ruin; and
do it politickly: how will he hug himself, and applaud his own wisdom! Hab.
1.13. to the end. But by his leave, he mistakes the greatest folly, for the
greatest wisdom: For while he cozens other men of their Estates; Sin and Satan
cozens him of his soul, see Job 20.15. 1 Timothy 6.8, 10. And woeful gain it is,
that comes with the souls loss. And how can we think those men to have
reasonable souls, that esteem money above themselves! That prefer a little
base pelf; before God, and their own salvation.

Nor are there any such fools, as these crafty knaves: For as Austine speaks;
If the Holy Ghost term that rich churl in the Gospel a fool, that only laid up
his own Goods, Luke 12.18, 20. find out a name for him that takes away other
men's?

These things considered, (viz.) the curse of God here, both upon the party,
and his posterity: and the eternal wrath of God hereafter; together with the
folly and madness of preferring Earth, yea Hell, to Heaven; time to eternity,
the body before the soul; yea, the outward estate, before either soul or body)
exempt your self out of the number of those fools, as little Zacheus did: what
you owe, pay it; if you have wronged any man of ought, restore it; though you
part with a great part of your Estate. Yea, admit you shall leave your self a
beggar, do it: for (as you see) there is a necessity of it: Yea, there is
wisdom, and gain in it; for when all is done, how to be saved is the best plot:
And better it is to cast your evil gotten Goods over-boord, then make shipwreck
of Faith, and a good Conscience, read Job 20. from verse. 5. The Merchant will
cast even his Bulloyn into the Sea, to save himself. And he that is troubled
with an aching tooth, finds it the best way to pluck it quite out.

Here I might show you, both from the Word, and a world of instances, that
restoring and giving rather then sinning, is the way to grow rich; I mean in
pecuniary riches, see Prove. 11.24 and 28.27. Mark 10.29, 30. Mat. 6.33. 2 Cor.
9.6, 9, 10, 11. 2 Chronicles. 25.9. and 27.6. Deuteronomy. 7.13. to 16. and 28.1. to 14. 2
King. 6 25. to Chap. 7. verse. 17. Psalm. 34.9, 10. and 37.26, 28. and 112.3. and
37.3, 4, 5. Luke 18.29, 30. Mark 4.24. Hag. 1.2. Chapters, Mal. 3.10, 11, 12.

But I fear least addition in this case, should bring forth substraction: Yea,
if this weary you not, its well; for I may conjecture, that time, and the
deceitfulness of riches have wrought in you a change, since we were first
acquainted. Wherefore before I go any further, a question would be asked.

Does Covetousness reign in you? Are you yet bewitched with the love of money?
Is your heart riveted to the Earth? Are you already inslaved to this sin? Do
you make Gold your God? and Commodity the stern of your Conscience. For if so,
all labor hitherto is lost; and all that can more be said, will be to no
purpose: Yea, it is to no more end to admonish you, then to knock at a deaf
man's door, or a dead man's grave; and that for sundry reasons.

First, Because, as there is no colors so contrary, as white and black. No
elements so disagreeing, as fire and water: so there is nothing so opposite to
grace, and conversion, as covetousness. And as nothing so alienates a man's
love from his virtuous Spouse, as his inordinate affection, to a filthy
strumpet: so nothing does so far separate, and dimiuish a man's love to God, and
heavenly things: as our inordinate affection to the World, and earthly things.
Yea, there is an absolute contrariety, and impossibility between the love of
God, and the love of Money: Ye cannot serve God and Riches, Luke 16.13. All
those that doted upon Purchases, and Farms, and Oxen; with one consent, made
light of it, when they were bid to the Lords Supper, Luke 14.16. to 21. The
Gaderens, that so highly prised their Hogs: would not admit Christ within their
borders, Luke 8.37. Judas that was covetous and loved money, could not love his
Master: and therefore sold him. When Demas began to embrace this present world:
he soon forsook Paul, and his soul-saving Sermons, 2 Timothy 4.10.

If a man's affections be downward, his hope and inheritance cannot be above.
And they that expect no life after this, will make as much of this as they can.

Secondly, If a covetous man do repent, he must restore what he has wrongfully
gotten, which perhaps may amount to half, or it may be three parts of his
Estate at a clap: which to him is as hard, and harsh an injunction, as that of
God to Abraham, Genesis 22.2. Sacrifice thy Son, thine only Son Isaac. Or as that
of our Saviors to the young man, Luke 18.22. Sell all that ever thou have, and
distribute unto the poor: And is there any hope of his yielding? No,
Covetousness is idolatry, Ephesians. 5.5. Col. 3.5.

And Gold is the covetous man's God: and will he part with his God, a certainty
for an uncertainty? No. A godly man, is content to be poor in outward things,
because his purchase is all inward: but nothing except the assurance of
heavenly things, can make us willing to part with earthly things. Neither can
he contemn this life, that knows not the other: and so long as he keeps the
weapon (evil gotten goods) in his wound, and resolves not to pluck it out by
restoring: how is it possible he should ever be cured? Whence it is that we
shall sooner hear of an hundred Malefactors contrition at the Gallows; then of
one covetous Mizers in his bed. To other sins, Satan tempts a man often: but
covetousness is a fine, and recovery upon the purchase. Then he is sure of
him; as when a Iaylor has locked up his Prisoner safe in a Dungeon, he may go
play.

Thirdly, Covetous men, are blind to all dangers; deaf to all good
instructions: they are besotted with the love of money, as Birds are with their
bane. Yea they resolve against their own conversion: The Scribes and Pharisees
who were covetous: shut their eyes, stopped their ears, and barrocadoed their
hearts against all our Savior did, or said. Yea, they scoft at his preaching.
And of all sorts of sinners, that Christ preached unto: he was never scorned
nor mocked but by them; when he preached against Covetousness, Luke 16.14. And
well may rich worldlings, scoff at Christ's poor Ministers: when they think
themselves as much wiser, as they are richer. And commonly, the cunning
Politician is wiser then his Pastor; or indeed any of his plain dealing
Neighbors; by five hundred, if not by five thousand pounds.

These things considered, no wonder that our Savior expressly affirms, that
it is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle, then for a rich man
(that is, a covetous rich man) to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Luke 18.
25. and the Apostle, That no covetous man can look for any inheritance in the
Kingdom of Christ, and of God, Ephesians. 5.5. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.

Secondly, Hence it is, that in all the Word of God, we read not of one that
was covetous, but Hypocrites: as Laban, and Nabal, and Judas, and the rich
Fool* and the Pharisees. For though Zacheus (before he met with Christ) knew
nothing but to scrape: yet so soon as Christ had changed his heart, all his
mind was set upon restoring, and giving, Luke 19.8. which also was a miracle,
like his curing of him that was sick of the dead Palsy, Matthew. 9.2. to 7. And
Christ did some miracles which none of his Apostles were able to do, Matthew.
17.16.

And indeed, it is a sin so damnable, and inconsistent with grace: that of all
sins, the children of God have cleared themselves from Covetousness, when they
would approve their integrity before God and Men. Thus did Samuel, 1 Samuel 12.3.
and Jeremiah, Chap. 15.10. and Paul, Act. 20.33. and Job, Chap. 31.24, 28. and
Agar, Prove. 30.8. and David, Psalm. 4.6, 7. and Solomon, 1 King. 3.5, 9. and
Zacheus, and in fine all that fear God, 1 Cor. 7.30, 31, 32. Their expressions
are very remarkable: but I may not stand to repeat them.

We find many acts of deception in the Saints infirmity in those acts: But
covetousness, that idolatrous sin we find not. Once Noah was drunk with wine,
never drunk with the World. Lot was twice incestuous, never covetous. Peter
denied his Master thrice; it was not the love of the World, but rather the fear
of the World that brought him to it: for he had denied the World, before he
denied his Master. Once David was overcome with the flesh, never with the
World. Grace may stand with some transient acts of naughtiness, but never with
covetousness: those were acts, avarice is an habit.

Covetousness is flat idolatry, which makes it out of measure sinful, and more
heinous then any other sin, as appears, Col. 3.5. Ephesians. 5.5. Job 31.24, 28.
Ier. 17.5. 1 Timothy 6.9, 10. Fornication is a foul sin; but nothing to this: that
pollutes the body, but covetousness defiles the soul: and the like of other
sins. Yea, it is such a sordid, and damnable sin; that it ought not once to be
named among Christians, but with detestation, Ephesians. 5.3. Nor ought covetous
persons to be admitted into Christian society, 1 Cor. 5.11.

Thirdly, From hence it is; that the whole Bible, all the Sermons men hear;
yea, the checks of their own consciences, and the motions of Gods Spirit,
judgments, mercies, and what else can be named, prove altogether ineffectual.
And that there is so small a part of the world, scarce one of an hundred, that
runs not a whoring after this Idol: and is not in too great a degree covetous.
That from the least, even unto the greatest, every one is given unto
covetousness, and to deal falsely, Jer. 6.13 and 8.10. (For I may speak it with
fear and trembling) where shall we find a just Cato, Romans 13.7. Where can we
meet with a sincere single hearted Nathaniel, in whose spirit there is no
guile, Joh. 1.47. where with a Job, an upright and just man, Job 1.1. Where
with a Samuel, that can be acquitted by himself in private, by others in
public, by God in both, 1 Samuel 12.3. where with a Paul, that can say, I have
coveted no man's silver nor gold, Acts 20.33. and 24.16. where with one that
does unto all others, as he would have others do unto him, as our Savior
requires, Mat. 7.12. Where is a Jonathan, 1 Samuel 23.16, 17. or an Elieze^, Genesis
15.2. to be heard of, that is not troubled at, but can rejoice in their
welfare; by whom themselves are deprived of great honor, and Revenues. O that
I could be acquainted with three such men.

And yet Justice is the mistress of all virtues; and the truest trial of a
good man. For as the Touchstone tryes Gold, so Gold tryes men: and there is
little or no danger of that soul, which will not bite at a golden hook.

Ministers wonder that their Sermons take no better; That among so many
Arrows, none should hit the mark: but God tells us the reason, Ezekiel. 33. They
sit before thee, and hear thy words: but their heart goes after their
covetousness, verse. 31. O this golden Devil, this Diana has a world of
worshippers: For how to gain, is every man's dream from sun to sun, so long as
they have one foot out of the grave. Yea, it destroys more souls, then all
other sins put together, as the Apostle intimates, 1 Timothy 6.10. But were men so
wise, as they think themselves: Yea, did they but truly love themselves, and
covet to be rich indeed, and not in conceit only: they would both know and
believe, that better is a little with righteousness, then great Revenues
without equity, Prove. 16.8. And (to omit all that has been formerly said) that
ill gotten goods, lie upon the conscience; as raw meat upon a sick stomach;
which will never let a man be well, until he has cast it up again by
restitution. That sin arms a man against himself; and our peace ever ends with
our innocence: That guilt occasions the conscience, many a secret wring; and
gives the heart many a sore lash. Or if Satan finds it advantageous, to lull us
asleep for a time; yet when death besieges the body, he will not fail to
beleaguer the soul: and that then there will be more ease in a nest of Hornets,
then under the sting of such a tormenting conscience. And certainly, did you
know what a good conscience, and the peace of God which passes all
understanding is; you would think it more worth, then all the worlds wealth,
multiplied as many times, as there be sands on the Sea shore, that any thing,
that every thing were too small a price for it. That things themselves, are in
the invisible world: in the world visible, but their shadows only. And that
whatsoever wicked men enjoy, it is but as in a dream: that their plenty is but
like a drop of pleasure; before a river of sorrow, and displeasure: and
whatsoever the godly feel, but as a drop of misery, before a river of mercy and
glory. And lastly, That shallow honesty will prove more profitable in the end,
then the profound quicksands of craft and policy.

Wherefore let your conversation be without covetousness, and be content with
that you have (I mean remaining, after you have faithfully, and impartially
given to every man his own.) For God has promised, never to leave nor forsake
you, if you will rely upon him, in the use of lawful means only, Heb. 13.5.
And (with which I will conclude,) bethink your self now I beseech you, rather
then when it will be too late; when the Drawbridge is takn up, and when it will
vex every vein of your heart; that you had no more care of your soul.

R. Y.




London, Printed by I. L. 1653.

The second Part of Philarguromastix.

OR, The Arreignment of Covetousness, and Ambition, in our great and greedy
Cormorants. That retard and hinder Reformation, (all whose reaches, are at
riches:) that make gold their god; and commodity the stern of their
consciences: that hold every thing lawful, if it be gainful: that prefer a
little base pelf, before God; and their own salvation: that being fatted with
Gods Blessings; do spurn at his Precepts.

The second Impression much enlarged By R. Young, Florilegus.

Imprimatur, Thomas Gataker.

CHAP. 13.
IN the former part I have shown, how the Commonwealth has been robbed,
defrauded, and abused by Monopolists, Ingrossers, Lawyers, and all kinds of
corrupt Officers: and how the Supreme Magistrate, has been the sole cause of
all. Whereby they have gulled and cheated the People without control, or once
being ashamed of it. I have likewise declared, what every of them in their
several places ought to do or suffer, and be served for their baseness. Which
was as much, as I could at first afford in forma pauperis. And now finding that
it has bin as acceptable to the honest and innocent, as distastful to the
galled and guilty: (nor did I ever expect by carrying my saddle to shame my
horse) I am willing at the same rate, to add the like scantling about corrupt
Judges: and to hint a way, how this Nation may become more happy and
flourishing then ever. The former Part contained twelve Chapters, the
thirteenth begins and goes on thus.

Nor would Delinquent Judges, and Officers be dispensed withal: but severely
punished according to their several demerits. His Highness should do well to
serve them, as Combyses served Sisamnes a corrupt Judge: who caused his skin to
be flayed off, (though his very friend) and nailed over the Iudgement-Seat; for
example to those that should succeed in his place. And this would make others
afraid, and that fear would keep them honest. Which neither the Oath they take,
nor their consciences will do. For every Judge as he has a conscience, so he
is sworn to judge uprightly, to take no bribe, etc. O that this conscience might
ever give the Judgment! But woe is me, how often are the Laws altered,
misconstrued, interpreted pro and con; made as a Nose of wax; A Cause good to
day, bad to morrow; yet still the same case; His opinion firm, yet sentence
prolonged, changed, reversed, as the Judge is made by friends, bribed, or
otherwise stands affected. As O the wicked hearts, and wide consciences of some
Judges; as well as of Atturneys, and Lawyers: Who like Burs hang together, and
like Andirons, hold up their Clients, till they burn each other to Ashes. They
receive warmth by these, these by them their destruction. They are Bawds that
live by other men's loss: And become rich by making others poor; whose felicity
is in bringing others to misery, and making merchandise of the poor. These be
Gowned Vultures, Harpies, Devils in the shape of men. These are far from being
Peacemakers; to whom the Kingdom of Heaven is promised. And should they not be
all served alike? and in the same manner before specified?

Nor can his Highness, as I conceive (I mean when other affairs will give
leave, if he seeks the public good, and not his own private gain: If he
intends not by receiving gifts, to sell his own liberty (which I do not in the
least fear:) for those Governors that are plain-hearted themselves, are the
bitterest enemies to deceit in others,) do less then compel them to restore,
what they have unjustly gotten. Like Constantine the Great, who caused
Proclamation to be made; that if there were any, of what place, estate, or
dignity whatsoever, Judges, Earls, Friends, or Palatines; that had not dealt
uprightly and justly, every man should be freely admitted to appeal to him; and
upon proof they should make satisfaction, and further suffer as the case
deserved. Yea, and I hope, having done this, he will discard them all; after
the example of Alexander Severus, who in the beginning of his Reign, discharged
all them that were known to be vicious persons from their Offices, and forced
them to make restitution of all that they had taken bribes of, or defrauded;
and from thence-forth to live of their own proper labor. Nor would he ever
keep in his Court, any ill disposed person; or suffer any though never so near
to him in blood, once found faulty, to escape unpunished; as Lampridius
delivers it. And this is of great concernment, for, take away the wicked from
the King, (or those that govern in chief) and his Throne shall be established
in righteousness, Prove. 25.5. whereas let them remain, they will but prove like
the Canaanites (not cast out by the Israelites, as God commanded) who became by
his just judgment, for their neglect a snare, and destruction unto them; a
whip on their sides, and a thorn in their eyes, Judge. 2.3. Joshua 23.13.

And full well they deserve it, for they ought to be indicted, not only for
Bribery, but for Perjury also. As most basely perjured they are; for among
other things in their Oath, when they are made Judges, one is, that they shall
take no bribes, or gifts. Which Oath, if they had the like care to keep, would
cause them to imitate Sir Thomas Moore; who, when two great silver Flaggons
were sent him by a Knight, that had a Suit depending in his Court (though
gilded with the specious pretense of gratuity) sent them back again, filled
with his best Wine: saying, If your Master likes it, let him send for more.
And when his Lady at another time, offered him a great bribe, in behalf of a
Suppliant, he turned away with these words; Gentle Eve, I will none of your
Apple. It will be long enough, e're you hear the like of these Cormorants I am
speaking of; whom I may liken to that Lord Chief Baron, who when one offered
him fourscore Pieces, protesting, That no living soul should know it, answered;
Make it up an hundred, and then let all the Town know of it.

Yea, this would also keep them from such vast estates as usually they leave
behind them: We read of Sir Thomas Moore, that having been of the Kings
Counsel, and gone through many Offices, besides his Lord Chancellorship for
almost twenty years together: after his debts were paid, he had not (his Chain
excepted) left, the worth of an hundred pounds in movables; and his Land
before his Mother-in-law died (who survived him many years) did not amount to
above fifty pounds per annum. Nor was he ever a prodigal spender.

CHAP, 14.
THese being cast out, provision would be made (if I may be worthy to advise)
that none come in their places, but such as fear God, hate covetousness, love
godliness, and deal uprightly. Alexander Severus, Adrian, and other Emperors
of Rome, would call to their Counsel, and put in places of Judicature not their
Favorites; but men learned, grave, experienced, of good conscience and known
integrity.

Aurelianus the Emperor, was so fearful of placing an unworthy man in the Seat
of Judicature, that he never admitted any to the dignity of Senator, but such
as none could justly except against, and then with the consent of the whole
Senate.

Then that they may continue so, and discharge the trust they are put in; His
Highness may please to follow the example of these ensuing presidents: (I am
bold, though much unworthy to advize) Antiochus had that care, to have justice
administered, that he writ to all the Cities in his Kingdom, that they should
not execute any thing he commanded, if it were contrary to Law. And the
Emperonr Justinian, commanded the Lawyers to swear; they should not plead in an
evil or unjust cause. That Law, which was made in the ninth Parliament of James
the First, King of Scotland; did enjoin all Counselors and Advocates, before
they pleaded any temporal cause; to take oath and swear, that they thought the
Cause to be good they pleaded. Antoninus, never sent any Praetor or other
Officer of State, to govern any Province, but who were free from pride and
covetousness. And withal caused them first, to give up an Inventory of their
own proper goods; to the end, that when their charge was finished, the increase
of their wealth should be considered: telling them, that he sent them to
administer justice, and not by fraud to rob his people. The Emperor
Valentinian, and Theodosius; made all Judges, and Governors of Provinces at
their entering upon their charg, to swear that they had not given, nor promised
any thing to procure their places. And also that they would take nothing, but
their just fee: And if it were proved that they had taken any thing (it being
lawful for every man to accuse them) they should pay four times as much;
besides the infamy of their Perjury. And lastly, Moses, (who is a president
beyond all exceptions) charged the Judges to hear all Controversies between
their Brethren, and to judge righteously between every man and his Brother, and
also the stranger that was with them. Further charging them, that they should
have no respect of persons in judgment; but hear the small as well as the
great, not fearing the fac^s of men. Yielding this as a reason, for the
judgment is Gods, Deuteronomy. ^.16, 17. Briefly, let not sin be connived at, but see
that justice be executed impartially; for good Laws without execution, are like
the Picture of George on horsback; with his hand always up, but never
striking. Let no man's greatness protect him; It is the impartial execution of
noble Delinquents, that wins credit to Government. And the want of it cuts the
sinnews of any State. If there sins have made them base, let there be no favor
in their penalty: Or else the wickedness that is done by them, shall be reckoned
unto you, the permitter, for your own; for Governors make themselves guilty of
those sins they punish not. So that to be merciful to offenders in this case;
is to be unmerciful to your self: yea, to the party offending, and the whole
Nation, as I could easily demonstrate, could I stand upon it.

The best friends to a State, are the impartial Ministers of judgment: Nor do
the prayers of them that sit still and do nothing: so much pacify Gods wrath
against us: as their just retribution, be the delinquent never so mighty.
Obedience is better then sacrifice, as Samuel told Saul, for sparing of King
Agag. Yea, the Prophet compares that pity and mercy of his; to witchcraft and
idolatry. And tells him that for his so doing, God had cast him off from being
King, 1 Samuel 15.22, 23. So that the sum of all is, Let them that sit at the
Helm discharge their parts; and all will soon be mended: Let them that govern
in chief be men of courage, fearing God, and hating covetousness, Exodus 18.21.
A King by judgment, maintains the Country: bnt a man receiving gifts,
destroys it. Prou. 29.4.

And now, blessed be God, his Highness has leave and opportunity to redress
all: let our earnest and incessant prayers be, that he may well improve the
same; to Gods glory, the Nations good, and his own eternal renown and comfort:
that so his Government may be found like the reign of godly Constantine: who
succeeding immediately Dioclesian, and other persecuting Emperors, was a
notable nourishing Father unto the Church; under whose shadow the Christians
dwelt, and prospered a long time. And sure I am, we have far more hope of
completing Reformation, both in Church and Commonwealth, then we had
formerly; when the Delinquents themselves had all the power in their own hands,
and when the commonness of offenders, had benumbed the sense of offending.

Now the way for his Highness to effect it, will be, not to imitate our former
Governors, who measured their right by their power; and that would therefore
do injury, because they could do it. Yea, if I may be so bold, were they not
Heads under which the whole body groaned? and most of the members were ill
affected. Did they not make their greatness? a Supersedeas to sin, and a
Protection against the arrest of judgment? Did they not think, that because
they were great on earth; they might be bold with heaven? Did they not make it
lawful to profane the Lords Day? and justle out Gods honor (which should be
more deer to Princes then their Crowns and lives) with their own? and chink to
bear off the judgments of God, by virtue of their high places? Was not vice
countenanced, and virtue discouraged? until God resisted their pride, and made
them to know; that be they never so great, even Kings, Monarchs, Emperors;
though they are gods among men, and many made gods of them; yet they are but
men with God: who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, Psalm. 82.6, 7. Revel.
19.16. And scarce so do the good esteem themselves; Constantinus,
Volentinianus, and Theodosius three Emperors: called themselves Christ's
vassals: Such is the distance between him and the greatest Potentates on earth.

CHAP. 15.
WHerefore be wise now O you most noble Protector, be instructed ye his
honorable Counselors: Serve the Lord with fear, you whom God has so highly
honored, as to make you (together with thrice noble Fairfax, never to be
forgotten) the happy deliverer of your Country. Serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling, Psalm. 2. Seek the public good, (and not your own
private gain) as your place engages you. For the chief Magistrate is a mixed
person; the Physician of the Commonwealth, the Father of the Country, the
Spouse of the State: who was wont by a Ring to be married unto the Realm at his
Coronation. Make Epaminondas your President, whom all the riches of the world,
could not withdraw from the least duty to his Country, as AElian reports. Yea,
love your Country as Ziska did, who wished that his skin might serve the
Bohemians in their wars; when his body could no longer do it. Imitate Mordecay,
who was great among the Jews, accepted among the multitude of his brethren,
procured the wealth of his people, and spoke peaceably to all his seed, Ester
10.3. With good Nehemiah, be not chargeable to your people; neither let your
servants domineer, and rule over them, as has been the manner of former
Governors, Nehem. 5.15.

If some special occasion requires (as occasion enough there is) or necessity
urges you to borrow: let it be of those you have enriched, and done good to;
rather then of such as have already suffered, as the manner has been.

Be able with Samuel, to justify your self before all the people, 1 Samuel 12.3,
4. And with Moses the same, Numb. 16.15. nor could any one of the people tax
either of them in the least. And happy is that man, that can be acquitted by
himself in private, in public by others, by God in both. For in all
likelihood, there is no danger of that soul, that will not bite at a golden
hook. And indeed it is too base and sordid for honor to be covetous. Though
multitudes there are in these degenerate times, (wherein men generally worship
the Golden Calf) that imitate Themistocles: who before he was elected to bear
authority in the Commonwealth, was little worth; but when he had once swayed
the place of superiority, when he was banished; his very movables being
praised, did amount to an hundred Talents.

Receive no gifts, for whosoever receives a benefit, sells his own liberty.
Besides, it is Gods express command, Thou shall take no gift, for the gift
blinds the wise, Exodus 23.8. and destroys the heart, Eccles. 7.7. In
choosing of Officers, Judges, etc. let God be consulted, without whom Samuel
himself, will take seven wrong before one right, 1 Samuel 16.6, to 13. And how
contrary Gods method, and that of man's is, may be seen, Acts 7. This Moses,
whom they forsook, saying; Who made thee a Prince and a Judge; the same God
sent for a Prince and a deliverer, by the hand of the Angel, which appeared to
him in the Bush, Verse 35. Let all places be given, and not sold: to the most
deserving, and not to such as will give most for them, viz. not to the covetous
and ambitious: who make preferment their god, and Mammon their Mediator: who
study more to be advanced, then to be worthy of that advancement. The godly and
conscientious can make no such gain or profit of places and offices as others
do, that buy them at high rates: they dare not take bribes to make up their
money again; Nor enrich themselves, by making others poor: they will be so
honorable, as they may still be honest. And in all reason, if a man be not
worthy of a place, why should he have it? if deserving, why should he buy that,
which (in justice, piety and true policy) is due unto him?

Do not think every one sufficient, that thinks himself so: yea, Ne sit, qui
ambit. Let him never speed, that sues. They that are worthy, must be sued to.
Let such be preferred, not as would have places; but such as places would have.
That think it better to be worthy of honor, then to have honor. I most admire
the humility, and grace of those; whose virtues and merits are visible, whiles
their persons are obscure: it is secretly glorious, to shine unseen.

Good men know Offices to be Callings: and so will not meddle with them, until
they be called unto them. Ambitious and unworthy men are like Absalom, who with
a great deal of subtilty, insinuated and intruded himself: pretending what
great matters he would do, if he were made Judge in the Land, or deputed of the
King to hear Causes; when he intended nothing less, 2 Samuel 15.2, to 7. Or like
Pope Boniface, who meek-minded man, would eat only a dry crust, until he had
gained the Popedom. In the vacancies of the Sea of Rome, the Cardinals use to
compose certain capitulations, to reform the Papal Government: and with all
swear to perform: if they shall be chosen to the Popedom: though it appears by
all precedent examples, that every one swears with a mind not to keep their
oath, in case he shall be Pope.

Forwardness argues dishonisty, or insufficiency: When Jesus perceived that
they would come to take him, to make him a King: he withdrew himself, and
departed, John 6.15. None in all Egypt, or Middian was comparably so fit, for
that Embassage to Pharaoh, as Moses: which of the Israelites had been brought
up a Courtier, a Scholar, an Israelite by blood, by education an Egyptian;
learned, wise, valiant, experienced? Yet, Who am I, says he? The more fit any
man is, for whatsoever vocation; the less he thinks himself. The un-worthy
think still, Who am I not? but modest beginnings give hopeful proceedings and
happy endings.

With Moses, Abraham and Job relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, and
defend the widow, when they cry unto you, and such as are ready to perish, but
have none to help them. Break the jaws of the unrighteous, and pluck the prey
out of his teeth, Genes. 14.14, 15, 16. Job 29.12, to 18.

CHAP. 16.
SO demean your self, that the good may love, and the wicked fear you. When
Rome was in her great prosperity; no service was left unrewarded, nor crime
unpunished. And of the two, seem with Domitian, rather cruel in punishing, then
dissolute in sparing offenders. It was a commendable, and impartial severity in
Seleucus: who rather then the Law should be violated, in favor of his sons two
eyes; would lose one of his own. And so in that godly Bishop, who
excommunicated Marcian his own son, having committed whoredom.

We read that Solomon's Tribunal was underpropt with Lions, to show what mettle
a Magistrate should be made of, not that they should be like Lions or Bears, as
too often they are; as that wise King makes the resemblance, Pro. 28. As a
roaring Lion and an hungry Bear: so is a wicked Ruler over the poor people, v.
15, 16. And the Prophet Micah, Chap. 3. They eat also the flesh of my people,
and flay off their skin from them; they break their bones, etc. Verse. 3. But to
show that they should be of an undaunted courage, in discharge of their places;
though otherwise most meek. No man could have given more proofs of his courage;
then Moses, he slew the Egyptian, he confronted Pharaoh in his own Court, he
beat the Midianite Shepherds, he feared not the troops of Egypt, he did look
God in the face, amidst all the terrors of Sinai: and yet that Spirit which
made and knew his heart, says, He was the mildest, and meekest man upon earth.
Mildness and Fortitude, may well lodge together in one breast; to correct the
mis-conceits of those men, who think none valiant, but those that are fierce
and cruel.

Magistrates must not be cruel, subjects are their sons; and such should be
their corrections, such the provisions of Governors as for their children: as
the obedience and love of subjects should be filial. Severity should never be
but by compulsion. Christianity abhors cruelty, and rather wishes with that
happy Queen; that it knew not how to write, then sign a sentence of
condemnation.

Do nothing of moment without counsel, for without it purposes are
disappointed: but in the multitude of Counselors there is stedfastness,
Proverbs 15.22. and let them be such Counselors, as will counsel you for the
peoples good, as well as your own, should you be never so unwilling to hear it.
Resembling Jonathan, who spoke good of David to Saul his father: though he
incurred the Kings displeasure, and hazarded his own life. And as Saul
thereupon, hearkened unto the voice of Jonathan, and swear, As the Lord lives
he shall not die* so Noble Prince, not only hear, but follow such counsel, if
you will have the Land flourish, and your government established.

But in no case hearken to Flatterers, for they will persuade great ones, that
they are more then men, that they may do what they list, and that they are
accountable to none but God himself; how destructive soever they are to their
Country. Yea, Alexander's Flatterers, would persuade him, that he was a God.
Dionysius his Parasites would lick up his spittle, and boast that it was
sweeter then Nectar, or Ambrosia. It is well observed, that flattery and
treachery are but two names of one vice; two sundry suits of the same mischief:
for flattery is but gilded treason, poison in an enameled cup. It is an evil
more tame, not less dangerous; and it had been better for many Princes not to
have been, then to have been in their conceits, of a more divine mettle then
other men; as they shall be (and not seldom) told.

Nor are any fit, or worthy to be of your Counsel; but such as fear God: In
vain shall you hope that a carnal heart, can prefer the care of his soul, or
the good of his Country; to the care of his own safety and honor, God to
Caesar. Hope of preferment, or fear of punishment, makes them like Spaniels:
which ever hunt that way, their Master looks. Or like weathercocks, that will
look which way soever the wind blows. But your Highness has long since
learned of King Solomon, that as the Northwinde drives away the rain, so does
an angry countenance the flattering tongue Prove. 25.23.

But because it is not easy to meet with such Counselors, as will always
counsel you for the common good, and according to their consciences: which
occasioned Dionysius the Tyrant, being retired to Athens, after he was deprived
of his Kingdom: to bewail the state of Princes, especially in that men never
spoke freely unto them, and the truth was ever hid, and concealed from them.
And likewise Alphonsus King of Spain and Naples a good Prince, to bewail the
case of Kings: for that they hearing with other men's ears, could seldom hear
truth. And therefore he held it a great happiness, that he might consult with
his Books, especially the Bible; which he is reported to have read over
fourteen times in course, together with Lyra, and other men's notes upon the
Text. And indeed dead men are the best Counselors: Books will speak, when
Counselors blanch, as the Lord Bacon has well noted. Yea, Conscience is also
Gods Monitor to speak to great men; when others either cannot, or dare not
speak, as Divines well note; and therefore would be hearkened unto and obeyed.

In the last place, as your Highness would have Christ to maintain and
continue, bless and prosper you in all your undertakings, as hitherto he has,
even to the astonishment of all both friends and enemies: so let it be your
principal care, to maintain the purity of his worship, and the true Religion;
together with a godly, able, orthodox Ministry: without which the former
cannot possibly subsist. Yea, take away the Ministry, or their maintenance:
and you pluck up Religion by the roots, as Satan, together with his instruments
(those new-start-up white Devils, that have a long time made it the main of
their business; to plot and contrive their downfall, and indeed to extirpate the
very Nurseries of all Learning, that so they may with Jeroboam, make Priests of
the lowest of the people) know. Your Highness has done God and his Church much
service many ways: but never more, nor more opportunely, then in this last, of
breaking their deep and devilish design about the Ministry, and their
maintenance; and in frustrating their imaginary, but most mischievous and
malicious hopes, the which will one day, add weight to your Crown. That days
work made many to rejoice: but when with the news, this ensuing passage came
into my mind; it made me no less thankful, then joyful. The which was this:
Philip of Macedon besieging Athens, sent Legates to the City, conditioning with
them; that if they would deliver into his hands ten of their Orators, such as
he should choose, whom he pretended to be the disturbers of their Commonwealth,
he would raise his siege, and be at peace with them. But Demosthenes smelt out
his plot; and with the consent of the Athenians, returned him this apological
answer. The Wolves came to treat of a league with the Shepherds; and told them
thus: All the feud and discord betwixt you and us, arises from a certain
generation of Dogs which you maintain amongst you: Deliver us up those Dogs,
and we will be good friends with you, neither will we any ways wrong you. The
Dogs were delivered up, the Peace was concluded, the Shepherds secure: but Oh
the woeful Massacre that was presently made amongst the poor Lambs: they were
all devoured, the Shepherds undone; and all by parting with their Dogs. If the
Autinomian and Anabaptistical faction could once get the Ministers of the
Gospel to hold their peace, or procure them to be muzzled by Authority, or to
be delivered over to their Wolvish cruelty; woe were to our souls. Error would
then play Rex, Darkness triumph, Hell make play-day, Truth would languish, and
all goodness fall flat to the earth. As little as men now regard them, they
would then miss them; and wish for them, and say, Blessed is he that comes to
us in the Name of the Lord.

CHAP. 17.
THus may you comfortably do my Lord, and then making it your principal aim
and end, (with Asa, Hezekiah, Iehoshaphat, Josiah, Zephaniah, Constantine the
Emperor, and King Edward the Sixth, that none such for early holiness) to do
that which is good and right in the eyes of the Lord, in seeking the good and
welfare of the people, and in promoting Gods glory and worship, 2 Chronicles. 30.1.
to the end of the Chapter, and 19.4. and 14.2, to 8. 2 Kings 10.26, 27, 28.
Exodus 23.24. Zeph. 1. The God of peace shall be with you, and so crown your
undertakings with prosperous and happy success: that all your enemies together
with Gog and Magog, shall never be able to do you hurt. Yea, do you but yield
to God, touching his Commandments: and God will so yield to you, touching your
petitions; that his dealing toward you, shall be to the astonishment of all
the World. For then as by his singular providence, he turned Achitophels
wisdom, Shimeis cursing, those Princes conspiracy, Dan. 6.12, 13. the malice
of Haman, and the Arrians hatred and devilish industry; to the no small good,
honor and profit of David, Daniel, Mordecai, and Paphnutius: so the same God
shall turn the most deep and devilish plots and practices of your worst and
greatest enemies, to your great good, benefit, and advantage.

Proceed therefore, thrice Noble Sir, until you have completed a happy
Reformation, both in Church and Commonwealth. Many high Cedars, and huge
Mountains have bin thrown down, and removed to level the way; sundry Bulwarks
and Fortifications built up, to shelter and defend the friends of Peace and
Truth. It will be to your eternal praise and comfort; if you both erect and
finish the whole Fabric. This is the way, and the only way to make you truly
happy and comfortable; to make your advancement a blessing to you, and the
Nations; and to establish your Power, and posterity: when your conscience shall
be able to testify, that out of a public spirit, and for the love you bear
to Christ and his members; you can make your self a servant unto all that need
your aid.

Whereas on the contrary, if you shall out of any private, or self ends, or
interest; neglect or hinder this great work of the Lord, whereunto he has
called you: if you should not hearken to the voice of the Lord your God, to do
his Commandments: your greatness will yield your Highness but a little solace.

As what will all your Honor and Greatness do you good? I need not tell you,
how the ods that is between the high and low, rich and poor, in respect of true
happiness is such; that the wise and good have never desired dignity barely for
it self; but even sought to shun, and avoid great Places; except it has been
more to do good, then to grow rich, or great in them.

Good men that have clarified understandings; have many solid and weighty
reasons, to dissuade them from great Offices, and high places.

First (not to nominate what has been already said in the former division) in
regard of the great cares, and pains, and fears, and dangers, which usually
they are subject unto, and attended withal: and likewise the peoples envy,
malice, and evil speaking, deal they never so evenly and uprightly. We read
that when Isocrates was demanded, if he would be a King; his answer was he
would not: and being asked wherefore, he said, If I judge rightly, I cannot
eschew hatred, and evil speaking on the one side; and again, if I judge
wrongfully, I can no less escape it on the other: yea, I cannot eschew the pain
of eternal damnation; Wherefore it shall better content me, to remain as I am.
But this of men's evil requital, and hating them; is least to be stood upon.

For to speak really and impartially, what is the Justice, the Judge, yea, the
King himself? but a great servant to the Commonwealth: (as Statesmen are wont
to call them.) Yea, Antiochus thus told his son Demetrius, that Kingly rule,
was but noble slavery. Whence good Q. Elizabeth, spoke it openly in the
Parliament House,: that she had rather be a Milkmaid then a Queen, were it not
more for her Subjects sake, then her own. Whence Ptolomy seeing certain
Fishers, sporting themselves upon the Seashore; wished he were like on of them;
adding moreover that Monarchies are full of cares, fears, mistrusts, and
disguised miseries. Which also Charles the Fourth and Fifth Emperors were wont
to allege, even desiring to lead a private life. And Seleucus before them did
the like; adding, that if he should cast his Crown into the high way, there
would be none found, that would take it up, knowing the cares, charges and
griefs, that ever did accompany it. And Pope Adrian said, he conceived, no
estate so miserable, nor dangerous as his own: and that he never enjoyed a
better, nor more pleasant time; then when he was but a simple Monk. Trajan the
Emperor, wrote unto the Senate of Rome, that having now tasted the cares and
pains which the Imperial State brought with it: he did a thousand times repent,
that ever he took it upon him. I have read also of another Roman, (whose name
has slipped my memory) that long aspiring to be Emperor; he was not so forward
formerly to have it; as now feeling the burden, he was willing to cast it off;
even bemoaning himself, and complaining, how heavy and burdensome he had found
it. Demosthenes also, after a long Government at his pleasure, in the
Commonwealth (upon what consideration himself knew best, and Statesmen may
easily guess at) is reported to have confessed to his friends, who came to visit
him: that if at the beginning, two ways had been proposed before him; the one
leading to the Tribunal of Authority, the other to his grave; if he could by
inspiration have foreknown the evils, the terrors, the calumnies, the envies,
the contentions and the dangers, that men in such places must accustomarily
meet with, that he would much rather with alacrity, and cheerfulness; have
posted on to his Sepulcher; then to his greatness. And lastly, when some egged
Dioclesian forward, to re-enter again into the Empire, he answered them: that
having once escaped the Plague, he would no more drink Poison; and was
contented to become a Gardener. To couclude this reason, besides all this a
Prince is always in great danger, and fear of his life by treason: especially
a good one, as the Life of Queen Elizabeth may inform us. To omit many examples
of the Kings of Israel and Judah; as being well known', as also a cloud of
examples out of other Histories: we read that in the Imperial Seat; in the
space of an hundred years (in which were threescore Emperors) there were but
three that died in their beds by sickness; all the rest suffering violent
deaths. So that how great and glorious soever, they may seem to men of the
World; they are but in a sad condition. As suppose a man arrayed and apparelled
in Tissue, or Cloth of gold; set in a Chair of State, having before him a Table
furnished, with all dainty delicates; his servants Monarchs and Princes; his
riches the very choicest and chiefest treasures and Kingdoms of the World: but
withal that there were one standing by, with a naked sword to cut his throat;
or a wild Beast, ready to pull him in pieces: we cannot otherwise say, but his
condition is rather to be pitied then envied. Now it fares not so with other
men, the mean Cottage of a Swain stands in more safety, then the Palace of a
Prince.

Furthermore, the greatest Princes cannot so clip the wings of prosperity or
victory; but she may fly away before they dream of it. Riches, honors,
pleasures, are so transitory; that the same day has seen the knee bowing to
the head, and again the head stooping and doing reverence to the knee. Yea, as
in fairest weather, a storm may suddenly arise: so one hour may change the
greatest King, into the most miserable captive, as every age gives instance.
For men are both more sensible of their present misery, by remembering their
former happiness; and also more tender and delicate, and so less able to bear
it. The memory of former happiness, makes the present misery more deplorable,
which like dead Beer, is never more distastful then after a Banquet of
Sweetmeats. For Bajazet, to change his Seraglio for a Cage: for Valerian, to
become a footstool to his proud soc: are calamities able to sink a soul deep in
sorrow. Yea commonly, their change is not more sudden, then it is doleful. Who
but Adrianus, Emperor of the East, for many years? but at length he was set
upon a scabbed Camel, with a Crown of Onions platted on his head; and in great
mockery, carried in triumph thorough the City. And the like of Polycrates King
of the Samians. Dionysius, Henry the Fourth that victorious Emperor, Gelimer,
that potent King of the Vandals, Adonibezeck, and many others: of whom I might
muster up a multitude. And no fewer of them, whose life and happiness have
ended together, as it fared with Pharaoh, Herod, and Belshazzer: who was
sitting at a Feast merry, while on a sudden death came like a Voider, to take
him away: with many the like, though that one example of Haman and Mordecay
might serve in stead of all; to show that as men honor and obey God in their
places: so God will bless or curse them. We see how Haman, whose command
ere-while almost reached to Heaven; was iustantly adjudged to the Gibbet: while
Mordecay, who was condemned to the halter, was all of a sudden made second in
the Kingdom. What stability is there then, in earthly greatness? when he who
in the morning, all knees bowed unto; as more then a man: now hangs up like a
despised vermin, fot a prey to the Ravens: and when he who this morning, was
destined to the Gallows, now rules over Princes, Ester 6 and 7 Chapters. But

CHAP. 18.
SEcondly, good men know, and well consider; that the greatest places, are
subject to the greatest temptations: as the highest boughs of a tree, are most
subject to be shaken with the wind. That greatest men have the greatest
biasses to draw them away. Riches, honors, pleasures are such thorns: that for
the most part, they even choke the good seed of G^ds Word, formerly sown in
men's hearts, Matthew. 13.22. They are to Religion, as is the Ivy to the Oak; that
even eats out the heart of it. The pleasures of the body, are the very po^^ons
of the soul. And the more any man has, the more cause he has to pray: Lord,
lead us not into temptation. Nothing feeds pride, nor keeps off repentance so
much; as a prosperous condition. If I could be so uncharitable, as to wish an
enemies soul lost; this were the only way: let him live in the height of the
worlds blandishments. For temptations on the right hand, have commonly so much
more strength in them above the other; as the right hand has above the left.
They are more perilous, because they are more plausible and glorious. Whence
the Devil did not appear to Christ in a terrible form; threatening the
calamities of earth, or torments of hell; but makes fair promises to him, of
many Kingdoms and much glory.

Neither has God worse servants upon earth, then are the great ones of the
earth. If adversity has slain her thousand, prosperity has slain her ten
thousand. Commonly, where is no want, is much wantonaesse: and as we grow rich
in temporals, we grow poor in spirituals. We use Gods blessings as Iehu did
Iehorams messengers; David, Goliahs sword: we turn them against their owner and
giver; and fight against Heaven with that health, wealth, honor, friends,
means, mercies; that we received thence, and commonly so much the more proud,
secure, wanton, scornful, impenitent; by how much the more we are enriched,
advanced, and blessed. Saul was little in his own eyes, before God made him
great: but when he was made great, God was less esteemed by him. Honor and
Greatness will so swell some men's hearts, and make them look so big: as if the
River of their blood could not be banked, within the channel of their veins.
They spend their days in wealth, therefore they say unto God, Depart from us;
for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. And what is the Almighty that we
should serve him? Job. 21.13, 14, 15. Yea, with the rich Glutton in the Gospel,
they scarce ever think of Heaven, till they be in Hell.

It is the misery of the poor, to be neglected of men: it is the misery of the
rich and great men of the World to neglect their God. The poor, says Christ,
receive the Gospel: Luke 7.22. But, the Kings of the earth, says David, set
themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together against the Lord, and against
his Anointed, saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their
cords from us, Psalm. 2.2, 3. All the life of Solomon was delicious,
resplendent, and contentful: and therefore we find, that he did even sink in
the midst of delights: but David among so many public and private calamities
and disasters, kept his head above water, and stood upright in his heart to God.

Prosperity, makes us drunk with the love of the world: but as Sleep composeth
drunkenness, so the cross will bring a man to himself again. The ^cottish King
prisoner in Mortimers Hole, by his own confession, learned more of Christ, then
in his Palace, he could all his life.

Now hence it is, that Heaven is peopled with so few great ones. Not many
mighty, not many noble are called, 1 Cor. 1.26. yea, of twenty Kings of Judah,
only six were good: and of eighteen Kings of Israel, all but two are branded by
the Holy Ghost for wicked. Nor is it for nothing, that our Savior says: It is
easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a Needle, then for a rich man to
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 19.24. These men have their portion in
this life, Psalm. 17.14 and receive their consolation here, Luke 6.24. all here,
nothing hereafter. But it is otherwise with mean ones: He has chosen the poor
in this World, to be rich in faith, James 2.5.1 Cor. 1.26, 27. The younger
brother, shall not have all his Portion, left he run riot. Few men can digest
great felicity: therefore as Dionysius gave for a reward to Plato Books; but
unto Aristippus money: so God gives wealth and honor to those whom he least
respects: but unto his owu, he gives his grace and Spirit; keeping them short
of other things. Yet so, as each one has what he likes best. As what says the
worldling? Oh that I were so rich, so great and honorable. Yea, with Nero's
Mother, let them be damned, so they may be dubde they care not. But the wise
Christian as holding it better to be ranged with the Saints in Heaven, then
ranked with the Kings on Earth: Considers thus, the enjoyment of all outward
things, might add to my content; but it would endanger my soul: and it were
better for me to swim a River of boiling Brimstone, to live eternally happy:
rather then dwell in a Paradise, to be damned after death. He considers, that
God not seldom strips the body of pleasures, to clothe the soul with
Righteousness: and oftentimes strengthens our state of grace, by impoverishing
our temporal estate, because commonly the more prosperity, the less piety.

To all which may be added as a greater misery, do great ones never so ill,
they shall not be told of it; no, not by their Chaplains. Oh thou the Seer,
says Amaziah to Amos, go flee thou away into the Land of Judah; and there eat
thy bread, and prophecy there: but prophecy no more in Bethel, for it is the
Kings Chapel, and it is the Kings Court, Amos 7.12, 13. So that it is a
wonder! if any great man be saved, says Chrysostom, (alleged by Latimer
before King Edward) because there are so few, to tell and admonish them of
their faults. Whence many have sought by all means, to shun earthly dignities:
lest by gaining a place upon earth, they should lose a better place in Heaven,
as Millions have done: And upon this consideration: Isocrates refused the offer
of a Crown, and told them that motioned it: That he had rather live poorly,
being assured of the bliss of Heaven, as now he was; then by possessing all
worldy riches and splendor, to put the same in hazard.

CHAP. 19.
BUt thirdly, what good can their great wealth and honor do them, if other
things concur not therewith? As let a man have all felicities heaped together,
which this World can afford, have he but one tooth out of tune, they can yield
him no ease; yea, a smaller matter may deprive them of all, as we see in Haman
who counted all his honors and riches, the Kings and Queens favors, as
nothing: only for that Mordecai did not bow the knee to him, nor honor him as
others did, Esther 5.11, 12, 13.

But to pass these, and other the like, a little sickness will quickly thaw all
these cold and frozen comforts. Let but that day come (and come it will sooner
then they look for it) and then rich Crassus cannot command health, or get
himself a stomach. His Worship in all his pomp and great plenty, is forbidden
to eat, when in the mean time, all his household are merry, and the poorest
servant that he keeps, is in better case then he.

It is not the embroidered slipper that will drive away the painful Gowt: nor
the golden Diadem, the cruel headache, nor the Diamond Ring, the angry
whit-loaf, nor the long Velvet Robe: the burning Fever, yea, the prick of a
thorn, or some passion of the mind: is able to deprive us of the pleasures of
the whole Worlds Monarchy. What will all those goodly Titles of Majesty, and
other privileges avail them? if a guilty conscience do but chide them? Will
not this make their Palaces Prisons, their gold chains golden fetters, their
Crowns crosses, and all their earthly honors but burdens and vexations? What
were it to have a purple coat, and a polluted conscience? a gay gown and a sick
heart: a bed of gold or Ivory; and a diseased mind: a full chefi, and an empty
soul: a fair face, and foul affections: to glister in jewels, and be filthy in
manners: to be in grace with men, and in disgrace with God?

Fourthly, However death will dissolve them, and all their imaginary felicities
into nothing: will cut thee wholly from them, and them from thee. And then as
at a game at Chess, the highest now upon Board, may presently be lowest under
board: so it may fare with the greatest of them here, and the like when they go
hence. For although in the Theater of this World, like Actors upon a Stage; the
King, the Lord and the Clown have differing respect: yet after the play is
done; it may be that he who was the Clown, is a better man, then the King. So
it is with men after death. Nor will a poor Lazarus then, change places with a
Rich Dives, nor an Eliah with Ahab. Yea, then Nebuchadnezzar will wish that he
had been Daniel, Haman will wish that he had been Mordecai, and Herod will wish
that he had been John Baptist. And therefore if men were wise indeed, and loved
themselves as they think they are and do: they would not be so greedy after
great places, as after grace, and Gods favor.

Nor is honor and greatness in it self a blessing; or to be desired.
Advancement is not ever a sign of love, either to the man or the place. Yea,
often times instead of a blessing, it proves a judgment; both to the party, and
to the people, as in the case of Saul, 1 Samuel 8.9, etc. Yea, there are no men
so miserable, as those that are great and evil. For as it is the manner of God,
to cast down that he may raise up; to abase that he may exalt, as in the cases
of Joseph, Daniel, and Saint Paul: so contrarily, Satan raises up, that he may
throw down, and intends nothing but our dejection, in our advancement, as in
the cases of Haman, Absalom, and that Rich Fool in the Gospel.

Besides, as the errors of eminent persons, are eminent errors; and the more
noble the person, the more notorious the corruption: so great offenders, shall
meet with great punishments. And as their fault is, according to the condition
of their place; so shall the nature and proportion of their retribution be:
yea, and the more enjoyments they have had, or pleasure they have lived in
here; so much more shall their torment and sorrow be hereafter, Revel. 18.7.

Now these things being so, let them be but seriously considered, and then say,
wherein the great gain lies, that should make men desire great places? except
it be to do good, and glorify God in them. I cannot think of any thing
therein, that will make good men gainers. But lose they are sure to do; I mean
of their peace and spiritual enjoyments. For in my judgment, there is nothing
in the world worth envy, save or besides the condition of a true Christian, and
a retired life spent in study and contemplation.

Indeed, men are apt to think it a brave thing, to be always conversant with
great ones: but sure I am, the privileges can never countervail the
inconveniences. Whence Henry the Eighth professed, that he knew none in his
Kingdom so happy; as that Subject who never was so low, as to be a Constable,
nor so high, as to be a Justice of the Peace; and the same was King James his
judgment. And you know what that Heathen Monarch said, Whom the whole World
could not content: Were I not Alexander, I would be Diogenes. What then will a
godly conscientious Christian say? For the state of grace, is Heaven upon
earth: and he that knows the sweetness of Gods presence, will deem it more
tolerable to be ever alone, then never able to be so. And indeed, that soul can
never enjoy God, or it self, that is not sometimes retired, which is seldom
the lot of men in high places; which made Anacharsis, a Barbarian, (being led
only with the love of virtue) leave the Kingdom of Scythia, to his younger
brother; betaking himself to the study of wisdom, and many others: but of this
I have spoken enough upon another occasion, only I will add a word touching a
studious life: which many (not for want of ignorance) take to be the most
melancholy life of all others, though a Scholar finds such beneficial variety
of joys and delights therein, as any other calling shall promise in vain. Yea,
I dare say, this my very Work (which yet requires swetting of the brain) is
more sweet to me, then most men's wages is to them, nor were the profits and
places inconsiderable; that I have refused, the better to enjoy my self and
Books. The which I tell you, to draw on others to taste of this Manna, who
hitherto (like so many blind Moles) have placed all their felicity and
delight, to dig in the earth, and are so eager to get, and heap up silver, that
they have no leisure to think of their souls: whom I the most pity, of any men
alive.

CHAP. 20.
BUt listen to that (you miserly Muckworms) of a studious life: which (if you
have brains) will make your souls so long after the enjoying it; as that you
shall no longer like of your present employment; get you never so much and grow
you never so rich thereby. And that you may not take it to be my single
opinion, (as too much doting upon my own conceited happiness) in characterizing
out of the life of a Scholar, I will mostly deliver my own mind, in the words
of that Reverend Divine Doctor Hall, the Nightingale of our Age.

Alphonsus King of Arragon, so greatly loved learning, that he omitted not his
hard studies; in his most dangerous wars. And Pliny the second, so inwardly
affected it; that he held the time to be lost, which was not spent in study.
Nor can any one think it strange, that has truly tasted the sweetness of it.
Yea, I can wonder at nothing more, then how a Scholar can be idle, or dumpish?
having the opportunity of so many improvements of reason, in such variety of
studies: in such importunity of brave thoughts. Other Artizans do but practice,
a Scholar never ceases to learn, wherein also his choice is infinite. Other
labors require recreation, our very labor recreates our sports. We can never
want either somewhat to do, or somewhat that we would do. How numberless are
those precious Volumes, that are ever tempting us both to delight and profit?
Who can be weary? that finds such wit in Poetry, such profoundness in
Philosophy, such acuteness in Mathematiques, such wonder of events in History,
such sweet eloquence in Oratory, such supernatural light, and ravishing
delight in Divinity, as so many rich metals, in their proper Mines. Now, whom
would not all this ravish with joy? After all these, let us but open our eyes,
we cannot look beside a lesson in the universal Book of our Maker: worth our
study, and taking out, as what creature, has not his miracle? what event does
not challenge our observation? And if weary of foreign employment, we list to
look home into our selves: there we find a world of thoughts, which set us on
work anew, and not less profitably. Or admit we could be cloyed with our own
company, the door of conference stands open; offering such interchange of
discourse, as will not more please, then benefit us, and he is a mean
companion, from whom we return not wiser.

But suppose we have not this opportunity always: what ingenious mind can be
weary^ of talking with learned Authors, the most sweet, harmless, and
cha^geless companions. What an heaven lives a Scholar in? that being pent up in
his voluntary prison at once, in one close room or case of walls: can daily
converse with all the glorious Martyrs and Fathers. That can single out at
pleasure either sententious Tertullian, or grave Cyprian, or resolute Hierome,
or flowing Chrysostom, or divine Ambrose, or devout Bernard, or (who alone is
all these) heavenly Augustine: to talk with, and hear their wise and holy
counsels, verdicts, resolutions, yea, (to rise higher) with Courtly Esaias, with
learned Paul, with all their fellow Prophets, Apostles; yet more, like another
Moses, with God himself in them both. Let the World contemn us, while we have
these delights; we cannot envy them, we cannot wish our selves other then we
are.

Besides, the way to all other contentments is troublesome, the only recompense
is in the end. To delve in the Mines, to scorch in the fire for the getting,
for the fining of gold, is a slavish toil, the comfort is in the wedge; to the
owners, not the laborers: whereas our very search of knowledge is delightsome.
Study it self is our life; from which we would not be barred for a World. How
much sweeter then is the fruit of study? the conscience of knowledge? in
comparison whereof the soul that has once tasted it, easily contemns all
humane comforts. Wherefore spare not ye worldlings, to insult over our
paleness, our neediness, our neglect: ye could not be so jocund, if you were
not ignorant. If you did not want knowledge, you could not overlook him that
has it. For me, I am so far from emulating you; that I profess, I had as lieve
be a brute beast, as an ignorant rich man.

And so taking leave of great ones, I return to the thousands of ordinary
Grip^^s and Oppressors; that have dispersed themselves here and there amongst
the multitude; as Cutpurses in a crowde. Only it requires, that as I have
largely spoken to Magistrates and Governors; showing them what God requires at
their hands: so I should say something to the people governed, in showing what
they ought to do: of which a word, and but a word: because I foresee, that one
Dos^ of so untoothsome a truth, to such as I shall especially speak; will be as
welcome as water into a Ship, and I love not to intrude.

CHAP. 21.
I Seldom hear any man speak of Taxes or Governors; but I perceive in them a
kind of enmity against both: which to me is not a little strange, at least it
makes me suspect, that they do not wisely consider of things and circumstances.
Yea (if I shall speak my conscience, as it is informed from Gods Word, and
common reason) when I consider how mad many men are about what they pay to
their Governors: as parting with it like so much blood from their hearts:
which makes them so far as they dare, fly in the face of Authority, and
grumble out no less then treason; though in such a deformed silence, as Witches
raise their spirits, which God takes as done to himself; though they want eyes
to see it. It makes me conclude, that they are more guided by the god of this
World, then by rectified reason, or the written Word, witness those many
precepts and prohibitions, Exodus 22.28. Acts 23.5. Eccles. 10.20. Matthew. 15.4.
Prove. 24.21, 22. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2, 3. Jude 8, 9, to 17. 2 Pet. 2.9, 10, 11, 12,
13, 18. 1 Samuel 10. 24, 27. Romans 13.1, to 8. Titus 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15.
which men should do well to read and lay to heart, for I intend not to speak
much of the point, nor to answer all those Objections, that men (blinded with
prejudice) are over-forward to make. It is sufficient if I speak enough, and
that out of a desire to do others good, I am content to forfeit my discretion,
and hazard the loss of my reputation. For I am not ignorant, how I shall be
censured, hated and calumniated for speaking this, so necessary and seasonable
a truth But hear it, and let come on what will: so long as I have the Word for
my warrant, and the glory of God (the which we are bound to redeem with our
lives) for my end. Certainly he that for the common good, is not willing to
contribute according to his ability, to the public charge, or that feigneth
himself poor, to avoid a Tax or Seasment, Prove. 13.7. is worthy to be made as
poor, as the sum of money he is allotted to pay, because he grudgeth the
State a part, by means of whom he enjoys all. For without Rulers and good Laws:
none could say this is mine. Nor would Cheapside be safer then Salisbury Plain.
We could not eat our own meat, nor sleep in our beds, nor meet one another in
the Congregation: if every man might do what were good in his own eyes. Judge.
17.6. Yea, then, thou that art so unwilling to pay five shillings; would be
glad to parr with all thy wealth, to save thy skin, and would thou have it
so? If not confess, that Governors are the light of our eyes, the breath of
our nostrils: yea, under God (and to speak it with reverence) even the life of
our lives. And what man will not hazard a joint, much more part with a little
pelf to preserve his life, and all else he does enjoy? Nor are they followers
of Christ, that refuse to pay unto Caesar, that which is his due, Matthew. 22.21.
For if he by whom Kings reign, sorbore not to pay tribute to an Heathen Prince,
Matthew 17.24, to 28. what power under Him can deny it unto those that rule for
him, and the good of his Church and People?

A man feeds the stomach, that it may nourish and preserve his whole body: if
he did not, what should he gain by it? but starving. We read in the Fable, that
the other members mutining against the belly complained; that all their
industrious care and service was for the good and satisfying of the belly,
where as it alone was idle, lazy, and quiet in the midst, and did nothing at
all: whereupon they conspired, that neither the eyes should spy out, nor the
feet fetch in, nor the hands reach, nor the mouth receive, nor the teeth chew
meat for it: but in pining it with hunger, they brought also themselves into
extreme, and almost irrecoverable consumption; until they fell again to perform
their several offices. A body can no more be preserved without sinnews, then a
Commonwealth without tribute. A common interest challenges an universal aid.
Reason would, that every man should be burdened about the upholding of that,
wherein every man has an interest, that a public charge, should be defrayed
by a public purse: every man his share according to his means. Many hands
will make light work. Only there are some so base, ignorant, or envious; that
to spite and mischief others; they will undo themselves like Samson, Judges
16.29, 30. or those Israelites Judges 21.15, to 24. or him in the Fable; Men
not worthy to live amongst men: most unworthy to enjoy those privileges they
do, in this happy though unthankful Christian Commonwealth. I bless God, I
never thought much to pay whatsoever I have been demanded, all these twelve
years past, but have exceedingly admired the goodness of God; that by parting
with a part; the whole, or residue has been preserved. Whereas if those
Royallists and Cavalliers might have had their wills: I should have lost all,
yea, not a good man, should have been the better for what ever he had; were it
the Inheritance of his Ancestors.

Let none think that self-interest, makes me partial: for it is well known, I
never gained groat since the Parliament: nor did I ever personally act in the
least, either on the one side or the other.

But this is not all, for they will murmur against, and speak evil of Christian
Magistrates. Yea, in their hearts curse them (as Shimei did David) who are the
Ministers of God for our wealth: which is to come near to God, whose
Vicegerents they are, for the Magistrate is the Garment, in which God
apparelleth himself: And what does the Murmurer but wound Christ through the
sides of his Deputies.

Where men command with God, we must obey men for God, and God in men: when
against him, the best obedience is to deny obedience; and to turn our backs
upon Herod, Matthew. 2.12. Again, there is an active obedience, and a passive: I
may not execute a Magistrates impious commands, I must suffer his unjust
punishments.

One may desire other Magistrates, but we must obey those we have: and happily it
is more commendable to obey the wicked, then the good observing the former
caution. And I wish men, (yea, Ministers unless it be in their presence) would
trouble themselves less with the Magistrates duty, and look more to their own.
However for private persons to question the lawfulness of that Government,
under which they desire protection is insolent, stupid and intolerable. But
sure I am, when Moses is praying, Joshua leading, Israel obeying, and God
blessing and prospering all. O happy are the people that be in such a case,
Psalm. 144.15. But if men cannot have their wills, to invade the Inheritance
which the right heir keeps from them: Or suppose they be injuried, and may not
have redress in that manner, and measure themselves prescribe: presently
maledicunt Principibus, they murmur against the Magistrate. Yea, what can a
Magistrate do acceptable to the good; but lewd men will misinterpret it? Every
tongue is ready to speak partially, according to the interest he has in the
cause, or patient; or according to the wickedness that is in his own heart.

CHAP. 22.
ANd so they would do, had we the rarest and uprightest Governors, that ever
the World could boast of. As what Magistrate can hope to be free from their
malice and murmurings: when Moses himself could not escape the same, nor
faithful Samuel, as observe how the Israelites dealt with Moses! They no sooner
want water to quench their thirst, but they murmur against him; and say to his
face, (being ready to stone him) wherefore have thou brought us out of Egypt,
to kill us, and our children and cattle with thirst? Exodus 17.3, 4. As if Moses
had been a God: yea not long after, they gather themselves together, and are
agreed to cast off both him and his government, and why forsooth? What Is the
matter? (he never had done them the least wrong) he stays a little longer with
God in the Mount, then they expected, Exodus 3^.1. But fools as they were, how
could they find out a better Governor? among all their twelve Tribes? Had
they been asked this question, it would have shown them their folly. As
Pacuvius at Capua: when the people would have had their Magistrates massacred;
desired them first to agree upon the election of new Officers: then they
nominated diverse, but could agree upon none; whereupon the Massacre was
delayed, and after forgot.

We have too many such fools, when the Duke of Buckingham reigned o if he were
taken away all would be well! when he was dispatched, and sent to his long-home:
they murmured as much, and no less complained of their oppression under the
King, Prelates, Council Table, Star Chamber, High Commission, and Court of
Honor: now they are all removed, and God has given us since better Governors
then (I am sure) we deserved: they thought themselves worse then ever. Yea,
they did not spare to curse their Governors, and could have eaten their very
hearts, (as they gnawed their own tongues) for spite. And how could better be
expected from such sons of Belial? 1 Samuel 19.24, 27. that have more rage then
reason: For their words are but the light froth of an impotent anger: wherein
they accuse others unrighteousness, and profess their own.

An end of the second Part or Division.

