A LETTER To Mr SPEAKER LENTHALL, SHOWING, THAT IT WERE BETTER TO COMPLY WITH
HIS MAJESTY'S OFFERS AND DESIRES OF PEACE, Then to pursue the Destruction of
this Land, in the continuance of this unnatural WAR.

Printed in Year, 1646.

SIR,
AS clean Creatures were esteemed only those that chewed the Cudde, so is it
amongst men: sure I am, did not too many men in this age, like the Horse rush
into the battle, not consider what it is they are doing, they could not have
raised nor continued this unnatural War as they do. You sit amongst that
Party as a Moderator, therefore I direct this to you to think upon. I was one
of those that conceived your late great success promised some quiet (I cannot
say Peace) to this miserable Kingdom, especially when I read His Majesty's
gracious Message to the two Houses But now I perceive you are a people that
have Fretium in manu, The opportunity, but not the heart to lay hold on the
occasion to still this storm. The sad thoughts therefore of a Mourner for this
Nation, and of a constant friend to you, (if you be at leisure for such stuff)
read in what follows.

The first thing that came in my view was, from whence we were fallen. Here, I
may say, I saw a very great Glory, but like a wordly pomp, my after thoughts
soon clouded it. I looked upon a lawful King set in the glorious Throne of His
Ancestors, in His own Person of eminent virtue, mastered by no bad
inclination, but like him that S. Paul says seeks the mastery, was temperate
it all things. 1. Cor. 9. 25.
Nay when his Enemies were to wound him, they were forced to do it through
other's sides, and complain of ill Counselors that they might, as much as in
them lay, make him an ill King. And yet when some of those Counselors that had
the envy of three Nations upon them, were to be condemned, it could not be by
the Laws in being, but an extorted new Bill, or an unheard of Ordinance of
Parliament, that must cut their thread of Life. And as these few dyed thus, so
the rest survived, not accused of Bribery, Oppression, etc. but questioned for
opinions in Law: so as sure the Subject that was thus ruled was little oppressed;
and its feared our plenty made us collect our hard ships by Reasoning, not
Sense, which former times complained of. God knows there is a great difference
betwixt Speculative Evils which may happen, and Practical, or Sensitive,
which men do feel. Besides, what Government there that may not have somewhat
said against it?

Do you not remember the plenty and splendour the Jews possessed in Solomon's
time? And yet in his Sons (but mark it was because God meant to visit) a
Declaration must come out, 1. King. 12.
Your Father laid heavy burdens upon us. I am sure they brought one upon
themselves, for they never had a good King after, and were led into Captivity,
and never came out, which was not the lot of Judah,which clove to Rehoboam,
Solomon's Son. Do you not call to mind what was written of good King Asa, one
charactered like his forefather David, etc? and yet the words are, 2. Chron.
16.10.
Asa oppressed some of the People in his time. Do you say, the World is not
Round, because there are some irregular Mountains, Do you not say, no
Individual Person is perfect in all things? Is it not a received opinion, he
is best, that has least faults, not he that has none? And must we then look
for this perfection in Government only, or cast off all obeaience? True it is,
we can say there was illegal Ship money; but converted to public use we must
acknowledge, (for give me leave to make a large Parenthesis, and rell you never
a penny of that money came to the Kings private: Nay, he spent besides it on the
Navy, 40 or 50000 l per Annum of his own Revenues) There were many Monopolies,
its true, but in the hands of most of those men, that have raised their hands
against their King since, and pursued Him to save themselves.

But enough of this: Next I saw as hopeful an Issue attending the Throne, and
securing the succession of it as ever this Kingdom was blessed with. And I
cannot doubt (what ever threatens) but they were borne for the happiness of
this Nation, and to possess the Splendour of their own Birthrights; And sure,
where Ingratitude dwells not, the Royal Person that brought such fruit cannot
want her due reverence.

Then I looktupon the Profession of the Christian Religion in this Church: A
Considerative man must acknowledge it. Apostolic and Primitive. It wore
Christ's seamlesse garment, more then any Church in the World, for the Rule of
her Faith was the Word of God, and that (in difficult places understood (which
God knows though they be many, yet concern few persons, for their is enough
without dispute, that if believed and practiced, shall make private men sase)
as expounded from the Primitive times. She proved not her truth by her
opposition to either Romanist, Heretic,, or Schismaticke, thought it not
sufficient argument to prove she was true, because another was false, for she
was acquainted, that most commonly too warm disputants, are often as distant
from truth, as they are differing from each others opinion. Her Common Service
or Liturgy, which She imposed on none for their Private Devotion, but
prescribed for the Uniformity of the public, was Systeme of all Practical
Divinity, and She made the Life of Christ the Calendar of her year, for so did
it busy her Disciples, that in every one year of their lives, they commemorated
all their Savior did in his: The matter and words of it were all Scripture
phrases, or sense, and such as without all Controversy have been understood so
by the learned Men of all differing professions, until a sort of Enthusiasts,
questioned some few (but by them misunderstood) passages herein: So as it may
be said, God was served in this Land, in Truth, Unity, Decency, and Honor. And
as this blessed Reformation was made by the Prince and Clergy, with the mark
of Authority, and not the brand of Tumult, so it was admitted in to and
confirmed so by the Laws of the Land, that those that will overthrow the
Church, must ravell the whole Commonwealth, and if it be possible, make us
more miserable them we are at present.

For the Laws of this Land, when I consider how absolute a Monarch the King
was, Power of making War and Peace, Issuing Commissions of Lievtenancy,
(argument enough to whom the Sword was entrusted) Granting all Pardons and
Dispensations, Coining Money, and Calling and Dissolving Parliaments, etc. I
could not but admire the wisdom of our Ancestors, who had procured from their
Kings such restrictions, as that though they could not be denied to have the
single Power to all the former purposes invested in them alone, yet could they
not have the free use of some of them without the general Concurrence of the
People; For though they could make War without their People, yet could they
not Levy Money to maintain it without their Consents: Though the King only was
said to make the Law, (notwithstanding all can be said against it, which is too
long for a Letter) yet it was no Law, 'till the two Houses of Parliament had
consented unto it. And so in some other things, whereby it may appear the
People sought not to Eclipse their Sovereigns due Honor, but to preserve to
themselves a sober Liberty. Here I cannot but sadly contemplate how in all
times some few. Persons, upon the pretense of Liberty for the People, have got
the advantage and preferment of having a share in the rule of them. And Whether
such Changes bring ease, this is a time that the wealiest; man may have gained
experience enough to inform himself; To you I need not quote History to prove
it, since you know nothing is more unquestionable. He that knew the danger of
Innovation, Prove. 24.21.
cries loud, My Son, meddle not with those that love changes. And he that
considered how naturally men degenerate, 1. Pet.2.16.
gave it as a Precept, Make not your liberty at loake for Licentiousness.

Well Sir, but Hinc illae Lachrimae, This was the sowrce of our present
miseries, for upon the calling of this present Parliament, though the Subject
in general were never in a more plentiful condition at home, by reason of his
MAJESTY'S strength at Sea, and their own great Trade so considerable and rich
abroad, yet the Roll of greivances is presented, and this Free People taught
to believe they were Issachers Ass, ready to couch betwixt her burdens; And
fit for them to Commend new Officers to their King, they might confide in. And
what was theirssue of it? A speedy gracious and entire remedy afforded by his
Majesty (without any return) to all complained off. Was it said frequeney of
Parliaments were wanting? A Trieniall Bill was granted, nay, with such a
Clause, that they might meet, if omitted to be called. Was it feared his
Majesty's inclinations lay not to receive Counsel from that Body? He secures
that, by granting such Acts as divested himself in point of Revenue, of a
Regal subsistence, without a future constant good understanding betwixt Him
and them: Witness quitting Ship money by a Bill, laying down His Costomes, and
Impositions, and obliging himself to receive them only when granted to him by
Act of Parliament. Did He not as I may say, impale all His Forests in narrow
bounds, that were so extensive before? Did He not secure His Subjects from
being pressed, which was little though then, would have been an occasion of so
many thousands of them to be soon after, imbruing their hands in each others
blood? Were there any Courts conceived to be grievous, and not taken away? was
not the Starchamber of excellent use and known necessity submitted to this
fate? Was not the High Commission takes down, so us since there has been no
legal restraint or punishment for Incest or Adultery? I Will not dwell upon
repenting the Bill concerning the Court of York, nor limiting the Council
Table, etc. But I Will shut up all in this, That the King gave one assurance in
all, when He Consented to the Bill for not dissolving this Parliament: That He
intended wholly to throw Himself upon the Affection and Love of His People.

Me thinks now any man living should be ready to ask me, What? after all this
Purging, did the Stomach send up any Jealous Fumes to the head? yes, you know
they did; and how for desiring the same Justice and form of proceeding against
some Members, whom He accused, which they had held against some others that
they had formerly impeached, They taised such popular Commotions, They drove
Him from His Parliament: yet as if loath to part, willing to return, whilst He
was at Hampton Court, and Windsor, what Gracious Messages did He send in
Expostulation of that busineffe, what acknowledgement offered He to make upon
pretended Breaches of Privileges, and could not be hearkened too. When He was
forced to retire further, and when He was at York, attended with so many
Lords, what was the whole Consultations there, but by Messages from Himself,
Assurances from the Peers about Him, that He sought nothing more, but a good
understanding with them.

When the 19 Propositions came, that Dropsie-like thirsted after so much more,
when it had bin fed so plentifully before. What were his condescentions? Did he
not offer His Councillors should take a larger Oath (then was proposed) for
maintaining not of any part, but the Whole Law? Did he not assure you, That
there was no man so near him in place or affection, whom he would not leave to
the Justice of the Law? Was not all offered you could devise whereby Papists
might be disabled to disturb the State, or Elude the Law? nay, was not the
Education of Papists children by Protestants offered to you? And much more of
this kind: all this had none of the Magnetic virtue, to draw you together.
After this, can to mind His Majestres Message from Nottingham, when he Foot
was only on the way, the hand not lifted up, for no stroke was struck, but men
Marching only toward this unnatural and Civil War, how does His Majesty
press for a Treaty, to procure the peace of the Kingdom, what does he offer
for it, To call in his Proclamations, to take down his Standard; if the like
might be done by his two Houses? After a Battle, in the first, second, and
third Treaties, how endeavored he to stanch the blood, how in all these did he
make great condescentions, whilst the Commissioners from the two Houses were
Authorized to afford no Compliance, so as neither he, nor his party can surely
loose this comfort, that this War was by all means declined by Him; That his
part in it, has been the defense of the ancient and known Laws of the
Kingdom, whilst those that were against him, had nothing to pretend, but a
Liberty to introduce new ones, and such as suited more with the defense of
their Crimes they had run into, then any ways the good of this people. It is,
must needs be now, His great content, that though many of those Rights He has
parted with, and since offered, are so vested in him, That he might justly have
insisted to have maintained them. Yet the quiet of his people so far prevailed
with him, above his own interest. Their ingratitude cannot rob him of that
inward intection, nor his own late adverse fortune (which begins with him, but
I am afraid will end with the Kingdom in general) deprive him of the
tranquillity of mind, which die former mentioned Acts, Offers, and late
Messages yields to him.

What have you fought for all this while? did you not still pretend it was to
have Him come up to His Parliament? why do you then reject that offer?
Especially accompanied with the offer of a secure Militia, Satisfaction in the
business of Ireland; Consideration of the Public Debts of His Scots
Subjects, City of London and others; The Government of the Church, according
to the best days of Queen Elizabeth and King James, with full Liberty for the
ease of their Consciences, who will not communicate in that Service established
by Law; And likewise for the free and public use of the Directory, to such as
shall desire to use the same; To give content in the choice of the Lord
Admiral, and Officers of State and others, with many Reasons as well as
Professions of his confidence of a good accord; And lastly, of disbanding His
Armies, and slighting His Garrisons, etc. I know your obvtous reply; I but this
was late, this was necessitated. Not late, for from the beginning you see how
much was offered, had He met with any compliance, at least, such a one as might
have satisfied Him what He parted with, should not have been turned to His and
His Peoples harm, but security, undoubtedly they had had more, and that
sooner: Besides, remember what was pretended too, was another man's Right, and
which of us, without more reluctance and delay, would not have deferred the
granting more to them, to whom so much gave so slender satisfaction. I perceive
the last Answer to His Majesty, is a negative to all His desires and offers,
and referres all to Propositions to be sent. How can I hope they will be
reasonable, when your party has been so unreasonable in their rejecting His
Majesty's Messages? How can I think they are trully meant, that have been so
long deferred? I know not which party prevails most with you; but I am afraid
it is too true what I have heard a great Independent said lately to a Confident
of his, That there was two things they must pretend, which they would never
do; The one was, to set up the Presbytery, the other to send down
Propositions; Or if they meant the last, it must be reserved for a season, when
they will have a prevailing Army to back their unreasonablenesse and insolency.
Ah Sir! does your party pretend the Law and so forget it, what is become of the
Statute that forbids all men to come up with force to Parliament, was it not
that nothing might either be, or seem to be Coerc't there; what is become of
the great security he Subject had against the King, and by the King? Against
the King, That no Law could be made but their consent must first be had by the
King: That no prevailing part in one or both Houses, could make a Law, no not
an Order without His consent, who was first placed by God over them, Then whose
Personal experience in Government (or if a Minor His Council) was likely to
know best, what suited with the public good. Am I (Sir) any whit the freer
that the King cannot but the two Houses may (nay after they have driven diverse
of their Members from them) make a Law at their Pleasure? Am I (Sir) the freer
Subject, he King can not press me, the Two Houses may, The King cannot use
Martial Law, the two Houses may, The King cannot impose on my Estate, the two
Houses may, The King cannot make other crimes Treason then those mentioned in
the Statutes, the two Houses may, nay, may make them none; And others not
mentioned there to be Treason for as a Dilemma must lie upon the Subjects lives
and good? If the King prevail, the Statutes and Laws too condemn them; if
the Two Houses, their Declarations and Ordinances rise up in place of Laws
against them What am I the better the King swears to Magna Charta and the
Petition of Right, if neither of these be to be observed by the Houses? If you
Answer: yes but they will do you no harm, they are of your own body Pray tell
me, may not I as justly say, my Head will not Harm me, as my hand: Is it in
nature, a man cannot hurt himself, sure it is nor, we have caily enperience of
Felons and Manslayers of themselves. And I am sure there is more of tenderness
and bowels of an Individual man to his own body, then there is of a
representative body to the body represented: I cannot hurt my self but I must
feel, I may another, and be the better for it, warm my self by the burning
my Neighbors house. God grant that at this day (though the Kings party are not
very guilty of it) Divitiae pro criminibus non habeantur, that some honest men
estates make them not Delinquents; That the sense of the guilt of one Party,
make not the same men so rigid to inflict punishment upon another, and so
flatter themselves, or at leas t satisfy the Vulgar, Justice is done, when
like the Custom in the education of Princes, the Page is whipped for the Princes
fault. The Innocent is punished and the Offend or scapes.

Sir, I will conclude all. Ne glorietur accinctus aeque ut discinctus, Presume
not on the Kings weakness (it led you into the War) nor your own strength,
it may fail you before you come to your journey's end. While you may, temper
your succesles by wisdom, to a dutiful compliance with your Sovereign, Let
your heart smite you, you pursue His life so violently. Zimti had no Peace, and
Zadock that presu???med all he did was by the spirit, found Micaiah told him
true, That he should find it otherwise, when he should fly into the inner
Parler to save himself. The Canon of Scripture must be the Rule, the Spirit is
to be tried by the doctrine, not the doctrine by the Spirit: No though an
Angel (whether Tutelary to a Presbyterian or Independent) bring it, you have
Christ's word for it, He that takes the Sword shall perish by it, Mat. 26.52.
Perish not only by being killed, but perish, (I am loath to write it)
Everlastingly for killing. Were your quarrel just, your mannaging of it ought
to be more dutiful to your Superiors, more merciful to your Brethren, you
should love the Peace of the Land, more then the pursuit of a few: Non hoe
tantum respicite quas ob causas paenas sitis exacturi, sed and qui sint, de
quibus sumenda sit paena, Qui not ipsi, and quis justus panarum modus. Remember
who you are, and who we are. Remember he that slayes an Innocent man hastens
his glory, and his own judgment: Leave off therefore, more for your own sakes
then ours, to be cruel. Think with what unrempered Mortar you build, How many
forced into you, and not of you, are among you: How many from you: How many of
you that cement not together, and leave to destroy your firm and ancient
foundations, your King and Church, so may we once again see the Structures of
our Temples and Iudgement-Halls repaired, The King on His Throne, and every man
sitting under his own Vine.

This from Your


