YOUTHS LOOKINGLASS,

Wherein they may behold the Frailties and Vanities of all things under the
Sun.

ALSO Seasonable Admonitions and Instructions for every Age and qualification
of Mankind in general.

Readers who ere you are, you here may find
Your own conditions if this book you mind.
Printed for J. Williamson.


YOUTHS LOOKINGLASS, Wherein they may behold the frailtyes and vanities of all
things under the Sun, etc.
ONe pleasant Evening in a shady Grove
My thoughts being free from business and from Love
I there could see the trees were flourishing
On which the pretty birds did sit and sing:
And Madam Flora had bedeckt each field
With fragrant flowers, which did much comfort yield
Unto my senses: on the other side
Making great sport the pretty Lambs I spied.
They leap, they run and from their Dams they stray
Then back return, half tired with their play:
Well pleased with this under a shady tree
Whose well spread branches were my Canopy,
I sat me down, considering in what state
Of happiness, the Almighty did Create
Mankind, who over all things was made Lord,
And all things to him comfort do afford:
Yet for all this poor man must surely dye
And leave the world to his posterity;
The thoughts of which at last my mind did bend
To write man's state from's infancy to's end.
First from the Cradle I will contemplate
And view the newborn babe who cannot prate;
Nor sign can make for what it wants, but cry,
Whilst patient Nurse sits singing Lullaby:
Yet for all that it will not be content
Until the Breast affords it nourishment,
Which having had, sleep locks up its sweet eyes
And innocently down the infant lies.
In its first state not knowing what you say
But sleeps and frowardly cries the time away.
Whilst quiet, it is a pretty pleasing thing
But when untoward it does disquiets bring:
Thus void of sense twelve months are dully spent,
The child no pleasure knows, nor Nurse content,
But time progreding the child grows amain
And now some little sense it does obtain,
Whilst lying in the lap it laughs and smiles
Which pretty charms the mothers heart beguiles,
It gapes and crows and plays before it stands
Grasping the Nurses Bubbies with its hands,
Playing with the breasts, being nourished by sleep
The pretty boy at length begins to creep
About the house, and tumble up and down,
Thus it is with all, though born to great renown.
Years coming on, this pretty wanton fooll
At three or four years old is sent to schooll,
To learn his A B C; poor child! it is hard
That he of so much play must be debarred:
At six or seven years old excuse he will make
If in a fault you chance the Lad to take.
Ask him who did it, straight he cries not I,
Observe how soon he will learn to tell a lie.
This proves Original sin in all mankind
Since our first Parents did the Apple find.
At nine or ten he learns to understand
His English, and the Bible can command;
His Accidence he has at fingers end
And with his Schoolfellow seems to contend,
For grand precedence in Classick rules
And baffles such as are soft headed fools.
Then cock a hoop the rest he does deride
Oh who but he; thus enters sin of Pride.
Into the teens being entered he grows bold,
And scorns by every one to be controlled;
He Is now ashamed at Push-pin for to play
And throws his Cat and Catstick quite away:
At Nine pins he amongst the biggar crew
Consorts himself resolving to pursue
Most Man-like Exercises, observing how
Young men the Maidens Buss; and finding now
His Nature prompt him that he should do so,
Ere you can tell whether he will have beard or no.
Ashamed to venture yet he longs to try
But fears the Virgin will a kiss deny
And check his offers calling of him boy
Saying fie fond Lad, you are too young to toy;
The thought of this makes him a while forbear
Until he is riper by another year.
About eighteen the youngster thinks of Love,
And fancy of enjoyment does him move;
He casts an Eye upon some sweet faced matd
And is by Cupid amourously betrayed.
He courts with all the Rhetoric he can,
She scornfully denies the new-grown man.
His youthful blood most passionately burns,
He cannot sleep, but tosses, tumbles, turns.
All night in bed; no rest can close his eyes,
But cries out Lovely Celia don't despise
Thy Lovers sighs and tears, grant Love again;
Oh pity pity me and ease my pain.
Thus is he trapt, thus is the youth ensnared
Grown up to troubles all mankinds reward.
Having past twenty then perhaps he sees
The folly of his earthly vanities.
Being now full grown in strength he looks about,
Desirous for to find new glories out
By some Archievement of his own, saying none
Can claim descended Honors for his own.
Those noble acts my Ancestors have done
Are none of mine now they are dead and gone.
I must find out some way to magnify
My Name, and act such things as cannot die.
Twill nothing me avail to hear men tell
My Fathers valor none could parallel,
And I a coward; no, I have a soul
That dares the fury of the Fates control.
I Will do such deeds in serving of my King
That Christendom of my renown shall ring.
I was not born to sleep in women's arms
Nor be deluded by their wanton charms.
I will out-look their eyes though full of darts,
They have no power to wound courageous hearts.
Fond puny mortals may perchance submit
And I in Nonage when I wanted wit
Was one of those, then I could sigh and cry
If my proud Mistress did a kiss deny.
The more I strived to humor her, the more
She slighted me, base damned imperious whore,
She captive lead me till more riper years
Of blessed discretion made me ashamed of tears.
Now rousing up my senses I defy
The strongest of their charms and subtilty.
Thus speaks the generous youth, whilst in his prime
And counts fond Love a childish idle crime.
Trumpets and Drums are now his chief delight,
They that will honor win must dare to fight.
The choicest of his youth thus spent and gone
Arriv^d at thirty or at thirty one.
He now considers of the time that is past
And what is to come, finding youth will not last.
He sticks close to his business and keeps home
Resolving never more abroad to roam.
But turns a Statesman politic and good
Assisting now by council not with blood,
And being happily in marriage tied
Unto a virtuous well descended Bride,
Is blessed with children who about him run
To ask him blessing every rising sun;
Which joys his heart that he should live to see
So sweet an issue for posterity.
The mother no less joy'd but bears a part
And gives her benediction from her heart.
At forty he consults his interest
An hoards up Gold and Silver in his chest,
He now bethinks that his prime age is gone
And childrens marriage time is coming on,
His daughters must have portions equal to
Their husbands fortunes else Love will not do.
The Heirs Estate must not divided be
But kept entire for his Posterity.
This makes him look about him and contrive
If he their settlements chance to survive,
How he shall best bestow himself and where,
Which the best Climate is and sweetest Air.
For now at fifty he begins to find
His (once warm) blood to chilness is inclined
Bloes bore in youth, are now to aches turned,
And spirits fainting which with heat once burned;
But scorns as you should call him old as yet
He Will rather strive beyond his strength to get
Himself esteem amongst the younger crew,
He tricks and trims yet all this will not do.
For sixty comes and bids him now prepare
Days of thy life but few and Evil are.
A fainting Traveller; a wearied soul
Who, days misspent with sorrow, does control.
To give good counsel now he does begin,
Confessing youthful vanites are sin;
Age sees oft-times too late what should have been
Well weighed in youth, and then have been foreseen:
Yet not to make a grand mistake in this
To think that Youth and Age suitable is;
No that would make all man, no youth at all;
We know man has a rise before his fall:
Our childhood ought not to be counted vain
With children, childish actions will remain.
Till riper years give summons to betake
Our selves to actions that may happily make.
Threescore is peevish yet would be thought wise
He pleads antiquity, and will despise
All youthful contradictions; mark ye then
How dare you prate (quoth he) young Rascals when
My age you do consider? what I have done
This forty, fifty years, it is well known
Was bravely done, not to be held in scorn
By beardless boys that were but lately born.
I never was no blockhead, no not I,
But spritely from my infancy.
The very thoughts of my past youthful age
How brisk, how free, how nimble to engage
Each Gamster, and how well I played my part,
The thoughts of this, I say, revives my heart,
And heightens so my senses, I could fain
Shake off Old Age, and once grow young again.
But man, like to a flower which from the earth
First springs a little, and from thence takes birth:
Then shoots and slips up higher, till at length
Its tender stalk begins to gather strength.
Then Blooming ripe, its glory forth does spread,
A fragrant blossom from its fruitful head,
So flourishes a time, then snatched away
By Sith, or else do wither and decay.
Just so it is with Man in every state
Whom heavens great King did from the earth create,
First Infant, then a Youth, then full grown man
Then down the hill he goes do what he can.
When old age comes, this life must be forsaken
And man return from whence he first was taken.
Now he bethinks him of his latter end,
And vows in prayers his little time to spend;
And sitting by the fire he does relate
Unto his children all his former state:
What worthy deeds he has done in youthful days,
How that above some others he got praise;
This to my comfort now at last I find,
To all I ever bore an honest mind.
Be valiant now my boys keep up my name,
To my renown add everlasting fame;
Let no vile woman crop your blooming years,
Believe 'em not though they shed thousand tears:
But oh the Gout, the Palsy shakes me sore,
Aches and pains do make me cry and roar;
Thus Time does handle him, for none he stays
But hastens on till man fulfils his days.
Now weary, Seaventy draws upon his head,
And bids him now prepare himself for bed:
That manly face once ruddy, fresh and clear,
Is now made pale and wrinkles do appear
Strength fails and those strong Nerves which scorned to yield.
That once made death to fly ith open field,
Are now grown feeble; now he is fain to creep,
And once strong eyes, with rheum now daily weep,
One hand on staff another on the wall
Must guide him now, or else the man must fall:
He stoops down low, and reverence gives to earth
From whence mankind derived his first birth,
Which makes divinest Oracle out plain
From dust I came, to dust must turn again.
Now he complains, my life is burdensome,
Oh gentle Death I now entreat thee come!
Come out I prithee, life's untwifted thread
All worldly joys are gone, each part is dead;
This bed of mine is all the world I have,
Nor can I find out rest till in the grave.
My senses now decay, I childish grow
I find no pleasure in this world below,
My friends do visit me but all in vain,
There Is none can ease me of my cruel pain.
Vain world adieu my glass is almost run
My time will set before the setting Sun:
Welcome cold death I do not fear to dye
My soul is soaring now to Heaven high.
Thus have I run through man's troubled state,
From's infancy unto his latest fate,
Here is the infant in his swaddling clout
The prattling boy that now can run about,
The Lad, the Youth, the Stripling and the Man,
who one and twenty now look over can,
From thence to thirty, forty, fifty then,
They are accounted pretty ancient men.
Then sixty comes, and some do seaventy gain,
But those last days are spent in grief and pain,
Threescore and ten as David does you tell
Shall man's days be, then to this world farewell.
A seasonable Admonition to mankind of every Age and every Condition.
ANd first to youth that is to discretion grown
Let him take heed least he be overthrown,
By bad examples gaind from riper years
And years with Grace not seasoned, Vice appears
More ripe and subtle, readier to decoy
The imitating, too apt, beardless boy.
You that to twenty are arrived, your prime
Take my advice use well your strength and time.
For often you find the Ax with fatal stroke
Before the shrub cuts down the sturdy Oak.
You that full thirty years live to enjoy
Seek wisdom now, and don't your time destroy
With foolish childish actions, Time invites
That thou should bid adieu to Youth's delights,
At forty let thy care and industry
Be to enrich thy homebred family,
Taking an honest course to lay up store,
That none of thine hereafter may be poor:
The rest of all thy days (freed from the cares
Of this vain world) give to thy God in Prayers.
That he may pardon thy offenses all
Both actual crimes and sin Original.
If with a contrite heart, and lift up eyes
Thou prayest to Heaven, he wont thy prayers despise
All men must dye, but no man knows the time
Some in their infancy, same in their prime.
Some live until they childish grow again
But those their latter days are grief and pain.
Then happy's he that does make God his friend
For such there is Crowns and Kingdoms in
The End.

