YOUR SERVANT SIR, OR Ralpho to Hudibras Descanting on Wilds Poetry.
Lo, now comes he, that came not yet,
Who cares not though his Master fret;
As Shoemaker so has Translator,
In stirrup Foot; so Imitator
Of Hudibras is little Ralph,
But servant has more wit bit'h half.
This Doughty Knight by Puny Squire
Out done is, as a simple Sire
Is by his wiser Son surpassed,
So much does Ralph exceed this rash head,
As does the Quiristers Sol fa-la-mi,
Old Hopkins Rhimes when sung by Calamy.
Brave Squire against proud Knight does vant,
And proves as stout a Combatant,
With Oberon as was Pig-wiggin
Whose head was armed with Achorn Piggin:
Here may be seen, as in a Glass,
The Mushrom wit of Hudibras,
Who cannot avoid in best of writing
Such stinking stuff as that of sh --
The Squire has got the quicker sight
Mounted on back of Giant-Knight.
HAh, are ye come? Welcome Sir Hudibras,
For all you are my Master, y' are an Ass.
Parturient Montes since you make a blunder,
Not in Wild Squibs, but Lightning joynd with Thunder,
I question if you are as you pretend
Unto the Bishops and the Church, a friend,
For by those words a man that has no eyes,
May plainly see you do Hiperbolize:
A Bishop's calmly urgent, makes no stir,
Nor Thumps the Cushion like a Presbyter,
He spits no fire, nor Wildly throws about
Hell and Damnation amongst the rout;
Flint breaks on Pillows: It Is not Pulpit Thunder
But mild persuasion melts men's hearts asunder.
Sugar and Honey excels gall or Verjuice,
A Barnabas wins more then Boanerges:
Such fiery Zealots by their Frantic fits
Drive others (like themselves) besides their wits.
You play with the Organs, and their virtue show,
As if you thought there were no Devil below:
After which your more sordid style is held on,
(Sans Reverence to the name of Paul's or Sh^ldon)
Against Calamy, by Metaphor descrying
Your malice to a man that lies a dying,
To kick a worm what glory may be found?
That Is dead in Law, and prostrate on the ground,
Is he a bird of prey? (buzzard or Kite)
Mute had been better far then plainly sh --
See how the Term with his condition suits,
Preachers when silenc't, what are they but Mutes?
Thus do I (like your self) quibble at quicquid
In Buccham venerit, or Mute or liquid:
Not that I hate you, yet you must not think
That Wits whole Mass is lodged in the chinck
Of your own Scull, Sir, but that Ralph your man
Has somewhat likewise in the little pan
Of's Pe^i^^^^^i^m is not such an Ass
As still to be outvi'd by Hudibras.
To wake the Bishops you do make a Roar,
And tell them naught but what they knew before.
How they should be a sleep I much do wonder,
Since you compare them unto fire and Thunder,
Though what you say of Calamy be true,
Yet it is not meet to lance old sores a new,
To write a crime that's past on th'Actors Front,
Whilst that Amnestia remains upon it.
The King has pardoned such, then why should we
Stir up again their stinking memory?
But if they Act again those faults a new,
Then Dun and Devil (a Gods name) take your due.
Now leave we Calamy, and come to trace
Thee Hudibras throughout thy Wild-goose Chase,
In other manner then does True de Case,
Who least he should be thought for to transgress
Ends ( Poetaster-like) The King God bless --
Whose sacred name should not be made a Sallad
For Bread and Butter, such mean fare's a Ballad.
And here I must confess that Wild has hit
On several pretty passages of wit;
Although your Knight-ship's pleased at's lines to flout,
Saying his Verses (like him) have the Gout:
The difference twixt you both is not a pin,
Squibbing and Squirting (Sir) are near a kin.
It Is true, his rhimes too much abusive be,
But thine's the more Profaner Ribaldry;
In down right words he Jerks at Calamy,
Thou at the Prelates by an Irony:
Two Cocks well matched, for his Invention sprung
From Tap and Spigot, thine flows from the bung.
His Verse is vain enough, since wanton lines
Become Knights Errant, rather then Divines,
Being shrewdly vexed for that he cannot handle
In Church a Text, he dies like snuff of Candle;
Much discontented since that none will mind him
And being dead, has left a stinck behind him.
But Hudibras it is strange what should thee move
To take in the Ashes of deceased Love;
That son of Thunder by some men admired,
Vollies whereof were heard when he expired.
Thy Ravenous Muse too, wanting better Cates
Must feed on Peter's Quarters ore the Gates.
Such Darts against their dead Carcasses being hurld,
May chance to vex 'em in the other world;
And cause their Ghosts to haunt thee in the night,
Enough to scare a poor Romantic Knight
Out of his wits, if such a thing should be
Thou would be robbed of all thy Poetry:
And if thy rhiming faculty once fail
Thou Wilt shortly after die for want of Ale.
Or if thou do hold on to vex Wild thus,
Thou Wilt make him furious as Archilocus,
Whose keen Iambicks may thy credit blast.
And force thee through a Rope to breath thy last.
FINIS.

