XENTH PHON

CYRUS Le GRAND The Entire STORY

Done into English by a PERSON OF QUALITY and Dedicated to the LATE KING

Printed for William Hope

INTER PRES

AEtatis suae 80, Ao 1654

portrait

CYRUS Major Persarum Rex Mundi Monarcha.

CAROLUS D.G. Britanna^ Rex Magnae Britanniae Monarcha

Hh invent

Will. Marshall Sculpsit

engraved title page

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY MONARCH, CHARLES, by the Grace of God, King of
Great Britain, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Most dread Sovereign.
WHen that Maiden-Monarch, the Wonder of the World in her time, Queen
Elizabeth (of famous memory) swaied the Imperial Scepter of this Kingdom, in
her latter days, my dear Father, Doctor Philemon Holland, presented unto her
Majesty, his English Translation of the Romans most renowned *
Historiographer. Tit. Live. Anno. 1600.
And it pleased her Highness full of Clemency, to reach out the Golden Scepter
of her gracious acceptance thereof.

Sol occubuit, nox nulla sequuta est: For, no sooner was that glorious Sun
set, to our sight on Earth, in our Horizon, and translated to shine in heaven,
but your Royal Father King James (of blessed memory,) appearing even then by
his radiant beams out of the North, in maturitie of time, came to we are the
same imperial Diadem lawfully descended upon his Head. At whose very first
entrance, Plutarch. Anno. 1603.
my said Father dedicated his translation also of * Trajanus his Masters Morals
unto his Majesty, who was no less pleased to hold forth his Gracious hand and
accept the same.

Also, when my unworthy self offered mine own Collections, Anno. 1610.
entitled (Heroologia Anglica) unto his Highness, he most graciously received
it.

And now, most dear Sovereign, unto this present version of Xenophons
Cyrupediam out of Greek, which is, as I may say, the Author his Masterpiece,
and my fathers work likewise, your Majesty has the sole right; in regard
that he enterprized it long since, and that by special order and direction
from your Royal Father, delivered unto him by one of his near servants in
Court, (even when your self were in your tender years) for the contemplation
and use of your most Generous and Magnanimous Brother, Prince Henry, now in
Heaven. Of whose virtuous life and Princely exercises, more may be seen in
the said Heroologia.

His death caused a demurre as it were in publishing thereof: until of late my
father, importuned by some friends, having revised and finished his said
Traduction, destined it to me his son, that in regard both of the Author and
Argument, it might lie no longer in obscurity, but at length (and as I hope in
good time) see the light of the Sun.

The Author then of these books, Xenophon, a deep Philosopher, a politic
Counselor of State, and an expert Warrior beside, how-ever he penned them
Non ad Historiae fidem, Epist. ad Quintum Fratrem.
as Cicero writes, sed ad Effigiem justi Jmperij: yet in such request they
were, that Scipio Africanus the famous Roman Commander, was never wont to lay
them out of his hands; for, as the same Orator records, Nullum in hijs
praetermissum est officium diligentis and moderati Imperij. No mervaile then,
that L. Lucullus A noble General under the Romans, being at first a raw and
unexpert Commander, by serious studying upon these books on ship-boord, became
so worthy a warrior, and complete General, as that he vanquished the most
puissant, politic, and victorious Mithridates, King of Pontus, who had before,
subdued in manner all Asia. And all these books wrote he so sweetly and
eloquently in Greek, that he was named the Muse, or (as Suidas writes,) The
Be of Athens. Insomuch as the very Muses were reported to have spoken in
Xenophons voice; as out of whose mouth, by the testimony of that Cicero Orator.
Roman Orator, alluding to Nestor in Homer, melle dulcior fluebat oration
Which albeit my father in English could not Parallele: yet treating as he does
of the life and achievements of so worthy a Prince; of whom may I seem to
crave Patronage, in the first place but of your sacred Self, my liege Lord?
For these books how ever Englished, may happily hereafter, if your Majesty shall
think so good, be held worthy the view and imitation of your right Roial Son,
our most hopeful Prince Charles whom I cannot name but with this zealous and
devout prayer, That he may grow up in stature and in favor with God and Man.
Vouchsafe therefore, I most humbly crave, of your innate Clemency, which makes
you renowned throughout the Christian world, not to withhold your Golden
Scepter, but in like manner as your late Predecessors and Progenitors have
done, to welcome into your Court, Greek Xenophon his Cyrus, a Persian Prince
by birth, but now clad in English Accoustrements, speaking our Language, and
hither arrived to kiss your Royal hand: especially seeing he is that Cyrus
the elder, of whom the holy Ezra 1.2.
Scripture makes honorable mention. And why should I doubt hereof,
considering he being a warlike Monarch and skillful in Arms, according to the
ancient discipline, tendereth discourse of military Preparations, Stratagems
and Expeditions, now in these days (not without Gods providence,) of Action:
when as your Majesty and your subjects are so deeply engaged with your Royal
Allies and Confederates, in Martial Actions, who fight the Lords Battles;
and that, blessed be God, with late good and victorious success; so as we
cannot but hope still, for better, now that your Royal Aid is not wanting,
and the Britains Banners are there advanced. For although your Majesty, in
great wisdom has of late laid down Arms, and entertained Peace with some
Christian Princes; so as we for the time may say, Dulce bellum inexpertis:
Yet, as the wisest of Kings said, Eccles. 3.8.
There is a time for War, as well as for Peace.

Demands your Majesty now, what he is, that dares to approach so near your
Presence, as to speak of War in time of Peace? Give your poor vassal leave
to answer in the submissive voice of a loyal subject: He is no Scholar
professed, nor Martial man, yet a lover of learning; and being one of the
Trained Band, to guard CAMERAM REGIS, always pressed without your Impressed money,
to fight, if occasion be presented, in defense of your Majesty's person, of the
Realm, of that Faith and Religion, whereof you, under God, are entitled The
sole Defender: yea, even to lay down his dearest life: For according to my
fathers Jmprese, Pro Christo and Patria, dulce periculum: Which I desire of
God, may be my last Cygnean song.

However, The Lord of Hosts fight for you: The God of Jacob protect you: The
King of Kings preserve your most excellent Majesty in health and safety of
soul and body, from all your enemies, spiritual and temporal, Foraine and
Domestique. The same JEHOVAH preserve you from all Wars, Disasters and
Diseases; and in the end, he give you one Celestial Crown, for your three
Terrestrial. And let not him prosper or thrive that will not eft-soones say
and pray, LET THE KING LIVE: yea and I add,

Methushelahs life the King of Heaven Him lend,
Upon Whose life, Millions of Lives depend.
To conclude these illiterate Lines: The English Translatour of this Book (my
dear Father) now an old man, full of years, and living still in your
Mediterranean City Coventry, (named in former times CAMERA PRINCIPIS) far
remote from Court, could not himself present this last labor of his unto your
Highness hands, but has left it unto me so to do. Deigne therefore my Liege
Lord, and dear Sovereign, with my Fathers loyalty and mine prostrated, your
benign Aspect hereunto and gracious Protection thereof, though from the
unworthy hand of him (who thrice humbly beggeth pardon for his boldness)

Your Majesty's meanest, yet most loyal Subject, HENRY HOLLAND.

To my Worthy and Learned Friend, Philemon Holland, Doctor of Physic, on his
Translations.
WHEN truce on Death thy powerful Art had pressed,
And Hels grim Ferriman had forced to rest:
Thy rest, learned Holland, was, from pitchy night
And darkness damned to bring to public light
Knowledge of Times and States; which antique Rolls
Had veyld and wrapped in Greek and Latin scrolles.
Hence has our Language Natures mysteries;
Moralls, Domestique, foreine Histories:
England knows England. For the thank is thine
That Pliny, Livy, Plutarch, Marcelline,
Suetonius, Camdens Britain, Xenophon,
Speak English, now can stand alone.
But though thy skill over Lethe and Styx have power,
Can save, what Death and Time would else devour:
Yet can it not escape that blatant Beast
Which at the heels dogs virtue; whose chief feast
Is gall of base Detraction; which barks
That Learning erst engrossed by languag'd Clarks,
Entaild on Gowns, by the Translatours pen
Is now made common to mere Englishmen.
And why should Spanish, French and other Nations,
Rather than we, make use of such Translations?
Why should not Courtiers read what Courtiers write?
And Soldiers know what Soldiers do recite?
Besides, that Authors often are rectified
In the translating, and their wants supplied.
I wish in Arts as Story we might save
Labor and time for language: we should have
Sooner and sounder Science, fill our mind
With things, not words, eat fruit, not gnaw the rind.
Live long, grave Sir, and write, write thus: so shall
The public profit grow the Ingrossers fall,
Greek spite, and Latin envy, break their gall.
THOMAS FARNABY, Armig.

To Doctor HOLLAND upon this his Translation.
With the prime Poems of their faetuous Bray'n,
The learned Bards of great Augustus days
Presented Caesar; Caesar, them, again
(Besides great Gifts) with his own learned Lays;
With no less Bounty learned Holland play's
With his great Master, (famous Xenophon:)
To Hollands youth He the Greek Tongue bewray's,
Him teaching t'understand it as his own;
(In guerdon of whose pains) Holland him pay's
(Shall I be bold to make the Paragon
The English with the Greek in equal praise?)
A full smooth Language, (yielding unto none;)
That when unequally I come to paize
Them Both in Balance of Comparison,
My doubtful Mind's divided diverse Ways,
Whom to praise most with thanks, and thereupon
Determine thus, to say, (as Paris says)
"They both deserve the Garland to have won,
Yet (if ought odds there been) thine be the Bays
(Grave learned Holland) who (so long agon
Dead in his Grave,) thy Master now do raise
And add new Life, to his dried Skelliton,
Making him proud, translated thus to be
From Greece to England, and to learn of Thee.
W: Lathom Genesis

To learned Dr. Philemon Holland, the faithful Translatour of Xenophon.
How well have thou laid out thy aged sweat
To benefit thy Country, to repeat
Those sober Rules, examples, which declare
Thy Authors ripeness, and thy learned Care!
How sweet a weight dwells in thy cleanly Style!
Each English tongue must speak't: none can defile
Thy honor, bought with pains, or dare bespaule
Wise Innocence with their ignorant Gall;
Such virtue stands above their Malice blessed.
But this Translation shall speak the rest,
Which shall remain admired till Time betray,
By breaking of his Glass, the Worlds decay.
Io: Hall, Hosp: Gray: Gen:

Of Doctor Philemon Holland.
BEfore thy rare Work I shall truly prize,
Let me thy Name first Etymologize,
Learned Philemon; which (unless I miss)
We call Deosculor. i. sweetly to kiss.
When Jupiter with Mankind much offended,
From high Olympus to the Earth descended
With Mercury; the better how to know
How all affairs were managed here below,
No Creature save Philemon he could find
To give him Food or welcome to his mind.
For which his Cottage he a Temple made:
And lest his memory by Time should fade,
When he grew old (as Thou Philemon now)
To a fair Oak with many a spreading bow
He changed the good old man; to yield such Mast,
As should both Memory and Time out-last.
We live not in an age so dull and rude,
But of the Gods we can learn Gratitude,
Acknowledging by many a sweet Translation,
What profit Thou have brought unto our Nation.
Into the Greekish Treasures thou have broake,
Plutarch and Xenophon have English spoake:
And though They (living) no such Language knew,
(As dead long since) their Works to us are new.
Latin did at our Barbarism once hiss:
Thy refined Pen has made them sweetly kiss,
Picking from them the best and choicest Flow'res,
By making Pliny and Suetonius ours.
(So much) our English is now grown so rare,
It may with either of those Tongu's compare.
Jove's Tree, decay Thou can not: or if dead?
Yet from Thy Mast how many shall be fed,
Who Thy Translations read? If King CHARLES give
Grace to Thy Work? King CHARLES shall ever live.
An observer of all true Worth and Learning, THOMAS HEYWOOD, Genesis

To my worthy friend Mr. HENRY HOLLAND, the publisher of this His Fathers Work.
TWixt Parent, and the Issue, I have heard
There Is a Descending Love: but ever feared,
To speak of Love that did Ascend, till now:
But Harry Holland, In this Work, I vow,
(To do thy Father right) thy Toil, thy pain,
From home to the Press: from the Press, home again:
To see this thing Corrected: that, Amended,
Persuades me now thy Love has much transcended,
Thou Art too as good a Subject (as a Son)
Unto thy Liege. For whose sake this was done.
Idem THOMAS HEYWOOD.

THe Translatour once caused in a fair Signet of a Gold Ring, to be engraven
in the midst of the colit, the heart of a man all naked or plain, instead of
an Emblem, about which there went round this Symbolum or double Anagram of
both his Names, to wit, ((...).) or Philemon Holandus. (...): implying thus
much in Latin, Animus [praesens] fraudum expers. (A ready heart without
deceit) Verum Amicorum signum. Both which members of the sentence joined
together, make up this one Hexameter, with the addition of (...), That
signifies (est.) (...)

A ready Heart and mind thus void of fraud,
Is that true sign Virtue does most applaud.
Henry Holland in honor of his dearest father Dr. Philemon Holland, upon the
interpretation of his double Anagram, and his indefatigable labors.

The Heart most ready, honest and upright,
Devoyd of fraud unto each living wight:
The Head diseased for ease of Englishmen,
The Hand benumbed with holding of its pen,
The Pen unworne, though worn beyond a pen,
Do still hold out to glad their Countrymen.
They rest in motion, and restless Rest is that,
Yet may they rest, though Death does frown thereat.
And when those Martalls may be turned to dust,
The Immortal part must needs b' among the Just.
PSALM. 112. verse. 6. In memoria aeterna erit justus. Upon the Translatours Pen,
wherewith only he translated and wrote all Plutarchs Moralls, containing above
a Reame of Paper, he wrote this Dystick:

This Book I wrote with one poor Pen, made of a gray Goose quill:
A Pen I found it, used before, A Pen I leave it still.
Which Pen afterward was begged by an ancient Gentlewoman (mother to a Noble
Countess yet living:) who garnished it in silver, and kept it as a Monument.

The Contents of the eight Books following:
THE FIRST BOOK.
The Prooeme, treating of Monarchies, Democraties and Oligarchies. CHAP. I. The
Customs of the Persians in governing their Natives. How Cyrus was instituted
during his Childhood in the discipline of virtue, with other children of his
age in the public Schools. CHAP. II. How Cyrus went into Media with the
Queen his mother: where he showed many tokens of his good nature and pregnant
wit unto King Astyages: semblably of his temperance and sobriety. CHAP. III.
How the Queen mother Mandane returned into Persia, and Cyrus abode behind in
Media; where he gave himself much to Horseman-ship and feats of Arms. And
with his own hand killed many wild Beasts. CHAP. IIII. How Astyages through
the politic Counsel of Cyrus, won a victory of the Assyrians, who were
come to invade his Territories. CHAP. V. How Cyrus returned to his father into
Persia: and what honor the Medes did him at his departure. CHAP. VI. The
beginning of the Wars between the Assyrians and the Medes. Of the Forces
that Cyrus levied in Persia, to aid the King of Media his Uncle. CHAP. VII.
The Oration of Cyrus to the Peers and Chieftaines of his Army, for to incite
them to enterprise this war, with the better courage. CHAP. VIII. The good
instructions that Cambyses gave unto his son Cyrus, as touching the
enterprise against the Assyrians: and how a good Captain should carry himself
with his Army in a strange Country, and win the love of every man. CHAP. IX.
How a Prince may gain the obedience of his people, vanquish his enemies and
get the attribute of Wise and Virtuous.
THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. How Cyrus came into Persia with his men, and procured them all to be
armed by his Uncle Cyaxares. CHAP. II. The speech that Cyrus made to the
Chieftaines of all his Host, for to incite their Soldiers to take their
harnois and Arms that Cyrus had prepared for the Persians. CHAP. III. The
exhortation of Cyrus to the Persian Soldiers, to put on the new Armor that
King Cyaxares had prepared. CHAP. IIII. The Ordinance that Cyrus made for the
exercise of his Soldiers and to keep them in all obedience. CHAP. V. How
Cyrus devised and communed graciously with his Chieftaines: and of the pleasant
narrations that they related unto him, for to do him pleasure. CHAP. VI. The
Consultation of Cyrus with his Army, whether he should reward all his
Soldiers alike: or every one according to his desert. CHAP. VII. The Oration
of Cyrus to his whole Camp: the opinions of Chrysantas and Pheraulas, as
touching that which Cyrus had proposed: And what was the conclusion and
determination thereof. CHAP. VIII. The feats of Arms, that Cyrus his Captains
practiced, in exercising their Companies. CHAP. IX. How Cyaxares gave audience
to the King of India his Ambassadors, and sent them afterward to the King of
Assyria. CHAP. X. How Cyrus being in deliberation and conference with his
Uncle, as touching this affair and about levying sums of money, enter prized
war upon the King of Armenia. CHAP. XI. The Project and speech of Cyrus to
his Captains, and to Chrysantas about the laying of an Embush: and how the
same was put in execution, against the King of Armenia.
THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I. How Cyrus without giving Battle took the King of Armenia prisoner,
and seized upon his Goods. The discourses that the said King made with his
son Tigranes, about his deliverance. CHAP. II. How Cyrus with great humanity
did set the King of Armenia with his wife and children at large: And after he
had received their Ransom, levied a good power of Footmen and Horsemen both,
out of Armenia for this War. CHAP. III. How Cyrus took Tigranes with him in
his Train, and went to assail the Chaldees upon the Mountains. CHAP. IIII.
The peaceable Communication that Cyrus had with the Armenians, and the
Chaldees. The mutual accord and peace between them all. CHAP. V. How Cyrus
sent an Embassage to the Indians: and returning into Media, consulted about
making War upon the Assyrians. CHAP. VI. The speech of Cyrus to Cyaxares,
about his expedition against the Assyrians. CHAP. VII. How Cyrus went to
encampe near unto the Assyrians, and prepared to give them Battle. CHAP.
VIII. The exhortation of Cyrus to his Chieftaines and the Peers, to moove them
to advance with better courage to the Battle. CHAP. IX. How the King of
Assyria issued out of his Camp to fight a Field, and made a speech unto his
Soldiers. How Cyrus and they afterward joined Battle, wherein the Assyrians
were discomfited.
THE FOVRTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. How the King of Assyria dyed in fight. King Croesus and the Assyrians
fled, and Cyrus purposed to follow in chase. CHAP. II. The opinion of Cyaxares,
to divert Cyrus from following the train of his Victory. CHAP. III. How Cyrus
obtained of Cyaxares part of the Medes forces: and with them and the Hyrcanians
together that yeeled unto him pursued the Assyrians in their flight. CHAP.
IIII. The exhortation of Cyrus to his whole Army, inciting them to follow the
chase of his Enemies, with the Cavallerie of the Medes. CHAP. V. How Cyrus
defaited the Assyrians again, and took prisoners Kings, Lords, and other
Soldiers, a great number. The order that he gave how to be provided presently
of victuals without confusion and trouble. CHAP. VI. How Cyrus communed with
his Centeniers, persuading them to sobriety, and to stay for their fellows,
who were in the pursuit; and how they raised a great booty of men, women and
goods. CHAP. VII. Cyrus consulteth with his Centeniers, about mounting foot men
on Horseback, and erecting a Persian Cavallerie, with the Horses taken from
the Enemy in the Wars. CHAP. VIII. How Cyrus by the counsel and advise of
his most politic Captains, ordained in his Army a troop of Horsemen,
serving upon the Assyrians Horses: and intended to set at large all his
Prisoners. CHAP. IX. The speech of Cyrus to the Assyrian prisoners, at their
deliverance. CHAP. X. How Cyaxares envied the glory of Cyrus: and was wroth
with the Medes. The answer that Cyrus made to him, and the Embassage which he
sent into Persia. CHAP. XI. The Missive of Cyrus to Cyaxares. CHAP. XII. The
oration of Cyrus directing his soldiers how they should part the spoils:
Also, how he mounted the Persians on Horseback. CHAP. XIII. How Gobryas
yielded himself unto Cyrus, and related unto him the disasterous calamity of
his son: and required revenge for his death upon the King of Assyria: which
Cyrus promised to do.
THE FIFTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. How Araspas had the keeping of fair Panchea, on whom he became
enamoured. A discourse between Cyrus and him, whether love were voluntary or
forced. CHAP. II. How Cyrus being assured of the Medes and other Allies, rode
to the Castle of Gobryas. And of his Magnificence. CHAP. III. How Cyrus
intended to assault the great City of Babylon, the discourses which he had
with the Prince of Hyrcania and with Gobryas. CHAP. IIII. How Cyrus challenged
the King of Babylon to come into the Field, and then making a league with
Gadatas, won the Fortresses of the Frontiers, and augmented his Forces with a
number of 40000. and how the King of Assyria would have surprised and taken in
the Castles of Gadatas. CHAP. V. How Cyrus exhorted his soldiers, to give all
the booty unto Gadatas: how he raunged his battles, as well to fight as to
march by night. CHAP. VI. A Conspiracy against Gadatas. An Ambush laid by the
Assyrian King, where he received a great overthrow. How Cyrus saved Gadatas and
all his men. CHAP. VII. The good Remonstrances of Cyrus, as touching the fault
of the Cadusian Prince. The Treaty with the King of Assyria, for the good of
his people. CHAP. VIII. How Cyrus as he returned into Media, passed before
Babylon, and surprised certain Forts upon the Frontiers. CHAP. IX. How Cyrus
returned to the Monarchs of Media, and labored to appease the wrath of
Cyaxares. The answer also that he made unto him.
THE SIXTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. The Counsel that Cyrus held about the dissolving his Army for that
year. The preparations which he made against the year next ensuing. The
fabric and engines that he devised for to batter the walls. His Chariots armed
with Pikes and Sithes, carrying turrets upon them: Also the Camels which he
provided for the war. CHAP. II. How Cyrus sent Araspas as a spy into Lydia,
who feigned that he fled for the displeasure of Cyrus. CHAP. III. How Panthea
sent for her husband to come unto Cyrus. The preparation that Cyrus made for
the war. The form of Chariots devised by him, for the carriage of his great
engines and fabrics. CHAP. IV. How the King of India sent an Embassage unto
Cyrus to treat about a league with him: who sent the said Ambassadors, to
listen after (as spies) the affairs of the Assyrians. The news that they
brought back. CHAP. V. The oration of Cyrus unto his soldiers to put them out
of that fear and astonishment, which they had conceived of the News they
heard, as touching the war toward. CHAP. VI. The Instruction of Cyrus
delivered unto his Chieftaines, as well concerning their soldiers diet, as the
conduct of an Army in their march through the Country. The order of the
Pioners, Merchants and Tradesmen, Artizans and Munitioners. CHAP. VII. How
Cyrus marched against his Enemies in Lydia. The manner he used as well in
encamping, as in leading his whole Army. CHAP. VIII. How Araspas returned unto
Cyrus, and recounted unto him all the Ordnance and preparation of the Enemy.
How himself prepared to raunge himself in Battaile-ray. CHAP. IX. How Panthea
enarmed her husband Abradate, and Cyrus did put himself in readiness to give
battle.
THE SEVENTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. How Cyrus entered the field with his puissance: approached King
Croesus to give him battle. The manner that both Armies used to fight with
their best advantage. CHAP. II. The great Battle and slaughter of the
Lydians: where King Croesus and his forces were discomfited. The Egyptians
yield unto Cyrus. CHAP. III. How Cyrus following the train of his victory,
forced the City Sardes, and took King Croesus prisoner. The discourse that he
held with him as touching the Oracle of Apollo: and how he did set him at
liberty, and saved the same City from saccage. CHAP. IV. The death of
Abradatas. Of fair Panthea and her Eunuchs. Cyrus caused a goodly Monument to
be erected, for their perpetual memory. CHAP. V. How Cyrus by the Wisdom and
Policy of Cadusius, took the King of Phrygia prisoner: brought under
subjection in small time the Cappadocians, the Arabians and all the Nations
round about: which done, how he embattailed his forces, to the number of 40000.
men in Arms, and approached Babylon. CHAP. VI. How Cyrus laid siege unto the
City Babylon, and by a wonderful Stratagem won it. How the King of Assyria
and his men were slain, the City put to the sack, and the Fortresses rendered
into his hands. CHAP. VII. How Cyrus established his Kingdom in Babylon:
instituted the honor and veneration of Kings: entertained Eunuchs for the
service of his House: and Persians for the Guard of his person. CHAP. VIII. The
Oration of Cyrus to his chief friends, the Peers or Homotimes. To the
Captains also of his Allies, for to induct and frame them to virtue: and to
entertain prowess and feats of Arms in his Dominion: with many other good
Instructions to make them mild and virtuous.
THE EIGHTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. How Cyrus ordered the seat of his Court. What Institution of his life
he recommended to his Courtiers. The manner that he used in teaching them how
to live devoutly to Godward, and to exercise themselves in all manner of
virtue toward men. CHAP. II. How Cyrus ordained military Discipline in his
Realm. The Officers of his Court. His magnificence and humanity. CHAP. III.
The Trial that Cyrus made of his friends love unto him. How he dealt away his
riches, to be himself the better beloved of them: and they not to affect one
another. CHAP. IIII. The triumphant pomp of King Cyrus riding forth of his
Palace. A solemn Horse-running, wherein himself was winner. CHAP. V. The
liberality that Pheraulas showed unto one that gave him a fair Courser. A
notable discourse of that which is able to make a man happy, and to live in
contentment. CHAP. VI. By what means Cyrus graced and honored his friends.
The marriage of Gobryas his daughter, with Hystaspas one of Cyrus his
grand-Seigneurs. CHAP. VII. How Cyrus sent away his Associates into their own
Countries: distributed the spoil, and returned into Persia. How he ordered and
marshalled his Camp, being arrived in Media: where King Cyaxares offered him
his daughter in marriage: and gave with her for a portion the Kingdom of
Media. CHAP. VIII. How Cyrus arrived in Persia, where Cambyses treats with
him, his Lords and Chief Commanders, about the affairs of State. How he took
to wife the daughter of Cyaxares: and being returned to Babylon, sent Rulers
and Deputies into all his Provinces. CHAP. IX. The expeditions that Cyrus made
during his Reign: and how he returned into Persia and there dyed. CHAP. X.
How after the death of Cyrus all his ordinances were perverted. The Authors
discourse concerning the government of the Persian Kings after Cyrus.
FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOK, TREATING OF THE LIFE AND INSTITVTION OF CYRUS KING OF THE
PERSIANS, the first of that name.
The Prooeme:
I Entered sometimes into this serious cogitation: How many Popular States or
free States menaged by the people.
Democraties have been subverted by those who would needs govern the
Commonwealth, otherwise than in a popular State. How many also, as well
Absolute States ruled by one Prince. Kingdoms.
Monarchies as Seignories under some few Rulers.
Oligarchies are come already to naught by conspiracies of the Commons. How
many persons likewise who attempted as absolute Princes to reign, were either
very soon utterly overthrown; or else if they ruled any while, held in great
admiration, as passing wise men and fortunate. Me thought again, I had
observed thus much, That whereas in private families, some masters have many
servants in household, others very few: yet even those few they could never have
wholly at command. I considered moreover, that as the feeders of Neat and
Horses, so all others bearing the name of Heardmen.
Pastors, may by good right be reputed the Commanders of such beasts as they
have under their hands. But withal, I perceived evidently, that all these
Herds are more willing to obey their Pastors, than men their Magistrates.
For, the said Herds go whithersoeuer their Heardmen direct them; and as they
gladly graze in those Or Pasture.
grounds to which they are by them driven; so they forbear such, as they
debar them fro. And verily, they suffer their said Pastors to use at their
own pleasure, those profits that arise from them. Neither have we ever known
any such Herds to have risen rebelliously against their Pastors, either by
way of disobedience, or in denying them the use of their fruits. Nay rather,
more cursed and hurtful are beasts to all others whomsoever, than to their
Rulers and those who receive commodity by them: whereas contrariwise, Men set
themselves against none more, than such as they perceive, go about to exercise
dominion over them. When I had well pondered these points in my mind, thus I
concluded in the end, That more easy it was for a man to command all other
living creatures in the world, than men.

But when I considered eftsoons, How Cyrus a Persian borne, had won exceeding
many men, very many Cities, and Nations likewise, to his obedience, I was
thereby enforced to change my former opinion, and thus to resolve at the last;
That it is neither impossible, nor yet a matter of difficulty, to govern men,
in case one have the skill thereof, and go about it with dexterity. For why?
of this we are assured, that there yielded obeisance willingly unto Cyrus, some
who were many days, others as many months journey, distant from him: those
that never saw him, yea and such as knew full well they should never see him:
yet nathelesse would they all become his liege men and devoted subjects. And no
marvel. For, so far excelled he all other Kings, as well those that by
inheritance succeeded in their Fathers Kingdoms, as those who by their own
conquest attained to their dominions; that whereas the Scythian King, (albeit
the Scythians be a State, for number of people most puissant) is not able to
command any foreign Nation; but would be well apaid, if he might but rule his
own: The Thracian Prince, likewise the Thracians: and the Illyrian Potentate,
the Illyrians: which is the case, as we hear say, of other Countries besides;
(For in Europe, the people live by report severally under their own laws, and
remain hitherto, free one from another) Cyrus alone, who found the States of
Asia likewise ruled by their own laws, having with a small Army of Persians,
made an invasion, became Sovereign Lord verily of the Medes, and the
Hyrcanians, without resistance, as who willingly raunged themselves unto him:
But the Syrians, Assyrians, Arabians, Cappadocians, Of the greater Phrygia and
the less. See the beginning of the second book.
Phrygians both the one sort and the other, the Lydians, Carians, Phoenicians
and Babylonians, he by force of arms subdued. The Bactrians moreover, the
Indians and Cilicians: likewise the Sacans, Paphlagonians, Megadines, and other
nations exceeding many, whose very names a man may hardly rehearse; he reduced
under his Empire. The Greeks also in Asia, he brought to his devotion. And
having made expeditions and voyages by sea, conquered the Cyprians and
Egyptians. Thus achieved he the Seignorie of the nations, which in language
agreed neither with him, nor yet among themselves. And notwithstanding he was
able to compass so great a part of the earth, and that through fear of his
prowess; in so much as he astonished all men, and none durst attempt any thing
against him: yet could he withal imprint such an affection in their hearts,
with an earnest desire to do him pleasure, as that they sued always to be
ruled according to his will and direction. Furthermore, he had so many sorts of
people obliged unto him, as it were a painful piece of work, to number them
all: what way soever a man take, from his royal Palace, either East, West,
North, or South. In which regard, I have diligently enquired touching this
Prince, as of a man worthy to be admired: and namely, how he was by birth
descended? what his natural disposition was? what manner of education he had?
that he so far surpassed all men in princely government. Whatsoever therefore
I have either heard, or otherwise seem to have known as touching him, I will
endeavor to relate.

CHAP. I. The custom of the Persians in government of their Natives. How Cyrus
was instituted during his Childhood in the discipline of virtue, with other
children of his age, in the public Schools.
CYrus verily (by report) had for his Father, Cambyses King of the Persians
(now was this Cambyses lineally descended from the Persidae, which take their
name of Perseus.) And his Mother, all writers agree to have been, Mandane, the
daughter of Astyages King of the Medes. The common speech is, and among the
Barbarians rife it is even at this day in every man's mouth, That Cyrus
naturally for his outward countenance was very fair and well favored, and for
the inward enduments of his mind, most courteous, passing studious, and
exceeding desirous of honor: insomuch as for to win praise, he would refuse no
pains, but undergo all perils whatsoever. Cyrus being thus by nature, endued
with rare gifts of the mind, and adorned with beauty of body also, (according
as we find in written records:) was trained up besides, in the laws of the
Persians, Laws, (to say a truth) which seem even at the very first to provide
for the weal public. Neither go they that way to work, nor begin there, as
in many States they do. For, the most part of other Commonwealths, permitting
every man to bring up his own children as he list, and suffering the elder
sort themselves to lead what life they will, ordain afterward and command
them [in this wise] Not to steal: Not to rob: To break into no man's house by
violence, nor to strike any person wrongfully: Not to commit Adultery: Not to
be disobedient to the Magistrate, and semblably other [Edicts they publish] of
like nature. And look, who transgresses any of these Ordinances, they impose
a penalty upon him. But the Persian laws by good foresight take order, that no
native of theirs should at the first be so affected, as to commit any foul and
dishonest fact.

They have amongst them a common place of free resort (as they term it,)
where the Kings Palace, with the other stately Courts are erected: from whence,
all Merchandising, al mercate folk with their clamorous noises and trifling
fooleries, are driven into another place; to the end, that the unruly and base
multitude of such as they are, might not be intermingled with the civil order
of those, who have had good breeding.

This common Or place.
Hall situate about the Courts and Edifices aforesaid, is divided into four
quarters. Of which, one is [appointed] for Or boys.
children, another for young men, a third for men of middle age; and the last
for such, as by reason of their years be exempt from warre-fare. Now, by order
of law, provided it is; that every of these should present themselves in their
own several quarters. The Or boys.
children, and they who be at men's estate, by the break of day: But the elder
sort, when they best may and see their times; unless it be upon certain set
days, when they must of necessity give attendance. As for the young men, they
also lie about the Courts aforesaid with those arms which they are trained
with, except such as be married: And these verily are not so much as enquired
for, unless they had especial warning before to wait. Howbeit, for them also
to be often absent, is not commendable. For every one of these divisions, there
be 12. Provosts (according as the whole nation of the Persians is divided into
12. Or Shir^^.
Tribes. Children or boys, are under the charge of certain choice men of the
elders, such as are thought fit to make them most virtuous and honest. Over the
young men, are appointed those of middle age, such as seem sufficient to bring
them to best proof and perfection. The men also of ripe and complete years,
have for their overseers those, who are deemed able so to instruct them, as
they may perform those things most of all, which are prescribed unto them, and
commanded by the Sovereign Magistrate. The Ancients likewise are not without
their Presidents chosen of purpose to rule them, and to give direction, that
even they also may execute their duties. And verily, what several functions
are appointed for every age to be employed in, I will declare in particular,
that it may the better appear, how diligent they be, and what course they
take, that their Or Natives.
Citizens may prove right honest men.

The Or, children.
boys then, ordinarily frequenting their (...): Or Schoolmasters houses.
Schools, spend the time in learning Justice: and they give it out, that for
this purpose, they go thither: like as with us they do, who are to learn
their Or, Grammar
letters. As for their Governors, they bestow the most part of the day, in
ministering Justice among them. For, even these Or, younglings.
boys after the manner of men, frame their enditements and actions one against
another, of Theft, Robbery, Violence, Deceit, Slanderous or reproachful words,
and such like usual cases. And whosoever be found delinquent in any of these
crimes, punished they are. Those also they chastise, whom they take accusing
others without just cause. Moreover, they call iudicially into question that
crime, for which, men hate indeed one another most, yet never question any
therefore, And that is Ingratitude. And whomsoever they understand able to
requite a good turn, and yet short in requital, him they sharply punish: For
this they think, That unthankful persons, are of all others most negligent
likewise in their duty to God, to their parents, to their Country also and to
their friends. Yea and it seems, that unthankfulness is accompanied
especially with Impudence.
vnshamefacednesse: And this vice verily is thought to be the head-Mistris that
leads to all lewdness and villainy. Moreover, they teach these boys
temperance: And much furthered are they in learning such moderation, for that
they see before their faces, even the Ancients every day, to live right
temperately. Furthermore, they give them precepts to obey their Rulers. In
which point also it avails much, that they behold the very Elders, passing
obedient to the higher powers: Semblably, they instruct them to be spary in
their meats and drinks: wherein also they have a great help; partly because
they have before their eyes the example of the Seniours, who depart not unto
their refection before the Magistrates give them leave; and in part, for that
the children themselves feed not at home with their mothers, but with their
Masters, and when the Provosts do so appoint: Now they bring with them from
home for their standing food, bread: and for their (...) Or, Pitance.
cates beside Of which the Irish Shamrogth are a kind.
cresses; And if any of them be athirst; he has an earthen Or Godet.
pot wherewith to clitch up water out of the running river. Furthermore, they
learn to shoot and dart. Thus you see, what the boys practice, until they be
sixteen or seventeene years of age.

After this time, raunged they are among the young men: and these be employed
and do live in this manner: For ten years immediately after their childhood,
they lie by night (as is aforesaid) about the Kings Palace and other Courts, as
well for the guard of the public State, as for the exercise of temperance;
(For, this age seems to have most need of careful tending and governance)
but in the daytime they show themselves principally to the Magistrates, if
happily there be some service to be done for the Commonwealth. And whenever
need requires, they all give attendance about the Palaces and Courts
aforesaid. But when the King goes forth on hunting (and that does he often
every month) he leaves behind him half of this Guard: And they that go
out with him, must have with them, a bow and arrows with a quiver, a short Or,
skein.
Falchion in a scabbard, or else a battell-Axe; a light Buckler besides, and
two Iauelins: the one to lance afar off, the other to use if need be, close at
hand-fight. Now why they practice hunting in public; and wherefore the King in
person is their Leader, as in time of war, (for he both hunteth himself, and
also takes order that others also should hunt;) the reason is; because this
exercise seems to be an exercise that most truly does resemble warfare. For
it inureth them to rise early in the morning, and to endure both heat and
cold: it traineth them to travel on foot in their march, yea and to run.
Again, of necessity they must shoot and dart at the wild beast wheresoever he
happens to encounter them: yea and oftentimes in hunting, their courage can not
choose but be quickened and whetted, namely, when any of these fell beasts shall
be presented unto them. For when the same approaches near, strike they must:
and withal, in any wise avoid such as violently make head. So that all things
considered, there cannot lightly be any feat in war, which is not seen in
this wild chase. When these go forth on hunting, they have for their dinner a
larger allowance somewhat, as good reason is, than the Boys have, howbeit in
other respects alike. During the time that they be hunting, dine they may not:
and say it fall out so, that they must stay long for the game, or that they
will for their pleasure otherwise, continue the chase, and tarry by it still:
with this their dinners allowance, they make their supper, and the morrow
after, hunt all day until supper-time: and so these two days they reckon but
for one, because they spend but one days proportion Or, of bread.
of food. Which they do of purpose, to accustom themselves, that if the like
occasion should happen in war, they might be able to perform the same. And
look what venison they of this age and growth get, that have they for Or,
pittance.
Cates to their bread: but if they speed not, they must take up with bare
besides bread.
Cresses. Now if any man think they have no pleasure in feeding thus, because
Cresses be their only Cates to their bread, and as little in drinking, for
that they drink nothing but sheere water, let him remember, how savory is
(...). Some take it for meal with water and oil: others, for thick gruell of
meal and milk: others al^o for biscuit bread.
barley meal and dry bread to him that is hungry: and how sweet it is to drink
sheere water when a man is dry. As for these companies which remain at home,
among other exercises that they practiced when they were boys, they give
themselves to the feate of shooting and darting. In making matches also
continually and striving one to excel another, they spend the time. There be
also certain public games for these masteries; and prizes withal proposed
for the winners. And in what Tribe there prove to be the greatest number, of
most skillful, hardy and trusty persons in this kind, their Provost not only
for the time being, but he also who trained them up in their boys age, is
highly praised and honored of the people therefore. Moreover, these young men,
who tarry at home, the Magistrates still employ, in case there be need of any
guard, or of search for the finding out of malefactors, likewise of heui-and cry
for the intercepting or apprehension of thieves: and in one word, about the
execution of any service that requires either maine strength or speedy
expedition. Thus much of young men and their employments.

Now after they have passed these ten years in this wise, they come to be
reckoned men of perfect age: and so for the space of five and twenty years
from this their youth forward, they spend after this manner: At the first they
give attendance as the young men did upon the Magistrates: what need soever the
Commonwealth has, of such service especially, as is to be performed by those
that are both for wisdom and knowledge and also for courage and strength yet
sufficient. And if they must upon some occasion go to the wars, these men
who have thus far proceeded, use no more either bows and arrows, or darts
and javelins to be launted from them, but such weapons and armor as be called
(...). i. meet for close fight, to wit, wearing a cuirace for the defense of
the breast, and bearing in their left hand, a light Or shield of wicker.
Targuate, such as the Persians be portrayed with in their pictures; but in the
right hand a sword or Cymiter. And of this rank consist all the Rulers, except
the Or masters, and teachers.
Preceptors of the boys abouesaid. Who by the time that they have spent these
twenty five years, may well be somewhat above fifty years of age: and
therefore then, they be accounted, of their rank and number, who both indeed
are, and also be called Or Elders.
Seniours.

These Ancients go now no more to war out of their own country, but
remain still at home, employed in deciding and dispatching of all causes as
well public as private. These likewise determine iudicially matters of life
and death. They have the election also of all Rulers and Magistrates. And if
any one of the younger sort, or of the middle and settled age be slack in
observing the laws, him whomsoever he be, the Tribunes [or Presidents of each
Tribe and company] or any other person else that will, do present. And these
Elders when they have heard the cause, displace the said party: who being thus
removed out of his rank, leads all the rest of his life in disgrace and
infamy. But to the end that the whole Commonwealth of the Persians, and the
form thereof may more evidently appear, now will I return and ascend a
little higher: For, by reason of that discourse which has already been made,
I shall be able to declare the same very briefly.

The Persians are said to be in number about one hundred and twenty thousand:
and none of them all by law, incapable of honorable dignities and Offices of
State: Yea, and lawful it is for all the Persians to send their children to
the common schools of Justice. Howbeit, they only do send, who are able to
keep them otherwise in ease and doing nothing: but such as cannot so do,
never send them thither. And verily, these Or boys.
Children who have had their Institution by the public Schoolmasters, may
lawfully among the young men pass their youth forward; But such as have not
bin so taught, may not once come amongst them. They also who have conversed
with other young men and performed their parts as the law requires of them,
are allowed to step higher unto the fellowship of those men that are come to
full age; to be partakers also with them in Magistracies and dignities. But
such as have not lived and continued out their time, among the boys or young
persons abovesaid, are never admitted into the society of the middle aged men.
Moreover, as many as have passed their complete time without blame and reproufe
among those of full and perfect years, be promoted unto the order and degree
of the Ancients. And thus are they ordained Seniours, when they have gone
through all good and honest functions. And truly this is that form of policy
and government, which as many as use be reputed simply the best men and most
virtuous. And even at this day, there remains a testimony, as well of their
moderate diet, as also of working out their food. For even yet, among the
Persians, it is held a shameful thing, either to spit, or snit the nose, or to
seem full of ventosities. Yea and a shame it is for a man to be seen openly
to go any whither abroad, either to make water, or to do any such requisite
business of nature. And surely, never were they able thus much to do, unless
they did, not only, keep a spare diet, but also by travel, so spend and
consume their excrementitious moisture, as that it might pass and be conveyed
some other way. Thus much I thought good to speak of all the Persians in
general. But now will I deliver the noble acts of Cyrus, for whose sake I have
entered into this treatise, beginning even at his very Childhood.

CHAP. II. How Cyrus went into Media with the Queen his mother: where he
showed many tokens of his good nature and pregnant wit, unto King Astyages:
semblably of his temperance and sobriety.
CYrus therefore was trained up in this discipline, until he came to be twelve
years old and somewhat better: by which time it was well seen, that he
excelled all his schoole-fellowes, both in quick apprehension and aptness to
learn what was put unto him: and also in performing of every action handsomely
with a grace and manly courage. After which time [King Astyages sent for his
daughter [Mandane] and her son: as having a great desire to see him, for the
report that went, what a goodly and towardly Youth he was. So Mandane went to
her father, taking with her Cyrus her son. Unto whom, when she was come, and
that with great speed, no sooner knew Cyrus that Astyages was his mothers
father, but forthwith (as he was a child by nature kind and loving to his
parents) he saluted and embraced him, as if he had been one brought up with
him long before, or inwardly acquainted with him of old. And beholding him, how
he was set out with painting under his eyes, with a set borrowed color in his
face, with a perrucke also or cap of counterfeit hair on his head, after the
guise of the Medes (for all these devices are received among them, like as
beside these Median fashions, it is the manner with them to wear purple coats
and Amices which they call Candyes, as also cheines and carkanets about their
necks, and bracelets Or on both arms.
at both hands: whereas the Persians, such as keep at home in their own
country, even at this day use much courser raiment and more slender diet,
Cyrus I say, seeing this gay attire and ornaments of his grandfather, and
looking wistly upon him, Mother, quoth he, what a fair grandfather have I? And
when his Mother asked him again whether of the twain he thought the goodlier
man, his own father or this his grandfather? he answered thus, Madame, of all
the Persians my father is most fightly: but of the Medes, as many of them as I
have seen, either upon the way, in the streets, or at their doors, my
grandfather here is the goodliest person by far. Astyages therefore embracing
the child again, did put upon him a beautiful robe, and withal honored and
decked him with costly Or cheines.
collars and bracelets. Also, if he rode forth any whither, he would have Cyrus
evermore with him, mounted on horseback, with a golden bridle, even as he was
wont himself to ride. And Cyrus (being a child given much to decent
gallantnesse, and no less desirous of honor) as he took great delight in
that rich robe, so he joyed not a little, that he learned the feat of riding.
For, in Persia, by reason that it is hard for want of forage to keep horses,
and to ride there, because the country is full of mountains, seldom might a
man so much as see an horse. Now Astyages being upon a time at supper with his
daughter and [little Or grandchild as some will have it.
nephew] Cyrus, minding also that the child should sup with greatest pleasure
and contentment, to the end that he might the less long after home, did set
before him sundry platters full of the daintiest cates and viands of all sorts,
and the same served up with the most exquisite (...).
Sauces that could be devised. Then Cyrus, as they say, spoke in this wise,
Grandsire, what trouble do you put your self unto at supper, if you must
reach with your hand to every dish here, and taste of so many and sundry
meats? why? quoth Astyages again, Is not this, think thou, a finer supper
by many degrees than that in Persia? No verily Good Sir answered Cyrus,
considering we go a more plain and direct way to satisfy our selves than ye
do: For, bread and flesh only bring us straight thither; whereas ye, shooting
at the same mark that we do, after much wandering up and down, and fetching
many a compass and winding cranke, hardly and with much ado at length, arrive
unto that, whereto we attained long before. But we my child, quoth Astyages,
think it no pain thus to raunge and go about, only do but taste, and thou
also shall know, quoth he, how toothsome and savoury these cates are? Yea, but
me thinks, quoth Cyrus, that even your self, grandsire, do loath these
deinties. Then Astyages, whereby speak thou so, my child? and what
conjecture leads thee thereto? because says he, I see, when you have handled
bread, that you do not wipe your hand with any thing: but no sooner touch you
any of these viands and sauces, but presently at every morsel, and as you dip
therein, you make your hand clean with a napkin, as if you were much offended,
that the same was full of it. Well, my son, quoth Astyages, if this be thy
conceit; be merry yet and fall to thy flesh-meats, that thou may return home
a gallant Youth. Which he had no sooner said, but he caused many kinds of
flesh, both wild and tame, to be set before him. Now when Cyrus beheld such
store of flesh, Tell me Grandsire quoth he, do you bestow upon me all this
venison and other flesh-meats to do what I list therewith? yea mary do I my
son quoth Astyages, I frankly give them all to thee. Then Cyrus taking to him
the said flesh-meats, distributed them all among the servitours that waited on
his Grandfather, saying these or such like words to each one: Take thou this,
for that thou teach me so willingly to ride. Here is for thee, because thou
did bestow on me a dart, for (...) or thus. For this (only) am I able now to
do.
this have I yet by me. To one, I give thee this in regard of thy good service
to my Grandfather. And to another, have thou this at my hands, because thou
do honor to my mother. In this manner dealt he, until he had made an hand
of all the flesh which he received. But how is it quoth Astyages, that thou
give nothing to Sacas my Cup Bearer, whom of all others I esteem most? Now
was this Sacas a goodly fellow of person; and besides, in that place of credit
and honor, as to admit Suitors unto the presence of Astyages, and to put back
such as he thought came out of season and not meet to have access. But Cyrus
(as a child) not smaying at all, nor abashed at the question, readily came upon
him again with a reply, And why Grandfather, quoth he, set you such store by
this Sacas? Then Astyages answered merrily in this manner, See thou not quoth
he, how destly and featly he does his office? for, the Cup-bearers of these
Kings, be very neat and fine in pouring in the wine with a singular grace:
bearing the Or boll.
Cup also with three fingers so handsomely, that as they deliver it into the
hands of him that shall drink thereof, he may receive it with greatest
facility. Why? quoth Cyrus, command Sacas good Grandfather to put the Cup
likewise into my hands, that I also serving you with wine right decently, may
if I can, win your grace and favor. Whereupon, Astyages willed him to give the
Cup unto Cyrus; which when he had received, he rinsed it as featly as he had
seen Sacas do it; and so with a settled countenance he brought it to his
Grandfather and gave it him so curiously with such a seemly gesture, that he
set both his Mother and Astyages a laughing full heartily. And Cyrus himself
taking up a laughter for company, ran unto his Grandfather and kissed him,
saying withal, Thou art utterly undone Sacas, for I am like to thrust thee out
of thy honorable place. For, as in other respects I shall power out wine better
than thou, so when I do it, I will not drink it off, my self. For, these
Kings Cup-bearers when they present a cup of wine, power some of it forth into
a taster which they hold in their left hand, and so take the assay and drink it
off, to the end that if they had conveyed poison into the Cup, they might not
escape themselves without a mischief. Hereupon Astyages, minding to make some
sport with Cyrus, And why, quoth he, unto him, do thou imitate Sacas in all
points else, but drankest not the wine as he did? Because, said he, I feared
that poison was mixed therewith in the goblet. For, when upon your birthday
you feasted your or Favorites
friends, I perceived evidently, that he powered forth unto you all, very
poison. And how knew thou that, quoth he, my Son? For-sooth, said Cyrus,
because I saw you distempered both in body and mind. For, first, look what ye
forbid us children to do, that did ye your selves: ye did set up a cry, and
howred all at once together: ye fell to singing, and that very ridiculously,
and whom ye heard not to sing at all, ye would not stick to swear, that he
sung passing well. Moreover, when every one of you bragged of his own strength
and valor, no sooner rose ye up to dance, but (so far were ye from
keeping the measures) that unneth ye were able to stand upright on your feet.
So that ye all forgot your selves, you, that you were a King, and the rest
that they were your subjects. And then learned I first, that this which you
then did, was that very (...).
liberty of free speech, which allows every man to speak indifferently his
mind. And, to say a truth, your tongues never lay still. Why? quoth Astyages
then, Tell me my son, when thy father drinks wine, is he not drunken
otherwhiles? No truly, answered Cyrus. But how does he order the matter, quoth
Astyages, that he continues sober? Truly, says Cyrus, he drinks so, as that
he allayeth his thirst only: and in so doing, other harm he feels none:
For he has no Sacas, I trow, Grandfather, to fill him wine. Hereat inferred
his mother and said, What is the reason my son, that thou art so heavy a
friend to Sacas and thus set against him? To tell you troth, said Cyrus,
because I hate him in my heart; for, many times when I am desirous to run
unto my Grandfather, this fellow (most lewd and wicked varlet as he is) puts
me back. But I beseech you good Grandfather, give me the command over him,
but three days. And after what sort said Astyages, will thou exercise thy
authority upon him? Stand I will, quoth Cyrus, in the very entry, where he is
wont to stand, and when he would come in to dinner, Back Sir will I say,
There is no ingresse for you yet unto your dinner: My Grandfather is busy in
giving audience unto certain persons. Again, when he comes to supper, I
will say, He is now bathing of him. And if I see, that very feign he would
eat, I will tell him that my Grandfather is even then with the or, Women.
Ladies. Thus will I do until I have put him off, like as himself uses to
delude and delay me, keeping me back from access to your presence. Such
pretty sports as these, ministered Cyrus at the table, all supper while. But in
the day time, if he perceived that either his Grandfather, or Uncle by the
Mothers side, had a mind to any thing, hard it was for any other to prevent
him, in effecting the same: For, exceeding glad was Cyrus to gratify them, in
any service to his power.

CHAP. III. How the Queen Mother Mandane returned into Persia, and Cyrus abode
behind in Media: where he gave himself much to Horse-manship and feats of
Arms: and with his own hand killed many wild beasts.
NOw when Mandane addressed her self to return unto her husband, Astyages
besought her to leave Cyrus with him: But she made this answer again, That
willing she was indeed to satisfy her father in all things, howbeit she
thought it hard; to leave the child behind her against his will. Then Astyages
directing his speech to Cyrus, my son quoth he, if thou will tarry here with
me: First and foremost, for access to me, thou shall not be beholden to Sacas,
nor at his appointment: But whenever thou art disposed to enter into my
chamber, it shall be as thou will thy self: and the oftener that thou shall
repair unto me, the more thank will I conn thee. Again, mine own horses
shall be at thy command, yea and others as many as it pleases thee to use:
And when thou will depart, take with thee which of them thou list. Besides, at
thy suppers use thine own diet, and take what course thou will unto that which
thou think to stand with moderate sobriety. Moreover, I bestow upon thee all
wild beasts that now be in my Park, and others will I get together for thee of
all kinds: which, so soon as ever thou have learned to ride an horse
perfectly, thou shall chase at thy pleasure, and by shooting and darting
overthrow, like as tall and mighty men are wont to do. Furthermore, I will
appoint certain young Gentlemen to be thy play-feers: And in one word,
whatsoever thy mind stands to, say but the word to me and thou shall not fail
but have it. After that Astyages had thus said to Cyrus, his mother asked him,
whether he would stay or depart? who without any study upon the point, answered
readily, That tarry he would. And being demanded again of his mother,
wherefore? This (by report) was his answer: Because, Mother, at home, as I am
indeed, so men repute me, of all my companions for shooting and darting the
very best. But here, I know full well, that in riding I come short of all my
fellows: which thing, I would you knew, Mother, how it greeveth me not a
little: Now, if you leave me here behind you, that I may learn the fear of
Horse-manship, when I am come among the Persians, I suppose you think, I shall
soon surpass them (as good as they are) in foot-man-ship: and if I return
hither unto the Medians, I shall endeavor, being of many good horsemen, the
best my self and most excellent, to aid my Grandfather in his wars. Then
replied his mother, But how, my son, shall thou learn Justice here, seeing
thy Preceptors be there [in Persia]? Why Mother quoth Cyrus, I am therein
perfect enough already: And how know thou that? said Mandane: Forsooth,
quoth Cyrus, because my Schoolmasters, taking me for one very well and
thoroughly seen in Justice, appointed me to be a Judge over others: And verily
in deciding one time a certain controversy, I was well beaten, because I gave
not sentence aright: And such a case it was as this. A great boy having a
little coat, disrobed another boy, who being but small had a large coat: and
when he had so done, put upon that boy his own coat, and with the others clad
himself. I therefore sitting as Judge upon this matter between them, gave
judgment in this wise, That for both parties it was better, to have either of
them, the garment that fitted them. But my Master did whip me for my labor:
saying withal, that if I were made a Judge in question of that which is meet
and fit for any person, I ought to proceed in that sort: But when I am to
determine whose coat it is? then I must consider which is the rightful
possession? and whether it be reason for him to enjoy it, who having taken it
away by violence, holds it so; or rather for him, who either caused it to be
made for himself, or else bought it with his own money? he added moreover and
said, That a thing was then just, when it was lawful: and whatsoever was
unlawful, the same also was to be reputed violent: and finally, he concluded,
that a Judge ought always to give definitive sentence according to the law.
And even so, Mother, I say to you, that in matters of Justice I am perfect
enough and sufficiently practiced: but if in any point I be defective, my
Grandsire here shall and will teach me and supply my wants. But son, quoth
she, The same things are not all deemed just by your Grandfather here, which
among the Persians be received so. For here in Media, he has made himself the
absolute Lord of all that the Medes have: whereas among the Persians, to keep
equality is held to be just. Again, your Father, what prescript rules are
ordained in the State, receives the same, and is the first himself that
observes them: So that, the rule and measure which he goes by, is not his
own lust and will, but the Law. Take heed therefore my child, that thou be not
skourged to death at home, when thou art returned thither, having learned of
him here, in stead of Princely government, Lordly tyranny: the very nature and
property whereof is this, To think it reason for to have and hold more than
all others besides. Never fear that, good Mother, quoth Cyrus, The King your
father here is very wise and skillful, that he can teach one to have less
rather then covet more. For see you not, how he has brought even all the Medes
to this pass, as to hold less than himself? Be sure therefore Mother, that
your Father will so school me, that when he sends me away, I shall be
instructed as well as all the rest, not to covet for to possess more than
others. Many such speeches and discourses as these, passed from Cyrus. Well, at
the last, Mandane his Mother took her leave and departed: but Cyrus remained
behind, and had there his bringing up.

Quickly grew he into acquaintance with his companions, so as he became very
inward with them: Soon also did he wind himself into the love and favor of
their fathers, both by going unto them, and also by showing what affection he
bare to their children: in so much, as if they themselves had any suit unto the
King, they would bid their children to request Cyrus to take upon him for to
dispatch their business: And Cyrus for his part (such was his courtesy and
desire of honor) took no greater pleasure in the world, when these children
requested ought, than to speed their suits. Neither had Astyages the power to
deny any request that Cyrus made, but was ready to satisfy him therein. For,
when it happened that the King was sick, he would never depart from him, nor
give over weeping: that every man might well perceive, how exceedingly he
feared, lest his Grandfather should die. And if Astyages called for any thing
in the night whereof he stood in need, Cyrus was the first that heard him:
start he would up, and of all others make greatest haste to minister unto him
such things as he thought might please him: whereby he won Astyages his heart
and was every way gracious with him. And Cyrus to say a truth, was peradventure
somewhat talkative and too full of words: partly by reason of his education, For
that he was enforced by his schoolmaster to render a reason of all his own
doings, and to require as much of others, when he sat in Judgment: and in
part, because (being as he was desirous of knowledge) he would ever both
himself be inquisitive asking many questions of them that were in place, how
the world went with them? and also, whatsoever others demanded of him (such
was the quickness of his wit,) he had always his answer ready for them: So
that, considering all these causes, he had gotten to himself an habit of
loquacity and much prattle. But like as in their bodies, who being very young,
are shot up, and grown to great stature above their age, there appears
nevertheless a certain vigorous youthfulness that bewraies their tender
years: even so out of all the lavish language that Cyrus used, there was seen
no audaciousnesse, but simplicity and loving behavior. So as any man would
have desired, still to hear him speak more and more, rather than to be with
him when he held his peace. Howbeit, when in process of time, Cyrus was grown
both in body and years toward a young man's estate, he not only used fewer
words and shorter speech, but took himself also to a more still and lower
voice. So bashful likewise he was, that he would blush whenever he met with
any elderly persons. That overmuch forwardness also of his, in fawning upon
every man and preasing into all companies, like unto wanton whelps, he showed
nothing so much now, as before: whereby he became more stayed by far, and
nevertheless in all meetings right lovely and passing well accepted. For,
truly, what games and exercises soever companions are wont many times to
practice one against another, look in which he knew himself better than
other young Gentlemen his fellows, therein he never challenged them: but
wherein he wist full well that he was the weaker, he would be sure to begin
first, and give out withal, that he would perform the same better than they.
Yea he assayed first before all others to vault and mount on horseback, to
shoot also and dart from his horse. Went he any time away with the worse? very
pleasant he was and laughed at himself most of all: By reason therefore, that
when he had once the foil, he would not shrink and give over clean, but
still assay and practice eftsoons to do better and better, those feats
wherein he was inferior: in short time he became as good a rider as his
fellows: within a while also (such was his fervent affection to the thing) he
outwent and excelled them all. To conclude, within a little space, what with
chacing, shooting and killing those beasts which were in the park, he made
such havocke, that he destroyed them all; insomuch as Astyages could not get
together for him more game. Cyrus then, perceiving that his Grandsire was not
able, would he never so feign, to furnish him with beasts alive, many times
said thus unto him, What need you Grandfather to trouble your self so much as
you do, in seeking wild beasts? If you will send me forth on hunting with mine
Uncle [ His mothers brother.
Cyaxares] I will suppose, that every beast which I shall see, you keep up and
nourish for me. And in very truth exceeding desirous though he was to go
abroad into the forest, yet could he not now any more be so bold and forward
as before-time, when he was a child, but held off and took good leisure to
come unto his Grandfather for to get leave: So that wherein heretofore he
complained of Sacas for not suffering him to go unto his Grandfather, he was
therein become a Sacas to control himself. For he would not venture to
press in, unless he foresaw that the time served thereto: yea he would not
stick to desire Sacas to do him the favor, as always to signify unto him,
when he might have the opportunity of access, and when not? And therefore this
Sacas now loved him passing well, like as all others did. Now when Astyages
knew once that Cyrus had such an ardent desire to hunting abroad in the Chase,
he sent him forth together with his said Uncle: and appointed a guard of
certain ancient Gentlemen of the Court, who also were on horseback, with
special charge to keep him out of dangerous places, and to save him from
savage beasts, if happily any of them should be put up. Cyrus therefore was very
inquisitive of these warders that attended upon him, what kind of beasts they
were, which he might not approach nor meddle with, as also which he might be
bold to hunt? Who told him, that Bears, Lions, wild Boares and Libards had
slain already many a man adventuring to come over nigh unto them: But Hearts
and Hinds, Bucks and Does, wild Sheep and wild Asses, said they, be nothing
dangerous to be dealt withal. They added moreover and said, that the
difficulties of some places were to be taken heed of, no less than the very
beasts: For, many men, horse and all (said they) have heretofore fallen down
headlong from steep rocks and so perished. Cyrus gave good care and willingly
conceived all these advertisements: Howbeit, no sooner had he espied an Hind on
foot, but forgetting all that he had heard, he made after her, looking to
nothing in the world else, but whither she made way and fled. In so much as his
horse under him, leaping forward, I wot not how, fell upon his knees, and went
very near to have cast him over his neck: nevertheless Cyrus made means,
though it were with much ado, to sit him still, and so the horse recovered.
But so soon as he was come into the open field, he picked his dart and
overthrew the Hind, a goodly fair beast, I assure you, and a large: whereat
himself verily rejoiced exceeding much: but his Governors and those of the
guard aforesaid, came riding to him apace, all to rated and rebuked him,
showing to what peril he had exposed himself, and saying withal that they
would tell his Grandfather of him. Cyrus therefore who by this time was
alighted from his horse, stood still, as one much grieved and troubled in his
mind, to hear such words. But when he heard the cry, he leapt presently on
horseback again, as one beside himself and in a fanaticall fit: and so soon
as ever he saw a wild Bore affronting him, he ran against it, launced his
javelin, and took his aim so right, that he struck him in the forehead,
astonished the beast, overthrew him and gat the upper hand of him. Then, his
Uncle also seeing his adventurous rashness reproved him: who notwithstanding
his rebukes and checks, requested him, that he might with his good leave, carry
whatsoever himself had gotten, unto his Grandfather and present him therewith.
But his Uncle made, as they say this answer, Your Grandfather, if he should
know that you chaced these Beasts in proper person, would not only chide you,
but reprove me also for suffering you: let him skourge me too, and spare not,
quoth he again, if it be his pleasure, when I have once bestowed them upon
him: And even you, Uncle, may likewise chastise me, if you will, and as you
list, so you gratify me first in this my request. Well, quoth Cyaxares then at
length, do as you will your self, for now already you seem to be a King over
us. So Cyrus presented the beasts and gave them to his Grandfather, saying
withal, that he had hunted the said venison for his sake. As for his darts he
showed them not openly unto him, howbeit all bloody as they were, he bestowed
them in such a place where he thought his Grandfather should see them. Then
said Astyages unto him, I accept my son gladly at your hands whatsoever you
give me: but I stand in no such need of any of these things, that you should
hazard your self therefore. Why then Sir, quoth Cyrus again, if you need them
not, I humbly beseech your Grace, to bestow them upon me, that I may deal them
among my companions. Take them, my Son, quoth Astyages, and give not only
the same, but whatsoever else you will desire, to whom you please. So Cyrus
took them, and gave them among the boys such as himself, saying thus
withal, How trifled we my lads, when we hunted the dear empaled within the
park? for mine own part, I think it all one, as if a man should course
beasts in a Or, pinfold.
prison. And why? First they were enclosed within a straight place: then, they
seemed but small, lean and mangy: some halt and lame, others maimed. But the
(...). Or beasts.
dear that be in the mountains, Forests, plains and meadows, how fair, how
great, how fresh and slick seem they? The Hearts and Hinds, like so many winged
fowls, were so fleet, that they mounted aloft toward the sky: and the wild
Bores gave assault, in manner, as one would say, of hardy and valiant men: so
large and broad withal, that a man could not possibly miss them. Certes, in
my conceit, these beasts here of the Forest lying stark dead, make a goodlier
show, than those immured within a pale or wall, for all they be alive. But how
think you sirs quoth he, will your fathers give you leave to go on hunting?
Yea, and that right soon, said they, if King Astyages would but command.
Which of all you then, quoth Cyrus, will moove the matter to the King? Who,
said they, is better able to persuade and speed than your self? As for me
quoth Cyrus, by Juno I swear, I wot not to what pass I am brought. For
neither can I speak ought, nor able am I any more so much as to look my
Grandfather in the face, as I was wont to do. And if I grow on still after
this fashion, I fear me that I shall prove altogether some blockish coward or
stark fool. And yet when I was but a little child, me thought I had tongue
enough, and could speak, none so well. Why then said the boys again, by your
saying, it goes hard with us, in case you can do nothing in our behalf, if we
should stand in need, but that we must seek unto some other for to effect
that, which lies in you to do. Cyrus at these words being much agrieved and
vexed at the heart, departed from them in silence: and arming himself with
boldness, he went in to his Grandfather. Now when he had waited his time, and
cast with himself how he might without any trouble and displeasure address
his speech unto him, for the obtaining of his and the boys suit, in this
manner he began, Tell me, good Grandsire quoth he, if any one of your household
servants ran away, and you should catch him again, in what sort would you
entreat him? How else, quoth he, but imprison him, and force him to work as a
slave in yrons? yea, but say, he returned of his own accord? after what manner
would you deal with him then? what should I do, but after I had skourged him,
that he might do no more so, use him again as I did before? Then were it high
time, quoth Cyrus, for you to be provided for to whip me, who have a purpose to
run away, and to take with me my fellows on hunting. Well, quoth Astyages, it
is honestly done of you yet, to give me warning; for now I command you not to
stir one foot out of doors: A trim and goodly matter it were indeed, if I for
a little piece or two of hunted flesh, should bereave my daughter of her son.
Upon these words Cyrus obeyed indeed and tarried at home; howbeit with a sad
and heavy countenance he continued silent and would not speak a word.
Astyages then perceiving how he sorrowed, as one much discontented; yet
minding to please him again, had him forth into the chase: And having
assembled a great number both foot and horse, together with the boys also, and
caused the wild beasts to be driven together into the plains commodious for
the horsemen, he made of it a great day of hunting. Himself also in person all
royally beseene was present, and gave straight commandment, that no man
should be so hardy as to shoot and strike a beast before that Cyrus had his
fill thereof. But Cyrus not able to endure that others should be thus
forbidden, Grandsire, quoth he, if you would have me to make a pleasure of my
hunting, suffer all those that are about me here, to chase, to strive, and do
their best. Then Astyages gave them all leave: And him self stood still and
beheld how egrely they encountered the beasts, how they contended for the
better, how they pursued them in chase and piked their darts at them: Great
delight he took in Cyrus, who for very joy could not hold his tongue, but like
a whelp of a good kind, set up a cry, when he drew near unto any beast, and
therewith encouraged and called to every one by name. He rejoiced moreover to
see how Cyrus laughed at one, and to hear how he praised another, without any
show at all of repining envy. But in the end Astyages departed, with a great
prey of many beasts: And from thence forward (such pleasure he had in this
hunting) he would always, when his leisure served go forth with Cyrus, yea
and for Cyrus sake, take the youths aforesaid abroad, among many others beside.
And verily after this manner spent Cyrus the most part of the time; wherein his
carriage was such, that as he procured some contentment and good to all men, so
he wrought no displeasure nor harm to any.

CHAP. IIII. How Astyages through the politic counsel of Cyrus, won a
victory of the Assyrians, who were come to invade his Territories.
NOw when he was about the age of fifteen or sixteen years, it happened that
the Kings son of the Assyrians, being upon the point of marriage, was very
desirous himself in person, against that time to hunt. Hearing therefore that
in the marches and confines between them and the Medes, there was great store
of (...).
dear (for by reason of the wars, they were spared and not of long time
hunted) he had a mind now to hunt there. To the end therefore that he might
follow his game in more safety, he took with him, many of his light horsemen,
and targatiers, who should out of the rough thickets put out the beasts for
him, and drive them into the tilled grounds and open plains. And being come as
far as to his frontier Forts, and where he had a garrison, there he supped;
that early the morrow morning he might hunt. Now by that time it was evening,
there were come out of the city both horsemen and footmen, to succeed in place
of the former garrison. So that now he supposed himself to be furnished with a
great army, as having two garrisons in readiness, besides the foot and horse
which himself had brought with him. Upon good deliberation therefore, he
thought it best to make an incursion and raise booty out of the Medes ground;
for that thereby, as the pastime of hunting would seem more brave and gallant,
so he thought he should have greater store of beasts to sacrifice. Betimes
therefore in the morning, he did set forward with his power in this order. His
footmen he left thick embattayled upon the borders: himself with his
Cavallery advanced toward the fortresses of the Medes, where he stayed with the
best men of arms and those in number most, whom he kept about him, that the
garrison soldiers of the Medes might not make head upon his Avantcourriers as
they stragled and overran the confines: as for the light horsemen nimbly
appointed, he sent certain forth out of every band to make rodes, some one way,
some another, with commandment, to overspread every place, and whatsoever came
within their reach, to drive the same to his hand. Which service they performed
accordingly.

When advertisement was given to King Astyages that enemies were already entered
into his land, both himself in person went forth with such as were about him
to relieve the marches, and his son also, with such a troop of horsemen as
were in readiness accompanied him. Not forgetting withal to send out his
commissions to all others, for to come forward in aid. The Medes when they saw
a great power of the Assyrians arraunged in good order, together with their men
of arms keeping their ground and not stirring, made also a stand themselves.
And Cyrus for his part, seeing others on all sides, ready to set forth in
defense of the Frontiers, did the same likewise. Which was the first time that
ever he put harneis on his back (a thing not permitted him before to do) so
desirous was he to be armed: and truly a very fair armor it was and well
befitting him, which his Grandfather had caused to be made complete for his
body. Thus armed at all pieces, and mounted upon a goodly courser, he rode
forward to the service. Astyages seeing this, albeit he mervayled much at whose
command he came; yet required he him to abide with him and not to stir one
foot. Cyrus then, so soon as he discovered a number of horsemen afront,
demanded saying, Be those yonder, our enemies Grandfather, who sit still upon
their horsebacks so quietly? yea quoth he, enemies they are. And what are they
a far off that ride and drive before them, quoth Cyras be they likewise
enemies? yes said Astyages and they too. Now surely Grandsire, quoth he, they
seem to be but cowards, and to ride upon very jades and titts, who thus harry
and drive before them our goods. It were a good deed, yea and uery requisite,
that some of us made a rode out after them. Yea, but see you not my Child
(answered he) what a strong troop of great horse and men of arms, stands on
a plump in battell-ray? who if we should make after those, would intercept us
by the way and stop our passage: besides, our forces are not yet come together.
But if you will tarry here, replied Cyrus, and receive such as are coming
hither to aid; those that stand still hereby, will be afraid and not once dare
to quetch: those other also who are driving booties, will immediately forgo
their prey, upon the very sight of some that charge upon them. Having thus
said, he seemed unto Astyages for to speak somewhat to the purpose. Who
wondering withal at his prudent forecast, and vigilant circumspection,
commanded [Cyaxares] his son to take a Cornet of horsemen, for to set
forward, and to charge those that were a boot-haling. And I for my part quoth
Astyages will make head at these here, if they once seem to stir and advance
against you: so that they shall be forced to have a watchful eye unto us. Thus
Cyaxares taking with him the valiantest men and best mounted, did put forwards.
And Cyrus so soon as he perceived them to come on, speedily breaks out with
them; and long it was not but himself was the foremost of the troup, and led
them all a great pace: Cyaxares followed hard, and the rest were nothing
behind. Whom, when they that drove the booty saw to approach, incontinently
they abandoned all and fled. But the company about Cyrus intercepted them: and
whomsoever they could overtake and reach, they wounded out of hand, and Cyrus
was the foremost: but as many as ouerrode them and escaped their hands, those
they pursued hotely, and never gave over until they had taken some of them
prisoners. And like as a generous Hound, untrained yet and without experience,
runs all on the head rashly upon the wild Bore: Even so for all the world,
rode Cyrus upon the spur, looking at this only, how he might strike
whomsoever he could overtake, and regarded nothing else. The enemies seeing
their fellows thus distressed and in jeopardy, came forward with their maine
troop, supposing that the chase would cease, if they were seen once to
advance toward them. As for Cyrus, he slacked never a whit the more, but for
joy called upon his uncle, to hold on and maintain the chase still. And for
that he had gotten the upper hand, he did put the enemies to an exceeding great
rout. And verily, Cyaxares [the yonger] for his part, followed, happily for a
reverent regard of his father: the rest likewise came after, being then more
willing by such an example to make pursuit, who otherwise were not very
courageous nor resolute to encounter the enemy. Astyages perceiving them
inconsiderately to follow on still, and the enemies many in number, and those
in good order of battle ready to confront and receive them: being affrayd
withal in the behalf of his own son and of Cyrus, lest they being in
disaray should rashly rush upon the other so well appointed, and so endanger
themselves, directly led against the enemies: who on the other side perceiving
the Medes making toward them, stood still, some with their darts ready to
lance, others with bows and arrows bent to shoot, and so kept their ground:
supposing that the other likewise would stay and stand, so s^^ne as they came
within shot, according as they were wont to do. For, their manner was, thus
near and no more to approach one another, and so many a time to skirmish only
with shot at randam even until night. But now seeing their own men to fly
unto them amain, and therewith the soldiers about Cyrus pursuing them
fiercely hard at heels, and Astyages likewise with his Cauallery, already
within arrow shot, they declined from them at one side and fled: The other, who
also at once followed in chase, took many of them by force one with another:
and whomsoever they caught, down they went, both horse and man, killing and
slaying all that fell: and never gave over the execution until they came as
far as to the Assyrians Infantery: And there verily, for fear of some
greater ambushment in covert, to intercept and cut them off, they stayed
themselves. Then Astyages retired with his forces, as right joyful for the
horsemens victory: But of Cyrus he wist not what to make or say: For, well he
knew, that he was the chief author of this exploit: but he saw withal, how
in all the service, for his audacious adventure he fared like unto one
furiously transported. For, even at that time I assure you, when others were
returning homeward, he only did nothing else but ride up and down all about,
to view them that were overthrown and slain: in so much as hardly could they
(who had commission so to do) hale him away and bring him to Astyages: and
even those who had the conducting of him, he caused to go a great way before,
for that he perceived his Grandfathers fathers countenance at the sight of him,
to be stern and terrible. And thus passed these things in Media. As for Cyrus,
as he was rife in every man's mouth, whiles they ceased not to say and sing all
praises of him: So Astyages, who beforetime highly honored and esteemed him,
had him now in exceeding great admiration.

CHAP. V. How Cyrus returned to his father into Persia: and what honor the
Medes did him at his departure.
THEN Cambyses the father of Cyrus, hearing this report that went of him, joyed
thereat, you may be sure, not a little: but for that he heard that Cyrus had
achieved manly Acts already, he sent for him home, to the end that he might
perform those parts which by the discipline of the Persians were required.
Whereupon Cyrus, by report, said, that depart he would, because his father
should not be offended, nor his country and the State complain and find
fault with him. Astyages therefore thought it requisite and necessary to send
him away: and having bestowed upon him such horses as it pleased himself to
take, and furnished him besides with all things for that purpose, he honorably
dismissed him: which he did, both because he loved him, as also for that he
conceived withal a great hope of him, that he would prove a man another day,
sufficient both to pleasure and help his friends, and also to displease and
hurt his enemies.

Now was Cyrus at his departure accompanied on the way with all sorts and
degrees, as well boys and such as were of his own years, as men and
Ancients all on horseback: yea and Astyages himself rode onward with him:
Neither was there any one, as it is said, but at his return homeward wept
amain. Cyrus also is reported to have shed many a tear at his farewell:
Moreover, men say, that among his equals in age and companions, he dealt many
of those gifts which Astyages had bestowed upon him: In conclusion, the very
Median Robe which he then ware, he did put off, and gave it unto one, declaring
thereby that he loved him especially above the rest. Who when they had received
these gifts at his hands, presented them all, as they say, unto Astyages: and
Astyages when he had them, sent them back unto Cyrus: but he returned them
eft-soones into Media, delivering this message withal, If you would ever have
me, o Grandfather, to repair unto you again without the blemish of shame and
disgrace, suffer each one to have and hold that which I have given them: which
words when Astyages heard, he did according to the said message. And, if I must
recount some merry speeches, and amorous words also that passed among, the
voice goes, that at Cyrus departure, when they took their leave one of
another, Cyrus dismissed his kinsmen with a kiss of his lips, after the
Persian manner, for it is the fashion among the Persians even at this day so to
do. At which time there was one of the Medes a right good and an honest
Gentleman, who advised well a long while, the exceeding beauty of Cyrus and
wondered thereat: who when he saw his other kinsmen to kiss him, he himself
stood still and stirred not. No sooner were the rest gone, but he came unto
Cyrus and said, What Cyrus! Am I the only man whom you know not for your
kinsman? Why, quoth Cyrus, are you also of kin to me? Yea surely that I am
says the other. This was it quoth Cyrus, that you eyed me so: For me thought
I marked you oftentimes so to do. True said the other: and as desirous as I
was, all the while to come unto you, yet God so me help, for very
bashfulnesse I ever held off. But you should not have so done, quoth Cyrus,
being a cousin of mine: and with that he came unto him and kissed him. The Mede
when he had this kiss, asked him and said, Is this the manner indeed of the
Persians, for kinsmen thus to kiss one another? Yea verily, quoth Cyrus, both
at meeting when they have not seen one another a certain time, and also at
parting when they take their leave and go forth any whither. Then it is time
now says the Mede, that you give me another kiss. Foreven now as you see, am
I to depart. So Cyrus having kissed him the second time, bade him farewell and
went himself away. They had not ridden far asunder on their journey, but the
Mede returned again with his horse under him all sweating and in a lather:
whom when Cyrus saw, what! says he, have you forgotten any thing that you
would have said to me? No verily answered the other, but after a time, I am
come as you see unto you. True indeed, cousin, quoth Cyrus, you are so, and
that after a very short time. What short time answered the Mede is that? wot
you not, o Cyrus, that if I do but wink never so little, I think the time
very long, for that I see you not the while, being so gallant a young Gentleman
as you are? Hereat Cyrus began to laugh (and the first time it was, after his
former weeping) saying withal unto him, Go your ways and be of good cheer:
For shortly the time will come, when you may behold me if you will, with your
eyes broad open and never wink for the matter.

Cyrus being in this manner returned into Persia, continued by report, one
whole year more in the school of Or Boys.
Children. And they verily at his first coming would scoff at him, as who
having learned among the Medes to lead a delicate life, was now come again to
them. But after that they saw him to eat and drink heartily and savourly as
they did: and found likewise by experience, that if there were any great cheer
upon some high and festival day, he could find in his heart to give away unto
others some of his own part, rather than desire any of others: when they
perceived besides, that in all other things Cyrus far excelled them, then his
companions began to have him again in great esteemation. When he had passed
through this first discipline, and was now entered into the rank of young men:
therein also he seemed to surmount all the rest, as well in studying and
practicing all that was required, in enduring also and suffering whatsoever he
was put unto, as besides in reverencing respectively his Seniors: yea and in
obeying dutifully the Rulers and Magistrates.

CHAP. VI. The beginning of the wars between the Assyrians and the Medes. Of
the forces that Cyrus levied in Persia to aid the King of Media his Uncle.
But in process of time Astyages [the King dyed in Media: and Cyaxares
Astyages his son, and brother to Cyrus Mother, succeeded in the Empire of the
Medes. Then the King of the Assyrians, who had vanquished all the Syrians, (and
those were no small nation,) subdued the King of the Arabians, and brought him
to his obedience, and who held already the Hyrcanians likewise under his
subjection, and now warred upon the Bactrians and besieged their cities,
thought this with himself, that if he could once conquer the Medians also, or
weaken their estate, he might soon become the absolute Monarch of all the
neighbor countries round about him. For, this Nation, of all the borderers was
reputed most puissant. Sending therefore unto his own subjects, and to those
who were under his allegiance: likewise to Croesus King of the Lydians, and to
the King of the Cappadocians: to the inhabitants of Phrygia, both the one and
the other, to the Carians, Paphlagonians, to the Indians and Cilicians, he laid
open unto them many grievous imputations against the Medes and Persians,
alleging, how great and mighty these States were, how they combined and
linked themselves together by mutual marriages: and in a word, were so knit
and united in perpetual league and amity, that unless some one arose by good
forecast to prevent their growth and abate their force, great danger there
was, that they would invade one nation after another, and so subdue them all.
These Princes and States therefore, partly persuaded by these his suggestions,
and in part inveagled by his presents and money, whereof he had exceeding
store, condescended and entered into association with him. But Cyaxares Astyages
his son, perceiving what trains were laid and purveyance addressed against
him; immediately both made what preparation he could himself: and also
dispatched his Ambassadors to the Persians as well unto the States there, as
also to Cambyses his brother in law, who had married his sister and reigned
King of Persia. He sent also to Cyrus, requesting him that in case the
Council and State of Persia sent any power of men to aid, he would endeavor
to be the General of those forces. For, now by this time, had Cyrus spent his
ten years with the Youths, and was reckoned in the rank of men full grown.
Cyrus therefore having well approoved the motion, was by the Elders
(Councellers of the State) elected Lord General in this expedition into Media.
They gave him also commission to choose unto him 200. Gentlemen as Peers
called That is, of equal dignity.
Homotimi. Also every one of those 200. they licenced to make election of four
others like unto themselves in degree: which number amounts unto one
thousand. Semblably to every one of this thousand they granted for to levy from
out of the common people of the Persians, 10. light targuatiers, ten slingers,
and ten archers. By which means, over and above the thousand Peers or
Gentlemen aforesaid, there were in all ten thousand Archers, ten thousand
Targuatiers, and ten thousand Slingers. This so great an army was committed to
the conduct of Cyrus: who was no sooner chosen, but forthwith he began devoutly
at the service of the gods: and being assured by his sacrifices of their
propitious favor, then and not before, he made choice of those two hundred
aforesaid: and when they also had taken every one four more unto them: Cyrus
assembled them all together, and made his first speech unto them in this manner.

CHAP. VII. The oration of Cyrus to the Peers and Chieftaines of his Army for
to incite them to enterprise this war with the better courage.
MY friends, chosen you I have, not as one who had good proof of you at this
present and not before: but in that I have seen, even from your Childhood,
with what alacrity you travail in those things which the Commonwealth
reputeth virtuous: and utterly abandon such as it deemeth vicious. But what
motives induced me not unwillingly both to undertake this high place of
government, as also to call you forth into the Action, I am now minded to
declare unto you. Thus much I observe, that our Ancestors have in nothing
been inferior unto us, as who evermore practiced the deeds of virtue: But
what benefit they have acquired being so brave men as they were, either in
public to the Persians Commonweal, or in private to their own estates, I
cannot yet perceive. For, surely, in mine opinion, men give not their minds to
exercise any virtue for this end, that when they are become good and honest,
they should in nothing be preferred above the wicked. And even they that
forbear the fruition of pleasures presented unto them, do it not because they
would never joy any more: but, for that by such continent behavior, they might
in future time attain to many and sundry delights. They that desire to excel
in eloquence, aim not in all their studies and meditations to this end, that
they should never give over the eloquent pleading of causes: but their hope is,
that when they have by their fine tongues persuaded men to their minds, they
may to themselves purchase many great and goodly availes. Moreover, Martial
men that are emploid in feats of Arms, take not all this their pains, never
to make an end of fighting: but even these men also, set this down to
themselves, that being once come to perfection in military prowess, they shall
win both to themselves and to their country much wealth, much happiness and
great honors. Now, if any men after their great toil in these affairs,
before they reaped any fruit thereof, have carelessely suffered themselves to
age, and thereby to grow unmeet for war, in my conceit they fare much like,
as if one desirous to be a good and thrifty husbandman, should sow well and
plant his ground as well: but when he is to receive the increase coming of his
tillage and husbandry, suffers the corn not inned, to shed, and fall again
upon the ground. Or, as if some Champion when he has sustained much travail,
so as now he is thought a worthy victour, should never after enter into the
lists and perform his devoyr. For, in my judgment, even such an one deserves
worthily to be condemned for his folly. Let not us therefore my soldiers be
faulty in this kind: but considering we are privy to our own hearts, and
assured that even at first from our tender years we have been trained up in
noble and worthy Acts, set me forward against those enemies, whom I know most
certainly, by that which my self have seen in them already, to be unexpert in
fight against us. Certes, for my part, I hold not these to be able soldiers,
who howsoever they have the feat and knowledge, to shoot well, to dart likewise
and ride as well, yet cannot endure any labor, but quail when they are put
unto it. But these our enemies, for any matter of pains taking, are very raw
and untrained novices. Neither are they to be accounted good soldiers, who
when they should watch cannot away withal: and our enemies here are such, as
for their sleep cannot of all things want it: Nor yet may they go for good
warriors, who albeit in the points abovesaid are sufficient enough, yet be to
seek how to carry themselves toward their friends, and how to enemies. And
evident it is that these here be altogether to learn those disciplines which
in war be of greatest consequence. But as for you, able ye are to use the
night in every point as well as others the day: ye repute labors to be the
guides leading the way to pleasant life. Hunger ye reckon in stead of sauce
(...).
: and to drink water, ye can endure better than the very Lions. To conclude,
the fairest possession, the most precious treasure and best agreeable unto
warriors that is, ye have laid up within your hearts: in that ye take more joy
in being praised, than in all things else in the world. And they that are
lovers of praise and renown, must needs for the attaining thereto, willingly
undergo all travel and abide all danger. Now, if I should pronounce thus
much of you, thinking and knowing otherwise, I do but deceive my self: as
upon whom the fault will redownd, incase no such thing be performed by you. But
verily, such is your own skill, your love also to me ward: such likewise is
the blockish ignorance of our enemies, that I trust assuredly these good hopes
will not fail me. Only let us march on in this our journey with bold and
courageous hearts: considering, it is far from us to be thought for to covet
other men's goods unjustly: for even now, as, our enemies are coming and begin
first to deal wrongfully with us: so our friends call unto us for aid. What
then is there either more just than to put by an injury, or more honorable,
than to help our friends? Moreover, in this regard I suppose you repose not
the least confidence, because I have not enterprised this expedition, with
neglect of the Gods: For, being as ye are, privy unto many of my doings, and
much conversant with me, ye know very well that not only in weighty affairs,
but also in smaller matters, I use always to begin in the name of the Gods. In
conclusion, quoth he, what should I say more? when you have chosen and taken
unto you elect men, and are otherwise in all points well and sufficiently
provided, set forth toward the Medes. As for me, repair I will unto my
Father, to the end that having with all speed learned of him the state of our
enemies, I may accommodate you what I can in this affair, and so with the
power of God, make a right noble journey of it.

CHAP. VIII. The good instructions that Cambyses gave unto his son Cyrus as
touching the enterprise against the Assyrians: and how a good Captain should
carry himself with his army in a strange country, and win the love of every
man.
THus therefore were they busied and thus prepared they themselves. But Cyrus
after his return home, and having made his prayers unto Vesta the Patroness
of his country, to Jupiter also the Protector thereof, and to other gods, did
put himself in his war expedition: and his father brought him on his way.

When they were gone forth of the Palais, it thundered and lightened on the
right and lucky side, as they say: whereupon without any other token or presage
taken by augury, they marched forth, as who would say; no man then could be
ignorant of the signs given by the most high and mighty God. Now when Cyrus
was gone a little forward, his father began to discourse unto him in this wise.

That the gods, my Son are propitious, and accompany thee with their gracious
favor, evident it is as well by sacrifices as celestial tokens: and thou thy
self do know as much. For, taught thee I have these matters of purpose,
partly that thou might know the will and counsel of the gods by no other
interpreters, but understand the same by thy self, seeing the sights and
hearing the noises that are to be seen and heard: and not depend upon
wizards, who might if they were disposed deceive thee, by relating other things
than were signified by the gods above: and partly because, if at any time thou
were without a Soothsayer, thou should not doubt what to resolve upon, by
those divine tokens: but observing by this skill of Divination what Gods will
is, obey the same. Surely father, quoth Cyrus, endeavor I will always even to
the uttermost of my power and according to your advertisement, that the gods
being favorable unto us would ever be pleased to advise us for the best. For,
I remember, that I heard you once say, It stands with good congruity, that he
should obtain any thing at the gods hands as well as at man's, yea and more
easily, who does not fawn upon them when he is in distress: but at what time
he is in greatest prosperity, even then thinks upon the gods most of all. You
said moreover that the same consideration of friends likewise must be had.
Certes, then my Son, quoth Cambyses, being as thou art so devoutly affected
to the gods, thou come unto them now at this time more willingly in that
regard, to crave their help, yea and thou hopest so much the rather to obtain
whatsoever thou need and make petition for, because thy conscience bears
thee witness that thou were never slack in their service. Doubtless, father,
quoth he, I am thus conceited of the (...).
gods, as of my affectionate friends. What Son, said the Father, and do
thou remember those points, which sometime we resolved upon? Namely, that such
men are like to speed better who have learned those sciences which are given
unto us by the gods, than those that be ignorant of the same? Again, that by
travel they shall gain more, than by sitting still? As also that by careful
diligence they shall live in more safety, than if they carry themselves
carelessly and take no heed? And verily thus was then our opinion, that after
this sort we should crave good things at Gods hands, to wit, in demeaning our
selves as we ought. Truly Father, quoth Cyrus, I remember very well that I
heard you deliver these lessons: and I could not choose but of necessity yield
my consent to those speeches and be persuaded thereby. Full well I wot also,
what you added moreover and said, that in no wise lawful it was for them to
crave of the gods victory in Horse-fight, who have not learned to ride well:
neither for those who be unexpert in shooting, to pray unto the gods that they
may have the better hand of cunning Archers: ne yet for such pilots as know not
how to guide the helm, to beseech the gods they may save ships by their
steering: no more than for them that never sowed their seed to wish for a fair
crop of corn to come up; or for those who look not to themselves battle,
desire the safety of their lives. For, all such [prayers and wishes] verily, be
against the ordinance and law of God. Semblably, you said, that whosoever asked
at Gods hands ungodly things, by as good reason deserved to be said nay, as
those to take a repulse who prefer unto men unlawful suits. But have you
Son, forgotten those matters, quoth Cambyses, whereof you and I sometime
devised and talked together? namely, That it is a sufficient Act for a man to
perform, if he be able to procure thus much, as to be himself a worthy man
indeed and so reputed; and also that both he and his family may be well
furnished with necessaries: And if this be so difficult a matter to effect,
then to have the skill, for to rule other men, so, as they may have foison of
all things needful and be themselves likewise all, such as they ought to be, I
suppose is an admirable thing. Truly Father, quoth Cyrus, I remember full well
that this also was your saying, and therefore unto me as well as unto you it
seemed then an exceeding hard matter to Govern well. And even now likewise am I
of the same mind considering as I do with my self what a piece of work it is
to command. But when I look into other men, and observe withal, both the
quality of those persons that are become Rulers, as also what manner of
concurrents and adversaries we shall find, I think it a foul shame to be
afraid of any such, and not willingly to oppose our selves against them: whom
I for my part (to begin first with these our friends here) perceive to be of
this opinion, that a Prince or Ruler ought to differ from his people, and to
go beyond them, in more plentiful fare and sumptuous suppers; in having at
home better store of gold and treasure; in sleeping and lying longer abed, and
in a word in living at greater ease, and taking less pains than those that
are under him. Whereas I (quoth Cyrus) contrariwise am of this mind, that a
Sovereign ought to excel his subjects, not in idleness of life, but in
prudent forecast and in forwardness to endure all travail. True it is Son
(quoth he) but it falls out otherwhiles in certain cases, that we are to
fight not against men, but even with the very things themselves, which we
cannot without great difficulty overcome. As for example, you know well, quoth
he, that all your rule and command will soon come to naught, if happily your
army have not at hand sufficient provision of necessaries. Yes, quoth Cyrus,
but Cyaxares (Father) says he is to make purveiance thereof to serve all those
that go from hence, how many soever they be. And do you indeed my Son,
quoth Cambyses, enter upon this journey, trusting in these means of Cyaxares?
Yea that I do answered Cyrus. Why! do you certainly know, replied he again,
what store of treasure he has? Not I, quoth Cyrus, I assure you. And give you
credit nevertheless to these uncertainties? Or wot you not thus much, that
you shall have need of many things, and even anon be forced to spend much
otherwise? Yes, full well I know that, quoth Cyrus. How then, quoth Cambyses?
Say that he either lack money and be not able to bear the charge: or for the
nonce hold you up with untruths; where are you then, and in what case will your
army be? Certes, plain it is, verily that it cannot be well with it. If then,
Father, quoth he, you see any way, whereby I may raise some mass of money
whiles we are yet among our friends, show unto me the same. Ask you of me o
Son, quoth he, whether there may be means wrought by you to make money? Why?
who should in all reason devise and cast about for to make provision thereof,
rather than you, who have so puissant an army to command? going as you do
from hence with such a power of footmen under your hand, as I know you would
not exchange the same for another far greater in number than it? and as for
horsemen, you shall have a troop to join with you from the Medes; which of
all other in these days is simply the best. What neighbor nation then, think
you, will not be glad both by way of gratification and also for fear of
damage and displeasure, to relieve you? which you and Cyaxares ought jointly
to consider and think upon: to the end, that at no time you be at a fault,
for want of ought that must be had: yea and if it were but for custom sake,
you are of course to lay for means to bring in revenewes store. But of all
things remember this especially, that in no wise you defer and put off your
provision, until very need enforce you thereto: but whereas you have most
plenty, be you careful so much the more, to be furnished before you feel any
want: For you shall the sooner speed at their hands of whom you are to seek
relief, if you seem not to be destitute and in need: besides, your soldiers
shall have no cause to find fault: and so by this means, others also will the
rather have you in reverence: your soldiers likewise so long as they have all
things necessary, will be more ready to serve, if you be disposed by the help
of your army, either to do pleasure or displeasure unto any. And this moreover
you are to know, that your speech will carry greater credit, and be more
effectual to persuade them, when as you shall be most able to show that you
have power enough, as, to do a good turn, so also to work a mischief. Then
Cyrus, Me thinks Father, quoth he, that you speak all this very well unto me,
as in other respects, so in this also, that whatsoever the soldiers shall now
receive, not one of them will take himself beholden to me as who know well
upon what conditions Cyaxares sends for them to aid him: But look what
shall come unto them over and above that which is set down, the same verily
will they both take as an honor due unto themselves: and like it is by good
reason also, that they will yield much thanks therefore, to the giver.
Furthermore, he that has the command of an army, by the which he may both do
his friends good, and so receive for it the like benefit from them: as also
endamage his enemies, by attempting to get something from them: and then
afterward be negligent in purveiance of plenty and store. Think you this,
quoth he, to be less shameful in him, than if a man who has land of his
own, and husbandmen beside to till the same, should yet for all that suffer
his ground to lie still, and unprofitable? And therefore, this opinion I would
have you Sir to conceive of me, that I will never be careless in devising all
means possible of provision for my soldiers necessaries, neither in my
friends country nor in mine enemies. But, bear you not in mind Son, quoth
Cambyses, what other matters we thought upon and concluded sometimes, and those
in no wise to be neglected? Yes verily, quoth he, I remember them well, what
time I came unto you for silver, to pay unto one by way of reward, who said he
had instructed me in the leading of an army: For when you gave me the said
money, you questioned withal in this manner with me. Tell me, my Son, said
you, whether this man to whom you carry this reward, among his rules of a
General, made any mention unto you of House-goveroment.
economy? For, soldiers verily have no less need of necessaries for their
living in the Camp, than servants in an house. And when I told you the truth
and said, that he spoke not one word at all of that point, you asked me
again, whether he discoursed unto me of health and bodily strength, whereof a
Grand-Commaunder should be no less careful than of the conduct of his host?
And upon my denial thereof, you demanded of me once more, if he had taught me
any means whereby mine Associates fighting under me, might in every respect
be most expert in warlike feats? And when hereto also I answered nay: you
enquired farther, whether I had learned of him how I might encourage and cheer
up mine army? saying therewith, that in every deed, courageous alacrity, far
excelled heartlesse backwardness. When I had denied this too, you came yet
still upon me, and would needs know, what precept he had given of this point,
namely the obedience of an army, and how a man might best bring that to pass?
And when it appeared, that there had not been a word delivered as touching
that, in the end you concluded with this question, what one point he had taught
me when he said, that he instructed me in the Art Imperatory? Unto which when I
made answer, saying, That he had trained me in The Tactiks.
embattailing an army, you smiled thereat, and discoursed unto me in
particular, to wit, what good did the embattailing of an army to the Art (...).
Imperatory, without the purveiance of things necessary to live by? also what
availed it without preservation of health? what, without the knowledge of arts
devised for war? what, without obedience of soldiers? Now when you had made
it plain to me, that the Tactick skill.
setting of a battle in ray was but a small part of the Of commanding an
army.
art Imperatorie, and therewith I asked of you, whether you could instruct me
in any of those points? you willed me to go my ways and repair unto military
men, that were reputed expert Commanders, and of them to enquire how these
matters each one might best be effected? Since which time I conversed with
those whom I heard to be most skillful in these points. And verily, as touching
victuals for our camp, I am persuaded that so much will suffice for this
present occasion, as Cyaxares will provide for us. As concerning our bodily
health, because I heard and saw, how Cities such as regarded health, make
choice of cunning Physicians, whom they maintain: and Generals of the field
also, for their soldiers sake, take Physicians forth with them in their train,
I likewise was no sooner appointed to this charge, but presently I had a care
thereof. And I suppose, quoth he, o father, that I have about me very expert
men in the Art of Physic. Whereunto his Father replied in this wise, But
these Physicians, my Son, whom you speak of, are much like unto certain
botchers, that mend torn garments; For, even so, when some are fallen sick,
then and not before they cure and heal them. But your regard of health I would
have to be much more honorable unto you: for, you are to endeavor and provide
in the beginning that your army fall not into sickness: And what course shall
I take father, quoth Cyrus, to perform this? At the first and principally you
must, quoth he, see to this, that the place be wholesome, where you purpose to
abide and lie encamped a long time together; wherein you cannot fail, if you
take any heed. For, commonly men cease not in their ordinary talk to give out
which be healthy coasts and which subject to maladies; and there be always at
hand certain apparent signs, to testify and direct unto both, to wit the very
bodies and color of the inhabitants. Moreover, it will not be sufficient to
consider the regions only, but remember you ought also, in what manner you
endeavor to look unto your self, that your own person may live in health.
Then Cyrus, first of all quoth he, my principal care I assure you is, that I
never surfait, for that is a dolourous and yrksome thing. Secondly, with labor
and travail, I digest and work out whatsoever is gone into my belly: For, by
this means I am persuaded, that I stand to health the longer, and besides get
the greater strength. And even so my Son, quoth Cambyses, as careful you
ought to be of others. But may Soldiers, good Father, have leisure to
exercise their bodies? Yes Iwis, quoth his father, they not only may, but of
necessity must so do. For an army, if it would do as it should, and as
belongs thereto, ought never to be at rest, but be doing still, either
working mischief to the enemies, or doing good to it self. A grief it is my
Son, to nourish but one person idle, much more grievous to keep a household
that is sloathfull: but most importable of all, to maintain a whole host in
idleness. Many things there be in an army, (to begin at the least, and so to
proceed forward) that eat and spend: and look what they win, they waste
excessively. And therefore in no wise is it expedient that an army should be
idle. Your words, Father as I conceive them, imply thus much, that like as of a
sloathfull husbandman there arises no profit, even so of an idle General can
never come good. But I undertake quoth he, that an industrious Captain,
unless some God do cross him, will both bring to pass, that his soldiers
may have plenty of victuals and necessaries, and also provide that their bodies
be passing healthy, strong and able. To the end therefore, quoth he, that they
may be well seen and practiced in each feat of arms, I suppose, Father, that
if I publish to every one of them certain games of prise, and propose rewards,
I shall cause them best to be exercised in each thing: that when need shall
require, I may find them pressed and ready for any service. That is very well
said of you Son, quoth Cambyses. And in so doing, know this assuredly, that
you shall see your military bands always studying to perform their parts, no
less than in daunces, to observe measures and keep their order. Moreover,
says Cyrus, for to make soldiers forward and courageous, there is nothing in
mine opinion more effectual, than to have the cast to feed men with good hopes
of great availes. But this, quoth he, my Son, is much like for all the world,
as if a man in hunting would evermore holla to his hounds in such a note as he
uses to set up when he sees his game. For at the first, full well I wot, he
shall have his hounds willing enough to hear and obey: but in case he delude
and deceive them often in this sort, at the last they will not believe him at
all, no, not when he sees the game indeed. Semblably it is in this hope whereof
you speak. If a man proposing many times unto them the expectance of good
things, deceive them, it will come to pass in the end, that when such an one,
shows in truth assured hope, he shall not be able to persuade them. And
therefore, my Son, you ought to take heed, and spare to speak, that which
you know not for certain. Well may other men sometime so do, and cast out
words to that purpose: but it behooveth a Captain to reserve his own
encouragement to the greatest dangers and extremities, that it may carry the
most credit. Now, believe me Father, me thinks you speak this very well, and
being so delivered, it pleases me better.

CHAP. IX. How a Prince may gain the obedience of his people, Vanquish his
enemies, and get the attribute of wise and virtuous.
BVr how to make my soldiers obedient unto me, I think not Father, that I am
now to learn. For, you have taught me this your self, even immediately from
mine infancy, when you enforced me to obey you. Afterward you recommended me
in my childhood to Schoolmasters, and they inured me likewise to the same.
Also what time I was raunged among the young men, our Governor was very
careful and diligent in this behalf. Yea, and most of our laws seem to
prescribe these two points especially, To Rule, and To be ruled. And therefore
when I consider thoroughly these matters in general, me thinks I observe thus
much, that the thing which moves men most effectually to obedience, is, both
to praise and honor him that obeys, and also to disgrace and punish the
disobedient. Indeed my son, quoth he, this is the ready way to cause men to
obey by constreint, but to make men of their own accord obedient (which is
far better) there is a more compendious course to be taken. For, whom men
think to be more wise in procuring their own good than themselves, him right
gladly they will obey. And this you may know to be true as in many other
instances, so in sick folk, how forward are they, to call for Physicians that
should prescribe and direct what they ought to do? Semblably at Sea, how
cheerfully do the passengers obey the Pilots? Likewise, look whom men
suppose to know the avenues and ways better than themselves, how earnestly
strive they to follow such guides, and will not by their good wills be left
behin? But contrariwise, when they think that by obeying they shall take some
harm, they will neither yield much for any punishment, nor yet be stirred up
with rewards; For, no man willingly takes any gifts to his own hurt. Then,
Father, quoth Cyrus, your words import thus much, that there is nothing more
available to keep subjects in obeisance, than for a Ruler to be reputed wiser
than they. This is my meaning in deed said he. But how may a man Father, quoth
Cyrus, soonest acquire such an opinion and esteem of him self? There is not,
my son, a nearer way, says Cambyses, than to be prudent in very deed in
those things wherein a man would be thought wise. Do but consider hereof in
particular, and you shall find that I say true. For, if you would be taken for
a good Husbandman, an expert horseman, a skillful Physician, a cunning
Musician, or any such, when you are in truth nothing less, mark what a number
of shifts you must devise to maintain this outward semblance? And say, that by
your persuasion, many men fall to praise you, to the end that thereby you might
raise a glorious name of your self: so as you have now laid a good foundation,
and possessed every of them with a singular conceit of you: First, you should
but deceive them for the present; and soon after when you come to the trial,
bewray what you are, and so appear in your own colors, a vain boaster. But
how might a man Father, in very deed, attain unto such wisdom, as to foresee
what in future time will be expedient? Truly, even thus, my son, said
Cambyses; If so be you study to get as much as may be had by learning, like as
you are taught already the skill of marshalling an army. But, what things
soever men cannot learn by discipline, nor foresee by humane wisdom, if you
by divination, and oracles consult with the Gods thereabout, you shall be wiser
than other men: especially, if when you know what is best to be done, you be
careful withal to put the same in execution. For, to be industrious in
procuring of things requisite, is the part of a wiseman, rather than to be
altogether negligent in that behalf. Moreover to win the love of subjects, a
point, which I hold chief and principal, evident it is that the same way
would be taken, as if a man desired to be loved of his friends. For, I suppose
that to effect this, he must endeavor to be seen bountiful and beneficial. A
difficult matter it is my son, for a man to be able always to pleasure whom
he would. But to show himself joyful and ready to congratulate their good
fortune, and with them to grieve and take heavily any adverse calamity; as
also to be pressed and ready to relive them in distress, to be affraied
aforehand least they do amiss, to labor also to prevent and provide that
they do not stumble and fall: in these cases, I say he ought in some sort to
go even with them and bear them company.

To come now to the practice of arms; If service fall out to be performed in
Summer season, a General must in all men's sight endure the heat of the Sun
above the rest: semblably in Winter time abide most cold: and where travail is
required, there is he to take the greatest pains: For, all these things make
much to the winning of his soldiers hearts. And say you so, Father? quoth he,
should a Captain in deed be more painful every way, than his men that serve
under him? Yea ywis, that is my saying. Howbeit, my son, be of good cheer
and be not dismayed thereat. For, know you this, that the same labors be not
in semblable bodies of a chief Commander and a private soldier, grievous
alike: both because in a Commander the respect of honor makes the travail
somewhat lighter; and also for that he knows whatsoever he atchieveth shall
not be hidden but openly seen. But, Father, when soldiers are now well
provided of necessaries, when they be in good health and able to travail: when
they be trained in martial fears, and have a kind of ambitious humor,
desirous to appear valiant: and withal take more pleasure to obey than to be
stubborn and disobedient, think you not, father, the man wise who then would
make have to encounter his enemies? Yes truly said he, if he might get the
better of them. If not, I for my part verily, as I thought both my self to be
in better case, and my followers also better appointed, so much the more would
be wary and take better heed: like as all other things that we think most
precious and set greatest store by, we commonly endeavor to have in best
security. But, to get the vantage and ods of our enemies, by what means
Father, may one best attain? This is no mean point, I may tell you, my son,
nor of small importance that you demand of me. But know for certain that who
ever shall effect this, had need be a waitlayer, a deep dissembler, a crafty
and fraudulent deceiver, a very thief and greedy robber, and in one word,
every way able to overtop his enemies. Hereat Cyrus smiling, o good God,
Father, what manner of man would you by these your words, have me to be? Even
such a one, son, as may for all that, be right-just, and most observant of
the laws. Why then, quoth he, when we were children and younglings, taught ye
us quite contrary to all this? Why! even so do we now also, quoth Cambyses,
namely toward our friends and compatriots. And wot you not that ye learn
many mischeivous devises, whereby ye may be able to annoy your enemies? No
truly, Father, answered Cyrus: Wherefore then, quoth he, learned ye to shoot?
For what purpose were ye taught to dart? Why were ye trained up in taking
wild Bores with net and toil, yea and in entrapping them in pitfals, or in
catching Staggs with snares, grinnes, and cords? Wherefore stood ye not your
ground, nor fought on even hand with Lions, Bears, and Libards, but evermore
went about to encounter these wild beasts upon advantages? Or know ye not,
that all these things be naught else, but mischeivous slights, deceitful
practices, fraudulent wiles, and laying for all advantages? They are no other
Father, quoth Cyrus, howbeit, against savage beasts. But, were I but seen so
much as willing to beguile any man, I remember full well, that I met with many
a stripe for my labor. No force, said Cambyses. For we did not, I take it,
permit you, my son, either to shoot your arrow, or cast your dart through a
man: but we taught you to drive directly at a mark, and in no wise for the
present to hurt and mischeive your friends: But if there happened any wars,
that ye might be able to level, yea and to hit even very men also. Likewise we
taught you to practice deceit and to win advantage, not of men but of wild
beasts: to the end that even herein ye should not hurt your friends. Howbeit
in time of war, if need so require, ye might not be short in such feats.
Then, Father, said Cyrus, if it be expedient to learn both; namely, to know
the way how to do good and hurt also unto men, it were meet to teach men the
one as well as the other. It is reported my sone, quoth Cambyses, that there
was sometime in our ancestors days a certain Schoolmaster, that taught his
children (right as you also would have it) Justice [and Injustice] Not to lie,
and withal, To lie: Not to deceive, and yet to deceive: as well, Not to accuse
wrongfully, as To accuse unjustly: both, Not to get advantage above others, and
also To lay for private gain and commodity before others. Now, In these
points, forsooth, he did distinguish thus, namely which they were to do unto
friends; and which unto enemies. Nay, he went further than so, and taught, That
lawful it was even to beguile friends for profit, yea and to steal from
friends their goods for commodity. He that taught these rules, could not choose
but exercise his scholars to practice the same one unto another when they were
children: like as men say, the Greeks in the feat of wrestling teach the art of
deceit, yea and inure their children also to supplant and beguile one another.
Whereby it came to pass, that some of them, grown to be towardly impes, both
to beguile cleanly and also to get the vantage of others cunningly: and happily
framed withal by nature not unapt for covetousness and greedy getting of
goods, spared not their very friends but attempted to go beyond them also.
Hereupon a law was made, which stands in force with us at this day. That our
children should be taught simply and after one way: even as we teach our
houshold-servants, To speak truth to our selves, not to deceive, nor steal
and filch, ne yet to seek their own commodity: and if they trespass herein,
we threaten to punish them. To the end that being nuzzled up and inured in
this wise, they might prove the milder and more tractable patriots. Afterward
when they were grown to your age, then and not before it was thought, they
might safely teach, what things were lawfully to be done to enemies. For being
thus brought up together in a mutual respective reverence one of another, ye
are not like now so far to exorbitate and break out of order, as to become
fierce and fell among your fellow-citizens. And even so, we do not discourse
of venereous matters and fleshly pleasures unto those that be very young: least
happily, young as they be, when audacious boldness meets with heat of lust
they might use the same immoderatly. Par-die quoth Cyrus, true it is, And
therefore, good Father, forbear not to teach me what you can, as one somewhat
dull and coming late to learn, these subtle casts of catching vantage how I
may be able to make my part the better and outstrip mine enemies. Then said
Cambyses, Devise therefore to the uttermost of your power, when your own men
are, in good order arraunged, to surprise your enemies when they be in
disarray: with your own soldiers armed and well appointed to assail them
unarmed: with your companies watching, to set upon them fast asleep: when they
are espied by you, and your self not discovered by them: also whiles you are
in a fensed place of safety, to take them encumbred, within the difficulty and
disadvantage of the ground. But how is it possible Father, replied Cyrus, for a
man to watch his enemies such a turn, as to fall upon them in these and such
like defaults? For that, my son, as well you as your enemies, are of
necessity to meet with many of these occurrents (For both of you ought to go
and send out a foraging, ye cannot choose): ye must needs of both sides take
your sleep: Early in the morning, ye cannot otherwise do but all-togither,
make starts and straggle aside to purvey necessaries: and such ways as ye
light upon, be they better or worse ye are to use perforce. All these things
ought you to think upon; and look wherein ye find your selves weakest,
therein most of all ye are to be wary and circumspect: in what things you
perceive your enemies easiest to be taken and vanquished, therein especially to
set upon them. What! quoth Cyrus, is it lawful to lay for vantage in these
particulars only, or in some others beside? Yes ywis, that it is, and in those
much more my son. For in these, all men for the most part keep sure watch
and ward, as knowing that ordinarily they have need thereof. But they that are
skillful to circumvent their enemies, can either put them first in a good
conceit of themselves, and then surprise them at unwares: or suffer them to
follow in chase, and so cause them to break their rays: or by semblance of
flight, train them into streights and places disadvantageous, there to assail
them suddenly. Now, my son, it behooveth you, to practice not only all these
stratagemes, which with earnest desire you have already learned, but devise
also and of your own head other sleights against your enemies: even as
Musicians, use not those tunes and songs only which they have learned, but
study also to make and set other. And verily in Music new dities and fresh
notes in their very prime are in most request: but much more in war new
policies are best set by. For why? such late devised inventions, are those that
soonest can deceive the enemies? And if you my son, quoth he, would turn
upon men naught else but those sleights, which you have laid for very small
wild beasts, think you not that you should make good progress in winning the
better hand of your enemies? For, to catch foul, you have in the most bitter
time of winter risen and gone forth by night: yea and before the poor birds
were stirring, set snares and grins for them so cunningly as that the mooveable
false floor seemed like unto that which moved not. Besides certain fowls
were so taught by you, as that they served your own turn, but in the mean
time deluded other silly birds of their own fether: whiles your self lay in
convert and espiall so, as you saw them, and they had no fight of you.
Moreover, your care and endeavor was, to prevent the said fowls and draw them
unto you before they should fly away. As for the Hare because she goes to
releife and feeds in the dark night, but by day saves her self by her
light foot, you kept Hounds which by sent might find her out: and for that
when she is started, she swiftly runs away, you had Greehounds besides
trained of purpose to overtake her in pursuit, by good footmanship. And in case
the said Hares should outstrip these Greehounds also, you learned out their
paths and musets: and to what harbors they choose to fly, therein you pitched
haies and nets hardly to be seen, to the end that the Hare in her most eger
flight 01 might fall into them, and therein entangle her self. And that she
might not escape thence, you placed men of purpose to watch and mark the
manner of it, who being near at hand should streight-waies seize upon her. And
your self verily from behind, by setting up a loud cry, that raught unto her,
so affrighted the poor Hare, that caught she was at unwares: whiles those who
on the forepart lay in wait instructed by you to keep silence were hidden and
unseene. Therefore as I said before, if you would practice likewise such
devises as these, against men, I know not for my part, how you should come
short of any enemy in the world. Now, if it chance at any time, that you be
enforced, in plain even ground and open field to join battle with ensigns
displayed, when ye are on both sides armed and well appointed, even then, my
son, those helps and advantages provided long before do very much avail.
And such, I say, be these: namely, if your soldiers bodies have been well
exercised; if their hearts have had an edge set upon them and thereby be well
encouraged: and last of all, if they have diligently studied and practiced
martial feats aforehand. Moreover, this thing also you are to know; that so
many, as you shall think it meet they should obey you, will all of them
likewise deem it as fit, that you provide for their good and safety every
way. Therefore be you never careless in this point, but foresee overnight
what you would have your liege men to do the morrow, and forecast by day, how
night-service may speed best. Furthermore, in what sort an army is to be put
in order against a battle: after what manner it is to be led in march by
night or day? how in streights, how in broad plains and open ways? how over
hilly places, how through champian fields and plains? Also in what wise a
camp is to be pitched? How watch and ward is to be set, as well for night as
day? How to advance against the enemies, how to come off, and retire? How to
march before an enimie-citie? how to lead an army to the assault of a walled
Fort, and how to withdraw the same from thence? In what manner to pass through
(...)
hollow ways full of woods, or over rivers? What order to take with horsemen?
what with darters and archers? Also, when you lead your army displaied into
wings, if then your enemies charge directly upon you, in what sort are you to
make head and withstand them? Again, when you lead it in form of a thick Or
Phelony.
squadron, and they flank you from some other side, and not afront; in what
manner you are to encounter them? Also, by which means you may best know your
enemies behavior and projects: and they least perceive your desseine and
purpose. But all these points, why should I now rehearse unto you? For,
whatsoever my self knows, you have often heard: and if others besides seemed
expert therein, you have not neglected conference with any one of them: and
never were you dull witted and hard to learn. You ought therefore, as I
think, according as occasions shall be presented, to put such instructions in
ure, as you shall suppose will be at all times most expedient for you. And
learn withal, my son, of me these directions of greatest importance. Never
adventure any thing either by your self alone, or in your army, without
warrant of sacrifices and auguries by bird flight: considering thus much, that
men take matters in hand no otherwise than by guess, as not knowing for
certain from whence any good shall redound unto them: how ever happily a man may
by the events understand the same. For, many men and those reputed most wise,
have persuaded (...), or States.
cities to make war upon those, at whose hands they thus persuaded, have
afterward been overthrown. Many a man besides, has both enriched private
persons, and also amplified public States, from whom by their means thus
enriched and advanced, they have sustained afterward extreme loss and
mischief. Many also when they might have used others as friends with
reciprocal interchange of doing and receiving pleasures, choosing to make them
their slaves rather than their friends, have felt the smart thereof, and
suffered punishment even at their hands. Many again, not content to live a
pleasant life with a competent and sufficient portion, but coveting to be Lords
of all, have lost thereby even all that they had, and possessed before. And to
conclude, many having gotten much gold and treasure which they so greatly
wished for, have by the same perished and come to ruin. Thus, man's wisdom
knows no more how to choose what is best; than if one should cast lots and
draw whatsoever falls unto him. Whereas, the immortal Gods know all as well
past as present, yea and the future events of every King. And to as many as
seeking to them for direction they vouchsafe their gracious favor, therefore
signify, what enterprises they are to attempt, and what not. Now, if they be
not willing thus to advise all men, no marvel is it. For, they are not bound
of necessity to regard such as they will not.

THE SECOND BOOK.
CHAP. I. How Cyrus came into Persia with his men, and procured them all to be
armed by his Uncle Cyaxares.
AS they discoursed thus together, come they were as far as to the marches of
Persia. Where, after that an Aegle appeared unto them on the right hand, and
became their guide to lead them the way, they made their prayers unto the Gods
and Demigods, Patrons of the Persian Land, for to dismiss them with propitious
grace and favor, and so passed over the bounds thereof. When they were once
past these Frontiers, they prayed again to the Tutelan Gods of the Median
Land, that they likewise would vouchsafe as graciously and with semblable
favor to receive them. This done, after they had in decent manner embracedech
other, the father returned back into Persia, but Cyrus journeyed forward in
Media to [his Vnkle] Cyaxares. When he was come thither unto him, at their
first meeting they saluted one another, as it well beseemed. Then Cyaxares
enquired of Cyrus, how great an Army he had brought? Who answered, thirty
thousand, even those who were wont heretofore to come unto you and serve as
mercenaries: And certain others besides of the Peers rank who never yet went
forth to war, are coming to them. And, How many be they? quoth Cyaxares: As
for the number, said Cyrus, it will not greatly please you when you hear it:
yet thus much I would you knew, that as few as these Peers be whom we call The
flower of the gentry called Homotimi.
Homotimi, they so far excel, as that they be able easily to rule all the
other Persians, be they never so many. But what! Is there any need of the^? or
did you fear in vain? and happly the enemies come not. Yes verily, that they
do, quoth Cyaxares, and those a great number. And how know you that? said
Cyrus. Because, quoth he, how ever there be many come from those parts
reporting diversely, yet they all agree in one point of substance, and speak to
the same purpose. Then, I see quoth Cyrus, fight we must against these men. No
remedy said Cyaxares. Why then, replied Cyrus, did not you tell me (if you
have so good intelligence) what power of theirs is a-foot, as also what our
own forces be, that upon the certain knowledge thereof we may consult
together, which way best to join battle with them? Hearken then, quoth
Cyaxares. Croesus that rich King of Lydia brings, they say, ten thousand
Horsemen: and of Targuetiers and Archers more than 40000. Artames the Prince of
Great Phrygia, is said to come with a power of 8000 Horse, and of Pikemen and
Targuetiers together, no fewer then 40000. Aribaeus King of the Cappadocians,
leads (by report) 6000 Horsemen, and his Archers with Targuetiers are not
under 30000. Maragdus the Arabian, has in his conduct 10000 men of Arms, one
hundred Chariots; and of Slingers an exceeding great multitude. But as touching
the Greeks that inhabit Asia, it is not yet known, whether they follow or no?
Gabaeus, as the speech goes, who has from about the plain of Caystros 6000
Horse, and 10000 Targuetiers, will augment his number, with those of that
Phrygia, which joyneth to Hellespont. But the Carians verily, the Cilicians and
Paphlagonians, for ought we hear, follow not, although they were requested to
come. Howbeit, the Assyrian (Monarch) who has under him Babylon and all
Assyria beside, will bring into the Field, as I suppose, 20000 horse and no
fewer: Chariots I am sure not above 200: but of footmen, I guess, an huge
number: For so is he wont to do whenever he invadeth these parts. By this
computation then, quoth Cyrus, you say that our enemies be in Horse 60000: of
Targuetiers and Archers not so few as 200000 strong. Go to now, to what
number, say you, do your own forces amount? There be, quoth he, of Median
Horsemen, above 10000: of Targuetiers and Archers, there may be levied in our
own territory, about 60000. But of the Armenians and Borderers, there will be
here 4000 Horse, and 20000 Foot. By your saying then, inferred Cyrus: Our men
of arms be fewer than one third part of our enemies Cavallery, and our
footmen well near half their Infantery. How then, said Cyaxares, do you
accoumpt the Persians to be but few, whom you bring as you say with you? (...)
As for fighting men, quoth Cyrus, whether we have need of any more or no? We
shall take into consideration Or shortly, (...).
hereafter: but for the present, relate you unto me the manner of their
several services. Surely, quoth Cyaxares, They use in manner all, the same
kind of fight. For, there be of them as well as of us, Archers and Darters.
Since then, said Cyrus, they be for weapons thus appointed, there musts needs
be skirmishing with volly of shot from a far? Of necessity it will be so,
answered Cyaxares. Then quoth he again, in this kind of service it cannot be,
but that the greater number shall have the victory. For, sooner will there be a
few hurt and slain by many, than many by a few. If the case so stands, my good
Cyrus, quoth he, what devise may a man find better, than to send unto the
Persians, both to declare unto them, that if the Medes sustain any disastre,
the loss and calamity will reach even unto them; and withal to require a
greater power? But I would have you to understand thus much, says Cyrus, that
if all the Persians should come into the field, we were not able for number to
surmount our enemies. What other means then, do you see better than this,
quoth Cyaxares? Were I, said Cyrus, as you are, I would cause to be made for
all the Persians that are coming, such armor in every point as those
Gentlemen of ours have, who are repairing hither and be called Homotimi:
namely, a Curace over the breast, a light targuet for the left hand, and a short
curtelax for the right. If you can provide us these arms; you shall bring to
pass, that as it will be more safe for us to confront our enemies and cope with
them in close fight: so it shall be better for them to fly than to keep their
ground. And verily, we that are Persians be pressed to deal with such as will
stand to it: but look how many of them do fly, those commit we to you and to
your horsemen: so that they shall have no leisure, either to fly or once to
turn back. When Cyrus had thus discoursed upon the point, Cyaxares approved
well his speech: insomuch, as he made no more words of sending for a new levy,
but presently provided the armor and weapons abovesaid. Now, when the same
were in good forwardness and almost ready, the said Peetes were by that time
come with the army sent out of Persia. Whom Cyrus after he had assembled
together, spoke by report unto them in this wise.

CHAP. II. The speech that Cyrus made unto the Homotimi.
Chiefetaines of all his host, for to incite their soldiers to take the
harneis and arms that Cyrus had prepared for the Persians.
MY friends, seeing as I did, your selves in arms so well appointed and in
hearts so resolute, as men ready to join in close fight with the enemies:
knowing withal, that the Persians who follow you are not otherwise armed than
to skirmish a far off; I was not a little afraid, least ye being few in
number, and abiding the shocke of a battle, destitute of those that were to
second you, and falling upon your enemies so many in number, should happily
incur some hard extremity. But now, considering ye are hither come with such
able and manly bodies, as cannot be found fault with: and that they again
shall have the like armor unto yours: it remains only that for your parts,
ye whet and quicken their hearts. For, it is the office of a Captain, not
only to show himself hardy, but also to endeavor effectually, that his
soldiers under him may prove right valiant. When he had thus said, they
rejoiced all, verily for that they thought they should have many more to
accompany them in fight; but one of them above the rest delivered also these
words.

I shall be thought peradventure to speak wondrous absurdly, if I should
advise Cyrus to say ought in our behalf, what time as they shall receive their
armor, who are to fight with us against the enemies: For, this I know, that
whosoever be most able, either to do a good turn, or to work mischief,
their words enter deepest into the hearts of the hearers. Such men also, if
they bestow any gifts, although they be less than those that come from equals,
yet the receivers do much more prize the same at their hands. Semblably the
Persians now, in case Cyrus should exhort them, would joy far more, than if
they were exhorted by us. And being admitted into the order of the Peers, they
will account the preferment more assured, and the benefit better worth, if it
proceed both from a Kings Son, and also from a Lord General, than if by our
means they were advanced to the very same place of dignity. And yet ought not
we to fail in performing our parts accordingly, but by all means we can,
encourage these men and give an edge to their stomachs. For, the more valorous
that these prove, the better it will be for our selves. Cyrus therefore having
thus laid down the armor aforesaid in the mids of the open place, and called
together all the Persian soldiers, made unto them such an oration as this.

CHAP. III. The exhortation of Cyrus unto the Persian soldiers, to put on the
armor that King Cyaxares had prepared.
MY friends, ye that are Persians, as ye were borne and bred up in the same
region with us, and are in body besides framed nothing inferior to us: so, it
is meet that your minds also be not worse then ours. And albeit, such ye are
indeed, yet in our native country ye were not in equal estate and condition
with us: not for that ye were by us put by, but because ye were enforced to
provide necessaries. Now, both I, by the leave and power of God will take order
that ye shall have the same degree, and your selves also, if ye be so
disposed, using the same arms that we do, how ever otherwise in meaner place
than we are, may enter upon the same dangers with us, and upon the
achievement of any noble and worthy exploit, receive the like guerdon to ours.
Heretofore, ye were archers and darters as well as we. In which manner of
service if ye carried not your selves equal to us, it is no marvel. For
why? ye had not time to practice these feats, as we had. But in this kind of
armature here, we shall have no vantage at all over you. For, every one of you
shall have a curace fitted for his breast, a light buckler in his left hand, as
we all were wont to carry, and in his right an arming sword, or battle axe
wherewith we are to smite our enemy that stands opposite unto us, and need
not fear to miss whenever we offer to strike. What is it then, (considering
this manner of fight) wherein one of us should pass another? unless it be in
boldness and courage, which ye ought to show as well as we. And as for
victory, whereby all good things and excellent, are both gotten and kept, what
reason is there that we should desire it more than ye? To speak of
Sovereignty, which gives all away to the Conquerours, from them that be
conquered, why should it concern us more than you, to seek therefore? To
conclude then, says he, ye have heard all, and see the very armor. Take
every man what he needs and is fit for his body, and then give his name to
the Captain of some company for to be entolled in the same degree and rank
with us. But whosoever is content with the place of a mercenary soldier, let
him remain still in such arms as are meet for servitours unto others.

CHAP. IIII. The ordinances that Cyrus made for the exercise of his soldiers,
and to keep them in all obedience.
THese were the words of Cyrus; which when the Persians had heard, they made
this account, that worthy they were from that time forward to live all their
days in penury and want, if being thus called, to take pains alike, for to
enjoy therefore like availes; they would not accept thereof. Whereupon they all
entered their names, and being once registered, took every man his armor. But
all the while that the enemies were said to be coming near at hand, and yet
appeared not in sight; Cyrus endeavored both to exercise his soldiers bodies
in such feats, as it might gather more strength: to teach them also to set
their array, and embattaile, yea and to whet their stomachs against
warre-service. But first of all, having received ministers and officers from
Cyaxares, he commanded them to furnish every soldier sufficiently with all
things needful: Which order being taken, he left them by this means nothing
else to do, but to exercise only martial deeds: seeming, that he had learned
and observed thus much, that they became always in every point most excellent,
who leaving to busy their heads and to deal in many things, gave their minds
to one work only and no more. Nay, more than so, even of military exercises,
cutting off their training to the use of bows, arrows and darts, he left
them naught else to practice, but to fight with sword, buckler and breast plate,
whereby it came to pass, that immediately he imprinted this opinion in them,
that either they must buckle with their enemies close at hand-strokes, or else
confess themselves to be warre-fellowes of no worth. But to acknowledge thus
much was very hard and harsh to them: knowing as they did, that they were kept
for no other purpose, but in defense of those that gave them maintenance.
Furthermore, weighing well with himself, that men be much more willing to
practice all those feats, about which arises an emulation and contentious
desire of victory, he proclaimed games of price and trial of masteries among
them, in all those points that he deemed expedient for soldiers to put in ure.

Now, the particulars that he ordained and published were these: Imprimis, for
a private soldier, that he bear himself hardy, obey his Rulers and
Captains: be willing to labor; forward and pressed to adventure; yet so, as he
keep order in his rank: expert in military affairs, elegant and neat in his
armor: and in all such things desirous of praise and honor. For a That has
the leading of 5. soldiers.
Cinquenier, that both in his own person he behave himself as becomes a
valorous private soldier; and withal perform to the uttermost of his power,
that the Quincury under his charge may be like unto himself. For a A leader of
10.
Dizinier, that semblably he tend his Decurie, the (...).
Caporall likewise his band. The A Captain as I guess over 25. or 50.
Centinier his hundred. For every Captain beside, that he not only demean
himself without touch and blame, but be careful also, that other
peti-captaines under him keep those in good order whom they commanded. Now,
the rewards or prizes which he proposed were these. For the Centiniers, That as
many of them as brought their Centuries to best proof, might be made The
leader of an hundred, or a Centution.
Colonels. For the Caporals, Leaders of a thousand.
that such of them as were thought to have trained their bands most
sufficiently, might succeed in their places who had been Centurions: In like
manner that the best Decurions should be advanced to the rowme of Caporals: and
the Quincurions likewise to the leading of Decuries. Finally, that private
soldiers, such as excelled the rest, should step into the Quincurions degree.
And verily, all these Captains gained this at first, To be esteemed of those
Companies whereof they had the rule: then, other honors consequently followed,
as were beseeming every one according to their calling. Furthermore, he made
show of greater hopes to such as were praise worthy, if happily in time to come,
there should appear any show of farther commodity. He proclaimed likewise
rewards of victory, to whole Centuries, as also to whole Decuries and
Quincuries: according, as they showed themselves right (...).
faithful and (...).
obedient to their Captains, yea and most ready to execute the services
appointed unto them. And such were their rewards, as best befitted a multitude.
Thus much as touching these particulars, which himself published, and wherein
the Soldiers were exercised. Moreover, he provided for them Pavilions, for
number as many as there were Centurions, and for their capacity sufficient
every one to receive a A hundred.
Company: and each Company contained one hundred Soldiers. And thus pitched
they their tents by the hundreds. Of encamping thus and lodging together, he
supposed this commodity would arise unto them, against any future battle, in
that they saw themselves one with another kept and maintained alike: In which
regard, none could have pretense of Cowardice, for to shrink or bear himself
worse in fighting with his enemy, as having smaller availes one than another.
This conversing also under one roufe, he thought would make much for their
mutual acquaintance. For, in knowing each other, he was persuaded they would
be all more abashed to do amiss: Whereas, those who are unknown, like unto
such as live in darkness, seem in some sort more prone to commit wickedness.
Again, it seemed unto him, that by reason of this society in camp and
pavilion, they should find much good in the exact ordinance of their Companies
and setting them in array. For the Centurions had under them their hundreds
lying and lodging, (...)
in so good dispose, as if every Century marched by it self upon the way:
Semblably the Caporals of their bands: The Decurions their Tenns and Quicurions
their fives. This precise order of several bands and companies, he thought
very profitable, both to prevent all trouble and confusion: and also in case
they were once shuffled and in desarary, to rally and reduce them again sooner
into order: like as stones and pieces of timber, which are to be joined and
set together in building, how ever they chance to lie asunder and cast aside
may yet be easily fitted and couched one to another, if they have certain
marks, by which it may evidently appear from what place every of them came?
Finally by such fellowship in living together at bed and board, he thought they
should find this benefit, in that they would be more louth to forsake one
another: because he saw, that even wild beasts feeding together hoan
exceedingly after their fellows, if happly any man pluck and sever them
asunder.

Moreover, Cyrus had a special eye to this also, that his Soldiers should
never go in, to dinner or supper, unless they had labored first, until they
sweat again. For, he either led them forth on hunting, and so caused them to
sweat, or else devised for them such games and pastimes, as might drive them
into a sweat. And if it happened, that himself were to perform any exploit,
he would in person lead them, and set into the action so, as they should be
sure, not to return without sweating. For, this he supposed to be very good
for them, causing them to eat their meat with better stomach and delight, to
preserve their health, and to enable them unto labor. Yea, and this fellowship
in pains taking as he thought, would make them to be more mild and gentle one
unto another. For, even horses accustomed to work and labor together abroad,
are wont to stand more gently and quietly in the stable. And certain it is,
that those Soldiers will stick to it more courageously against their enemies,
who are privy to themselves that they have been well exercised. Furthermore,
Cyrus for himself reared a pavilion, sufficient for the receipt of those, whom
he bade at any time to supper. And for the most part, he invited to his table,
such Centiniers as he thought meet. Sometimes, Caporals, otherwhiles Diziniers
and Cinquiniers: Now and then also, headmitted to his board, certain private
soldiers, yea and whole companies or bands, of fives and tennes, of Or,
fifties.
twenty fives and hundreds, at a time. This manner of inviting and doing them
honor, he used whenever he saw some of them to have executed that exploit,
which he would have had jointly performed by all. As for the service of dishes
up to the board, it was no other for Cyrus himself than for his guests. The
O^, Sergeants and such.
ministers in the camp, he made equal in condition with the rest, and
partakers of all things. For that he judged these officers no less worthy of
honor and advancement than either Heraults or Ambassadors. For, he supposed,
that such ought to be trusty; expert in military affairs, quick witted and of
good conceit, hardy besides and active, forward to action, and firm in
resolution: yea and more than so, Cyrus judged that these ministers ought to be
as much respected every way, and to enjoy as many preferments as those, who
were reputed the very best: and therefore so to be inured, as that they might
refuse no labor, but think all things meet for them to do, which their
Captain commanded.

CHAP. V. How Cyrus devised and communed graciously with his Chiefetaines: and
of the pleasant narrations that they related unto him for to do him pleasure.
OVer and besides, Cyrus, whenever he with his invited guests made merry
together in one Pavilion, endeavored always to have such talk and speeches
interlaced among, as might cause most mirth, and withal incite to virtue and
prowess. And one time above the rest, he fell into such a discourse as this.
What think ye, Sirs, says he, seem others beside our selves? inferior unto
us any jote, in this regard that they had not had the same education and
breeding with us! or will there be no difference at all between them and us,
either in mutual conversing together, or in manner of fight when we are to
join battle with our enemies? Then Hystaspes made answer and said, How they
will demean themselves against the enemy, I wot not yet; but in their daily
conversation, so help me God, some of them seem peevish and teasty enough
already. For, of late Cyaxares sent unto every several Company, beasts slain
for sacrifice to make good cheer with, so as there should fall to every one of
our shares three pieces of flesh or more as they were served and carried round.
And verily, the Cook, when he went about with the first service began at me:
But as he came in, the second time to deal about, I willed him to begin at the
hinmost and so to hold on his course the contrary way. Whereat one of those
soldiers which sat in the mids of the Or, round.
Circle, cried out and said, Pardie, here is no indifferent dealing, if no man
will begin at us here in the midst. Which when I heard, I was not a little
grieved, that they should think themselves cut short and to have less than
the rest; and therewith, I called presently for the said party to come and sit
by me: who herein very orderly obeyed and came. Now when the meat that went
about came unto us, whereof by that time, the smallest portion remained, by
reason (as I take it) that we were then the last to be served, this fellow
then, would hold no longer nor dissimule his grief, but softly to himself
brake out into these words, What ill luck have I, who being now called hither,
must needs come, and fare worse then others for my labor? Take it not so to
the heart, quoth I, unto him. For, the Cook will presently begin at us: and
then, shall you be first served with the greatest piece. With that comes the
Cook with his third and last course, even all that which remained behind.
Then, that soldier took his part next after me: But when a third also had
received his share, and seemed to the other for to have gotten a bigger piece
than he, he casts from him that which he had taken already, as intending to
lay hold on a greater piece. But the Cook, supposing the man had enough
already and needed no more (...).
pittance, went his way from him, and so made an end of his course about,
before the party could meet with another piece. Whereupon he was so ill appaied
for his hard hap, that when the meat was eaten up which he had once received,
the rest, sauce and all wherein he should dip (in such a pelting chafe was he,
and so angry with his ill fortune) he quite ouerturned. A Caporall that sat
next unto us, seeing this, clapped both his hands together and laughed thereat
full heartily. But I, quoth Hystaspes, made as though I coughed: For, I assure
you, I could not contain my self but laugh a good. And such an one, quoth he,
o Cyrus, can I show unto you out of our own fellows. Hereat they laughed all,
as they might well enough. Then another Centurion, This man quoth he, o Cyrus,
met belike with a fellow thus froward and discontented. But I, quoth he, when
you had taught us the manner of marshalling our companies, and so sent us away
commanding every one to teach his own company what we had learned of you, did
my self when I was gone from you, according as I saw the rest to do, and
instructed one (...).
band. Now when I had set the Caporall, or leader of that band foremost, and
next unto him placed a lusty young fellow, and so others in order, as I thought
meet, I stood then my self before them all: and looking toward the said band,
when I saw my time, commanded them all to march forward: Whereat, this said
youngster advanced himself before the leader and marched foremost: which I
seeing, Whither now good fellow, quoth I, what meanest thou to do? I march on
Sir, quoth he, as you command. Then replied I, Why! I bad not thee alone, but
all the rest to come forward: which when he heard, turning back to his
fellows, Come on Sirs, quoth he: Hear ye not how he commands us all to
march? Then they all stepped before the Caporall, and came toward me: whereupon
the said Caporall called them all back again to their places: with that they
stomached the matter and grumbled saying: whether of the twain must we now
obey? for the one bids us march on, and the other forbids us. Well, I
took all in good part, disposing them eftsoons in order with this charge,
that none of them behind should set one foot forward until the former led the
way, but all of them have a special eye to this only, even to follow the
former. Now it happened, that one intending to take a journey into Persia, came
and called upon me for my letter which I had written home to my friends.
Whereupon I willed a Caporall (for he knew where the said letter lay, to run
unto the tent and fetch the same: He ran accordingly; but the foresaid
youngster followed the Caporall hard at heels, armed as he was in his curace
and with his curtelace. All the rest of the whole band seeing him to run,
ran also amain for company: and so they all of them came and brought me my
letter. Thus has my band, says he, learned all that you have enjoined us.
Hereat, all the rest verily that were present laughed, as well they might, and
namely at this warlike guard and convoy of the letter: But Cyrus said, O
Jupiter, and all ye the Gods besides, what manner of Associats have we to
fight for us? so (...).
tractable and easy to be won, that many of them will become good friends
for a small piece of meat, and some again so obsequious, that before they
know what they are commanded, be ready to obey? Trust me truly, I wot not
what kind of soldiers a man should wish rather to have than such. Cyrus also
laughed with them, and in this sort praised the soldiers. It fortuned moreover
that in his Pavilion there was then, at this meeting, one of the Centurions
named Aglaitadas, a man for his manners and behavior one of these austere and
grimme Sirs, who began in this wise: Think you, Cyrus, quoth he, that these
men make a true report unto you? Why? said Cyrus, what should they mean to
tell lies? what else, said the other, but because they are disposed to move
laughter? in which regard they both come out with these tales, and also show
themselves bragging boasters. Oh good Sir quoth Cyrus, Fair words I pray you.
And term not these men vain vaunters. For the name of boaster or vaunter, as
I take it, is aptly given unto them, that pretend either to be richer or more
valiant than they are: such also, as promise to do, that which they cannot
perform: yea and then especially, when they are known evidently so to do for
lucre. But they that devise means to make the company to laugh, neither for
their own gain, nor to the damage of the hearers, ne yet for any other harm
at all, why should not they more truly be called, merry conceited Pleasants
rather than Boasters? Thus much answered Cyrus by way of Apology, in the
behalf of those who had moved laughter. Then the Caporall again, who related
the merry narration of his band. Now verily, Aglaitadas quoth he, If we had
gone about to cause you to weep, as some Poets and Orators there be, who both
in their Sonnets and also in their Orations, invent pitiful and lamentable
arguments, thereby to provoke melancholicke persons to shed tears, you would
have greatly blamed us; when as you knowing as you do, that we are desirous to
make you somewhat merry, and in no wise to hurt you, yet you requite us with
great contumely and disgrace. I do so indeed quoth Aglaitadas, and (by Jupiter
I swear) auow it well and justly done. For, in my conceit, whosoever causes
his friends to laugh, does not so worthy an act by far, as he that sets
them a weeping. And even your self, if you weigh the thing aright, shall find
that I say trve. And why! by weeping, fathers bring their children to modesty
and sobriety: Schoolemasters likewise their scholars to learn good arts and
sciences: yea, and the laws, whiles they force citizens and subjects to shead
tears, put them forwards to observe and practice Justice. But as for these
Pleasants that procure laughter, tell me if you can wherein they profit men's
bodies or enhable their minds, the better, to menage either private government
of house, or public administration of Commonweal? Hereupon Hystaspes came
upon him with such a speech as this. Well, Aglaitadas, if you will follow my
counsel, be bold to expend frankly upon your enemies this that you price so
high: and do your best hardly to make them weep: but upon us, your friends,
be so good as bestow your laughing, being a matter of so small cost and value.
For, I know well, you cannot choose but have plenty thereof laid up in store:
considering neither your self for your own use have spent, nor willingly
afford ought of it to your friends and guests: and therefore can pretend no
excuse, but that you must impart some laughter among us. Why? quoth Aglaitadas,
and go you about Hystaspes to fetch a laughter from me? with that, the
Caporall above said, Nay in good faith; he were a very fool then: For I
suppose a man may sooner strike fire out of you, than get one laughter. Hereat
all the rest of the company, that knew the humor and quality of the man laughed
heartily: and Aglaitadas himself could not choose but smile also a little.
Cyrus then seeing him disposed somewhat to mirth, You do not well, Caporall,
quoth he, to offer this wrong; in that by persuading the man to laugh, you
seem to corrupt and mar this our most sober and grave guest: especially
being so professed an enemy against laughter. And thus, an end there was of
merry talk in this kind.

CHAP. VI. The consultation of Cyrus with his Army, whether he should reward
all his soldiers alike: or every one according to his desert?
AFter all this, Chrysantas entered into a discourse in this manner. Cyrus, and
ye all that are here present: I consider with my self, There be come forth
hither with us, some of more worth, and others of less. Howbeit, if there
shall befall unto us any good fortune, they will think themselves all worthy
of the same availes. But, I assure you, I repute nothing in the world more
unequal, than that the valiant man and the coward should be rewarded alike. To
this point Cyrus inferred thus. It were best therefore my friends (before God I
speak,) to put this matter in question unto the Army: namely, whether they
think it good, (if it please God to speed our labors,) to make all men of
equal condition: or duly considering the service of every one, to award them
their rewards in proportion accordingly. And what need you quoth Chrysantas to
propound this matter for to be debated? rather than to denounce that you will
proceed so? For have you not already proclaimed public Games, and withal
published prices? Yes, pardie said Cyrus, but the case of those and these is
not alike. For, whatsoever by their souldier-fare in this expedition, they
shall win; they will deem the same, I think, to be common unto me and them
all. As for the sovereign rule and command of the army, they suppose it happily
due still unto me, as being laid upon me from the State at home. And therefore,
in appoynting as I do, Provosts or Superiors.
Captains, and disposing of their charge, they are persuaded, I trow, that I
do not therein wrongfully. And, think you quoth Chrysantas that the whole
multitude of them assembled together, will decree, That every man shall not
have equal share, but the best and worthiest person ought to be preferred
respectively both in honors and gifts? I verily, says Cyrus, am of that mind:
partly for that ye are ready to opine the same with me, and partly because it
is unbeseeming to gainsay this position, That whosoever both travaileth most
and procures greatest good to the Commonwealth, is worthy also of best
advancement. Nay, the very basest cowards of all, will think it behoovefull I
suppose, that valiant men ought to be preferred before others. And Cyrus
verily was willing enough, that this decree should pass for those Homotimi.
Peers sake. For, he thought, that even they would be more valourous, if they
knew once, that being first judged by their deeds, they should receive condign
rewards. He thought it therefore the best opportunity, at this very time, to
have this matter decided by voices: when as the very Peers themselves feared
this equal condition of the vulgar with them. It was thought good then, by all
those who were assembled in the Pavilion of Cyrus to refer this question in
hand to a Scrutinie, and that, who ever would be reputed a man in deed, should
accord thereto. A Centurion there was in place, who smiling hereat; One man
quoth he of the common sort I know, who will soon agree that this even partage
thus hand over head shall not pass. And who may he be? I pray you, asked
another. It is, says he, a tent-fellow of mine: who in all things by his good
will would have more than others. What! says another, In labor and pains
taking too? Nay, quoth he, Ho there. Here I am taken in a lie. For, in
travailes and all such matters, he ever suffers very gently any one that will,
to have more than himself. Then Cyrus, I ordain says he, that such fellows
as he now speaks of, should be called and displaced, if we intend to have a
valiant and obedient army. For, of this opinion am I, that the multitude, in
general, of soldiers stand thus affected, even to follow which way soever any
man leads them. Now, such I suppose as be honest and valourous, endeavor to
be leaders unto good and honest actions: but lewd and wicked persons, unto lewd
and naughty deeds. And truly, it falls out oftentimes, that lewd folk
induce more to follow them and take their part, than the better sort. For, vice
conversing among pleasures, which soon offer and present themselves, uses
their help jointly to persuade many to assent unto her: whereas virtue leading
the way directly up to steep ascents, is not very powerful and able so quickly
and out of hand to win and draw men unto her: especially if there be others
again who allure them to gentle, easy and pleasant descents. And therefore,
if there be any, who only in sluggardy loitering and refusing (...).
to take pains become naught, such I repute as drones to endamage their
fellows in matter of expense, and nothing else: but such as in pains taking
with others be slack, howbeit in seeking their own gain, forward enough and
shameless withal, they become ringleaders also unto lewdness: For they are
able many times to show and prove, that wickedness has sped best, and gained
most. Wherefore such as these in any wise we ought to discharge and remoove
from among us. And verily ye are not so much to consider, how ye may supply
and make up these your broken bands with your own countrymen: but, like as in
horses, ye lay for them that be best, and not bred at home: even so in choice
of men, of all others take them whom ye think likely and meet, both to add
most strength and bring also greatest honor to your selves. And that such a
course will speed well I presume also upon the testimony of this one instance:
For that neither can a chariot be swift, in which the steeds be slow: nor a
Council or judicial Court be just, wherein unrighteous men be joined with
others in Commission; ne yet a house well governed that employeth lewd and
naughty servants. Nay, less detriment should an house receive, wanting
servants altogether, than being pestered with those that be false and wicked.
Certes, my friends, I would have you to know thus much, that by weeding out
lewd soldiers, not only this good shall ensue, that such persons will be rid
away and gone: but of those also who shall remain behind with us, as many as
be already infected and grown full of wickedness, shall be purged of the same
again: Yea and the good, when they shall see the wicked disgraced and put to
shame, will with far greater alacrity embrace virtue. When Cyrus had thus
said, all his friends approoved well of his words, and did accordingly. Then
began Cyrus eft-soones to jest and infer a pleasant conceited speech. For,
perceiving one of the (...)some read, (...) a Caporall or Leader of 12. as
appears afterward.
Centiniers to bring with him as a guest to supper, and to have sitting close
by his side, a certain fellow exceeding hairy, and withal as foul and
deformed: he called unto him the said Captain and spoke thus unto him:

How now, Sambaulas, (for that was his name), lead you after the Greek
fashion about with you as your shadow, this pretty youth that sits here
next unto you, because he is so fair and well-favoured? Yea verily do I,
quoth Sambaulas: And, so love me God as I delight both to be in his company,
and also to behold his countenance. When the other tent-fellowes heard this,
they looked wistly upon the party, and perceiving his face to be passing foul
and ill-favored, they all fell a laughing. And one among the rest, Now for
Gods sake, quoth he, Sambaulas, for what good demerit is this man so highly in
your favor? I will tell you truly, quoth Sambaulas. How often so ever I called
him either by night or by day, he never pretended for his excuse any business
of his own, nor used to tell his steps as he went, but always ran at my
command. When so ever I have set him about any thing, I never saw him do ought
but he swet at it. Moreover, he has made the whole dowzain beside like unto
himself, showing them not by word but by deed, how they ought to behave
themselves. Then said one, If he be such an one as you speak of, kiss you him
not as you are wont your kinsmen? To this the party himself with that deformed
face of his, Not so ywis, for he cannot away with pains taking. And if he
should but kiss me once, it might Or excuse him.
serve for all his other exercises whatsoever. Such matters as these mirth and
earnest were delivered and debated at this feast. (...) etc.
In the end, after they had performed the third complement of sacred Libations,
and withal prayed unto the Gods for to give them good success, they arose
from board to bed and so brake up their meeting.

CHAP. VII. The Oration of Cyrus unto his whole Camp. The opinions of
Chrysantas and Pheraulas as touching that which Cyrus had proposed. And what
was the conclusion and determination thereof.
THE morrow after, when Cyrus had gathered all his soldiers together, he made
a speech unto them in this manner: Friends we have a battle toward: For, our
enemies approach. And rewards belong only to victory. If we be victours,
certain it is, that both the enemies will be ours, and likewise all the
enemies goods: but if we be vanquished (for this must always be our saying)
semblably, all our goods in case we be overcome, are present prizes and rewards
evermore for the winners. Moreover, thus much ye ought to know, that if men
taking part together in war, shall every one set down this reckoning, that
nothing will succeed well, unless for their parts and places they play the
valiant men, they will soon atchieue many and those right brave exploits. For,
such as they, will not neglect through sloth any service that is to be done.
But when each one thinks, that some other man there will be to do the service
and to fight, though himself sit still and take his ease: then make this full
account and be sure, that there is no misfortune and calamity, but all such
persons must abide it. And verily, this after a sort is the ordinance of God:
For, over those who will not enjoin themselves labor, to effect good things,
he sets others to rule and command. Now therefore, let some one arise up
here and speak to the point, whether he thinks, that it is like we will
give our minds to exercise virtue the rather, if he that is willing to
travail most and to enter into greatest danger, shall obtain also the
greatest honor: or if he know, that it matters not at all if one be a coward,
seeing that all of us shall be rewarded alike? Then Chrysantas one of the Or,
Knights, Homotimi.
Peers above said arose. No big man was he of person to see to, nor strong,
but of singular wisdom, who spoke in this wise.

I suppose, quoth he, o Cyrus, you propound not this case to be decided,
because you think it meet, that cowards should by right have equal part with
valiant men, but to try, whether any one will be seen to carry this mind,
that although himself execute no good and commendable Act, yet he would be
full partner, and reap like fruit of those things, which others by their
valor have achieved? As for my self, quoth he, swift I am not of foot, nor
yet a tall man of my hands. And full well I wot, that for any feats which I
shall with my body perform; I cannot be raunged in the first, nor second, ne
yet I suppose in the thousandth, no, nor peradventure in the ten thousandth
place. And yet thus much also, I know for certain, that if hardy men shall
attempt any brave deeds, and do their best, I shall have such part of some
good commodities, as I am thought of right to deserve: but if both cowards and
slowbacks shall do just nothing, and also the valorous and able men be put out
of heart and discouraged, I fear me, quoth he, I shall have a part of any
thing rather than that which is good, yea and in greater measure then I would.

When Chrysantas had thus said, there stood up after him Pheraulas a Persian
Commoner, one in some sort ever since they came from home, inward with Cyrus
and well accepted of him. A man for his body not unpersonable, and in regard of
his mind, seeming no ignoble and base pesant, who made this speech.

I suppose o Cyrus, quoth he, and ye Persians as many as are present, that we
all endeavor, and strive to the trial of virtue. For, I perceive that
generally we acquaint our bodies to like diet: we are admitted all, to
semblable societies and meetings: and the very same acts of Prowess are
propounded to us all indifferently. For, to obey those that be in authority, is
a point in common that concerns all, and whosoever is known thus to do
without refusal and pretending excuse for the matter, him I see most honored
at Cyrus his hands. Also, to be stout and valiant against the enemy, is a thing
not deemed decent for one, and undecent for another: but even the same has
been judged already to be most seemly and honorable for all. But now, say I, a
fight battle also is presented unto us, unto which I see all men are fitted
and skillful by nature: like as other creatures are cunning every one in some
fight or other, which they have learned of no other schoolmaster but of
nature. As for example, the Bull [or Oxe] is naturally taught to push with his
horn, the Horse to strike with his house, the Dog to bite with his mouth, and
the Bore to wound with his tusk. And all these beasts know to avoid those
things which are most to be taken heed of. And yet for this, they never
frequented any School at all. My self, when I was but a little one, knew even
then, how to cast some thing in his way, who I thought would beat me. And if I
had nothing else about me, I would put forth both my hands and as much as
possibly I could impeach him that was smiting of me. And this did I untaught.
For, beaten otherwhiles I was, if in defense of my self I opposed ought
between. Being but a very child, I would catch up a sword, wheresoever I could
see it, not taught of any other so much as how to take and hold it, but only
by instinct of nature, as I suppose. Nay, I would thus do, when I was not
taught, but forbidden to do it: Like as other things there by, which
notwithstanding I was restreined by my father and mother both, yet by nature I
was enforced to practice: And, so help me Jupiter, as I loved to be striking
with a sword, what ever I could reach covertly and not espied. Neither was this
unto me natural only, as to go or to run, but besides the motion of nature
that way, me thought I found a pleasure and sweetness in so doing. Seeing
then, quoth he, this fight is left unto us, wherein natural courage is like to
prevail more than artificial cunning; why should not we delight to enter into
contention and aemulation with these Or, Gentlemen.
Peers: considering that the like rewards of fortitude be proposed unto us on
both sides? and yet we know, that we for our parts hazard not alike. For, these
here adventure an honorable life, which is the only life of all others most
pleasant, but we a painful and laborious life in deed, but a life without
honor, which I suppose is most odious and displeasant. And now, my fellow
foldiers, this most of all inciteth me to entertein a contention and trial
with them, For that Cyrus shall be our judge, who will not upon any envy
determine partially: but I dare upon mine oath say, That I am verily persuaded
in my heart, that whom soever Cyrus sees to bear themselves valiantly, those
he loves no less than his own heart. And this I perceive in him, that upon
them here, he bestows what he has with more pleasure, than keeps it for
himself: yet I am not ignorant: That these Peers be high minded Gentlemen,
and of hautie stomach, brought up and trained, as they are, to endure hunger,
thirst and cold: Full little knowing that we have learned even the same of a
better Schoolmaster than they. For, there is no better Preceptour of these
things than Necessity, which has taught us to be very perfect therein. As for
these Gentlemen I say, enured they have been to travail in bearing their
armours which all men have devised to make so, as they might be borne most
easily: but we were put to go and run also under great burdens: so that now,
the carriage of harnois, seems unto me more like unto wings than burdens. And
therefore, tak me, o Cyrus, for such an one as will do my devoyr: and
whatsoever I am, better or worse, I shall require to be honored and advanced
according to my worthiness and not otherwise. And ye also, my friends, of the
Commons, I exhort you that ye will arm your selves in this battle to strive
for the better, with these Gentlemen so well brought up. And now no doubt,
quoth he, are these Gallants Overmatchd.
overtaken already in this trial with us the Commons. To this effect spoke
Pheraulas. There were also, many others beside, who rose up and accorded to
both their speeches. Whereupon there passed a Decree, That every man should be
honored and rewarded after his own worth: and Cyrus to be Judge thereof. And
thus verily proceeded these matters.

CHAP. VIII. The feats of arms, that Cyrus his Captains practiced in
exercising their Companies.
MOreover, Cyrus invited also upon a time a whole Centurie together with their
Centinier to supper, by occasion that he had seen him to divide his Company
into two parts, and to set them in battle ray one side against the other
ready to skirmish; armed, as they were on both sides for defense, with
brest-plates, and bearing in their left hands light Or wicker targuets.
bucklers. But for offense, he gave unto the one half in their right hands
good round Or wasters.
bastons: signifying to the rest, that they should take up clods and fling them
at their opposites. Now when they stood thus arraunged and appointed, he gave
them the signal to combat. Then the one part threw from them their clods at
the other, and hit them, some on the brest-plates and bucklers, others upon the
thighs and Or greaves.
boots. But when those were once come to close fight, who had the wasters
abovesaid: they laid about them and basted the other well: some on their
thighs, others about their hands and arms: others also over their shinnes and
legs: yea and if any of them stouped for to take up clods, they would be sure
to lay upon their necks and backs. At length the Or bastoniers.
waster-men put the others to flight, pursued them, and beat them thoroughly
with much good laughter and pastime. Others also for their parts again, would
in like manner take wasters in hand and serve them so who fought with flinging
clods: Cyrus admiring as well the witty devise of the Leader, as the due
obedience of the Soldiers: for that they were at once both exercised and also
emboldened: and seeing withal, those gain the better who counterfaited the
Persians armor and weapons, being much delighted with this sight, bade them
all to supper: and espying in his pavilion, some of them with their shinnes and
legs, others with their arms and hands bound up, he asked them what they
ayled? who answered that they had been hurt with clods: then demanded he of
them again, whether they caught their hurt when they met close together, or
when they were far asunder? they made answer, when they were far asunder:
but when we came to close-hand-fight, said the Wastermen, we made most
pleasant pastime and sport: Sport? cried out the other who had been well
basted with the bastinado: We for our parts found no such sport when we buckled
together, thus to be cudgelled: and with that showed on their arms, hands and
necks, yea and some of them upon their faces the dry blows of the bastons
which they had received. And then verily they laughed heartily one at another
as they might well enough. The day following, the whole field was full of men,
who assayed to imitate these in this manner of fight: and when they had no
other weightier affairs in hand, they practiced evermore this kind of game.
Moreover, [Cyrus] having espied on a time another Centurion leading his
Centurie, one by one from a river (...).
to dinner, and when he saw his time commanding the Caporalls to bring forward
the hindmore band, the third likewise and the fourth, in to the front: also,
when as now the Caporals [or Leaders of the said bands] were all afront, how he
bade them to double their fyles and lead every band by two and two. And so
thereupon, the Decurions brought forward their men afront accordingly: And when
he thought it good again, how he gave charge to lead their bands by four and
four in rank: whereupon the Quincurions went forward with their soldiers so
as that the band marched four and four in rank. Also how after they were
come once to their Pavilion door, heeled the foremost band in, commanding them
to march two by two in rank: willing withal the second to follow hard after
in the very tail of the other: and having given the like charge to the third
and fourth, how he led them in: And thus as he brought them in, how he caused
them to sit down to their (...).
meal even as they entered. Cyrus I say wondering at this Or Centurion.
Captain for his mildness, his dexterity in teaching, and diligence withal,
invited this hundred also to supper, with their Centinier. Now, there being
then in place a certain other Centurion, that was bidden to supper; But,
invite you not my Centurie, quoth he, o Cyrus, into your Pavilion? and yet,
when he is at supper he does the very same every way: when supper also is done,
and the meeting dissolved; the last Leader of the rear band brings forth his
crew, having the last verily set foremost in array against they should fight:
then after them, he likewise that leads the tail of the second crew: and
semblably the third and the fourth: to the end that when they are to be led
away from the enemies, they might know how to retire. Furthermore, if we
address out selves for a running march, and be disposed to journey: whenever
we set out toward the Sunrising, I my self lead the way, and the first band
goes foremost: then, the second keeps his place, as is meet: the third
likewise and the fourth in order: as also the Decuries and Quicuries of every
band, so long as I bid them. But when we march toward the West [or Sunsetting
then the Caporall of the rear band and with him those that be last, lead in
the front: and yet they obey me nevertheless coming behind in the very tail:
that they may be accustomed as well to follow, as lead with like obedience. And
what! quoth Cyrus, Do ye always practice this? Yea Sir, I assure you, quoth
the said Captain, so often and as duly as we go to our suppers. I invite
therefore you also, says Cyrus, partly for that you yonder train your
soldiers so precisely to keep order in going and coming, in marching on and
retiring, and partly because you practice so to do both by day and night; and
withal not only exercise your bodies by journeying but also profit your minds
by teaching. And now, for as much as ye do every thing double, good reason it
is that we semblably make you double cheer. Not so, for Gods sake, says the
Captain, unless you give us also two bellies apeece. And thus brake up their
meeting in his Pavilion. The morrow after, Cyrus reinvited this Centurie to his
Pavilion, according as he had said overnight, and so the day following: Which
when the rest perceived, they all from that time forward imitated them.

CHAP. IX. How Cyaxares gave audience to the King of India his Ambassadors and
sent them afterward to the King of Assyria.
AS Cyrus on a time was mustering all his soldiers in their armor and
setting them in order of battle: there came a messenger from Cyaxares,
advertising him of an Embassage arrived from the Indians, and therefore,
Cyaxares his will is, says he, that you repair unto him with all speed. I
have beside, quoth the messenger, brought unto you from Cyaxares a most goodly
and fair robe: For, his desire is, that you should show your self in most
magnificent and gorgeous manner, For that the Indians are to view and behold
you as you come. Cyrus hearing this news, gave commandment to the principal
and foremost Centinier, arraunged as he was in battle ray, that standing
himself on the right hand, and leading his Centurie one by one, he should
place it afront: he willed him also to give the like charge unto the second:
and so, throughout them all he bad him intimate so much. Which order of his
they obeyed, and as they quickly delivered this charge, so they performed the
same as speedily. Thus within a short time, there stood afront in rank 200.
For so many Centiniers there were, and in depth one hundred. When they were
thus placed, he commanded them to follow, as himself led the way. And
forthwith, he set forward in a running march. But when he understood once, that
the way leading to the Court, was so narrow that it might not receive them
marching all afront, he commanded the Foremost.
first regiment of a thousand to follow in their place, and the second to march
after in the tail of it. And in this manner he went himself always foremost,
never resting between; and the other thousands followed every one hard at the
heels of the former. Moreover, he sent two Sargeants.
Officers of purpose unto the entry of the way for to instruct any one that was
ignorant and to seek, what to do. Now when they were come before the gates of
Cyaxares his Palace, he commanded the foremost Centurion to arrange his
Company so, as they might stand 12. in file, deep, and to place the leaders of
every 12. afront before the Palace. The like charge he caused to be given unto
the second, and so throughout to all. Which they did accordingly. Then Cyrus
presented himself to Cyaxares in a long Persian robe, nothing proud nor
sumptuous. When Cyaxares saw him, well pleased he was with this speedy repair
that he made, but offended at the baseness of his garment. How now Cyrus,
quoth he, what mean you by this, to show your self in so simple habit before
the Indians? I would have had you most stately and gloriously to be seen. For,
an honor it would have been to me, that you my sisters son had been set
out and arrayed most royally. To this Cyrus made answer in this wise. Whether
should I have honored you more, good Uncle Cyaxares, if being clad in purple,
putting on bracelets and wearing a colar about my neck, I have accomplished
your will and commandment by leisure, or rather as now I do, obey you so
speedily with so great and goodly a power, and all, to do you honor; adorned
(as you see) my self, and so adorning you with swett and through diligence?
teaching others also thereby, to be likewise obedient unto you? Thus spoke
Cyrus; and Cyaxares liked well of his speech: and thereupon commanded the
Indians to be brought forward for audience: Who being come in place, The Indian
King our Master, say they, has sent us with commission, to demand the cause,
wherefore the Medes and Assyrians make war one against the other? and upon
the hearing of your answer, he willed us to go on directly to the Assyrian
King, and of him likewise to demand the same: but in conclusion, to declare
unto you both: That the Indian King, upon consideration of right and Justice,
will take part with him that has the wrong. To which Embassage Cyaxares
returned this answer. Give ear then unto my words. No wrong at all do we
unto the Assyrian King. And now, go your ways ye may unto him, and enquire
what he says. But Cyrus being there present, Pleases it you, quoth he unto
Cyaxares, that I also may deliver mine opinion? Say on, quoth Cyaxares and
speak your mind. Ye then, says Cyrus unto the Ambassadors, shall thus
report unto the King your Master. That, unless it seem good otherwise to
Cyaxares, we make this answer. That if the Assyrian King say, he has in any
thing bin injured by us, we are content to accept of the Indian King himself
to be the Judge. When they heard this, they took their leave and departed.

CHAP. X. How Cyrus being in deliberation and conference with his Uncle, as
touching this Affair, and about levying sums of money, enterprised war
upon the King of Armenia.
AFter that the Indian Ambassadors were gone forth, Cyrus began to commune
with Cyaxares in this manner. Sir, hither came I to you bringing from home with
me no great store of treasure properly mine own: And how much so ever it was,
that I had, there is but very little left thereof, for that I have spent it
upon my soldiers: Now happily you marvel how I have consumed it, considering
they are at your finding. But I would have you to know, that I have done
nothing else therewith but bestowed it in gifts and rewards, whenever I
admired any one of my soldiers: For, thus I think, That a man may better and
with more pleasure incite by fair language and well doing, rather than by hard
dealing and compulsion, all those whose help he would use in any business
whatsoever: so likewise, he that is desirous to have in war affairs, willing
and forward coadjutours, must in my judgment, allure and win them altogether
with gracious words and liberal deeds. For, friends they must be and not foes,
who shall unfainedly and without pretense of excuse assist us in war, and fight
by our side as who will never envy their Commander in weal, nor shrink and
forsake him in woe: Upon these considerations, me thinks I had need of much
treasure. For, to have mine eye for every thing upon you, whom I perceive to be
at very great expense, seems to me absurd: And therefore, I deem it meet
both for you and me to consider upon this point together in common, that you be
not bare of money. For, if you be thoroughly stored, well I wot, that I also
may have my part thereof at my need whenever: especially, if I take the same
to such an use, as the defraying thereof may turn to your better profit. I
remember I heard you say of late, that the Armenian King slighteth you at this
present, because he hears say, there be enemies coming against us, and so
neither sends unto you an army, nor pays you the tribute due, as he ought.
He does so indeed good Cyrus, quoth he. And therefore I stand now in doubt,
whether it were better for me to make war upon him, and so to try what I can
do by force: or now for my behoufe, to let him alone at this time, for fear
we make the number of our enemies the greater by him. Then Cyrus replied and
asked, What! Do the Armenians dwell in places surely situate, or in such as be
easy of access? Surely, answered Cyaxares, Their houses be not seated very
strongly. For, I have not been careless in that behalf. Howbeit there be
certain hills, into which if The Armenian King.
he retire, he may straight-wayes be in such safety as that he need not yield
unto the enemy either himself or whatsoever he can convey thither, unless he
would beleaguer him a long time, with a standing camp, as my Father sometime
did. Hereupon Cyrus inferred thus. If you will send me, and give me the conduct
of a troop of horsemen, such as you shall think sufficient, I trust with the
leave and help of God, to cause the Armenian King both to send unto you an
army, and also to pay you the tribute. Yea, and I hope besides, that much more
friendly he will be to us, than now he is. And even I too, quoth Cyaxares, am
verily persuaded, that they will all rather come in and side with you than with
us. For, I hear say, that some of the Kings children were wont to be your
companions in hunting, who perhaps will join with you again. But if some of
them be subdued and brought under your hand, all things will succeed as we
would our selves. How then, says Cyrus, think you it not expedient to
conceal these dessignes of ours? Yes truly, quoth Cyaxares; For, by this
means, both some one of them we shall take the sooner, and also if a man
should invade them, they might be surprised less provided. Listen then, says
Cyrus, whether I shall seem unto you to say somewhat to the purpose? Many a
time have I, with all the Persians that were with me, hunted about the
confines of your land and the Armenians, and otherwiles having joined unto me
some horsemen, (those I mean who were my friends and familiars here in Media)
made a journey thither. Therefore, quoth Cyaxares, if you enterprise the like
now, you should never be suspected. But if your forces appear much greater,
than you were wont to take with you a hunting, then it were very suspicious
indeed. Yet may we devise a pretty persuasive pretense quoth Cyrus for this:
Namely, if some one give it out and carry word thither, that I have a desire to
make a great hunting, and seem withal to crave openly of you certain horsemen.
Well said of you, quoth Cyaxares, and I my self will not willingly grant unto
you but a mean sort, making semblance, as though I meant my self, to go unto
my Forts and Castles which frontier next unto Assyria. For, in very truth, I
intend a journey thither, to fortify the same holds, and make them as sure as
possibly I can. Now when you are set forth with those forces of your own, and
have hunted two days, I will send unto you a sufficient strength of horse and
foot, levied already about me: which when you have received, you may directly
make an invasion. And I for my part, ready to second you with the rest of my
forces, will do my best not to be far from you; to the end that when I see
my time, I may show my self in the field. Thus Cyaxares assembled out of hand
horsemen and footmen both, for his holds: and withal sent wagons before with
victuals, the very way that led to the said Forts. But Cyrus immediately
sacrificed in regard of this expedition, and therewith sent unto Cyaxares,
requesting that he might have the younger horsemen: and notwithstanding, many
were ready to follow as voluntaries, yet he granted unto him but few. When
Cyaxares had now put himself upon his way, with a power of foot and horse
toward his fortresses, Cyrus happened to have a lucky Sacrifice, presaging
fortunate success in his journey against the Armenian [King]: and so he set
forward, as one well appointed only for to hunt. And as he marched on, behold
in the very first open field that he came into: he presently started an Hare:
and with that an Aegle flying on the lucky hand; having espied the Hare
running, made wing, struck her, caught her up, and away: Now when she had
carried the Hare to the next hill top, she feized on her prey, as she would
her self. Cyrus observing this sign, rejoiced in his heart, and therewith
worshipped Jupiter King, and said unto those that were present: My friends,
This will be I trust in God, a fair and pleasant Chase. When they were come
hard to the Frontiers, he hunted streightwaies, as his manner was. And verily,
the common sort as well of footmen as of horsemen, coursed and galloped to and
fro, intending thereby to rouse the Dear: but the best and chief of horse and
foot both were divided, to stand at the receipt of the beast being once a-foot,
and to follow the game. So within few hours, they took many wild Bores, Stags.
Hearts, (...)
fallow Dear, and wild Asses. For, in these parts there be many such Asses
bred, even at this day. When they had given over hunting for that day, so foone
as he was entered into the marches of the Armenians, he supped. The next day he
hunted again, approaching night to those mountains, which he desired to
gain: And here likewise after he had done hunting he took his supper. But
so soon as he discovered the power that Cyaxares sent, advancing near at
hand, he dispatched secrerly a messenger, willing them, to fall off, about two
parasangs from him, and there to go to supper: Foreseeing, that this would
much avail to conceal his coming from the enemies: And so soon as he had
supped, he commanded that their Or Commander.
Captain should repair unto him. When supper was done, he called likewise
before him the Centurions, unto whom being present he spoke in this wise.

CHAP. XI. The project and speech of Cyrus to his Captains, and to Chrysantas
about the laying of an Embash. And how the same was put in execution against
the King of Armenia.
MY good friends, the Armenian King, has before-time been confederate with
Cyaxares, and as a Tributary done homage unto him. But now, upon intelligence
of our enemies coming, he sets him at naught, and neither sends us an
army, nor pays tribute, therefore must we hunt him now if we can: and in
this manner, quoth he, I think it good, that we proceed. You Chrysantas, after
that you have gotten some moderate sleep, take with you the one half of the
Persians which are with us: enter the way of the mountains and seize those
hills first, unto which, they say he uses to fly, when he is in fear: I my
self will give unto you guides for your better conduct. And verily, these
hills, by report, be so thick overspred with trees, that I hope ye shall not
be descried. Howbeit, if you send forth before the army, certain nimble
fellows lightly appointed, resembling both for number and apparel brigands
and robbers: If they chance to light upon any of the Armenians, look
whomsoever they can catch, them will they be sure to keep and make sure for
telling tales: and whom they shall not be able to take, they will yet hold them
so far all of, as that they shall not have a sight of our maine host, but
consult together as touching you, as of thieves and none other. Thus I say, do
you. As for my self, by day-breake, I will with the other moitie of the
Infantery, and the whole Cavallery, take to the plain and champion way,
marching directly to the Court where the King lies. Then, if he make head
against us and resist, it is a plain case, that of necessity, fight we must.
But say that he retireth and leaves the even ground, evident then it is, that
we are to course and pursue him. Suppose he flies to the hills, then quoth he,
it will be your part, to let none of them escape that shall come thither unto
you. Make the case thus, as in hunting: Imagine we be the hounds, that seek
and find out; and your self the huntsman, that keeps by the net and toil.
Remember therefore, that all the Avenues must be stopped before the hunting is
begun. Moreover, close they ought to be and secret who are appointed to keep
the passages, in case they would not have the wild beasts to be turned aside
that are running forth toward them. Howbeit, do not you, good Chrysantas, as
you are wont sometime to do, for the love you have to hunting. For, often-time
you pass the whole night in business without sleep. But now, permit you must
your soldiers, to take their rest moderately, that they may be able to fight
against sleep and resist it. Neither (because your self can raunge and wander
over the mountains, having no men to be your guides, but the skill to follow
that way whereas the beasts went before) may you therefore at this time, go
likewise in places hardly passable: But give you charge unto your guides to
lead you the easiest way, if so be there be not another far shorter. For, the
easiest way, is the speediest for an army and soonest dispatched. Ne, yet must
you lead your men a running march, for that you have been wont to run over
the hills: but see you go before them a moderate pace, that the army may
conveniently follow. It were good also, that some of the most able and
forwardest men staying behind, should encourage the other; that when as
afterward that wing passes on, which is to incite the rest for to make speed,
all the soldiers therein compared to those that go an ordinary foot pace, may
seem to run. Chrysantas having heard thus much, and ioying greatly in his
heart, that he had received these advertisements from Cyrus, took with him his
guides, and departed. Now when he had told them that should go with him, what
they were to do, he took his repose. After they had rested so long as he
thought meet, he advanced toward the hills. But Cyrus, by that time it was
daylight, sent a pursuivant before unto the King of Armenia, with instructions
to deliver this message unto him and to say, Cyrus commands you, o King of
Armenia, thus to do: namely to repair unto him with all speed, bringing with
you both your tribute and also a power of men. If he ask you where I am? Tell
truth and say, that I am within his marches. If he demand whether my self am
coming forward in person? Answer hereto also, and that truly, that you know
not. But if he enquire, how many we are strong? Bid him send some men to know.
Thus dispatched he the messenger away with this errand. For he thought it stood
better with courtesy and humanity, in this wise to deal, than to come upon
him at unwares without any warning. Himself being sufficiently every way
provided, both to go through his journey, and also to fight if need required,
set forth and marched forward. But, he made Proclamation before unto all his
soldiers, That they should do wrong to no person. And if any of them chanced
to light upon an Armenian, to bid him be of good cheer and fear nothing: and
withal to permit every man that were so disposed, to keep mercate in those
places where they abode: with liberty to sell at their pleasure for money any
victuals, (either meat or drink) whatsoever.

THE THIRD BOOK.
CHAP. I. How Cyrus without giving battle, took the King of Armenia
prisoner, and seized upon his goods. The discourses that the said King made
with his son Tigranes, about his deliverance.
CYRUS verily was thus busied in these affairs. But the King of Armenia upon
the mandate of Cyrus, delivered by his Herault, was much affrighted:
considering especially that he did wrong both in withholding tribute, and also
in not sending an Army. And this most of all he feared, least he should be
seen for to have begun to build and fortify his Palace so, as it might be
able to keep out his enemies. Being therefore much perplexed by all these
occasions: He sent forth Commissioners into diverse parts [of his Kingdome] for
to assemble his own forces, and withal, conveied away into the mountains his
younger son Sabaris, his own wife, his sons wife and his daughters,
together with their ornaments, furniture and Jewels of great value, appointing
a convoy of purpose to conduct them safe. He made out also certain men in
espiall, to see what Cyrus did; yea and did put in order of battle those
Armenians who were come unto him. And within a while, others repaired unto him
with news, that Cyrus in person was at hand. But then, his heart would serve
him no longer for to try a battle: and so, secretly withdrew himself out of
the way. Now when the Armenians saw him so to do, they also fled home every
man, intending to remove their goods farther off. Cyrus then, beholding the
fields, how full they were of those that ran straggling here and there
shifting for themselves, and driving before them their cattle, sent after, and
did them to understand, That he meant not to proceed in hostile manner against
any one that would tarry: but if he took any flying away, he denounced
aforehand that he would deal with them as enemies. By this means the vulgar
sort, and the most part stayed: Howbeit, diverse there were, that privily
conveyed themselves away with the King. When as now they that were gone before
with the women, fell within the danger of them that kept the mountains, they
set up by and by a great and piteous cry, and as they fled, very many of them
were taken. In the end, the Kings son, the wives also and daughters aforesaid
were taken captive, and all the goods and treasure seized upon, which they had
carried with them. The King himself, when he understood what was befalne unto
them, being in doubt what to do, and which way to turn him, fled up to a
certain hill top for to save himself. Which Cyrus likewise seeing, with the
power he had about him, laid siege to the hill round about: He sent also to
Chrysantas, willing him to abandon the Keeping of the foresaid mountain and to
come unto him. Mean while that Cyrus his army assembled, he sent unto the
Armenian King an Herald, by whom he demanded these questions. Tell me
directly, King of Armenia, whether you will remain there still to wrestle and
fight with hunger and thirst, or come down into the plain and fight it out
with us? The Armenian King and answered, that he would fight with neither. Then
Cyrus sent eft-soones and asked in these terms, Why then sit you there and
come not down? Because, quoth he, I am to seek what to do. But you neither
need nor ought to doubt, replied Cyrus; For you may come down to plead your
own cause. And who shall be our judge? says the King. Who but he? says
Cyrus, unto whom God has given power, without form of law and judicial
process, to use you at his pleasure? The King then, considering into what
streights he was driven, descended from the hill top. Then Cyrus having taken
both him and all other things also that he had, into the middle space between,
environed them round within his tents; For, now by this time, had he all his
forces about him. At this very instant, the Kings eldest son, Tigranes, who
before-time had accompanied Cyrus in hunting, was newly returned from a
certain journey: And hearing what occurrents were fallen out, went directly,
even as he was, to Cyrus. But so soon as he saw his father and mother, his
brethren, sisters, and his own wife captives, he wept as good reason he had.

Cyrus when he beheld the man, used no other complement of courtesy and
entertainment, but thus said unto him. Come you are in good season, that you
may be present to hear your fathers cause tried. And therewith immediately he
assembled together the Chiefetaines and Rulers, as well of the Persians as of
the Medes: He called likewise to this Council, as many of the Nobles and
Honorable persons of Armenia as were present: The very women also being there
in their Carroches he excluded not, but admitted them to the audience of his
cause. Now, when he was provided accordingly and saw his time, turning to the
King of Armenia, thus began he to speak. First, quoth he, o King of Armenia,
I advise you in the deciding of this matter, to speak the truth: that you may
be clear at least of that one thing, which of all others deserves most
hatred. For, this would I have you to wit well, That to be taken with a lie, is
the greatest bar that men can have against obtaining of grace and pardon.
Morcover, even your children and these women here your wives: many Armenians
also that be in place, are privy to you of all that which you have committed:
Who, if they perceive you to speak otherwise than truth, will think that you
judge your own self worthy to suffer all extremities, when I shall once find
out the truth. Propose then, quoth he, o Cyrus what questions you will: For,
utter the truth I shall, come of it what will. Why then quoth Cyrus. Answer
directly unto me. Made you war at any time upon Astyages my mothers father
and the rest of the Medes? I did, said he. And when you were vanquished by him,
Did you not covenant and accept of these conditions: Imprimis, to yield him
tribute. Item to aid him with men in his wars, whenever he gave you
warning? and lastly to hold no fortresses in your realm? It was even so
indeed, answered he: Now therefore why have you falsified your faith, and
neither tendered your tribute, nor sent a power for aid, but have walled your
forts? Because, says he, I was desirous of liberty. For, I thought it a noble
thing both my self to be free, and also to leave the same freedom to my
children. Certes, quoth Cyrus, a worthy matter it is for a man to endeavor,
that he may never come into bondage: but if one either defeated in war, or
otherwise brought into servitude, be taken practizing to revolt and shake off
allegiance unto his Lords, tell me, you first, do you honor him as a good
man and behaving himself well, or punish him as a trangressour, after you have
taken him? Surely I punish him quoth he. For you allow me not to lie. Then,
answer me plainly and punctually quoth Cyrus to these Interrogatories. If any
man in place of authority and command under you, do offend and deal
unjustly, suffer you him to bear rule still, or appoint you another in his
room? I place another, says he in his stead. And, say, such an one be very
wealthy and full of money; permit you him to be rich still, or bring you him to
poverty? I take from him quoth the King, whatsoever he has. If you understand
that he fall away from you, and takes part with the enemy, what do you to
him then? I put him to death, said he. For, why should I die convicted of
leasing, rather than confessing the truth? Then his son hearing these words
plucked in pieces, the Turbant from about his own head: and withal rent his
mantell and upper garments. The women also piteously cried out and tare
themselves, as if both father had been even then condemned and a dead man, and
all of them besides undone for ever. But Cyrus willing them to be silent, said
thus again. Well, be it so, I have enough. These be just and rightful
courses in your own practice, o King of Armenia. But what would you counsel
us hereupon to do? The Armenian held his tongue, as being doubtful whether he
should advise Cyrus to put him to death, or teach contrary to that which he
said himself did. But his son Tigranes, demanded of Cyrus and said. Tell
me, Cyrus, (because my father seems to stand in suspense) whether I shall
advise you concerning him what I think will be best and most expedient for you
to do? Cyrus having observed well enough, what time as Tigranes used to hunt
with him, that he entertained a certain learned man, who was very familiar,
and in wonderful esteem with him, desired greatly to hear, what he could
say: and therefore bad him speak his mind boldly. If you approve says
Tigranes either the designs by my father intended, or the acts by him already
done, I advise you in any hand to imitate him: but if in your opinion he has
altogether faulted, I would give you counsel not to follow him. Then quoth
Cyrus, If I do right, I may not in any wise take him doing thus amiss, for an
ensample. True, said Tygranes: By your reason then, inferred Cyrus, I must
punish your Father, in case it stand with justice to chastise a man that does
wrong. Yea, but whether think you it is better o Cyrus, quoth Tigranes, to
proceed unto punishment with your own good and profit, or to your own hurt
and detriment? Not thus, says Cyrus; for, so, should I punish my self. Yea
quoth Tigranes and much hinder and endammage your own estate, if at such a
time you killed any of your liege men when they might stand you in greatest
stead to be kept alive. But how can those men be prized so high, when they be
taken in the manner doing injury? Yes verily as I think says Tigranes, if
then, they may prove wise and sound-hearted. For, this is mine opinion, o
Cyrus, that without the mind be seasoned with prudence, no other virtue
avails ought. For what use can there be of a strong and stout man, or of a
valiant Knight? what profit may one make of a skillful horseman if he be not
wise and discreet withal? Nay, what commodity may arise from a wealthy person,
or a mighty man in a City, if discretion be away? But with wisdom, every
friend is profitable yea and every servant good and commodious. This is then,
the meaning of your words quoth Cyrus: That your Father also even this day, is
of an unwise and inconsiderate man, become wise and discreet. Yes verily quoth
he. Ergo you hold says Cyrus, that such wisdom and discretion, is an
affection of the mind, like as dolor and grief, and not an or, passion, (...).
habit that may be learned: For, if he ought first to be made witty who
afterward is to grow discreet, one cannot all at once and suddenly of a foolish
and witless man become discreet. What! good Cyrus quoth he, did you never yet
observe, that one man in his folly taking in hand to fight with another better
and mightier than himself, so soon as ever he was defeated, gave over
straightwaies that folly of his showed toward the other? Again, have you never
seen that one City standing out against another, presently after it has been
conquered, chooses rather to obey that other, than to maintain fight any
longer? But what calamity of your fathers can you allege, that you may so
confidently avouch him to be made wise and considerate? Even that, said
Tigranes, whereby he is privy to himself, that for a greedy desire of
liberty, he is brought to that servitude, which he never felt before: and that
he was not able to effect any of those matters which he thought either secretly
to have held, or by stealth to have compassed, or by fine force to have brought
to pass. But he knows right well, that wherein so ever you minded to deceive
him, you have circumvented him so, as a man would have deluded the blind or the
dease, and those that had no wit at all in the world: and what things so ever
you thought should be carried closely, therein he knows full well you have
been so secret, as that those places which he supposed most safe and sure for
his refuge, you made the same his prisons to hold him fast ere he was aware. As
for celerity, so far have you surpassed him, that coming as you did your
self (...).
from places far remote with a puissant army, you prevented him before that
he could bring his forces together. And think you in very deed quoth Cyrus
such a foil as this, sufficient to make men so wise and wary, as to
acknowledge others to be their betters and superiors? Yes verily said
Figranes, and much more ywis than when a man is defaited in battle. For, it
falls our otherwhiles, that a champion once put to the worse by mere
strength, thinks after he has exercised Graece, melius (...).
his body, to be better appointed, and to combat again. Yea, and some cities
forcel and won, having gotten fresh aides, suppose they are able to try it
out eftsoons by a new conflict. But, look whomsoever any shall judge to be
more virtuous and wiser than themselves, those many times they are willing to
obey, even vithout compulsion. You seem then, said Cyrus, not to think that
insolent and malapert persons take knowledge of any others more stayed and
temperate than themselves, nor thieves of true men, nor liers of truth
speakers, nor unjust of those that be righteous. And know you not, quoth he,
that now also, your father has dealt falsely, and not firmly observed
covenants with us, albeit heknew, that we for our parts have not broken the
least point and tittle, of those Articles, which Astyages agreed unto? Neither
do I my self, quoth Tigranes say this, That it makes men wise and
considerate, barely to know their betters, unless they suffer punishment also
at their betters hands: like as it is my fathers case now. Yea, but your
father, said Cyrus, has felt as yet no smart at all. He stands I know well in
great fear, that he shall be put to abide all extremities. And think you
indeed quoth Tigranes that any thing does cast men down and subdue them more
than strong fear? or, wot you not, that those who have felt the edge of the
sword, (which of all punishments is thought to be the sharpest,) will never the
less encounter the same enemies again who wounded them? But such persons as
men do mightily stand in dread of, they can not endure to look full upon,
although they speak comfortably unto them. This is then your saying, is it not?
quoth Cyrus. That men afraid of torments, are more punished already, than if
they were tortured in very deed. Why! even your self, quoth he, does know,
that I say truth, as well as I can tell you. For, well you wot, that such as
fear to be banished out of their native country, such also as being to fight
a field, are afraid of an overthrow, live in continual anguish. Semblably,
they that sail at sea, so long as they stand in fear of shipwreck: as many
also as fear bondage and imprisonment, by reason of their fear can have no
joy, nor receive benefit either of meat or sleep. Whereas such as be in exile,
such as be defaited and brought into servitude already, can otherwhiles eat
and drink, yea and sleep better than those which are in happy estate.
Furthermore, it appears even in these persons more evidently, what a
cumberous burden fear is. For, some fearing least after they be taken
prisoners they should be put to death, die before, for very fear: partly by
throwing themselves down headlong, partly by strangling themselves, and in
part by cutting their own throats: So that of all horrible things in the
world, fear most of all terrifieth men's minds. As for my father here, how is
his heart now affected think you, standing as he does in fear of Captivity,
not only for himself, but also for me, his wife and all his children? I can
easily believe in deed quoth Cyrus, that he is in this manner much disquieted:
yet am I of this opinion, that incident it is to one and the same man, in
prosperity to be proud and insolent: but in calamity to be suddenly dejected
and soon cast down: howbeit, if upon pardon he recover and be raised up,
eftsoons to look aloft, to wax high minded, and ready to stir up new
troubles again. True it is o Cyrus quoth Tigranes, Our offenses are such as
give good occasion, why we should no more be trusted: howbeit in your power it
is, both to fortify your castles with strong walls, and also to keep with
garrison your fensed holds, yea and to take what pledges and assurance you
will, of our fealty. And verily, quoth he, such persons you shall have of us,
as will not greatly grieve hereat. For, call to mind we shall, that our selves
are the cause of our own woes.

But when you have made over the government of this State, to any one of those
that never trespassed against you, if your self shall seem then distrustful,
take heed, least as you gratify and pleasure them; so they withal take you to
be no friend of theirs. Again, while you would be thought to avoid the
incurring of their hatred, if you lay no yoke upon them for to keep them under,
so, as that they can commit no insolent parts; beware that hereafter you have
not more need to reclaim them, than now you have to reduce us unto goodness
and order. But, for mine own part quoth Cyrus, so God me help, I have me
thinks no mind at all, to put such ministers in trust, whom I know to serve me
upon compulsion. But, as for those, whom I perceive, upon good will and love
unto me, ready to do their devoir, I suppose I can better bear with them,
delinquent though they be, than such as hate me, do they never so well, and
perform all double diligence upon constraint and necessity. To this, replied
Tigranes: At whose hands then, can you ever win so much love and friendship, as
now you may gain of us? Even of those I think, said Cyrus, who never were my
professed enemies, so I would be beneficial unto them, as you are desirous now
I should be unto you. Why! can you find any man, good Cyrus quoth he, at this
time, unto whom you may be so bounteous as unto my father? Say, you suffer some
one to live, who never did you wrong; what thanks suppose you will he render
unto you? Or, if you bereave him not of wife and children? who will in this
regard affect you more than he, who thinks himself to deserve no less than to
loose the same? And know you any man that is like to sorrow more, if he hold
not the Kingdom of Armenia, than we? Evident therefore it is, quoth he, that
unto whom most anguish and grief shall redound, if he be not King, the same
also if he receive of you the Kingdom, will yeald unto you the greatest
thanks. Moreover, if you have any care of this also, namely to leave the State
here at your departure in least trouble; consider quoth he, whether you think
all will be more quiet, by innovation and change of the Government under a new
Lord, or by suffering the old and received manner to remain still in force
under their ancient Prince? Semblably if you have an eye to this, how to bring
out into the field a puissant army: Who, think you, will muster and levy it
in better order, than he that has often used the same? Now, put case you stand
in need of money, whom suppose you meet to raise and procure it for your
better, than him who both knows, and has also under his hand all the store
that is? Beware therefore good Cyrus, least by casting off and loosing us, you
endammage your self more, than my father can hurt or hinder you. To this or
the like effect, spoke Tigranes.

CHAP. II. How Cyrus with great humanity did set the King of Armenia with his
wife and children at large: And after he had received their ransom, levied a
good power of footmen and horsemen both, out of Armenia for this war.
CYRUS was exceeding glad to hear him make this speech: for that he thought
now all was done and dispatched to his hand, which he undertook unto Cyaxares
for to perform: For, he called to mind what he had said, and namely how he
thought to make the Armenian King, a more fast and assured friend unto him,
than before. Hereupon he demanded of the King himself in this manner. Tell me
then, quoth he, o King of Armenia, In case I should condescend unto your
requests, how great an army will you send with me, and how much money will you
contribute toward this war? Whereunto the Armenian King made this answer, I
can say nothing unto you good Cyrus either in terms more plainly, or to the
point more (...).
justly, the^ to declare unto you first, all the forces that I have: which when
you see and know what they be, you may have away with you as great a power as
you list, leaving as much as may serve for the defense of the land. Then, for
money likewise, meet it is that I should show unto you all the treasure that I
have, whereof you may take and leave what you think good. Go to then, says
Cyrus: Show unto me directly what your strength is, and tell me withal, what
store of coin you have. Hereto the Armenian King returned this answer. Of
horsemen the Armenians are able to make 8000, and of footmen 40000. As for
money, quoth he, together with the treasures which my father left unto me, being
reckoned to the true rate or value in silver, it amounts to more than 3000
talents. Hereunto Cyrus, as one in this behalf nothing care-lesse said thus:
Of your army then, because the Chaldees your borderers make war upon you,
send with me the one half: but of your moneys, for those 50 talents which you
paid as a tribute, deliver double so much unto Cyaxares, in regard of deteining
the payment thereof: And to my self you shall lend another hundred talents.
For the lone whereof, I promise, If God speed me, either to do you greater
pleasures, or else to repay you the money, if I be able. If I do not, thought
happily I may be unsufficient, but judged, worthily, I shall never be unjust. Now
for Gods sake o Cyrus, said the Armenian King, use not these words: otherwise,
you shall not have me so confident and trustfull in you. But make this account,
quoth he, What monyes so ever you leave us, they are yours no less, than those
which you carry from hence. Well said Cyrus: But how much money will you part
withal unto me, for to have your wife again? Even as much, quoth he, as I am
worth. And what will you give me to enjoy your children also? As much for them
likewise as I can make. By this reckoning then inferred Cyrus, these be prised
at twice so much as you possess. Now, Tigranes, to you I address my speech.
With what ransom would you redeem your wife? (newly married he was and loved
the woman exceeding well) I assure you, o Cyrus, quoth he, I would lay down my
very life that she might never become thrall. Take her to you, then quoth
Cyrus, For yours she is: neither do I repute her to have been a captive at
all, seeing you never fled from us. You also, King of Armenia, have away with
you both your wife and children without any ransom at all, that they may know
they come unto you free. And now verily for this present take your suppers with
us: and when ye have supped: Depart whither ye list. So they stayed. But
after supper, whiles they were yet in the pavilion, Cyrus questioned in this
manner, Tell me Tigranes, quoth he, what is become of the Gentleman that was
wont to hunt with us: For you highly esteemed him. Why? quoth he, has not this
my father here put him to death? Of what offense said Cyrus was he convict? He
laid to his charge, quoth he, that he corrupted me, And yet my dear Cyrus, so
good a man he was and so honest, that even then, when he was to die, he called
unto me and said: Be not you greived Tigranes and offended with your father,
in that he minds to take away my life: For he does not this in any malice,
but of error and ignorance: And what trespass men upon error do commit, I
suppose is done against their wills. At these words said Cyrus, Alas good man
that he was. But the Armenian King turning unto Cyrus spoke in this wise,
Neither do those, good Cyrus who take other men naught with their wives pursue
them therefore to death, for that they make their wives more wanton and
unchaste; but because they think they steal away their hearts and quench that
love which they owe unto them: in which regard, they proceed against them as
very enemies. And even so, Ielous was I and envied that man, because me thought
he was the cause that my son admired and esteemed him more than my self.
Then Cyrus, So God me love good King of Armenia, as I think your fault was no
other than any man would have done. Therefore Tigranes pardon your Father for
this Gentleman's death. Thus having at that time discoursed, lovingly
entertained and embraced one another, as meet it was, after this
reconciliation, they mounted upon their carroches together with their wives and
so with great joy departed.

CHAP. III. How Cyrus took Tigranes with him in his train, and went to
assail the Chaldees upon the mountains.
WHEN they were come home, some made report of Cyrus his wisdom, others
related his patience and sufferance: one spoke of his mildness, another of his
beauty and goodly tall presence. Whereupon Tigranes asked his own wife and
said: How now my Armenian Lady, Seemed Cyrus in your eyes also a fair and
beautiful personage? In good faith, quoth she, I never looked upon him. Whom
then did you behold, said Tigranes? Even him I assure you, quoth she, who said,
That with the price of his life he would redeem me from captivity. And then,
as meet it was, after such matters as these passed, they took their rest
together. The day following, the Armenian King sent unto Cyrus and the whole
army, gifts and tokens of hospitality. He gave warning also to his own
subjects, such as were to go to warfare, for to be ready against the third day
following. As for the money whereof Cyrus spoke, he paid it down double. But
Cyrus when he had taken of it so much as he required, sent back the rest: and
demanded withal, whether of them twain would lead the army? The son, or
himself? Whereunto both of them made answer: the father in this wise: Even
he whom you shall command; but the son after this sort. As for me o Cyrus
I will not leave you, no though I should follow you hard at heels as a Camp
drudge. Hereat Cyrus laughed heartily and said. And how much would you be
content to give, for to have your wife hear you are become a Camp slave and
to carry fardels? She shall never need, quoth he, to hear that. For I will
bring her along with me, that she may see what ever I do. But now said Cyrus
it were time for you to trusse up and be furnished every way for this journey.
I make full account quoth Tigranes that we shall show our selves in readiness,
with whatsoever my father has allowed. And so for that time the soldiers after
gifts of friendly entertainment bestowed upon them, went to rest. The next day
Cyrus taking to him Tigranes with the best and most select horsemen of the
Medes, as many also of his own friends as he thought convenient, rode abroad
to view the country of Armenia, devising where he might build a fortress. And
being mounted up to an hill top, he asked Tigranes, which were those
mountains from whence the Chaldees used to make rodes down into the plains,
and so to drive away booties? Which when Tigranes had showed unto him, he asked
again, whether those mountains were now without company and unfrequented? No
verily, quoth he, for they have always certain spies and Sentinels, who
signify to the rest whatsoever they discover. And what do they, says he,
when they have notice of any thing? Every man says Tigranes makes what have he
can up to the hill tops for to help and succor. When Cyrus heard this, and
withal beheld the country all about, he might perceive that a great part
thereof, lay as wast ground to the Armenians, and untilled, by reason of the
wars. Then for that time returned they to the army, and after supper took
their repose and slept. The morrow next ensuing, Tigranes showed himself ready
and well appointed, having raised a power of four thousand Horsemen, with ten
thousand Archers and as many Targuatiers. But whiles these forces were a
levying, Cyrus sacrificed, and seeing the entrails of the beasts to be fair
and fortunate to him, he called together the Leaders both of the Persians and
of the Medes, and in the presence of that Assembly made this speech. My
welbeloved friends, These mountains that we see, belong to the Chaldaees,
which if we may first be masters off, and on the top of them build a fort and
plant our garrison: of necessity, as well the Chaldaees as the Armenians will
demean themselves loyally toward us. As for our sacrifices, they betoken all
good on our side: and as touching man's alacrity and humane means, nothing
will so much help the same forward to the atchieving of this exploit, as
expedition. For, if we can climb up the hills, before the enemies assemble their
power, we shall either gain the hill tops wholly without any resistance, or
else skirmish with our enemies, when they are but few in number and feeble in
strength. No labor therefore can be easier and more void of danger, than if
presently we be resolute in celeritie and quick dispatch. Arm your selves
therefore, on all hands. As for you the Medes, march on our left hand: but ye
the Armenians, go one half of you on the right side: and the other half lead
the way in the vaward before us. Ye that be horsemen, follow behind in the
Rear, to incite and put us forward up the hill, neither suffer ye any one
faintly to draw back. When Cyrus had thus said, and arraunged his files
directly upward; he advaunced before the Army. The Chaldees, [that lay in
espiall when they perceived the march forcibly to mount up hill, forthwith
signified so much to their fellows, and so, by outcries and alarmes from one
to another, they drew together. Cyrus also for his part gave warning to his
soldiers saying. These here, o ye Persians, signify unto us that it is high
time to make have. For, if we prevent them, and get the hill before, our
enemies shall be little able to do ought. Now the Chaldaees had light
bucklers, and two javelins apeece: and these are reputed the most martial men
of all that country. They serve also in wars as mercenaries and be always in
pay, whenever any man has need of them, because, warlike though they be and
valiant, yet are they poor and needy. For, the region which they inhabit is
full of hills, and a small part thereof welthy. Now when the soldiers about
Cyrus approached nearer to the hill-tops, Tigranes, who accompanied Cyrus, Wot
you not o Cyrus quoth he, that we must fight out of hand: and the Armenians
will not abide the first brunt of the enemies? Cyrus answered that he was not
ignorant thereof: in which regard I have already says he given order to the
Persians to prepare themselves and be in readiness. For they are to follow
hard, so soon as the Armenians begin to give ground and thereby draw the
enemies nearer unto us. Thus the Armenians advanced foremost in the vantguard.
But the Chaldaees, as many as were present, upon the approach of the Armenians
suddenly setting up a shout, rushed fiercely upon them after their manner and
gave the charge. The Armenians likewise, as they were wont, received them not,
but reculed. Now when the Chaldaees following them in chase, perceived others
with sword in hard to mount up the hill ready to encounter them afront, some
that happened to join in fight were quickly slain, others escaped by flight,
and certain of them were taken prisoners. Thus the hill tops were soon
gained. Now when Cyrus his soldiers were gotten up thither, and looked down
toward the habitations of the Chaldaees, they might perceive how they abandoned
the houses that stood next, and so ran away. Cyrus then, as soon as all his
soldiers were come together, commanded them to take their dinners: After
dinner, having learned that the place of Espiall where the Chaldaees lay, was
both safe and also well watered, presently he emmured it in manner of a
fortress. He commanded also Tigranes to send unto his father, willing, and
requiring him to make present repair thither, and to bring with him all the
Carpenters and Masons that were to be had. So there was a messenger
streight-wayes dispatched unto the Armenian King. Mean while Cyrus with those
about him began to build the wall. At which very time, they presented the
captives unto Cyrus, some bound, and others of them sore wounded. Whom when he
beheld, he commanded immediately the bound to be loosed, and such as were hurt
to be cured. For which purpose, he had sent for Or Chirurgions.
Physicians. This done, he said unto the Chaldaees, that his coming was not
either for any desire he had to destroy them, or need to make war: but
because he would conclude a Peace between the Armenians and the Chaldaees. And
before that I was possessed of these hill tops, quoth he, I wot well ye had
no desire of peace. For why? Your own State was in safety, and the goods of
the Armenians ye harried and carried at your pleasure. But now ye see in what
case ye stand. I dismiss you therefore that be prisoners, home to your
houses, and give you leave to consult with the rest of the Chaldaees, whether
ye will maintain war against us, or enterteine amity with us. If ye make
choice of war, See ye come not hither, if ye be wise, without arms and
weapons, but if ye think ye have need of peace, come hardly unarmed. Will
ye become our friends? I will then take care for the safety and welfare of
your state. The Chaldaees hearing this, after they had highly praised Cyrus and
on all sides given him their hands, departed home.

CHAP. IIII. The peaceable communication that Cyrus had with the Armenians and
the Chaldaees. The mutual accord and peace between them all.
THE Armenian King when he heard that Cyrus sent for him, and withal what he
had done, taking with him the Carpenters and Masons aforesaid, and all other
things which he thought necessary, repaired unto Cyrus, withal speed possible.
No sooner saw he him, but he brake out into these words: Little it is o
Cyrus, that we men are able to foresee in future things, and yet attempt and
enterprise many desseins. For, ere while, my self, when I went about to
compass my liberty, became a slave more then ever before: and after that we
were taken prisoners, whiles we made full account that we were utterly
undone, it appears now most evidently, that we are preserved, no time
before, so much. For, those who never ceased to infest us many ways, I see
now to be in that case, which I ever wished. And thus much o Cyrus I would have
you to know, that for to disseize the Chaldaees of these mountain tops, I
would have disbursed much more money, than your self have of me. And verily
the good turns which you promised to do unto us, what time you received that
money, you have performed already. We acknowledge our selves therefore to be
debtors unto you still for other benefits: Which (if we would not be naughty
persons) it were a shame for us not to requite. And what requital soever we
make, yet shall we not be found to have made condign recompense, beseeming so
beneficial a friend. Thus spoke the King of Armenia. But the Chaldaees came
unto Cyrus as Orators, beseeching him to make peace with them: whom Cyrus
questioned with, in this wise. Crave ye peace at this time ye Chaldaees, for
any thing else, but that ye think to live in more security by peace than by
war? considering that we also said as much. The Chaldaees made answer, Yea;
for, all other things we have already. But what and if, replied Cyrus, there
accrue unto you other commodities beside, by the means of peace? Then, said
they, would we be the gladder. And what other reason is there, quoth Cyrus,
why you repute your selves now to be poor, but for lack of rich and and
fertile ground? When they accorded to him in this point also. How then? would
ye be content, says Cyrus, to pay so much tribute as the other Armenians do,
so ye may lawfully occupy and till as much Armenian ground as ye will your
selves? Yes, right willingly answered the Chaldaees, if we might believe, we
should sustain no wrong hereafter. And what say you, King of Armenia, would
you have this ground of yours that now lies wast, to become tilled, provided,
that the occupiers thereof pay you such rent as you set down? Yes verily,
quoth the King, I would give a great deal of that condition. For, by this
means the revenues of my Crown should be much augmented. And ye Chaldaees,
quoth he, what say ye to this, considering ye have fertile mountains, would
ye willingly permit the Armenians to use the same for pasture, yielding unto
you for the pasturage a reasonable rent? Yea gladly, said the Chaldaees, for
that we shall receive much profit without any pain and labor. But you King of
Armenia, says Cyrus, are you willing to use their pastures, if for a small
commodity arising unto the Chaldaees, your self may receive far greater
profits? Yea, with all my heart, quoth he, if I thought I might enjoy the said
pasture-ground in safety without molestation. What! might ye not enjoy them
safely, if ye had the help of the h^ll-tops? Yes said the King. Hereat the
Chaldaees. But we, par-die, shall never be able to occupy, we will not say,
their grounds, but not so much as our own lands, if so be these be masters of
the said hill tops. But, What! quoth he, if those mountains may help you?
Mary, then, answered they, we should think our selves well apayed. But it were
not so good for us, believe me said the King, in case they recover the
mountains again, especially being walled and fortified. Well then, quoth
Cyrus, I will take this course. The strength of these hill-tops will I deliver
to neither of you both: But we our selves will hold them in our own hands;
And whether of you wrong the other, their parts will we take who sustain the
wrong. Which when both sides heard: they praised the devise, and said it was
the only way to establish an assured peace. So upon these capitulations
following, they all gave and received interchangeably hostages for security:
and agreed it was between them, That they both, should be free one from the
other, enterteine mutual marriages, use tillage and pasture in common
indifferently: and one aid the other if any did molest either of them. Thus for
that time things passed: and the league then and thus concluded, between the
Chaldaees and the Sovereign Ruler of Armenia, remains yet in force to this
day. Now after these Covenants of confederacy were confirmed, both parts
immediately did put to their helping hands with great cheerfulness, to build
and wall the said fortress as a common strength and defense for them both, and
thereto jointly brought all things necessary.

CHAP. V. How Cyrus sent an Embassage unto the Indians: and returning into
Media, consulted about making war upon the Assyrians.
WHen evening drew near, Cyrus entertained together with him at supper both
parties, as being now joined in mutual amity. And as they sat at supper, one
of the Chaldaees began and said: This accord may well be acceptable to all
others of our nation. But some Chaldaees there are quoth he, that live by
preading and robbing, who neither have skill of husbandry, nor can abide to
till the ground, as wonted always to get their living by the wars. For, they
used evermore to drive away booties, and many a time to serve for wages under
the King of the Indians, who by their saying is a Potentate full of gold, and
as often under King Astyages. Why then, said Cyrus, do they not take wages of
me? For I will give them as good pay, as he, who ever he be that gave most.
This offer of Cyrus they accepted and said, that many would be right willing
to serve him. And thus of these points abovesaid were they agreed. Cyrus then,
who had heard say that the Chaldaees oftentimes had recourse unto the Indian
King; and calling to remembrance, that from him there came to the Medes
certain persons as Spies to see and learn what was done among them, and the
same afterward went also to the enemies, for to have intelligence likewise of
their affairs, was willing enough that the Indian King might know what deeds
himself had achieved: And therefore he entered into such a speech as this.
Tell me o King of Armenia and ye Chaldaees, If I should dispatch a messenger
of mine, unto the Indian King, would ye send any of vours besides, who might
both conduct the man in his way, and assist him also to the obtaining at the
said Kings hand, of such things as I desire? For, I gladly would, we had more
money still, to the end that I might both give large pay to as many as have
need, and also by bountiful gifts grace and honor such as serve under me,
according to their worthiness. In these regards I say, desirous I am to be
furnished with great store of treasure. And, albeit I make reckoning to stand
in need, yet gladly do I spare your moneys whom I suppose now to be our
friends: yet, of the Indian King I would willingly take the same, if he would
part with it. As for the said messenger, unto whom I will and require you to
allow guides for his conduct, and to be assistant when he is thither come, he
shall speak in this wise, Cyrus has sent me unto you o King of India, saying
that he stands in need of more money: For that he expects another army from
home out of Persia (and in very deed quoth he, so I do.) If therefore you will
send him as much money as you think good, he says, that if God give him good
success, he will endeavor so to do, as that you shall think you have done
very well and wisely for your self, in gratifying him thus in this kind. This
message shall my Agent deliver from me. Now, for those whom ye shall send,
give them in charge and commission, what your selves shall think requisite.
And if, quoth he, we may get money of him, we shall have the greater store by
us to use. If not, we shall know that we are nothing beholden to him nor have
any cause to thank him, but may for ought that concerns him, order all
things to our own behoufe. Thus said Cyrus, supposing that those Armenians and
Chaldaees who were to go this journey, would make such reports of him, as
himself desired, that all the world should both speak and hear. And so for
that time when they saw good, they dissolved this meering at supper and went to
bed. The day following Cyrus sent away the Messenger with those directions
which he had delivered before. The King of Armenia likewise and the Chaldaees
appointed such persons to accompany him as they thought most meet to help
forward the business which they had in commission, and also to give out of
Cyrus such speeches as were befitting. After this, when Cyrus had finished the
fortress and furnished it with garrison soldiers, as many as were
sufficient, and with all things else necessary; yea and left as Captain over
them a Median, (in preferring whom he thought to gratify Cyaxares most) he
departed; leading away with him that army which he had brought thither; as
also those forces which he received from the Armenian King, and together with
them such as came from the Chaldaees, to the number of 4000. who of all the
parts inhabited, there was not an Armenian, man or woman that stayed within
doors, but they all went forth to meet him, rejoicing greatly at this peace:
bringing with them and driving before them, what thing so ever any of them had
worth presenting unto him. Neither was the King of Armenia herewith displeased;
for that he thought Cyrus would take the more contentment, in being thus
generally honored of all. In the end came forth likewise his Queen, with her
daughters and younger son. And beside other gifts, she brought that gold
also which before time Cyrus refused to take. All which when Cyrus saw, Ye
shall never quoth he make me o Armenians, for hire and reward sake to go from
place to place, and bestow my favors. And you Madame, go your ways and keep
the money that you bring, to your self, and give it no more to the King your
husband, for to be buried in the ground: but rather, therewith set out your
son right gallantly, and so send him forth to the wars. Of all the rest, for
your self, your husband, your daughters and sons, have and hold so much, as
by the enjoying thereof and adorning your selves therewith, you may lead a more
deinty and pleasant life: and let it suffice, quoth he, for the bodies of the
dead to be interred. This said, he rode away: whom there accompanied the King
himself of Armenia, and all the people besides, calling him their bountiful
benefactour, and a worthy good man. Thus they continued until they had
conducted him out of their country. The Armenian King then, sent unto him a
greater army, because he had now peace at home. Thus departed Cyrus mightily
enriched, not only by the present treasure that he had received, but also for
that by his good deportment he had made way for much more whenever he should
need. And so for that time they pitched their tents in the confines.

The next morrow, he sent the army, and part of the money to Cyaxares, (who
according to his promise was not far off.) But himself, with Tigranes and
the Nobles of Persia, hunted wheresoever he could meet with game, and merrily
followed his sports. Afterward, being come into the Medes land, he dealt
money among his own Centurions, so much as was thought sufficient for every
one, that they also might have wherewith to honor and reward, those that
served under them, as many as they admired for their valor. For this reckoning
made he, that if each one performed his part praiseworthy, the whole body of
the army likewise would prove right excellent. Furthermore, if himself saw any
thing that might adorn the army, the same when he had once gotten it, he
would bestow upon the best worthy: For, this he supposed, that what good thing
and beautiful ornament soever the soldiers had, himself with all the same
was likewise adorned. And at the very same time, when he distributed among
them, such presents as he had received, in a frequent assembly of his
Centurions, or, File leaders
Caporalls, and all those whom he best esteemed, he made a speech in this wise.

We seem now my friends, to conceive a certain joy, partly because we have
gotten some wealth: and in part for that we have, wherewith to adorn those we
would, and whereby our selves may be honored again, according as each one of
us is worthy of advancement. But in any wise we must ever call to remembrance,
what manner of feats they be, which have procured these good things unto us.
For if ye consider well, ye shall find, that ye have attained hereunto, by
watching when time required, by travail and pains taking, by celerity and
expedition, and finally by giving no ground unto the enemies. It behooveth you
therefore hereafter to be hardy and valiant men, setting this down with your
selves, that great pleasures and commodities both, cannot proceed but from
obedience, constancy, labors and perils undertaken in time convenient. Cyrus
now perceiving how fresh and able in body his soldiers were to endure
warre-travailes; how resolute also and courageous in heart to despise their
enemies: what skill beside each one had in every point belonging to their own
arms: Semblably, seeing them all well disposed and ready to obey their Rulers.
In these respects, desirous he was even now to perform some of those exploits,
which are usually enterprised against enemies: knowing, that many times by
delays and putting of, Commanders and Generals find some alteration even in
brave projects and worthy dessignements. Furthermore, perceiving that many of
his soldiers upon an ambitious humor, in their contentions where they strived
to surpass, began to envy one another; for this cause also desirous he was
with all speed to lead them forth into the enemies country, as knowing right
well, that common dangers kindle mutual love and affection, between fellow
soldiers; in which case none of them will either envy others that are set out
in bravest armor, or repine at them that be given to seek after glory and
honor: but rather such persons both praise and also embrace their like, as
reputing them to be joint laborers with them in procuring the common good.
First and foremost therefore, he harnoised his army and marshalled it in as
beautiful and excellent order as possibly he could, then, called he together
the Colonels, or leaders of ten thousand.
Myriarches, the Co^maunders of a thousand.
Chiliarches, the Centiniers, the Caporals likewise and pety Captains of
smaller bands (for these were free and not enrolled in the ordinary lists of
soldiers: and yet when it was required that the General should be obeyed or
any charge given, no part of the army for all that, was left ungoverned: but
all matters else executed well enough by pety Captains of 12. and 6. in a
crew.) Now after these serviceable men of note were come together, Cyrus
brought them into his Pavilion: and both showed unto them, what things were
well and in good order, as also instructed them how the several forces and
Companies of their Allies and Auxiliaries might be most firm and strong. And
when he had so wrought, that even they also had a longing desire to be employed
in some Action, they cared not how soon, thus he said unto them, Go your
ways now for this time unto your Companies and instruct every one your own
charge, as I have taught you, doing withal your best, to kindle in them all, a
fervent desire to undertake this expedition: that with a cheerful heart ye
may every one set forward: and to morrow betimes show your selves before
Cyaxares at the Court gate. Then departed they, and did accordingly. The next
morning by break of day, those men of Action pressed to perform their service,
were ready at the Palace. Cyrus therefore being entered in with them to
Cyaxares, began to speak in this manner.

CHAP. VI. The speech of Cyrus unto Cyaxares, about his expedition against the
Assyrians.
I Am not ignorant dear Uncle Cyaxares that the projects which I shall now
deliver, have been long since considered upon and approved by you no less
than by us: but happily, abashed you are to utter the same, least if your self
made mention of leading forth our army, you might seem weary of finding and
maintaining us as you do. Seeing therefore you keep silence, I my self both
for you and us will propound the business now in hand. For, we are all of this
mind, seeing we be so well appointed, not to fight then, when as the enemy
shall invade your land, nor to wait for his coming, sitting still as we do in
our friends country: but with all speed to make a rode into the territories of
our enemies. For now, so long as we remain in your land, much hurt we do even
against our wills unto many things of yours: but if we remoove into our enemies
quarters, we shall work them the like displeasure as willingly. Moreover, now
are we kept at your great charges: but if we war abroad without your
marches, we shall be victualled from out of our enemies country. Furthermore,
were it so that some greater peril might betide us there than here, then
peradventure the safest course were to be chosen. But now the case is all one
with them, whether we wait here for them or set forward to meet them there.
In like manner we also shall be the same in fight, whether we receive them
coming hither, or go thither and give them battle.

But in very truth the hearts of our soldiers we shall find more courageous,
if we invade our enemies and seem not loath to affront them and look them in
the face. Semblably they will be much more in fear of us, when they shall
hear that we sit not still at home, as men smitten with dread of them, but
upon intelligence of their coming, are ready to encounter them on the way for
to join battle with all speed, and not tarry until our own country be
endamaged, but preventing their attempts, waste their land first: Certes, if we
make them any whit more fearful, or our selves bolder, I suppose it will be
to our great advantage. And by this means verily I make account, that our
danger will be less, and our enemies hazard much greater. Moreover, my father
was always wont to say, you also to confess, and all others to accord, that
fields are fought and battles tried, rather by the resolution of men's hearts,
than the strength of their bodies. Thus verily said Cyrus, unto whom Cyaxares
made this answer. But I would not have you Cyrus and the rest of the Persians
once to suspect, that I think much to maintain you with victuals: Yet am I
also of this mind, that in every respect it will be more expedient for us,
even now to invade our enemies land. Since then, quoth Cyrus, we concur in
one opinion, let us jointly trusse up bag and baggage and so dislodge, and in
case our sacrifices unto the Gods assent soon unto our desires, with all speed
set forward. Hereupon, after warning given to pack up and to put themselves in
readiness, Cyrus sacrificed to Jupiter King, first: afterward to the rest of
the Gods: praying withal, that they would vouchsafe to be propitious and
favorable guides unto the Army, and show themselves gracious Assistants,
assured helpers and Associates, yea and Counselors for good, in all their
Affairs. He invocated likewise the tutelar Or, Deities.
powers, that inhabited and patronized the Median Land. Now when he had
finished the sacrifices with lucky presages, and that the army was wholly
assembled together before him in the very marches, after tokens likewise of
bird-flight, promising happy success, he did set foot within the enemies
country. And no sooner was he entered the borders, but presently he there
procured the gracious favor of Dame Tellus, with Libatours and liquid
offerings. The Gods also and inhabitant Patrons of Assyria he pacified with
solid hosts and sacrifices. Which complements done and ended, he sacrificed
eft-soones to Jupiter, the Protector of his own native soil: and look what
other of the Gods soever came into his knowledge, he neglected them not.

CHAP. VII. How Cyrus went to encampe near unto the Assyrians, and prepared to
give them battle.
WHEN all these things were accomplished in good sort, the Infantery forthwith
marched on and made no great journey but soon pitched their tents. Howbeit,
having put forth the Cavallery to make incursions and to raunge abroad, they
gate great pillage of all things. Then remooved they, and being now furnished
with all provision necessary, and forraging the country still, they encamped
and waited the enemies coming. Now, when noised it was that their army was on
foot and within ten days journey, Cyrus said, It is now high time o Cyaxares
to put on, and to meet with them: And let us give no cause to be thought,
either of our enemies or our own men, to shrink back, and not to abide them,
but rather show our selves not unwilling to fight. When Cyaxares allowed well
hereof, they marched on always after, in battle ray, going forward every day
as far as they thought good. As for their suppers they never took them but
by daylight: and in the night they made no fires within the camp. Howbeit,
before the camp they burnt fire, to the end that by the light thereof, they
might see if any came by night toward them, and yet not be seen themselves.
Many times also, to deceive the enemy they did set fires aburning behind the
camp: whereby otherwhiles the enemies spies fell into the hands of their
foremost escont-watch: For, by reason that the said fires were behind, they
thought themselves had been yet far from the camp. Now the Assyrians with
their Confederates and Allies, after that the Armies approached one the other,
entrenched themselves, A thing that the Barbarian Kings use to do even at this
day. For, when they pitch their tents, an easy matter it is for them to cast a
trench about their camp, so many hands have they to set on work. And, they
know that a power of horsemen in the night is soon disordered, and so of
little or no service, especially if it consist of Barbarians: For, such use to
have their horses tied by the feet at their mangers: And if any man should
charge upon them, a labor it were by night to unloose the horses, a trouble to
bridle them, a pain to saddle and trap them, much ado also to bard them and
do on their harnois. Yea and when they are mounted on horseback, impossible
it is by any means to ride them through the camp. For all these causes, they
also like as all other Barbarians enclosed these within certain
fortifications, thought they might being thus within the safeguard of a fensed
place, fight when they list themselves, and not otherwise. Whiles they were
thus busied, they approached one the other, and being about a About three miles
and three quarters English.
Parasang off, the Assyrians encamped thus as I said, in a place entrenched
round about, howbeit open and exposed to the eye. But Cyrus pitched his tents,
as much out of sight as possibly he could, as having of purpose sought out
certain villages, tofts and mounts, afront his camp, thinking that all his
warlike equipage suddenly presented, would be more terrible to his adversaries.
And verily that night, after the Sentinels set, as requisite it was, they
betook themselves on either side to rest. The day ensuing, the Assyrian King
and Croesus, with all the other Commanders, kept their forces quiet within
their Strength and rested still: But Cyrus and Cyaxares stood embattailed,
ready to fight if the enemies came forward. But when it was for certain
known, that they would not that day issue forth without their rampire, nor
intended to fight, Cyaxares calling for Cyrus and all the gallants and men of
Action, spoke unto them in this wise. My friends, I am of this mind, that thus
well appointed as we are, we ought to march unto the assault of our enemies
rampire, thereby to show that we for our parts are willing to fight. For, if by
this bravado, they will not come forth against us, our men shall be the better
encouraged in giving the attempt: and our enemies upon the sight of our
boldness and resolution more daunted. This was the advice of Cyaxares. But
Cyrus, For the love of God, quoth he, o Cyaxares, let us not do so. For, if
according to your mind we show our selves, and go forward; our enemies will
look upon us now, with no fear at all, as we come upon them knowing
themselves, as they do, to be in a place of security so as they can receive
no hurt: and more than that, when as we retire without effect, they eft-soones
seeing our forces far inferior to theirs, will despise the same, and to morrow
sally forth with much more courage and resolution. Now for this present,
knowing us as they do, to be here, and yet not seeing us, believe me verily,
they set not light by us, but must they do and marvel what we mean, neither
cease they, I dare well say, to talk and discourse of us. But when they shall
come forth first, then will it behoove us both to appear in sight and at once
to encounter and buckle with them, as having found them where heretofore we
long desired. When Cyrus had thus said, both Cyaxares and the rest also agreed
thereunto. Then therefore, having taken their suppers, set the watch and made
fires accordingly before the same, they went to bed and slept.

CHAP. VIII. The exhortation of Cyrus to his Cheiftaines, and the Peers, to
moove them to advance with better courage to battle.
THE next day, early in the morning, Cyrus, with a Coronet upon his head,
sacrificed: commanding likewise the Honorable Gentlemen, called Homotimi.
Peers to wear Chaplets and to be present at the solemnity of Sacrifices.
When these Devotions were done and Sacrifice offered, he assembled them all
together, and unto them made this speech. The Gods, my dear friends, as both
Divinors say and I my self accord, foretell us that a battle there will be;
They also give us victory, and in the Intrailes promise unto us safety. Now, to
admonish you; in what sort ye should bear your selves in this affair, abashed
I am. For, I know, that in these points, ye are as skillful and expert as my
self, as who have studied, meditated and heard, yea and continually do hear
these things as well as I: in so much as you by good right teach others the
same. But if ye have not hitherto understood and learned so much, listen then
to me. These here our Associats, whom we have newly taken unto us, and endeavor
to make like unto our selves, we must put in mind, for what cause we have
been maintained by Cyaxares? what exercises we have been trained in, and to
what purpose we have called them hither? as also in what regard they have
given it out, that right willingly they will enter into the Action with us, and
try it out by dint of sword. This also ye ought to recall into their
remembrance, that this is the very day, which will declare what rewards each
one is worthy off. For, such things as men be late ere they learn, no mervaile
it is, if some of them have need of one also to suggest and prompt unto them.
Yea, a blessed turn it were, if men might become valiant, even by the instinct
and provocation of others. And verily in so doing, ye shall give good proof
of your selves withal. For, he that is able in such a matter as this, to
better others and make them more valiant, may without question be privy to
himself, that he has atteined to the perfection of valor. Whereas, he who
being able to inform himself in these things, rests therein, supposing it
sufficient; and proceeds no farther, is by good reason to hold himself but
half perfect. And for this cause, I deliver not thus much to them, but charge
you to declare the same, that they may endeavor to give you content. For, ye
also are next conversant with them, every one in his own particular. And this,
quoth he, would I have you to know: that so long as ye shall be seen of them
full of valor and resolution, ye shall become masters and teachers, both to
them and also to many more, not in word, but in deed, for to be likewise
valiant and courageous. At the last, he knit up his speech with bidding them to
go to dinner wearing guirlands on their heads: and after the complements of
sacred libations performed, to repair every man to their own companies dight
as they were with the same guirlands. When these were departed, he called unto
him the (...) quibus oppon^ntur (...). bringers up.
Leaders in the Rear, unto whom he used these words. My good friends, that are
Persians, raunged ye also be in the number of the Peers as selected
Gentlemen, reputed as in other respects to parallel the very best, so for your
age to excel them in wisdom. And verily, for this cause are ye in place no
less honorable than that of the foremost Commanders in the vaward. For, being
in the rereward, by observing those that be hardy, and by encouraging them, ye
may soon make them to be more valiant, and again, if any one be
faint-hearted, by noting likewise and marking him, ye will not cocker nor
suffer such a one to continue so still. Moreover, expedient it is for you, if
for any other whosoever, to gain victory, as well in regard of your age as the
massinesse and weight of your Or, armor.
habit. If they then, that are before in the vaward call upon you and command
to follow, I would have you to obey them. And to the end that ye also may not
be inferior to them in this behalf, exhort them again to lead and put
forward with speed against the enemy. And now, quoth he, go ye also to your
dinners, and having dined, together with the rest in your guirlands, repair
unto your Or, colors.
companies.

CHAP. IX. How the King of Assyria issued out of his camp to fight a field,
and made a speech unto his soldiers. How Cyrus and they afterward joined
battle, wherein the Assyrians were discomfited.
THus were the soldiers of Cyrus occupied; by which time the Assyrians having
dined already, sallied boldly out of their camp, made a bravado, and with
resolute hearts stood strongly appointed in battle ray. The King himself in
person, mounted in his chariot did put them in order, and withal in this
manner exhorted them. Now is the time o ye Assyrians when ye must show your
valor: For, now are ye to fight for your lives, for the soil wherein ye
were borne, for the houses in which ye were fostered, for your wives and
children, and for all the goods that ye have. If ye atchieve the victory,
Lords ye shall be of all this as heretofore: but if ye be vanquished, wot
well that ye must forgo all, and leave the same to your enemies. Stand to it
therefore and fight manfully, as becomes those that affectionately do love
victory. For, mere folly it were, that such as desire victory should fly
away and turn unto the view of their enemies the blind back parts, such as be
neither armed nor furnished with hands. And, a fool he is, who desirous to
live, goes about to run away, as being assured that the winners are they who
shall be safe, where as they that fly, shall sooner die than those that tarry
by it. A fool also he is and no better who coveting wealth, suffers himself
to be overcome. For, who knows not that the Conquerours save their own
goods, and besides the same, gain also the goods of their enemies conquered?
Whereas they that be subdued, shall at once lose both themselves, and all that
they have. Whiles the Assyrian King was thus busied, Cyaxares sent some unto
Cyrus, who said, That now the opportunity of time served to lead forward and to
set upon the enemy. For, how ever few of them are issued forth without the
trench, by that time quoth he that we be come unto them, they will be very
many. Let us not stay therefore and wait until they be more in number than we:
but set forward whiles we think we may easily overmatch them. Cyrus answered,
I would have you to understand o Cyaxares, that unless more than the half
part of them be vanquished, they will give out, that we for fear of their
multitude did charge but a few of them, and therefore they will not take
themselves to be defaited: so that you must then fight a second field, wherein
peradventure they will be better provided and use more policy than now they do
offering themselves to us: so, as that we may at our own choice, fight with
what number soever we will. The messengers when they heard this departed. Mean
while, Chrysantas the Persian came, and certain other of the Peers and
Gentlemen, bringing with them those that had run from the enemies part unto
them: Of whom Cyrus enquired, as meet it was, what his enemies were a doing?
Who answered, That they were already come forth of the camp all armed, That
the King himself being without, was setting them in array, and encouraging
them ever as they issued forth with many words and those very forcible, as they
affirmed, who heard him speak. Hereat Chrysantas, What and if quoth he you
also o Cyrus would draw your soldiers together while you have time and exhort
them, should not you likewise make them more hardy? Tush, said Cyrus, let the
persuasive orations of the Assyrian King my good Chrysantas, never trouble you:
For, no exhortation will be so effectual, as to make men the very same day that
they hear it, of cowards to be valiant: nor Archers, unless they had
beforehand been exercised in that feat: nor Darters, ne yet horsemen: nay it
will not work thus much, as to cause them to be able in body, for to endure
pains taking, except they were trained before therein. But yet replied
Chrysantas, it would suffice, if by your exhortation you could but make their
hearts more courageous. Why! quoth Cyrus, is one days work, or one oration
able, not only to replenish the hearts of the hearers with modest shame, or
reclaim them from things dishonest and unbeseeming, but also to excite and
stir them up, for the love of praise and glory to determine for to undergo
all labor, and adventure all perils, and to grow unto this steadfast
resolution, that better it is for men to fight valiantly and so to die, than to
run away and save their lives? Also, to the imprinting, quoth he, of such
thoughts in men's minds, and to retain the same there firmly fixed, is it not
behovefull, That first there were such positive laws, by virtue whereof, for
valiant men there should be provided a worshipful and free life, but upon
cowards might be imposed a base, grievous and unpleasant condition? Then, there
ought to be Mrs. I suppose, and Governors appointed beside, who may rightly
instruct and accustom them to perform the same so long, until this opinion be
surely settled, namely to repute in very deed valiant and noble men happiest,
and to think cowards and obscure persons of all others most miserable. For, in
this wise ought they to be affected, who will show, that discipline avails
more than the fear that arises from the enemies. But, if a man, when
soldiers are going armed into the field (what time many of them forgo and
forget even their old lessons and principles) were able at the instant, with a
subitary speech to make them brave and worthy warriors, certes, it were the
easiest matter in the world, both to learn and also to teach the most
excellent virtue of all others that belongs to a man. And verily, for mine
own part, I would not believe, That even these here whom we have now with us,
and have trained up and exercised, will constantly persevere and abide to the
end, but that I see you present in place, both willing to give them good
example how they ought to carry themselves, and able also to suggest unto them,
that which happily they have forgotten. But as for those quoth he, my Chrysantas,
who are altogether raw and untrained in virtue and prowess, I would much
marvel if an oration with a goodly grace pronounced, could help them more to
attain unto valiantness, than a song sweetly chaunted, edify those in the
knowledge of music, that are altogether ignorant of that science. In this
manner reasoned and discoursed they. By which time Cyaxares sent eftsoons unto
Cyrus, charging him in plain terms that he did amiss, to delay the time so
long, and not with all expedition march against the enemies. Then Cyrus
returned this answer unto his messengers: Let Cyaxares quoth he understand,
That they are not come forth as many of them as should: And thus much tell him
from me in the hearing of all. Nevertheless, because it is his mind, I will
anon set forward. Having thus said, and made his oraisons unto the Gods, he
brought forth his forces. Now when he began to march still faster and faster
than ordinary, he led the way himself and his soldiers followed not only
with an orderly pace in good array, as having through long exercise learned to
keep order: but, also courageously and with resolution: For that, in a kind of
emulation, they strove one to excel another, and had bodies withal well
enured and hardened to travail: as also, for that all those that went foremost
were no other than their very Captains and Commanders: yea and cheerfully
beside, in regard of their skill and cunning: For, they knew and had learned
long ago, that it was the safest and easiest way, all at once directly to
charge the enemies, especially if they be Archers, darters and horsemen. Whiles
therefore they were yet without the danger of shot, Cyrus gave this Motto for
the signal of Battle. IVPITER AIDER And LEADER, which having passed from one
to another through the host and being returned again unto him, he began to sing
a solemn (...). or the Battle.
Hymn unto CASTOR and PoLLVX: and all his soldiers with a devour mind and
loud voice chaunted the same with him: For in such a case, as many as be Or,
superstitious. (...).
religiously given, stand less in fear of men. The said song being ended, The
Peers abovesaid march on, bravely together, with a lightsome countenance (as
being well trained and taught) beholding one another, calling by name to their
sidemen, and next followers, iterating full often these words. Now to it good
friends. Go to it now right valiant Knights: mightily encouraging each one his
fellow to follow. Which they that came behind hearing, exhorted semblably the
former to lead and go before boldly. Thus the whole army without, was
replenished with forward alacrity, desirous of glory and renown, full of
strength, of confident boldness, of encouragement and exhortation, of stayed
temperance and obedience, which I take to be the most terrible objects that can
be presented to enemies. But, of the Assyrians, such as were ready to fight
before the rampires and in defense of their camp, when the Persians army once
approached near unto them, mounted their chariots, and retired themselves to
their fellows where they were thickest embattailed. As for their Archers,
Darters and Slingers, they discharged from them their shot far sooner, and
before they could possibly reach unto their enemies. When the Persians now, by
preassing forward, were come within the danger of shot, Cyrus with a loud
voice cried out. Now most brave and redouted Knights, Step some one quickly
before, and show proof of his valor, and therewith encourage he the rest.
These words uttered they also again to the other. By occasion whereof, some
upon a brave and courageous spirit, upon an ardent desire also and love to
fight, began to make speed, whom the whole maine battle followed with a
running pace. Cyrus likewise himself, forgetting to keep his ordinary march,
ran before crying out, Who follows, who? where is the valiant soldier that
will fell and lay along the first man? Which others hearing, seconded him and
held on the same note. Thus throughout the whole army, as he began, the voice
went, who will follow? who will play the douty man! Well, in this manner gave
the Persians the first onset and fiercely assailed the enemies. But they not
able to abide the shocke and the open field, reculed, and turned their backs,
flying amain unto their trench and rampire. The Persians pursuing them unto
the very gates, whiles they thronged and thrust one another to get in, slew
many of them. And look who fell into the trenches, they leaped down upon them
and killed them outright both horse and man. For, some of the Chariots were
forced in this their rout to fall down into the ditches. Which when the Medes
horsemen saw, they rode with full carrier against the enemies horsemen: who
gave way to decline their violence. Whereupon began a great chase both of horse
and men, together with much slaughter as well of the one as of the other. Those
Assyrians which within the Munition stood upon the top of the rampire, had
neither mind nor might, to shoot and dart at those, who made such carnage and
havocke: so terrible was the spectacle thereof and so smitten were they with
fear. Perceiving then soon after, that certain Persians had broken through
the gates and entries of their fortifications, they turned back and fled from
the said top of the rampire. The wives, as well of the Assyrians as of their
auxiliary Associats, seeing this rout within the camp, skriked out and ran up
and down all amazed: Some of them being mothers of children, others but
younglings, tearing their side garments, and scratching themselves with their
own nails, lamentably beseeching all those whom they met, not to fly and
forsake them, but to defend their children and themselves. And herewith the KK.
themselves with their trustiest guard about them, stood at the very gates, and
climbing up to the top of the rampires, partly in proper person fought, and in
part exhorted others to do the same. Cyrus after he understood what was done,
fearing least by making an irruption and forcible entry, his men so few in
number might be hurt of so many, sounded the retrait, commanding them to
retire, out of the arrow shot, and to obey. Then, and there, a man might have
seen the noble Peers, how excellently they had been brought up in martial
discipline: For, streightwaies themselves obeyed, and gave charge to the rest,
for to do the like as quickly: and no sooner were they without the danger of
shot, but they stood raunged in their places, more orderly than in any dance
or quire of Musicians, whiles every man knew perfitly where he should be.

THE FOVRTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. How the King of Assyria died in fight: King Croesus and the Assyrians
fled; and Cyrus purposed to follow in chase.
CYRUS having stayed there long enough with his army and made open show, that
ready they were to fight if any would issue forth, seeing none to come abroad,
withdrew his power so far as he thought good and there encamped; Now when he
had set his Corpse du guard, and sent out his espialls before, himself having
assembled his soldiers, in this manner spoke unto them. My friends, ye that
are Persians, First, the Gods above I laud and praise to my full power, like as
I suppose ye all do: For, achieved we have this day both victory and
safety. In regard whereof bound we are to retribute gifts unto their
Majesty's, in token of thanks, even out of all that ever we have. And as for
you, I cannot choose but commend you every one: For, look what service there
is exploited, the same has been performed to the honor of you all. But as
concerning due recompense in particular, when I am certified by those, of whom
meet it is I should enquire, of what desert every one is, I shall endeavor both
in word and deed to confer rewards upon each one respectively. And verily, as
touching this Centurion here Chrysantas, who was next unto me, I need not to
learn of others, as knowing my self very well how he has borne himself:
For, as in every point else he has done his devoyr, like as of you all I
suppose no less: so when I had caused the retreat to be sounded and called
unto him by name, albeit he had his sword up ready to smite his enemy, he
presently obeyed, and leaving that undone which he went about, did as he was
commanded: For, not only retired he in person, but readily charged the rest to
do the same: in so much as he brought his own company without danger of the
voley, ere our enemies wist that we gave ground at all, even before they could
draw their bows, or lance their javelins against us: and so he is both safe
himself, and by his obedience has saved his own men also. As for others,
quoth he, I see some in deed wounded, of whom when I have better considred what
time they were hurt, I shall then deliver my doom. But Chrysantas being so
brave a man of action, so wise withal, and sufficient as well to rule as to be
ruled; him, I say, at this present I ordeine a Colonel over a thousand. And
whenever God shall give me a good hand again, I will not then be forgerfull
of him. And I would have you all, quoth he, to remember thus much and make use
of this journey. For, whatsoever erewhile ye have seen in this fight, never
cease to think upon, that ye may always judge within your selves, whether it
is running away, or preesse rather, that saves your lives? Also, whether they
that fight willingly, be sooner freed from war, or those who are unwilling?
Likewise, what pleasure it is that victory brings. For none of these points
may ye best determine, as having made proof and seen the experience,
considering the service is so lately performed. And verily by continual
meditation hereof, ye shall prove the better. Now therefore, as religious,
valiant, and temperate men, take your suppers. Offer sacred libations to the
Gods, beginning with a triumphant (...).
song, and withal have an eye and due regard to that which is commanded. Thus
said, he got up to horseback, and rode away until he was come to Cyaxares:
Where, after rejoicing with him as requisite it was, upon mutual
congratulation for their common victory: when he had seen how things went
there and asked of him what need he had of his service, he rode back from
thence to his own army. As for Cyrus and his soldiers, after they had supped
and appointed a sufficient watch, they betook themselves to rest.

But the Assyrians, whose Sovereign Commander was slain and with him the very
flower and best of his soldiers, were all in great heaviness yea and many of
them by night slipped away and fled out of the Camp. Which when Croesus and the
rest of their Allies perceived, they sorrowed all very much (for every thing
was dolorous) but this troubled them most in general, that throughout the
army, all the prime company of those that should have been their Leaders were
out of heart, void of counsel and at their wits end. Whereupon in the night
season they abandoned their tents and departed. When day appeared and
discovered how naked of fighting men their Camp was: Cyrus presently advanced
thither first with the Persians. Now, the enemies had left behind them, many
Sheep, many Kine and Oxen, and besides many wagons full of much treasure and
goods. Then repaired thither all the Medes likewise, who were with Cyaxares,
where they dined. Dinner being done, Cyrus called unto him his own Centiniers,
and unto them made this Oration. My soldiers, what benefits and how great,
presented here unto us by the goodness of God seem we to let slip out of our
hands? For now, your own selves see, that the enemies for fear of us be fled.
And if they, being fortified strongly within their hold have quit the same, and
are run away, how may any man imagine, that they will stand to it, if they
see us on even ground in the plain field? Also, they that durst not hold out
when they had no experience of our valor; how shall they be able now to abide
us, defaited as they are already and having suffered so many displeasures at our
hands? And how shall their greatest cowards be willing to fight with us, whose
most valiant men lie slain upon the ground before us? Hereat, said one of the
Company, why then do we not with all speed pursue them, seeing so great
availes coming toward us so evidently? Because, quoth Cyrus, we want good
horses: whereas the very best of our enemies, and such, as most fit it were
now, either to kill or to take prisoners, hie them homeward apace well mounted
on good coursers? And those verily by Gods help, able were we to put to
flight, but in following the chase, shall never overtake. Why then, say they,
go you not to Cyaxares, and impart so much unto him? Say you so? quoth he,
Then follow me all, that he may know, ye are generally of this mind. So they
all both followed Cyrus, and also declared what they thought meet as touching
the matter they required. Cyaxares, partly for that they made the motion first,
somewhat envied them: and partly because he thought he should do well for
himself, if he did not enter into danger a second time (for surely he gave
himself to joy and mirth, and saw many of the Medes do the same) answered in
this manner.

CHAP. II. The opinion of Cyaxares, to divert Cyrus from following the train
of his victory.
I Know nephew Cyrus both by report, and also by that which I have seen my
self, that ye Persians of all other men study most, not to set your minds
upon any pleasure unsatiably. But verily, for mine own part, I think it much
more behoovefull, in the greatest pleasure to be continent and hold a mean.
And what is it, that presents greater contentment to men, than good success,
which at this time is fallen unto us? If we therefore being now in happy case,
can soberly and wisely keep the same, we may perhaps live unto our old age in
felicity without all danger. But if we are never satisfied therewith,
pursuing still one good fortune in the neck of another: take heed, least that
befall unto us, which, they say, many navigatours have found at sea; who
meeting sometime with a good gale of wind and fortunate voyage, would never
make an end of sailing, until they were cast away and so perished. Semblably,
many men, (by report) having obtained one victory, by coveting to win
another, have lost the former: For, truly if our enemies who are fled, were
fewer in number than we, it might peradventure be safe for us to pursue them
being so few. But now, consider with how small a troup of them we all fought,
when we gained the upper hand? The rest were not at the battle nor struck
one stroke: whom if we force not to draw sword, they not knowing us nor
themselves, for want of skill and for cowardice will be glad to escape and be
gone: But if they perceive once, that they shall be in as great jeopardie by
running away, as by tarrying still, and have no hope of safety but in their
swords point, beware we urge them not even against their own wills and purpose,
to bear themselves like valiant men. For, this you must know, that you are not
so desirous to take their wives and children prisoners as they be to save them.
Consider also, that wild swine when they are espied by the hunter run away,
(many though they be in number) with their young pigs: but if a man hunt or
chase any of their young ones, they will fly no longer, no though there be but
one of them and no more, but assail him that goes about to catch the same.
And verily, the enemies at this time being enclosed within their strength,
give us leave to skirmish with as many of them as we thought good our selves:
but in case we join battle with them in the broad and open plain, when
they shall learn, divided apart as erewhile, some to confront us, others to
flank us on the one side and the other, and some again to set upon us behind
in the tail: See then whether every one of us have not need both of many eyes,
and also of as many hands? Furthermore, I would not wish, quoth he, for my
part, seeing as I do the Medes solacing themselves in mirth, to withdraw them
from their delights, and force them to hazard their lives in a doubtful piece
of service.

CHAP. III. How Cyrus obtained of Cyaxares part of the Medes forces: and with
them and the Hyrcanians together that yielded unto him, pursued the Assyrians
in their flight.
Upon this speech Cyrus briefly replied: You shall not need, [good Vnkle] to
compel any man: only let me have them who will follow me as voluntaries, and
peradventure we shall return, bringing unto you and to every one of these your
friends, that which will give you all good contentment. Follow we will not in
chase the maine multitude of our enemies (for how possibly should we encompasse
and take them?) but if we may light upon any piece of their army dismembered
from the rest, or upon a skirt and remnant thereof, we shall fetch it in and
bring the same unto you. Moreover, think this, quoth he, that we at your
request are come a great journey, and all to gratify and do you pleasure; You
therefore in all equity are to requite us in the like: that we also may in some
sort make up our own mouths, and so return home with good pillage; and not
depend all of us, upon your pay and treasure. Then said Cyaxares, If any one
will of his own accord bear you company, I would acknowledge my self
beholden also unto you. Send therefore, quoth Cyrus, with me one of these here
who deserves to be trusted most, that he may declare unto the Medes from you,
what you command. Go to, said Cyaxares, take of all these any one, whom you
will choose. Now, it happened that the Median Gentleman was there present, who in
times past had claimed kindred of Cyrus and gotten so many kisses of him. Then
Cyrus forthwith, This man here, quoth he, without more ado shall serve my
turn. Content said Cyaxares, let him wait upon you: and withal, he charged
the party, to deliver thus much in his name, That whosoever would, might go
with Cyrus. Thus Cyrus taking the man with him, went out: and when he was gone
forth, he presently said unto him: Now verily shall you make known whether you
spoke truth or no, when you said you took much pleasure in beholding me. Say
you so? quoth the Median, Then will I never forsake you. And are you willing
said Cyrus to impart as much to others likewise? Then the man bound it with an
oath and said yea by Jupiter that I will: and bring it so about in the end,
that even you shall be as willing to look upon me also. Then being thus sent
from Cyaxares, as he declared otherwise right cheerfully this errand to the
Medes, so he added this moreover, that he would never depart from so noble, so
excellent, so goodly a person, and that which passed all the rest, descended
from the race of the Gods.

Whiles Cyrus was busy about these affairs, there arrived, as it were by the
providence of God, certain Ambassadors from the Hyrcanians. These Hyrcanians
border upon the Assyrians. A nation verily nothing populous (which is the
reason that subject they were unto the Assyrians) howbeit, reputed then, (as
they are no less at this day,) good horsemen. In which regard also the
Assyrians employed them, as the Lacedaemonians did the Scyrites, making no spare
of them, but putting them to all pains taking and adventures. And at this very
time, they had charged them to keep the Rear (and in number they were about a
thousand horse) to the end that if any damage happened behind, they first, should
undergo it before themselves. These Hyrcanians, because they were to march
hinmost, had their wagons also and their families behind all the rest. For,
the nations of Asia, the most part, in all their expeditions, use to go to
war with their whole households. And in this manner served the Hyrcanians at
that time. Who now considering well with themselves, what hard and servile
warfare they were put to under the Assyrians: also that now their Sovereign
Lord being slain, they were all foiled and discomfited, their whole army in
great fear, their Associats out of heart, ready to faint and forsake them;
casting, I say, these things in their minds, they thought they had a fit time
and opportunity offered to revolt, if together with them Cyrus and his forces
would make head afresh and set upon them. Hereupon they dispatched their
messengers unto Cyrus. For, now by reason of this battle, his name was up and
his fame much increased. These that were sent, related unto Cyrus what just
cause they had to hate the Assyrians: if therefore at this time he were
disposed, to make an invasion they would become both Associates, and lead the
vaward also in this journey. Withal, they recounted unto him, in what state
the enemies stood, the rather to incite him thereby to take this expedition in
hand. Then Cyrus questioned with them in this sort: Think ye, quoth he, that
we shall be able yet to overtake them, before they put themselves into their
strong holds? For we take this for a great infortunitie of ours, that they have
so secretly in the night escaped from us. This spoke he because he would have
them to conceive an excellent opinion of him. Who answered, That early the next
morning they might reach them, if they made speed and went lightly appointed.
For, by reason, say they, of their great multitude, and heavy carriages, they
march but slowly: and besides, for that they sat up and watched all night
before, they had now rid but small ground forward, and pitched their tents
betimes. Then replied Cyrus, Can ye put in any pledge for our assurance, that
ye speak the truth? We will, say they, forthwith ride away, and even this
night bring hostages with us for your better security. Only do you assure us
in the name of God, and give us your right hand, that we may make report to
others, what we have received from you. Then he faithfully promised them,
that if they performed bona fide, what they had said, he would use them as his
trusty and assured friends: neither would he rank them inferior in place
either to the Persians or to the Medes. And even at this very day, a man shall
see the Hyrcanians put in trust and bearing office of state, as well as
Persians or Medes, such as are thought of best worth. After they had supped,
Cyrus led forth his army before day light was gone, and commanded those
Hyrcanians to give attendance there and to march onward together with him. As
for the Persians, they all in general, as requisite it was, speedily came
forth, and Tigranes also with his own Regiment. Of the Medes, some entered this
journey, for that having been children when Cyrus was a child, were now become
his friends: others, because they had been his companions in hunting, and were
much delighted in his good behavior: some again in token of thankfulness
unto him because he seemed to have delivered them out of great fear: others
also upon good hopes, that seeing he bare himself so valiantly, he would
prove afterward a fortunate, and mighty Prince. There were besides diverse of
them willing now to do him some reciprocal pleasure and service for the good
turns which he had procured unto any whiles he was brought up among the
Medes. And verily, (as he was of a kind and courteous nature), he had procured
for a number of them at his Grandsires hands many favors. Last of all, a great
sort of them, after they had seen the Hyrcanians and heard a rumor spread
abroad, that they would be their Leaders to bring them unto great wealth, went
forth for to get somewhat. Thus the Medes in manner all, followed him: unless
they were such as happened to be of the Domestical train of Cyaxares: For,
these only remained, together with those that were their vassals and
followers. As for all the rest, full gladly and cheerfully, they did put
themselves forward in this journey, not I say as men constreined, but as mere
voluntaries, and who to gratify him, of their own accord went forth. When
they were now abroad upon the way, first he comes out unto the Medes, whom
he praised: and prayed withal, Imprimis, that the Gods would vouchsafe to be
propitious guides both to them and his. Item, To grant him such favor as to
be able to render unto them condign recompense for this their affectionate
love unto him. In conclusion, he gave order, that the footmen should lead the
march: and then he commanded the horsemen to follow. Moreover, if in any place
they rested or stayed in their journey, he charged that some should ride unto
him, to know from time to time what was expedient to be done. After this, he
willed the said Hyrcanians to lead foremost. Who asked him in this manner, Why?
Sir, tarry not you and expect until we bring our hostages: that you also,
having taken pledges of us for the better security of our troth, may then set
forward? And he, by report, made this answer. Even, for that I consider, we
do all carry the assurance of our faith, no otherwise than in our hands and
hearts. For, at this point and thus provided seem we to be, that if ye be
true of your word unto us, we have sufficient power and means to do you good:
but if ye be false and deceive us, we take our selves to be in that state, as
we need not be in subjection unto you, but ye rather (if the Gods will) shall
be thrall unto us and at our devotion. And verily, quoth he, ye Hyrcanians,
because ye say, your countrymen use to march hinmost, therefore when ye see
them once, give us knowledge that they be of your nation, to the end we may
spare them. The Hyrcanians hearing this, led the way as he commanded: and
withal admired his princely heart and magnanimity. Neither stood they any
more in fear of the Assyrians or of the Lydians or yet of any other their
Allies and Confederates. And as for Cyrus himself, he supposed, there lay
matter of no small moment every way in them, were they present with him or were
they absent. Now as they marched and night drew on, reported it is, that a
clear light shining from heaven, appeared evidently unto Cyrus and his host,
in so much as they all conceived a reverent fear of the Divine power, and a
consident boldness besides against the enemies: and, for that they were
lightly appointed and went apace, by good reason they made, that night, a great
journey, and by break of day in the very twy-light, approached near unto the
Hyrcanians maine regiment. Which when the messengers abovesaid perceived, they
signified unto Cyrus that those were their countrymen: And hereof, said they,
have we sure intelligence, as well by their marching hinmost, as by the number
of fires which they make. Whereupon he sent one of these two unto them,
commanding him in his name to deliver this message: That if they were his
friends, they should with all speed come and meet him holding up their hands
aloft. Some likewise of his own men he sent with him, whom he commanded to
say unto the Hyrcanians, That as his men should see them coming toward him,
so they also would do the like again. Thus, one of the messengers tarried
still with Cyrus, and the other rode forth to the Hyrcanians. During the time
that Cyrus waited to see what the Hyrcanians would do, he caused his army to
stay the march. Then the Chieftaines of the Medes together with Tigranes
galloped hard unto him, demanding what they were to do? unto whom he made
answer, This troop next unto us is the regiment of the Hyrcanians: unto whom
one of their messengers, accompanied with some few of our men is gone for to
signify unto them, that if they mean to be friends, they should meet us
bearing up all of them their right hands. Wherefore, if they so do, receive
them ye, every one in his place friendly giving them your right hands, and bid
them be of good cheer. But if they either take weapon in hand or go about to
fly, do your best, quoth he, to dispatch them at first, so as not one of them
remain alive. These were the directions of Cyrus. Meane-while the Hyrcanians,
having heard what the messengers said, were exceeding glad, and quickly
mounting on horseback repaired toward them holding up their hands as they had
warning so to do. Semblably the Medes and Persians did put forth their hands,
welcomed them and bade them take a good heart. Then Cyrus, We for our parts,
quoth he, believe now and trust you Hyrcanians: and even so ought ye to be
affected to us ward. But first of all, Tell us this, How far hence is the
place where the principal rulers and puissance of our enemies maine army are?
They answer, somewhat above a Parasang.

CHAP. IIII. The exhortation of Cyrus to his whole Army, inciting them to
follow the chase of his enemies, with the Cavallery of the Medes.
WHich when Cyrus heard, Go to then, my dear friends, quoth he, Persians,
Medes, and ye Hyrcanians, (for now speak I to you as unto Allies and partners
with us.) Now ought we to know for certain in what state we stand: namely,
that if we now become faint hearted and demean our selves cowardly, we shall
incur the most grievous calamities that be. For, our enemies know full well,
wherefore we are come: but if we shall fiercely set upon our enemies and give
the charge with courage and manly resolution, ye shall see them soon like
unto fugitive slaves, that are found out and apprehended again, some to court
us in humble and suppliant manner crying us mercy, others to take them to their
heels: some again so maskared, as they will not be able so much as to think
either of the one or the other. For, as men once discomfited, they will stare
and look upon us: and suspecting nothing less, than that we are coming, they
being neither set embattailed nor provided to fight, will be surprised. If
therefore we desire to sit at supper feeding merrily, to pass the night
sleeping quietly, and in a word, hereafter to live pleasantly: let us give them
no respit, either to consult or prepare any good thing for themselves, no nor
so much as to know at all that we be men: but think only, that naught else is
come among them but bucklers, courtillaxes, glaives, browne-bills and bloody
wounds. And ye Hyrcanians, quoth he, step forward upon them, and make way
before us, that by the sight of your armor, we may be in covert and unseene as
long as possible it is. But, when I am come close to the enemies army, leave
with me Armenians, Medes, and Hyrcanians.
every of you a cornet of horsemen, to use as need requires so long as I abide
here with the army. And such of you as are Commanders, chiefe-Officers and of
the elder sort, see you ride close in a thick squadron together, when ye
charge them, if ye be wise: least happily ye light upon their massive troops,
and so be borne down by violence. But, suffer the younger gallants to follow
the chase, and let them have the killing of the enemies. For, this is the
safest way now, that we leave as few of our enemies alive as may be. And if it
come to pass (as it happens to many winners) that we quite overthrow their
fortunes, and break their backs for ever, take heed we must, that we fall not
to pillage. For, he that so does, is no more a valiant soldier, but a base
soldiers page, and such an one, any man that will may use as his slave. This
also ought we to know, that nothing is more gainefull than victory. For, the
victour presently carries all away with him at once, men, women, money and
goods, yea and the whole country withal. Furthermore, this one thing would be
thought upon especially: How we may hold and retain victory. (...).
For, in it even the rifler and spoyler himself is comprised. To conclude,
remember this among the rest, in your chase, that ye return to me while it
is daylight. For, be it once dark, we will receive none.

Cyrus having thus said, sent every man to his own or Centurie.
company; commanding them withal, that when they were thither come, each one
should signify as much to their Decurions. For, seeing that these Decurions
stood in the Front, they might easily hear: who likewise were bidden every one
to intimate as much unto their several Denaries under their charge. Thus the
Hyrcanians led the Vaward. Cyrus with the Persians conducted the maine battle
in the mids, and so marched. As for the Horsemen, he marshalled them as meet it
was, on both sides like wings.

CHAP. V. How Cyrus defaited the Assyrians again, and took prisoners, Kings,
Lords and other soldiers agreat number. The order that he gave, how to be
provided presently of victuals without confusion and trouble.
WHen it was day light, the enemies, some wondered and were astonished at these
occurrents: others perceived at the first what the matter was: some told it as
news: others cried out: some unloosed their horses: others fell to trusse up
bag and baggage, some flung armor and weapons from of their beasts backs:
others did on their harnois: some leapt on horseback, others bridled them:
some mounted their wives and women into wagons: others caught up their things
of greatest price to save them: some again were taken in the manner as they
were hiding the same in the ground: but the most part took their heels. And
we must think, that many and sundry things they did, save this only, that
there was not one of them fought, but perished without fight. Croesus the
Lydian King had sent away before in the night (for that it was the hot summer
season) his wives in Carroches, that during the cool air, they might travail
more easily: and himself followed hard after, with his horsemen. Likewise did,
by report, the Phrygian Potentate who ruled that Phrygia which lies upon
Hellespont. But when they understood by those that fled and overtooke them, how
the world went, themselves fled also as fast as ever they could. The KK. of the
Cappadocians and Arabians, who were next hand and made some resistance, unarmed
and without their curaces, the Hyrcanians put to the sword. The most part of
those that lost their lives were Assyrians and Arabians. For, being within
their own land, they made slowest haste, and went least forward. Whiles the
Medes and Hyrcanians made havocke and execution (as it was no other like)
following the chase as they did and having still the upper hand, Cyrus
commanded those Cornets of horsemen which were left with him, to ride about
the Camp: and whomsoever they saw going forth armed, to kill them outright:
but to those who stayed within, he made proclamation, That what soldiers so
ever of the enemies army, were either Horsemen, Targuatiers or Archers, they
should trusse up their armor and bring it forth, leaving their horses still at
their Pavilions. But as many as did not this, they should forthwith lose their
heads.

Mean while with their arming swords ready drawn, they stood in order of
battle round about the tents. They therefore that had armor, brought it
forth and flung the same from them into one place where Cyrus had appointed,
which they set on fire and burnt, who had commandment from him so to do.
Cyrus then, considering, that thither they were come unprovided altogether of
meat and drink, without which impossible it is, that either an expedition
should hold out or any other feat of arms be exploited: and casting about, how
he might most speedily and in the best sort be therewith furnished; thought
withal, how necessary it is for all those that undertake warfare, to have some
one man, who should take charge of Pavilion and lodging, yea and purvey
victuals ready for soldiers against their entry into the Camp. Knowing
therefore that by all likelihood such as these, at this present especially
might be found in the Of the Enemies.
Camp, for that now they would be busied in providing necessaries; he
commanded by proclamation all those or, Purveyours.
Campe-officers to show themselves: and if any such minister were wanting, the
most ancient in every tent to come forth and appear: and herein not to fail
not disobey at their utmost peril. They seeing their Lords and Masters to yield
obedience, forth with themselves obeyed also. When they were come in place,
First he commanded them to sit down, who had in their tents more provision
of victual then would serve for two months. After he had seen them, he bad
those likewise to sit, who had one months victual: and then, all in manner
sat them down. Now when he had learned thus much, he spoke unto them in this
manner. Go to then, good fellows, quoth he, whosoever of you do hate
miseries, and desire to have any good at our hands; look to it with all
diligence that there be in every tent, double so much victuals as well meats
as drinks provided, both for master and man, for Captain likewise and
soldiers, as ye were wont daily to provide. See also, that all other things
be ready prepared, which may set out and furnish a feast: For, there will be
here anon those, who after they have gotten the upper hand of their enemies,
will think it meet that they have all necessaries plenteously and to the full.
Know ye therefore, that it will be for your own good, if ye entertain them
so, as they have no cause to complain. When they heard this, they performed
diligently what they were enjoined to do. Then Cyrus called together his own
Centurions again and made such an oration as this unto them.

CHAP. VI. How Cyrus communed with his Centiniers, persuading them to sobriety,
and to stay for their fellows who were in the pursuit: and how they raised a
great booty of men, women, and goods.
WE are not ignorant, goods Friends, that you may now if ye will take your
dinners before our Associats that are absent, yea and enjoy those meats and
drinks, which are right exquisitly provided. But I am not persuaded, that this
dinner and refection of ours, will profit us more, than if it may appear, that
we are careful of our fellows and confederates: neither can all this good
cheer make us so much the stronger, as this one thing would do, to wit, if we
might be able to cause our Allies to be forward in ayding us. If therefore, we
should seem so to vilipend those who now follow the chase and execution of our
enemies, fighting still with them that make head, as that before we know how
they speed, we should dine and make merry, I fear me, as we shall be noted
openly for lewd persons, so we shall weaken our selves, when we miss their
aid. But to have such a care of those that take pains and expose themselves
unto dangers, as that when upon their entry into the Camp, they may find
food ready and all things necessary: This say I, were a feast alone, and would
make us much more jocund and joviall, than if we went by and by to fill and
pamper our bellies. Consider furthermore, quoth he, that although it stood us
not upon, in modesty to have any regard at all of them, yet ought we not at
any time, to give our selves to belly cheer and drunkenness. For, as yet we
have not fully achieved those exploits which we enterprised, but all things
now are come to the very pitch and doubtful point which requires careful
diligence. For, we have in the camp enemies in number far more than we be
our selves, and those loose, and at liberty, whom peradventure it were fit to
be guarded surely still: yea and care would be had, that there be such as may
purvey us necessaries. Moreover, our horsemen are away, who verily disquiet our
minds and make us to muse where they be: and when they are returned, whether
they will stay with us or no? therefore, in mine opinion, such meat and drink
we are at this time to take and stay our stomachs with, as a man may think
most meet and expedient, thereby neither to be full of drowsy sleep, nor
surprised with inconsiderate folly. I wot well likewise, that much treasure
there is and other goods in the camp: of which I know it is in our power to
convert to our proper use as much as we list, how ever the same be common, as
well to those who were with us at the winning thereof as to our selves. But I
do not think, it would turn more to our gain, for to seize the said goods
into our own hands, than if we show our selves true and just unto them, and in
so doing purchase thus much, as that they shall be more fast and assured
friends unto us than now they are. In these respects therefore, I think it
good to commit the dispose and distribution of these moneys and goods, to the
Medes, Hyrcanians, and Tigranes at their return: and say they deal the less
part among us, yet to reckon even it our gain and advantage. For, by reason of
lucre growing to them ward, more willing they will be to remain with us. As
for our selves, if at this time we should regard our own commodity before
theirs, verily it would gain us wealth to last but a small while. But to let
this pillage go by, and in lieu thereof to have and hold such things, whereof
riches does arise, this is it in my judgment, which may yield both to us and
to all ours, more durable and perpetual wealth. For this cause also, quoth he,
I suppose when we are at home in our own country, we do inure our selves to
master and keep down our bellies: to forbear likewise unlawful and
unreasonable games: that when need requires, we might use the same to our weal
and commodity. And verily, where we may show our institution and bringing up in
greater matters, than these now presented unto us, I cannot see. And herewith
made Cyrus an end of his speech. This advise of his, Hystaspes a Persian and
one of the abovenamed Peers approved, and said as follows. An indignity and
shame it were o Cyrus: if we many times in hunting should continue without meat
and all for to take some wild beast, and the same peradventure but little
worth: and now when we are in the pursuit of a world of wealth, we be our own
hinderance by those things that rule lewd men, and are subject to the good: so
as we should not seem to perform what we ought and befitteth us best to do.
Thus agreed Hystaspes with the opinion of Cyrus, and all the rest allowed
thereof. Go to then said Cyrus, Since we concur in one and the same mind,
Send every Caporall out of his own band five of the tallest and best men to
go round about, and as many as they see busy in purveiance of necessaries, to
command them; but whomsoever they perceive slack in this behalf, against them
to proceed with more severity, than if they were their very masters. And thus
verily did Cyrus and those with him. As for the Medes, some of them who
overtooke certain waines which had gone before, and turned them back, brought
them full laden with such commodities as the army had need of. Others took
and brought away with them Or, Wagons.
Chariots and Carroches, wherein were passing fair women: partly lawful wives
and in part Ligbies.
concubines, such as for their singular beauty were carried about and went with
the Camp. For, the manner is of all the nations in Asia, even at this day
whenever they make any warlike expedition, to take with them along, the most
precious things they have: saying, That they are the more eger of fight, when
their most leife and dearest jewels are about them. For, there is a certain
necessity imposed upon them, manfully to protect and defend the same, and even
so in very deed perhaps it is: or peradventure thus they do, to satisfy their
lusts and pleasures. Now Cyrus, when he saw what feats the Medes and
Hyrcanians had exploited, checked, as it were, and rebuked himself and his
whole train: in that others at this time seemed to outgoe them in valor, and
to win somewhat: whiles he and those about him sit still in a place far
remote from performing good service, doing just nothing. And in truth, they
that came away with this said booty, had no sooner showed unto Cyrus what they
brought, but they rode forth eftsoons, to pursue the rest of the enemies: For
so said they, we have express commandment from our Provosts and Rulers.
Cyrus albeit he was stung herewith, yet bestowed he this booty safe, and laid
it up every thing in due place. Then assembled he once again his Centiniers;
and standing so as he might be heard whatsoever he spoke, made this oration
unto them.

CHAP. VII. Cyrus consulteth with his Centiniers, about mounting footmen on
horseback: and erecting a Persian Cavallerie, with the horses taken from the
enemy in the wars.
MY good friends, We all, I suppose, do know, that if we may atchieve those
matters, which fortune at this time presents unto us: as, there shall accrue
much profit unto the Persians all in common: so the greatest part of good right
will be ours, by whose travail the service is done. But, how we should be
Lords thereof, being not of sufficient strength to enjoy and hold the same,
unless we have a Persian Cavallerie of our own, truly I cannot yet see. For,
consider I pray you with me, that we Persians are furnished with those
weapons, wherewith we may seem to foil and discomfit our enemies at close
fight: but when we have once routed them, what Horsemen, what Archers, what
Targuaters, or what Darters, can we either take prisoners or kill as they fly,
wanting horses as we do? And why should either Archers, or Darters, or
Horsemen, be afraid to assail us and work us mischief, so long as they know
for certain, that they stand in no danger to receive hurt from us, no more
than from the very trees that grow fast in the ground? Which being so, is it
not evident, that those men of arms who now assist us, do think that all
these preies which now are taken, be no less their own than ours? yea and
perhaps more too, so help me Jupiter. Thus therefore stands the case now, and
it cannot otherwise be: But if we may provide our selves of a Cavallerie, out
of our own nation, not inferior to this of theirs, is it not very apparent
unto you all, that we shall be able to do as much against our enemies without
them as now we do with them? and besides, find even them more modest in their
carriage and respective toward us? So that we shall need the less to care
whether they will stay with us, or be gone, seeing that without their help we
shall be sufficient of our selves. Well, Let this go by: For I think no man
will gainesay this opinion, but that it is every way and simply better, for the
Persians to have Horsemen of their own. But happily ye think with your selves,
How this may be brought about? If then, we desire to set up a Cavallery, let us
take into our consideration what we have toward it, and what we want? Horses we
have these here, in number many, taken already in the Camp, bridles we have
for to rule and keep them in: with other things besides meet for those to
occupy, that have horses. We have moreover all that a man of Arms needs to
use: For defensive armor, brestplates to protect our bodies: For offensive
weapons, Darts and Iavelins which we may lance from us, or keep still in our
hands as we please. What lack we then? Belike, men we have need of: but of
them we are best sped. For, nothing is so much our own, as we our selves be
ours. But peradventure, some man will say, we are not skillful in horsemanship.
Neither was there, I assure you, any one of them cunning in that which now they
can skill of, before he was taught the feat of it. And happily another will
object and say, that they learned it when they were young children. But I pray
you, good Sir, Whether are children more apt and of better capacity, to learn
such things as are told and showed unto them, than men grown? or whether when
they have learned them, are childrens bodies or men's, more able to put the same
in practice? Now, for our selves we have such opportunity to learn, as
neither children nor any other men have so much. For, we shall not need to be
taught the feat of shooting, as children are; considering that we know it
already: nor the sleight of darting; for we can do it well enough. Nor is it
with us as with other men: who are, some, troubled about tillage and husbandry:
others hindered by trades, arts, and occupations: and some again let with
dornesticall affairs: Whereas we, are not only induced by time and leisure,
to menage martial feats, but also driven thereto upon necessity. Moreover, it
is not in this, as in many other warlike points, which may well be profitable,
but yet are difficile and hard. For, is it not more easy and pleasant to ride
our journeys, then to go them on foot? When there is required expedition and
speed, is it not a great pleasure, to be streightwaies with a man's friend? yea
and in the pursuit of man or beast, quickly if need requires, to outstrip and
intercept them? Is not this also very handsome and convenient, that what armor
soever is to be worn or weapon borne, a man's horse should carry both it and
him? For, truly it is all one to wear, and to bear the same. Now for that,
which we may seem to fear most, namely, least if we be put of necessity, to
try the fortune of a battle on horseback, before we have atteined to the
exquisite skill of riding, we prove neither good footmen nor fufficient
horsemen: This is not so hard a matter but it may be well avoided. For, when
and wheresoever we list, we may soon alight and fight on foot: neither shall
we in learning to ride, forget our footmanship or the service thereto
belonging. Thus spoke Cyrus: and Chrysantas seconding his speech, delivered his
mind after this sort.

CHAP. VIII. How Cyrus by the counsel and advise of his most politic
Captains, ordained in his army, a troop of Horsemen, serving upon the
Assyrians horses: and intended to set at large all his prisoners.
TRVLY for mine own part, quoth he, so desirous I am to learn the feat of
riding, that were I once a horseman, I would think that ever after I had wings
and flew. For now, being as I am, it would content me passing well, if striving
a-vie with any man to run a race on even ground, I could but get before him by
the head, and if seeing a wild beast running by me, I might so aim mine arrow
or level my dart as to strike and hit him, before he be gotten a great way of.
But were I set once on horseback, I should be able to kill a man, so far of
as I could see him, and in chacing of wild beasts, I would not doubt to
confront and kill some at hand, to strike others also aloof with my javelin,
as if they stood still. For, although man and beast both of them run swiftly,
yet drawing nigh together, they seem as though they stood. And verily me
thinks of all living creatures I can admire most and wish to resemble the
Hippocentaures, if ever any such were; as who in forecast, used men's prudence
in managing that which was to be done, their hands: in taking that which fled,
and in overthrowing whatsoever stayed and stood still, the swiftness and
strength of an horse. Therefore, if I were an horseman, I would I trow be
furnished with all these together. For, having humane reason and understanding
of mine own, I might be able to foresee all: in my hands I should be able to
bear and weld my weapons: with my horse-feet to pursue, and with his strength,
to lay my concurrent along. Neither yet should I be so conjoined and grown
together unto my horse, as Hippocentaures are. And indeed better is it, thus to
be, than so united and concorporate. For, the Hippocentaures I suppose, were
ignorant, how to use many good things invented by men, as also how to enjoy
many pleasures and delights, which horses naturally have: whereas I, having
learned once to ride, shall whiles I am on horseback, perform in some sort
what belongs to an Hippocentaure: and when I am alighted on foot, dine and
suppe, wear my clothes, and do as other men do: what else therefore shall I
be but an Hippocentaure divided one while, and compounded again another while?
Besides, in this one point more, I shall have the vantage of an Hippocentaure
and excel him. For whereas he saw before him with two eyes, and heard with two
ears only, I certainly shall guess at things with four eyes, and have the
ynkling and intelligence of them by the means of four ears. For, it is said,
that an horse, by the foresight of his eye, warns a man of many occurrents,
yea and advertiseth him no less, by the foreknowledge that he has with his
ears. Enroll me therefore in the list with them, that would most gladly be
horsemen. And us also, for Gods sake, said all the rest. Then Cyrus, Seeing we
are so fully accorded, What if we make a law unto our selves, that it shall be
a shameful reproach, for any of them to whom I shall give horses, to be seen
abroad on foot, be the journey that they take, great or small? that men may
think us to be very Hippocentaures indeed? Thus when he had proposed this
law, they all gave their assent and enacted the same. Hereupon it is, that ever
since that time, unto this present day, there is not a man of worth and haviour
among the Persians, seen by his good will to go on foot. Thus debated they
these matters, and discoursed as ye have heard. By which time it was past
noone: and then, the Median and Hyrcanian horsemen, came riding toward them,
bringing both horses and men whom they had taken prisoners. For, they did not
put any one of them to the sword, who had delivered up their weapons. Being
come, Cyrus demanded of them, First, whether they were all safe? And when they
answered yea; he asked them what they had exploited? Who made report of their
service done: and how valiantly they had performed every thing in particular,
they stuck not to set out to the full, in most brave words. Now when Cyrus had
with pleasure heard all that they were disposed to relate, he fell afterward
to praising of them likewise, in these terms. Certes, it appears very well,
my good friends, that ye have borne your selves right manfully. For, surely
ye are now far greater, fairer and more terrible to see to, than heretofore.
He enquired moreover of them, how great a journey they had made? and whether
the country were inhabited or no? Who made answer, that they had ridden over a
great ground: that the land throughout was inhabited, and replenished with
Sheep, Goats, Neat, Horses, Corn and all good commodities. Then, quoth he,
two things are we to look unto. The one, that we may have the soveraintie over
them who possess this wealth: the other, that they remain where they be. For
a country well peopled is a rich possession and worth much: whereas, if the
same lie desert and abandoned of men, it must needs be destitute also of all
good things. I know full well, that slain ye have those which made
resistance: Wherein ye did well, I assure you (for this is it that chiefly
mainteineth victory) but such as yielded ye have taken prisoners and brought
away: Whom if we let go, we shall, as I think, do well for our own
behalf. For, first we need not now to take order how to beware of them, how to
keep them in safe custody, or to find them food, and with hunger truly we
will never kill them. Then, if we set these at liberty, we shall still meet
with more captives. For, Conquer we once the country, all the dwellers therein
will be our captives. Yea and the rest will the sooner tarry, choosing rather to
obey, than to fight it out, if they see these remaining alive and let go at
large. This is mine opinion. If any man see farther into the business, let him
speak his mind. But they having heard his advise, agreed, that the same
should be done accordingly. Cyrus therefore calling unto him the said
prisoners, spoke thus unto them.

CHAP. IX. The speech of Cyrus to the Assyrian prisoners at their deliverance.
YE have now Sirs for this time saved your lives, by yielding obedience: and
if hereafter ye do likewise, there shall no hurt befall unto you: unless it
be this, That the same Prince shall not be your Ruler who was heretofore. For
otherwise, the same houses ye shall inhabit, the same land ye shall till,
with the same wives ye shall cohabit, and as ye do at this present, of your
own children ye shall have the government. But against us, ye shall not
bear arms, no, nor against any other whomsoever. And if any one beside do
offer you injury, we will our selves be sure in your quarrel and defense to
fight. And, for our security that no man shall solicit and excite you to
take any war in hand, present your armor here unto us. Look, how many of
you bring the same in, they shall have peace, and all things before named
without fraud or covin. But whosoever shall not lay down their warlike arms,
upon them will we war out of hand. Will any one of you come to us in friendly
manner, and be seen either to perform any action and to teach us ought? him
will we entertain, and entreat, as one deserving well of us: as a friend I
say, and in no wise as a slave. Thus much, quoth he, would I have you both to
know, your selves, and also to intimate unto others. Now if ye for your parts
be willing to condescend hereunto, and yet some other will not consent, lead
ye us against those, to the end that we may rule them, and not they us. When
he had thus said, they with great reverence did obeisance unto him, and withal
promised so to do. After that they were departed, Cyrus spoke in this wise, It
is time now o ye Medes and Armenians both, that we all go to our suppers. And
behold, we have prepared for you the best cheer we could get. Go your ways
therefore and send us half your bread that is purveied and ready made, for
there is sufficient provided for both. As for (...). whatsoever is eaten beside
bread.
meat beside and drink send us none. For we have thereof with us enough
prepared already. And ye Hyrtanians, quoth he, bring these men to their
lodgings; the chief and principal Commanders to the best and largest, (ye
know whither well enough) the rest as ye shall think most meet and
convenient. Take ye also your suppers your selves where ye best like. For,
the tents are kept safe and untouched for you, and therein is provision to
serve you as well as them. And this know ye both, that for all matters without
doors, we will for you keep watch and ward this night: Look ye your selves
to those things that are within the pavilions, and therein bestow your harnois
and weapons. For, they be not yet our friends all, that are in the said tents.
So the Medes and Tigranes his soldiers washed (for all things were prepared to
their hands) and after they had shifted their clothes went to supper. Their
horses also had forage and provender enough. Moreover they sent unto the
Persians of their bread half a loaf to every one: but neither cates Cates,
(...).
nor wine thereto did they send: supposing that Cyrus and his company had
sufficient thereof, because himself had said, he was well stored therewith.
But indeed Cyrus meant by (...).
Cates, Hunger, and by drink, the water of the river running thereby. Then
Cyrus having caused the Persians to take their suppers, for that now by this
time the night drew on, sent many of them diverse ways by five and ten in a
company, commanding them to lie close and in covert round about the tents.
For, thus he thought, that these would serve both as a good watch and guard, to
keep back any that from without attempted to enter in: and also by this
means whosoever intended to make an escape out of the camp, and convey money
away with them, they should be intercepted and taken in the manner. And even so
in very truth it fell out. For, many fled, and many were apprehended. As for
the money found about them, Cyrus left it behind, for those to have, who had
taken pains to attach them, but the men themselves he caused to be killed:
Whereby it came to pass afterward, that you could not easily, would you never
so feign, have found one going out of the Camp by night. Thus verily the
Persians bestowed their time: whereas the Medes fell all the while to drinking,
banqueting, piping and revelling in all kind of jollitie to the full. For so
many things and of such variety were taken, as that the watchmen had work
enough, to employ themselves thereabout.

CHAP. X. How Cyaxares envied the glory of Cyrus: and was wroth with the Medes.
The answer that Cyrus made to him, and the Embassage which he sent into Persia.
TO return now unto Cyaxares the King of the Medes. He the very night that
Cyrus made this rode forth, drank himself drunk, together with those who
conversed with him and were quartered about him (like as in time of
prosperity,) and also thought that the other Medes were all in their tents,
except some few, because he heard so great a noise. For, the Medes domesticke
servants, as whose masters were now gone forth and absent, fell to quaffing
riotously, yea and kept a great stir with much howting, The rather, for that
out of the Assyrians army and camp they had sped themselves with wine and
many other such things. But when it was day, and not one repaired into the
Presence within his Royal Pavilion, but such as supped with the King
overnight: and Cyaxares.
hearing withal, that the Camp was void of Medes and their horses: seeing
also when he went out himself, that so it was: then fumed he and chafed both
against Cyrus and the Medes also, for that they were departed and had left him
desolate: whereupon he gave commandment forthwith, (as he was, by report,
cruel and Witless, or undiscreete (...).
unreasonable,) to one of those about him, to take his own troop of horsemen,
and in all have to ride unto Cyrus his host, and in his name to deliver this
message. I did not think, that either you Cyrus, would have dealt with me so
inconsiderately: nor if Cyrus had been so minded, that ye Medes would ever
have left me in this manner solitary: Now therefore if Cyrus will, be it so:
But whether he will or no, See that ye with all speed make repair unto me.
Thus commanded he. But the Captain appointed to go with this errand, replied
thus unto him, And how, quoth he, my or Liege, (...).
Lord shall I find them out? Why! quoth Cyaxares, How did Cyrus and those with
him find out them to whom they went? Because Sir, quoth he, I hear say, that
certain Hyrcanians revolted from the enemies, and being hither come, went away
as guides to conduct them in their journey. When Cyaxares heard this, he was
much more wroth and angry with Cyrus, because he had not acquainted him
therewith: and he made the more have to send unto the Medes, thereby to leave
Cyrus more naked and destitute: And so, with greater menaces than before, he
cited the Medes peremptorily. Threatening the Captain aforesaid likewise, if he
delivered not this message stoutly and in sharp terms. So, took he his leave
that was sent, accompanied with some hundred horsemen of his own, being angry
in his heart that he went not himself this voyage with Cyrus. Now, as they
were upon their journey, by reason of certain turnings where the ways were
divided, they chanced upon a wrong by-lane, and so wandered out of the right
way they wist not whither: in so much as they could not come unto Cyrus his
army, until they happened upon some of the Assyrians whom they constrained to
be their guides. By this means having espied the fires, they came thither
about midnight. Now, when they approached hard to the camp, the watchmen,
according as they had in charge from Cyrus, would not let them in before day.
But by day-breake Cyrus first sent for the Priests.
Magi, whom he commanded to choose forth, according to the usual and solemn
manner, offerings unto the Gods, for so good success and so rich booties. And
whiles they were busied hereabout, himself assembled the Peers, and thus unto
them said. My Friends and Countrymen, God presents unto us many good things;
But we o Persians, are at this time too few, for to have and hold the same.
For, whether it be, that whatsoever we have gotten, because we shall not be
able to keep, the same must return again into the hands of others: or
whether we leave some of our own forces for the custody of our winnings, it
will be soon seen, that little or no strength remains with us: I think it
good therefore, that one of you should with all speed go into Persia, both to
inform the State what I say, and to will them, with all expedition to send a
power, in case the Persians desire to have the Dominion, and enjoy the fruits
of Afia. Go you therefore quoth he to one, Go you I say that are most
ancient, and being thither come deliver thus much: and say moreover, that how
many soldiers so ever they send, after they be come unto me, I will care for
their finding and maintenance. What we have, your self sees: and conceal I
advise you nothing thereof. Of all this pillage here, what oblation I may send
especially into Persia, in decent manner and lawfully, (as pertaining to the
Gods,) enquire that of my father; but as concerning the Commonwealth, consult
with the chief Magistrates. Moreover, let them send certain Overseers of what
we do: as also expositours unto us of such points as we ask and demand. Thus
quoth he make you ready, and take your own (...) a company of a hundred,
sometime a crew of ten or twelve.
band to accompany you. This done, he called unto him the Medes. And at the
same instant was the messenger abovesaid of Cyaxares brought in and had
audience. Who in the presence and hearing of them all, declared the indignation
of Cyaxares against Cyrus, as also his threats unto the Medes. In conclusion,
he said, That Cyaxares commanded the Medes to depart, [from Cyrus] although he
would have them to tarry: Which message when the Medes heard, they kept
silence, being in doubt and perplexity how they might disobey him, sending for
them in this manner: and fearing as much on the other side, how to obey him
menacing thus as he did; especially knowing his cruel nature. Then Cyrus, For
mine own part quoth he, you the Messenger, and ye my Friends the Medes, I
nothing marvel, if Cyaxares seeing our enemies then, to be so many, and not
knowing now what we do, be much troubled both for us and also for himself.
But when he shall once understand, that a number of our enemies be slain and
all the rest ^ut to flight: First he will give over his fear, and afterward
acknowledge, that he is not now left desolate when as his Friends thus destroy
his foes. And how are we blameworthy deserving so well of him, and namely
enterprising naught of our own heads? For, I persuaded himself, first to
license me to take you out with me in this journey: and ye again, not as men
very desirous to be gone, asked him whether ye might go forth? And so, come
hither now ye are in deed; but commanded by him to go forth, so many at
least wise of you as thought not much and were not unwilling thereto. And
therefore, assured I am, that this anger of his will both upon these good
exploits of ours be concocted, and also with the ceassing of his fear vanish
away and come to nothing. And you good messenger, quoth he, for this time,
because you have travailed hard and are weary, rest your self. As for you
Persians, For that we expect these our enemies will be here, either to fight it
out, or else to yield, let us be bravely appointed in the best manner; for
being thus scene, great likelihood there is, that we sooner shall effect what
we desire. As to you the Prince of the Hyrcanians, tarry you here, and command
the Captains of your soldiers to see them armed. Which when the Hyrcanian
Prince had done accordingly and was come unto him: I take great pleasure [my
Lord] quoth Cyrus, to perceive, that not only you are here present to show
your friendship, but also that you seem unto me wise and politic. And verily,
at such a time as this, the same I am certain may much avail us. For, as the
Assyrians be mine enemies, so they are now more malicious to you than to me. We
are therefore on both parts so to consult, as that of those our Allies which be
now present, none revolt from us; and that we may, if possible it be, procure
more to side with us. Ye have heard how this Captain or Messenger.
Median here calls away the Horsemen home: and if they depart, how shall we
footmen only remain behind? Wherefore, both ye and I must order the matter
so, that this messenger who thus calls for them away, may be willing himself
to stay with us. Do you therefore find out a Pavilion and appoint it for him,
wherein he may keep and live right gallantly, as being furnished with all
necessaries whatsoever. For mine own part, I shall devise to set the man about
such business, as wherein he will be more willingly employed, than depart
from hence. Discourse you with him, what hope there is of great availes coming
toward us and all our friends, if those matters speed well which are meet to
be performed. When you have thus done, repair eftsoons unto me. So the
Hyrcanian Potentate went his way and brought the said Median unto his tent. And
the messenger addressed for Persia was there present, pressed and ready to take
his journey. Unto him Cyrus gave in charge, For to say unto the Persians, what
was declared in the former conference, but unto Cyaxares to deliver letters.
And I will says he, read unto you what I writ, that you may be both privy
thereto, and also able to avow the same, if any one do enquire of you as
touching their contents.

CHAP. XI. The Missive of Cyrus to Cyaxares.
NOw the tenor of the said Epistle was this: Cyrus to Cyaxares Greeting.
Neither have we left you desolate, [good Uncle,] (For no man is then destitute
of friends when he has the upper hand of his enemies) nor in departing from
you think we, that we exposed you to any danger. But the farther that we are
from you, the more in our conceit we work your safety. For, they that keep
nearest unto their friends, provide not always best for their security: but
such as drive their enemies farthest of, those be they that set their friends
in greatest surety. Consider moreover, how I have carried my self toward you,
and in what sort again, you have dealt with me. Then, complain of me and
spare not. For my self, I brought unto you Auxiliaries and Confederates, not
so many as you persuaded, but as many as possibly I could. And you verily,
whiles I was yet in our friends country, granted unto me as many as I could
by persuasion win: But now whiles I am in the enemies land, you call away not
every voluntary, but generally all without exception. Certes, at that time I
thought my self beholden both to you and them: whereas now; you force me as to
forget you, so to endeavor all that ever I can, to thank and requite those
wholly, that followed me: Howbeit for all this, I can not be like unto you. But
even at this present, sending as I do into Persia for an army, I charge as
many as shall come unto me, that, before they repair unto us, if you stand in
any need of them, they do you service, not as they will themselves, but as it
pleases you to employ them. And withal, I would advise you, younger though I
be than your self, not to revoke your gifts, and take those things away which
you have once given, least in stead of thanks, evil will and heart-burning be
your guerdon: nor to summon in minatory manner, when you would have any one to
repair speedily unto you: ne yet when you give out, that you are forlorn,
withal to threaten many; for fear, you teach them to vilipend and set light
by you. As for us, we will do our best to be with you so soon as we have with
all expedition performed those exploits, which being once achieved, we are
persuaded will redound indifferently to the profit of us both. Farewell.
Deliver this letter unto him, says Cyrus; and if he ask you concerning any of
these points, answer accordingly to that which is therein written. For, as
touching the Persians also I give you commission to do as it is set down in
writing. When he had thus said and given him the missive, he sent him away,
with a charge so to make have, as he knew that his speedy return would be
expedient. After this, immediately he took a survey of the Hyrcanians and
Tigranes his soldiers all in arms: The Persians likewise were armed. By which
time also certain of the marches brought away their horses and presented their
armor and weapons. But those he willed to fling away their javelins into that
place whither he had before commanded the rest: and such as were appointed
thereto, for to set them on fire, as many I mean, as they themselves had no
need of. As for the horses, he charged those that brought them, to keep; and to
tarry still themselves, until some notice were given unto them what they
should do. But to the Captains of the Horsemen and to the Hyrcanians, whom he
assembled together, he made this oration.

CHAP. XII. The oration of Cyrus directing his soldiers how they should part
the spoils: Also, how he mounted the Persians on Horseback.
MErvaile not my good Friends and loving Confederates, that I call you so often
together: For seeing our present state and condition is new, many occurrents
therein are disordered and out of frame. And look, what things be out of
order, the same of necessity make work for new trouble, until they be well
settled in their due place: At this time, much treasure we have gotten, many
men besides taken prisoners. And because neither we our selves do know, what
goods properly belong to every of us, nor they, what severally they be owners
and masters of: therefore a man shall hardly see very many of them doing what
they ought to do: but all of them in manner, doubtful what is to be done. To
redress therefore this inconvenience, divide the said goods; and whosoever
has received a tent, stored sufficiently with meat and drink, with
servitours to attend, with hangings and counterpoints, with apparel, with
other furniture and implements, meet for a warlike Pavilion to be dwelt in
conveniently, thereto verily needs, no other addition but this, that the
receiver know, he is to take charge of these things, as if they were his own:
but whose chance is it to meet with tents unfurnished of many necessaries, it
is your part to see unto them, and to supply their wants. Certes, there will be
yet, of many things, I know, a surplusage. For, our enemies had of all sorts
above the proportion of our number. There came moreover unto me the Treasurers
of the Assyrian King, and of the other Potentates, who said, they had under
their hands gold in ready coin: making mention therewith, of certain
tributes. Proclaim therefore and command, that they bring forth all before
you, wheresoever ye sit down and make abode: Terrify them withal, in case
any one do not according to your commandment. Now, when ye have received
the same moneys: deal the same, to every horsman a double share, to a footman
a single, that ye may have, what ye need, and wherewith also to buy somewhat
beside. Moreover, let proclamation be made forthwith in the mercate place
within the Camp, that no man wrong another. Also, that retailers and merchants
may sell every man what wares and chaffer he brings: and when he has had
utterance and made return, that he fetch more, to the end that our camp may
be well peopled and inhabited. And this verily they proclaimed our of hand.

But the Medes and Hyrcanians, How shall we, said they, without you and yours,
distribute these things? To these words of theirs replied Cyrus in this manner:
And are ye in deed, (my friends) of this mind, that when ought is to be done,
we should all be present at every affair? So that if either I negotiate for
you in any business requisite, or ye deal for me, we shall not satisfy and
content one another? And by what other means, shall we busy our selves more,
and effect less, than by this? But, consider I pray you, quoth he, we have
here kept these things for you, and ye believe, I doubt not that they have
been well kept. Semblably, distribute ye the same: and we will likewise
believe, that they are very well distributed: and even so in other things
again, we will endeavor to do somewhat else for the good of all in public.
First therefore quoth he, See how many horses we have here? and how many are a
bringing to us? If we suffer them to be without riders, they will serve us in
no stead, but put us to trouble in keeping of them. But if we set men upon
their backs, we shall be rid of trouble, and withal, augment our own
strength. Now if ye know any other to bestow them upon, with whom ye would
more willingly hazard your selves and enter into danger (if need be) than with
us, let those have them. But if ye had leifer that we stand to you and help
at a pinch, before all other, give them unto us. For, erewhile, when ye made a
rode and adventured without us, ye did put us greatly in fear, that all was
not well with you: and besides, ye caused us to be much affraied for that we
were not where ye were. But if we receive horses, follow you we will: and if,
fighting on horseback together with you, we may be thought to do you better
service; there shall be no courage nor forwardness wanting on our behalf.
But, in case we shall be thought to stand you in better stead on foot: soon
will we alight from our horses, and straight ways be with you as footmen: and
as for our horses, devise we will whom to deliver them unto. Thus said he: and
thereto they made answer in this wise. We, Cyrus, neither have men to back
these horses, nor if we had, seeing it is your mind so to have it, would we
prefer any course to be taken before this. Here therefore take you these
horses unto you, and do with them what you think good. I accept them, quoth
Cyrus, and in the name of God, and in a lucky hour be it spoken, Let us from
henceforth become men of arms: and now divide ye the common spoil. But first
and foremost quoth he, cull out of the whole for the Gods, what the Mag^.
Sages [or Priests] shall direct you unto. Then, set by for Cyaxares that
wherein ye think to gratify him most. Whereupon, they smiled and said: Then
must we needs choose out for him some fair and beautiful Ladies. Go to then,
quoth he, select those women, and what else ye please. And when as ye
Hyrcanians have made choice for him, See what lies in you, quoth he, That all
these Medes who so willingly on their own accord have followed me, have no
cause to complain. Ye Medes likewise, esteem and honor these who became our
first Associates, that they may think they have done well for themselves in
siding with us and seeking our friendship. Moreover set out some part of every
thing, for the messenger sent from Cyaxares, both for himself and also for his
train. Entreat him likewise to stay a while with us, saying, that I would very
feign have it so: to the end, that when he has better intelligence of every
thing, he may relate the truth unto Cyaxares. As for the Persians, quoth he,
that are about me. Whatsoever remains, as superfluous, when your selves be
gallantly furnished, the same shall suffice them. For, we I may tell you, have
not been overwantonly brought up in deinty delicates, but after an homely and
rusticall manner: whereby, happily, ye would make good game at us, if any rich
or goodly apparel were hung upon us: like as, quoth he, I wot well we should
make you very good sport, and moove you to laugh right heartily, as we sit on
horseback, and namely, as I suppose, when we take falls and lie along on the
ground. After this, they for their parts went to the division of the booty,
laughing heartily at this mention of riding and horsemanship. But Cyrus having
sent for the Centurions, commanded them to take the horses together with their
harnoise and keepers, to take them I say by tale, equal in number to the
soldiers, as they fell out by lot unto them, according to their bands and
companies. He caused also proclamation to be made, that if there were any
slave in the army of the Assyrians, Syrians or Arabians, or out of Media,
Bactriana, Caria, Cilicia and Greece, or from other countries whatsoever, by
force brought thither, he should show himself. Which proclamation being heard:
many willingly made their appearance. Then Cyrus chose out of them those that
were (...) or, (...)
best favored, and said unto them, That being now become free, they were to
bear arms and weapons, such as he would put into their hands; and for other
necessaries he promised to take order, that they should have sufficient. So he
brought them directly to the Centurions, unto whom he recommended them, with
commandment, to deliver unto them, light bucklers and (...) or, naked.
slender swords: that having the same about them they might follow with the
horses: and to receive for them allowance of victuals and other necessaries as
well as for his own countrymen the Persians. But the said Centurions with
their cuiraces and lances, to be always on horseback, wherein himself gave
the first example: Also, that every one of them should set over the footmen of
the Peers, another Captain in stead of himself, so he were of the rank of
the Peers aforesaid.

CHAP. XIII. How Gobryas yielded himself unto Cyrus, and related to him the
disasterous calamity of his son: and required revenge for his death, upon
the King of Assyria: which Cyrus promised to do.
WHILES they were busied about these affairs, Gobryas the Assyrian an aged
man, showed himself on horseback with a brave retinue of his men of Arms.
And all these had bard horses, furnished with arms and other equipage
accordingly. Now those or Sergeants. (...)
officers whose commission it was to receive the aforesaid arms and weapons,
commanded him and his company to deliver up unto them their lances, that
they might burn them as they did the rest. But Gobryas said, that he was
desirous to see Cyrus first. Whereupon the said officers, leaving all his other
Horsemen behind, brought Gobryas in person before Cyrus: who when he saw Cyrus,
spoke thus unto him. My Lord, I am by birth an Assyrian. A strong Castle I
hold, and have the sovereign rule of a large territory. With a thousand horse I
served the Assyrian King, whom I friended loyally, no man more. Now sithence
his hap has been (good Prince as he was) to be slain by you; and seeing his
son my most mortal enemy succeeds him in the Empire; I am come unto you,
humbly kneeling and falling down prostrate at your feet. And here I yield and
submit my self unto you, as your vassal, ready to do you service, beseeching
you to revenge my wrongs, and as much as lies in me, I adopt you for my son,
as having no issue male of mine own body begotten. For, the only son and
heir that I had, (my Lord) who, though I say it, was a gallant young Gentleman
and virtuous withal, one who loved and honored me so as any child might do,
and by that dutiful honor make me his father a most happy man, him this
Prince who now does reign, when as the late King his father had sent for him,
intending to bestow upon my said son, his own daughter in marriage (and
verily when I sent him from me, I carried my head aloft, as one who looked to
see my son another day affied to a Kings daughter) him I say the King that
now is permitted to hunt and chase the best he could, as counting himself a
better horseman than he was by many degrees. So he hunted with him as with his
very friend. And when there was a Bear rowzed insight and both of them
followed the Game, the Prince who now reigns, flung his dart from him, and as
ill luck was missed. But that son of mine, (alas the while) launced
likewise, and in an ill hour, ywis, and unseasonably, hit his mark and
overthrew the Bear. Whereat, for the present verily, the other (vexed though
he was) kept in his envy. Again, when upon the presenting of a Lion which
encountered them, he failed the second time (which was as I think no great
mervaile) my son likewise as before, happened to kill the Lion outright: and
thereupon said, Certes, twice now together have I darted and both times
stricken, and laid the beasts along. Then verily at that word, the wicked wight
could no longer dissemble and contain his envy, but catching a Iavelin out of
one of his followers hands, ran him into the breast, and so bereft my liefe
and only son of his life. Thus I poor wretch, in stead of a Bridegroom (...)
Spouse brought away a dead Corpse; and aged as I was, enterred my best and
dearest beloved son, in the very flower of his years, even when the Down of
his beard began to bud forth. But the murderer, as if he had slain some
mortal enemy, neither showed at any time one token of repentance: nor yet for
this wicked act of his vouchsafed the dead now under ground any honor at all.
His father verily I must needs say, rued my woeful case, and openly showed that
he had a fellow-feeling of my calamity. And therefore, had he lived still, I
should never have come to you for to work him any woe. For, he was my
singular good Lord, and many favors there passed from him to me ward, and I
again was his liege man and a faithful servitour. But, seeing the Kingdom is
now devolved upon the slayer of my son: surely, neither can I ever be well
minded unto him, nor can he, I wore well, think that ever I will be his
friend. For, well he knows, how my heart stands affected to him ward: and
that as heretofore I lived merrily, so now despoyled of my son, I lead mine
old age in sorrow and heaviness. If it will please you therefore, to
enterteine me so, as that I may conceive some hope by your means to be
revenged in any measure for my dear sons death, then shall I think my self
to wax young again, and neither seem to live with dishonor, nor to die in
dolor.

When Gobryas had thus said, Cyrus made answer in this manner. If it may
appear, my Gobryas, that you think in heart, as you have spoken with your
lips: I both receive you graciously as an humble suppliant, and also promise
with the help of God to punish the murderer accordingly. But tell me now,
quoth he, In case we do thus much for you, and withal suffer you to be
possessed still, of your (...)
walled forts, your country, and your armor, yea and to hold that power and
authority which heretofore you have held, what service will you perform for
all these favors? Who answered thus. My strong holds are at your command: and
whenever it pleases you, render them up to you I will, that you may dwell
therein. The tribute issuing out of my Lands, which I paid to him, the same
will I transfer and bring unto you. Whenever you shall need to make an
expedition, I will go to warfare with you, bringing with me the forces of my
country. I have besides, a daughter, a young damsel and evirgin, whom I love
full dearly; and marriageable now she is. Whom heretofore I thought to
cherrish and bring up, to be a wife for this new King. But now, my daughter,
with many tears and humbly upon her knees besought me, not to bestow her upon
the murderer of her brother. And of the same mind I also am. Now therefore I
give you good leave, to deliberate of her no otherwise, than I my self would
be thought to consult concerning you. Hereupon, Cyrus, In regard, quoth he, of
these Capitulations, and in confirmation thereof I give here unto you, truly
and from my heart my right hand, and likewise take yours again. The Gods be
witnesses betwixt us both.

After these contracts passed, Cyrus commanded Gobryas to depart with his
armor: and withal enquired of him how great a journey it was to the place of
his abode? as minding to hold his progress thither? If, quoth he, you set out
to morrow betimes in the morning, the next day after, you may lodge in my
house. So Gobryas departed, leaving behind him a guide for the way. By this
time also were the Medes come, having allowed unto the Priests.
Magi what especial things soever they said should be put apart for the Gods.
Chosen they had besides, First, for Cyrus a most goodly tent, also a Susian
Lady, who had the name to be the fairest in all Asia, and two Chanteresses
most skillful in Music. Secondarily, for Cyaxares, the same in kind, but of
a second sort. Moreover, they sped themselves to the full of other commodities
as they needed, to the end they might want nothing whiles they warred. For,
great plenty there was of all things. The Hyrcanians likewise took whatsoever
they stood in need of, yea and the Messenger of Cyaxares they permitted to
share equally with the rest. As for those Pavilions which remained over and
above, they delivered into the hands of Cyrus, for the use and behoof of the
Persians. As touching the money in coin, they said, they would then make
partage thereof when they had gathered in all. Which duly they performed. Well,
thus they did, and thus they said. As concerning the portion selected for
Cyaxares, Cyrus gave order to such as he knew to be most inward and familiar
with him, for to receive and keep the same safe. Now for those gifts, quoth
he, which ye confer upon me, I take them willingly. Yet, whose mind
soever among you all stands most thereunto, he shall use the same with all my
heart. Then a certain Median, who loved Music very well. Truly Cyrus, quoth
he, when I heard these musical women sing whom now you have, I took great
delight in hearing them. And if you would be so good as to bestow one of them
upon me, I should think it a greater pleasure to be a soldier here in the
Camp, than to tarry at home. Then, quoth Cyrus, and I give her thee with all
my heart: yea and I take my self to be more beholden unto thee, for craving,
than thou to me for having her of me. So desirous am I to gratify you all.
Thus he that requested the woman, had her for his own.

THE FIFTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. How Araspes had the keeping of fair Panthea, on whom he became
enamoured. A discourse between Cyrus and him, whether Love were voluntary or
forced?
CYRUS having called unto him Araspes the Median (who had been his companion
of achild, to whom also he had given from his back at his departure from
Astyages into Persia, the rich Median robe aforesaid) commanded him to take
the custody as well of the beautiful Lady, as of the rich tent abovesaid, to
his use. Now was this Gentlewoman the wife of Abradatas King of Susa. But what
time as the Assyrian Camp became surprised, this husband of hers was not
there, but gone in Embassage unto the King of the Bactrians, sent thither from
the Assyrian Monarch to treat of an Association in war, between them: For
that, there was a mutual course of hospitality, betwixt him and the King of
the Bactrians. This Lady, I say, Cyrus commanded Araspes to keep safe,
until he took her to himself. Araspes having this charge, questioned with
him about her in this wise. Have you, quoth he, o Cyrus, seen the woman, whom
you will me to keep? No truly, said Cyrus, nor I. But I, quoth he, again,
beheld her well when I chose her for you, And verily at our coming into her
tent, at first we knew her not from others. For, she was set upon the ground,
with all her waiting maids about her: and clad she was like unto them. But
when upon a desire that we had, to know which was the Mistress, and cast our
eyes about, wistly avising them all, it was soon seen how far she
surmounted the rest, set though she were wimpled and veiled, yea and looking
downward to the ground. But when we willed her to arise upon her feet, and
therewith all the other that were about her arose likewise, then she surpassed
them all indeed; First, in tallnesse and goodly presence; then, in the strong
feature of her body, in her virtuous carriage; also in a seemly grace and
lovely favor, albeit she stood araied in poor and simple habit. We might
withal see plainly the tears partly distilling upon her mantle and upper
garments, and in part trickling down to her very feet. Hereupon, when as the
eldest person in our company said unto her, Madam, be of good cheer. For,
albeit, we hear say, that you have a good by Gentleman and a valiant to your
husband, yet now wot well, we choose you forth, for such a person, as neither
in beauty and favor, nor in discreet judgment, ne yet in puissance and
valor is inferior to him: but in our conceit, if there be any one else in
the world, Cyrus I assure you is the man worthy to be admired; and his from
henceforth you shall be. The woman when she heard this, all to rent her mantle
from above, and cried out piteously; yea her maidservants also with her
skriked out amain. With that, the most part of her face was seen, her neck
bared, her hands and arms discovered. And assure your self Cyrus, quoth he,
that as well to me, as to all the rest who saw her, it seemed there was never
yet the like woman in Asia, begotten and borne of mortal parents. Therefore,
you also shall neither will nor choose, but see her. Not so, quoth Cyrus. If she
be so goodly a creature as you report, so much the less will I behold her. And
why so? Sir, said the young Gentleman. Because, quoth he, if now upon your
report, that she is fair and beautiful, I should be persuaded to go and eye
her, having no great leisure and time to spare, I fear me least she might
eftsoons allure me sooner to come eftsoons for to view and review her again,
and so perhaps neglecting my serious and weighty affairs, which I ought to
manage, I should set by it, avising and looking upon her. Why? quoth the said
young Gentleman, and laughed withal. Think you, Cyrus, that the beauty of
man or woman, is so powerful, as to enforce any one against his will, to do
otherwise than for the best? For, if, said he, it were so by the course of
nature, it would force all indifferently. Behold, the fire here, quoth he,
burns all men alike, and why? because such is the nature of it. And of
beautiful women, men love some, and others they do not. One is enamoured of
this thing, and another of that. For why? love, quoth he, is a passion mere
voluntary, and every man likes what and whom he lists. Now, you see, that
the brother is not in love with his sister, but a stranger is: Neither falls
the father in fancy with his own daughter, another does. For, fear and law,
are sufficient to restrain love. But if a law were made, that who eat not,
should not be hungry; who drink not, should not be dry: Also, that no man
should be a cold in Winter, nor hot in Summer: how strictly soever it were
devised and penned, it could not bring to pass, that men in those points would
obey the same. For, by nature they are framed to yield thereto. But, to love,
is mere voluntary. Every man, to say a truth, affects the things that be his
own, as his raiment, his shoes, etc. Then replied Cyrus. If love be
voluntary, how is it that a man cannot cease to love when he will? For, I my
self have seen men to weep, for very sorrow occasioned by love, yea and to
become bond and thrall to those whom they loved; how-ever, before they were in
love, they reputed servitude and bondage to be very evil. Yea I have observed
them to give away many things, which without their loss and hinderance they
might not miss: who also wished of God for to be delivered from love, no less
than from some other grievous malady, yet could not be released therefrom: but
were bound with a stronger duresse of necessity, than if they had been tied
with chains of iron. Hence it is, that they yield themselves thrall unto their
Paramours, ready even to perform many idle and foolish services unto them: yea
and being once thus encumbred and distressed with these miseries, they never so
much as give the attempt to get away, but rather become Gaolers themselves unto
their beloved; observing them narrowly, that they make no escape. They do
indeed thus, as you say, quoth the young Knight, poor wretches as they be. And
therefore I suppose being (...).
in this miserable case, they always wish indeed to die; but notwithstanding
there be ten thousand means, to make themselves away, yet they do it not.
And even these selfsame men also [to maintain their lives] fall to stealing,
and forbear not other men's goods: yet when any have either robbed or filched
ought, see you not how your self with the first, (as if there were no
necessity of such theeving) accuse the thief and robber, neither do you
pardon but punish him? Semblably, they that be fair and beautiful, neither
compel men to love them, nor to covet such things as are not to be desired:
but silly and foolish folk, be, I suppose, in all manner of lusts and desires
incontinent, and when they cannot rule their own affections, lay all the blame
afterward upon love. Whereas, honest and wise men, although they desire gold,
fair steedes and beautiful women, yet can they easily abstain from all
these, so, as that they will not so much as touch them wrongfully. And for mine
own part, I assure you, albeit I beheld this fair Dame, and that she seemed
in mine eye right lovely and amiable, yet you see, how I am now with you, I
ride my horse, and perform other parts of my devoir in your service. And so
you do, quoth Cyrus, as God me love. Yet peradventure, you came sooner away
from her, than is the time that love uses to ensnare a man. For, it may well
be, that if one touch fire, he is not presently burnt therewith; and wood
streight-wayes catches not a light fire and flameth out. Yet neither willingly
do I touch fire: nor with my good will look on beautiful persons: ne yet do
I advise you o Araspas, to keep your eyes fixed long upon those that be
fair. For that, the fire indeed burns those only that touch it, but the
beautiful inflame even those also that eye them afar off, so as they burn
again in love. Be content I pray you, quoth he, o Cyrus. For, I warrant you,
look I never so long upon her, yet shall I not be so far overcome as to
commit any lewd and undecent part. That Is very well said of you, quoth Cyrus:
and therefore keep you her as I bid you: For, perhaps, this woman may one day
stead us very much. Thus having communed together they departed asunder.

But this young Gallant, partly seeing her to be of incomparable beauty, and
in part perceiving her virtuous deportment: as also for that he having the
charge of her, was persuaded that he did content her humor: Finding withal
her self not unthankefull, as who for her part again, was very careful, that
by the means and ministry of her servants, whenever he came into his
pavilion, he should have all things convenient, and if at any time he were ill
at ease or sickish, want nothing requisite: by occasion of all these things, I
say, caught he was in the snares of love, and perhaps, this was no strange and
wondrous thing that befell unto him. And thus passed these matters.

CHAP. II. How Cyrus being assured of the Medes and other Allies, rode to the
Castle of Gobryas. And of his Magnificence.
BUT Cyrus being desirous that both Medes, and other Associates also, should
be willing to continue with him, called unto him all his men of Action, unto
whom when they were come together, he made a speech to this effect. I know for
certain, that ye Medes and all here present, have gone forth with me, neither
for want of money, nor because ye thought in this behalf to do Cyaxares
service: but upon a desire to do me pleasure and honor, ye have been
willing even by night to travail and adventure with me. In which respects, I
take my self obliged unto you, unless I would be unjust. But to recompense
you accordingly, and to your desert, me thinks I am not able as yet. And
verily, so to say I am not abashed: And to promise, That if ye tarry still, I
will requite you, wot ye may well, I am ashamed. For I might suppose it would
be thought, I so spoke, because I would have you to be more willing for to stay
with me. But in lieu thereof, thus much I protest unto you: That albeit ye
depart upon your allegiance to Cyaxares, yet will I endeavor, so to carry my
self to you ward, in case I speed well, that even your selves may commend and
praise me. For, I am not now upon my departure out of these parts. But with the
Hyrcanians, unto whom I have given mine oath and right hand; I will keep just
promise, and never will I be found to betray them. As for Gobryas, who
erewhile, has made over unto us his walled forts, his territory and forces, I
will so deal with him, as he shall never repent of his journey made to me.
And that which more is, since that the Gods so evidently go with us and
further our enterprises, I should both stand in fear of them and also be
ashamed, if I gave over these designments, and departed inconsideratly without
effect. This therefore, quoth he, will I for my part perform, do ye as ye
shall think good: but withal acquaint me with your resolution. Thus spoke he.
But the Gentleman, who sometime claimed kindred of Cyrus, opined first in this
wise. As to my self verily, thus much, o King; for, a King you seem to be by
nature no less than the Master Be, which in the hive is bred their Leader, as
whom the Bees are willing to obey: in so much as wheresoever he remains, not
one of them will depart from thence: and whithersoever he goes, none will
tarry behind: such an ardent love is inbred in them, to be governed by him:
Semblably, are these men, I say in some sort affected to you. For, when you
went from us into Persia, who was there of all the Medes young or old left
behind, but he waited upon you? until such time as King Astyages called us
away. Again, after that you came out of Persia to aid us, we might perceive
incontinently your friends in manner all, as voluntaries to follow you.
Moreover, when you were desirous to undertake an expedition into these parts,
all the Medes willingly attended upon you. And truly, at this present, thus
disposed we are, that so long as we have your personal presence in our enemies
Land, we dare be bold: but without you, affraied we should be to return even
into our native country. Therefore, what other men intend to do let them
speak themselves: but I, o Cyrus and all those that are under me will stay
with you: and so long as we behold you, be resolute to abide all brunts, and
show our selves firm and fast to you, in regard of those favors and benefits
which we have received at your hands. Then spoke Tigranes after this manner.
Mervaile not o Cyrus, quoth he, if I keep silence: For, my mind is not ready
now to deliberate, but to execute whatsoever you command. Then, the Hyrcanian
Prince, I would say, quoth he, that if ye the Medes departed now, it were the
will of adverse fortune, and some cross handiwork of God, not to permit you
for to enjoy any great felicity. For, in the judgment of man, who would
either turn back, when his enemies fly? or when they deliver up their arms,
not receive them? or when they yield themselves and what they have, not take
all? especially, seeing we have such a Captain, as seems, I take all the
Gods to record, to delight more in doing us pleasure and procuring our good,
than in enriching himself. After him all the Medes with one voice brake out
into these or such like words. You, o Cyrus, brought us forth, and therefore
when you think it time to depart, bring you us likewise home again.

When Cyrus heard this uniforme accord, he prayed in this wise. Grant I
beseech thee, most mighty Jupiter, that I may exceed these in beneficence, who
do me this honor. Which said, he commanded all the rest, after they had set
their watch and ward, to keep themselves in their several quarters: but the
Persians to set out and distribute the tents, to the men of arms, such as were
meet for horsemen; to the footmen those that were sufficient for them: Also to
take order, that generally throughout, as many as were within the tents, should
bring all things necessary unto the Persians, according to their several
companies, yea and furnish them with horses well tended and dressed to their
hands: to the end that the Persians themselves might have nothing else to do,
but to attend upon warlike affairs. Thus spent they this day.

The next morning early when they were risen, they put themselves in their
journey toward Gobryas. Cyrus verily being mounted on horseback together with
the new Cavallery of the Persians, grown now to the number of 2000. or there
about. After whom followed those who carried their targuets and cimiters, being
in number equal to them. Semblably, the rest of the army marched in good
array. Moreover, Cyrus commanded every one of them to say unto these their new
waiters and followers; that whosoever were seen either dragging behind the
leaders and keepers of the rereward, or leaping before the front of the
vantgard, or taken on either side [or flanke] of the battle without, divided
from those that were in their ranks, they should be grievously punished. Thus,
the next day, they were come by the evening as far as to Gobryas his Castle.
An exceeding strong pile they saw it to be, and upon the walls, every thing
planted to make resistance and forcibly to repel the enemy. Furthermore, they
perceived many head of oxen, and a mighty number of sheep driven and brought
together, under the very fortifications. Then, Gobryas sent unto Cyrus, willing
him to ride about and view where the avenue was most easy: and withal, to
send in unto him certain of his trusty men, who might relate unto him what
they had seen within. Cyrus therefore, desirous in very deed to see whether
the Castle were any where prenable, or whether Gobryas would be found a lier,
rode all about: where, he saw every place stronger, than to yield any access.
As for those whom Cyrus had sent in to Gobryas, they brought word back again
unto him, that there was within, such store of goods, as in their judgment
seemed sufficient to serve those therein, all a man's life. Hereupon Cyrus mused
with himself what those things might be. By which time Gobryas in person came
forth unto him, and brought out all the persons that were within: some, laden
with wine and wheat-meale; others driving before them kine and oxen, swine,
sheep and goats: And all other victuals whatsoever, they presented unto him:
so as Cyrus and his whole army might sup right-well therewith. They therefore
who were thereto appointed, ordered these things accordingly, yea and dressed
supper. Then Gobryas, when all his own men were gone forth, willed Cyrus to
enter in, and that in such manner, as himself thought best for his own
safety. So Cyrus having sent before his spies to discover, and a strong troop
for to guard, at the last entered in person. When he was once within, and the
gates kept wide open still, he called unto him all his friends and chief
Commanders of the soldiers about him. When all were come in, Gobryas brought
out wine bolles of gold, flagons, basins and ewers, with ornaments and
furniture of all sorts, certain pieces also of coin called Dareiks
innumerable, and all things that were fair and goodly to be seen. At the
last, having presented his daughter also, (an exceeding beautiful Damoisell
she was, very tall, and personable besides, clad in mourning weed for the death
of her brother aforesaid.) Here quoth he o Cyrus, All this riches I bestow upon
you. And this daughter of mine likewise, I recommend to your tuition even to
dispose of her as you think good: And humbly beseech you, both I, as
beforetime in the behalf of my son, and she now for her brother, that you
will be his avenger. Hereto Cyrus answered in this wise. I promised you verily,
as then, to revenge your quarrel to my power, if I found you true of your
word. And now, seeing you have spoken a truth, I am bound to perform my word
and promise. To her also I make behest, with the help of God, to do no less.
And as for this treasure quoth he, I accept thereof, and withal bestow the
same here, upon this your daughter, and him whose hap it shall be to espouse
her. But one gift there is beside, that I would gladly at my departure receive
at your hands; which if I may obtain, I would not more joyfully depart, if I
had all the wealth either in Babylon which is much, or in the universal world,
which is infinite. Gobryas mervailing what it should be, and suspecting he
would name his daughter, asked him and said: What is that boon Cyrus which you
would so feign have? Then Cyrus answered, I suppose my Gobryas quoth he, there
be many men, who by their good wills are not impious to Godward, nor injurious
to men, ne yet, of themselves willing so much as to lie: Howbeit, because no
man would ever put into their hands great wealth, regal dominion, strong
castles, and most dearly beloved children, they die before they be known what
they are. But you, by tendering unto me, fensed and walled forts, riches
infinite of all kinds, your whole power and puissance, yea and your daughter so
liefe, so dear, and so worth the having, have made known to all the world
that I am the man, who would neither deal unconscionably with strangers, nor
do wrong to any for love of money, nor yet willingly falsify my promise and
covenant. Be you sure therefore and wot well, that so long as I am a just and
righteous man, and shall be for that good opinion praised among men, I will
never forget this [your kindness and affiance in mee] but endeavor by all
good and honest means, to honor you again. Neither fear you quoth he, that
you shall lack a man, worthy to be an husband for your daughter. For, many
friends I have and those right honorable and valiant Knights: and whose hap
soever it is of all them to marry her, whether he shall have so much money and
good as is given by you with her, or much more than that comes to, I am not
able to say. But this would I have you to know for certain, that some of them
there be, who in regard of the portion which you give, will not esteem you one
whit the more. And verily, they now imitate me with a kind of emulation: and
pray unto all the Gods, that they may have occasion one day to show that they
are no less loyal and faithful to their Friends, than I am to mine; and to
their enemies, whiles they have a day to live will never yield, unless some
God cross them. Now for virtue and good reputation, they would not prefer
before it, all the riches of the Syrians and Assyrians put them both together,
and set the same to yours. And such men I would you well knew, are now sitting
here. Then Gobryas laughed heartily and said. For the love of God, Cyrus, show
me where these men are, that I may beg at your hands one of them for to be my
son. Care not you for that, quoth Cyrus, neither shall you need to enquire
that of me: do but keep us company, and you shall be able your self, to
show each of them, even to another. Thus much having said: he took Gobryas by
the right hand, and rising withal went his ways forth, and drew out all his
men with him. And albeit he was earnestly importuned by Gobryas to take his
supper with him, yet would he not, but supped in the Camp, and took Gobryas
with him as his guest.

Now being set upon a green bank, he questioned with him in this manner. Tell
me, my Gobryas, quoth he, Think you that you have more cuishons and carpets
than every one of us? To whom he answered, I know right well, so God me love,
that ye have carpets, cuishons, beds, pallets and tables many more, and that
your dwelling house is far larger and of greater receipt than mine, as who for
your habitations make use of the earth and sky, and have as many beds as there
be couches and resting places on the ground. Besides, ye take for your carpets
and cuishons not so many as the sheep afford fleeces of wool, but as
mountains and fields do yield brush and branch to make fagots of. And this
being the first time, that Gobryas supped among them, when he saw their coorse
and homely fare, he thought himself kept more plentiful and liberal cheer
than they. But after that he observed their moderate feeding (for there is not
a Persian of good education, who with any meat or drink is perceived openly
either in his eyes, to be distempered, or by ravening and greedy eating, in
his mind to have less forecast, than if he were not at his meat: For, like as
good horsemen, for that they be not troubled on horseback, are able all the
while they ride, to see, to hear, and to say as they ought: even so, they at
their meals, think they should appear openly to be wise, sober and
temperate; supposing, that to be stirred and disquieted after eating and
drinking, is doglike, swinelike and brutish.) He observed withal in them, that
they demanded one of another such questions, as it was more pleasure to ask
them than not: and cast forth those pretty jests and merry conceits, which being
uttered, caused more delight in the delivery, than otherwise kept in: and that
in all their mirth, they were far from contumelious and spiteful terms,
far from doing any lewd and filthy act: far from grieving and offending one
another. But the greatest thing of all other in his opinion was this; that
being in warre-service, they thought not any of them who adventured the same
peril, ought to have more allowance at the table than the rest: but supposed
that Feast to be best, wherein they made their confederates that were to fight
with them most valiant: Now when Gobryas arose to go home to his own house,
he used, by report, these words. I wonder now no more quoth he, o Cyrus, that
we have more drinking cups, more garments, and gold in coin, and yet are of
less account than you. For all our care and study is who shall have most of
these things: Whereas, your chief endeavor is as it seems unto me, to be
the best and most valourous men. When Gobryas had thus said, Go to then, quoth
Cyrus unto him, See that to morrow morning betimes, you show your self here
with your men of arms well appointed, to the end that as we may take a view of
your forces, so you may conduct us through your country. Whereby also we shall
know, what parts thereof to account friendly, and what to repute as hostile.
Having thus communed together, they took their leaves, and either of them went
to that which was meet for them.

CHAP. III. How Cyrus intended to assault the great City of Babylon. The
discourses which he had with the Prince of Hyrcania and with Gobryas.
WHen morrow appeared, Gobryas presented himself with his horsemen accordingly
and led the way. But Cyrus, as became a General and chief Commander, did not
only set his mind upon his journey, but also as he passed on, cast with
himself, how possibly he might weaken his enemies, and make his own side
stronger. Whereupon, sending for the Hyrcanian Prince and Gobryas, (for he
supposed them to have most skill in those points which he was to know) I
think, quoth he my good friends, that I shall not do amiss to confer with
you that are trusty confederates, as touching this war. For I see, that it
concerns you much more than me, that the Assyrian King get not the upper
hand of (...).
us. For my self, if I should take the foil and loose this that I have
gotten, I might happily find some other place of refuge: but in case he win and
get the day, I see your whole estate will be alienated from you and become
other men's. Mine enemy he is, not because he hates me, but for that he
supposes it will be his loss if we be great, which is the only reason why he
warreth upon us. But you, he not only hates and that mortally, but takes
himself also to be wronged by you. To this both of them answered. That as they
had a care to perform the exploit, as who knew as much as he told them, so
they were exceeding sollicitous withal, about the future issue of the present
enterprise. Whereupon, thus began he first with them. Tell me, quoth he. Thinks
the Assyrian King, that ye alone carry hostile hearts against him, or know
ye, that he has some other enemies besides? Yes verily quoth the Hyrcanian
Prince: His greatest enemies be the Cadusij: a nation very populous and mighty.
The Sacans also our borderers, who have sustained much harm from the Assyrian
King. For, he has attempted to subdue them as well as us. Think ye not then,
said Cyrus, that both of them now, would gladly take our parts, and be ready
with us jointly to invade the Assyrians? Yes, and that right fiercely said
they, if by any means they might join with us. And what is the let between,
quoth he, that we may not combine and be united together? Even the Assyrians
themselves, say they, that very nation through which you go at this time. When
Cyrus heard this. What now? my Gobryas: and accuse you not this young Prince
newly come to the Crown, as one who in his deportment is very proud and
insolent? Yes verily quoth Gobryas, for I found him so. But has he carried
himself in that sort, replied Cyrus, to you only, or to some besides? So
help me Jupiter quoth Gobryas, to many others likewise. But of his outrages
committed upon feeble persons, what need I to relate? For, a much greater
Potentates son then I am, and one verily who was his companion as mine had
been, whiles he drank and made merry with him, he laid hands upon and guelded
him: because as some have given out, a Concubine of his had praised him for his
beauty and goodly personage, in saying that the woman were right happy, who
might be his wife: but, as himself now says, for that he would have forced the
said Concubine. And now is he become indeed an Eunuch. But since his fathers
death enjoys his Seignorie and Dominion. How then quoth Cyrus thereupon,
think you, that this young Gentleman also would gladly see us, if he might be
persuaded that we would aid and assist him? Yes, that he would, I dare be
bold to say, quoth Gobryas. But to have a sight of him, my good friend Cyrus,
it is an hard matter. And why so? says Cyrus. Because quoth Gobryas, he that
will join with him, must of necessity pass hard by Babylon: And what
difficulty lies in that? said Cyrus. For that, I assure you, upon my
knowledge, there has issued out of that City a more puissant army by far,
than that which you have in field at this present. Moreover, this you are to
know, that for this very cause the Assyrians furnish you less with armor now,
and bring unto you fewer horses, than they did at first: Because your forces
seemed unto them that viewed the same but small: and this rumor is already
very much spread abroad. And therefore in mine opinion better it were, that we
march warily and well guarded.

Cyrus having heard Gobryas deliver such speeches, made answer in this manner.
I approove very well o Gobryas of this, that you advise us to stand upon our
guard, and to make our journeyes most safely. And considering the business
well, I cannot think in my mind of any surer way than to pass on, directly
unto Babylon, if so be our enemies forces be there most puissant. For, many
they be in number as your self confess. Now, if they shall take heart, and be
confident withal, they will upon my word, be terrible also unto us. In case
therefore they shall have no sight at all of us, but think that we keep
close and unseene, as if we stood in fear of them, know assuredly quoth he,
that they will be delivered of the fear which they have conceived, and in
stead thereof gather more boldness, the longer it be that they see us not. But
if we march now straight against them, we shall find many of them weeping and
wailing still for those whom we have slain: many having yet their wounds bound
up, which they received from us; and all of them carrying the fresh
remembrances of the late manhood and valor of this our army, together with
the woeful flight and disasterous calamity of their own. You are besides o
Gobryas to take knowledge of this, what an ordinary thing it is in most men,
when they are confident and resolute, to carry an hautie and invincible mind.
Let them be affrayd once, the more they are in number, the greater will their
affright and amazedness be. For, by many rumors and those evil, it is in
them augmented: upon many adverse occurrents also: by occasion likewise of many
heavy down-lo^^s and astonished countenances, it gathers still and grows more
and more. In so much as, for the greatness thereof it is no easy matter to
extinguish it with comfortable words, or by leading against the enemies to put
heart and strength again, or yet by drawing them away, to recover in them any
good conceit of themselves. But the more that a man exhorts them to
resolution, the greater perils they think they are plunged into. Let us
therefore take thoroughly into consideration this point. For, if in the question
of war and martial exploits, we measure victories by this, whether side can
levy and number more men, good cause you have then, to be afraid on our
behalf, and we in very truth are in great jeopardie: but if, as heretofore, so
now also, battles are tried and determined by the valor of those that fight
manfully, you cannot do amiss, if you be bold and confident. For, you shall
find with the help of God, many more with us and in our Camp willing to
fight, than among them. And that you may yet take more courage unto you,
consider this also with your self. The enemies are at this present, in number
less by far, than before they were discomfited by us: yea and fewer still
than what time they fled away from us. As for us, greater we are now than
heretofore, by reason that we have won a victory: more puissant also and
strong, in regard of our good fortune, and withal more in number, by your
coming unto us. And do not you henceforth detract from the honor of your
own men, now that they be with us. For where Conquerours be, wot well
Gobryas, that even the very Lackeys and Pages in the train that hang on,
follow boldly. Neither be you ignorant of this, that well may our enemies take
a view of us now: but know for a truth, that no way can we terrify them more
than in our march against them. Since then my opinion is thus delivered, lead
us forth directly to Babylon.

CHAP. IIII. How Cyrus challenged the King of Babylon to come into the field:
and then making a league with Gadatas, won the fortresses of the Frontiers,
and augmented his forces with a number of forty thousand. And how the King of
Assyria would have surprised and taken in the Castles of Gadatas.
THvs they set forward, and by the fourth day reached as far as to the utmost
marches of Gadatas his country. But so soon as Cyrus was entered within the
enemies land, he ordained to have in battle ray about his own person, both
of foot and horse as many as he thought sufficient. The residue of the
horsemen, he permitted to make rodes, and to raunge abroad, charging them to
kill whomsoever they found in arms: but all the rest, together with the
cattle that they took, to bring unto him alive. The Persians with the rest he
commanded to harry and over-runne the country. Many of them came back again,
such as had tumbled down from their horses and were fallen: and many brought
away rich booties with them. Now when the whole pillage was before him: he
assembled all the Chieftaines of the Medes and Hyrcanians, the The Peers
aforesaid.
Homotims likewise of Persia, unto whom he made this speech. Gobryas, my good
friends, has heretofore entertained us all, with many gifts of hospitality.
If now therefore, after we have selected (as the manner is) a due proportion
for the Gods, and set by for the rest of the army a competent part, we bestow
upon him the remnant of the spoils, we shall do passing well: showing our
selves straightwayes to endeavor for to surmount those in courtesies who
deserve so well at our hands. No sooner heard they this, but they all approoved
yea and commended the motion: but one above the rest added moreover and said.
We must in any case o Cyrus so do. For, thus Gabryas, as I take it, reputed
us no better than beggars, because we came not with our proofs full of
Daricke purses, nor drank in Goblets, or bottles.
cups of gold. But if we thus do, he will perhaps acknowledge, that we may be
liberal without gold. Go to therefore said Cyrus, when ye have delivered up
unto the Priests the Deo-dands, and set aside as much as may suffice the army,
send for Gobryas, and let him have the residue. So after they had taken all
that was meet and necessary, the surplusage they gave unto Gobryas.

This done, Cyrus marched against the very City of Babylon, with his army
arraunged in order of battle, like as when the field was fought. Now when the
Assyrians issued not forth against him, Cyrus commanded Gobryas to ride on,
and in his name to summon the King, saying, That if he would come out in person
and fight for his country, himself would combat with him: but in case he would
not defend his country, then of necessity he must give place and submit unto
the winners. So Gobryas rode so far as he might with safety, and delivered
the said Challenge. Unto whom the King sent out one to return his answer in
these words. Thy Lord and Master, (Gobryas) says, I repent me not that I have
slain thy son, but because I killed not thee also with him. If ye are
minded to fight, come thirty days hence: For, now we have no leisure, and
cannot intend it, being as yet but in preparation for a battle. Unto whom
Gobryas said, God grant that this repentance of yours may never have end. For,
evident it is, that ever since it came upon you thus to repent, I am become a
prick in your sides. Then Gobryas related the answer of the Assyrian King
unto Cyrus, which so soon as he heard, he raised his Camp and withdrew the
Army. And calling Gobryas unto him. Tell me, quoth he, Said you not erewhile,
that he whom the Assyrian [King] did evirate, would as you thought willingly
side with us? Me thinks, said he, I dare warrant that he will. For many times
he and I have freely communed together. When therefore you think it good, go
unto the man: but first handle the matter so as that ye may sound him and know
what he says. And after you have familiarly talked with him, if you perceive
him willing to friend us, devise what you can that he be not known to be our
friend. For, in war, neither can a man by any means more pleasure his
friends than if he seem to be their enemy, nor endamage and hurt his enemies
more any way, than if he make show to be their friend. Certes, I know, quoth
Gobryas, that Gadatas would give a great deal, to work this King of Assyria
some mischief, but it behooveth us to consider what he is able to do? Tell
me then, quoth Cyrus. Think you that the Captain of the Fortress situate in
the Frontiers of this country, which ye say was built against the Hyrcanians
and Sacans, to be a bulwark in time of war, for to defend these parts, will
admit into it this Eunuch when he comes with his power? Yes verily, quoth
Gobryas, if he come unto him unsuspected, as now he is. And farthest from all
suspicion, says Cyrus, he should be, if I besiege and assault his holds as if
I were desirous to win them, and he again make resistance and defend them
with all his might: If I also for my part take somewhat of his, and he again
for it, intercept as much of ours: if he catch I say some others of our men, or
else the very messengers whom I send unto those that ye say are enemies unto
the Assyrian King: Also, if such as chance to be taken prisoners, give out and
say, they are going to the army and bringing ladders for to skale the foresaid
Castle walls. Again, if the Eunuch, as hearing thereof, make semblance, that
he is come to him with all speed, for to give intelligence aforehand of these
occurrents. Surely, quoth Gobryas, I know very well, that if matters be thus
carried, he will be ready to receive him, yea and entreat him to stay with him
until you be departed. And so, quoth Cyrus, being entered once into the Fort,
he will be able easily to make us Masters thereof. It cannot otherwise be by
all likelihood, says Gobryas, whiles he within practices and helps what he
can, and you without more hotely give the assault: Go your ways then, quoth
Cyrus, and do your endeavor, after you have acquainted the Eunuch with this
plot, and dispatched every thing accordingly, to be here pressed and ready with
me. As for pledges of assurance, you shall neither promise nor show unto him
greater, than those which you have received from us. Hereupon Gobryas departed;
whom the Eunuch was glad to see: and so they covenanted and agreed in all
points that were meet and requisite. Now when Gobryas had related unto Cyrus,
that he thought all was well and sure enough on the Eunuchs part, for the
execution of these designments of Cyrus, the very morrow after he gave an
assault, and Gadatas withstood him and defended the Piece. The Fort which Cyrus
took, was the same that Gadatas had given order to be assaulted. As for the
messengers whom Cyrus dispatched before with instructions whither to go,
Gadatas suffered some of them to get away and escape, to the end they might
bring the forces forward and fetch skaling ladders: but such as he took, he
examined by torture in the presence of many. And when he heard by their
confession, whereabout they went, he addressed him immediately that very night
to his journey, as if he would reveal the same. Finally, he menaged the
matter so, as that his words were credited: and so he enters the Castle as a
friend, and one that would do his devoyr to aid him. And verily, for the
while, he joined with the Captain of the said Castle, in making preparations
all that he could for the defense thereof. But when Cyrus was come, Gadatas
with the help of those captives in Cyrus his army, seized the Castle into his
own hands. Which done, presently this Gadatas the Eunuch, having settled all
things in order within, came forth unto Cyrus, and doing his obeisance
reverently, as the guise is, saluted him in this manner. Welcome Cyrus, as I
may say, God save you and give you joy. And even so he does truly, said Cyrus
again. For, you with the help of God do not only bid me, but compel me
also to rejoice. And I would have you to know for certain, I am not a little
proud, that I may leave this fortress to our Associates here, in terms of
friendship: As for your self Gadatas, the Assyrian King has disabled for
getting children, howbeit not bereft you of strength to get friends. For,
persuade your self thus much, that by this deed of yours, you have made us so
fast friends unto you, as that we will endeavor what we may to stand to you
as helpers and assistants, no less than if you had natural children and
(...), children, children, as we say unproperly, Grand-childre^.
nephews of your own. Thus said Cyrus. Whereupon the Hyrcanian Prince, who
even now and not before understood what was done, ran unto Cyrus, and taking
him by the right hand, said: O noble Cyrus, the exceeding joy and comfort of
your friends, how much bound in thankfulness by your means am I to the Gods,
for that they have joined me in alliance to you? Go you therefore, quoth
Cyrus, Take possession of that Castle, for which you love me so
affectionately: yea and dispose of it so, as it may be best worth and most
acceptable to a friend of ours, to the rest of our confederates, and above all
to this Gadatas, who has won it and delivered it into our hands. But hear
you Sir, quoth the Hyrcanian Prince, Shall we when as the Cadusians, Sacans and
my subjects are met, call him also unto us, that we may all, unto whom it
apperteineth, lay our heads together and consult, how to our best behoof and
benefit we may hold this fort? Hereto Cyrus also gave his assent. When they
were met, whom the charge of the Castle concerned, they agreed in this, that
they should jointly have the keeping of it, unto whom it was commodious for to
be a peaceable and friendly neighbor; to the end it might be, as, a warlike
and defensive fortress for themselves, so a strong skants and offensive to the
Assyrians.

When this was done, the Cadusians, Sacans and Hyrcanians were much forwarder
in the service of war, and came up unto him with their forces more
cheerfully. And hereupon there assembled a power of the Cadusians to the
number of twenty thousand light Targuatiers on foot, and four thousand
horsemen. Of Sacans ten thousand Archers on foot: and Carbires [or Archers on
horsebacke] two thousand. The Hyrcanians also sent unto those that were there
before, an addition of as many footmen as they could make; beside a supply of
two thousand horsemen. For, beforetime they had left the greater part of their
Cavallery at home, because the Cadusians and Sacans maintained hostility with
the Assyrians. But, all the time that Cyrus sat here about settling the estate
of the Castle; the Assyrians inhabiting near to those parts, many of them led
away their horses thither; many brought and put into his hands their armor;
For that by this time they stood in fear of all their bordering neighbors.

After this, came Gadatas unto Cyrus, advertising him of certain messengers,
who reported, how the Assyrian King, when he heard in what terms the said
strong Castle stood, took it to the heart, and withal made preparation to
invade his country. And therefore, o Cyrus, quoth he, if you will let me go, I
will do my best to save my forts yet. As for other things I pass the less.
Then Cyrus, Say you should at this present depart, when will you be at home?
Surely, quoth Gadatas, by the third day I shall be able to suppe in mine own
land. Why! do you think says Cyrus, that you shall find the Assyrian King
there already? Yea verily, quoth he, I know I shall; For, the farther you seem
to have marched forward, the more have will he make. By what time, quoth Cyrus,
might I reach thither with my forces? Whereunto Gadatas made this answer. You
have now my Lord, a great army already, neither can you get unto my habitation
in less than six or seven days. Well, said Cyrus, Hie you thither. Make you
what speed you can for your part: I shall rid way and follow after, as well as
I may. So Gadatas took his leave and departed. Then Cyrus calling together all
the Rulers and Chieftaines of his confederates, who seemed by this time in
number to be many, and those right hardy and martial men, in their Assembly
made a speech to this effect.

CHAP. V. How Cyrus exhorted his soldiers, to give all the booty unto Gadatas:
how he raunged his battles, as well to fight, as to march by night.
MY Friends and Allies, Gadatas has done such service, as seemed unto us all
worthy of good esteem: and that, before he ever had received any boon at our
hands. And now, there is news come, that the Assyrian King invadeth his
borders: Who, no doubt, at once will be thoroughly revenged, because he thinks
he has sustained much damage by him: and happily casts withal thus in his
mind, that if those who revolt unto us shall not be distressed, but
contrariwise his confederates be by us utterly destroyed, within a little
while, in all probability, there will not one abide with him. Now therefore, I
think my friends, we shall do a noble Act, if with alacrity we aid Gadatas,
a man so friendly unto us and beneficial. We shall besides perform a deed of
Justice in thankful requital of a good turn; and therewith in my conceit
work a feat commodious for our selves. For, if it shall appear in the eyes of
the world, that we aim at nothing more, than to exceed them in hurt doing that
annoy us, as also excel those in good doing who deserve well of us: great
reason there is, that by this means many will seek unto us gladly for our
friendship, and more desire to be enemy unto us. But if we be thought to
neglect Gadatas, with what eloquence I pray you, (before God I speak it) shall
we persuade others to gratify us? How dare we praise and commend our selves?
or with what face may any one of us look upon Gadatas? if we so many in
number be overcome in well doing of him who is but one, especially being in
that case as he is.

When he had thus said they all approved his speech and accorded, to go in
hand with these projects and to perform them thoroughly. Go to then, quoth
Cyrus, since ye also give your assent, let us every one leave with our draught
beasts, with our wagons and chariots, such as are most meet to go with the
same: And let Gobryas be Captain of the convoy, and go before them. For,
skillful he is in the ways, and for all other occasions sufficient. As for our
selves, with the very best horse and men that we have set we forward, taking
with us victuals to serve for three days. The lighter we be now laden, and the
slighter provided, the more pleasantly shall we dine, sup, and sleep the days
ensuing. Now, for the order and manner of our march, let it be thus. First and
foremost, you Chrysantas, lead those that be armed with corselets, for as much
as the way is even and broad. Place all your Centiniers in the Front: and let
every hundred march severally by themselves. For going thus thick and close
together, we shall rid ground most speedily, and travail with greatest
security. The reason wherefore I will and command those or, Corseletiers.
Cuirace men to go before is, because they are the heaviest part of the army
and most charged: who leading thus the way, it must needs be that the rest will
sooner follow and more easily, that are more lightly armed. Contrariwise, if in
the night season the nimblest and swiftest part should march foremost: no
marvel is it, if the or, batailons.
regiments be distracted: For, so, that which is in the vaward, quickly
outgoeth the rest, and gets out of sight. Next after these, let Artabazus
conduct the Persian Targuatiers and Archers. After them, Andramias the Mede
shall have the leading of the Median Infantery, and Embas next to them of the
Armenian. Then let Artuchas follow with the command of the Hyrcanians. After
whom, Thambradas with the Sacan footmen, and at the tail of them Damatas with
the Cadusians. But lead they all their regiments in this order, namely having
the Centurions affront, the Targuatiers on the right hand, the Archers on the
left of their own side. For, marching in this manner, they are the readier to
execute any piece of service. Behind these, quoth he, shall the Soldiers, or,
pages. (...).
porters follow with all their baggage: Whose Provosts must look unto them
all, that in the evening they bring together every thing in good order before
they sleep: as also that early in the morning, they be with their carriages
ready, appointed in due place and follow decently. Next to these, Madatas the
Persian, is to lead the Persian Cavallery: Who also shall have the Centurions
of the horsemen in the front: and let every such Centurion lead his troop
single, by it self, like as the Captains of the footmen do. After whom let
Rhambacas the Mede march with his men of Arms likewise; and then you Tigranes
with your own Cavallery. And so forth, for the Confederates; let all the
Guiders.
Captains of horsemen conduct those, with whom every one came unto us. The
Cadusians, as they came last, so let them march in the Rear hinmost. And you
that are their Commander, take the charge now of all them that are behind, and
permit not any one to follow after your horsemen. Ye Captains and soldiers
both, as many as be wise look to it diligently, that ye march in silence.
For, by night, every thing must of necessity, both be perceived and also
wrought, by help of ears rather than of eyes. And put case that any trouble
and disorder arise in the night season, it is much greater, and the same harder
to be composed than in the day time. And therefore, both silence is needful to
be kept, and order also as possibly to be observed. Now, for the night watches
quoth he, (so often as ye are to arise in the night) they must be always
appointed very short, and as many as may be: For fear that any man by occasion
of long wanting sleep in his watch, be enforced to take hurt in his march. And
look, when the hour of remoove and setting forward is come, the signal must
be giv^^ by winding an horn. To conclude, when every man is furnished with
necessaries, be ye ready to take the high way that leads to Babylon. And
let each one, ever as he begins to march onward, he exhort him that
comes behind at his heels to follow on.

After this, they retired to their Pavilions, discoursing as they went one with
another in this sort. What a singular memory has Cyrus? How many has he
given directions unto? How has he charged and commanded them by name? And, in
truth, Cyrus attained unto this by his industry and diligence. For, he thought
it a great wonder, That whereas base artificers and mechanical Artisaries,
know every one the several names of the tools belonging to their Art, and the
Physician likewise the terms of all the instruments, drugs and medicines which
he uses; the General I say of an army, should be so stupid and blockish,
as not to know the inferior Captains names under him, whom he must
necessarily use as instruments when he is minded either to surprise any thing
by way of prevention or to hold the same: when he intends I say either to
encourage or to put in fear. Moreover if at any time a General be disposed to
grace and honor one, he thought it seemly and decent to call the party by
name. Furthermore, of this opinion he was, that they who thought their Prince
took knowledge of them, were both desirous to be seen above the rest
exploiting some brave service, and also readier than others to forbear
committing any lewd and unseemely act: This also he supposed to be a foolish
and absurd fashion, that when a Lord General would have a thing to be done in
the Army, he should give order therefore, as some masters in their houses use
to command, namely in this manner, Let one go for water, Some body cleave
wood, etc. For, when they bid in this wise, he thought they would all look and
stare one upon another, and none go about that which is commanded: all are in
fault alike: yet is there not one ashamed of his fault or once afraid: because
it is common to him with many other. In these regards, whenever he
commanded ought to be done, he called unto them all by name. And thus much as
touching the discreet judgment of Cyrus in these matters.

The Soldiers then, for that time, when they had supped, appointed sentinels,
and brought together all things needful, went to bed. And at midnight he gave
the signal [to dislodge] by sound of home. Then Cyrus, after he had said unto
Chrysantas, that he should give attendance in the very way, before the vaward
of the army, taking his Sarjeants.
officers [and guard] about him, went forth. Within a while, Chrysantas with
the Cuirace men in his conduct. Whom Cyrus when he had given him guides of the
way, commanded to march fair and softly, until a messenger came unto him;
For as yet all the army was not on foot. Himself standing still in the same
place, look whom he saw coming toward him, he did put forward orderly in his
rank, but unto him that lagged behind he sent to call him on. Now when they
were all upon the way, he dispatched certain horsemen unto Chrysantas to tell
him, how they all now had put themselves in their journey, and therefore willed
him to mend his pace and lead on faster. Himself in person, mounted on
horseback rode gently to the Front of the army and beheld the companies in
rank: and whomsoever he saw marching in good order and with silence, to them
he would ride close, and ask who they were? and when he once knew, praise them
he would: but if he perceived any to be tumultuous and disorderly, after the
cause thereof known, he would labor to appease the misrule. One thing there
remains yet, as touching the diligence and care which he showed in the night
march: namely that he sent forth before the whole army certain footmen
lightly appointed, and those not many in number: who being both seen of
Chrysantas, and also seeing him, should as or privy Escouts.
Otacusts listen and advertise him of all occurrents, occasions and
opportunities presented. And one there was over these Avantcurriers, to rule
and order them: and whatsoever was ought worth and material, he would give
notice thereof: and what was not, he troubled him not with showing the same.
And thus verily, marched he by night. But when the day was come, certain of
the Cadusian horsemen, he left with their Infantery marching as they did
hinmost, for that they should not go naked and destitute of men of Arms: the
rest he commanded to ride on, to the Vantguard: because the enemies affronted
it: to the end that if any encountered full opposite unto him, he having the
strength of his army in battle ray, might make head and fight with them; but
if they were seen any where to fly, he might be most ready to pursue them:
for, he had ever about him, some appointed to follow the chase when there was
need of pursuit: others again to abide with him. For, never would he suffer a
whole Regiment to be (...): or, (...).
dismembered. In this wise led Cyrus his Army forth. Yet kept not he himself
always in one place: To be scattered.
but riding to and fro, and up and down, surveied his soldiers, and with good
care took order for whatsoever they wanted. Thus much of the march of Cyrus
and his host.

CHAP. VI. A Conspiracy against Gadatas. An Ambush laid by the Assyrian King:
Where he received a great overthrow. How Cyrus saved Gadatas and all his men.
NOW it happened, that a certain great person one of Gadatas his men of
arms, considering how his Lord and Master was revolted from the Assyrian King,
thought this with himself, that if ought but well should come unto Gadatas,
he might obtain at the Kings hand the seizure of all his goods and lands.
Upon which project of his, he sends one of his trusty servants unto the said
Assyrian King with these instructions: That in case he found the Assyrian
forces already in Gadatas his country, he should give the King to understand,
that if he lay in ambushment, he might take both Gadatas himself and all his
company: willing him withal to signify what power Gadatas had in his
conduct? likewise that Cyrus accompanied him not; as also, to show which way he
would come. Moreover, to the end he might be the better believed, he charged
his own servants, to deliver up the Castle which himself held within the
territory of Gadatas, with all that was therein, into the hands of the King of
Assyria. Furthermore, he promised that after he had slain Gadatas, he would
come to him in person if he could: if not, yet would he from that time
forward take the Kings part. The messenger appointed for this errand rode post,
and with great speed came unto the Assyrian King, and declared unto the King
the cause of his coming, which when he heard, he presently entered upon the
said Castle, and with a great power of horsemen, and a number of chariots, laid
wait in the villages standing thick thereabout. Gadatas when he drew near to
those villages, sent forth certain in espiall to clear the coasts. The
Assyrian King having intelligence that these espies were coming, commanded
two or three of the chariots and some few horsemen to give ground and fly,
making semblance as if they were affrighted, and but few in number. Which when
those foreriders perceived, they not only themselves followed in pursuit, but
also gave the Al-arme to Gadatas. Who being deceived thereby, made after and
followed amain. The Assyrians then, for that they thought Gadatas at the point
to be taken, arose straight out of their embushment. Gadatas with his companies
seeing that, fled, as good cause they had: The otherside again with as great
reason pursued them. At which very time, that traitorous villain who had
plotted to forelay Gadatas, struck him: and failed in deed of giving him a
deadly blow, but smote him in the shoulder and so wounded him. Which deed done,
he went his ways to join with those that followed in chase. For, being known
who he was, he together with the Assyrians put spurs to his horse, and
helped the King in his pursuit. Then and there, be you sure, they that rode
upon the heaviest and slowest jades, were taken by those who had the swiftest
steeds under them. And verily Gadatas his horsemen being all sore overlayed,
for that they were tired out with their long journey, no sooner espied Cyrus
coming forward with his army, but a man might well think they were right
joyous and glad, as if out of some storm and tempest they had arrived to a
safe harbor. Cyrus at the first sight, mervailed thereat: but when he
understood what the matter was, so long as they rode all afront toward him, he
led his forces in order of battle against them. But so soon as the enemies
knowing how the world went, reculed and fled, Cyrus commanded the light
horsemen appointed therefore, to make hot pursuit, and himself with the rest
followed hard after according as he thought it expedient. There, might a man
have seen, some Chariots taken, out of which the drivers were fallen, partly
in the very turning and partly otherwise: others again intercepted by the
horsemen and surprised. They slew also very many; and among the rest, the
traitor himself who had hurt Gadatas. Meane-while the Assyrian footmen who
were besieging Gadatas his fortress, abandoned that enterprise. Some fled for
succor into the Castle, which had revolted from Gadatas: others got away
before their enemies, and did put themselves into a great City of the Assyrian
Kings, whereinto himself with his chariots and horses was retired. Upon these
exploits thus achieved, Cyrus returned back into Gadatas his country: and
after order given unto those whom it concerned, to take charge of the captives,
he went directly to see how Gadatas did upon his hurt. And as he went forward,
Gadatas having by that time, his wound dressed and bound up, met him on the
way. When Cyrus saw him, he rejoiced and said. I was coming to you, for to see
how you did: And I, quoth Gadatas, so God me love, was going, to behold you
again and see what a countenance you carry, bearing as you do this brave
mind: who, when I wist not my self what need you had now of my help, nor you
ever undertook or promised to do this for me, ne yet in your own particular
received so much as any small pleasure at my hand; but only for that I seemed
unto you, in some measure to benefit my friends, have so lovingly and with such
affection reskued me: as that now for any thing in me, I might have perished,
but by your means I am saved. And here, my good Cyrus, I report me to the
Gods whom I take to record, were I as perfect and sound a man, as when I was
newborn, and had I begotten children, I doubt whether ever I should have had
a child of mine own, who would have prooved so kind to me, as you have
been. For, I have known other unnatural children; (and even for example this
very King of Assyria that now is) who has wrought his father much more woe and
trouble, than himself is able now to work you. Whereas Cyrus returned this
answer. My Gadatas, You make a great mervaile of me now, letting pass I
assure you a greater wonder. And what might that be, quoth Gadatas? Even this,
says he, that so many Persians, so many Medes, so many Hyrcanians, and all the
Armenians, Sacans and Cadusians here present, have hastened and been so
forward for your sake. Whereupon Gadatas brake out into this prayer. O Jupiter,
the Gods grant unto these men many good blessings, but unto him most, who is
the author of this their so kind affection. And to the end, o Cyrus, that we
may enterteine and adorn these whom you so praise, here take such hospital
gifts as I am able to bestow, And therewith presented unto him very many: that
not only whosoever would might sacrifice unto the Gods, but the whole army
also throughout be rewarded according to the worth of these Acts so well
performed, and speeding as well.

CHAP. VII. The good Remonstrances of Cyrus, as touching the fault of the
Cadusian Prince. The treaty with the King of Assyria, for the good of his
people.
BUT the Cadusian Damadas.
Leader, who having the conduct of the rereward, had no hand in the chase, yet
desirous for his part also to do some notable piece of service by himself,
without acquainting Cyrus with his design, and saying never a word unto him,
made a rode into the territory toward Babylon and harried it. But whiles his
horsemen were raunging abroad and straggling asunder, the Assyrian King issuing
out of a City of his own whereinto he was before fled, came upon them at
unwares, with his army very well appointed, and in order of battle, to
encounter him. And when he discovered them to be the Cadusians only, he
charged upon them, and among many other slew the said Commander of them. He
took many horses also of the Cadusians, and despoyled them of all that booty
which they had gotten and were driving away. Thus the King of Assyria, after he
had followed the Cadusians in rout, so far as he might with safety,
returned. As for the foremost of the Cadusians, they recovered the Camp by the
shutting in of the evening and so escaped safe. Cyrus being advertised of this
disaster, went forth and met the Cadusians. As he saw any one wounded, him he
received and comforted, yea and sent to Gadatas for to be cured. The rest he
bestowed in pavilions by themselves together, and with great care gave order
that they should have all necessaries, assuming unto him as assistants in the
business, certain of the Persian Homotimi. (For, in such cases as these, good
and honest men are willing to set to their helping hands) And for his own part
verily, how much he grieved it evidently appeared, in that it being now supper
time, when the rest were at supper, Cyrus still with his Sergeants.
Ministers, Physicians and Chirurgions gave attendance, and by his good will
left not one neglected and unlooked to, but if he did not in his own person
see to them, every man might plainly perceive, that he sent others to tend
them. And so for that time they went to rest.

By the break of day, he made Proclamation by the public Criers that the
Rulers of the other Associates, but the Cadusians all in general should
assemble together: and unto them he delivered these or such like words. My
friends and Confederates. An ordinary accident it is among men, that has
befalne unto you. For, men ye are, and that men should err, is in my conceit,
no wonder. And yet by good right meet it is, that of this infortunitie we
should reap some profit. Namely, To learn, never hereafter to sever from the
whole body of the army, any Regiment, weaker than the enemies forces. Neither
speak I this, quoth he, that a man ought not sometimes to go out, when the
case so requires, with a less power, than wherewith the Cadusians erewhile
did set forth. But if one enterprise an exploit, imparting his mind first to
him, who is able and sufficient to help; and so go forth, he may perchance
fail of his purpose and be deceived: yet as possible it is, that he who
stays still behind, may delude the enemies, diverting them another way from
those who went forth. There are besides, other means to work trouble unto the
enemies, and thereby to procure the safety of friends. And so verily, he that
is gone apart from the rest, may not be coumpted absent, but to depend upon the
residue of the forces behind. But he that departs, making no man privy
beforehand where he is, differs nothing at all, from him, who of himself
alone undertaketh an expedition. Howbeit for this mischance, quoth he, that
has happened, God willing, ere it be long we will be avenged of our enemies:
For, so soon as ever ye have taken a short dinner, I my self will bring you
where the deed was done: and there will we both bury our dead, and also if God
will, show unto our enemies, that in the very place where they think they have
gotten the upper hand, there be others better men than themselves: in so much
as they shall take no great joy, to see that plot of ground, on which they slew
our Associates. But in case, they will not come forth and meet us in the field,
let us set their villages on fire, let us harry and wast their country, that
they may have no pleasure, in the sight of those things which they have done to
us, but contrariwise sorrow, and grieve to behold their own calamities. Go
ye therefore all the rest, quoth he, to your dinners. As for you that are
Cadusians: First, choose according to your own law and custom, some one to be
your General, or Coronell.
Prince, who with the auspicious help of the Gods and us, may take the charge
of you, and see what ye stand in need of. When ye have elected him and dined
withal, send whom ye have elected unto me. And so they did accordingly. But
Cyrus, after he had brought forth his army, and appointed him to his Regiment
whom the Cadusians had made choice of, commanded him to lead the same
arraunged in order of battle close to himself, to the end, quoth he, that if
it be possible we may encourage these men again. Thus set they forth, and
being come to the place, they both entered the Cadusians, and harried the
country. And when they had so done, and gotten victual and other provision out
of the enemies land, they departed and returned into the territory of Gadatas.

Cyrus then, considering that they who had revolted unto him, bordering as they
did upon Babylon, should sustain much detriment by so ill a neighbor, unless
himself were continually present with them, commanded as many of the enemies
as he dismissed, to say unto the Assyrian King, and withal sent an Herald to
denounce unto him in his name, that ready he was for his part to forbear the
husbandmen that tilled the ground, and would do them no wrong; in case the
King likewise would permit their laborers and husbandmen, who had revolted
unto him, to till their grounds in peace. And you verily, quoth he, to the
King, were you able to prohibit them, shall when you have all done hinder but a
few: For their territories are but small who have turned from you to me: but it
lies in my power to suffer a large country of yours to be tilled. And as
touching the harvest and inning of the fruits therein; if the war continue,
he shall reap and gather all, (as I suppose) that is the Conqueror. But if
peace shall be established, who but your self shall have and hold all? For
surely, if any of my soldiers shall rise and take arms against you or yours
against me, we will of both sides, quoth he, do our best to chastise and
punish the delinquents. Having put these instructions in this wise into the
Heralds mouth, he sent him away. The Assyrians when they heard this message,
did the best they could to persuade their King, to condescend unto these
conditions, and to leave as little war behind, as might be. And verily the
Assyrian King, whether it were through the persuasion of his own nation, or
for that himself was willing enough, and inclined that way already, assented
thereto. Hereupon capitulated and covenanted it was between these two
Potentates, that the husbandmen should have peace, and the armed soldiers
war. Thus much effected Cyrus in the behalf of husbandmen. As touching
pasturage for their laboring beasts, he gave order unto his friends, That it
should be assigned and set out, as they would themselves, where their own
Demesnes and Seignories lay: but from the enemies they drove booties
wheresoever they could light upon any: to the end, that unto his Associates the
warfare might be the more pleasant. For admit they gat no victuals and
necessaries, yet the dangers were all one: but to live of their enemies
country, seemed to make their soldiery and service the easier.

Well, whiles Cyrus now made preparation to depart out of those quarters,
Gadatas came and showed himself, bringing and driving before him many and
sundry presents, as having a large habitation, and the same well stored: and
among the rest, many horses of service, which he had taken from his own men of
arms, such as he distrusted for their treacherous lying in wait for him. And
as he approached near unto Cyrus, he spoke in this wise. Here Sir, quoth he, I
bring now unto you these things, that you may for the present use them as you
need. But think this withal, that whatsoever beside is mine, the same is also
yours. For neither have I nor ever shall, a child of mine own body begotten,
unto whom I may leave my house and inheritance, but when I die, my whole line
and name must of necessity be extinct with me. And the Gods, o Cyrus, I take
to witness, who both see all and hear all, that I have not committed either
in word or deed, any unjust or dishonest act, whereby I should deserve these
calamities. And as he uttered these words, he bewailed his own fortune, and
for very tears could speak no more. Cyrus hearing his pittious moan, took
commiseration of the man's hard hap and calamity, saying withal. As for the
horses, quoth he, I accept of them. For hereby shall I do you a pleasure, all
the while I bestow them upon those men, who are better affected unto you, as it
appears, than those whose ere-while they were. And, the Persian Cavallery I
shall shortly make up, to the number of 10000 horsemen, the thing that I have
so long desired. Your other treasure, quoth he, take away, and keep it to your
self, until you see me have so much, as that in requital I be not inferior
to you. For, if at your departure you give me more than you receive at my
hands, I know not, so help me God, how to do, but to be grieved and ashamed.
To this Gadatas said, Truly I believe you herein. For, I see your gentle nature
and frank disposition. But, see I pray you, whether I be able to keep the
same? For, so long as we and the Assyrian King were friends, my Patrimony was
thought to be a very fair livelode and estate. For, lying as it did near unto
that great and populous City Babylon, look what commodity might grow from a
noble and ample City, we got and enjoyed the same: and what trouble or
encombrance might arise from thence, we could retire hither home and be far
remote therefro. But now, standing as we do in terms of enmity, evident it
is that after you be once departed, both we ourselves shall be forelayed with
our whole family: and so far as I can see, a pensive and sorrowful life we
shall lead, having our enemies so near, and seeing them to be more puissant
than our selves. But, peradventure you will say. And why thought you not so
much before you revolted? Certes, Cyrus, because my mind fixed upon such a
wrong done, and blinded with very anger, considered not what was best and
safest for me: but conceived and ever was with child of these fancies. Will it
never be, that I shall be revenged of him, an enemy both to God and man? him, I
say, who mortally and continually hates not one, if he do him any wrong, but
if he do but suspect another better than himself? And therefore, I think
verily, that being so bad as he is, all the confederates that he employeth in
his service, he shall find worse than himself. And say, there be any one
that seems better than another; Be assured, Cyrus, you shall never need to
fight against any good and valiant man, but he will be sufficient so to work
and contrive, as to kill him to your hand that is his better. And as for
molesting me, verily, he will I suppose with the help of those wicked ones
overmatch me.

When Cyrus heard him say thus, he thought, that he spoke to the point, and
what was worthy to be considered. Whereupon he inferred presently and said. How
say you then Gadatas, have you not fortified your holds and castles with
garrisons for your own defense and safety, whenever you shall enter into
them? And do you not your self in person go with us in this expedition, that
if God be still on our side, as now he is, this [wicked Prince] may stand in
fear of you, and not you of him? Go along therefore with me, and what ever of
yours you take pleasure to see, or delight to company with, have with you.
Certes, you may as I suppose stand me in very good stead, and I will endeavor
likewise to my power for to pleasure you. Which offer when Gadatas heard, he
took heart again and said. Is it possible for me to trusse up bag and
baggage, and to gather together all that I have before you depart? For,
desirous I am, quoth he, to have away my mother with me. You may very well,
quoth Cyrus. For I will stay for your sake, until you say that all is well. So
Gadatas for the present took his leave, and by the advice of Cyrus, did put
garrisons into those Castles which he had fortified: and gat together all such
stuff and furniture, as might beseem an ample and stately house for to be
inhabited. Moreover, of those about him he took such trusty friends, as in
whom he had delight: yea and many likewise whom he distrusted: and of those,
he compelled some to bring away with them their wives, others their sisters:
to the end that being yoked to them, he might hold them in their allegiance.
Thus Cyrus having Gadatas in his retinew, departed: Who served his turn very
well, to direct him in the ways, to show him where water, where forage,
provander, and corn was to be had, to the end he might always encampe in
places of most plenty.

CHAP. VIII. How Cyrus as he returned into Media, passed before Babylon: and
surprised certain Forts upon the Frontiers.
NOw when he marched on, and discovering in his journey, the city of Babylon,
perceived besides that the way which he went, led directly to the very walls, he
called Gobryas and Gadatas unto him. Of whom he demanded, if there were not
another passage, that they might not approach the wall so near? Then Gobryas,
There are, my Lord, quoth he, very many avenues, but I thought you were now
minded to lead your army as nigh as you could unto the City, for to show unto
them within, your army how brave and puissant it is. For, when you had a less
power, you came close to the very wall, and they beheld us to be but few in
number. And now, although the King be in readiness, as he said himself he
was preparing to fight, yet I know very well, that when he vieweth your forces,
he will think his own to be yet unready. To this, Cyrus made answer thus. You
seem to mervaile my Gobryas, that when I came with a less army by far, I
advanced hard to the City wall, and now having a greater power, am unwilling to
march under the same. But mervaile not thereat, quoth he. For, it is not all
one to advance (...) To lead by, or aside.
close forward, and to (...)
pass by aloof. For, all men advance forward, so arraunged, as they think
they may fight best: and yet those that be wise, use in withdrawing and
retyring their forces, to consider, how they may get away, not most speedily,
but with greatest safety. Now, of necessity, pass by we must, with our wagons
stretched out in length to the view: but withal, other porters and carriers of
baggage very near together and hidden. And all these ought to be fensed very
close with armed men. Neither must our carriages be seen of our enemies any
where without arms. In which regard, if we march so, it cannot otherwise be,
but the strong and able men to fight, must be placed close to the weak and
feeble. And therefore, if the enemies would in any place sallie forth thick
out of the City and charge us, wheresoever they shall encounter with us, they
will be able more fiercely to maintain the fight, than we that thus pass by.
Again, to those that march so (...).
in length, there can no help and supply be brought, but a great way off, and
long first: Whereas they from the walls, may in a trice, both run to succor
them that are so near, and also as soon retire again. But if we pass along
no nearer than so as they may see us, keeping only the same breadth as now we
do in our march, our number verily they shall behold, but by reason of the
glittering harnoise and armed men intermingled among, the whole multitude and
body of the army must needs seem terrible. Now, if as we march in this order,
they shall closely set upon us, we discovering them before a good way off,
shall not be taken tardie nor unprovided. But rather, my good friends, quoth
he, they will not so much as give the attempt, when they must go far from
the walls: except they suppose themselves with their whole power able to
outmatch us and all our forces. For, thus to go aside and out of the way is a
fearful thing. When he had thus said, he was thought unto them all that were
present to speak fully to the purpose. Gobryas therefore led as he commanded
him. Thus, as the army passed aloof by the City, Cyrus himself held of, and
drew back so, as evermore he made the rereward stronger and stronger. After
he had passed forward in this sort, so as within few days following, he was
come unto the Confines of the Assyrians and Medes, from whence he had first set
out, finding there three fortresses of the Assyrians, one of them which was the
weakest he assailed and forced the other two, what with the terrible summons of
Cyrus, and what by the fair persuasions of Gadatas, the Captains of the
garrisons within, surrender.

CHAP. IX. How Cyrus returned to the Marches of Media, and labored to appease
the wrath of Cyaxares. The answer also that he made unto him.
THESE exploits achieved, Cyrus sent unto Cyaxares, requiring him personally
to repair unto the Army, to the end they might devise together and consult,
as touching the keeping of those holds newly taken in: as also, that upon the
sight of the Army, he might advise farther concerning other affairs, what he
thought meet to be done. Yet say, quoth he, that (if he think so good) I am
ready to come unto him; there to encampe. Thus the messenger went to declare
this errand. Meane-while Cyrus gave order unto Gadatas for to adorn and set
out most gorgeously that Assyrian Kings Pavilion which the Medes had chosen out
for Cyaxares, with all the other furniture that it had, also to bring the
foresaid two Ladies into the women's Cabin, or Parlour.
room within the tent, and with them the musical chanteresses, selected for
Cyaxares, which they did accordingly. But when he that was sent to Cyaxares had
delivered his message, no sooner heard he it, but he thought it better, that
the Army should remain there still upon the Confines. For, the Persians also
whom Cyrus had sent for, were now come unto him, being in number 40000 one with
another, of Archers and light Targuatiers. And therefore when Cyaxares saw that
these likewise much endammaged the Medes land, he thought it would be more for
his ease, to be discharged even of them, rather than to receive a multitude of
others unto them. Now when he, who had the leading of this army out of Persia,
asked Cyaxares according to the tenor of Cyrus his Letter, whether he had any
need of the said forces? and he again answered, that he had none; O he, the
very same day hearing of Cyrus his coming, went forth with his power toward
him. The morrow after, Cyaxares with the residue of the Medes horsemen that
remained with him, did put himself on his journey. And when Cyrus was
advertised of his approach, he took unto him the Persian horsemen, who by this
time were in number much increased; all the Medes likewise and Armenians, the
Hyrcanians also and other Confederates, as many as were best mounted and armed
withal, and so met Cyaxares and showed unto him his whole power. But Cyaxares,
seeing such a show of so many brave men accompanying Cyrus, and contrariwise so
small a train, and the same of base account, attending upon his own person,
thought it a great dishonor and disgrace unto his Majesty, and thereat
grieved not a little. Then Cyrus alighted from his horse, and when he came
toward him for to kiss him, as the manner was, Cyaxares likewise dismounted
in deed, but turned away and would not kiss him: nay, he wept amain, that
all men might see him. Whereupon Cyrus commanded all others to go aside and
be still. But himself taking Cyaxares by the right hand, and leading him out
of the way under a row of certain Date trees, gave commandment, to lay
Median carpets and ruggs for him on the ground, upon which when he had caused
him to sit down, he sat himself by his side, and began to break with him in
this manner.

Tell me on For Gods sake.
Gods behalf, my good Uncle, why you are so angry with me? what offensive
matter see you, to take it so grievously as you do? Hereunto Cyaxares made
answer after this sort. Because, Cyrus, I being reputed to have lineally
descended, so far as the memory of man or ancient records do testify,
from Kings in old time mine Ancestors, known also to be a Kings son, and
taken for a King my self, see how basely and unbeseeming my estate I ride.
Contrariwise with what a company of my retinew, and with a warlike power
besides you bear a port here, and magnificently show your self: It would have
grieved one, in my conceit, to have been served thus at an enemies hand: but
so to be entreated of them, by whom there was least cause, it is before God, a
greater indignity by far. And better it were for me, I suppose to be buried
quick ten times in the earth, than to be seen so abject, and to see mine
own servants and subjects, thus to neglect me, yea and to make a laughing
stock of me. For, it is not unknown unto me, that not only you are of
greater puissance than I, but also even mine own vassals are come to meet me
more mighty than my self: and so well appointed, as that they be able to do
me more harm than I can them. And as he uttered these words, the tears came
upon him more and more, in so much as he enforced Cyrus also to weep, so as
his eyes stood full again of water. Who after he had stayed and continued
himself a while brake out into these words.

But you, Cyaxares, neither say truly nor deem aright, in case you think that
the Medes by my presence with them are so well appointed, as to be able for to
work your woe. Certes, I nothing mervaile that you are wroth and affraied. And
whether you be offended with them justly or unjustly, let that for me, go by:
For, well I know, that if I should plead in their behalf, you would take it to
the heart. But, for a Prince and Sovereign, to be angry and displeased with
all his subjects at once, I hold it a foul fault. For, many enemies must needs
be procured, when a man is terrible unto many. And when one is set against
all, he gives them occasion to join all in one mind, and to draw in a line.
In which regards, be you assured, I sent these your men back unto you not
without my self, as fearing on their part, lest ought might by reason of your
indignation have fallen out, which we all should rue. And verily by Gods help,
for these matters you shall incur no danger so long as I am present. But
whereas you think your self wronged by me, that goes to my heart, if
endeavoring as I do, all that I can to pleasure my friends most, I be thought
afterward for my labor to work and practice the contrary. Well, Let us not
thus rashly contest and blame one another: But see, if it be possible in most
plain terms what manner of injury mine is? And verily, content I am for my
self to make that offer which is most just and equal. If it appear that I
have done ill, acknowledge I will and confess my fault. But, if it be found,
that I have done nothing amiss, nor intended evil, will not you then yield,
that you have not been wronged by me? It must needs be so quoth he. Nay, what
and if it shall evidently be known, says Cyrus, that I have been the author
of your welfare? that I have studied to confer as many benefits as I could
upon you, will you not judge me worthy of praise rather than of rebuke? That is
but reason, quoth Cyaxares. Why! then says Cyrus, let us examine in particular
every thing that I have done: and so it will most evidently aopeare, what
therein is good, and what is bad? Begin we, I say, if you think that will
serve, at the very original. For, what time as you perceived many of your
enemies assembled, and those already come forward against you, and invading
your land; what did you but send immediately to the State of Persia, craving
their aid, yea and to my self especially, entreating me both to come, and
also to labor, if any Persians were sent, to be their Leader and Commander?
Persuaded therefore I was by your words: I came unto you in person, and brought
unto you men, for number many, and for valor the best I could. True it is
quoth he, you came indeed. Tell me then, says Cyrus, First, whether herein you
condemn any injurious dealing of mine to youward, or rather commend my (...).
beneficence to you? Apparent it is quoth Cyaxares, that hereby I must
acknowledge your good dealing. Go to then, said Cyrus, when your enemies were
come, and that there was no remedy, but fought they must be with, did you in
that trial perceive me, either to shrink for any pains, or to spare for any
peril? No surely quoth Cyaxares, I protest before God. To proceed, said Cyrus,
what time as by Gods assistance, the victory was ours, and the enemies fled.
When I requested you, that we might with our united forces, pursue them, and
in common revenge our selves of them, and what event soever ensued thereof,
good or bad, to take part indifferently? in these things can you impute any
avarice unto me, as if I sought mine own advantage above others? At this,
Cyaxares held his peace. Then replied Cyrus and went on in this wise. Since it
pleasethyou at this question to keep silence rather than to answer: yet tell
me thus much I pray you, whether you took your self to be wronged in that,
when you thought it stood not with your own safety to follow the chase, I
would not suffer you in proper person, to be in any part of the danger, but
requested you only to send unto me some of your horsemen: Show I say, whether
in this request of mine, I did you wrong, especially seeing I had already borne
my self in your service as a true confederate? And when Cyaxares said nothing
to this also. Seeing then, quoth Cyrus, it is not your pleasure to answer unto
this point: Speak yet from henceforth, whether I wronged you, in that, when
you made me this answer, that perceiving as you did the Medes addicted to
Ioviall mirth, you would not have them to give it over, nor force them to enter
upon a dangerous piece of service, Tell me I say, Think you that I offered you
any hard measure, in that I neglected to be angry with you, but eftsoons
entreated of you afterward, that thing, than which I knew, there was nothing
of less moment for you to grant, nor easier to be imposed upon the Medes?
For, I prayed you only to give me such as willingly would follow me. Which
being granted, yet was I never the nearer, unless I could persuade them. To
them I went, I persuaded with them: and look whom I could prevail with, I
took with me, and went my ways with your good leave and permission. Now if
you esteem this blameworthy, then surely even to take any thing at your hands
which you frankly give, cannot, as it should seem, be void of blame. To be
short, Thus and thus we did set forth. When we were gone, what was exploited
by us which is not to all men known? Was not our enemies camp by force won?
Were not many of them slain that took arms and rose against you? And of
those that remained alive, lost not many their armor? and as many their
horses? The goods verily of those who beforetime carried away and harried
before them yours, you see now in the hands and possession of your Friends:
part whereof, they bring to you, and part for themselves, who nevertheless are
under your dominion. And that which of all the rest is most honorable and
glorious, you see your own Territories and Seignories enlarged, but those of
your enemies diminished. Your enemies Castles and Forts, you see won and held
by force: but your own, as many as formerly were plucked from you and in the
possession of the Syrians, are now contrariwise reverted unto you. Of these
particulars to desire for to know, whether any were good (...).
to you or hurtful, I cannot say what it should mean: but yet gladly would I;
and what is the let but I may hear it? Deliver then what your opinion is of
the premises. This said, Cyrus ended his speech. And then Cyaxares returned
this answer.

That these deeds which you have done, nephew Cyrus, be simply ill, I wot not
how it can or ought to be said. But this I would have you to know, quoth he,
that these good things be of this nature, that by how much more conspicuous
they be, the more they depresse me. For I would rather you had augmented your
own dominion by my forces, than see mine own enlarged by you in this sort.
And as these Acts are to you the Actour honorable, so to me in some sort they
bring dishonor. As for goods and riches verily, I had leiffer bestow them upon
you, than to receive at your hands, those that you present me with. For, I
plainly perceive that you enrich me with such things, as whereby I am become
the poorer. And suppose, that I saw my subjects sustain some little injury at
your hands, I should, me thinks, grieve less than now I do, seeing how great
benefits they have received under you. Now if you think that I weigh these
matters inconsiderately, alter the case, and turn the same from me to your
self, and then take them into your own consideration. Set case I say, that a
man should make so much of those dogs which you keep for the safety of your
self and yours, as that thereby he cause them to be more familiar unto him
than to you, should he with this obsequious diligence of his, please you well?
But say; that you think this but a small matter, consider this also, If any
one should frame those servitours of yours, (such I mean as you have and keep,
partly for the guard of your person, and in part to wait upon you,) so, as they
had rather be his than yours, would you for this good demerit of his con him
any thanks? Again, to come unto that which men love best and accoumpt as their
own most entierly: Suppose another man were so double diligent in attendance
about your wife, as that he brought her in the end to be more kind to himself
than to you, should he by this well doing of his delight your heart? He would
miss in my conceit of that and come far short; Nay, well I wot, that
whosoever did so, should of all others wrong you most. Moreover, to speak that
which most does parallele this present grief of mine, If any man dealt so
courteously with those Persians whom you have brought unto us, as that they
made choice to follow him rather than you, would you take him to be your
friend? I think verily no. Nay he would repute him a greater enemy to you, than
if he had killed many of them. Say, that some friend of yours upon occasion of
such a loving word as this, [Here, take of my goods as much as you will] should
after he heard you so say, go and seize upon all that he could lay hand on,
and so with your substance enrich himself, whiles you have not so much as a
mean use of them, could you possibly hold such a friend unreproveable?
Semblably, my Cyrus, I suppose that I have suffered, if not the same every way,
yet surely the like at your hands. For, true it is indeed which you say, namely
that when I granted you leave, to take up all voluntaries, you went away with
them so, as that you had my whole power, and left me alone solitary. And now,
forsooth, what you have gotten with the help of my forces, you bring unto me,
and enlarge this my dominion with mine own power, whiles I being no coadjutour
with you in atchieving these commodities, show my self, me thinks no better
than a woman, in doing pleasures both to other men, and also to these my
subjects. So, by this reckoning, you appear to be the man, and I not, worthy
to rule and be a King. And think you Cyrus, that these be benefits and good
turns? and certainly you know this full well, that if you had respected me any
whit, you would have been better advised, and bereft me of any thing rather
than of my honor and dignity. For, what boot gain I by this bargain, to
have my kingdom never so much enlarged and my self despised? For, in this
respect, ruled I the Medes, not because I am better and worthier than they all,
but for that they reputed me every way worthier than themselves. As Cyaxares
thus spoke, Cyrus interrupted his speech and said. For Gods sake, good uncle,
If ever heretofore I have done you any pleasure, gratify me now, I beseech you
in that I shall request of you. Make an end once of reprooving me, and when you
have made a prouse of us, how loyally we stand affected to you: if it appear
that those achievements of mine, were performed for your good, embrace me as I
do you, and take me to be your well deserving friend. If othertherwise, then
blame me and spare not. Well, quoth Cyaxares, peradventure you are in the
right. And even so will I do. What then, quoth Cyrus, Shall I be so bold as to
kiss you? Yes verily, if you be so disposed said he. And will you not turn
away, quoth Cyrus, as you did erewhile? No, said he. And so Cyrus kissed him.
Which when the Medes and Persians with the rest (and those were many) saw:
(For, they were all in suspense what would come of this in the end,) they
became immediately right glad and rejoiced. Then Cyaxares and Cyrus both,
mounted on horseback and rode before. The Medes followed Cyaxares their King;
For, Cyrus beckened unto them so to do. The Persians attended upon Cyrus. After
whom the residue followed in order.

When they were come to the Camp, and had brought Cyaxares unto his Pavilion
richly dight for him; They who were appointed thereto, provided all things meet
and necessary for him. But the rest of the Medes, all the vacant time before
supper that Cyaxares had, repaired into the Presence: some of their own
accord, others by commandment from Cyrus, (and those were the greater number)
presenting unto him their gifts. One a deft and fair Cup Bearer: another a
good and skillful cook: Here comes in one with a baker, another with a singing
woman, one brings drinking or flagons, (...).
cups, another gorgeous and trim apparel. And for the most part every one gave
him one especial thing or other, out of that which they had gotten. In so much
as Cyaxares began to retract, and change his mind, confessing that neither
Cyrus had stolen away their hearts from him, nor the Medes were less
observant unto him than before. When supper time drew nigh, Cyaxares called for
Cyrus, and because it was long since he had seen him before, requested his
company at supper. O good uncle quoth Cyrus, will me not to do that. See you
not all these here, how by my impulsion they are come hither? I should not do
well therefore, to neglect them and follow mine own pleasure. For, thus it is
quoth he: Soldiers thinking themselves unregarded, were they valiant before,
become much less courageous; if cowards, they grow far more insolent and
malapert. Your self therefore, considering you have come a great way hither,
go now to your supper, and if any do you honor, see you embrace and make much
of them again: invite such I say and entertain them with good cheer, that
they may have the more affiance in you hereafter. As for me, I will go my
ways, about such affairs as I said. To morrow morning betimes, all the
principal men of employment, shall be ready here before your roial tent, to
show themselves: to the end that we and you together, may consult what
henceforth is to be done. And you being then present in place, put to question,
and deliver your own opinion: Whether you hold it expedient to continue the
war, or think it now a good time, to dispatch the army? Hereupon Cyaxares
went to supper. But Cyrus calling to him such friends of his, as were most
sufficient both for wisdom and execution as need required, made this speech
or the like unto them. My loving Friends, what we first wished and prayed for
unto the Gods, the same through their goodness we have obtained. For, look
how far we march on forward, so much ground we get still. Our enemies we see
to be impared: but our selves in number increased and in strength more
puissant. In case our Associats newly come, would be willing to stay with us,
more powerable we shall be to effect any thing, whether opportunity serve to
win the same by force, or to gain it by persuasion. And therefore, your part
it is no less than mine, to work this feat, that the greater number of our
said Associats may like well of their abode here. And, as in fighting a field,
he that takes most prisoners, is reputed the hardiest soldier, even so when
counsel and policy is required, he that can draw the greater part to our
mind, ought by good right to be esteemed most eloquent in word, and most
valiant in deed. Neither speak I this, as if I would have you to premeditate
and exhibit some formal oration which you may pronounce to every one of them:
but order the matter so, that they who are by any of you persuaded, may show
what they are by their deeds. This, I say is the charge which I would have you
to think upon. I for my part will endeavor diligently, that the soldiers
having what victuals and necessaries I can provide for them, may deliberately
resolve of this warfare and expedition.

THE SIXTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. The counsel that Cyrus held about dissolving his Army for that
year. The preparations which he made against the year next ensuing. The
Fabric and Engines that he devised for to batter walls. His chariots armed
with pikes and sithes, carrying turrets upon them: Also the Camels which he
provided for the war.
HAVING thus spent this day, and taken their suppers, they went to rest. The
next day early in the morning all the Associates repaired to the Pavilion gates
of Cyaxares. And therefore in the time that he dressed himself royally to be
seen, as hearing that so great a multitude attended at the gates: meane-while
I say Cyrus his familiar friends brought with them, some the Cadusians who
desired him to tarry, other the Hyrcanians. Gobryas came with one, and Sacas
with another. Hystaspes came with the Eunuch Gadatas, who also requested him to
stay. Cyrus understanding that Gadatas was long since full woe and even out of
the world for fear, least the Army should break up, smiling pleasantly upon
him, said. It appears evidently, o Gadatas, that upon the persuasion of
Hystaspes, you think as you say. Then Gadatas stretching up his hands toward
heaven, devoutly swear: That he was not moved thus to think by any
inducement of Hystaspes. But I know right well, quoth he, that if ye were gone,
my estate should utterly be overthrown. And therefore came I of my self unto
him, to ask the question, what your resolution was, concerning the dissolution
of the army? It should seem then, quoth Cyrus, that I do wrongfully charge
Hystaspes. Yea surely said Hystaspes very unjustly. For, I gainsaid Gadatas
and affirmed, that it was impossible for you to stay: alleging withal, that
your father had sent for you. How now, quoth he: What is that you say? Durst
you indeed utter so much, whether I were willing or no? Yes in troth said he.
For I see you are exceeding desirous to be seen illustrious in our progress
among the Persians, yea and to recount unto your father, how you have achieved
every exploit. And for your self, quoth Cyrus, have not you a longing, to be
gone home? No, I assure you, said Hystaspes: but here will I abide in quality
of a General, until I have made this Gadatas Lord over the Assyrian King;
Thus communed they together between jest and good earnest.

Meane-while, Cyaxares arrayed in his royal robes, came forth, and sat him
down upon a Throne of State after the Medes fashion. When all were assembled
together whom such affairs concerned, after silence made, Cyaxares spoke in
this wise. My friends and Associates. Because I am here in place and Senior to
Cyrus, meet peradventure it is that I should enter into speech first. And in my
conceit, quoth he, It is now a time convenient, to debate of this point,
whether it be expedient still to continue war, or to dismiss the Army? Let
some one therefore deliver what he thinks of this matter? Then, spoke the
Hyrcanian Potentate to the question, first. My friends and Associates, I wot
not what need there is of many words, when the very deeds show what is best.
For, well we all do know, that remaining together we do our enemies more
harm, than we can receive from them our selves. But, when we were severed
asunder one from another, then they dealt with us, to their own greatest
pleasure and our most grievous pain. After him the Cadusian Commander opined
thus. What should we speak of departure home, and living there apart; When as
even already in this very expedition, they get no good as it is seen, who are
disjoined? For, our own selves, (when we quartered but a while and served
apart from the body of our whole army) paid dearly for it and abid the
smart, as ye all know well enough. After him Artabazus; he who sometimes
claimed kindred of Cyrus, uttered his opinion in this manner. For mine own
part, says he, o Cyaxares, I do thus far forth dissent, from these who have
before me spoken to the matter in question. For, these men say, that we ought
to tarry still here and make war: but I affirm, that even when I was at home
I lived in warfare. For, many a time I came to the rescue, when our goods were
harried and carried away. Yea and oftentimes I had employment enough to defend
our forts, against which, trains were laid: whiles I stood in fear, watched
and warded, yea and did all this at mine own charges. But now, I hold their
fortresses, and fear them not at all: Nay, I make merry at their cost, I eat
and drink, I say, of the enemies provision. As if therefore our state at home
were a continual warfare, and this here a very feast, I am not of the mind to
dissolve this solemn and general Celebrity. Next unto him spoke Gobryas. For
my part, good friends and confederates, I commend hitherto the faithfulness of
Cyrus: For, he fails not in the performance of ought that he has promised.
But if he be once departed out of this country, evident it is that the Assyrian
King will be at rest, and taste of no punishment for the wrongs intended
against you and done already unto me. And I contrariwise shall be sure to be
evil entreated at his hands: because I have friended you and become your
Associate. When these had all delivered their opinions, Cyrus spoke in this
wise.

Neither am I ignorant, my friends, that if we now break up camp and
dissolve the army, we shall our selves be in weaker case, and our enemies
again in much stronger. For, be there never so many of them disarmed, they
will soon cause other new armor to be made. They that are deprived of their
horses, will quickly after be deprived of others. And in lieu of them who are
slain, there will spring and grow up eftsoone a new supply to succeed. So that
no mervaile will it be, if shortly they put us to new troubles. The case
standing thus: what meant I to moove Cyaxares for to propose this question as
touching the dissolution of the Army? Know ye then, quoth he, It was for
fear of after-claps. For, I see those enemies ready to encounter us, with whom
if we encampe still here, we shall never be able to make our parts good in
fight. For, the winter comes on apace. And say that we our selves had houses
to put our heads in, yet I assure you, we want covert for our horses, for our
ministers and officers, and for the multitude of our common soldiers: and
without these we cannot possibly maintain war. Again, the victuals in those
parts whither we have come, are by us already spent: and where we have not
been, it is all conveyed away for fear of us, into their strong holds: so
that, if the enemies enjoy them, impossible it is for us to come by the same.
And who is then so valiant, who is there so strong and lusty, as whiles he
wresteth with hunger and cold, will be able to keep the field? If therefore
we must war in this manner, I hold this and aver, that we ought rather to
dismiss our army willingly, than for want of means to be driven forth
against our wills. Howbeit, if we be desirous still to lie in camp and continue
the war, This course in my advise we must take, namely, to endeavor with all
speed to disseize Our enemies.
them of as many soldiers of theirs as we can, and to fortify as many as we
may for our selves. For, if this be effected, greater store of victual shall
they have, who can take more from others, and lay the same up: besieged also
and assaulted they shall be who are the weaker. And verily, as now things
stand, our case is all one with Sea-fearing men. For, they make sail still,
and pass on continually: yet leave they that behind them which they have
sailed through, no more their own, than that which they have not yet sailed
over. Howbeit if we can take in their strong holds and castles: the same will
alienate the whole country from our enemies: and therewith all things will be
more calm and quiet with us. Now, whereas peradventure some of you be afraid,
lest ye be put to lie in garrison, far from your native country, let not
that trouble you. For, how ever we Persians used to foreign countries, far
from home, may take in hand to keep those places which be next unto our
enemies: yet, possess ye and occupy the while those parts of Assyria which
border hard upon you. For, if we shall be sufficient to hold those marches
safely that be nearest unto them, ye that possess the quarters farthest from
them, shall live in much rest and peace. For, in my conceit, they shall never
be able, neglecting their own harms and dangers hard at their doors, to lay
wait and practice against you so far distant. When these reasons were set
down, all the rest rose up, saying they would be willing, so to do. Yea and
Cyaxares himself did no less. Gadatas also and Gobryas, both the one and the
other promised, if their Allies would give them leave to fortify their holds,
to the end that the same also might be unto their said Associates friendly and
helpefull.

Cyrus then, seeing them all, pressed to perform whatsoever he had said, in the
end concluded thus. If therefore, quoth he, we be fully minded to accomplish
all that we say, then there must be done with all expedition that which is
needful, namely; we are to make fabrics and engines, to beat down our enemies
walls and fortifications: provided we ought to be of Carpenters and other
workmen to raise towers and bulwarks for our selves. Then Cyaxares promised
for his part to find one fabric for the said purpose. Gadatas and Gobryas
another: Tigranes also a third; Cyrus likewise for himself, said he would take
order for another. These designs being thus decreed, they got unto him the
said workmen and enginers, and every man provided such things as were
requisite for those works. Yea, and such men were appointed overseers for the
work, as were thought meetest for those purposes. As for Cyrus, perceiving
that the performance of these matters required time, kept his standing Camp in
a place which he took to be for health right wholesome, and for the carriage and
bringing in of all things necessary, most passable. And whatsoever needed
defense, he ordered the matter so, that if at any time they encamped far off,
with the maine army, those that remain behind might ever be in safety.
Moreover, enquiring of those whom he supposed to have best knowledge of the
country, from what parts his army might get greatest commodity, thither he
led forth evermore a foraging: thereby partly to provide all things necessary
for the host in greatest plenty, and in part that his soldiers being
exercised in such journies, might the better stand to health and gather more
strength: and withal in their convoyes be put in mind to keep their ranks in
array. Thus Cyrus employed himself.

Now there were certain fugitives from Babylon and captives, who gave
intelligence, that the Assyrian King was gone into Lydia, and had conveyed with
him many talents of silver and gold, besides great riches otherwise and
furniture of all kinds. Whereupon the common sort and multitude of the
soldiers supposed and gave it our, that for very fear he now remooved and
carried his goods-away. But Cyrus knowing full well, that he departed for this
intent, to solicit and excite, if possibly he could some opposites to make
head against him, prepared and made himself strong, resolute to encounter him,
as making no other reckoning yet, but to fight it our. And verily to this
purpose, he made up the full companies of the Persian Cavallarie; taking some
horses at his prisoners hands, others, of his friends. For, such things as
these he received of all, neither rejected he ought that any one gave him, were
it a fair armor, or a goodly Courser. Furthermore, he provided himself of
Chariots, both out of that store which he had taken from the enemy, and
elsewhere also as he could. As for the old Trojane manner of chariots used
aforetime, as also the Cyrenaicks fashion of driving, which they use even at
this day, he did quite put down. For, in times past, the Medes, Syrians and
Arabians, yea all those in Asia generally used their chariots so, as at this
day the Cyrenians do. Now was Cyrus of this opinion, that the best part, by
all reason and likelihood, of the army (considering that the bravest and most
valiant men, use to be mounted in chariots) is but in the nature of light
skirmishers with shot, before the battle, and for the atchiving of victory
stand in small stead. For, three hundred chariots, yield not above three
hundred fighting men, but require 1200 Steeds. To guide also and to rule the
same, (such men as by good reason they trust most, who are the very flower of
the army) they have 300 beside. And these are they, that do no hurt at all
unto their enemies. This manner therefore of charioting he abolished: and in
lieu thereof, devised to make chariots fit for war, with strong wheels,
because they should not quickly break, and with long axelltrees. For, that all
things are the harder to be overturned that (...)
carry a good breadth. He made also for the drivers a seat in manner of a
turret, of strong quarters of timber, the height whereof raught up to their
elbowes: to the end that the Steeds might be ruled by them sitting upon their
seats. These drivers he armed at all pieces throughout save only their eyes.
Moreover, he fastened to the axeltrees on both sides of the wheels, certain
iron Or sithes. (...)
hooks two cubits long: besides others under the very axel-tree to the
groundward: as if they meant even with the chariots to charge upon the enemies.
And like as Cyrus then, devised and made these chariots, so even in these our
days, they that are under the dominion of the King use the same. Cyrus also
had many Camels gathered together, such as he could get of his friends, beside
all those that were taken from the enemies. And thus verily finished he these
things.

CHAP. II. How Cyrus sent Araspas as a spy, into Lydia, who feigned that he
fled for the displeasure of Cyrus.
CYRUS now being desirous to send a certain Spy into Lydia, and to learn
what the King of Assyria did, thought Araspas to be a meet man, for to
negotiate in this business: him I mean, who had the keeping of that fair
Lady [Panthea.] For, unto this Araspas such like employments usually had
befalne. Who, being surprised with the love of that Gentlewoman, was forced to
break with her about the same, and desired her carnal company. But she
denied and rejected his suit, keeping her self true unto her own husband; for
she loved him entirely. Yet complained she not of Araspas unto Cyrus, as one
very loath to set two friends at difference. But Araspas, (supposing it would
make much to the obteining of that which he longed after) menaced the woman,
that if she condiscended not willingly unto him, she should do it against
her will: whereupon the woman fearing violence, concealed the thing no longer:
Or Chamberlain. (...). Araspas.
but dispatched her * Eunuch unto Cyrus, commanding him to reveal the whole
matter. Which when he heard, he set up a laughter at * him for making such
brags, that he was able to conquer love, and therewith sent Artabazus back
with the Eunuch, willing him to deliver unto Araspas this message, that in any
wise he should not force the woman; but persuade and win her if he could, and
in so doing he would not be his hindrance. But Artabazus, when he was come
unto Araspas, all to rated and reviled him, charging him with this, that the
Lady was committed unto his custody upon trust: and laying upon him the
imputation of impiety, injury and incontinency: insomuch, as Araspas for very
grief of heart wept sore, for shame hid himself, and for fear also of some
hard measure from Cyrus, was in manner out of the world. Which when Cyrus
understood, he both sent for him, and also when they were by themselves alone,
used these words unto him. I see, quoth he, o Araspas, that you are afraid of
me and exceeding much ashamed: But give over and make an end once: For, I have
heard say, that the very Gods themselves have been overcome of love, and I
know what accidents have befalne unto men reputed very wise, by occasion of
this passion. Yea, and thus much have I noted and blamed in my self, that I am
not so continent, but if I conversed with those that are fair and beautiful,
I despise them not. Nay, that which more is, I my self am the cause of all
this business: For, I was he that immured you up, as it were, (...). or
incomparable.
with this inexpugnable thing. Unto these words of his Araspas made this
answer. Now surely, quoth he o Cyrus, you are in this particular like unto
your self, and as in all other cases the same still, to wit, mild and ready to
pardon men's trespasses. But other men there be, that overwhelme and oppress me
with grief. For, ever since that this my adverse hap and calamity was bruted
abroad, mine enemies take their pleasure of me: but my friends, coming about
me, give me counsel to withdraw my self out of the way, least I might be
hardly entreated at your hands, as one whom I have much wronged and abused.
Know this well therefore, o Araspas, quoth Cyrus, that by this opinion which
men have conceived, you may do me a high pleasure, and withal greatly profit
our Associates. Would to God said Araspas, it lay in my power any ways to do
you acceptable service. Why! quoth Cyrus. If you would now make semblance, as
though you fled from me and so go to the enemies, I am verily persuaded, you
might be credited of them. And I assure you of my troth, and as God shall help
me, said Araspas, even my very friends would raise such a rumor, as if in
deed I had made an escape from you. So by this means, quoth Cyrus, you may
return again unto us with the full intelligence of all our enemies affairs.
I suppose also, that being once trusted among them; they will make you privy
to all their speeches and secret counsels whatsoever: in so much as there shall
no designment be hid from you, that we are desirous to learn. Well then, quoth
Araspas, I will even now set forward. For, this, you may well wit, will be one
argument to induce them for to believe me, because I shall be thought to have
run away from you, fearing some mischief at your hands. But, can you, by the
way, find in your heart, says Cyrus, to leave that same lovely [Dame] Panthea
behind you? Cerres, quoth he, o Cyrus, I have in me two or minde^.
souls. For, even erewhile of that point I philosophized, and argued with an
untoward Sophister, namely, love. For, were the said or mind.
soul of mine but one, it could not be for both good and bad at once: neither
could it affect at one and the same time, as well honest actions as dishonest:
ne yet be willing and unwilling alike to effect the same. But evident it is,
that or, souls.
two minds there are: And when that which is good has the soveraintie, honest
deeds are enterprised and done: but when the bad has the mastery, we set in
hand with those that are dishonest and naught. And now this good or, mind.
understanding in me having gotten your help and assistance, is become
superior and rules very much. If therefore, says Cyrus, you also think it
good to take this journey, you must order the matter so, as that you may win
the greater credit and reputation among them. To which purpose, discover hardly
unto them what we are about: and discover it so, as what plots so ever you
disclose unto them, may be the greatest lets to check and cross their own
designments and proceedings. Now, this would be a block in their way, in case
you give it out, that we are preparing, and upon the point in some place or
other to invade their Land. For, when they hear this, they can the worse be
assembled all together with their whole puissance, whiles every one stands in
fear for his own estate at home. And stay you with them as long as you may.
For, it will be most availeable unto us, to have intelligence especially of
those enterprises that they go about, even when they are nearest unto us.
Furthermore, advise them to put themselves in ordinance of battle, the best
way that shall be thought. For, after that you are departed, who seem to know
their order of embattailing, they must needs be arraunged in the same sort:
For, loath will they be, and afraid to change the manner of setting the field:
and if they should chance to alter it, they will be much troubled at the
instant to do it in such have. Thus went Araspas out of the place, taking with
him his most trusty servitours: and having acquainted some with what he
thought most expedient for this affair, he departed.

CHAP. III. How Panthea sent for her husband to come unto Cyrus. The
preparation that Cyrus made for the war. The form of Chariots devised by
him, for the carriage of his great Engines and Fabrics.
NOw, when [Dame] Panthea understood that Araspas was gone, she dispatched
unto Cyrus a messenger, in her name, thus to say. Let it not trouble you Cyrus
that Araspas is turned to the enemies side: For, if you will give me leave to
send unto my husband, I undertake that he shall come a more faithful friend
by far than was Araspas. And I know moreover, that he will be ready to assist
you with all the power that he is able to make. For, this man's father who now
is King, was his very good friend: howsoever he that reigns at this present,
went about once when it was, to make a distraction and separation between me
and my husband. And therefore, I know right well, that taking him to be, as he
is, spiteful and malicious, he will be glad to turn unto such a Prince as you
are. When Cyrus heard this, he commanded her to send unto her husband; which
she did accordingly. Then Abradatas as soon as he took knowledge of the
tokens that came from his wife, and understood besides how other things went,
willingly with all speed went unto Cyrus, with a troop of 2000. horse or
thereabout. And being come as far as to the Persian or Sentinels.
Espials, he sent unto Cyrus, signifying who he was. Whereupon Cyrus gave order
streightwaies, that he should be conducted directly to his wife. Now when she
and Abradatas her husband had seen one another, they mutually embraced each
other, as reason it was (...).
meeting thus beyond all hope. Then, Panthea reported unto him the Integrity.
piety, temperance and commiseration of Cyrus toward her: Which Abradatas
hearing: What were I best to do, my Panthea, quoth he, to requite Cyrus, both
in your behalf and in mine own also? What else said Panthea, but endeavor to
beat your self toward him so, as he has been to you ward? After this, went
Abradatas to Cyrus: and no sooner saw he him, but taking him by the right hand,
thus he said: For the favors you have done unto us o Cyrus, I know not what to
say more than this, That I will devote my self wholly unto you, as a friend,
servitour and Associat in war. And whatsoever I see you studiously to affect,
therein shall I do my best devoir to effect the same. Why! then quoth Cyrus, I
accept of you: and now for this time I dismiss you, to go and sup together
with your wife. But henceforth, you must lodge even in mine own Pavilion with
your Friends and mine.

Afterward when Abradatas perceived Cyrus to set his mind earnestly upon those
sythed chariots: to affect likewise bard horses and horsemen armed at all
pieces, he endeavored out of his own Cavallery to provide him an hundred
chariots, with the like equipage to his: yea and address himself in person to
ride in a chariot, as Captain to govern the rest. As for his own chariot,
he ordered it so, that it had four spires, and eight steeds drew jointly
therein. His wife Panthea out of her own privy purse, had made for him both a
or Poles.
curet and also an helmet of beaten gold: likewise a pair of golden or Curace.
Vambraces. (...).
As for the horses belonging to his chariot, she did set them out with
furnitures and harnish all of brass only. Thus verily was Abradatus busied.
But Cyrus, when he had seen his said Chariot with four poles, thought this
with himself; that he likewise might as well devise one also of eight, so as
the Towers.
nethermost rowne for engines, might be drawn with a teem of eight yoke of
oxen. Story.
Now, took this Chariot with wheels and all, (...).
three fathom at the most from the ground. That such turrets as these should
follow with the maine battle, (...).
he thought might be a great help to his own or Phalanx.
troop and no less anoiance to the enemies battle. Galleries.
Upon these foresaid rownes he made round compassed or turret-like.
lofts with their battlements, and in every such wagon or chariot.
turret he bestowed 20. fighting men. Now when he had finished all that
belonged to these said turrets, he made trial of the or load.
Draught: and he found by proof, that eight yoke would draw a turret with all
the soldiers or in it.
upon it, much more easily than each yoke the ordinary lode of stuff and
baggage. For there was commonly charged upon a single yoke, as much as weighed
about 25. talents: Whereas in a turret drawn after this manner, (the timber
carrying the thickness of a tragical Pageant, with 20. soldiers in it, and
armor besides) the draught came to less in proportion than 15. talents for
every yoke. When he perceived therefore, that the or carrying.
draught was so easy, he provided to bring these turrets together with his
army, against the enemies. For, this he thought, that in war, all catching
and winning of advantage, was both safe and just, and withal fortunate.

CHAP. IIII. How the King of India sent an Embassage unto Cyrus to treat about
a league with him: who sent the said Ambassadors, to listen after (as spies,)
the affairs of the Assyrians. The news that they brought back.
ABout this time there came unto his Presence those that brought him money from
the Indian King, and declared besides unto him their Credence, That the King
[by way of answer] greeted him in these terms. It pleases me right well, o
Cyrus, and I take it kindly, that you made me acquainted with what you stood in
need of. Willing therefore I am to entertain the law of hospitality and
friendship with you, and so, I send you money. And if you want any thing else,
send, and you shall have. Moreover I have commanded those that are come from
me to you, for to do whatsoever you bid them.

Which news when Cyrus heard, Why! then, quoth he, I charge all the rest of
you, to abide here in those tents which you have taken up already; there, to
have the custody of the said money, and to live at your most pleasure: only
three of you, at my request, shall make an errand to the enemies, as if ye
came as Ambassadors from the Indian King, to treat with them about an
Association in these wars. Wherein, if ye do me good service, I will take
my self more beholden unto you and give you greater thanks, than for the
treasure which ye have brought unto me. For, these common Intellige^cers.
Spies, in form of slaves, can learn and report no other thing but what all
men know: Whereas, such men as ye are, in quality of Ambassadors, do many
times come to the intelligence even of their secret projects also. The Indians
having heard this right gladly, and been for that time courteously entertained
and rewarded by Cyrus, did put themselves in readiness, and the next day set
forward on their journey; promising upon their fidelity, that when they had
learned what they could of the enemies, they would repair again unto him with
all speed possible. And Cyrus verily (as he was a man who projected no small
enterprises) provided all things for the war magnificently. Neither took he
order for such matters only, as his Allies thought meet, but also kindled an
aemulation among his Friends: who might show themselves in their armor most
gallant, in horsmanship most skillful, in darting and shooting most cunning,
and in travail most painful? And these feats wrought he, what by training
them forth to hunting, and what by gracing and rewarding the best in every
kind. Such Captains also and Rulers, as he saw most studious and careful in
this point, that their soldiers should prove right expert and valiant, such I
say, he did put forward and embolden, as well by praising, as by gratifying
them in whatsoever he could. And if at any time he sacrificed, or kept some
festival holiday, he would then set forth and exhibit some games of price,
respective to all those feats which men practice for the use of war. Yea and
to the victour he gave rewards most magnificently. So that much joy and mirth
there was throughout his army.

And now by this time were all things in manner finished, which he minded to
use in his expedition, saving only Artillery.
engines. For the Persian horsemen were grown already to the complete number of
10. thousand: of sithed chariots, that himself had provided, there were full
one hundred: and of others that Abradatas the Susian took in hand to make,
according to the pattern of Cyrus his chariots, there were as many. Moreover,
Cyrus had persuaded Cyaxares, to change his Median chariots, from the Trojane
and Lybian fashion: and to make them after his own. Of which sort also there
was a third hundred. Furthermore, for the Dromedaries.
Camels, were soldiers appointed to serve upon them: for every one two
archers. And the most part of his army carried this mind, as if they had won
the victory already, and as if the enemies were of no worth. Now when as they
stood thus affected and appointed: after that the Indians also whom Cyrus had
sent to discover, were returned from the enemies, and related how Croesus was
elected the General and Conductor of all their forces: How it was decreed by
all the Confederate KK. that every one should be present with all his
puissance, and bring with him great store of money, to serve partly for to wage
as many as they could levy, and partly to bestow by way of largess upon such
as need required: Moreover, that many Thracians wearing swords by their sides
were already hired: and Egyptians, to the number of an hundred and twenty
thousand were under sail, and those armed with shields reaching down to their
feet, and great massy spears, such as they use even at this day, and long
swords: Also that a power of Cyprians was coming by sea: And as for the
Cilicians, That they were all arrived already: The Phrygians likewise of both
sorts, together with the Lycaonians, Paphlagonians, Cappadocians and
Phoenicians. Furthermore, that with the Babylonian King, the Assyrians,
Io^nians, Aeolians, and well near all the Greeks inhabiting Asia, were
enforced to follow Croesus: And that he had sent unto Lacedaemon also for
aide-souldiers. That the maine army was assembled about the river Pactolus.
That they would march forward to the Rendezvous at Thybarrhe, (where even now
the Barbarians inhabiting the lower Syria that are in subjection to the King,
use to hold their meetings) and how general proclamation was made, that every
man should translate the mercate of all wares and chaffer vendible, thither.
Semblably, when the Captives also delivered almost the same Intelligence (for
Cyrus had given order, that some should be taken prisoners, of whom he might
enquire and learn somewhat: yea and sent out certain Spies, in likeness of
slaves, as if they had bin runnagates from him.) Upon these news I say, which
the army of Cyrus heard, every man, as good reason was, began to muse and be
follicitous: they walk also up and down abroad more silent than they were
wont, neither seemed many of them to be cheereful and merry: but flocked
together in companies: questioning and communing one with another every where,
as touching these occurrents. Cyrus perceiving then, that fear had possessed
his army thorowout: called together the principal Captains and Commanders
of all his forces: yea and so many as whose discouragement might seem to do
hurt, and whose resolute courage do good. He gave his own Sergeants.
ministers about him also to understand, that if any other soldiers bearing
arms were desirous to draw near, and hear what speech he would make, they
should not prohibit or keep them back. And when they were gathered all
together, he spoke unto them in this wise.

CHAP. V. The oration of Cyrus unto his soldiers to put them out of that
fear and astonishment, which they had conceived of the news they heard as
touching the war toward.
MY Friends and Allies, I have called you together, because I saw some of you
(upon the news arrived from the enemies) far like unto men affraied. And I
mervaile much, I assure you, that any of you should be affrighted, for that the
report goes that our enemies are gathered together: especially, seeing that we
our selves be assembled now many more in number, than heretofore, when we gave
them an overthrow: and are besides through Gods favor and grace, far better
appointed at this present, than ever before. A wonder it is, I say, that when
you see all this, ye are not bold and courageous. Oh the will of God, if ye
be smitten now with fear, what would ye have done, in case some had brought
news, that those means which make for us had bin bent and brought against us:
If, I say, ye had heard, First and foremost, that they who beforetime
discomfited us made head again, as carrying in mind still that victory which
once they had achieved: then, that they, who at that time defaited the
velitary fight and skirmish of Archers and Iaveletiers, entered now eftsoons
the field, and brought with them many more, and those equal to themselves.
Again, if word had come, that like as these being in complete armor overcame
the footmen then, so their horsemen now were coming thoroughly appointed
against our men of arms, and abandoning bows [arrowes] and javelins, taking
every man to his strong lance, advanced forward and rode on with full intent
to cope hand to hand. Semblably, that there be chariots coming, which are not
to be so placed, (as heretofore) turned backward as ready to serve for flight:
but as well the horses in the teeme drawing, be bard and armed with
brest-plates, as the Drivers.
chariotiers which stand in within turrets of timber, have all their upper
parts which are seen, defended sure with cuiraces and morrions: also that
trenchant sythes of iron are fitted fast to the axel-trees: to the end that
these also may drive directly and in a moment forcibly assail the ranks of
those who affront them. Besides all this, that they have Dromedaries.
Camels, upon which they may ride forward and give the onset; beasts so
hideous, as that an hundred horse will not abide to see one of them.
Furthermore, that they march on, with turrets, from whence they will be ready
to help their own side, and to annoy you with darting, so as ye shall not be
able to fight on even ground. In case, I say, one should tell you who are
affraied already, that our enemies had all these means; what would ye do
then, being so troubled now as ye are with these flying rumors? That Croesus
is elected General of their Field; a man, so much more cowardly than the
Syrians, as that when they were in battle foiled and put to flight, he seeing
them vanquished whom he ought to have succored as his Associats, ran himself
away and escaped. And besides all this, it is verily bruited: that our very
enemies think not their own forces sufficient to join battle with us, but
hire others, as if they would do better service for them in the field, than
their own selves. The case standing thus, If there be any that think the
enemies condition puissant and the means they have terrible: but contrariwise
our own to be slight and of no validity, such men I say, my friends, are meet
to have their pass and to be sent away unto our enemies. For, being there,
they will stead us better than if they were still with us.

When Cyrus had thus said, Chrysantas that Persian Lord, stood up and spoke
thus. Mervaile not o Cyrus, if some hearing these news which are reported,
have seemed sad and heavy of countenance. For, it was not upon any fear, that
they looked so but even for very grief and indignation: Faring like to those,
who desirous and making full account to go to their dinners, have some work
imposed upon them, which must needs be done before they dine. And no man will
be glad I suppose, to hear of that. For, even so it is with us: Who reckoning
now to be in the way of getting great wealth, after we understood, that there
was a piece of service yet to be performed, looked heavily on the matter, not
for any fear, but desirous rather that the same were achieved already.
Howbeit, considering that we shall fight, not only for Syria, which has
plenty of corn, store of cattle and abundance of fruitful Datetrees: but
also for Lydia, wherein there is affluence of wine, figgs and oil: unto which
the sea flows, whereby more goods are brought than any man has ever seen.
We thinking, I say, of these matters, are no longer discontented, but most
confident and resolute: that we may the sooner enjoy also these Lydian
commodities. These words delivered he: Wherewith all the united Associats were
well pleased, and commended the same. Then Cyrus, I am of this mind my worthy
friends, with all expedition to march on against them: For, first by our
sudden coming, we may prevent and surprise them even in those very places
where they are getting their provision: then, the sooner that we come upon
them, the fewer necessaries about them shall we find in readiness, and the
more wanting. This verily is mine opinion. Yet if there be any among you of
another judgment, thinking we may take some course besides, either safer or
more easy, let him show the same. Now when many there were who accorded, and
said it was necessary, with all celerity to march against the enemies, and not
one replied to the contrary, Cyrus began his oration unto them, to this effect.

CHAP. VII. The Instruction of Cyrus delivered unto his Chieftaines as well
concerning their soldiers diet, as the conduct of an army in their march
through the country. The order of the Pioners, merchants and tradesmen,
artizanes and munitioners.
MY Friends and Confederates, Our hears, our bodies, our armor also which we
are to use, be long since, praised be God, in readiness. And now we ought to
purvey and get together our voiage-victuals and other necessaries both for our
selves and for the beasts we employ in our service, and that for no less time
than 20. days. For, by casting my account I find, that we must be in our march
forward more than 15. In which journey we shall meet with nothing. For, all the
provision is quite consumed, partly by our selves and partly by our enemies, as
much as possibly they could come by. And therefore, gotten there would be
together, meat sufficient, as without which we can neither fight no nor live
at all. As for wine, we must every one have as much as may serve to acquaint
us to the drinking of water. For why? The greater part of the way which we are
to travel is altogether without wine. And say, we should for our journey
provide good store thereof, yet would it not hold out. To the end therefore
that by a sudden default of it, we fall not into some diseases, this order we
are to take. Let us even at the first begin to drink water with our meat:
Which if we now do, we shall find no great alteration. For, whosoever feeds
upon made or barley meal.
thick gruell, he always eats it in manner of Graece, (...).
batter tempered with water: and he that lives upon bread, eats that bread
soked in water. Moreover, there are no boiled meats but the same be dressed
commonly with much water. If then, after our meal and repast only we drink
wine, our minds will rest as well contented. But in process of time, we must
cut off even that wine also after supper, until by use and custom we have
learned to be water-drinkers altogether. For these chaunges that are made by
little and little cause nature to brook and abide every alteration. And verily
this is it that God himself teaches us: Who withdraws us from the chilling
cold of winter, to endure the parching heat of summer: and from the hot summer
to abide the sharp winter. By imitation of whom, we must be enured long before
to that which we ought to attain unto. As for the weight or, your bedding.
of your bed-clothes, (...).
bestow all that upon your victuals. For, (...).
in case ye have of victuals to spare, yet will it not be lost or good for
nothing: and suppose ye want such clothes, fear ye not but for all that ye
shall sleep sweetly. If not, blame me for it. Now for wearing-clothes,
whosoever he be that has store thereof, know he that it helps both sound and
sick. And as touching (...). all ^ates beside bread, also, sauces.
meats and viands, there ought to be provided such as be for the most part,
sharp, tart, biting and saltish. For these, as they provoke appetite, so
withal they last longest: But when we are come to those places which have not
yet been spoiled, and where is some likelihood that we shall get corn,
provided we must be from thenceforth of (...).
handmils to make our bread. For, of all informents that belong to bread
making, that is the lightest. Moreover we ought to have ready about us, all
such things as sick men need. For, those be of boulke and burden the least:
but if there should be such occasion, they would be missed most. Furthermore,
we must be provided of leather thongs. For many things by these are tied and
fastened both to men and horses, which if they be overworne or fretted in
twain, we must needs be at a default, and do nothing the while, unless a man
have such letherings, wanties or surcingles. Again, if there be any one of you
can skill of furbushing.
polishing his Spear or chacing staff or lance.
Iavelin, it were good for him not to forget a skratcher or gresser. It were
well also that he carry with him a for the staff.
fyle. For, he that whetteth his lance head, gives an edge also in some sort
to his own heart and courage. And the man that sharpneth his spear, would
himself be ashamed for to be a coward. Over and besides, meet it is to have
as quarters, etc.
pieces of wood, in the wagons and waines. For, where much doing is, it cannot
otherwise be but many things will decay and be worse for the wearing. There
would be proper tools likewise had, and instruments, needful for all these
purposes: because artificers and handicraftsmen are not in all places to be
gotten. For, even to make that only which is to serve for a day, some few are
not able. We must have besides to every cart or waine a mattocke and a spade:
and to each packehorse, an axe, a bill [or a cutting hook.] For, these
instruments be not only necessary for every man's private use, but profitable
many times in public occasions. Well then, whatsoever is requisite for food
and sustenance, ye that are the leaders of the or porters.
armour-bearers, see that ye enquire of those that be under you. And regard
must be had, that nothing be forgotten which any one wants. For need we shall
have of such. As for all those things, which I command that the draught beasts
should have, ye that are the Masters of the Carriages, with the bag and
baggage see thereto: and look who has not the same, compel them to provide.
Ye that be overseers of the Pioners, for making of the ways even and passable
before the army, have already for that purpose, those that I enrolled, to wit,
out of the darters, archers and slingers, such as I cassed and put out of their
places. And therefore, those of the late darters, ye shall enforce in this
warfare to do service with an or pitching axe.
hewing axe for to cut wood: such as were archers, put them to serve with a or
shoule.
spade, and the slingers with a mattocke. These Pioners then thus furnished,
ye must compel to go before the waines by several troops together, that if
there be cause to make ways and causies, ye may presently go to work: and
that my self, if I need any men's help, may know from whence to fetch them for
my use. I will have also with me copper-smiths, and black-smiths, carpenters
and shoomakers [or leather-cutters] with their tools, such as be of full age
for warfare: to the end there be no want of ought that requires the help of
such artificers in an army. And these verily shall be freed and exempt from
the raunge of armour-bearers, and having a certain place appointed for them
shall according to their skill serve all comers, for their money. Furthermore
if there be any Tradesmen.
merchant disposed to follow the camp, minding to sell any wares and
commodities, let him have allowance of victual, during those 20. days [before
named] but in case he be found selling ought else in that time, he shall
forfeit and lose all he has. But after these days be expired, he may fell
what he will at his pleasure. And look which of all these merchants or
tradesmen, is known to furnish the mercate best with wares of all sorts, he
shall both at my hands and mine Allies also be best rewarded and advanced. Now,
if any such person thinks that he wants money to merchandise and trade with,
let him bring unto me such as know him well, and sureties to be bound and to
undertake for him, that he will go with the army, he may take what we have in
our coffers. Thus do I punctually deliver my mind and profess the same. And
if any man sees ought else, that is requisite and needful to be done, let him
acquaint me therewith. As for you, go your ways and get together your bag and
baggage, whiles I sacrifice for our happy out-fare. And when our devotions
shall be well performed, we will give you the signal. And let every man be
ready with the premises at a place appointed under their own colors. And ye
that are the Leaders, when ye have put your Company in array, shall repair
all to me, that ye may each one take his several place. Which they hearing,
addressed themselves for the journey.

CHAP. VII. How Cyrus marched against his enemies in Lydia. The manner he used
as well in encamping, as in leading his whole Army.
CYRUS then sacrificed: and for that the inwards of the beasts showed good
luck, he did put himself on the way with his army. The first day, he pitched
his tents in the nearest place he could find: to this end, that if any man had
forgotten ought, he might go back for it; or if he found that he wanted any
thing he might provide it. And Cyaxares verily stayed at home in Media, with
the third part of his Medes, because his country should not be disfurnished
of soldiers: but Cyrus went forward, with as swift a march as possibly he
could. In the vaward he placed his horsemen: and before them, he sent out
always certain avantcurriers and spies, into the coasts and quarters lying
forward, such as were meetest to discover. Next after them, he led the
carriages. But when he came into any plain and open ground, he made many ranks
and rows of wagons and carriages. Behind these, followed a great battalion of
footmen, raunged four square, to the end that if any carriage dragged behind,
such Captains thereof as came foremost and espied them, might see to it, that
they were not hindered and stopped in their march. And where ever there was an
over-narrow and straight pass, the armed soldiers received the same baggage
within them, and went on either side thereof. Also if there chanced to be any
let by the way, impeaching the passage, certain soldiers were appointed
beside, to go thither and remedy all. But for the most part in this march,
they kept this order that every company had their own carriage with them.
For, commandment was given unto all the Porters.
carriers, that every one should go close unto his own company, unless some
important accident fell out to the contrary. Moreover every carrier went before,
having the watchword of his own Centinier, such as to all the soldiers of
that company was well known. And therefore they kept their way close and
round together, whiles every one did his best that none of their own fellows
should be left behind. And so doing, they needed not to seek one another, and
therewith were all things hard at hand in more safety, whiles the soldiers
throughout the host, had every thing sooner and readier. Now, the Avantcurriers
and Spies that were gone before, supposing they saw men in the plains getting
forage and wood: perceiving also draught-beasts to draw other things, and
feeding the whiles: and by discovering the coasts more remote, when they spied
as they thought any smoke rising or dust raised on high: by all these signs
understood that the enemies army was somewhere near at hand: Wherefore the
Or, Provost.
Captain of these Spies dispatch presently one of purpose to give intelligence
thereof unto Cyrus. Upon which advertisement, he commanded, that they should
remain still in the same place of espiall, for to signify unto him from time
to time what new occurrent they saw. Moreover he sent out a Cornet of light
horsemen, into those parts before them, with commission to do their best for
to intercept some or other of them about the plains, that he might learn the
truth more certainly. Who did as they were appointed. But Cyrus himself
bestowed the rest of his forces in their several quarters, to provide
whatsoever he thought necessary, before he approached the enemies too near.
And, first of all, he willed them to dine, then to abide in their own
stations; and so to have an eye unto that they were commanded. When they had
taken their dinner, he called together the Captains of the horsemen, footmen,
and chariots, as also the Provosts over the Engines, over the carriages also
with their carts and waines. Mean time whiles they came together, those
foreriders who had skowred the plains, brought with them certain men, whom
they had taken. And when these captives were examined by Cyrus, they confessed,
that they belonged to the enemies camp, and were gone out, some to provide
forage, others for fuel. For, by reason of the great multitude in camp, all
things were very scarce. Cyrus hearing them say so; demanded how far off,
their army was? who answered, 2. parasangs. Then Cyrus enquired further and
said. What! was there any talk of us among them? Yea forsooth, say they, and
that very much: and namely that your host is on foot, and approaches near.
But, tell me further quoth Cyrus, were they glad when they heard so? Nay verily
said they, glad they were not, but exceeding sad. And what are they doing now,
quoth Cyrus? They are a training and setting the soldiers in array, and even
so they were yesterday and two days ago. But who is he quoth Cyrus that thus
embattaileth them? Even Croesus himself answered they, and with him a certain
Grecian, and another Median, one by report who is fled from you and turned to
them. Most mighty Jupiter quoth Cyrus, o that I might catch him, as I desire.
After this he commanded these Captives to be had away, and returned unto those
that were present, as if he had somewhat to say unto them.

CHAP. VIII. How Araspas returned unto Cyrus, and recounted unto him all the
ordinance and preparation of the enemy. How himself prepared to raunge his
men in battle ray.
BY this time was there another come from the Sergeant, or Provost.
Captain of the Espials, saying, that there was seen upon the plains a great
troop of horsemen: and we suppose, quoth he, that they ride out as destrous to
view this army of yours: For, even before this troop, there be other horsemen
to the number of thirty galloping, and verily, they make toward us even and
anon, happily because they would gain this Barbican.
place of Espiall, if possibly they could: and surely we are but ten in all to
make good the said hill. Then Cyrus commanded certain of those horsemen, whom
he had always attending about him, to ride hard under the said Barbican, and
there to rest and keep themselves quiet, so as they might not be seen of the
enemies: But, quoth he, when as our ten men there abandon the place, arise ye
and set upon them that climb up the hill: and to the end that ye be not hurt
or annoyed by those of that great troop: go you forth Hystaspas, quoth he,
taking with you a Regiment of two thousand horsemen, and make a bravado
directly against the troop of our enemies. Howbeit, pursue them not in any
wise so far as into covert and unknown places; but so soon as you have
taken order that your spies may safely remain and keep the ground, retire you
and depart away. Now, if there be any of them shall ride toward you, holding
up their hands in token of peace, receive the men courteously. So Hystaspas
went from him with this charge and armed himself: the other horsemen also his
followers, rode away forthwith as he had commanded. And who should meet them in
the way, on this side the said Barbican, but Araspas with his men? him (I
mean) who being the keeper of that Panthea.
Susian Lady had been sent long before as an epsy? Cyrus no sooner saw the
man, but he Leapt.
sprung out of his chair, went toward him, and lovingly took him by the hand.
The rest, who knew nothing of the matter, wondered hereat, as good cause they
had, and were much amazed, until such time as Cyrus thus said. Here is, my
loving friends, a right worthy Gentleman returned unto us: For now, meet it is
that all the world should know, what good service he has done. This person
here in place, departed from us not attaint of any lewd act, neither for fear
of me: but by me was he sent away of purpose, to learn out the secret designs
of our enemies, and to exhibit thereof a true report unto us. Therefore my
trusty Araspas, look what promise I made unto thee, I well remember, (...)
and with all this here perform the same I will. And meet it is my soldiers
all, that ye every one do honor this man as a doutie Knight: in that for our
good, he has exposed himself to danger, and undergone the aspersion of a
crime imputed unto him. With that, they all embraced Araspas and took him by
the hand. Then said Cyrus, Enough of this. And now, Araspas, quoth he, relate
unto us what the present time and occasion requires we should know, and say
not less than truth one whit as touching our enemies puissance. For, better it
were, that we imagining it to be more, should afterward see it less, than
hearing it less now, sinde it afterward much more. Certes, quoth Araspas, I
have done my best endeavor, to know their strength most certainly. For, present
I was my self in person with others to set them in ray. Why! then quoth Cyrus,
you know not only their number, but their order also. Yes verily, says
Araspas, yea and in what manner they intend to embattaile and fight. Yet show
us first, quoth Cyrus, and that summarily their number. Their battalions all,
quoth Araspas, as well footmen as horsemen be ordered so, as that they bear in
From the front or in fyle.
depth thirty Or beside.
except the Egyptians. And, these are about Five miles stadia.
40 furlongs off. For, very careful I was to know how much ground they took
up. But as touching these Egyptians, says Cyrus, tell me how they be
embattailed, because you said, [beside the Aegyptians] Surely, quoth Araspas,
their Mytiarchs.
Colonels [over ten thousand] ordered them so, as that every Regiment of ten
thousand, bare every way a hundred square. For, this manner of embattailing,
was by their saying after their country fashion. And Croesus I assure you was
very loath to grant them thus to be arraunged. For, he desired all that he
could, to hemme in your army on every side with his battalions. And to what
end, says Cyrus, desired he that? Even because he might, quoth he, environ you
with his exceeding number: But first, Let them see to it, said Cyrus, least
whiles they go about to encompasse others, they be not enclosed themselves.
Well, we have heard of you that which the time required. Now therefore let us
proceed thus accordingly. After ye are departed hence, look well to the
armor both of your horses and also of your selves. For oftentimes, if there be
wanting but a small matter, man, horse, and chariot serve all to no purpose.
And to morrow morning betimes, First of all, whiles I am busy at sacrifice,
both horse and man ought to take their Or breakfast.
dinners: to the end that if any opportunity be offered of an exploit, we be
not wanting in that behalf. Then, lead you Araspas the right wing according to
the charge which now you have. The other Colonels likewise, having the conduct
of ten thousand keep your places still. For when the fight is once a-foot, it
will be no fit time, for any chariot, to change or shift horses. Enjoyne
moreover the Taxiarchs.
Centiniers and File Leaders.
Caporals in the Vantguard, to order their files every one divided in two parts
phalang-wise, (each part fronting one with another in a right line.) Now, (...)
each file contained 24 soldiers. Then spoke one of the Myriarchs.
Colonels abovesaid in this wise. Think you Sir, that we shall be sufficient,
arraunged into so many files and those so shallow, against so square and deep
a Or Phalang.
battalion of our enemies? Why! quoth Cyrus, how think you of this? These
their Or Phalangs.
squadrons standing deeper in file than with their weapons to reach unto their
opposites, do they either hurt their enemies, or help their fellow soldiers?
For mine own part, quoth Cyrus, I could wish that whereas these armed men of
theirs raunged a hundred deep in file, had been in depth ten thousand. For,
by this means we should encounter with fewest. But, as I order my battalion
Heavily armed.
in thickness: it will I trow so come to pass, that by such a number, the
entier body thereof will be strong throughout, and ready withal to maintain a
joint fight in every part. The Iavelotiers verily will I place after the (...)
or depth.
Corseletmen, and next after them the Archers. For who would raunge them in
front, confessing themselves that they cannot endure any close fight at hand?
But if these have the The armed.
Coselettiers before them to confront the enemies, they will hold their ground:
and what with launcing darts and javelins, and what with shooting arrows over
all their heads that stand embattailed before them be able to annoy their
enemies. Now, Or Cuiracers.
whatsoever it is wherewith a man endammageth his adversaries; clear it is
that thereby he relieveth his friends. But hinmost will I set those that be
called (...).
after all. For like as an house without a strong ground-sill and foundation
laid with choice stones, or without those pieces which frame the rouse to it,
is good for naught: Even so Answering I suppose to the Roman T^iatij.
a battalion stands in no stead, either without the foremost or without the
hinmost, if they be not right valiant. See then, quoth he, that ye be thus
arraunged as I give order. Ye Captains of the light Targuetiers, place in
like sort your bands after these. Ye the Leaders of the Archers, set your
companies semblably next unto those Targuetiers: As for you the chief
Commander of the Or Phalang.
Rear, see you keep the Rereward and give a charge unto the other
Rear-commaunders to have an eye to those under them: encouraging those that do
their devoir, and sharply menacing such as slack their service. And if any
turn back upon a traitorous intent, let him dye for it. For it is the part of
those Commanders that stand foremost, by word and deed to embolden them that
follow. And even ye also who have your place (...)
After All, ought to make Cowards to stand in more fear of you than of their
enemies. Thus much for you severally, and what I would have you to do. But you
Abradatas the Master of the Ordnance and Ruler over the Enginiers, order the
matter so, that the beasts in teeme that In the Rear.
draw the turrets, follow as close as may be to the Phalang. You Dauchus
Captain of the wagons that go with the (...).
carriages, next after those turrets conduct all such forces, and let your
Sergeants sharply chastise those that either step forward before due time, or
lagge behind. And you Carduchus Captain of those Or baggage.
Carroches wherein the women are, place them last even just behind the said
carriages, (of baggage). For, if all these follow in the Rear, they shall both
cause an opinion of a great multitude, and also minister unto us good means to
lay an ambush. Yea and withal, our enemies if they would environ us shall be
forced to fetch a larger compass. And the more ground they take up in this
compass, the weaker must they needs be. See then that ye thus do according
to my direction. And now to you Artabazus and you Artagersus. Those Regiments
of a thousand footmen apeece, which either of you command, lead next after
these abovesaid: As for you twain, Pharnuchus and Asiadutas, see that ye
intermingle not your Regiments of a thousand horsemen apeece, whereof ye both
have the charge, within the maine body of the Phalang, but behind the wagons:
take your place well armed by your selves, and then with the rest of the
Leaders and Commanders repair unto us. For, so ought ye to be ready and
appointed, as those who must give the first charge and begin battle.
Semblably you that are the Ruler of those Or Wagons
that serve with the Camel tiders.
Camels, keep your place next after the wagons aforesaid: and whatsoever
Artagersus shall command, that do ye. Ye that be Captains of the
war-chariots, cast lots, and unto whomsoever the lot falls, let him place his
hundred chariots before the Or Dromedaries.
maine battle: of the other two Centuries of chariots, let the one hundred
being raunged directly, and so flanking the right side, follow the maine
battle in a wing, and the other the left side. In this manner embattailed
Cyrus and marshalled them all. Or Phalang.


CHAP. IX. How Panthea enarmed her husband Abradate. And Cyrus di^^^ut himself
in readiness to give battle.
THEN Abradatas the Susian King replied. For my part, quoth he, o Cyrus,
willing I am of mine own accord, to take my place even in the very face of the
enemies battle: unless it seem unto you otherwise expedient. Whereat Cyrus
admiring the man and taking him by the right hand, demanded of the Persians
which were in the other Chariots in this wise. Will ye also, quoth he, admit
all this? But when they answered, that it could not stand with their reputation
to give way thereto: he did put it to the casting of lots: and the lot fell
upon Abradatas, even as himself had undertaken: and placed he was afront the
Egyptians. Thus verily for that time they departed, and having provided all
things, as I before showed, went to supper, and after the watch set betook
themselves to their nights rest.

The next day early in the morning, Cyrus sacrificed: the rest also of the
army, after they had Broke their fasts.
dined and performed their sacred libations: clad themselves with many gay and
goodly coats of arms, with many brest-plates besides and helmets as fair.
They harnessed also their horses with Shaffions and crements.
frontlets and poictrels. The single horses likewise and coursers they armed
with greves for their legs, as also the Steeds that drew Or in teeme.
in their geeres with harnois for their sides: in so much as the whole army
show again with Copper.
brazen armor, and glittered throughout with red and purple Tabards.
liveries. The four poled chariot likewise of Abradatas drawn with eight
Steeds, was very bravely and gallantly set out. But as he was putting on a Or
linen armor, or Lacket.
tabard of linen after his country fashion, Panthea his wife, brought unto him
an helmet of gold: with vambraces likewise and broad bracelets to wear about
the wrests of his hands. Also a side purple cassocke down to his foot, with
the skirts falling in plaits beneath: together with a Or plume, as says
Bingham.
crest upon his armet, of an Hyacinth or Azure dye. All these ornaments had
she wrought for her husband unwitting to him, as having privily gotten the
just measure of his armor. Which when he beheld, he wondered thereat, and said
unto Panthea, How now my wife, have thou cut and mangled thine own Jewels and
ornaments for to make me this fair armor? No verily, quoth Panthea, I have
not yet defaced the most precious and richest jewel of all. For, if you Sir,
appear unto others, as you seem unto me, your self shall be my greatest and
most sovereign jewel. And as she thus said, she fell to enarme him, and how
ever she did what she could, not to be seen for to weep, yet for all that,
the tears trickled down her cheeks. And Abradatas, albeit he was before a
goodly man to see to, yet now after he was thus dight and harnessed with this
armor, he seemed right beautiful, and of a most liberal presence, as being
by nature also correspondent thereto. Then, having taken of his charriottier
the reins into his own hand, he addressed himself presently to mount up
into his chariot. But then, Panthea commanding all those that were present to
void, said thus unto him, My Abradate, If ever there were any woman that
esteemed her husband more than her own life, I suppose you acknowledge me
also to be one of them. And therefore what need I to particularize in every
point? For, I am persuaded that the deeds which I have done already, are of
more credit with you, than the words which I now speak. Howbeit although I be
thus affected, as you know well enough: yet do I solemnly profess, my love
to you-ward and yours also to me: and that I had rather together with you
having borne your self as a valiant Knight be enterred, than live with you
disgraced, and taking disgrace my self. So far forth esteem I both you and
my self worthy of the best respect. Moreover, in my conceit, we are much
beholden unto Cyrus in this behalf, for that he daigned to enterteine me a
captive woman and selected for himself, not using me as a slave with villainy,
nor as a free woman with disparagement of mine honor: but when he had received
me, kept me for you, as if I had been his own brothers wife. Again, when
Araspas my Guardian revolted from him, I assured him, if he would give me leave
to send unto you, that you should come unto him a more faithful friend and a
better, and every way by far than Araspas. Thus spoke she, and Abradatas much
delighted with her speech, softly touching her head and therewith looking up
toward heaven made this prayer. O most mighty Jupiter, grant that I may be
thought an husband meet for Panthea, and a friend worthy of Cyrus, who has so
honorably dealt with us. With these words, he mounted the Chariot at the entry
and door of the seat thereof. When he was thus gotten up, and that the
Vnder-Chariotier had made fast and shut the seat close after him: Panthea
having no other means otherwise to embrace him, kissed yet the very sear. And
so the Chariot went forward: But she closely followed after her husband unseene
of him, until such time as he turning himself and espying her, said, Be of
good cheer my Panthea, Farewell, and now depart. Then, her Eunuchs and
waiting women took and conveied her into her Caroch, and when they had laid
her down, they covered her within the Or Cabin.
closet thereof. But the folk there in place albeit both Abradatas and his
Chariot also made a goodly show, yet could they not behold him until Panthea
was quire gone.

Now when Cyrus had sacrificed with the favorable approbation of the Gods, and
the army was set in array as he commanded; and had appointed Avaunt Curriers
one before another ^e assembled his Captains together, and made a speech unto
them in this wise. Dear friends and Confederates. The Gods show unto us such
signs in our sacrifices, as they did sometime when they gave unto us our first
victory. I will recall therefore into your minds, those points which if ye
remember, ye shall in mine opinion advance more courageously to battle. For,
in martial prowess, exercised ye are much more than your enemies. In the same
ye have been brought up and trained far longer than they, and jointly one
with another, have achieved victory. Whereas, many of your enemies with their
Associates have been foiled and vanquished. And of both sides, as many as have
not yet fought: those of the enemies part, know well enough that they have for
Assistants, such as will betray them: but ye that side with us are sure, that
ye shall hazard the fortune of battle with them that are desirous to help
their Allies. And it stands to good reason, that they who repose mutual
trust one in another, will jointly stick to it, and fight with one accord: but
they that distrust, must needs devise how every one may soonest get away and
escape. Advance we therefore my friends, against our enemies, with strong
armed Chariots, against those that are not armed: with horsemen likewise in
complete armor and horses bard, against those that be naked; ready to cope
with them hand to hand. As for you that are footmen, ye shall deal with no
other than ye have heretofore. The Egyptians be harnoised after the same
sort, and in like manner set in array. For greater Targuets.
shields they have, than that they can either do or see ought, and being
raunged by hundreds no doubt they will hinder one another in the medley, except
some very few: Now if they trust by preassing hard upon us, to make us give
back and lose ground: First, they must beare-off the brunt of the horses
themselves, then, of the iron harnois wherewith the horses are strengthened.
And say that any of them shall hold out and abide by it, how can they possibly
at once maintain fight against the horsemen, and the maine battalion [of
footmen] and the turrets beside? For, from those turrets, our men will be
always ready to succor us, and annoy the enemies so, as being by us slain,
they will rather despair than fight it out. Now, if ye think that ye want
ought, let me know: for with the leave of God ye shall lack nothing. Again,
if any man be disposed to say ought, let him speak his mind. If not, draw
near to the sacrifices, and when ye have prayed unto those Gods, to whom we
have sacrificed, repair unto your companies: See also that every one of you
put them in mind who are under your charge, concerning those points that I
have admonished you of. And let each one show himself unto those that are in
his conduct, so undaunted and fearelesse, in gesture, countenance and speech,
as he may seem worthy of command and government.

THE SEVENTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. How Cyrus entered the field with his puissance: Approached King Croesus
to give him battle. The manner that both armies used, to fight with their
best advantage.
THESE Captains then, having made their oraisons to the Gods, departed to
their Ensigns. But unto Cyrus and the Gentlemen of his train, whiles they
were yet about offering sacrifice, the servitours brought both meat and drink.
And Cyrus even as he stood, after consecration of the first essay, took his
dinner, and ever gave part to him that most wanted: who also when he had
performed the complements of libations and prayed withal, drank himself: and
so did all the rest that were about him. Which done, having besought Jupiter
the protector of his native country, to vouchsafe him his guidance and
helper, he mounted on horseback, and commanded all the rest to do the same.
Now were they all that attended upon Cyrus, armed as he was, to wit, in purple
tabards, corslets and head-pieces of or copper.
brass, with white crests and with swords: every man also with a javelin of
corneil wood. Their horses were bard, with frontlets, poictrels and side pieces
of brass. Of the same matter likewise were the greives that every man wore.
This only was the difference of Cyrus his armor from the rest: that whereas
their harneis was vernished over and laid with a golden color, his glittered
like a Crystal mirour. When he was once mounted, and sat still a while,
looking to his way that he was to go, it (...)
thundered on his right hand [in token of good] whereupon he said, Thee will we
follow most mighty Jupiter. And so he did set forward: having on his right side
Chrysantas General of the horse with his men of arms, and Arasambas Colonel
of the footmen on his left. He gave commandment also, that they should cast
an eye to the maine Standard, to keep even pace and to follow in order. Now,
this Ensign Royal that he had, was a golden Spred-Eagle displaied upon a long
spear. And at this very day the King of Persia retains the same standard.
But before they came within sight of the enemies, he caused the Army by
resting thrice, to refresh themselves. And by that time that they had marched
outright twenty stadia, they began to descrie their enemies power to approach
and come forward against them. Now when they were all evidently seen one of
another, and the enemies determined on both sides to environ the battalion [of
footmen] afront them, they stood still with their own maine battalion: (For,
otherwise there can be no encompassing round) and then wheeled about therewith
for to enclose the enemies in the mids: to the end, that when they had
embattailed themselves on both sides after the form of the Greek letter *
Gamma, r
they might every way fight all at once. Which albeit Cyrus saw well enough,
yet stayed he never the more for it, but led still as before, and perceiving
how far off the enemies stretched out on both sides the wings and points of
their battle: Mark you not Chrysantas, quoth he, where the enemies begin to
fetch a winding compass? Yes, very well, says Chrysantas, and I mervaile much
thereat: For, me thinks they distract the points very far from their own
maine battle: yea and from ours too, quoth Cyrus, I assure you. And why so?
said Chrysantas: because quoth he, lest if their wings were near unto us, and
their own maine battle far remooved, we might charge upon them. But how
can they then afterward help one another, said Chrysantas, when they be so
far asunder? It is evident quoth Cyrus, that their purpose is, when their
wings have proceeded so far as to flank us and to stand against the sides of
our host: then to turn short again as it were into squadrons, and so at once
on every side to set upon us. But what think you, says Chrysantas, is this
their policy good or no? Good, quoth Cyrus, in regard of that which they see:
but in respect of that which they see not, they hurt themselves more, then if
they should assail us afront, point to point. But you Arsamas, quoth Cyrus go
softly before the Infantery like as you see me to do. And you Chrysantas,
semblably as he does follow close with your Cavallery. As for me, thither will
I go where I think it best to begin the battle: yet withal, as I pass by,
view I will and consider how every thing stands with us. After I am thither
come, and when we are at the very point to encounter, I will begin to sing the
* P^an, This Hymn to Apollo was sung at the first joining of battaile^ To
incite the soldiers, and for averting all disaster: likewise in the end, after
victory, and then it was by way of Triumph* (...) Macrobius.
and then see that ye all second me. But when we buckle and join fight with
our enemies, ye shall soon perceive; For, (there will be I suppose no small
shouts and escries.) And then shall Abradatas with the chariots charge upon his
opposites. For, he shall have word and direction so to do. Then must ye
follow on as near and close as you possibly can to the Chariots. For, by this
means, shall we fall upon our enemies when they are most in disorder. I will
my self also be present in person, and by Gods help with all speed pursue
them. When he had thus said and withal pronounced this or Signal.
Motto, Jupiter Savior and or Leader.
Guide, he advanced forward. And as he rode on, between the Chariots and the
Corselettiers: ever as he spied any orderly in their Companies, he would one
while say thus unto them. Oh how it does me good my soldiers to see your
faces. Another while, to others, Go to Sirs, Think that this present fight,
is not only for this days victory, but in regard of that also, which
heretofore ye have achieved; yea and for all felicity whatsoever. As he came
to some, he would use these words. From this time forward we shall never have
cause to blame the Gods, for they have put into our hands, the means to
attain to many and those goodly chievances. But yet we must my good
soldiers play the parts of valiant men. To others again, such a speech as
this he would use. What more gaudy feast could we possibly bid one another
unto, than to this? For, now the opportunity we have, bearing our selves
manfully, to stead and benefit passing well one another many ways. To another
Company thus would he speak: Ye know I suppose my soldiers, that these
rewards are now proposed: to wit, unto winners. To chase, to wound, to kill, to
be possessed of goods, to gain renown and fame, to enjoy freedom, to
command and to rule. But unto Cowards, what else but the contrary? Whosoever
therefore loves himself, let him enter battle and fight as I do. For, with
my good will no example shall I give of cowardice, nor admit of any lewd and
dishonorable act. Moreover, as he came to some of those who had served with him
in the former battle, he said: As for you my douty soldiers what need I to
speak unto you? For, ye wot well enough what a fair day valiant men have,
and how badly cowards speed. Then as he went from them and came to Abradatas,
he stayed. And Abradatas, having given the reins unto the Manhood.
under chariotier, dismounted, and made toward him: others also came running
unto him whose places were near at hand, as well footmen as those who had the
conduct of chariots. And when they were come, Cyrus spoke in this wise. God
has according to your request, o Abradatas, judged both you and yours, worthy
to lead in the vaward before our Associats. Remember therefore, that when you
are to fight, they be the Persians, who shall both behold and also second you,
neither will they suffer you to be forlorn and succourlesse. Then Abradatas,
For mine own self, Cyrus. I think all well enough with us. But for the sides
of the battle, I am perplexed and troubled. For, I see that the enemies
points be stretched out in length and those very firm, by reason, as well of
their chariots as all other forces: Whereas we have opposed against those
nothing but chatiots. And therefore, but that the charge of this place, is by
lot fallen unto me, I would have been abashed to be here: in such safety, me
thinks I am. Go to quoth Cyrus, If you be well for your own part, take you no
thought for them. For I trust, with the help of God to order the matter so,
that I shall show unto you these sides of the enemies naked. And here I beseech
you not to give the onset upon the enemies, before you see even those, whom you
fear now so much, put to flight. (These brave words verily gave Cyrus forth at
the point of battle, being otherwise none of these great and vanting
boasters.) But when you see these quoth Cyrus once to fly, then think me to
be hard at hand, and then, lustily charge you. For then shall you find the
enemies to be stark cowards, and your friends right hardy soldiers. And
verily, whiles you have leisure, o Abradatas, ride every way all about your
chariots, encourage and exhort your men to give the onset: partly by your
lightsome countenance embolden them, and partly by hopes relieve them. And that
ye may seem the best and most valorous of all those that be mounted in
Chariots, kindle some emulation among them. For, know assuredly, that if this
be done, they will hereafter say, that nothing is more gainefull than (...)
Virtue. So Abradatas gat up again into his Chariot and did accordingly. But
Cyrus passed on, and being come to the left wing were Hystaspas was with half
of the Persian Cavallery, called unto him by name and said. You see now
Hystaspas, a piece of service, wherein there is need of your celerity and
expedition: For, if now we can get the start of our enemies, and fall first to
the killing of them, there shall one of us die. Hystaspes smiling hereat: Let
me alone quoth he with the enemies afront. And for those on the side, give you
the charge to others that they be not idle. Why! quoth Cyrus, I my self will
take them in hand. But, Hystaspes, remember you this: that unto whomsoever of
us God shall give the upper hand, in case there remain still any danger of
hostility, we always set upon that part that makes head and maintains
fight. Having thus said he went forward, and being come as far as to the
side and to the Captain of the chariots which were there, he said unto him:
Come I am to succor you: But when you perceive once that we charge the enemies
at the Points.
ends, then do ye also your devoir to break through the mids of them. For, in
more safety shall ye be when ye are At the sides.
without, than enclosed within. Passing on still until he was behind the
wagons, he commanded Artagerses and Pharmathus to stay there with a thousand
footmen and as many horsemen. And so soon as ye understand, says he, that I
fall upon them that are in the right wing, take ye also them in hand, that be
opposite unto you. For, ye shall fight against the point in that place, where
the maine battalion is become weaker: And keep ye embattailed as ye are, in
a thick squadron, that ye may be the stronger. And verily the enemies
horsemen (as ye see) are raunged hinmost: against whom in any wise oppose the
raunged troop of the Camels. For know this assuredly, that before ye fight, ye
shall see your enemies to become ridiculous and to make you good sport. After
these directions give, Cyrus crossed over to the right side.

CHAP. II. The great battle and slaughter of the Lydians: where King Croesus
and his forces were discomfited. The Egyptians yield unto Cyrus.
CRoesus supposing that the Regiment under his conduct drew very near already
unto the enemies, *** and that the wings were stretched out along, did set up a
signal unto the said wings, to proceed no higher, but in that very place to
turn short. Now when they all made a stand, and beheld the host of Cyrus
embattailed, he gave the Sign unto them for to advance against the enemies. By
this means three squadrons charged upon Cyrus his army: one full afront: and
of the other tw^^^e, one on the right hand, the other on the left. In so much
as great fear seized upon the army of Cyrus. For like unto a little brick
couched within a greater, the battalion of Cyrus was environed on every side
with the enemies: what with horsemen, armed footmen, light targuatiers: and
what with chariots, all but behind. Howbeit after that Cyrus had given
direction, they all turned a-brest upon the enemy. And verily, there was on
all parts a deep silence, for fear of the future event. But when Cyrus now
saw his time, he began to sing the Paean, and the whole Army chaunted and
answered him. Then with a loud and cheerful note they sounded Alala, to Mars;
and with that, Cyrus showed himself, and presently with his men of arms
flanking the enemies, with all speed joined battle. The footmen also in good
array, soon followed after, and charged them on every side, so, as that they
had the greater vantage of them by far. For, with their maine battalion, they
gave a charge upon the wing, whereby it came to pass that the enemies were
mightily discomfited and quickly put to flight. When Artagerses perceived that
Cyrus was in Action and entered into the medley, himself also came in fiercely
with his Or, Dromedaries.
Camels on the left side, according as Cyrus had commanded. Their Horses could
not abide these Camels a great way off, but as their nature is, being madded,
some run away, others flung out of their ranks, and some again rushed one
upon another. For, thus fare horses, when once they epsy Camels. And
Artagerses with his own men in good array and himself well appointed preassed
hard upon them thus disranked: and withal put forth his Chariots at once both
on the right side and also on the left. Whereupon many of them, to avoid the
Chariots were killed by those who followed at the wing: and as many there were,
who flying from them, were intercepted and caught up by the Chariots. Abradatas
also, for his part slacked no time, but crying alowd, Follow me friends, follow
me, spared no horseflesh, but by pricking his Steeds drew blood of them good
store. And with him the rest of the Chariotiers made a violent impression upon
them. Then immediately the enemies Chariots fled from them, some taking their
riders with them, others leaving them behind. But Abradatas passed directly
through them, and violently assailed the Phalang of the Egyptians: and
together with him, they also who stood embatteled next, did set upon them. And,
as many ways else it is clear, that there is no battle more strongly
arraunged, than that which consists of friends assembled to fight together:
so, at this time, that company of his about him, showed no less. For, they
were his familiar friends and companions at his table that stuck close to him
and jointly charged the enemy. The rest of the Chariotiers, when they saw how
the Egyptians with a strong troop stiffely abid the shocke, withdrew
themselves toward the Chariots as they fled, and followed after them. But
Abradatas his company, where they had once broken in, because the Egyptians
could not give back, by reason of those their fellows who stood thick about
them on every side, look how many they encountered directly in their way, with
violence of horses they slew and overthrew, and as they fell, trampled and
crushed in pieces themselves, their armor, their horses and wheels:
whatsoever the iron Or, hooks.
sythes of the chariots took hold of, they violently cut in twain, as well
harnois and weapons as men. In this tumultuous medley that cannot be expressed
in word, it fortuned that Abradatas, for that his chariot wheels were flowne
off, by reason of so many confused heaps of all sorts, fell out of it with
others besides that accompanied him in this exploit, who having borne
themselves with him in fight right manfully, were there slain and left dead in
the place. The Persians following hard after, rushing thither where Abradatas
and his company had made the overture, disranked the enemies and killed them
outright. But the Egyptians where they stood still, in good order, not
disarrayed (and these were many in number) advanced directly forward all
a-brest against the Persians, where there was a hot and fierce conflict
pell-mell, with lances, chasing staves and swords. And, to say a truth, the
Egyptians had the ods as well in number as in weapon. For, they bare stiff
and long Lances (which even at this day they use) shields also which convered
their bodies much more than the Curaces.
breast plates and bucklers of the Persians, and helped them somewhat else to
punch and shoove from them, fitted as they were to their shoulders. And
therefore locking their targuets together, they went on and thrust from them.
But the Persians were not able to sustain their force, considering they
carried their light bucklers of wicker at arms end: but softly retired (...).
foot by foot, giving and taking blows, until such time as they gate close
under their or engines.
fabrics aforesaid. When they were thither come, the Egyptians began to have
the worse, and to be wounded afresh from the Turrets. They then who stood
behind in the rere, would suffer neither Archers nor Darters to fly, but
lifting up and bending their swords at them, forced them both to shoot arrows
and also to fling darts. Hereupon grew a great carnage of men, and a mighty
noise and clattering, as well of armours as of or, missive.
casting weapons of all sorts, together with a wonderful cry: whiles some
called to their fellows, others encouraged them to fight, and a third sort
cried unto the Gods for their help. Meane-while, Cyrus, who had pursued in
chase those that stood against him, came: and seeing the Persians put back and
lose ground, he grieved at it: perceiving also that by no other means he could
sooner stay the enemies from preassing still forward, than by wheeling about
and riding at their very tail, he commanded his men to follow him, and so
rode hard upon their rereward. Thus they assail and wound them behind, yea and
kill many of them looking another way. Which when the Egyptians perceived,
they cried, That the enemies were hard at their backs, and withal, amid their
wounds, were feign to turn head upon them and make resistance. Then fought
horsemen and footmen one with another. And there it fortuned, that one being
fallen under Cyrus his horse, as he lay trampled under foot, with his sword
stabbed the horse in the belly: whereupon the beast, winsing and flinging out
with his heels for pain of the wound, never rested until he had cast and
overthrown Cyrus. But here a man might have seen, what a worthy matter it is
for a Prince to be loved of his subjects. For, presently they all did set up an
outcry, and with exceeding violence, fought together right manfully. Here was
thrusting to and fro: here were blows given and taken reciprocally. But one at
length of Cyrus his guard, alighting from his own horse, mounted him
thereupon. Now when Cyrus was gotten up, he might by that time see the
Egyptians beaten down on every side. For, both Hystaspas was come already
with the Persian Cavallery, and Chrysantas also. Howbeit he would not suffer
them any longer to run upon the Egyptians battalion: but commanded, from
without, to discharge arrows and darts at them. Now, after he had ridden all
about, until he was come unto the fabrics, he thought good to get up into one
of the turrets, to espy whether any other company of the enemies stood to it
and fought in any place. When he was once aloft, he saw the whole field and
plain before him full of horses, men and chariots: some flying, others
chacing: some winners, others losers: to wit, the enemies running away, and his
own men having the upper hand. And verily, of those that were discomfited, he
could see none any more but only the Egyptians. Who being driven to a
straight, cast themselves round into a ring, so as their armor was only
seen, and they set close covered under their shields. And now verily, naught
did they else, but abide many and grievous extremities. Cyrus then, wondering at
them and pitying their distress, to see so hardy and valiant men to die,
caused all those to retire, that charged them on every side, not permitting one
of them to fight any longer. He sent withal an Herault at Arms unto them,
demanding whether they would all of them perish, for their sakes who had
betrayed them, or rather save their own lives, with the reputation of brave
and valourous soldiers? Unto whom they answered, And how can we be saved, and
yet reputed valiant soldiers? Then Cyrus said again: For that ye are the men
alone, whom we see to abide by it and willing to fight it out. But, from
henceforth, replied the Egyptians: By what good and notable Action of ours may
we possibly be saved? In case, quoth he, ye deliver up your arms into our
hands, and join with them in amity, who when it lies in their power to
destroy you, choose rather to save your lives. Which when the Egyptians heard,
they asked this question: Say, we enter into league and friendship with you, In
what manner would you carry your self to usward? Then, answered Cyrus: I will
do well by you, and look for the like at your hands, as of true liege men.
And what good turn is that said they, which you will deigne us? Whereto Cyrus
made this answer. I will give you better pay, during the war, than at this
time ye receive. But if there be a peace concluded; as many of you, as list to
tarry with me, I will endow with lands to occupy, and Cities to inhabit. I
will bestow upon them wives and household servants. Which when the Egyptians
heard, they entreated him to except this only in the Capitulation, that they
might not be compelled to bear arms against Croesus. For, him alone said
they, we acquit of all fault. As for all other Articles they agreed unto: and
therewith plighted their faith and troth interchangeably. [And even at this
very day, the posterity of those Egyptians, who then stayed with him,
continue firm and loyal unto the Of Persia.
King, and yield allegiance to him.] Unto whom Cyrus gave Cities: both those
in the higher country, which in these days be called, the Egyptians Cities:
and also Larissa and Cyllene, near to Cumes by the Seaside: which be yet held
peaceably in possession by their issue and offspring. When Cyrus had achieved
these exploits, he withdrew his forces even when it was dark, and encamped in
the Thyribarians country.

CHAP. III. How Cyrus following the train of his victory forced the City
Sardes, and took King Croesus prisoner. The discourse that he held with him as
touching the Oracle of Apollo. And how he did set him at liberty, and saved
the said City from saccage.
IN this battle, the Egyptians alone of all the enemies bare themselves
courageously and won renown: and of those on Cyrus side the Persian horsemen
seemed to perform the bravest service. In so much, as that manner of armor,
which Cyrus caused them to be made for the men of Arms, continues still in
credit and price to this very day: Also those fythed Chariots were in high
esteem: so that even in this age, the King who reigns in those parts,
reteines the use always of that warlike kind of Chariots. The Camels only
affrighted the horses and did no other hurt. For, as they that rode upon them,
slew none of the horsemen, so were not they killed by the horsemen: because
there was not an horse that came near unto them. And even that, was thought
then to do good. Howbeit, there is no valiant man of any worth and quality,
willing either to keep a Camel for his saddle, or to practice fight and
service from their backs. Thus therefore being come again to their wonted
manner and fashion, they are employed only as beasts for carriage. As for
Cyrus his soldiers, after they had supped and appointed their Sentinels,
betook themselves, as meet it was, to their nights rest.

But Croesus upon this overthrow immediately fled with his army to Sardes: the
other nations departed and took the way homeward, every man reaching so far
as possibly he could by night. The morrow morning when day appeared, Cyrus led
his power forthwith directly to Sardes: And no sooner was he come to the walls
of the City, but he planted his Ordnance, and bent his Engines of Artillery,
intending to give an Assault thereto, and prepared ladders to skale. Whiles he
was busied hereabout, he caused the Chaldaees and Persians the night following
to get up unto those munitions and bulwarks of the Sardians which seemed most
steep. Now, he that guided them was a Persian, one who had been a servant to
a garrison soldier within the Castle of the City: A man, that had learned both
the descent down to the river, and the ascent also into the Castle. But when
it was once known that the said high or Castle.
fortress was surprised, the Lydians all abandoned the walls, and fled every
man whither he could. Cyrus by the break of day entered the City, and gave
commandment that no man should break his ray or quit his place. But Croesus
being shut close within his royal Palace, cried out unto Cyrus: Howbeit Cyrus
leaving a strong guard about him, went in person to the Castle that was newly
won. Where, seeing how the Persians kept the Piece (as requisite it was) and
the Chaldaeans armor no where to be seen (for, run down they were to
rifle and ransake houses) presently he called their Captains together, and
commanded them with all speed to avoid out of the Army; For, I cannot quoth
he, endure to see them that break order and forsake their ranks, to enrich
themselves with pillage, above others. And know ye this assuredly, quoth he,
that I had determined with my self to make you that serve with me, such as all
the Chaldaees might report to be happy. But now, mervaile not at all, if some
one stronger than your selves, set upon you as ye depart from hence. Which the
Chaldaees hearing, were so stricken with fear, that they besought him to lay
down his anger, saying, they would restore all the money and goods which they
had taken. To whom Cyrus made answer, that himself had no need thereof. But if
ye would have me says he to cease my displeasure and indignation, Bestow all
that ye have gotten upon them that kept the Castle: For, if the rest of the
soldiers shall perceive, that they who forsake not their ranks and stations,
gain greater commodities than others, all will go well on my side. And even
so did the Chaldaeans as Cyrus commanded. And as many as had behaved
themselves obediently, received much money and goods of all kinds. Now when
Cyrus had pitched tents for his own soldiers in that place of the City
wherein he thought most commodious for them to abide in arms, he gave
commandment, that to supper they should go. Thus having set all things in
order, he commanded that Croesus should be brought unto him. No sooner saw he
Cyrus, but he said, All hail, my Lord and Master. For, this is the name that
Fortune has granted both you to use from henceforth, and me also to call you
by. And you likewise quoth Cyrus, All hail o Croesus, since we both of us are
mortal men. But, would you, my Croesus, quoth he, give me any Counsel? I
would to God, says he, o Cyrus, I could devise some good thing for you. For,
I might think, that the same would be gainefull and commodious modious to my
self. Then, quoth Cyrus, listen O Croesus what I shall say. Whereas I see my
soldiers spent, by taking exceeding pains, and plunged into many dangers,
think now that they hold in possession the richest City in all Asia next to
Babylon, I judge them worthy to receive some benefit for their service. For,
this I know, that unless they reap some fruit of their travailes, I shall not
have them long obedient unto me. Howbeit, my meaning is not to give them the
spoil of this City. For I suppose, that not only the City would thereby be
utterly destroyed, but I wot well also, that in the rifling thereof, the worst
will speed best. Which when Croesus heard: Give me leave I pray you, quoth he,
to say unto some of the Lydians, whom I will make choice of, that I have
obtained at your hands thus much, That there shall be no pillage at all, and
that you will not suffer their wives and children to be quite undone: In regard
of which grace and favor, That I have promised unto you in the name of the
Lydians, that they shall willingly and assuredly give unto you as a ransom
whatsoever is fair and of best price in all Sardes. For, if they shall hear
thus much, I am assured they will come with what beautiful thing or precious
jewel either man or woman has here. And likewise, by another year, the City
will be replenished with many goodly things for you. Whereas, if you fall to
sack and spoil it, you shall have your very arts and sciences, which are the
fountains, they say, of all good things, to perish utterly. Moreover, seeing
and knowing all this, you may come and consult further hereafter of saccage at
your pleasure. But first of all, quoth he, send you for mine own treasure: and
let your officers require the same at the hands of mine, the keepers thereof.
Cyrus approoved all that Croesus had said, and gave consent to do accordingly.
But tell me first my Croesus, quoth he, and that to the full, what was the end
of those points which were delivered unto you from the Delphicke Oracle? For,
it is reported, that you have highly honored Apollo, and done all in obedience
to him. Helas, I would it had prooved so, quoth Croesus. But the truth is, My
deportment to Apollo has been such, as to do all from the very first clean
contrary unto him. How came that about, quoth Cyrus? inform me I pray you. For
these be wonders, and paradoxes that you tell me. First and foremost, says
Croesus, setting behind me all care, to enquire of that God, those things that
were necessary for me, I would needs make proof, forsooth, whether he could
answer truth or no? And well known it is, says he, I will not say, that God,
but even very men who are good and honest, cannot of all things abide to be
discredited: and if they perceive themselves once that they are not believed,
they love not those that distrust the^. But afterward, knowing that I had
committed a gross absurdity, and was far from Delphi, I send unto him about
children. But he, at the first time gave me not so much as an answer. Yet
afterward, when by presenting unto him many gifts of gold and silver both, and
by killing very many beasts in sacrifice, I had at length pacified him, as I
thought; to this my demand, how I might do for children? he answered me,
that children I should have. And verily, a father I was of children (for in
this also I assure you he lied not unto me.) But when they were borne, I had no
joy nor comfort of them. For, the one of them was all his life time dumb and
never spoke word: the other being grown to excellent proof, dyed in the very
flower and best time of his age. Depressed thus with these calamities as
touching mine issue, I send eftsoons to know of the God, by what means I
might lead the rest of my life in greatest felicity? and this answer he
returned to me.

(...) KNOW THY SELF CROESVS, AND THOU SHALL SVRELY BE HAPPY.

OR THVS, CROESE, KNOW THY SELF, AND THOU ART HE THAT TO THY LAST SHALL HAPPY
BE.

Upon the hearing of this Oracle, I rejoiced: For, I thought that the God by
enjoining to me a most easy matter, gave me happiness. For, I supposed, that as
other men might partly know some, and in part not: so every one knew himself
well enough. And verily all the time following, so long as I lived quietly in
peace, no cause had I after my son his death, to complain of fortune. But
being once persuaded by the Assyrian King to undertake an expedition, and to
war against you: I entered into a world of dangers. Howbeit, escape I did
safe for that time, without sustaining any hurt. So, that herein I blame not
the God. For, so soon as I perceived my self unable to hold out with you in
fight, by the help of God, both I and also my company gat away in safety. But
now eftsoons, waxing more proud by reason both of my present wealth, and their
persuasions also who requested me to be their General: allured also by the
rich gifts which they bestowed upon me: solicited again by men who by way of
flattery bare me in hand, that if I would take upon me this sovereign
government, all the world would be ruled by me: Lord I should be of all, and
the greatest Potentate upon earth: By these and such like words I say, being
puffed up; so soon as all the Kings and Princes round about me had elected me
for their General, I took upon me to conduct this royal Army: as if I had
been the only man sufficient for that supreme greatness. But in truth,
herein I knew not my self: For that I thought I was able to match you in the
field: who first descended from the Gods, and then, reckoning Kings for your
progenitors, have even from your childhood practiced virtue and chivalrie.
Whereas, the first of my ancestors that ware a diadem, I hear say, became at
once, a King and a Freeman. By good right therefore punished I am for mine
ignorance in that behalf. But now at last, good Cyrus, quoth he, I know my
self: and think you Sir, that Apollo spoke true when he said, That if I knew
my self, I should be happy? For, this question verily, I put unto you of
purpose, because you seem able to give the nearest conjecture thereof by this
present occasion, seeing in your hand it is to effect the thing. Then said
Cyrus, Impart unto me your counsel concerning this matter. For, considering
your former felicity, I pity your present condition, and here withal, I
permit you to enjoy your wife whom you have, your daughters also (for, I hear
say you have some) together with your friends, your servitours, and the table,
such as hitherto ye have lived at. As for battles and wars, I Or, free you
from.
disable you: If it be so, quoth Croesus, then, for the love of God, deliberate
no further what answer to give unto me as touching my happiness. For now, I
protest unto you: If you do thus as you say, it will come to pass, that the
same life which others have reputed most blessed, and to whom my self have
accorded, I shall now both have and hold. Then replied Cyrus, And what person
enjoys this happy life? Even mine own wife, quoth he, O Cyrus. For, of all
good things, of all delicacies and delightsome pleasures she has been
partaker with me: but of the cares about attaining thereto, of wars also and
battle she never had part with me. And after the very same manner, you also
seem to prepare me, as I did her, whom of all mortal wights I loved most
entirely. And thereby, bound I am of duty to offer yet more gifts and
oblations unto Apollo, in token of thankfulness. These words of his, when
Cyrus heard, he much admired the quietness of his mind: yea and from that
time forward, whither so ever he went, Croesus he had continually with him:
either for that he thought to reap some good by him, or because he supposed,
it would be best for his own safety and security. And so for that time they
went to their nights rest.

The morrow after, Cyrus calling to him his friends and the Captains of his
host: some of the^ he appointed to receive the treasures of Croesus: to others
he gave in charge, that what money soever Croesus delivered into their hands,
first they should select out of it for the Gods, such a portion as the Magi.
Priests thought good to be taken, the residue thereof to lay up in coffers,
and so to bestow in waines: and then, casting lots for the said waines, carry
it in to what place so ever they went: that as opportunity served, every man
might take thereof proportionably to his desert. And thus did they accordingly.

CHAP. IIII. The death of Abradatas. Of fair Panthea and her Eunuchs. Cyrus
caused a goodly Monument to be erected for their perpetual memory.
THe next morrow, Cyrus having called unto him certain of his sergeants and
officers about him. Tell me quoth he, whether any of you has seen Abradatas?
For I mervaile much, that I cannot have a sight of him now, who heretofore was
wont to frequent our presence. Then answered one of the said officers. My Lord,
he is not living: but slain he was in the field, what time as in his chariot
he valiantly brake in among the Egyptians. All the rest of his company save
only certain of his familiar friends, avoided, (by report,) the danger and
forsook him, when they once saw the strong troop of the Egyptians. And now
quoth he, the speech goes, that his wife has taken up his dead corpse,
bestowed it in the very or, Wagon.
Carroch wherein she was wont to ride, and brought it somewhither hereabout,
to the river Pactolus. They say also, that his Eunuchs and servants are a
digging for him now dead, a grave upon a certain little hill: and the woman
her self fitteth on the ground; who having dressed and adorned her husband
with such things, as she had, holds his head resting upon her knees. When
Cyrus heard this, he smote his thighs: and forthwith mounting on horseback,
and taking with him a thousand men of arms rode to see this woeful spectacle.
Likewise he commanded Gadatas and Gobryas, to take with them, what ornaments
they could get, befitting so friendly and valiant a man thus deceased, and to
seek him out. Furthermore, if there were any one that had either any Herds,
Kine, Oxen, or Horses in his train, him he charged to bring them along with
him: yea and many sheep besides, to drive to the place wherever he should
hear that himself was: to the end that the same might be killed and
sacrificed in the honor of Abradatas his Funeral. Now when Cyrus was come,
and saw the woman sitting upon the ground, and the dead corpse there lying, he
wept for very ruth of this hard fortune, and said withal, O valiant and
faithful heart: Alas the while: and have thou left us and gone thy ways? with
that he took him by the right hand: and lo, the dead man's or, arm.
hand followed him: For, cut off it had been by the Egyptians, and dissevered
from the body with an arming sword: which when he saw, he grieved so much the
more. The Lady also, setting up a pitious cry, and taking the hand from Cyrus
kissed it, and fitted it again as well as she could in the right place: saying
also, The rest of his body, O Cyrus, is in the like case. But, what should you
see and view the same? And all this I know, quoth she, has he suffered for my
sake especially, and perhaps nothing less for yours. For, I foolish and silly
woman that I was, used many words to encourage him, so to carry himself as
might beseem your friend and one worthy of men's commendation. And as for him,
I know very well, he never considered what he did, but how he might by any
brave exploits and worthy service gratify you. Therefore, he verily for his
part has had a noble and renowned death: whereas I, who exhorted him thereto,
sit here alive. When Cyrus had continued a good while silent and weeping still,
at length he spoke and said. This Knight, Madame, has made an excellent end.
For he died with victory. But here, you shall take of me these things,
wherewith to adorn his body (for both Gobryas and Gadatas also were in place,
and had brought with them good store of funeral ornaments) and for the time to
come, know this, that of other things to do him honor, there shall be no
want. Nay, there be many of us, that proportionally to our estare and degree,
will in memorial of him erect a monument: yea and in his honor, killed there
shall be whatsoever is convenient for so noble a personage. Neither, shall your
self be forlorn and forsaken: but in regard of your chastity and all manner
of virtue besides, as I will grace you otherwise, so I will commend you upon
trust, to some one who shall bring you whithersoever you would. Do but you say
only unto whom you desire to be brought. Then Panthea, set your heart at rest
quoth she o Cyrus: For, conceal I will not from you, to whom I have a mind to
go. When Cyrus had thus communed with her, he departed: pitying the woman, who
had lost such a husband, and the man likewise who had left such a wife, and
should never see her more. Then she having commanded her Eunuchs to void,
until such time quoth she, as I have bewailed him my fill and as I would my
self: willed her nurse to abide still with her: whom she straightly charged,
that after her self was dead, she should wind both her husband and her, in one
and the same shrowding sheet. The nurse besought her most instantly, not to
commit such a deed. Howbeit, when she could not prevail, but saw her angry and
much displeased with her, she sat her down and wept. Then Panthea, who a good
while before, had prepared a cimiter for the purpose, (...).
kills her self, and reposing her head upon her husbands breast, yielded up
her vital breath. With that, the nurse skriked out aloud, and enwrapped them
both according as Panthea had given her in charge. But Cyrus being advertised
what a deed the woman had done, was wonderously affrighted, and went to see, if
happily he might help and do any good. At which very instant, her Eunuchs who
were in number three, seeing what was befallen, drew forth their cimiters also,
and in the very place, where she had commanded them to stand, slew
themselves. In memorial whereof, it is said, that those Eunuchs Tomb then
erected, remains to this day. Upon an upper pillar were written aloft, by
report the names of the husband and wife, and those in Syriack letters: but
below are three other or pillars.
Columns with this Inscription EgNOgON (i. of the Eunuchs.) Cyrus when he
was come near unto this pitious sight, as he wondered much at the woman's act,
so when he had lamented for her hard fortune, departed. And verily good order
was taken as meet it was, that they should be honored with all due obsequies
accordingly, yea and as the voice goes, a mighty great monument and a stately
was there erected for them.

CHAP. V. How Cyrus by the wisdom and policy of Cadusius, took the King of
Phrygia prisoner: brought under subjection in small time the Cappadocians, the
Arabians and all the Nations round about. Which done, how he embattailed his
forces to the number of 40000. men in arms, and approached Babylon.
AFter all this, the Carians upon some discord and variance that arose among
them, growing to civil war, those I mean, who held and inhabited the strong
forts of the country, came from both sides to Cyrus and besought his aid. And
Cyrus himself remaining still in Sardes, caused fabrics and engines, and
warlike rams to be made, to the end he might raze their holds and castles
who would not come in and yield obedience unto him. But into Caria he sent
Cadusius the Persian, a man otherwise not unwitty, nor unskilful in military
feats, and besides very gracious and of pleasant behavior, him I say, he sent
with the conduct of an army: In which expedition, the Cilicians and Cyprians
right willingly joined with him. Which was the cause that he never did set any
Persian Lord over the Cilicians and the Cyprians, but stood contented with
their own native Kings. Howbeit, he imposed a tribute upon them, and enjoined
them to serve in his wars, as occasion required. Now when this Cadusius,
General of the forces abovesaid, was come into Caria, there presented
themselves unto him certain Carians of both factions, ready to receive him
into their strong forts and walled towns, for to endamage the adverse side.
But Cadusius did by both alike, and showed unto them the same countenance:
saying unto those with whom he happened to parle, that they spoke to right
good purpose, and propounded conditions standing better with reason than the
other: willing them withal, to carry the business so closely, as that their
opposites might not know they were entered into amity with him, making semblance
as if by this means he meant to set upon the adverse side more unprovided.
Moreover he required security on both parts: to wit, that the Carians should
swear for to receive the Persians into their walled towns without all fraud,
and to the behoufe of Cyrus and the Persians: also that himself should take an
oath, that he would enter into their forts without guile and to the good of
those that admitted him. Which when he had made sure, he appointed unto them
both, one and the same night, without the knowledge either of other: and in it
with his Cavallery entered their Castles, and so at one time, became master of
both their said fortresses. So soon as day appeared, sitting in the mids with
his army about him, he called before him, such persons of either side, as were
men of worth and action, who being in place, and looking one upon another,
took the matter very ill: supposing they were on both sides circumvented and
deceived. But Cadusius made a speech unto them to this effect. I swear unto
you, O ye Carians, that I would enter these holds and castles without all
guile, and for their benefit who received me. Therefore, If I should destroy
either of you, I judge my self to have come in, to the hurt and hinderance of
the Carians: But if I make peace between you, and work it so, that ye may in
safety till your grounds, I suppose then, that my coming is for your good and
profit. And therefore, behoovefull it is, that from this day forward, ye
commerce friendly one with another, follow your husbandry without fear, and
contract mutual marriages between your children reciprocally. Now if there be
any of you besides the true meaning hereof, go about to offer injury: know
they, that both Cyrus and we will be enemies unto them. From thenceforth, were
the said Castle gates set open, the ways frequented with passengers resorting
to and fro, and the fields full of husbandmen tilling the ground. On both sides
they kept holidayes and made feasts; In a word, all places were with peace and
joy replenished.

Soon after, there arrived certain messengers from Cyrus [unto Cadusius]
demanding of him, whether he stood in need of any forces or munition? Unto
whom he made answer, that he could make use, even of the army which he had
already elsewhere. And no sooner had he uttered these words, but he led away
his power, leaving behind him in the said walled towns, soldiers in garrison.
But the Carians earnestly besought him to stay, which when he refused to do,
they sent unto Cyrus, requesting him to send Cadusius unto them for to be their
Governor.

About this time, Cyrus had sent away Hystaspas with an army, into that
Phrygia which boundeth upon Hellespontus. Therefore, after that Cadusius was
come, he commanded him to follow with his power, that very way where Hystaspas
was gone before: to the end that the Phrygians might the rather yield obedience
unto Hystaspas, hearing once that other forces were to join with his: And
verily those Greeks which inhabit the seacoasts, by giving many presents,
wrought so, that they were not compelled, to admit the Barbarians into their
fensed towns: but only to pay tribute, and go to serve in the wars,
whither Cyrus should command them. But the King of Phrygia prepared to stand
upon his own guard, as if he would defend his strong holds and not obey: and
so he openly gave it out and sent defiance. But when his Captains were once
revolted from him, so that he was left alone, at the last he rendered himself
into the hands of Hystaspas, for to receive his doom of Cyrus. Then Hystaspas
leaving behind him strong garrisons of Persian soldiers in the fortresses,
dislodged, and led away with him over and above his own forces, many Phrygians
as well horsemen as targuatiers. Now Cyrus had given authority and commission
unto Cadusius, after he had joined with Hystaspas, to bring those Phrygians
with their armor, who made choice to side with him: but such as chose rather
to fight, to unhorse and disarme; and command them all to follow with slings.
Thus were they at that time employed.

But Cyrus went forward out of Sardes [toward Babylon,] leaving there in the
City a strong garrison (...). of Persians.
of footmen: having Croesus in his company and carrying away with him many
carts and waines laden with treasure and riches of all sorts. Croesus also
thither came, who having precisely set down in writing, all the parcels of
treasure which were in every waine, gave up the said book into Cyrus his
hands: saying withal unto him: If you have about you quoth he, O Cyrus, this
Inventary, you shall know who deals truly and justly, in delivering up his
charge, and who does not. Then said Cyrus; You do well, good Croesus, to
provide thus for the worst. But surely, they shall for me, carry the goods, who
are worthy, even to be owners thereof: so that if they embecile or steal any
of it, they shall but rob themselves of their own goods. Which said, he put
those notes into the hands of his friends and Captains, that they might take
account and know, whether they that had the charge of those things delivered
them back safe and sound, or no? The Lydians likewise, as many as he saw to
show themselves gallantly in arms on horseback and in chariots, such also as
endeavored every way to perform that, whereby they thought to do him
pleasure, he led with him in his army. But whom he perceived to follow him
unwillingly, from them he took their horses, and gave them to those Persians,
who first had served with him in the wars. Their armor he burnt, and
constrained themselves to follow after with slings: Yea and all those without
arms, whom he had vanquished and subdued, he forced to exercise the sling:
thinking that kind of weapon and manner of service most base and servile. For,
how ever it falls out, that slingers otherwhiles if they be in place, with
other forces stand in very good stead: yet by themselves, put them altogether,
if they encounter but a few of such as use weapons for close fight at hand,
they are not able to hold out the skirmish. Now in his journey toward Babylon,
he brought under his subjection by the way, the Phrygians inhabiting that great
Phrygia: the Cappadocians also and Arabians he subdued. And with the harnois
and weapons of all these, he furnished the Persian horsemen to the full number
of 40000. Semblably many of the Captives horsemen he distributed among all his
Associates throughout. So, he came before Babylon with a mighty power of
horsemen, with many archers also and darters, but with slingers innumerable.

CHAP. VI. How Cyrus laid siege unto the City Babylon, and by a wonderful
stratageme won it. How the King of Assyria and his men, were slain, the city
put to the sack, and the fortresses rendered into his hands.
CYRUS being now set before Babylon, with his whole army, invested the City.
Then accompanied with his friends, and such of his Associates as were men of
Action, himself in person made a bravado and rode about the town. After he
had well viewed the walls thereof, he intended presently to withdraw his forces
from the city. At which time a certain fugitive from out of the town came and
gave him intelligence, that the Babylonians would sally forth upon him, as he
should retire with his army: For when from the walls they beheld this maine
battle of yours says he, it seemed but weak. And no mervaile in very truth,
that it should be so. For, when they encircled the walls being so large in
compass, it could not otherwise be but the said maine battalion must grow
thin, and bear a small or, thickness.
depth with it. Which news when Cyrus heard, standing in the mids of the army
with his guard about him, he commanded the soldiers heavily armed, to display
and stretch out the said battalion from both or, points.
ends, and to go off, close by that part of the army that stood still until
such time as both the said points raught unto him, and enclosed the very mids.
Which when they did: both they who kept their standing now that the body of
the battle was double in thickness, as also those that went from both ends,
were more emboldened. For they that stood still, were presently near unto the
enemies. But when by this manner of passing to and fro, they had brought both
points together: they stood more strong and confident, as well they that went
off, by reason of them before, as they before also, for that those behind
joined unto them. By means of displaying and spreading the battle in this
manner: the best must needs be raunged foremost and hinmost, but the worst cast
into the mids. Which order of embattailing seemed to be well provided both for
to fight, as also to keep them from flight. Moreover, the horsemen and light
appointed skirmishers in the wings, approached ever to the General so much the
nearer, as the maine battle thus reenforced and doubled, bare greater (...).
thickness and became deeper. After they were in this wise put in array, they
gave back from thence by little and little.
foot by foot, so far as a dart shot raught from the wall. But when they were
once without their reach, they turned their faces toward the city: and verily
at the first, having stepped some few paces forward, they shifted full upon
their shields: and stood so, as they might behold the wall at full, and the
farther they were off, they shifted so much thinner. Now when they thought
themselves to be in safety, they retired in a continued order together, until
they were come unto their tents. And after they were encamped: Cyrus calling to
him his best warriors and men of action, said thus unto them.

My Friends and Associates, we have viewed the city round about: and how it is
possible to force by assault the walls, so strong and high withal, I cannot
see. But this I suppose, that the greater multitude of people there be within
the City, so long as they yssew not forth to fight, the sooner shall they be
overtaken with hunger. Unless therefore, ye can allege some other way, my
advise is, that presently we lay siege and beleaguer them. Then spoke
Chrysantas: This river here which is above or, a quarter of a mile.
2. furlongs over: runs it along the mids.
through the mids of the city? Yes verily answered Gobryas, and so deep it is
withal, that two men standing one upon the head of another will not reach
above the water: Whereby the city is better defended with the river than with
the walls. Let these matters go by, quoth Cyrus then, unto Chrysantas, which
are above our strength, and after that we have with all speed taken measure, we
must of necessity quarter our selves accordingly, and go in hand to dig a
mighty deep and broad trench, to the end that we may have need, of as few
warders as may be. Having measured therefore all about the walls, leaving a
space from the river sufficient for great or, platformes
bulwarks, he dug an exceeding great trench round about the wall, casting
up the earth toward themselves. Then, the first thing that he did was to raise
skonces hard to the river side, making their foundations upon Date trees, which
took up no less than (...).
an acre in length. (For they will grow out in length more than so) because the
nature of the Date trees is such, that if they be pressed down with any
weight they will swell or bunch upward, after the manner of those (...).
great asses [backs] called Canthelij. Now, these trees he built upon of
purpose, that he might seem especially, to lay siege unto the city, and in
case the River should break into the trench, yet it might not carry away the
said (...).
skantses. He erected also many other turrets or skantses upon the (...).
earth that was cast up, to the end he might have as many places for Sentinels
and warders as possibly he could. or turrets.
or terrace.


And thus verily were they employed. But the Babylonians upon the wall, made a
mock at this manner of siege, as who were stored with victuals within, for 20.
years and more. Which when Cyrus heard, he divided his army into 12. parts,
that each part might by turns watch and ward one month in the year. The
Babylonians likewise hearing of that, derided them so much the more, thinking
this with themselves, how the Phrygians, (...). the Lydians.
Lycians, Arabians and Cappadocians should have the warding of them, all whom
they supposed to be more friendly affected unto themselves than to the
Persians. And now by this time were the trenches dug and cast up. But Cyrus
having intelligence that there was in Babylon such a feast solemnized, whereat
they use all to drink, eat and banquet all night long, thereupon so soon as
it grew to be dark he took with him a number of men, and opened the heads of
the trenches toward the river: Which done, the water in the night time flowed
and ran into the trenches, and thereby, the channel of the river, keeping his
way through the city, became so passible, as that it might be waded through by
men. Whiles this was thus in hand about the river, Cyrus commanded, the
Persian millenarie Chiliarchi over 1000. men.
Colonels as well of foot as horse, to come unto him, leading their regiments
of thousands 2. by 2. in rank. As for the rest, that were associats, he gave
order to follow at their backs arraunged, as they were before. And they verily
presented themselves accordingly. Then Cyrus causing officers and ministers
both footmen and horsemen to enter into the dry part of the river, commanded
them to sound whether the bottom thereof were firm ground and passible or no?
And after they had brought word back, that it might be waded through, he
assembled the Captains as well of foot as horse, unto whom he made such a
speech as this. This river, my loving Friends, has left his ordinary course
that leads into the City. Let us enter in therefore with confidence fearing
naught, Considering that they against whom we now advance, be no other than the
very same, whom when they were well friended and backed with associats, when
they were all awake, sober, armed and in order embattailed, we defaited.
Whereas now, we march against them, what time as many of them are asleep, many
drunk, and all out of order. But that they shall perceive also, that we are
gotten within the City, they will be far less able to fight than now: For
that they shall be astonished and amazed at this unexpected surprise. And if any
man happily think, that we shall have a hot welcome at our first entrance, for
fear least the townsmen get up to the roufes of their houses, and from thence
assail us with shot on every side, let this most of all embolden you: For, if
any of them shall climb up to their house-tops, we have a God to help us,
even i. Fire.
Vulcane. For, the porches of their houses be soon set on fire, the doors are
made of Datetree-wood, and those vernished and laid over with Bitumen, which
will soon catch fire and burn. As for us, good store we have of matches and
torches, which will quickly kindle and make a great fire. We have pitch and
hirds likewise, that will as suddenly flame out. Whereby, it will come to
pass, that of necessity they must either forsake their houses or be soon
consumed to ashes. Go to therefore and with good courage take arms. And I my
self in the name of God will lead you in this service. As for you Gadatas and
Gobryas: show us only the ways, for, ye know them full well: and so soon as
we be entered into the City, guide us and bring us directly with all speed to
the Kings Palace.

And that verily, said the soldiers about Gobryas, can be no wonderful
matter. For, the court gates will not be shut: being as it is a time of
banqueting: and the whole City this night, seems altogether set thereupon.
But we shall light upon the Warders, before the Palace gates, which are wont
always to be placed there, as a Corpse du guard. Well, says Cyrus, we must not
therefore slack our business, but go with all speed, that we may take them
most unprovided. The word was no sooner spoken but they went forward. And
look, whomsoever they met in the way, they were wounded and some slain
outright; others fled back again into the City, and part of them made
outcryes and shouts. Semblably, the soldiers about Gobryas and Gadatas,
answered them with like shouts, as if themselves had been drinking and
banqueting as well as they. And so marched they on in great have, so farreas
to the Kings Palace. And verily Gadatas and Gobryas with their Companies being
in ordinance of battle, found the Court-gates fast shut: but such as were
appointed to encounter the Warders, ran upon them drinking, as they were, by
a great light [fire] and presently dealt with them as with enemies, whereupon
arose a huge noise and rumbling hurry: which hurliburly when they within heard,
(for the King commanded to see what the matter was) certain of them did set
open the gates and ran forth. Then Gadatas his soldiers seeing the gates
standing wide open, rushed in, chasing them as they fled back again into the
Palace, and beating them down before them, until they came as far as to the
King himself, whom they find standing with his cimiter that he had, drawn. And
him, the soldiers about Gadatas and Gobryas, being many in number overcame and
disputched. They also about him were slain every mothers son: whiles one
opposed somewhat in their way, another did what he could to fly and escape,
and in one word whiles every man defended himself by what means he might. In
this mean while, Cyrus sent forth certain Cornets of horsemen into the
streets, with commandment to kill whomsoever they found out of their houses:
but to as many as kept within doors, he made Proclamation, by the mouth of
those that were skillful in the Syriacke tongue to abide still within house:
And look, who was taken abroad without doors, there was no remedy but dye he
must. And thus did they accordingly. Then came to them Gadatas and Gobryas: who
first of all worshipped the Gods by way of thanksgiving, for that they were
revenged of that wicked and impious Tyrant: then weeping abundantly and leaping
for very joy, they kissed both the hands and feet of Cyrus. When it was day
light, They that kept the fortresses and Citadels within, perceiving that the
City was won, and the King slain, rendered up their holds likewise. Cyrus
immediately seized them into his own hands, and sent garrison soldiers,
together with Captains into them. He gave leave unto those, for to bury their
dead, that were of kin or near allied unto them. Also he commanded the
Heralds to make proclamation: That (...): That would not be neglected, yet
go we must, etc.
all the Babylonians should bring out and deliver up their Arms. And
wheresoever in any house there should be found harnois or weapons, he commanded
as many as were therein to be put to death. So they brought forth their arms
accordingly which Cyrus bestowed in the forts, that they might be in readiness
against the time of need. Which done, the first thing that he went in hand
with, was to call for the Priest.
Magi. And because the City was taken by force of arms, he charged precisely,
that the first fruits of the spoil, together with all the shrines and
chapels, should be selected apart for the Gods. After this, as well private
houses as stately and princely edifices, he distributed among those whom he
supposed to have had a hand in that exploit. And thus as it was thought good
and decreed, he awarded the best unto the best. But if there were any man, that
imagined he had a less part than he deserved, he willed him to come forth and
declare so much. Moreover he published by way of proclamation, that the
Babylonians should till the grounds, pay Or, rent.
tribute, yield obedience and service to them, unto whom every one was
allotted. Furthermore he proclaimed thus much, that both Persians and those who
any ways communicated with them: yea and as many of the Confederates also as
chose to stay with him, they should term as their Lords and Masters to whom
they befell.

CHAP. VII. How Cyrus established his Kingdom in Babylon: instituted the
honor and veneration of Kings: entertained Eunuchs for the service of his
house: and Persians for the guard of his person.
AFTER all this, Cyrus being now desirous to compose himself so, for his own
person, as beseemed the State of a King, by the advice of his friends, thought
it good, that with least envy he might be seen seldom, and with greatest
Majesty. This he wrought in this manner. First, by delight he took up his
standing, and gave audience to as many, as had any thing to say unto him: Whom,
so soon as he had answered and dispatched, he sent away. Folk perceiving that
they were thus admitted and had free access, flocked about him in multitudes
infinite. Thus whiles they preassed forward and thrust to come near unto him,
there grew much stir and fighting withal: in such sort as his Sergeants and
Officers did all they could to void the numbers of them, and to make way
themselves to come unto him. And if any even of his friends putting the people
by, came within sight, Cyrus would reach forth his hand and draw them to him,
saying in this wise: My friends, stay a while until I have dispatched this
multitude out of the way, and then shall we commune together at ease. So, his
friends gave attendance: But the concourse of people conflowed still more and
more, so that he was prevented by the evening, before he could have leisure to
confer with his friends. Therefore said Cyrus unto them. It is hight time now
my friends (for this day) to break up the assembly. To morrow morning fail
not but come early. For I would gladly speak with you. When these his friends
heard him say so, they departed willingly, and that apace, as having been
punished all day long, and wanted even the necessaries of this life. The next
morning Cyrus came again to the same place. But then, he was beset with a
greater throng by far of people, such as were desirous to have access unto
him, and much sooner were they there, than his friends aforesaid. But he having
placed all about, a great guard of Persian Halberds and Partisanes, gave
commandment, that none should be so hardy as to present themselves unto him,
save only those his favorites, and the chief Rulers as well of Persians, as
of his Associates. Who when they were all met together, Cyrus spoke unto them
in this manner.

My friends and Confederates, Albeit no cause we have to blame the Gods, for
that hitherto, we have not archieved all that we wished and prayed for, Yet, if
the performing of brave exploits bring this withal, that a man cannot repose
himself as he would, nor take delight and solace with his friends, Farewell
for my part, all such felicity. For, both yesterday ye perceived, that from
the very morning betimes, we began to give audience unto suitors, and gave not
over before eventide: and now also ye see, these are here come far more in
number than those yesterday, to put me unto new trouble. And therefore, if a
man should give way unto these, I account hereby, that little use ye shall
have of me, or I of you. And sure I am, that of mine own self I shall have
very small or none at all. There is also, quoth he, another thing beside, that
I see, very ridiculous. For, howsoever for mine own part I stand affected to
you as I ought, yet of all these that throng here about me, I know in manner
not one, and they nathelesse are all of this disposition, that if by thrusting
and importunity they can prevent you, they will presume to obtain at my hands
their requests and be served before you. But I would think it meet and
reasonable, that if any man have need of me, he should make means to you my
friends, seek your favor, and request you to bring them to me. But some man
happily will ask me why I did not carry my self so at first, but lay open so,
as I did, to all comers? To whom I answer, that I knew the state of war
affairs was such, as it behooved not a Sovereign Commander, to be wanting
either in taking knowledge of all things requisite, or in execution of such
exploits as by any occurrents be presented. And if Generals themselves were
seldom seen abroad, I suppose that many affairs would have passed by, which
were meet to be put in execution. But now, seeing that this war so toylesome
and laborious is laid asleep, my very soul deemeth it to stand with equity,
that it also may have now some repose. And therefore sithence I am in doubt my
self what course to take, that not only our own estate, but theirs also, of
whom we ought to take the charge, may stand upright: let some of you advise,
what in his conceit he sees most behoovefull. When Cyrus had delivered these
words, Artabazus stood up, him I mean who sometime claimed kindred of Cyrus,
and thus spoke. Now I assure you, quoth he, o Cyrus, you have done passing well
to enter into this discourse. For, my self even from my childhood began to
desire your friendship. But seeing how you stood in no need of me, I durst not
be so bold as to come unto you. Afterward when you happened to request me upon
a time frankly to relate unto the Medes a message from Cyaxares, I argued thus
with my self, that if I performed cheerfully this service for you, I should
be very inward with you, yea and enjoy your conference whenever I would. And
verily that affair I executed so, as that you commended me highly therefore.
After this, the Hyrcanians were the first that joined with us in amity, what
time as we were exceeding desirous of Allies, so that we embraced their
Society, as if we had been desirous to carry them about in out arms. And who
then but they? When this was done, and our enemies camp forced, I thought
then, you had no leisure to attend me: neither could I blame you for it, but
bear with you. Then comes me Gobryas, and he became a friend unto us, whereat
I did rejoice: after him, Gadatas likewise: whereby it came to pass, that
still it was an hard matter for me to be acquainted with you. Semblably, when
the Sacans and Cadusians became our confederates, good cause there was that
they should be honorably entertained. For why? they honored you. But after
that we were returned thither again from whence we first set out in our
expedition, because I saw you much busied about the erecting of a Cavallery,
about Chariots, Fabrics and Engines of Artillery, I made this account, that
when you had been once past this care and trouble, you would have been at
leisure to regard me. Howbeit, when the fearful news came, that men of all
nations were banded and in hostile manner assembled against us, I understood
very well, that these were affairs of right great importance: But yet, if God
gave once good success therein, I was persuaded fully in my heart, that you
and I both should then converse mutually together. And now that we have fought
a great field and won the victory: Now that we have brought Sardes and
Craesus under our subjection: Now that we have forced Babylon, subdued and
conquered all before us, yet could not I yesterday, so help me That is, the
Sun.
Methres, have had access unto you, but that I laid well about me with my
fists against many that stood in my way. But when you took and drew me once by
the hand, willing me to stay by you, then, forsooth, I was well holp up,
abiding with you all day long without meat and drink. Now therefore, if by any
means it be possible, that we who have done you best service, may likewise be
chief about you and enjoy you most, it is well: if not, then will I denounce
eft soones in your name, that all depart from you, excepting us only, who from
the beginning have been your friends and followers. At these words, both Cyrus
and many others also laughed heartily. But Chrystantas the Persian arose and
spoke in this wise. Heretofore, by good reason, o Cyrus, you have showed your
self abroad in the eyes of all men, as well for those causes, which your self
have alleged, as also because we were not they, whom you were chiefly and
above the rest to respect. For, we were present also for our own particular.
But necessary it was for you by all means possible, to win the multitude, to
the end that every one might be most willing to undergo the same travailes and
perils together with us. And now, seeing your condition is not otherwise, but
you may oblige others also unto you, whom you think meet, it is now high time
for you to have the benefit of your house and home. For otherwise, what fruit
should you reap by your Sovereign rule, if you alone want your own dwelling
place, than which there is no land or possession in the world more sacred, more
secret, more proper and familiar? Moreover, think you not, quoth he, that even
we also blush for shame, to see you resolutely for to live abroad, keeping our
selves within doors, and seeming to be in better case than you are? When
Chrysantas had opened his mind in these terms, many there were who accorded
thereto. Whereupon Cyrus entered the Royal Palace; and here they that brought
the treasure taken in Sardes, rendered up the same. After he was entered in,
First, he sacrificed unto Vesta; then to Jupiter King, and to what other God
soever the Magi.
Priests directed him.

These complements finished, he began to apply his mind, to the settling of
other affairs. And taking into consideration, what a charge he undertook in
going about to govern many men: and intending to keep resiance in a Babylon.
City, which among others of great name, was most renowned and stood so ill
affected unto him, as the most enemy City in the world could be unto a man:
pondering I say these things in his mind, he thought it requisite, to retain
a guard about his person. Considering also full well, that men in no place can
sooner and easier be overcome, than at eating and drinking, bathing, lying abed
and sleeping, he did cast about, whom in these premises he might keep about
him most trusty. He thought withal, that the man could never be true and
faithful, who loved another more then him who stood in need of his guard. And
therefore he observed, that such as had children, wives of their own fitted to
their minds, or beloved (...).
Catamites, were by nature forced to affect them most. On the other side,
seeing that Guelded men.
Ennuches wanted all these, he concluded that they would set most by them, that
were able to enrich them most, by whom also they might be relieved if they were
wronged, yea and advanced to greatest honors. And he supposed, there would
none go beyond himself, in conferring benefits and favors upon such.
Furthermore, in regard that Eunuchs be of base account among other men, for
that very cause, they had need of a Lord and Master to be backed and assisted
by. For, there is not one, but would in all things deem himself worthy to be
in better place than a guelded Eunuch, unless some better thing be a bar
thereto: But, that Eunuch who is faithful to his Master, finds no
impediment, but he may be chief about him. And whereas in some one this reason
may most of all prevail to the contrary, namely, that such evirate persons
become weaklings and cowards: Cyrus himself was not of that mind. And here he
argued strongly from instance in other living creatures. For, horses be
otherwise fierce and untractable, if they once be guelded, how ever they leave
their biting and cease to be frampold, yet are they nevertheless serviceable
in the wars: and Bulls if they be libbed and made Oxen, are not so stomackfull
and stubborn as they were: howbeit they abate nothing of their strength and
ability to work. Semblably Dogs if their If they be cut, or splayed. (...)
cullions be taken from them, use no more to leave and lose their Masters, but
are never the worse to watch and keep the house, no nor to hunt abroad. Even
so it is with men in this kind: more mild and gentle they are, being bereft of
this fleshly lust: yet be they never the more negligent, in the execution of
such things as they are enjoined to do, nor less industrious in service on
horseback, nor one jote disabled for launcing their darts, ne yet less
desirous of honor. Nay rather, both in martial feats and in their hunting,
they show evidently, that they have kept still in their hearts a certain
emulation and desire of victory. And that they be trusty withal, they have
showed good proof in the murders of their Masters. For, none there be, that
have given better testimony of their approoved fidelity, in the calamities and
distresses of their Lords, than Eunuchs. And say, it may be thought that they
have lost some bodily strength [being thus evirate] yet in the wars the same
is supplied by use of weapon, which make the weak and strong all one. Upon
these considerations, having begun first at his Porters and doore-keepers, he
chose for the Squires of his body, Eunuchs all. And for that he thought this
guard not sufficient, to make head against a multitude of those, that carried
an hostile mind against him, he devised, whom he might beside elect out of
others, to be most faithful Warders for his Court and Palace. Knowing
therefore, that the Persians remaining at home in their country, lived
exceeding hardly by reason of poverty, and took excessive pains, as well in
regard of the rough and hard soil of Persia, as for that they maintain
themselves by their own labor: he supposed that they above all others would
most embrace this condition of life with him. Hereupon he draws out of them a
guard of ten thousand Pensioners, who night and day should watch and ward round
about his Palace, so long as he abode there at home: and in case he went
forth any whither, march also on either side of him, in good array and well
appointed. And because he thought there was need of garrison-souldiers for all
Babylon throughout, and those sufficient persons, whether himself remained
within the City, or were gone forth, he placed a standing garrison in Babylon,
whom he appointed to receive their wages at the Babylonians hands, for that he
intended to keep them disfurnished of all things, to the end they might be
brought very low, and so by consequence, with least ado be held in awe. And
verily, this set watch and ward then appointed for his own person and for the
City of Babylon, continues still in the same manner even to this day.
Moreover, casting about, how he might hold his whole Empire thus achieved, as
also enlarge the same by further conquest, he thought that these Mercenaries.
stipendiaries, were not so much better in valor as fewer in number than his
subjects: and therefore determined to retain still about him such valiant
Knights, as by the help of God had gained so famous victories, and to take
order that they might be trained still to the perfection of prowess. And
because he would not seem to command them, but that of their own accord,
(as deeming these things to be most commendable) they might persist therein,
and with all diligence ensue virtue, he called unto him, the abovesaid Peers:
the principal men besides of Arms and action, as also those, whom he thought
most meet and worthy to be part-takers both of travailes and availes. And when
they were all assembled together he made this speech.

CHAP. VIII. The Oration of Cyrus to his chief friends, the Peers or
Homotims. To the Captains also of his Allies, for to induct and frame them to
virtue: and to entertain prowess and feats of arms in his Dominion: with
many other good instructions to make them mild and virtuous.
MY dear friends and loving confederates, we yield unto God, as our bounden
duty is, exceeding great thanks, for that he has granted unto us those
blessings to enjoy, which we thought our selves right worthy of. For now,
possessed we are of a large country and fertile soil: Lords we be also over
them, who by tilling and husbanding the same, shall find us and maintain our
living. Houses we have also and the same well furnished with utensiles
necessary. Neither think any of you, that in possessing all this, he holds
the goods or lands of other men. For, a perpetual law this is throughout the
world, that when their City is won, who stand out in arms, as well the
bodies of them within that City, as their goods and whole estates be due unto
the winners. And therefore, unjustly shall ye not possess those things that
ye hold: but if ye permit those enemies to retain ought, it is of your mere
courtesy, that ye took not the same quite from them. But as touching that
which is henceforth to be done, this verily is my determination. If we give our
selves to idleness, and the voluptuous sensuality of cowardly persons (who
are of opinion that there is no other misery, but labor and pains taking,
like as, to live at ease and exempt from labor, is the only pleasure and true
felicity) then I avow and say, we shall quickly be of no reckoning nor worth,
to our own selves, yea and soon forgo all these goods that were enjoyed.
For, to have been once valiant men, is not sufficient, to the perpetuity and
perfection of valor, unless a man daily persevere therein, even to the end.
But like as other Arts and Sciences if they be forlet, grow to be of less
esteem: and our very bodies otherwise healthy, and in good plight, if they be
let loose to sloth and idleness, turn eftsoons to be diseased and
misliking: even so temperance, continence and fortitude, whenever a man
slacketh their exercise by disuse, grow shortly to vice and lewdness.
Therefore we must not in any wise be remiss and take our ease, ne yet abandon
our selves to the pleasures and delights presented unto us. For I assure you,
in my conceit, howsoever to gain a Or Empire.
kingdom is a great matter, yet a much greater piece of work it is, when one
has won it to hold it. For, oftentimes his fortune is to obtain it, who
shows himself only but bold and venterous: but to retain and keep still
the same which he has gotten, cannot be effected, without the gift of (...)
temperance and of continency, nor without much study and diligence.
Understanding therefore all this; we ought now to exercise virtue much more
than we did, before we attained to this great estate: Yea, and know we must
that a man shall have then the greatest number to envy him, to lay wait for
him, yea and to become his mortal enemies, when he has most in his
possession: especially if he has gained both wealth and observance, (as we
have done) from men against their wills. Certes, we are to think, that God
will be on our side. For, unjustly we have not come by all this, nor by
treacherous slights, but being forlayed our selves, revenged we are for our
own wrongs. That therefore, which next after this is best, let us endeavor to
be furnished with: And that is this, to enjoy our Empire by being better our
selves than those, whom we rule. As for heat and cold, meats and drinks,
labor and sleep, common they must be of necessity to us with our very
servants: Howbeit let us so communicate therein with them, that we endeavor
first and principally, even in these matters to be seen more virtuous than
they. But in martial discipline, and military exercises, we ought in no wise
to communicate with them, whom we are minded to make our (...). As workefolke
and husbandmen.
laborers and tributaries: For, in these exercises it behooveth us to go
beyond them; knowing thus much, that God has showed these means unto men, for
to be the instruments of liberty and blessedness. And like as we have stripped
them of their armor, so we our selves ought never to be disarmed, as knowing
this, that they who have always weapons nearest at hand, may make most account
to hold as their own, whatsoever they desire. Now, if any there be, that
reasons thus, what are we the better for effecting that which we would, if
we must of necessity endure hunger, thirst, cares and travailes still? To him
I answer, We ought thus much to learn, that good things bring so much the more
joy with them, by how much the toil was greater that went before the
achievement thereof. For, travail is meat alone and sauce to valiant and
hardy men: And without this one thing, namely, the need of that which one
obtains, nothing be it never so costly can be provided, to make it sweet and
savory. And if those things which men desire most, God has from heaven
furnished us with: but that the same may seem most delectable, some one
provideth for himself: such a man shall have this advantage, and be in better
case, than they that live more slenderly, in that he shall get the most
toothsome cates, when he is hungry, enjoy the pleasantest drinks when he is
thirsty, and take the sweetest repose, when he has need of rest. Which being
so, thus I conclude and say: That we ought now to strain our selves to the
uttermost, for to play the parts of good and honest men: to the end that we may
have in the best manner and with most contentment, the use of these benefits,
and not taste of that which of all things in the world is most grievous. For it
is nothing so grievous, never to have gotten good things, as heavy and irksome
to forgo the same, after a man has once had them. Furthermore, this also ye
are to consider, what pretense or color we have to be more idle and negligent
hereafter than heretofore? Is it, for that we are now in place of sovereign
command? But it is not meet, that the Ruler should be worse than the subject.
Or is it because we seem to be in an happier estate now, than beforetime? And
will a man say indeed, that in prosperity Cowardice is to be borne with, and
pardoned? Or, because we have gotten slaves to serve us, shall we chastise them
if they prove lewd and naught? But how befitteth it him, who is bad and
blockish himself, to punish others for lewdness and stupiditie? Moreover, I
would have you to think of this also. We forecast to feed and maintain many,
that keep our houses and guard our bodies. And how can it otherwise be but a
stark shame for us to imagine that we ought to entertain others for the guard
and safety of our persons, and be not a guard to squire and defend our selves?
For, this we ought assuredly to know, that there is no defense or protection
like to this, as when a man himself is honest and virtuous. For, that of
necessity must go always with him and bear him company. But, whosoever is
void of virtue, in all congruitie, no thing besides can prosper and speed well
under his hand. What is then to be done? say I, and where should we practice
virtue? wherein is our study and industry to be employed? I will tell you, my
friends, no new and strange thing: but, like as in Persia, the noble Gentlemen
called Homotimi, converse about the State and Princes Court; so, I pronounce,
that we who semblably are all in (...)
equal honor, ought to make our abode here and bestow our labor in the same
affairs and occasions, that we were there employed in. And as for you here in
presence, ye ought to have your eyes upon me and to consider, whether I am
continually occupied in such duties as belong unto me. And I likewise will
observe you as well. And verily, whom I shall perceive to apply their minds
unto good actions, those will I honor and reward. Moreover, the children that
shall descend from us, instruct we here and bring up in this Court. For, both
we shall be better if we show our selves unto our children, as the best
precedents to follow: and our children also cannot easily, though they would,
prove naught and vicious, when they shall neither see nor hear any
filthiness and dishonesty, but spend the whole day continually in virtuous and
honest exercises.

THE EIGHTH BOOK.
CHAP. I. How Cyrus ordered the State of his Court. What institution of his he
recommended to his Courtiers. The manner that he used in teaching them how to
live devoutly to Godward, and to exercise themselves in all manner of virtue
toward men.
WHEN Cyrus had made this speech, Chrysantas stood up and spoke in this wise.
Many times else, my Friends, have I observed, That a good Prince nothing at all
differs from a good Father. For, as Fathers provide for their children, that
they never want ought that good is, so Cyrus seems now unto me, for to
advise to those things, whereby especially we may live in perpetual weal and
happiness. But, for as much as he has delivered his mind not so fully, as it
behooved, I will endeavor to open the same more at large, and instruct therein
such as be ignorant. For, consider with your selves what enemie-state could
ever be won by them, that were not obedient to their Prince? What Friend-City
kept, by such as did not obey? What army of disobedient soldiers was ever able
to get the victory? By what means more may men in battle be defaited and
lose the field, than when each one begins to seek a way by himself for his
own safety? What good exploit besides can be performed by those that obey not
their superiors? What City can otherwise be orderly governed? what houses
preserved? or how else can ships arrive at their desired haven? And even we our
selves by what means more are we come to that wealth which now we possess,
than by obedience to our Rulers? For, hereby it came to pass that with speed
we touched at what place we should: and following our Captains as we did in
number together, no man was able to stand in our way and abide our force. To
conclude, we have done nothing by the halves, but fully accomplished all that
we were commanded. If then, it be evident, That to obey a Prince and
Sovereign, avails most to the atraining of wealth and honor: Wot well
also, that the same is the best way to keep the said good things as we ought.
And heretofore verily many men ruled us, when we governed none: but now the
state of you here present is such, as that ye be all Commanders, some of
more, some of fewer. Like as therefore, ye think it meet and requisite, that
ye should rule your servants under you: even so let us our selves, obey those
unto whom by duty we are bound to be obeisant. But thus much difference ought
there to be between us and servants, that whereas they do service unto their
masters against their wills, we ought of our own accords, (in case we would be
free indeed) to do that which is of most worth. And this shall you find quoth
he, that even there, where the State is not governed by way of Monarchy, that
Commonwealth is never by enemies brought under subjection, which is most
willing to obey the Rulers.
Magistrates. Let us therefore give attendance as Cyrus wills us, at this our
Sovereigns Court: and exercise our selves in those matters, whereby
principally we may be able to hold such things as ought to be preserved: Let us
be pressed to serve Cyrus at all assaies, and in his affairs whatsoever. For,
this we are to know very well, that Cyrus cannot possibly find ought, wherein
he may use our helping hand for his own benefit, but our part also will be
therein. The selfsame things, I say, will be to us also commodious, like as we
have the same enemies and no other. When Chrysantas had delivered these words,
many others likewise, as well Persians as Allies rose up and approoved what he
had said. Whereupon there passed a decree, That Homotimi, the Peers.
the Honorable persons and Gentlemen of quality, should continually wait at
Court, and tender their service unto Cyrus in all occasions, as he thought
good, until he gave them their discharge. And as it was ordained then, eve^ so
at this day observed it is of those, who are under the Empire of the King of
Asia: They frequent right dutifully the Palaces of their Princes. And as in
this present treatise it is declared, that Cyrus instituted a form of Empire,
whereby he might preserve the same firm to himself and to the Persians: even
so, the Kings his successors, from time to time retain the same ordinances,
and do likewise at this day. And verily it falls out herein as in other
things. The better that the Prince is, the more sincerely are the ancient
ordinances of the State kept: and the worse he is, the more untowardly go all
proceedings. Well, those honorable persons repaired ordinarily to the
Court-gates of Cyrus, mounted upon great horses, with their lances
accordingly: For that this order was so decreed, by those chief men of mark,
who together with him had made this conquest of the Empire.

Howbeit Cyrus afterward instituted other officers, unto whom he committed the
menaging of other affairs: as who had under him both receivers of his Finances.
revenewes, and stewards also for the disbursing of his expenses, Masters and
Overseers of his works, keepers of his demaines and treasure, and purveiours of
necessaries for diet and hous-keeping. Moreover he appointed certain Escueries
of the Stable for his horses, masters of Venerie and Sergeants of his hounds,
such as he thought had skill and dexterity, to train and fit these beasts for
his own use and purpose. As for those persons whom he was minded to retain
next about him, for society in preserving his own happy estate, and who might
become right excellent in their place, he betook not this choice and charge
unto others, but thought that care belonged to himself: For, he wist very
well, that if at any time he were to fight a field, he must out of all that
number, elect those for his nearest assistants and trusty officers, with whom
he had partaken in greatest dangers. He knew likewise, that out of them he
must choose his Centurions and Colonels as well of footmen as of horsemen. And
say, there were at any time need of Generals in his own absence, he considered
that out of these they were to be sent. Moreover, he was not ignorant, that
some of these he should employ as Presidents under him of Cities, and Deputy
Rulers of whole Provinces: others also to be sent forth in Embassage. For that
he thought it a matter of greatest importance, to treat and negotiate by the
means of them, and so to obtain what was requisite without war and force of
arms. Now, if they, whose service was to be used, in the effecting of his
weightiest affairs, were not such as they ought to be, he supposed it would
not be well with his royal estate: But if they were as they should be, then he
supposed all would prosper with him. Being settled therefore in this opinion,
he bent his mind wholly thereunto. Furthermore, of this judgment he was, that
himself ought semblably to practice virtue: For, he thought it unpossible for
a man not qualified in his own person, as he should be, to excite others to
brave and lawdable actions. And in pondering all these points, he perceived
that the contriving and compassing of so high designs required principally
time and leisure. And therefore he supposed, that he might not in any wise
neglect the provident care about revenues of the Crown: as wisely for
esteeming, that in the wealding of so great a State, there must of necessity be
much expense. Again, considering that he had large possession of his own
demaine, if he were in person evermore busied about them, he knew it would be
an occasion to withdraw his mind quite from the care of preserving the safety
of the whole Empire. Casting therefore how he might well order his own
oeconomicall state, and himself enjoy rest, he looked in some sort into the
order and discipline of military affairs. For in war the Decurions for the
most part take charge of the Decuries: the Caporals oversee the Decurions: the
Colonels of thousands, the said Caporals: The leaders of ten thousand, those
said Colonels. Whereby it comes to pass, that albeit there be many ten
thousands
miriades of men in an army, yet there is not one soldier of them all, but he
is regarded and seen unto. So that when the Lord General himself is disposed
to employ his army, sufficient it is to give charge unto the Myriarches [or
Commanders of ten thousands.] Cyrus considering the reason of this order in
military affairs, framed thereto summarily his domestical matters. And by
this means, when he conferred himself but with a few, his household businesses
were not forlet. Thus, from that time forward, more repose he had than others
who took the charge but of one house or of one ship. And so having ordered his
own estate, he taught those also about him to take the same course. So, by
this means he provided for the easement both of himself, and of those also
who belonged near unto him.

After this he did set in hand to ordain, what kind of persons they should
be whom he would have to be of his inward company. First therefore, as many as
were able to live of themselves, putting over unto others the tillage and
husbanding of their lands, if they gave not attendance at Court, he enquired
after them: because he supposed those that thus waited would do nothing that
was evil and unseemely: partly for that they were in the Princes presence, and
in part by reason they knew themselves to be marked and seen whatsoever they
did of men of the best note. And for those that kept away, he thought they were
absent, in regard of some Intemperance, injustice, or negligence. Being
therefore thus persuaded of them, he forced them to be present. For, he gave
commandment to some one or other of his chief favorites, to seize upon the
goods of him who usually frequented not the Court, and to profess openly and
say, that he entered upon his own. This was no sooner put in execution, but
immediately, they that were thus despoiled came with complaint as if they had
been wronged. But Cyrus did put them off a great while, saying his leisure
would not serve to lend his ear to such persons: and even after he had heard
their cause, yet deferred he a long time the debating and deciding of their
suites. And in so doing, he supposed, that as he taught them to wait and give
better attendance: so they would be less offended with him, than if by
chastisement he had forced them to wait. This I say was one means to teach
them for to attend. Another way he had, and that was thus. Whiles they were in
presence he enjoined them very easy ministeries, and the same most gainefull
to themselves. A third device he practiced besides, namely in that he never by
way of gift.
dealt ought among those that were absent: but the most effectual means was,
mere necessity: that if any one would by none of all these be brought to it,
he would take from such an one his goods and bestow the same upon another whom
he thought sufficient and able to be ready at his command in all occasions.
Thus got he a profitable friend for an unprofitable. Well, in this manner dealt
Cyrus with those that were absent. And even the King who reigns at this day,
inquireth into such, as being by their place and office bound to give
attendance are away. But look who presented themselves, those he thought he
should excite most, unto noble and excellent actions, if as he had sovereign
command over them, so he endeavored to show himself unto his subjects most of
all others adorned with virtues. For, it seemed he considered thus much, that
even by positive and written laws men are made better. But a good Magistrate
he supposed to be unto his people a seeing law: as who was able to reduce into
order, to note also and to punish him that was disorderly. Being of this mind,
first and principally above all things, he declared himself at this time more
religious and respective of Gods worship, because he had sped so happily in his
affairs. And then it was first ordained that the Magi.
Priests should chaunt hymns continually by break of day unto the honor of
the Gods, and daily to offer what sacrifices unto which Gods themselves
pronounced. These ordinances instituted then, continue still at this day by
tradition from King to King successively. And herein especially did other
Persians imitate him, because they were fully persuaded, they should be the
happier if they served the Gods in that manner as he did, who was of all other
most happy, and their Prince beside. Again, in so doing, they thought to be in
his favor and to please him. Cyrus also himself was of opinion that the
religious devotion of his subjects was behoovefull for him; directed herein by
the same reason that they are, who upon grounded judgment are more willing to
go to sea and to sail in their company that fear God and be religious, than
with those that are tainted with irreligion and impiety. Moreover, this account
made he, that if all those that accompanied him were devout, they would be
better affected one to another, and more respective of him, and in no wise
perpetrate any ungodly act against his person, who thought himself to have
deserved right well of the whole society of his favorites and courtiers.
Furthermore, making it known abroad, to esteem highly of this one thing, that
no friend or confederate of his should be wronged, as one who had an exact
insight in law and precisely observed the same he thought this would ensue of
it, that others likewise forbearing filthy lucre, would by just and lawful
means only choose to better their estates. He supposed also they would all be
more shamefaced and modest, in case he made open show, to have that reverent
regard of them all, as neither to speak an undecent word nor commit any foul
deed. And that this would proceed thereof, he collected by this argument. For,
men are wont to give better respect, I say not to a Magistrate, but even to
those of whom they stand not in awe, if they be modest and bashful, than to
such as be shameless and impudent: yea and perceiving any woman to be modest
and demure, they respect them also with semblable reverence when they behold
them. Likewise, he thought that those about him would persist constantly in
their allegiance to him, if he graced and rewarded in the eyes of the world,
those who without excuse or refusal, obeyed him, than such as seemed to be
endued with the greatest virtues, and such as could not be acquired without
exceeding labor and pains. And as he was of this judgment, so he professed
the same continually in all his practice. By showing also his own moderation
and temperance, he provoked all others the rather to use the same. For when as
men see one in his carriage modest, who has greatest means to warrant his
insolency, others who have smaller means, will not openly be seen to commit
any insolent parts. And in this wise distinguished he, between bashful
modesty and sober temperance, saying that bashful persons forbear wickedness
abroad in the sight of others, but temperate men avoid the same in secret
corners. As touching continency, he thought his courtiers would be given
thereto the more, in case he bare himself so continent, as not by any
pleasures presented unto him, to be plucked away from good things, but willing
to undertake travailes joined with honesty, before all delights whatsoever.
And verily, being thus disposed in himself he effected this, that among those
in his court, there was much comely order, whiles the inferior sort gave place
unto their superiors, and yet carried a respective reverence and decent
gravity one unto another. A man should not have seen one there, either in
anger crying out uncivilly, or in mirth laughing excessively. But whosoever had
beheld them, would have thought they had lived canonically indeed, to the very
rule and squire of virtue and decency. Well, thus they partly did, and these
examples they saw who conversed in Court.

CHAP. II. How Cyrus ordained military discipline in his Realm. The officers
of his Court: his magnificence and humanity.
TO come now to martial exercises, Cyrus used to lead those forth a hunting,
whom he thought meet to be inured and trained therein: For that, he took
hunting to be the best simply as in general, of warlike feats; so the truest
practice especially of good horsemanship. For in this regard, they must of
necessity chase and follow wild beasts as they fly; it makes them most fit
and expert in riding any ground whatsoever; it causes them also to be most
deliver and expedite in performing any service on horseback, by reason of the
ambitious and eager desire they have to take the said beasts. And herein also
he acquainted those of his inward dependancy and favorites, with temperance
and continency, enabling them to endure travail, cold, heat, hunger and
thirst. And now even at this day, the King himself and his train about him
practice this ordinarily. And that he thought none worthy to bear sovereign
rule, who was not better than the subjects whom he ruled, appears evidently
to every man, as well by that, which heretofore has been related, as also by
this, that in exercising his Courtiers after this manner, himself above them
all, by labor, practiced as well sobriety and temperance as military arts and
warlike feats: For as he trained others forth a hunting, when time served, and
no necessity compelled him to stay at home, so himself also upon urgent
occasions detaining him, hunted wild beasts kept of purpose in parks about
home. And then, would neither he himself take any supper before he had swet,
nor give his horses provender before they were well exercised and ridden. To
this hunting, his manner was to call the Scepter-bearers of his Court. By
reason therefore of this continual exercise, himself excelled in worthy
deeds: they also who accompanied him surmounted as much: And verily such a
precedent and example he showed himself unto others. Moreover whom he saw of
all the rest most earnest followers of good and honest actions, those adorned
he with gifts, with places of government, with preeminence of higher rowmes,
and with all manner of honors. Whereby it came to pass, that he kindled in
them all, an ardent desire and emulation, whiles every one strived to be
thought of Cyrus most excellent. Furthermore thus much also to our thinking
have we observed in Cyrus, that not herein only he thought magistrates should
surpass their subjects, namely, to be better than they, but to charm also and
enchaunt them, as it were, otherwise, after a cunning sort. And therefore made
he choice himself to go in a side and loose Median robe, and persuaded also
his Courtiers and Favorites to wear the like. For, Cyrus thought, that if any
defect were in the body, this manner of vesture would hide the same: and
besides make them that were arrayed therewith, to carry a right goodly presence
with them, and to seem most personable. For the Medes use under this habit,
such a kind of shoes, as they might underlay closely and out of sight, thereby
to appear taller than they are. He permitted them likewise to use painting
under their eyes, to the end they might be thought to have more beautiful eyes
than they had: also to rub colors into their skins, to seem of better
complexion than they were by nature. Besides, he inured them to this, neither
to spit nor snit openly in sight, nor to turn their bodies to the aspect of
any show, as men that admired nothing, nor regarded novelties. And all these
things he supposed to make somewhat for this, that they might be less
contemptible to those under them. And verily after this manner framed he those
whom he meant should rise by him, and become deputies under him, both in their
exercises, and also in carrying a port and majesty over them. But such as he
ordained for to serve, he neither stirred up to ingenuous labors, nor
permitted once to bear arms. Howbeit, he provided for them so, as they never
went without meat or drink competent, for the attending of any liberal
exercises. For, those servants, so often as they or rowze.
did put up any wild beasts, and drove them into places for the horse-means
game, he suffered to take victuals with them into the Forest where they
hunted, but none of free condition allowed he so to do. Also when he was to
make any journey, he led them to the waters like as laboring beasts. Now,
when dinner time was, he would stay with them until they had eaten somewhat,
to the end they should not faint for hunger. And by this usage, he wrought so
with them, that even these also, as well as the nobles and men of best mark
called Cyrus Father, as taking such care for them, to the end that without
making any question, they might always bear the yoke of servitude.

Thus established he the whole Persian Empire in great safety, and was fully
confident, that toward himself from the nations which he had subdued, there
was no danger at all. For, he reputed them feeble and weak, he saw them
unfurnished and without good order: and withal, there was not one of them that
either by night or day approached near unto his person. As for those whom he
took to be the bravest and hardiest men and saw armed in troops, and knew
some to be leaders of horsemen and others of footmen: Many also of them whom
he perceived to carry an hauty mind (as who were sufficient to command) and
to draw nearer than the rest to his guard and to the squires of his body, for
many of these oftentimes had intercourse with Cyrus himself (a thing that of
necessity could not be avoided, because he meant to make use of their
employment.) From these I say, there was some doubt and danger of harm to
grow unto his person, and that many and sundry ways. Wherefore when he devised
with himself by what means he might be secured from them: to disarme them
that thereby they might be disabled for the wars, he would not allow: as
supposing that to be mere injustice, and deeming it to threaten the subversion
of his own Empire: Again, not to admit them to his presence, and openly to
show that he distrusted them, he thought was the next way to stir coals and
kindle rebellion. This one device for all these he deemed both to serve best
for his own security, and to stand most with his honor: to wit, if possibly
he could bring those of best worth, to be more friendly affected to himself
than they were one to another. And therefore by what means as we think, he
attained thereunto, namely to win their love, we will endeavor to declare.
First and foremost, at all times he showed unto them especially, as much as he
could, humanity and kindness of heart, supposing this with himself, that as
it is no easy matter to love those which seem to hate us, nor to will well to
them, that are ill minded unto us: so it is impossible, that they whose love
and good will is once known, should be odious unto those who thought they were
beloved of them. Wherefore so long as he was not so well stored with money, nor
had wherewith to be liberal: by provident care over them whom he kept about
him, as also by his forwardness in pains taking before them: by open
declaring that he rejoiced at their well doings, and grieved at their
misfortunes, he endeavored to win their hearts and gain their friendship. But
after he had gotten so much aforehand, as that he was able by bountiful giving
to be beneficial, he judged as we suppose, first and principally that men
esteemed no benefits of the same cost and value more welcome and acceptable,
than the participation of meats and drinks. Being I say of this opinion, he
took up this order first, at his own table, that what meats himself used to
feed upon, the like thereto should always be served up unto him: but
sufficient to content and satisfy many men besides. And look, what viands
soever were set upon the bourd, he ever dealt among his favorites whom he
thought well of, all the same, save only such dishes as himself and those who
sat with him at the table fed upon: thereby to show that he was mindful of
them, or else to testify his bounteous mind. Moreover, he was wont to send
meats unto them, whose diligent service either in keeping watch and ward, or in
obsequious attendance, or in some other actions, he highly admired: thereby to
declare, that he would have them know, how willing he was to gratify them. And
even his very household servitours he would honor and grace, by sending them
dishes from his own table, whenever he had commended any of them. Yea and
all the cates for his said servants, he would have to stand upon his own
bourd, thinking that even this also would win their hearts, and gain a
certain love from them, like as we see it usually does in Or dogs. (...). i.
children.
hounds. And if he were desirous that and of his friends should be esteemed and
loved of many more besides, even to them also would he send somewhat from his
own bourd. In so much, as at this very day, unto whom men see any viands sent
from the Kings table, they all count them so much the more, as whom they repute
to be honorable persons and able enough to do them good and to speed their
suits if need required. And not only in these respects aforesaid, whatever is
sent from a King is acceptable and delightsome, but also in very deed, those
meats which come from a Kings table, be exceeding sweet and delicate. And no
mervaile they should be so: For like as all other arts be in great cities most
perfect and exquisite, even so Kings meats are above other very curiously and
finely handled. For, in small towns it falls out, that one and the same man
makes a bedsted, a door, a plough and a table (yea and many a time believe
me, the same party also builds an house, and is well appayed if by this
means he can meet with any to set him aworke, whereby he may find a competent
living. And verily it cannot be, that he who practices many arts should
perform them all very well and excellently.) Whereas in great and populous
cities, because many men have need of one and the same thing, one several
science is sufficient for each man to maintain and keep him. And many a time,
less than one whole and entier mystery will do it: For ye shall have one man
make shoes for men: another for women. Yea and that which is more, one man
finds a good living by sowing shoes only, whiles another lives by bare
cutting them out. In like manner you shall see one, that cutteth out and
shapeth garments, and does naught else: another practices none of all that,
but sets and sows the pieces together. And therefore it must needs be,
that he who is occupied in the shortest piece of work, is able to do that
passing well. The selfsame thing is to be seen in our diet and
housekeeping. For, whosoever he is that has one and the same man to make his
bed, to cover the bourd, to mould loaves and to make bread, to dress now this
dish of meat, then that, he must in my conceit have every thing done but so so,
and as it happens. But when one man has enough to do to boil, another to
roast flesh, one to seethe fishes, another to fry or broyle them, and another to
make loaves of bread and those not molded after diverse fashions, but serve the
turn it will if in some one kind the same be passing well and perfitly done,
it cannot then otherwise be, but that these things in this wise made, should
every one be excellently wrought: and so by consequence, the fare in Court
surpasses all other. Well, after this manner in winning the hearts of those
about him, he went far beyond all other Princes.

But how in all things else he excelled, for making much of them, I will now
declare. For, albeit he outwent all other Potentates in this, that he received
most revenues, yet he surmounted them much more in liberal gifts. And this
munificence began in Cyrus first, and has continued ever since to this present
day, with all the Kings of Persia. For, who is he that has richer friends and
favorites openly known, than the Persian King! What Prince is seen to array
his followers in more gorgeous and sumptuous robes than this King? Whose gifts
are known to be such, as some of this Kings are? to wit, bracelets, collars
and cheines, horses also with bridles and trappings of gold? For, in Persia,
none may have these but of the Kings gift. Who but he, has the name by his
large gifts to bring this to pass, that he is preferred in love before
brethren, parents and children? who besides him was able so to be revenged of
his enemies, distant though they were from him many months journey, as the
King of Persia? who again, but Cyrus having conquered a mighty Monarchy,
ended his life so, as at his dying day he could get the name of a father among
all his subjects? and evident it is, that this name is attributed unto him
rather who gives benefits, than to one that takes ought away. Moreover we
have heard it reported, that such as are called the Intelligencers.
Eyes and Ears of Kings, he procured to himself by no other means but by
largess and giving great rewards. For, when he highly fed with gifts those who
brought him intelligence of all such occurrents, as were meet for him to know,
he effected thus much, that very many men both spied and listened after
somewhat, to bring the same to the Kings ears, whereby some commodity might
accrue unto him. Hereupon it came, that a King was thought to have many eyes
and as many ears. Now, if any man think that a King ought to have one to be
his especial eye and no more, he takes not the thing aright. For, one man is
able to see or hear but a little. And if that one have this commission all the
rest may seem to be enjoined negligence. Besides, whomsoever they perceived
once to be that eye of the King, him they might know well enough they ought to
beware of. But the case is nothing so: For, the King gives ear to every one,
that says he has either heard or seen ought, worth regard. Thus, there are
thought to be many eyes and ears of a King: and in every place men are afraid
to let fall any words that are not for his behouse, as if he heard all, and
likewise to do any thing, against his good estate and dignity as if himself
were in person present to see all. And so far off, was any man from daring to
give out any reproachful speeches against Cyrus, that every one demeaned
himself so, as if all that were in place conversed continually in the eyes and
ears of the King. Now, that men's hearts were thus knit unto Cyrus, I know no
better reason that men can allege than this, that for small kindnesses he was
willing ever to give great gifts. And no mervaile that he excelled thus in
bountiful giving, being as he was exceeding rich. But this rather deserves to
be spoken of, that albeit he was in regal estate and dignity, yet he
surpassed, for courtesies and favors to his friends and dependants. Certes
reported it is of him, that in no one thing was he so much abashed to be
overcome as in kind offices to his friends. And to this purpose, reported there
is this Apophthegme of his: For he was wont to say, that the parts required in
a good heardman and a good King were semblable. And as it was the duty of a
pastor, after he has made the beasts under his hand in good plight and happy,
(For that verily is the felicity of cattaile) then to use them: even so a King
ought to make use of those Cities and that people which himself before had
made fortunate.

CHAP. III. The trial that Cyrus made of his friends love unto him. How he
dealt away his riches, to be himself the better beloved of them: and they not
to affect one another.
NO wonder it was therefore, that Cyrus being himself of this mind, labored
especially to outgoe all other men ingentlenesse and humanity; And hereof it
is reported, that he gave a singular proof unto Croesus, what time as That is,
Croesus.
he admonished him and said, That giving away so much as he did, he would
himself become a beggar in the end. Whereas, quoth he, you are the only man
that might have laid up exceeding much treasure of gold in your coffers, if you
had list. For, then Cyrus by report asked him saying, And how much money think
you might I have had by this time, if according to your read, I had bin a
hoarder of gold, from the first time that I came to mine Empire? Croesus
answered and named a certain great sum. Then Cyrus, Go to then Croesus,
quoth he, send with Hystaspas here, some one whom you of all other trust best.
And as for you Hystaspas, Go among my friends from one to another; and say, in
my name, that for some business of mine own, I am at a fault for gold (and in
very truth great occasions I have of money) will them to let me have what they
can every one make. And withal when they have set down the several sums
and sealed them up, to give the note of particulars with a letter to Croesus
his servitour, for to bring back with him. When he had written also
whatsoever he had spoken, and signed his letters, he gave them to Hystaspas to
carry unto his said friends, with this Or, Postscript.
Addition unto them all, That they should entertain Hystaspas also the bearer,
as his friend and favorite. Now when he had gone round about them all, and
Croesus his minister brought the letters aforesaid: then Hystaspas, You are to
make use of me also, quoth he, o King Cyrus, as of a wealthy man. For, lo,
here am I enriched of a sudden with many gifts in regard of your letters.
Whereupon Cyrus, Here is, o Croesus, our Treasure that we have gotten already:
Consider the rest by him, and reckon what great sums of money I am provided
of, in case I stand in need of them for any purpose. Croesus when he had cast
the account, found, as they say, that it amounted to much more than he said
Cyrus should have found in his Exchequer, if he had been a gatherer and laid
up continually. When this appeared thus, See you not, o Croesus, quoth Cyrus,
that I also am stored with treasure? But you would have me by heaping up
altogether at home, for to lie open unto envy and hatred abroad, by the means
thereof: yea, and to set hirelings and trust them with the keeping of the same.
But I account my friends by me enriched to be my treasuries, and the keepers
both of my person, and also of my goods more sure and faithful, than if I
should wage garrison-souldiers, and trust them with the custody thereof.
Another thing also will I say unto you. That which the Gods have put into men's
minds, and thereby made them all indigent and poor alike; the same affection
verily, I my self am not able to conquer and subdue. For, I cannot have my
fill of money no more than all others. But, in this point me thinks, I go
beyond most of them: in that when they have gotten together more than will
suffice their turns, part thereof they bury in the ground, part they suffer to
rot and be marred: And what with telling, measuring, weighing, winnowing,
ayring, and keeping, they have much ado withal. And yet for all this, whiles
they have all at home, they neither eat more than they can bear (for then
would they burst) nor put on more clothes, than they can carry, for so they
should be sweltered and stifled: but their superfluous money and riches
troubles and torments them not a little. As for me, I serve and honor the
Gods with my goods, and ever covet to have more still. And when I have gotten
it: look what surplusage I see over and above suffisance, therewith I supply
the penury and want of my friends. By enriching men, and bestowing benefits
liberally upon them I win good will and amity: The fruit whereof I reap, to
wit, security and glory. And such fruits as these, neither fade and perish,
nor by growing over-ranke corrupt any man: but glory and good name the more it
is, the greater and fairer it grows still: the more portable it is, and
oftentimes causes them to be the lighter that bear it. And for your further
knowledge, o Craesus, take this also with you, quoth he. I esteem not those
the happiest men, that possess most and have greatest store in their custody
(for by this reason the Warders of town walls should be most fortunate, For,
the keeping they have of all within the said towns) but who can get most goods
justly and use the same well and honestly, him I repute most blessed, and his
money and wealth also. And as Cyrus delivered thus much in word, so he was
known to perform it in deed.

Furthermore perceiving most men to endeavor, if they were in good health, to
be furnished with necessaries, and to lay up in store such things as served for
the diet of healthful persons: seeing withal, that they took no great care,
to have in readiness means requisite, if they should fall sick: he thought
it good to be provided also in this behalf. Whereupon he entertained about him
the most skillful Physicians that were to be had. And look what means and
instruments any man put into his head to be good and expedient for him: were
they in the nature of [purging] medicines, or meats, or drinks, there was not
any of them, but he would be stored therewith, and have ready in his Cabinets.
And if at any time, one of them whom it skilled most to be cured, fell sick,
him would he visit, and minister unto him whatsoever was needful. Yea,
thankful he was unto the Physicians, if one had healed any of them, although
he had taken and used in the cure some drugges which himself had laid up for
his own store. These means and many other such he practiced, for to be in
chief esteem with them, of whom he desired to be loved.

Moreover, of what things he published solemn games and proposed prises,
minding thereby to kindle and stir up in men's minds a strife, about brave and
worthy feats, the same wanne Cyrus praise and commendation: because his care
was, that prowess should be practiced. And verily, these games and exercises
bred and imprinted in the best sort contentions and emulations one with another.

Furthermore, Cyrus ordained in manner of a law, that whatsoever was to be
decided either by way of Civil Action or by trial in Combat, they whom it
concerned to have their causes determined, should have recourse together unto
the Judges. And thus it is evident that the adversaries of both sides had an
eye unto such Judges, as were simply best, and their greatest friends. And he
that was cast and had the foil, envied them that had the better hand, and
hated those that pronounced not sentence on his side. Contrariwise, he that
overcame, pretended, that he had the victory by right, and therefore thought
not himself beholden unto any. Semblably, they who sought to be in most favor
with Cyrus, bare envy one to another, like as it fares with others that live
in Cities. And therefore the most part wished one another rid out of the world,
rather than procured the mutual good either of other. Whereby it appears
evidently, that his drift and policy was, that the greatest and best persons
about his Court, should all of them love him, rather than reciprocally to
affect one another.

CHAP. IIII. The triumphant pomp of King Cyrus riding forth of his Palace. A
solemn horse-running wherein himself was winner.
AND now declare we will in what manner Cyrus the first time came abroad riding
forth of his Royal Palace. For, the majesty of this setting out of his,
seems unto me one of those arts and cunning casts, which made his Imperial
State not to be contemned. First, therefore, ere he went forth on horseback,
he called together unto him those that were in any place of government under
him, as well Persians as others: and dealt about unto them Median side-robes,
(and this verily was the first time, that ever the Persians ware this Median
habit) and in this distribution, he said withal unto them, that he was minded
to ride unto the sacred groves especially selected for the Gods, and together
with them, there to sacrifice. Be ready therefore, says he, betimes at the
Court gates, clad in these robes before the Sun rise, and stand ye in such
ray, as Pheraulas the Persian shall appoint by order and direction from me.
And when I am gone before, follow ye after, every man in the same rank and
place wherein he stands. And if any of you can think of a better and
comelier way for us to ride forth than this is: let him acquaint us therewith,
when we shall return back again. For, as ye shall think it most seemly
and best, so, shall every thing be disposed respectively. After he had bestowed
upon the worthiest persons the fairest robes, he brought forth other Median
garments likewise of the same fashion, (for provided he had many vestures of
diverse and sundry sorts, making no spare either of purple and scarlet, black
and puke, or of red, or of sanguine color. And having given some of these to
every Captain: Deck herewith, I bid you, quoth he, your friends, like as I
do you. Then one of them who were present said, And when will you good Cyrus
be dight your self? Unto whom he made this answer, Why! Do not you think
me now adorned, when I thus dress and trim you. Certes, quoth he, were I able
to do you good that are my friends, what robe soever I wore, therein should I
seem fine and gorgeous enough. Thus when they were departed, they sent for
their friends, and clad them richly in those robes. But Cyrus for that he
supposed Pheraulas, (by his degree a Commoner) to be a wise understanding man
and beside handsome and feat, and withal very formal, and one that would let
slip no occasion to gratify him: and who before-time had approoved that
Decree, of honoring every man according to his worth, him he calls for, and
devises with him, how he might make this progress of his, most acceptable to
his affectionate friends, and as terrible to his enemies. Now when they both
had considered well hereupon, and were accorded in one and the same point, he
gave Pheraulas in charge, that this riding forth the next day might be ordered
so, as they thought it most decent and commendable: For mine own part, quoth
he, I have given warning already, that they be all obedient to you, in the
marshalling of this said solemnity, but to the end they may more willingly be
ruled by you, here, take these coats to distribute among the Captains of the
Or, Pensioners.
Guard: These saddle clothes besides (of tapestry) bestow upon the Leaders of
the horsemen, and these other liveries give unto the Rulers of the Chariots. So
Pheraulas received this furniture and carried it accordingly. Whom when the
Captains and Rulers aforesaid saw, You are become say they, o Pheraulas, some
great man now, in that you are to direct us also in those things that are to
be done. Not so, quoth Pheraulas, as God love me. So far am I from being
such an one as you take me: that I am ready even to be a Porter also, to carry
bag and baggage among you. For, see how I bring here with me, these two shag
clothes of tapestry, the one for you, and the other for him there: but take you
the choice of them: whereupon the party that was about to receive the said
saddle cloth, forgetting all envy, presently asked his advice, whether of them
he should take. And when Pheraulas gave him counsel to lay hold of that which
he took to be the better: If you will blame me, quoth he, for giving you
the choice, hereafter when I shall execute my function, you shall find me
another kind of minister, and unlike to my self now. Thus Pheraulas having
made this distribution as he was commanded, took order for all things that
belonged to the solemn riding forth and pomp of Cyrus, that every thing might
be most handsomely and featly performed. When the morrow was come, all was made
clean and neat, before daylight. And they stood by rank and file directly in
order on both sides of the way: like as at this day they use to take their
standing what way the King is to ride forth any wither: neither is it lawful
for any to enter within these said ranks, unless they were eminent and
honorable persons. There were also certain As Tipstaves.
Officers that stood with whips, to beat those that made any mis-rule. First
and foremost, presented themselves those Pensioners of the guard to the number
of 4000. (...).
with lances, four in rank before the Court gates, and on either side of the
gates 2000. All the men of Arms likewise were present to show themselves,
being alighted from their horses, carrying their arms out of their sleevelesse
cassocks, as the manner is in these days to put them forth whenever the King
When they muster before him.
vieweth them. Semblably, on the right hand stood the Persians, and the rest
that were Associates, on the left hand of the way. After which manner were the
Chariots placed, half on the oneside, and half on the other. Now when the
Court gates were set open, First, were led forth goodly fair Bulls In rank.
four by four for Jupiter, as also for other Gods, as the Magi.
Priests gave direction. For, the Persians are of this opinion, that in the
service of the Gods, there are to be employed skillful Artists, much more than
in any other occasions. After these Bulls, were Horses led out for sacrifice to
the Sun: and after them was brought forth a white Chariot, with a golden Or,
Crosbred.
Spring-tree, and the same adorned with Coronets (and sacred this was unto
Jupiter.) Behind which came the white Chariot of the Sun, set likewise with
Crowns as the other before. After it was led forth, a third Chariot and the
Steeds drawing it, all trapped and covered with red Caparisons: and behind it,
certain men followed, who upon a great Or, Hearth. (...).
pan carried fire. After all these rode Cyrus himself out of the gates, all
goodly to be seen, in a Chariot, with an upright turbant upon his head, clad
in a purple cassocke half white (for none else may wear a garment half
white) and having about his thighs and legs, breeches and stockings of scarlet
dye, but his coat of Arms, was all purple throughout. About his turbant
aforesaid, he had Or, Regal band.
a Diadem, the very badge and cognizance, that all his kinsmen likewise be
known by, and even at this day they retain the same Ensign. His hands
likewise he did put forth out of his sleeves. There guided his Chariot mounted
hard by him, his Chariotier, a big man of stature, yet nothing so personable
as himself: whether it were so in very deed, or by some other means, I wot
not: but however, Cyrus seemed a much taller and goodlier person. When they
beheld him as he passed along, they all adored him; either for that some had a
commandment to begin this manner of adoration, or because they were ravished
and amazed with the sight of so rich and stately array: or else for that Cyrus
himself seemed to carry such a majesty and beauty in his personage. True it
is, that before this time, never any Persian had thus worshipped Cyrus. After
that Cyrus his Chariot was gone forth, those four thousand Pensioners marched
before, and two thousand on either side of the Chariot accompanied him. Then,
hard after followed his Scepter-bearers on horseback bravely accoutred with
their Iavelins, to the number of three hundred. Moreover, led forth there were
about two hundred lere-horses richly to be seen with golden bridles, which
were kept for Cyrus his saddle, and those covered with streaked and
party-colored clothes. After these marched two thousand Or, Pikemen.
lances: and then the Cavallery first erected, ten thousand in number,
arraunged throughout by hundreds, who had Chrysatas for their Leader. Next
after followed another Regiment of ten thousand Persian horsemen in like manner
appointed, whose Commander was Datamas: And in the tail of them, another
troop likewise conducted by Gadatas. Behind them the Median Cavallery, next
unto them the Armenians: after whom the Hyrcanians, then the Cadusians, and
after the Cadusians, the Sacans [horsemen all.] Now behind the Cavallery thus
marshalled, there followed the Chariots, four in rank, under the conduct of
Artabates the Persian. When Cyrus was now upon the way riding in this pomp,
very many there were that followed extraordinarily without the Or, Guiders.
Colors, preferring sundry petitions unto him. To them therefore he sent
certain of his Scepter-bearers, or S^ave-bearers. (...).
Mace-bearers (for three there were on either side of his Chariot that
accompanied him of purpose to inform and carry messages between) to declare
unto them in his name, that whosoever had any request to exhibit unto him, he
should deliver his mind unto such Delegates; as were deputed therefore under
him. For they, quoth he, will acquaint me therewith. Whereupon, they went away,
and immediately turned to the men of arms, consulting to whom each one should
repair? But Cyrus, when he was disposed to have any of his favorites most
honored of the people, would by a messenger send for them severally by
themselves to come unto him, and thus say: Whenever any of these here, that
accompany me in my train, inform you of ought: if the matter that he mooveth
be frivolous, give no ear nor take heed of his words: but look who seems to
prefer a just supplication, make me acquainted therewith, that upon
deliberation in common together, we may dispatch such businesses with
expedition. And verily, all the rest, whenever Cyrus called them, obeyed, and
with all their might and maine came riding unto him: partly to amplify all
they could, the Sovereign Majesty of his Empire, and in part to show their
own double diligence and obedience. But one Darpharnes there was rude and ill
bred above the rest; who had this conceit in his head, that if he were not so
forward in coming at his call, he should be reputed a jollier fellow and more
free than others. Which when Cyrus perceived, before he was come upon a time
and had communed with him, he sent under hand one of those Scepter-bearers, or,
Stave-bearers.
Macebearers with a countermaund, willing him to say unto the man, that now he
had no more employment for him. And from that time forward never sent he for
him again. But when a companion of his, that was called for next after him,
made his appearance unto Cyrus before him: Cyrus rode out himself to meet him,
and of those lere-horses that went by, bestowed one upon him, commanding
withal one of those Mace-bearers, to lead him forth for him, whither he would
himself. Which as many as saw, took it to be some great grace and honorable
favor. Whereupon ever after many more men did him observance.

Thus when they were come to the sacred Or, Shrines.
groves abovesaid, they sacrificed unto Jupiter, with Holocausts, that is,
burnt offerings of whole entire Bulls. Semblably unto the Sun, burning Horses
all whole in like sort. After this, they killed other beasts for sacrifice to
the Earth, doing as they had direction from their Priests the Magi. Afterward,
to the tutelar Gods of Syria they did likewise. Which complements being
performed, because the plot of ground was even and fair, he erected a goal
at the end of a race to the length of five stadia. Wherein he commanded, that
Nation by nation.
tribe by tribe, they should put out their Horses to run their best, for the
Prize. Himself with the Persians ran a course and won. For why! he was most
expert in Horsemanship. Of the Medes, Artabates gate the victory; for, Cyrus
had given him an Horse (of speed.) Among the Syrians, he that was their
Captain. Of the Armenians, Tigranes. Among the Hyrcanians, the Colonels son
who had the leading of their Horsemen. Of the Sacans a private soldier, and he
with his Courset gained ground, and out-rid the other Horses well-neere half
the race length. Hereupon Cyrus asked the young man, whether he would exchange
his Horse for a kingdom? Who answered, I would not willingly take a kingdom
for him. Yet I would not stick to make a friend with him, and bestow him upon
some Or, worthy.
good man. Why then, quoth Cyrus, I will show you, where if you wink with both
eyes, and do but A clot, or stone.
fling from you: you shall not miss but hit a good man. Do then but show me,
quoth the Sacan, where they be, that when I have taken up this clot, I may
throw among them. With that, Cyrus pointed where there were a great sort of his
friends and favorites. Then the young man shutting both his eyes close, threw
the clot from him, and it light upon Peraulas, as he rode by: For, it chanced
even then, that he was to declare some errand that Cyrus had given him. When he
was stricken, he never turned for the matter, but rode on still to do that
business which he was enjoined. Then the Sacan opened his eyes, and asked
whom he had hit? Not one, quoth Cyrus, so help me Jupiter, of all those who
are here present. Why then, I am sure, quoth the young man, much less any one
of those that be absent. Yes verily, says Cyrus, you have hit him yonder that
rides pricking so fast, by the Chariots. How is it then, quoth the other, that
he turns not again? No doubt, quoth Cyrus, he is some frantic fellow, and
not well in his wits, as it should seem. Which when this young man heard, he
went straight to see who he was, and found him to be Pheraulas: whose beard was
all agore blood, and foully berayed with earth besides: For, his nose bled with
the blow. Being come unto him, he asked whether he had been smitten, with that
which he flung? Even as you see, answered the other, how think you of it? Why
then, quoth he, I bestow upon you, this fair Courser under me: Take him I
pray you for my sake. And why so, quoth Pheraulas? then, the Sacan related unto
him the whole matter, and said in the end, I have not missed I trow, but met
with a good and worthy man. Then Pheraulas, you should have given him to a
richer man if you had done wisely. Howbeit I accept your gift: and I beseech
the Gods (whose will it was, that you should light on me) to give me grace so
to carry my self as that you may never repent of this your gift bestowed upon
me. And now for this time, quoth he, get up upon my Horse and ride away: And I
will be with you anon. And thus they exchanged. To conclude, among the
Cadusians Rhathonices was the winner.

Moreover, Cyrus did put forth Chariots one to one for to run a race. And to
the Victors he gave both Oxen to sacrifice and make merry withal, and also or,
Flaggons.
drinking pots. Himself being victour also, received an Ox, which was the
price for victory. But, of the said flaggons he bestowed his part on Pheraulas,
because he thought he had done so well in ordering this riding forth out of the
Court. And verily this solemn pomp of riding, as it was instituted first by
Cyrus, so the King for the time being, continues still at this day, save only
that there be no beasts for sacrifice so often as the King sacrifices not.
When these Complements were ended, they returned unto the City. And as many as
had houses given them, thither they went: but such as had none, lodged in their
several or, Stations.
quarters.

CHAP. V. The liberality that Pheraulas showed unto one that gave him a fair
Courser. A notable discourse of that which is able to make a man happy, and to
live in contentment.
THEN Pheraulas invited the Sacan who had bestowed upon him the good Horse, and
courteously entertained him: but beside many other gifts which he fastened upon
him in great abundance, when they had supped together, he filled those or,
Pots.
cups (with wine) that he had received of Cyrus, drank to him and gave them
likewise unto him when he had done. The Sacan beholding in the place goodly
fair carpets and coverings, with much trim furniture besides, and a number of
household servants. Tell me Pheraulas, quoth he, were you at home also in your
country reckoned in the number of rich men? what rich men mean you? said
Pheraulas. To be plain, I was one of them that got their living by their
hands. For, even my father before me, laboring hard himself for a poor
living, kept me bare and brought me up with other children at school. And
when I was past my childhood, because he was not able to find me in
idleness, he had me away with him into the field, setting me to labor and
till the ground. Then and there I kept and maintained him likewise to his dying
day, digging and delving with mine own hands, and sowing a piece of land,
little though it were in quantity, yet nothing bad (I may say to you) but of
all others most true and just. For, what seed so ever it took, the same it
yielded again truly and justly, with increase for usury though not very great.
And yet one time above the rest, upon a special fertility, it rendered double
as much as it received. Thus you see truly, in what sort I lived at home. But
all this riches now that you see here, Cyrus has freely bestowed upon me.

Happy man are you, quoth the Sacan, as in other respects so in this, that of a
poor man you are become wealthy: For, I suppose you have much more joy and
pleasure in your riches, because when you hungered after it, you attained
thereto and grew rich. And think you, my good Sacan, quoth Pheraulas, that I
live now much more merrily, for the greater store of goods that I possess?
ywis, you are deceived. For, wot you not that I eat, drink and sleep with
no greater contentment one whit, than when I was a poor man. Thus much I gain
by having a great deal, that I must look to the keeping of more than I did, I
must deal more unto others, I must carke and care more, and so by consequence
have much ado. For my household Hines.
servants, many call on me for meat, many for drink, and many for Liveries.
garments: And some of them need the Physicians. One brings me word that
either my Sheep are worried by the Woolfe, or mine Oxen fallen headlong from
some steep downe-fall: or else he tells me, that some disease is come
among my cattaile. Whereby, quoth Pheraulas, I am of this mind, that I feel
now far more grief and sorrow by possessing much, than heretofore, when I
had but little.

Yea marry, quoth the Sacan, you say very true: yet when you see this world of
wealth safe and in good case, you take more pleasure than I do, by many
degrees.

But, it is not, says Pheraulas, so great a joy to be possessed of riches, as
grief to forgo the same. Do but mark what I say, and you shall find my
words true. There is not one of these wealthy men driven to break his sleep
for joy, but of such as lofe ought, you shall not see one able to sleep for
sorrow.

Neither shall a man see, I assure you, quoth the Sacan, one of them also to be
sleepy for joy, that are or, getting.
taking any thing. True, says the other: But the case is not alike. For, were
it as sweet to keep, as to get, the rich should be in happier state by far
than the poor. And, trust me truly, it cannot be chosen, my Sacan, but he
that possesses much, must likewise spend as much upon the Gods, upon his
friends, upon guests and strangers coming in. Whosoever therefore takes great
delight in his money and riches, know he this for certain, that he also is
much vexed, when he is at any expense.

But, for my part, I protest before Jupiter, quoth the Sacan, I am none of
these: but I repute even this to be a felicity, that a man which has much,
may likewise dis-spend much. Why then, before God, quoth Pheraulas, what should
let, but that you all of a sudden may become very happy, and withal make me
happy too? For, take in Gods name all that is here: Have and hold it, use and
bestow it at your pleasure. As for me, do but find and maintain me as you
would your guest and no otherwise: Nay, keep me more barely than a guest.
For, it shall suffice me to take part with you of that which you have. You do
but jest with me, I am sure, quoth the Sacan. With that Pheraulas swear unto
him and said, that he was in good earnest and spoke as he thought. Yea, and
more than so my good Sacan: I will obtain of Cyrus other things besides for
you: namely, that you shall not be tied to wait and give attendance in his
Court: not to go in any voyage and serve in the wars: but remain still at
home with all this wealth. This I say will I effect both for your sake and mine
own. Over and above, look what commodity else I can procure, either by my
dutiful service unto Cyrus in Court, or by any warlike exploit in the field, I
will bring the same to you, that you may have the rule of more still. Only do
you thus much for me, as discharge me of this care. For may I once be
delivered from these troubles and live at ease, I think you shall stead me
much, and I likewise shall the better serve Cyrus. These words thus passed
between them and as they covenanted, so they did accordingly. The one reputed
himself happy for being Lord and Master now of so much wealth: the other
again thought he was most happy, because he should have a Procurator in his
place to procure him rest and leisure for to do that which contented his
mind. This Pheraulas was of a gentle nature, courteous and amiable to his
friends, neither thought he that there was so great pleasure or gain in
making much of any thing as of men. For, he supposed, that of all living
creatures in the world, man was simply the best and most thankful: seeing as
he did and observing, those that were praised by any, how studious they were to
praise them again, and how they endeavored to requite one kindness and
pleasure done, with another: such as they know to be kind unto them, how they
requite with like affection: whom they see to love them, how they cannot hate:
and as for their parents, how willing they are with all respect to do them
pleasure and honor both quick and dead, much more than any other creatures
use to do in their kind! For, to speak of all creatures beside, he perceived
they were more unthankefull and less mindful of benefits received than man.
Thus therefore was Pheraulas wondrous glad, that being freeed from the care of
other possessions, he should be able to converse among his friends: as the
Sacan also, because in the possessing of much, he should have the fruition of
much. Thus the Sacan verily loved Pheraulas well, because h^ ever brought him
somewhat: and Pheraulas him likewise, for that he was realy to take all that
came: and notwithstanding he always endeavored to procure him more and more
still, yet it troubled him never the more. In this manner lived they and loved
together.

CHAP. VI. By what means Cyrus graced and honored his friends. The marriage
of Gobryas his daughter, with Hystaspas one of Cyrus his Grand-Seigneurs.
AFTER that Cyrus had sacrificed, he made a feast for joy of his late victory,
and thereto invited those friends, that openly had showed their forwardness to
advance his State most, and their willing minds to do him greatest honor. To
whom he adjoined Artabazus the Median, Tigranes the Armenian, the Hyrcanian
Commander of the Cavallery, and Gobryas. As for Gadatas he became or, Captain.
Ruler under him of the Scepter-bearers: and according to his direction, all
the housekeeping of Cyrus was ordered. And when there were any at supper with
Cyrus, Gadatas did not so much as sit down, but took the charge of all, and
waited: But if no guest were there, himself supped with him: For he took
delight in his presence and company. In regard of which affection and diligence
of his, he was highly esteemed of Cyrus, and of others in the Court likewise
for Cyrus his sake. When guests invited to supper came, Cyrus placed them not
one with another hand over head without respect: but whom he vouchsafed most
honor, him did he set on his left hand, because the same hand is more exposed
to danger of wait-laying than the right: the second in dignity he placed on
the right hand, the third again on the left hand, and the fourth on the right.
If there were any more, he marshalled them in the same order. And he thought it
very expedient, to declare how he honored each one. For, where men suppose,
that he who surpasses others in worthiness shall receive neither praise nor
prize, evident it is, that there is no emulation among them, who shall excel.
But where the best is seen to be in the highest place and to have the
precedence of the rest, there do they all with exceeding alacrity enter into
open strife and contention. And Cyrus verily after this manner showed who were
of greatest authority and reputation with him, beginning first with the order
of their sitting with him and standing about him. Howbeit he would not that any
man should challenge that place then assigned as his own for ever: but he
brought up this custom as a law, that according to their good and virtuous
deeds, they should be advanced to an higher degree of honor, and as any one
demeaned himself more basely, he should come down to a lower place. For, Cyrus
thought it would redound greatly to his own shame, in case any person promoted
to the highest room in sitting, should not be seen abroad for to enjoy many
ornaments and favors by him. And as in Cyrus time these matters were thus
carried, so in these days, we understand the same order holds still. When
they were at supper, Gobryas thought it no wondrous matter, that every thing
was served up unto Cyrus in so great plenty, being a Prince so puissant, and
the Ruler over so many: but he mervailed rather at this, that having ^tchieved
so great exploits, if any toothsome and deinty cates came before him, h^ would
not enjoy the pleasure thereof alone, but take the pains even to intrea^ his
friends about him, for to receive part thereof. Nay, he saw him many at me, to
send unto some that were absent, such deinties as happily he had a special ^^nd
unto himself. Whereby it came to pass, that after they had supped themselves,
Cyrus would send from the very table one way or other, all the dishes as many
as they were, whereat Gobryas, I was of opinion heretofore, quoth he, o Cyrus,
that you surmounted all other men in military affairs and in leading an army:
but now I protest and swear by the Gods, that in my conceit you excel far
more in humanity than in martial prowess. So it is in truth quoth Cyrus, and
verily a greater pleasure it is unto me, for to show the deeds of courtesy
than of chivalrie. And how so? quoth Gobryas: because, says Cyrus, these must
of necessity be seen in doing hurt unto men, the other in doing them good.
After this, when they had drunk moderately, Hystaspas propounded this question
unto Cyrus and said, Sir, will you not be offended with me, if I ask you that
which I desire to know? No verily, quoth Cyrus, but contrariwise I would be
displeased with you, if you kept that in which you were minded to ask. Tell me
then I pray you quoth he, whether at any time I came not to you when you called
for me? Oh quoth Cyrus, no more of that, let us have no such words. Nay, but
was I any whit slack, said Hystaspas in coming to you? No, neither quoth
Cyrus, Commanded you me at any time, that which I performed not accordingly? I
can find no fault with you answered Cyrus. And whatsoever I did, could you ever
perceive me to do it not cheerfully, nor with delight and pleasure? No I
assure you quoth Cyrus, For, herein of all other I can least find fault with
you. What is it then, For the love of God quoth he, and wherein has Chrysantas
so prevailed with you, that he should be preferred to a more honorable place
than my self? Shall I tell you the reason says Cyrus? what else, quoth
Hystaspas? And will not you be angry, quoth Cyrus when you hear the truth? No
verily says Hystaspas, but rather very glad will I be, if I may know that I am
not wronged. Go to then, says Cyrus, you shall understand, This Chrysantas
here, first and foremost, never expected until I sent for him: but was always
present to attend and follow our affairs before he was called. Again, he did
not that only which he was bidden, but whatsoever himself knew expedient for
us to be done, that did he. Moreover, if at any time a matter was to be
delivered by speech unto our Allies and Confederates, whatsoever he thought
decent for me to say, thereto he would advise me: But whatever he perceived, I
was desirous that our Associats should know, but yet upon a bashful modesty,
loath my self to utter unto them, he would declare the same in such terms, as
if it had been his own opinion. So that in these cases, what can be alleged
to the contrary, but that he is more careful for my good and commodity, than
mine own self. Furthermore, this is his saying that he stands always
contented with his present fortune as sufficient for him, but for me he shows
himself provident and forecasting in my behalf, what good I may have by any
thing added to my estate. To conclude, in my welfare, he takes more joy and
pleasure, than I do my self. At these words, Hystaspas said, Now so love me,
Lady Juno, as it does me good at the very heart, that I demanded those
questions of you. And why so especially? I pray, quoth Cyrus: because says he,
I will endeavor what I can, to do the same. But for one thing, I know not
what to do: namely, how, and in what sort I might show my affection, when I
rejoice in your good fortune and welfare? Whether I must clap my hands, or
laugh, or what else I should do? Hereat Artabazus, you ought then, quoth he, to
dance the Persian dance. At which they all laughed a good. Now as the banquet
went on still and they began to drink more liberally, Cyrus demanded of
Gobryas. Tell me, Gobryas, whether are you more willing now, to bestow your
daughter in marriage upon one of these Gentlemen, than at your first
acquaintance with us? And will you give me also leave quoth Gobryas to say a
truth? Yea verily, says Cyrus, For no question needs to be answered with a
lie. Why then, says Gobryas, know for certain, That much more willing I am
now, than heretofore. And can you render a reason why? quoth Cyrus. Yea that I
can answered Gobryas. Say on then quoth Cyrus. Because quoth he I saw them as
then, to endure both pains and perils willingly, but now I perceive they can
bear prosperity wisely, and with moderation. And truly, o Cyrus in my
conceit, it is an harder matter to find a man to bear well the favoring, than
to brook the frowning of fortune. For, of the one may grow pride and insolency
in many: but the other breeds modesty and temperance in all. How now
Hystaspas, faith Cyrus, have you heard what an Apophthegme Gobryas has
delivered? Yes that I have quoth Hystaspas. And if he come out with many such
sentences, he shall have me sooner to become a suitor unto his daughter, than
if he showed me many drinking cups. And I assure you says Gobryas, Many of
these and such like sayings of his, I have put in writing: of which I will not
envy you the having, in case you espouse my daughter. As for drinking cups,
because me thinks you set no store by them, I wot not whether you should do
well to bestow them upon this Chrysantas here, because he has stolen your seat
from you. Then Cyrus, Certes Hystaspas and ye my friends here present, If ye
tell me when any one of you will in hand with marriage, ye shall see in what
good stead I also will stand you, in your wooing. Then Gobryas, If a man would
marry forth his daughter, whom should he acquaint with that business? Whom but
me! quoth Cyrus? For I am passing good at such a feat. What feat is that? quoth
Chrysantas: even the skill to know what marriage is meet for each person. Then,
for the love of God quoth Chrysantas, Tell me what kind of wife will best fit
me, and be most suitable to my person? First, quoth Cyrus, a little woman;
because you are but little your self. For if you should match with one of
stature tall, you must be feign to leap up to her, (as these little dogs do)
whenever you would kiss her upright. In good faith quoth Chrysantas, very
well considered of you, For I am nothing made at all for leaping. Then, quoth
Cyrus, A woman with a flat nose were very meet for you. And why so, says
Chrysantas: because, quoth he, your self are or, Hawke-nosed.
hooke-nosed. For, you know very well, that flat noses and hooked, will couch
and close best together. Say you then, quoth Chrysantas, That when one has
supped well, as I now have a wife that goes supperlesse to bed, were meet to
lie with him? yes verily quoth Cyrus. For they that are full, have round and
copped bellies, but their bellies be flat that are empty, and have not had
their suppers. But can you tell me for Gods sake, Cyrus, what manner of wife is
good for a cold King? Herewith Cyrus laughed and so did the rest. And as they
were altogether set a laughing, In this one point verily quoth Chrysantas I
envy you especially, in your royal estate: And, what is that says Cyrus,
because quoth he being as you are so cold and dry your self, yet you can make
us all to laugh. And would not you quoth Cyrus give a great deal, to have
these things told you, and report made unto her of whom you desire to be so
highly esteemed, that you are pleasantly conceited? Thus passed they the time
skoffing and jesting merrily one with another. Then Cyrus brought forth a suit
of woman's apparaile and omaments thereto for Tigranes, which he willed him to
give unto his wife, because she had borne her self manly in this expedition,
with her husband. To Artabazus he gave a cup of gold, and to the Hyrcanian
Captain a Courser, with many other fair and rich gifts. As for you, Gobryas,
I will bestow upon you an husband for your daughter. Then, me you will give I
trow quoth Hystaspas, that I may have those written sentences of his. Why,
quoth Cyrus, have you any estate of your own, answerable to the dowry of the
Damoisell? Yea, that I have quoth he, God be thanked, and the same worth much
more money. And where I pray you lies that wealth of yours? Even there, quoth
Hystaspas, (pointing to Cyrus) where you sit that are my friend. And that is
enough said Gobryas to content me. And therewith presently he raught forth his
hand and said, Give me him Cyrus, for I am ready to receive him. Then Cyrus
taking Hystaspas by the right hand, gave him unto Gobryas, who received him
accordingly. After this, he bestowed upon Hystaspas many goodly gifts, to send
unto the young Lady his spouse: and withal, taking Chrysantas close unto him,
he kissed him. Then Artabazus, As Jupiter me help o Cyrus quoth he, that cup
which you gave unto me, and the gift which you bestowed upon Chrysantas, be not
both of the same gold. But I will quoth Cyrus give you the like. And when?
asked he: Thirty years hence quoth Cyrus. See then quoth he, you order the
matter so, and provide against that time; as from whom I will expect so much,
and not dye in the mean while. Thus for that present, ended their feast and
merry meeting. When they were risen, Cyrus also arose and accompanied them to
the very gates.

CHAP. VII. How Cyrus sent away his Associates into their own countries:
distributed the spoil, and returned into Persia. How he ordered and marshalled
his camp: being arrived in Media: where King Cyaxares offered him his daughter
in marriage, and gave with her for a portion the Kingdom of Media.
THE next day, those Allies, who came unto him as voluntaries, he sent home
every man, except those that desired to dwell with him: For, he enfeoffed them
in house and land, to them and their heirs for ever. And verily the posterity
descended from those who then stayed, enjoy the same possessions to this day.
These for the most part, were Medes and Hyrcanians. When he had dealt away
gifts among them, at their departure, and taken such order, as neither Captain
nor soldier had cause to complain, he dismissed them. After this, he
distributed among his own soldiers, what money and treasure he got at Sardes.
To the Colonels verily over ten thousand men, To the Sergeants and Servitours
that attended about his own person, he gave peculiarly great and singular
gifts, according to the worthiness of every one: The rest he divided here and
there amongst them all. For, having bestowed upon every such Colonel, a part,
he charged them, that according to the proportion which he had delivered unto
them, they should distribute likewise unto others. And verily the rest of the
moneys were bestowed so, as every Captain approved well of their own Under
Captains: But the last were divided by the Captains over six.
Sizainieirs, (after they had made proof of their private soldiers in their
charge) according as they found each one worthy. And thus they all received,
that which was meet in equity. Which largess being done: some there were, who
gave out of Cyrus these or such like speeches. Certes, he must needs have much
treasure himself, who has given to every one of us so liberally. Others
again answered and said, And what great thing is it that he has? It is not
the manner of Cyrus to seek wholly to be enriched, but he takes more pleasure
in giving to others, than in keeping for his own use. When Cyrus perceived
what words men gave out, and what opinion they had conceived of him, he
assembled his friends with all the men of action and quality, and to this
effect spoke unto them. I have seen ere now, my good friends, men in the
world, who would be thought to possess more than they do in deed, supposing
thereby to appear more liberal. But in my mind quoth he, they come short of
their reckoning, and are haled away clean contrary to their intent. For, when
a man would be accoumpted rich, and is not seen withal, to benefit his
friends, after the rate of that wealth, me thinks it is enough to set the brand
upon him of base illiberality. Again, there be others, who would not be known
how rich they are: And they also in my judgment, deserve but badly of their
friends. For, by reason that their estate is unknown, oftentimes, friends in
their need acquaint them not therewith, and making no moan unto them are
deceived. But I take this to be the part of the best plaine-dealing man, to
make his power and substance known, and then accordingly to endeavor for to
show his goodness and honesty. And therefore what riches of mine may be seen:
I am willing of my self to show unto you: and look what can not be seen, I
will relate unto you by word of mouth. Having thus said, one part of his
treasures, which were many and fair, he gave them leave to see: the rest that
were laid up our of sight, he recoumpted unto them. And in the end, these
words: My friends, This accoumpt ye ought all to make: That these riches here
are no more mine than yours. For, I do not gather them, either to spend them
all my self, or to wear them out, which were a thing impossible: but partly
to have evermore about me wherewith I may at all times reward any of you, as he
performs any brave service: and partly, that whosoever among you thinks
that he stands in need of ought, he may come unto me and receive what he
wants. And there an end of these his words.

Now when he had well settled as he thought his estate in. Babylon, so as he
might take a journey abroad, he addressed himself to make a voyage into
Persia, and commanded the rest to be in readiness. And when he supposed that
he was sufficiently provided of all things needful and requisite for such an
expedition, he remooved and took his journey. But here I purpose to put down,
how orderly his army and train so great as it was, both in taking up their
harbor by the way, unpacked and discharged their carriage, and at their
setting forth again, trussed up bag and baggage, as also how quickly they made
stay and sat down in any place, as need required. For, where ever the King
encampeth, they all pitch their tents about him, as well in summer as in
winter. And Cyrus verily at the first ordained, that his own Pavilion should
be set so, as it might have prospect into the East: then, he appointed how
far off, from his Royal tent, the Guard and Pensioners should quarter and
have their lodgings. After them, he assigned for the bakers the right hand; and
for the cooks and victuallers the left. He appointed for the horses [of
service] the right side, and for the other laboring and draught beasts the
left. Semblably all things else were digested so, as that every man knew his
own place, as well by measure as by the plot of ground. Now, when they
dislodge and are upon their remoove, every man packeth up such baggage as he is
appointed to use. Others there be again, ready to lay them upon the Sumpter
beasts: whereby it comes to pass, that all the porters and carriers come
together unto those packs and trusses, that they are appointed to bring, and
every one at once lays his own stuff upon his own beasts. So that the same
time that serves for the pitching and setting up of one tent, is sufficient
for all. And at one and the same instant, were all carriages discharged and
laid down likewise. Moreover, every man had his charge what to do, for
purveying of victuals and all necessaries in due season: so, that one and the
same time serves for one part and for all, to make provision thereof. And as
there was a several place set by for the purveyours of necessaries meet for
them, so his armed soldiers in pitching of the camp, had that quarter which
was convenient for each kind of armature and munitio^. They knew also which it
was; and in general held and occupied it so as they never differed about it.
Certes, even in a private house and family, Cyrus thought it a special matter,
to be careful for the order and fit placing of every thing in it. (For, if one
has need of ought, he is not to seek whither to go and where to find it) but
he supposed it was a much more excellent thing, that in a camp the military
tribes and regiments should be placed in good and convenient order. For, by how
much, the occasions in war be more sudden, so much the greater is their
delinquency, who slack any time and be tardy therein. But in warfare, he saw
that exploits of great consequence, were performed by those that were ready at
hand in due time. In which regard, very diligent and careful he was, to have
every thing placed fitly and in order. First of all, he took up a lodging for
himself, in the mids of the Camp, because that place was strongest. Then had
he next about him (as his manner ever was,) his trustiest men: and round about
them the men of arms and chariotiers. For, he supposed it needful for them,
to quarter in a place of security: because, if any sudden Al-arme be given in
the Camp, they have not use of their arms out of hand: but their service
requires a long time ere they can be armed, in case they mean to go forth
with them into the field for to do any good. Moreover on either hand, as well
the left as the right, both of himself and of his said horsemen, the
Iavelotiers with their light bucklers were planted: but behind and before, the
Archers. As for the soldiers heavily armed and such as bare massy targuets,
they compassed all the rest, in manner of a wall: to the end that when need
was, that the horsemen should make themselves ready, these soldiers so well
appointed standing before them might abide the longest brunt, and give them
respit and time enough to arm in safety. And like as those heavily armed
soldiers lodged and slept keeping their order and array still, even so did the
Iavelotiers lightly armed and the Archers. That if any Al-arme were in the
night, like as those are pressed to wound the assailants close at hand, so these
Archers and Darters might be as ready to shoot their arrows, and lance their
Iavelins from them in the defense of those armed soldiers, if any enemies
approached and affronted them. Furthermore all the Captains had certain or,
Banners.
Ensigns upon their Pavilions: By which means, like as in Cities, the wiser
sort can point unto the dwelling houses of most Citizens, but especially of
such as are of employment: even so the ministers and servitours of Cyrus knew
in what places to find their Captains and what Ensigns or colors belonged to
every one. And thereby, if Cyrus had occasion to use any of them, they needed
not to seek up and down, but ran readily the next way to every one. And
because each nation was apart and not intermingled one with another, it was
much sooner seen, both when any kept his own rank in order as also whether
they did not that which was commanded. Being thus marshalled, he thought that
if any enemy either by night or day assailed him, they should come upon his
camp no otherwise, than if they fell into a place of ambushment. And, for a
one that professes the skill to embartaile an Army.
Tactick, he thought it requisite, not only to know how, readily to stretch
out in length the front of his Phalang, or display and spread it out in depth,
or reduce it from a pointed wing, into a massy squadron, or to countermarch as
readily the enemy being discovered and to wind about with it, in good sort, on
the right hand, or on the left, or in the rear: but he supposed also, it
appertained to that skill, for to be able to divide it if need required, and
each part thereof to bestow for most advantage, yea and to lead it on speedily,
where occasion is of prevention. All these points, and such like feats he
thought did belong to that Captain (...).
which is expert in the ordinance of a battle: And even so right careful and
studious was he in them all. And verily in his journeies he marched with his
host, not always alike and in the same order, but evermore accommodated to
diverse occurrents and sudden accidents: Howbeit in the pitching of his camp,
he used for the most part this dispose, which I have rehearsed.

Now when they had journeyed so far as they were come into the Medes
country, Cyrus turned in to Cyaxares for to lodge with him. And after they had
embraced one another, Cyrus said first to Cyaxares, that there was provided for
him in Babylon, a choice dwelling house with stately edifices: that if he came
thither he might keep his Court there, as in his own. Then, bestowed he upon
him very many and those right goodly presents. Cyaxares when he had received
them at his hands, sent his daughter unto him: who brought with her for him a
golden Coronet, a pair of bracelets and a collar of gold, with a most
beautiful Median robe. Here, quoth Cyaxares, I give unto you Cyrus, this young
Lady mine own daughter to be your wedded wife. For so, your father espoused my
fathers daughter, whose son you are. And this is even very she, whom you
being a child, many a time in our house, were wont to sport with and dandle as
a nurceling. And when any one asked her, whose wife she would be? she was wont
to make answer, that Cyrus should be her husband. And with her, I give over and
above, for a dowry the Kingdom of Media, and enfeoffe her wholly in it, since
I have no issue male of mine own legitimate. Thus said Cyaxares. Unto whom
Cyrus made this answer. The parentage, good Uncle Cyaxares, I commend, The
young maiden I praise, and of the dowry I like well enough: but before I
conclude of a marriage, I will have the consent of my father and mother. And
albeit Cyrus thus said, yet bestowed he upon the Damoisell, all those gifts,
wherein he thought he might gratify Cyaxares. Which done he took his leave
and went forward on his journey for Persia.

CHAP. VIII. How Cyrus arrived in Persia, where Cambyses treats with him and
his Lords and chief Commanders about the affairs of State. How he took to
wife the daughter of Cyaxares: and being returned to Babylon, sent Rulers and
Deputies into all his Provinces.
WHEN he was come so far as into the Frontiers of Persia, the rest of his
forces he left there: and went himself accompanied with his friends to the
Susa.
City: bringing with him as well beasts sufficient both to sacrifice, and also
to feast the whole nation of the Persians: as gifts meet to present unto his
father and mother and other his friends there: yea and such as might beseem
the Head Magistrates, Ancients, and noble Gentlemen called Homotimi, in
general. Moreover he gave a largess among all the Persians both men and
women, even such congiaries as at this day the King uses to deal among them,
whenever he comes into Persia. After this, Cambyses assembled a Council of
the Elders of Persia, together with such Rulers as had the menaging of the
weightiest affairs in Commonwealth. Who being come together, he called Cyrus
also unto them, and then made a speech to this effect. My Lords of Persia and
you likewise my son Cyrus: I heartily affect you all, as good reason I have,
both the one and the other. For, as I am your King, so you Cyrus are my son.
Meet it is therefore, and in all congruence it beseems, that I open here
before you, whatsoever I may seem to know, concerning your good and welfare.
As for you the Persians, in times past ye honored my son, when ye did put
an army into his hands, and chose him General thereof. And Cyrus being once
the Commander of that power, by the assistance of God has made you Persians
renowned with all men and honored throughout all Asia. And verily, as the
valiantest Knights of those that served under him, he has enriched, so to the
very multitude of Common soldiers, he has truly paid their wages and found
them food. Moreover, by erecting a Cavallery among the Persians, he has
effected, that they be as good horsemen upon the plains as others. If ye
therefore hereafter persist in this mind still, ye shall procure one unto
another manifold commodities. But if either you for your part Cyrus, being
puffed up for the late good success of fortune, shall go about to be an
absolute Lord over the Persians, thereby to make a private gain of them, as
over other nations: or ye that are natives and subjects, envious of his
puissance, endeavor and practice to depose him, and overthrow his royal
estate, know this for certain, that ye shall hinder one another in the
atchieving of many great and noble exploits. To the end therefore, that these
inconveniences befall not unto you, that ye may enjoy all good blessings, I
have thought it meet after we have sacrificed together and called the Gods to
record, to make this covenant, that you Cyrus for your part in the behalf of
the Persians, if any one either enterprise the invasion of the Persian land, or
attempt to break and abrogate the Persian laws, shall be aiding and assisting
to them with all your might: and ye likewise, that are Persians, if either any
Alien go about to dispossess Cyrus of his Kingdom, or if subjects rebel and
revolt from him, shall be ready to assist both your selves and Cyrus, according
to his Commandment. And verily so long as God shall lend me life, mine is the
Kingdom of Persia: but after my decease, Cyrus shall be King thereof, if he
survive. Who, when he As King.
once come into Persia, shall do well and devoutly to offer sacrifices for you,
like as now my self does sacrifice. But whiles he makes his abode in another
country, I suppose it will be expedient for you, that one of our line and
blood, whom ye think the very best, perform that which appertains to
religion and the worship of God. When Cambyses had uttered these words, both
Cyrus and the Rulers also of Persia agreed thereto, and by enacting a decree
ratified the same. And as they then capitulated and passed these Covenants,
calling the Gods to witness, so at this time, the Persians and their King do
constantly observe the same.

After these affairs thus accomplished, Cyrus departed, and when he was
returned back into Media, by the consent both of his father and mother, he
took to wife the daughter of Cyaxares aforesaid: of whom the speech goes even
at this day, that she was exceeding beautiful. Howbeit, some Historiographers
there be, who write that he wedded his mothers sister. But she had been
doubtless by this time an old stale woman and (...).
no fresh Damoisell. No sooner was the marriage solemnized, but presently he
took her with him and departed.

After he was come to Babylon, he thought good now to send Lieutenants General
and Presidents into those nations which he had subdued. As for the Captains of
Garrison-Castles, and those Colonels likewise over thousands, who had the
keeping of the country, he would not have them to obey any but himself. For,
this forecast he had (considering how it would prejudice his own State, in
case any of those Rulers and Lieutenants, presuming upon their wealth and the
multitude of men under them should bear themselves insolently, and shake off
the yoke of their allegiance) namely to have in readiness within the
Country, such as would make head against them. Intending therefore to bring
this about, first he thought it good policy, to call together the chief
Gentlemen of sort, and to declare this business unto them, that they might
take knowledge upon what motives they went thither who were to be sent. For, by
this means he thought they would take it the better. But if any such were
appointed Governors and Deputies first, and then afterward should understand
so much, he supposed they would bear it hard, as who might think all this was
done for their infidelity and his distrust in them. Having therefore assembled
those [principall Gentlemen] together, he spoke much after this manner unto
them! My good friends, we have in those Cities which we won, both garrison
soldiers and also Captains over them, such as then we left behind us: unto
whom at my departure I gave no other charge busily to meddle in, but only to
defend their Forts. And those surely will I not put out of their places of
Government: considering they have duly observed their commission. But other
Deputies and Governors I mean to send, for to be Presidents over the people
and inhabitants of the countries, who gathering tribute and receiving the
revenues of the State, are to pay the garrison soldiers their wages, and to
perform all services necessary: Also, to as many of you as here live, and
whom I employ about my affairs in foraine parts: I think it meet, whiles I
send them away unto these nations about some businesses which they are to
menage, for to assign house and lands there, to the end that tribute may be
brought hither unto them, and when they come thither, they may be lodged and
entertained in their own. When he had thus said, he gave houses and subjects
to command, in all the cities which he had conquered. And even at this day,
the posterity descended from them, who at that time received these Donaitons,
remain still in possession of those lands, situate and lying, some in one
country, and some in another: whereas, they themselves abide at the Court with
the King. But necessary it is moreover, quoth he, that ye consider of those
Deputies and Governors who are to go into these Provinces; that they be such,
as will be mindful, to send hither also what good thing and special commodity
there is in each land: to the end that we also residing here, may be partakers
of all the profits, that any country yields wheresoever. For, if any
fearful and dangerous object should present it self unto them, we must for
our parts defend them. Thus having said, he concluded his speech. And then such
friends of his, as he knew desirous to go upon those terms abovesaid, he made
choice of, and sent them as Lords-Deputies who were in his judgment, most meet
and worthy, to wit, into Arabia, Megabystus; into Cappadocia Artabatas;
Artacamas into Phrygia the great: and Chrysantas into Lycia and Ionia. Into
Caria, Cadusius according to the Carians request. Into Phrygia lying upon
Hellespont and into Aecolis, Pharnuchus. But into Cilicia, Cyprus, and to the
Paphlagonians he sent no Governors, because they seemed of their own accord
and unsent for, to join with him in the journey of Babylon. Howbeit, these
nations also he commanded to bring in their tribute. And as Cyrus ordained it
in those days, so at this time also: the garrisons in every Castle, are at the
Kings dispose. The Colonels also over every 1000. of garrison soldiers, are by
the King appointed, and their names enrolled and remaining with the King.

Furthermore he gave all those LL. Governors in charge whom he sent out, to
endeavor with all their whole power for to imitate his example in all things
that they saw him to do. First and principally, to ordain a troop of
horsemen and Chariotiers, out of those Persians and Allies who followed them in
their train. And as many as were endowed with Lands and Or, fair bouses.
Palaces, to force them to give attendance ordinarily at the [ (...).
Court] to the end that being studiously given to temperance, they might show
themselves ready to be employed by the Lord Governor as occasion required.
Also their children to be trained up at the Court, like as the manner was with
him. Item, that each Viceroy or Governor aforesaid, should bring those his
Courteours attending upon him, forth a hunting, and to exercise both himself
and those about him in such disports and pastimes as tend unto warfare. And
whosoever says he in proportion of his puissance and regiment, shall be able
to show unto me most charriots meet for service, the greatest number likewise
of horsemen right expert and skillful, him will I honor and reward as a
singular Associate in war, him will I consider, as a special preserver with
me both of the Persian Empire and mine. Let there be also quoth he among you
certain degrees of seats, and see that the best warriors and most valiant
Knights, sit in higher place, as it is the order with me. As for your Or. Dyec.
table I would have it answerable to mine, first to feed household servants, and
then to be sufficiently furnished for to impart an allowance for friends, and
to honor those who daily shall perform some worthy exploit. See likewise that
ye be possessed of parks, and keep wild beasts in them for game: and never
either your selves cause meat to be set upon the bourd, before ye have
labored, nor give your horses hay, unless they be first exercised. For, it is
not possible that I being one man alone, with all the humane wisdom and
prowess that is, should preserve the weal of you all: but necessary it is,
that I being a valiant person my self, should assist you with mine own also
and those redoubted Knights. Ye likewise ought to be hardy your selves and
with those brave and valourous men about you to aid me. Moreover I would have
you consider thus much, that none of these points which now I recommend unto
you, I do impose upon slaves, but whatsoever I say that ye ought to do, the
same I endeavor to practice first my self. To conclude, like as I bid you
imitate me, so teach ye those subordinate and inferior Magistrates within
your jurisdiction to follow you. And as at that time Cyrus first ordained, even
so at this day, are all the garrisons under the Kings dominion kept, all the
Courts of the Grand Rulers in like manner served and attended: all houses and
families as well great as small in the same sort ordered. Of all them that be
present in ordinary, they who have carried themselves best, are graced with
higher seats above the rest: all their journeyes are likewise appointed and
disposed. And generally many matters are compendiously dispatched by few
Governors. When he had given this charge to these Lieutenants and Deputies,
how every one was to frame and digest his affairs: and withal assigned unto
each of them a certain power of soldiers, he dismissed them, with a warning
given to them all, to prepare themselves and be in readiness: For that the
year next ensuing, he intended an expedition, and meant to review and muster
all his men, horses and chariots. Which laudable custom being first begun by
Cyrus, we understand, (by report) continues still. For, hereupon some great
man or other yearly visits the Provinces with an army: Who, if any one of
the foresaid Governors stands in need, is ready to help: if any bear
himself insolently, him he reduces into order, and teaches to be wiser. Is
there any one that neglects the bringing in of Tribute? is slack in
protecting the inhabitants? or looks not to the ground that it be tilled and
husbanded; or leaves ought else undone that is commanded, he it is that
brings all into good frame again: but if he cannot effect this by himself, he
gives notice thereof to the King. Then he no sooner hears the matter, but
consulteth deliberately about the party thus delinquent. And oftentimes they,
of whom it is commonly said, The Kings son comes down: The Kings brother;
The Kings Eye, etc. be the Visitours and Overseers: yea sometimes when they are
not seen at all themselves. For every one of these is called back again out
of the way, whenever the King commands.

Moreover we are given to understand of another invention of Cyrus (which
concerns the greatness of his Empire) whereby he quickly had intelligence
brought unto him, how the State of things went. For knowing by experience, how
far an horse would carry a man in a day without tyring, he appointed
stable-roomes distant so much one from another, and therein posthorses and
persons of purpose to look unto them. He appointed also in every of these
places, a man, fit both to receive packets of letters, and to deliver them as
they were brought: Who also should take the weary horses, and make supply with
fresh, to send forward. And it is said, that otherwhiles this manner of riding
post, gave not over all night: but after the day-messenger; immediately
succeeded another for the night. Which being thus ordered, some say, that his
posts dispatched their journeyes faster than Cranes fly. Which saying if it be
not true, yet thus much at least wise is evident, that of all journeyes by
land, it is of greatest speed. And this good came thereof, that so soon as one
perceived any occurrent, the same was looked unto with all expedition.

CHAP. IX. The expeditions that Cyrus made during his reign, and how he
returned into Persia, and there dyed.
AFTER a year come and gone, Cyrus assembled all his forces at the Rendez-vouz
in Babylon. And the report goes, that he was able to bring into the field
120000 men of Arms; of sithed Chariots 2000. of footmen, to the number of
600000. Which power being come together and in readiness, he entered into that
expedition, wherein he is said to have conquered all those nations that
inhabit, as far as from the entrance of Syria unto the red Sea.

After this, he made they say another voyage, wherein he subdued Egypt. From
which time the Empire of Cyrus extended, East to the red Sea: North, to the
Euxine Sea. Westward it confined with Cyprus and Egypt: Southward, with
Aethiopia. The bounds and marches of which Countries, some be hardly inhabited
for heat, others for cold: some for Wet.
water, others for drought.

Cyrus himself living in the very mids of these, passed the winter season for
seven months in Babylon (for it is a warm climate) the three spring months
at In Persia.
Susa: the extreme heat of summer for the space of two months in In Media.
Ecbatana. In so doing, he led his life all the year long in the temperate
heat and cold of the Spring. And so affectionately beloved was Cyrus of all
men, that people of every Nation, thought it went not well with them, if they
sent not unto him a present of what rarities either grew, or were fed, or made
by art in their country. Semblably, there was not a City or private person any
where, but he took himself made for ever, in case he could do a pleasure
unto Cyrus. For, as Cyrus received of every one such things, whereof the givers
had plenty, so he bestowed liberally upon them again, what he knew was geason
and scarce with them.

When he had lived thus until he was far stepped in years, being very aged he
made a journey into Persia, which was the seventh voyage thither after he came
unto his Empire. By which time his father and mother (as by course of nature)
had been long dead. Where, after he had sacrificed according to the laws, and
solemnly led the dance among the Persians, after the manner of the country,
and as his custom was, dealt gifts among them all, as he lay asleep one time
within the Palace, he dreamed, and saw such a vision as this: Him thought that
one came unto him resembling a personage more venerable and fuller of majesty
than any mortal wight, and said, Prepare thy self, o Cyrus, to a journey, for
shortly thou shall depart unto the Gods. With this dream and vision he awoke
and seemed in manner to take full knowledge, that the end of his life was near
at hand. Whereupon he took immediately beasts for sacrifice, and slew them to
the honor of Jupiter the Patron and tutelar God of his native country, to the
Sun likewise, and to other Gods resiant upon the tops of the mountains (for
so the Persians use to sacrifice) and then to this effect conceived his
Oraisons.

O Jupiter Protector of this my native soil, o Sun, and all ye other Gods,
accept of these Sacrifices, as the absolute perfection and finiall of many
noble and excellent Actions: as the tokens beside, of thanksgiving unto you,
for that ye have signified unto me, as well by the entrails of sacrificed
beasts, as celestial signs: as well by augury of birds as presaging Osses,
what I was to do in all my affairs, and what not? Many-fold thanks of duty I
render unto you, for that I have always agnized your especial care over me,
and never in all my fortunate and triumphant state, exalted my self above the
condition of a mortal man. And now I humbly beseech you vouchsafe unto my
children, wife, friends, and native country, long felicity. And in mine own
behalf I crave this grace, that ye would grant unto me such an end, as may
be answerable to the life ye gave me. When he had thus done and returned home
to his Palace, he had a mind gently to take his pleasant repose, and thereupon
quietly laid him down upon his bed. Now when bathing time was, his Grooms and
Chamberlaines for that office appointed, came in and put him in mind to wash*
but he answered them, that he sweetly took his rest. Others likewise
according to their place; when due time was, set his supper before him. But
Cyrus his Or, mind (...).
stomach stood to no meat, as seeming rather thirsty and desirous of drink:
Whereupon he drank with delight: Thus it fared with him the morrow, and
likewise the third day. By which time, he called for his sons: who fortuned
then to be in Persia as having accompanied their father thither. He sent also
for his friends and the chief Lords and Rulers of Persia. When they were all
come together, he began in this wise to speak unto them.

My children, and ye my friends all, that be here in presence: The end of my
life, as I evidently perceive by many signs, draws on apace, and is now
come. Your parts it is therefore, so soon as I am departed this world, both to
say and do by me in all respects, as a blessed and happy man. For, as during
my childhood I was thought to have envied the best things meet and commendable
for that age: so, in my youth I reaped the fruit of such actions as beseemed
young years. Likewise, being grown to the maturitie of man's estate, I had the
benefit of those deeds, which were answerable to men's ripeness and perfection.
Yea and as I waxed still elder and elder, me thought I perceived my strength
with progress of time to increase ever more and more. In so much as I never
found mine old age feebler, than the prime of my youth. Nor remember I, that I
ever enterprized or desired ought in my heart, but I achieved the same. My
friends verily have I seen by my means made fortunate: but mine enemies
brought into servitude. Mine own country, which heretofore was of no account
nor command in Asia, I leave now ennobled and in soverain honor above others.
And of all that ever I won and got, I know not what one parcel, I have not
held and kept still. And albeit for the time past, all matters have succeeded
to my hearts desire, yet for that I was accompanied with a certain fear, lest
I might for the future, see, hear, or feel some adverse calamity, the same
would not permit me to be hautie and proud at all, nor yet over-joyous for my
present fortunes: And now, if I my self forgo this transitory life, yet ye
my sons whom God has given me, I leave surviving behind me. My country
also and friends in blessed case: How can it then be otherwise, but that in
regard of this my state, I should of right be compted happy and renowned for
ever among men? As for the succession in my Empire, I ought to declare my will
and pleasure in that behalf also: lest if it be doubtful, unto whom I make
over the same, it may breed difference and trouble among you when I am gone.
Children mine, liefe and dear, I love you both alike: but yet I will and
ordain, that the elder of you twain, and who by good reason in regard of his
years, is more experienced in the world, shall both for policy and counsel
menage the affairs of State: and also have the command and conduct Of forces.
in all occasions needful and requisite. I have my self been so brought up,
according to the discipline of your country and mine, as that I have learned
to give place unto mine elders, not brethren only, but other natives also, in
the way as I meet them, in sitting also and making any speeches. And even so
have I trained you up my sons, from the beginning, to honor above others
aged persons, and likewise to be duly honored your selves, of your youngers.
And therefore take this advertisement, which I deliver unto you, as from one
who pronounces nothing else but things received of old, accustomable, and
agreeable to the laws. As for you Cambyses, enter upon the maine Empire, which
preeminence the Gods above, and my self, as much as lies in me, do here
devolve unto you. But unto you Tanoaxeres, I bequeath the principality of the
Medes and Armenians together, with a third Or, Seignory
Satrapie over the Cadusians. In bestowing these Seignories upon you, I suppose
that I leave a greater dominion indeed, and the name of an absolute Roialtie
unto your elder brother, but certainly to you I bequeath a felicity and happy
estate, more void of trouble, and freed from all vexation. For, I assure you, I
see not what worldly pleasure you can want. Certes, you shall enjoy all things
on earth, that may bring delight and content unto man. But the desire and
affection to difficult enterprises hardly to be achieved, the busy cares in
many affairs, a restless course of life, whiles the mind is solicited and
pricked with the emulation of mine acts and worthy exploits: to lie in wait and
espiall for some, to be forelayed and live in fear of the practices of
others: These be the troubles and dangers that of necessity accompany a
Sovereign Monarch more than you. And these things, wot you well, interrupt
ones joy with manifold troubles. And you my son Cambyses, I would have you to
know, that it is not this golden Scepter that is able to preserve your Kingdom
and Royal estate. But many friends and those trusty, are unto Kings the truest
appay and surest Scepter to rest upon. And never think that men are naturally
borne faithful friends unto you (for if that were so, the same men would be
true and loyal unto all: like as other things in one nature are seen to be
the same unto all indifferently,) But every Prince must himself make men
trusty and fast unto him: and made they are such, not by force, but rather by
beneficence and bounty. If you therefore would gain others unto you, for to
be assistant in the preservation of your royalty, begin not at any other
before him, who is sprung from the same stock that you are, to wit, your own
brother. And verily you see, that natural Citizens are more nearly linked
unto us than strangers: such as eat, drink, and daily converse with us, more
than those that live apart and be unacquainted with us. They then, that are
come of one seed and the same blood, nourished by the same mother, brought up
in the same house, loved of the same parents, calling one father and one
mother, how can these otherwise be but of all others most inward and familiar?
Suffer not then, those good blessings to be in vain bestowed upon you, whereby
the very Gods lead brethren to the entertainment of mutual amity: but over
and above this foundation already laid, build forthwith other works of love:
and thus your reciprocal friendship shall continue for ever invincible. And to
say a truth, he regards his own self, who takes care of his brother. For,
unto what other person is a brother (if he be a mighty man) such an ornament
as to his brother? And who beside is able to honor a puissant Potentate so
much as a brother? And whom will a man, having a great person to his brother
fear to wrong, so much as he will his own brother? See therefore that no man
obey him sooner, nor be readier to come and assist him than your self. For
neither his prosperity, nor adversity concerns any man more properly than
you. Consider moreover in gratifying whom, you should hope to gain more or
win greater thank, than if you do your brother a pleasure? In succouring,
shall you get a firmer Ally than him? whom is it more unseemely or dishonest
not to love, than a brother? and whom in all the world is it more decent and
befitting, to honor above the rest than a brother? It is a brother only, and
none but he, o Cambyses, who if he have the principal place of love with a
brother, incurreth not the envy of others thereby? For the tender love
therefore of our tutelar Gods, my children: As ye have any desire to gratify
me your father, honor ye one another. For, ye do not I trow believe and
know for certain, that when I end this humane life, I shall become nothing at
all and have no more being. Neither did ye so much as erewhile see my soul
visibly, but by the operations which it had, ye conceived of it as of a real
essence. Or know ye not yet, what terrors do their souls who have suffered
violence and wrongs strike into murderers hearts, and what (...) temorse and
sting of conscience.
revengefull tormentors, they send among the wicked? Think ye, that the
honors done to those that are departed, would have endured so long, if their
spirits had no power and strength remaining in them? For mine own part, my
sons, I could never be persuaded to believe, that the soul all while it is
contained within this mortal body should live, and afterward die, when it is
departed from it. For, this I see, that the soul quickens these mortal
bodies, and gives life to them, so long as it remains therein. Neither could
I ever be brought to think, that after the soul is separate from this
blockish and senseless body, it shall be it self void of sense and
understanding: But when the pure and sincere or soul.
mind is once departed, then by all likelihood and reason, it is most wise.
After the dissolution of a man, every thing is seen to return again unto its
own kind, save only the soul, which neither present nor absent can be seen.

Consider moreover, quoth he, that nothing in the world resembles man's death
nearer than sleep. But the soul of a man whiles he sleeps, shows most of
all her divinity, yea and foreseeth future things, being as it seems, at
such a time at greatest liberty. Is it so then, as I persuade my self it is?
does the soul quit and forsake the body? In all reverence and honor therefore
unto my soul, perform that which I request you to do. But were it nothing
so, but that the soul as it abides in the body, so it perishes with the
same, yet fear ye the Gods who are immortal; who see all things and be
omnipotent, who maintain and keep this orderly course of the whole world, so
(...) make a goodly show for number and multitude: but in the wars I assure
you there is no use of them at all. And that appears well enough by the
events that ensue thereof. For, ye shall have enemies sooner than friends
conversant in their land. And verily, Cyrus when he took his horsemen from
among the light skirmishers a far off, and furnished them with complete
armor and their horses likewise, giving every one of them a lance in his
hand, brought in the close fight at arms end. But now, neither do they
skirmish lightly and aloof with the enemy any more, nor yet join and cope
together: Semblably the footmen in these days have their light bucklers, their
short courtell-axes and cimiters to serve in the wars and to fight close as
they did in Cyrus his time: howbeit even these will not willingly so much as
come to buckle at handfight. Neither use they their hooked chariots in that
sort as they were ordained by Cyrus. For he advancing and honoring his
Chariotiers, made them good soldiers, and had them upon all occasions pressed to
assail armed enemies. But the Persians in these days, knowing not what they
be that are upon the said Chariots, think one as good as another, and those
that be unpractised, able to equalize the trained. A certain kind of onset and
charge they give, I must needs say, but before they come among the enemies,
either they willingly drop out of their chariots, or else leap forth of
purpose. Whereupon the Chariots and teemes both, being abandoned of their
drivers and rulers, do many times much more hurt unto their friends, than to
their enemies. Certes, they being privy to themselves, and knowing well enough
how slenderly they be appointed for the wars, withdraw their heads out of the
field: neither dare any of them prepare himself to battle, without aid of
the Greeks. Nay, they know well enough that they must have Greeks in their
army, whenever they mean either to make war one with another, or upon the
Greeks themselves.

Thus have I performed, as I think, that which I purposed and undertook. For,
I say and avow, that the Persians and their Associats, are in these days more
irreligious in the worship of the Gods, more unkind and unnatural to their
kinsfolk, more unjust to others, and for martial affairs more effeminate
than in former times. To conclude, if there be any man disposed to hold up a
side, and maintain the contrary to this position that I have set down, let
him but consider their own deeds and actions, and he shall find that they will
testify on my behalf, and verify my words in the end. (...) 80. Febr. 1620.
Recast. 50. April. 1629. aetatis Interpretis 77. PH.

FINIS.

