Of these Enchiridions, a Repenting Prodigal, (upon occasion of his late
return) thinks himself bound, to give ten thousand for others good; and takes
it for an incomparable favor, that it came into his heart so to do. Yielding a
threefold reason thereof. First, because it is probable, that that Medecin
which has cured one desperate Patient; if it be communicated may work the same
effect upon others: and that those thoughts, which our experience has found
comfortable, and useful to our selves: should (with neglect of all censures) be
communicated to others. Secondly, because the retribution of his obedience, may
in some proportion, answer his offense; as was that of Paul's, who as he had
done more evil to the Saints, then all the rest of the Apostles: so he labored
more then they all, in adding to the Church such as should be saved, 1 Cor.
15.10. Act. 9.16. Thirdly, for that at exemplary offenders, leave their
inventions and evil practices to posterity; whereby they cease not to sin,
though they cease to live, (for when dead they are still tempting, and still
sin so long as they cause sin; yea how should not every Turk that perishes by
Mahomets juggling, add to the pile of his unspeakable horrors?) So if we sow
good works, succession shall reap them; and we shall be happy in making others
so.

Good Report from Bad men, no mean disparagement. TOGETHER With a Cordial for
Christians; when they receive evil, for well doing.
BEING An Arrow drawn forth of that Sententious Quiver: Entitled, A Christian
Library, or a pleasant and plentiful Paradise of practical Divinity. SECT. 1.
Convert,
REverend Sir, when (by a providence) you heard me swear and curse; you gave me
a printed Paper to convince me of that foul, audacious, provoking, and yet
unprofitable sin, and withal entreated me to read three larger Tracts, viz. A
short and sure way to grace and salvation. The hearts Index, with A serious and
pathetical description of Heaven and Hell.

This to me (whom you had never before seen) seemed no less absurd then
strange; and having a dark heart, in stead of great love and thanks, I
returned you a most churlish and uncivil answer, and accordingly when I met
with my drunken consorts, I read it with no less scorn then ignorance; but
before I had done, it made me tremble! nor could I rest, until I had perused
the other three Books, which have so represented the very thoughts, secrets,
and deceitfulness of my heart unto my conscience; that I could not but say of
them, as the woman of Samaria once spoke of our Savior; They have told me all
things that ever I did, John 4.29. Which made me conclude with that Unbeliever,
1 Cor. 14.24, 25. That the hand of God was in the contriving of them; Nor could
they ever have so done, if they were not of God, as the young man in the
Gospel, reasoned with the Pharisees touching Jesus, when he had opened his
eyes, that had been blind from his birth, John 9.32, 33. Which is such a mercy,
that no tongue is able to express! for till then, I went on in the broad way,
and worlds road to destruction, without any mistrust. What change they have
wrought in me, (with Gods blessing upon the means) and how greatly I have
longed to see you again, I forbear to mention: Only this, when I had read
them, in reference to Levit. 19.17. and in compassion to their precious souls,
who are neither able not willing to help themselves, I have (and not without
some comfortable success) taken up your trade, in giving the Papers and
mentioning the Books to all that I hear blaspheme my Maker, or belch out their
spleen against goodness: As well considering, that one soul is of more worth
then the Indies.

And indeed, whose heart would it not make to bleed to see what multitudes
there are that go blindfold to destruction! and no man offer to stop or check
them, before they arrive there, from whence there is no redemption, Matthew.
7.13.14. 1 John 5.19. Revel. 20.8. and 13 16. Romans 9.27. 2 Timothy 2.26. 2 Cor.
4.4. Ephesians. 2.1. to 4. John. 8.44.

And certainly it more then behooves me, (as being myself snatched out of the
fire, Jude 23.) to do what I can to draw others of my brethren after me, in
imitation of Andrew, John 1.41. and Philip v. 45. and the women of Samaria,
John 4.28. to 41. and Peter, Luke 22.32. Acts 2.41. and 4.4. etc. 3. and of
Moses, Exodus 32.32. and Paul, Romans 9.3. Neither are we of the communion of
Saints, if we desire not the salvation of others. Yea how could I be thankful
to my Redeemer? that has done and suffered so much for me! or in the least
love God and my Neighbor? if I should not thus resolve; as by my sins and bad
example, I have drawn others from God; so now I will all I can, draw others
with my self to God; yea what a shame were it? If I should not be as faithful a
servant to my Savior? As I have formerly been to Satan. Saul converted, will
build up as fast as ever he pulled down, and preach as zealously, as ever he
persecuted.

Only there is a great rub in the way, which makes me fear I shall not be able
to hold out, for I am so scoft and scorned where ever I come, both by Parents,
Friends, and Enemies, for giving these Papers, that they make me even weary of
my life, as the daughters of Heth did Rebecca, Genesis 27 46. And yet I dare not
leave off, since our Savior faith expressly, that he will be ashamed of such
at the latter day, who are now ashamed for his sake, to bear a few scoffs and
reproaches from the World. Mark 8.38. Nevertheless, I am in a wonderful
strait! for if I seek to please God, and discharge my conscience, I displease
the world, and that will hate and vex me; if I seek to please the world, I
displease God, and he will hate and condemn me.

Now though the case he plain enough, for better it is to have all the world
mine enemies, then my Maker, my Redeemer, and my Conscience, Acts 5.29. Yet it
almost beats me off, from being religious, back to the world: And certainly he
must be more spirit then flesh, that can contentedly make himself contemptible,
to follow Christ, be pointed at for singularity, endure so many base and vile
nicknames, have his Religion judged hypocrisy, his godly simplicity silliness,
his zeal madness, and the like malicious and mischievous constructions made, of
whatsoever he speaks or does: For my part, I could better abide a stake, ( God
assisting me) then the mocks, scoffs, and scorns, which every where I meet
withal: Its death to me to be mocked, as it fared with Zedekiah, Jer. 38.19.

Now could you cure me of my cowardliness, as you have of my cursing and
swearing, I should have cause indeed to bless the time that ever I saw you, and
why not? Since God has given you the Tongue of the learned, to administer a
word in season to them that are weary, Esaias. 50.4.

Sect. 2. Minister, If you would shake off this slavish yoke of bondage and
fear, in which Satan for the present holds you, and be rid of this bashful
devil. Search the Scriptures, and they will both inform your judgment, and
confirm, comfort, and strengthen you against the worlds hatred* and calumny,
though there needs no more then, Ephesians. 6.11, 12. James 3.6. 2. Tim. 3.12.
Matthew. 5.10, 11, 12, and 10.22. and 24.9. Luke 2.34, 35. and 4.29. John 15.20,
Genesis 3.15. 1 John 3.13. 1 Pet. 4.12, 13, 14. Luke 14.27. and 6.26. Philip.
1.28, 29. Revel. 2.13. Do but seriously ponder those few places, and consider
by whom they were spoken, and then certainly you will confess, that if there be
any nectar in this life, it is in sorrows we endure for righteousness: And
methinks, when I hear goodness calumniated, I bear it the easier, because the
servants of vice (and none else) do it.

But the better to help and further you, in this great work, take these ensuing
Notions, Aphorisms, and conclusions, which perhaps alone, may both imbolden
you, and stop many of their mouths that scoff you.

First, men scoff and scorn you; and why is it? But because you delight no less
in goodness, then they do in lewdness: Because you in great love to their
souls, will be at the cost to give them Books, thereby to convince them of
their swearing and cursing, and use the likeliest means, to stop them in their
way to destruction, because you would draw them to heaven, as they do many to
hell. A grievous fault, if a wise man may have the judging of it! As I pray
consider of it you that have brains; Its no fault in them to be perjured! but
for you to keep your vow and promise which you made in your baptism, is both a
crime and shame. It has ever been the worlds great quarrel, we refuse to
pledge them, in their wicked customs, and will rather obey God then men. As
wherefore was Cain wroth with his brother Abel, and afterward flew him? but
because his own works were evil, and his brothers good, 1 John 3.12. Wherefore
was holy David had in derision, hated, slandered, contemned, and made a byword
of the people, a song of the drunkards? But because he followed the things that
were good and pleasing to God, and in him put his trust, Psalm. 11.2. and 22.6,
7, 8. and 37.14. and 69.10, 11, 12. Why were all the just in Solomon's time, had
in abomination, and mocked of the wicked? but because they were upright in their
way, and holy in their conversation, Prove. 29.27. Or those numberless number of
Martyrs, Rev. 6.9. even killed; but for the word of God, and for the testimony
which they maintained.

That great Dragon the Devil, and his subjects make war, and are wroth with
none but the woman and her seed, which keep the Commandments of God, and have
the testimony of Jesus Christ, Revel. 12.17. Lot vexed himself, because he saw
men bad; these because they are good: not because Gods Law is broken, but
because others keep it better then themselves. It is the cursed zeal of these
men, to malign the good zeal of all men. But,

Sect. 3. Secondly, men hate, scoff, and scorn you, but who? are they not
such as these? a crew of Drunkards, Psalm. 69.12. or a sort of vicious persons
following their own lusts? 2 Pet 3.3. Or a company of abject persons? Psalm.
35.15. like those enemies, Acts 17. lewd fellows of the baser sort? ver. 5. A
rout of profane, godless, irreligious Atheists and ignorant fools, that do no
more know the power, then Turks and Heathens know the truth of godliness,
Psalm. 14.1. to 6. And it is a shrewd suspicion, that he who is a mocker is an
Atheist. It well becomes him to mock at Religion that denies a God: And its
evident enough, that he denies a God, that mocks at godliness. However take
this for a rule: As Cham was worse then Noah, whom he der^ded, and Ishmael
worse then Isaac, whom he mocked; and Saul worse then David, whom he
persecuted; And Jezebel worse then Naboth, whom she defamed and murdered: So
they that are wont to jeere and persecute others, have greater faults
themselves, and cause to be jeered and despised by others, the which they know
not how to cover, but by disgracing of others: And let them but spy (as they
are as Eagle-eyed to our faults, as they are pur-blinde to their own) the
smallest spot in a good man's face, it shall excuse all the sores and ulcers in
their bodies. Again,

Sect. 4. Thirdly, why do these and the Devil hate you? but because God has
chosen you. Why are you a thorn in their eyes, as Job was in the Devils? but
because you fare better then they. As why did Cain envy and hate Abel? but
because the Lord had respect unto Abel, and to his offering; but unto Cain and
his offering he had no respect, Genesis 4.4.5. Wherefore did Saul so hate and
persecute David? but because he was so praised, and preferred of the people
before himself; And the Lord was with David, and prospered him in every thing
he took in hand, 1 Samuel 18.7, 8.12, 13.28, 29. David's success was Saul's
vexation: Yea, he found not so much pleasure in his kingdom, as vexation in
the prosperity of David: And so of his brother Eliabs envy and ill will to him,
1 Samuel 17.28. And of the Elder brothers envy (in the parable) to his younger
brother, when his father so kindly entertained him, Luke 15.25, 26, 27, 28.
which is meant of the Jews envying the Gentiles conversion.

Envy is sick, if her neighbor be well: and the good man's honor, is the
envious man's torment? As it fared between Haman and Mordecai: and as hereafter
the glory of Christ shall add to such Reprobates confusion, when they are
driven to confess, This is he whom we once had in derision: But,

Sect. 5. Fourthly, are you scoft, and scorned for goodness? a great matter;
our Savior Christ was far wose dealt withal. Yea, his whole life, even from
his Cradle to his Grave, was nothing else but a continued act of suffering. He
was called of his enemies Conjurer, Samaritane, wine-bibber, Sabath-breaker,
etc. was scoft at, scorned, scourged, crucified, and what not. Yea he suffered
in every place, in every part: In every place, hunger in the Desert, resistance
in the Temple, sorrow in the Garden, contumelies in the Judgment Hall,
crucifying without the City, etc. In every part, his eyes ran down with
tears, his temples with blood, his ears tingled with buffettings, glowed with
reproaches: They afflicted his taste with gall, spit in his face, pierced his
head with thorns, his hands and feet with nails, his side with a spear, his
heart was full of sorrow, his soul with anguish, his whole body was sacrificed
as an offering for sin: And yet he suffered all for us, to the end he might
leave us an example that we should follow his steps. Neither was it so much
what he suffered, as with what affection, willingness, and patience he
suffered; that did nobilitate the merit of his sufferings.

And the Disciple is not above his Master, Matthew. 10.24, 25. Shall we then
think much to taste of that Cup of which our Savior drank so deep. Christ
wore a Crown of Thorns for me, and shall I grudge to wear this Paper cap for
him? said John Huss, when they put a cap upon his head, that had ugly Devils
painted on it, with the Title of Heresy. The Apostle gives a general
testimony of all the Saints in the Old Testament, saying, some endured the
violence of five, some were wracked, others were tried by mockings, and
scourgings, bonds and imprisonments, some stoned, some heaven in sunder, some
slain with the sword, and the like, being such as the world was not worthy of,
as you may read, Heb. 11. Yea, our Forefathers here in England, most willingly
under-went those fiery trials, and shall any of Christ's hand shrink under the
burden of an ayery trial only?

Neither have any of Gods Children, (from the first to the last) been exempt
from suffering what you do; namely tongue-persecution. And it is an everlasting
rule, He that is borne after the flesh, will persecute him that is borne after
the spirit, Gal. 4, 29. When CHRIST was borne, all Jerusalem was troubled, and
Herod cut the throats if all the children in Bethlehem, Matthew. 2.3. 10 22. --
All was quiet at Ephesus before St. Paul came thither: but then there arose no
small strife about that way, Acts 19.23. etc. Again,

Sect. 6. Fifthly, Are you scoft and scorned? how can the world pleasure or
honor you more? First, for Honor; Reproach in Gods service is the best
preferment: For as in the Wars, to have the hottest and most dangerous service
imposed upon them by their General, is accounted the greatest honor. Neither
will he confer the same upon any, but the stoutest and most valiant: So even
^^aring the Cross with Christ, is as great a preferment in the Court of
Heaven, as it is in an earthly Count, for the Prince to take off his own Role,
and put it on the back of his servant, as you may perceive by the Lords speech
to Paul, Acts 9.15, 16. and 23.11. And our Saviors words to his Apostles, Acts
1.8. Yea, says Father Latimer, to suffer for Christ, is the greatest
privilege that God gives in this world. And the story of Job is a bookcase to
prove it. Yea, the same Job professes, that if his adversary should write a
Book against him, he would esteem it his crown, Job 31.35, 36, 37.

Whence Moses esteemed the rebuke of Christ greater rules then all the
treasures of Egypt, Heb. 11.26. Whence Peter and John, when they were beaten
and imprisoned, departed from the Council, rejoicing, that they were counted
worthy to suffer rebuke for Christ's Name, Acts 5.41. They esteemed it a grace
to be disgraced for him. And so it has been accounted by the best and wisest
ever since. They that reproach me, says St. Austine, do against their wills
increase my honor, both with God and good men. And another of the Fathers, It
is the highest degree of reputation to be evil spoken if for well doing. It is
no small credit with the vile, to have a vile estimation. Tertullian thought
much the better of Christianity, because Nero persecuted it. Calvin made the
reproaches, and evil speeches of his enemies a matter of great joy to him. To
be disliked of evil men, says Picus Mirandula, is to be praised for
goodness; their dispraise is a man's honor, their praise his dishonor.

Never did Neckarchife become me so well, as this chain (said Alice Drivers)
when they fastened her to the Stake to be burnt. And what said a French Martyr,
when a Rope was put about his fellows neck; Give me that Gold chain, and dub
me ^ Knight also of that noble Order. And shall we grutch to bear. a few
scoffs for CHRIST? No; but in our greatest streights and extremities let us
acknowledge it a favor, and give GOD thanks: And indeed it is the sum of all
Religion, to be thankful to GOD in the midst of miseries. But if thou can
not bear a few ill words for thy Savior, without murmuring and impatience?
how would thou endure wounds for him, yea how would thou afford him thine
^^ires, and write patience with thine own blood? Then,

Sect. 7. 2ly. For profit; Let a good man be scoft and scorned for a fault, lie
will be the better for it to his dying day. His enemies by their evil tongues
shall beget in him a good and holy life. For happily they shall bring to his
remembrance sins forgotten, wean him from the love of the world, discover
whether he be sincere or no, make him humble, exercise and improve his
patience, and all his other graces, and augment his glory. Yea, his patient
suffering shall be rewarded here, as well as hereafter, Deuteronomy. 23.5. 2 Samuel
16.12.

Blessed are they which suffer for righteousness, for theirs is the kingdom of
heaven, Matthew. 5.10. to 14. They that suffer here for well doing, shall be
crowned hereafter for well suffering. And certainly nothing that we can suffer
here, can be compared with those woes we have deserved in Hell, or those joys
we are reserved to in Heaven. By our crosses sanctified, weight is added to our
Crown of Hiss. Our Enemies, says Bernard, are but our Fathers Goldsmiths,
working to add pearls to the Crowns of the Saints. Whence Moses chose rather to
suffer affliction with the people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season, Heb. 11.26. And hence it is that the Holy Ghost calls upon us to
rejoice, and be exceeding glad, when men shall revile, and persecute, and say
all manner of evil against us falsely for Christ's sake: and tells us, we are
blessed and happy, for that the spirit of glory, and of God does so much the
more rest upon us, which on their parts is evil spoken of, but on our part is
glorified, 1 Pet. 4.12, 13, 14. Mat. 5.11, 12. Phil. 1.28, 29. Rev. 2.13. And
this has made thousands to embrace the very flames, when they might easily
have been freed, by exchanging eternal happiness, for temporary and transitory.

Your cruelty is our glory (laid the Martyrs in Tertullians time) to their
persecutors; For the harder we are put to it, the greater shall our reward be
in Heaven. It is to my loss, said Gordius the Martyr, if you bare me any thing
of my sufferings.

Sect. 8. Now if in conclusion, the most malicious practices of our worst and
greatest Enemies (by the blessing of God, and our well husbanding of them)
prove no other in effect to us then did the malice of Joseph's brethren,
Mistress, and Lord to him, then the malice of Haman to Mordecai and the Jews:
Then Balacks malice to the Children of Israel: Then the Devils spite to Job:
Then the malice of Achitophel and Shimei to David: Or then the Arians malice to
Paphnutius; all which made for their inestimable good, benefit and advantage.
Then grutch not at it, neither mutter at the matter, but receive what ever
comes, with humility, patience, piety and thankefulness. Yea, if none but evil
men do it, and that because you do better, or fare better then they; and that
what you suffer, is nothing to what Christ, and the best of Saints have
exceeded you in: Let it make you no less joyful then thankful: Yea, let it
cause you to cry out, O the wonderful and sovereign goodness of our God! that
turns even our poisons into cordials. And henceforth, think it no shame, but
count it your glory. Be not grieved, when you have so much cause to rejoice;
for it shows you to be borne of God, your enemies to be the seed of the
Serpent. The worlds hating you, shows that Christ loves you, and has chosen
you out of the world. Yea, this is to your Adversaries a sure token of
perdition, but to you of salvation, and that of God.

Yea, do nor only bear with them, but pity and pray for them, for they need
no help to be miserable: As who sell them on work, but he that will pay them
with damnation (though God offers them better wages) Nor is it so much they, as
the Devil in, and by them. It is his mind in their mouth, his heart in their
lips, his Arrow shot by man's Bow; He lends them his lies and malice, and
borrows their tongues to utter them, because the Devil wants a tongue,

True, they have sworn themselves Christ's faithful servants and soldiers: but
they will fight only for sin and Satan. And least their own sins should not
damn them deep enough; they do, what in them lies, draw others to damnation:
For it is not enough for them to be bad themselves, except they rail at, and
persecute the good, and that against their own consciences. As for example,
Pilate judged Christ guiltless, yet he put him to death; and Festus
acknowledged Paul without crime, yet he left him in prison.

Only they have some wit in their anger: For how should Naboth be clenly put
to death, if he be not first accused of blasphemy? 1 Kings 21.13. And the like
of Joseph, Elias, Jeremiah, Paul, Stephen, and our Savior Christ himself.
Indeed these want that power that their fellow persecutors have had: and
therefore can only show their teeth, otherwise their hearts are as bloody, and
as full of the Serpents enmity as Doegs was. In the mean time we are safe
enough, since their words are but like a boys squib, that slashes, and cracks,
and stincks, but is nothing. And how little is that man hurt, whom malice
condemns on earth, and God commends in heaven.

Only I wish they would take notice, that he is bottomlesly ill, who is so
far from being good himself, that he hates goodness in others. They are
desperately wicked, that cannot so much as endure the sight of godliness; that
are displeased with others, because they please God, and murmur like the
Scribes and Pharisees at the same things whereat the Angels rejoice. Such an
one is upon the very threshold of Hell, and none but a Cain, or a Devil in
condition will do so. Nor could they do it, if the Devil were not in their
hearts.

Sect. 9. Object. But their usual objection is, why will you be so singular?
are you wiser then all? this is but want of discretion.

Answ. Suppose such do think as they speak: Shall Lot leave his Righteousness,
for such an imputation of singularity? Or shall he net depart Sodom, because
the whole City thinks it better to stay there still? Shall Noah leave building
the Arc, and so himself and his whole household perish, because all the world
else thinks him have-brain'd? Or shall the name of Roundhead dishearten us
from the service of God? No, but after the way, which to profane men is most
ridiculous, let our souls desire to serve Jesus Christ, Acts 24.14. It was
Noah's happiness, that he followed not the Old worlds fashions; It was Lots
happiness, that he was singular in Sodom. It was good for Nichodemus that he
was singular among the Rulers. Yea, it was happy for Ruben, that he was
opposite to all his brethren. Happy for Caleb, and Joshuah, that they were
opposite to the rest of the Spies. Happy for Luther, that he was opposite to
the rest of his Country. And in case Jesus Christ, and his twelve Apostles be
on your side, no matter if all the world be against you. For better be saved
with a few, as Noa was in the Arc, then be drowned with the world, and damned
for company.

Sect. 10. And now for conclusion; Let all Scoffers take notice, that as they
scoff at us, so God laughes at them in Psalm. 2.4. Yea, judgments are prepared
for these scorners, and stripes for the backs of these fools, Pro. 19.29. God
shall rain down fire and brimstone upon such scorners of his word, and
blasphemers of his people as thou art, said Mr. Philpos the Martyr, to mocking
Morgan, and the rest of his persecutors.

But on the contrary, let not the taunts of an Ishmael make any Isaac out of
love with his Inheritance. A wise man will not be scoft out of his money, nor a
just man be stouted out of his Faith. Yea, for a man to be scoft out of his
goodness, by those that are lewd, is all one, as if a man that sees, should
blinde-fold himself, or put out his eyes, because some blind wretches, revile
and scoff at him for seeing. Or as if one that is found of limbs, should lump
or maym himself to please the Criple, and avoid his taunts. Wherefore proceed
good Sir, without ever growing faint: Let others serve the God of this world,
resolve you to serve the God of heaven.

Now if any swearer, curser, or scoffer has the wit, let him read those four
Books formerly mentioned, which for his, and others good, are all (together
with this) to be had for a penny, being an hundred and eleven pages, and
contain as much matter, as is usually to be found in a book of half a crown
price. The place where any one may have them, is at the full door on your left
hand, in Bores-head Court by Criplegate, Or at the Black Swan by Moore-gate.

FINIS.
Farewell my little Benjamin, go out into the world and prosper: And the
blessing of him that dwelt in the bush, Deuteronomy. 33.16. even the God of Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, Ex* 3.6. go along with thee: For otherwise Old Adam will
prove too strong for Young Melancthon.

To such as for my great love, and no little cost, do hate me; and for using
the likeliest means to stop them in their way to destruction, do scoff, and
traduce me.

Who so rewards evil for good, evil shall not depart from his house, Prove.
17.13. But,

ARe you Christians? Or do you own him that made you, and that has bestowed so
many millions of mercies upon you? 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. 2 Pet. 1.4. If so, fight
not for Satan against your Savior, 2 Chro. 13.12. Acts 5.39. and 23.9. who
has done and suffered so much for you, Romans 4.25. and 5, 6. to 20. and 6.23.
and 8.2. Rev. 1.5. 1 Pet. 2.24. For this is an unkindness, next door to
unpardonable, Mar. 3.22, 29, 30. Hate me not to the death, for ^^ewing you the
way to eter^all life, Acts 11.14. as those Libertines did Stephen, Acts 7.54.
and the Jews Christ, Mat. 27.27. Or if you do, what shall you gain, or I loose
thereby? when this your malice is a sure token to you of perdition, but to me
of salvation? as the Apostle tells you. Phil. 1.28. Ishmael did but flout
Isaac, yet for that flout, he is by the Holy Ghost branded for a persecutor,
and shall fry in hell flames everlastingly, Gal. 4.29. Those little children, 2
King. 2. did but mock Elisha, but for that mock 42. of them were devoured of
wild Bears, verse. 24. Cham did but deride Noah, but that alone brought his
Fathers curse upon him, and Gods upon that, Genesis 9.25. which Prophetical curse
lies so heavy upon Chams posterity (the Ethiopians) to this day (though almost
four thousand years since) and they are so devoted to slavery, that Parents
will sell their own children to be slaves, to such as trade in Negroes, And yet
the most dreadful part of the curse, lies upon them in spirituals, there being
few of Chams posterity in any age of the world, that have ever been taken into
the Church. Wherefore take heed of mocking or scoffing at Religion, or the
Religious: For (as the Serpents hissing, sufficiently betrays his malice, so)
that, viz. scoffing alone, infallibly declares you to be the Serpents seed, and
children of the Devil, Acts 13.10, Genesis 3.15. Nor is it you, but the Devil in
and by you; as you may see by Genesis 3.1. to 6, Ephesians. 2.2. Matthew. 16.22, 23. 1
King. 22.22, 23. John 13.2. Acts 5.3. And none but a Cain, or a devil in
condition will envy, because his own works are evil, and his brothers good, 1
John 3.12. 1 Pet. ^.4.

But they will not believe th^^ are (...) perish, Prove. 29.1. 1 Samuel 2.25. And
as good admonish a bruit beast, as a scorner, Prove. 12.1. and 13.1. and 19, 29.
For scorners are upon the very threshold of hell, Luke 26.31. 2 Chr. 25.16. As
how dreadfully does St. Peter speak o(...) his words are these, and the like:
They walk after the flesh in the lust of uncleanness, they are presumptuous,
and self-willed, they speak evil of the things which they understand not, they
sport themselves in their own deceivings, they are reserved unto the day of
Judgment to be punished, yea (says the Apostle) as natural bruit beasts,
they are made to be taken and destroyed (mark that! they are made to be taken
and destroyed) and shall utterly perish in their own corruption, and shall
receive the reward of unrighteousness, to whom the blackness of darkness is
reserved for ever, 2 Pet. 2.9. to the end. O woeful and doleful condition!

Beware then of scoffing at goodness, for there cannot be a greater argument of
a foul soul, given up to Satan the God of this world, 2 Timothy 2.26, Ephesians. 2.2. 2
Cor. 4.4. And to prove you a Soldier belonging to that great Red Dragon that
fights against Michael and his Angels, Rev. 12. Who when his hands are bound,
casts a stood of reproaches out of his mouth against the Church, and the
remnant of her seed which keep the Commandments of God, and have the testimony
of Jesus Christ, ver. 15, 16, 17.

Because sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore
the heart of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil. Though a sinner
do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I know that
it shall be well wish them that fear God, etc. Eccles. 8.11, 12.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for James Crump.


