THE Young Lawyer's RECREATION. BEING A CHOICE COLLECTION Of several Pleasant
Cases, Passages, and Customs IN THE LAW: For the Entertainment as well as
Profit of the Reader.

-- Si quid novisti Dulcius Istis,
Candidus imperti, si non, his utere mecum.
LONDON, Printed for Samuel Briscoe, over against Will 's Coffee-House in
Russel Street, Covent Garden, 1694.

TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THOUGH no Profession is more Honorable and Profitable than that of the Law,
witness the many great Titles and vast Estates acquired thereby, yet (perhaps)
it is of all other Studies the least Pleasant and Entertaining, which (no
doubt) is the Reason that so few are contented with the Honor to know It,
without the other Encouragement; and to such as have That, I do not say it is
Unpleasant; or if it be, yet when the Pill is Gilt, it is easily swallowed.
However, in some sense every Man is a Lawyer, that is, supposed to be so; so
Charitable is the Law to allow Ignorance in none, because every Man would make
that his Excuse, and none could tell how to confute him. And (as the Lord
Vaughan says) it is irrational to suppose Men ignorant of those Laws for the
breach of which they are to be punished.

But how Intricate soever this Study may seem in general, it cannot be imagined
but that among so great variety of Cases there will be found some of a double
Capacity, as well to please as to instruct.

Of this sort, Reader, is the Collection I here present you with, taken from
the Reports, and other Authentic Books of Law, all along most faithfully
quoted and referred to.

Some may Object against the Method, or indeed that I have used none, but this
let the Table answer, there being many Things that follow naturally enough,
which yet cannot properly be reduced under the same Head; my Design herein
being chiefly to Delight, which I thought could not be so effectually done any
other way by

Your very humble Servant Philonomus.

THE TABLE.
A
ABatement of Writs, Page 19, 178, 179, 192, Accessory, Page 35, 36, 144.
Action, Page 59. Action upon the Case, Page 59, 140, 164, 167, 168, 180.
Addition, Page 190, 192. Admiralty, Page 136, 137, 170. Advowson, Page 189.
Age, Page 3, 15. Agent and Patient, Page 50, 51. Alien, Page 122. Arrest, Page
85, 163, 198. Assault. Page 202. Attainder, Page 46. Attaint, Page 38, 39, 79.
Attorney, Page 191. Atturnment, Page 77. Averment, Page 101. Avoidance, Page
86, 87. Award. Page 77.
B.
Baron and Feme, Page 57, 97, 111, 113, 123, 169, 182, 183, 184, 185, 193, 194,
195, 204, 205. Barrister, Page 110. Bastardy, Page 103, 108, 117, 118, 119.
Battle, Page 64, 65. Bond, Page 76, 82, 83, 101, 164, 195. Brothel-houses,
Page 34. Buggery, Page 10, 11, 194. Burglary, Page 12, 59, 60.
C
Certainty, Page 40, 41. Challenge, Page 52, 60, etc. 66. Champion, Page 64,
65. Chancemedley, Page 9, 102. Chancery, Page 111. Charter, Page 54. Chattels,
Page 19, 134, 204. Cockpit, Page 153. Commitment, Page 165, 166. Common and
Commoner, Page 180. Condition, Page 41, 42. Confirmation, Page 119, 120.
Contract, Page 42, 85. 168. Coparceners, Page 135. Copyhold, Page 154. Costs,
Page 8. Counselor and Client, Page 126. Creation of a Gentleman, Page 191.
Customs, Page 130, 131. Cutpurse, Page 32.
D
Deed, Page 147. 196. Delivery, Page 147. Demurrer, Page 144. Deodand, Page 17.
Descent, Page 88. Devise, Page 20, 74, 88, 94, 95, 178. Discontinuance, Page
47, 48, 181. Distress, Page 77, 157, 206. Divorce, Page 4, etc. 113. Dower,
Page 133, 134. Drinking, Page 95, 96. Duel, Page 60, 61, 62, 63, etc. 66, etc.
E
Election, Page 201, 202. Enrollment, Page 196. Error, Page 78, 79. Estate,
Page 43. Evidence, Page 109, 110, 183. Exchange, Page 150. Excuse, Page 44, 45.
Execution, Page 26, 27, 28, 46, 89, 90. Executor, Page 129. Extinguishment,
Page 125, 188.
F
Felo de se, Page 24, 25 Felony, Page 4, 5, etc. 12, 14, 17, 18, 22, 23, 28 37,
58, 97, Fine, Page 102, 151, 153. Fine of Lands, Page 52, 121, 123, 124, 177.
Forfeiture, Page 106, 154. Forgery, Page 75. Formedon, Page 53. Freehold, Page
43, 134.
G
Gift, Page 24, 76, 78. Good Behavior, Page 202, 203. Goods, Page 22, 141,
148, 149. Grants, Page 46, 47, 76, 86, 146, 175, 176.
H
Hangings, Page 186. Heir, Page 19, 88, 135.
I
Idiot, Page 2, 3. Jews, Page 114, 115. Ignorance, Vide the Preface.
Indictment, Page 4, etc. 10, 11, 13, 23, 24, etc. 32, 33, 58, 150, 158, 159,
160, 194. Infant, Page 17, 52, 53, 56, 86, 97. Intention, Page 85. Jointenants,
Page 133. Judge, Page 50, 158, 159. Judgment, Page 45, 46, 48, 49. Jury, Page
74, 109. Justification, Page 102, 103, 104, 139, 143, 167. Justs, Page 64.
L
Law, Vide Preface, etc. Page 105. Presumption of Law, Page 105, 106. Lease,
Page 39, 40, 41, 78, 119, 188. Legacy, Page 18, 72, 73, 80, 87, 88, 94, 95,
141. Livery of Seism, Page 53, 54, 55, 77. Lunatic, Vide Non Compos Mentis.
M
Manslaughter, Page 70, 71, 72, 92. Market Overt, Page 142. Marriage, Page 1,
2, 3, 4, 5, 108. Master and Servant, Page 169, 171 172. Masters in Chancery,
Page 111. Monk, Page 46. 47. Murder, Page 70, 71, 111, 112, 115.
N
Names, Page 19, 81, 178, 179. Night, Page 77. Non Compos Mentis, Page 16, 25,
26. Non Obstante, Page 75. Nonsuit, Page 108. Not Guilty, Page 200. Nuisance,
Page 153, 154.
O
Oath, Page 114, 116, 124. Offenses, Page 96, 97. Outlawry, Page 92, 93, 94,
107.
P
Patent, Page 159. Payment, Page 185. Pictures, Page 186. Play, Page 132, 139,
140, 193. Plea in Bar, Page 14, 134, 173. Possession, Page 173. Practice, Page
83. Prerogative, Page 112. Presentation, Page 189, 201. Prince Committed, Page
165, 166. Privilege, Page 186. Prohibition, Page 57, 116, 190, 204. Promise,
Page 195. Property, Page 142, 189, 190. Provocation to a Challenge, Page 66.
Q.
Queen, Page 166. Queen Dowager, Page 167,
R
Rape, Page 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Common Recovery, Page 122, 184. Release, Page
98. Remainder, Page 20, 21, 107. Remitter, Page 181. Rent, Page 105, 145, 146.
Replevin, Page 155, 156. Reversion, Page 47. Rings, Page 128. Robbery, Page 30,
31, 32. Ropedancing, Page 153, 154.
S
Sheriff, Page 50, 91, 101, 198. Simony, Page 187, 189. Slander, Page 56, 86,
91, 148, 156, 160, 161, 162, 173, 174, 175, 186, 199, 200, 203, 204. Sodomy,
Vide Buggery. Stews, Vide Brothel-Houses. Surrender, Page 39, 40.
T
Tail, Page 136, 177. Tenant in Common, Page 22, 136, 137. Tenant by Courtesy,
Page 99, 100, 149, 150. Tender, Page 197. River Thames, Page 84. Trades, Page
82, 83, 158, 159. Treason, Page 26, 29, 151, 152, 167. Trespass, Page 43, 44,
57, 96, 97, 101, 103, 104, 139, 157, 169, 180. Trick, Page 84. Trover. Page
193. Tournaments, Page 64.
V
Uncertainty, Page 40, 41, 45. Voucher, Page 138. Uses, Page 43.
W
Wife, Page 130, 168, 182, 183, 184, 185, 193, 204. Will, Page 43, 130.
Witches, Page 18, 156, 157. Witness, Page 124, 127, 128, 197. Woman Bailiff,
Page 24. Words, Page 29, 30, 70, 71, 151, 152, 181. Writ, Page 19.
Common Law.
BEfore I come to particular Cases, it may not be impertinent, I hope, to
consider a little what is meant by these Words the Common Law, perhaps not so
commonly understood as imagined, since I find the Learned themselves differ
about them; and first let us see what is said in Doctor and Student, Lib. 2.
cap. 2. there you may observe that by the Common Law is understood such things
as were Law before any Statute made in that point that is in question, so as
that point was holden for Law by the general or particular Customs and Maxims
of the Realm, or by the Law of Reason, and the Law of God, no other Law added
to them by Statute, or otherwise. For Instance, It is said that at the Common
Law Tenant by the Courtesy, and Tenant in Dower were punishable for Waste, i.
e. that before any Statute of Waste made, they should be punished for it by the
Grounds and Maxims of the Law used before the Statute made in that point; But
Tenant for Life or Years were not punishable by the said Grounds and Maxims
'till remedy was given against them by Statute, and therefore it is said that at
the Common Law they were not punishable for Waste.

Glanvil and Bracton affirm that the Law of England was Jus non scriptum in
their times: And Sir John Davies says (in the Preface to his Reports) that our
Ancient Reports of the Law are but Comments or Interpretations upon the Text of
the Common Law, which Text (says he) was never originally written, but has
ever been preserved in the memory of Men, though no Man's memory can reach to the
Original of it, for (goes he on) the Common Law of England is nothing else but
the Common Custom of the Realm, and a Custom which has obtained the force of a
Law is always said to be Jus non scriptum, for it cannot be made or created
either by Charter or by Parliament, which are Acts reduced to Writing, and are
always matter of Record; but being only matter of Fact, and consisting in use
and practice, it can be Recorded and Registered no where but in the memory of
the People, for a Custom takes beginning and grows to perfection thus; when a
reasonable Act once done is found to be good and beneficial to the People, and
agreeable to their nature and disposition, then do they use it and practice it
again and again, and so by frequent iteration and multiplication of the Act, it
becomes a Custom, and being continued without interruption time out of mind, it
obtains the force of a Law. So far Sir John Davies: But sure what the Lord
Vaughan lays down, fol. 163. is very consonant to Reason, that in truth most of
the Common Law cannot be conceived to be Law otherwise than by Acts of
Parliament, or Power equivalent to them, whereof the Rolls are lost, for always
there was a Power and Practice of making new Laws: And again fol. 358. Many
things are said to be prohibited by the Common Law, and indeed most things so
prohibited were primarily forbidden by Parliament, or by a Power equivalent to
it in making Laws, which is the same, but are said to be prohibited by the
Common Law, because the original of the Constitution or Prohibiting Law is not
to be found of Record, but is beyond memory, and the Law known only from
practical proceeding and usage in Courts of Justice, as may appear by many Laws
made in the time of the Saxon Kings, of William the First, and Henry the First,
yet extant in History, which are now received as Common Law. So if by accident
the Records of all Acts of Parliament now extant, none of which is elder than 9
H. III. (but new Laws were as frequent before as since) should be destroyed by
Fire, or other Casualty, the Memorials of Proceeding upon them found by the
Records in Judicial Proceeding, would upon like reason be accounted Common Law
by Posterity.

A DOCTOR in PHYSIC Eminent for the CURE of all sorts of VENEREAL, SCORBUTIC,
and DROPSICAL PERSONS, still lives in Great Knight riders Street, nigh
DOCTORS-COMMONS, and of whom any Person may have Advice, and a perfect CURE,
let his or her Disease be of the longest Date, and with the worst of SYMPTOMS.
His HOUSE is known by a BLUE BALL over the DOOR.

THE Young Lawyer's RECREATION.
Marriage.
A MAN contracts with a Woman to Marry her, and after Marries another Woman,
and the first Sues him in the Spiritual Court, and by Sentence there, his
Marriage with the Second is adjudged void, and that He and the first Woman are
Man and Wife: Noy was of Opinion (as Sergeant Windham said) that by this
Sentence the Man and first Woman were complete Baron and Feme, without any
other Solemnity: But this was denied by Justice Twisden, who said the Marriage
must be Solemnized before they can be Man and Wife, 1 Siderf. 13. Sir Robert
Pain's Case.

So Note, The Spiritual Court may unmarry, i. dissolve a Marriage, but they
cannot Marry by such Sentence, for Matrimony is not accounted consummate by our
Law until it be celebrated in facie Ecclesiae, or, etc. by one in Sacred
Orders, according to the Form in the Book of Common Prayer.

Two were Married by a Parson in Holy Orders during the time of the Act against
Marriages by them, and which enabled Justices of Peace to Marry: The Justices
of Peace upon Petition, dissolved this Marriage; but the whole Court now was of
opinion, That the Marriage being once lawfully Solemnized, and without
Impediment, the whole World could not dissolve it, being by one in Sacred
Orders, though at an Alehouse, and at Twelve of the Clock in the Night. 1
Siderf. 64. Tarry and Brown's Case.

Whether an Idiot may contract Matrimony.
THOUGH it be generally said, That the Contracts of Idiots are void, because such
are natural Fools, yet it was adjudged, Trin. 3. Jac. B. R. in the Case of
Styles and West, that an Idiot may consent to Marriage, and his Issue shall be
Legitimate. Shep. Gr. Abr. tit. Idiot, and 1 Siderf. 112. and by my Lord Coke,
the Wife of an Idiot shall be endowed. 1 Inst. Shep. says there, If he have so
much Knowledge that he can read, or learn to read by instruction and
information of others, or can measure an Ell of Cloth, or Name the Days of the
Week, or beget a Child, Son or Daughter, or such like, whereby it may appear he
has some light of Reason, then he is no Idiot naturally; and cites for this
Terms Ley. Some doubt if Begetting be any Evidence of Reason; what think you of
an Horse or an Ass that beget, but most unreasonably; say rather he can beget
like these by Instinct, Natural perhaps to him as his Folly. Conjunctio Maris
and Feminae est de jure Naturae. 1 Inst. 187.

The Age of Consent to Marriage.
A MAN cannot consent to a Marriage before the Age of Fourteen, which are his
Years of Discretion; but a Woman may consent at Twelve, for the Law tenders the
speedy advancement of Women, quia maturiora sunt vota Mulierum quam Virorum.

Note, If the Man be above Fourteen, and the Wife under Twelve, or if the Wife
be above Twelve, and the Man under Fourteen, yet may the Husband or Wife so
above the age of consent, disagree to the Espousals, as well as the party that
is under the age of Consent; for the Advantage of disagreement must be
reciprocal. Babington and Warner's Case. 3. Inst. 89.

Marriage in some sort Felony by the Common Law.
BY the ancient Law of England, if any Christian Man did Marry with a Woman
that was a Jew, or a Christian Woman Marry with a Jew, it was Felony, and the
Party so offending should be burnt alive. 3 Inst. 89.

Contrahentes cum Judaeis, Judaeabus, Pecorantes, and Sodomitae in terra vivi
confodiantur, etc. Fleta lib. 1. cap. 35.. Contrahentes.

Whether a Man divorced from his Wife causa Adulterii, and Marrying a Second in
her Life, be a Felon.
ONE Williams Married a Wife, and was divorced from her causa Adulterii, and
then Married another, for which he was indicted upon the Statute of 1 Jac. cap.
11. for having two Wives: And if this were within the Proviso of that Statute
which provides for those who are divorced, was the question. [The Words are,
Provided that this Act shall not extend to any Person or Persons that are or
shall be at the time of such Marriage divorced by any Sentence had, or
hereafter to be had in the Ecclesiastical Court, nor to any Person or Persons
where the former Marriage has been, or hereafter shall be by Sentence in the
Ecclesiastical Court, declared to be void, and of no effect.] 'Twas resolved by
Brampston and Heath, (caeteris absentibus) that it is within the Proviso, for
it speaks generally of Divorce, and this is a penal Law. Heath said, That by
the Law of Holy Church the Parties divorced, causa Adulterii, might Marry, but
Pars rea, not without License; and cited the case of Ann Porter (which see Cro.
Car. 461. 2. 3.) who was divorced from her Husband causa saevitiae, and
afterward Married one Rooks, and being indicted upon this Statute, it was
doubted and debated whether it were within the Proviso or not; but resolved, It
was not, because only a divorce a Cohabitatione, and a temporal Separation
until the Anger passed; but the Divorce here is a Vinculo Matrimonii. Trin. 17.
Car. March Rep. 101.

Quaere the difference between these Cases, for though in former times it was
questioned, Whether a Man and his Wife Divorced causa Adulterii might Marry
again, yet now it is made clear by the Canons, That they may not, for this is
no absolute Divorce, being ex causa subsequente, and only a Separation a Mensa
and Thoro, freeing the Parties from the performance of Conjugal duties only,
the one with the other. Vide Cro. Eliz. 908. Stephen's and Totty's Case, and
Moor 665. where the Husband after such a Divorce, causa Adulterii, released an
Obligation made to his Wife before the Coverture, and adjudged a good Release;
which proves that the Coverture continues, and that there is no dissolution a
Vinculo.

In the Case of Ann Porter, as reported by Crook, it was said by the Court, If
she were suffered to be within the Proviso, many would be Divorced upon such
pretense, Scil. Causa Saevitiae, and instantly Marry again, whereby many
inconveniences would ensue; whereupon she was advised, Not to insist upon the
Law, but to procure a Pardon to avoid the danger; for it was clearly agreed by
all the Civilians and others, that the Second Marriage there was unlawful, and
she in danger to be adjudged a Felon by the Statute. Note the Decree was, Quod
propter Saevitiam of her Husband toward her, she should be separated a Mensa
and Thoro from him; but no Word of Divorciamus was therein; and expressly
intimated in the Sentence, that she should not marry to any other during the
life of the said Porter.

It should seem therefore, that where Sentence of Divorce is given, as in the
Case of Williams, causa Adulterii, there such Persons Marrying again shall not
be in danger to be Felons by the Statute, which being a Penal Law concerning
Life, ought to be favorably expounded in favorem vitae; and that the Proviso
extends to this kind of Divorce ex causa subsequente, i. e. Adultery, the Words
being of Divorces in general, where Sentence is given in the Ecclesiastical
Court, and not only where the former Marriage is by Sentence declared void. Yet
some are of opinion, That the Proviso does not intend, but when there is
Sentence of an absolute Divorce, as in Causes preceding the Marriage, viz. Pre
contract, Consanguinity, Affinity, and Frigidity, which dissolve a Vinculo, and
the Marriage declared void ab initio. But vide 3 Inst. 89. and Hales, Pla. Cor.
tit. Felenies by Stat. that this Branch of the Statute in respect of the
generality of the Words, privelege the offender from being a Felon, as well in
the case of the Divorce a Mensa and Thoro, as where it is a Vinculo Matrimonii;
and yet in the case of the Divorce a Mensa and Thoro, the Second Marriage is
void, living the former Wife or Husband. And if there be a Divorce a Vinculo
Matrimonii, and the adverse Party appeal, which is a continuance of the former
Marriage, and suspend the Sentence; yet after such a Divorce, the Party
Marrying is no Felon within this Statute, in respect of the generality of this
Branch, although the Marriage be not lawful.

The offender against this Statute may have the benefit of his Clergy. 3. Inst.
89.

Where notwithstanding one is acquitted, he shall be forced to pay Costs.
IF Baron and Feme are Sued in the Ecclesiastical Court for Polygamy, and there
it appears that the Wife was Married before to I. S. within the age of Consent,
and afterward at the Age of Consent did disagree, and Married the Defendant,
and so the Defendants are acquitted; yet if the Court tax Costs to the
Plaintiff, no Prohibition shall be granted, because they have Jurisdiction of
the Cause, and it is the Custom there to tax costs where the Plaintiff has
causam litigandi; and a Prohibition was denied. 2 Roll. 299. Blackdon's Case.

See 2. Brownl. 36. the same Case reported contra, that a Prohibition was
granted, for it was injustice to allow Costs to one who had vexed them without
cause, and when they had given Sentence against the Informer.

Chancemedly, or casual Homicide.
IT is where a Man doing a lawful act, without intent of hurt to another,
happens to kill a Man casually. By the Law of God there was a City of Refuge
appointed for such Person to flee unto, for the Act happening in such sort,
seems to be the work of God himself. But by our Law he shall forfeit his
Goods, in regard that a Subject is killed by his means.

Shooting at Rovers, or at a Bird, or hewing a Tree, and the Hatchet-head flies
off, or a Schoolmaster in reasonable manner beating a Scholar, or a Father his
Son, or a Master his Servant, and Death ensues, it is Chancemedley. Dalt. 351.
352. Quaere, If a Man beat his Wife for Correction only, and she die thereof.

King William Rufus was shot by accident in New Forest by Sir Walter Tyrel. And
in the Reign of King James I. Archbishop Abbot, a Man of a holy and
unblameable Life, (meddling with edged Tools that he used not to handle in his
Study) by a sad accident killed a Keeper with a forked Arrow, as he was
shooting at a Deer, where-upon he retired to Guilford in great perplexity; but
the King granted out a Commission to enquire whether casual Homicide did make
the Archbishop irregular, and in the disquisition of it, he found many Friends
that restored him to his Palace. Wilson's King James. 198.

Buggery, or Sodomy.
BUGGERY is a detestable and abominable Sin, not to be named amongst
Christians, committed by carnal Knowledge against the Ordinance of the Creator,
and Order of Nature, by Mankind with Mankind, or with brute Beasts, or by
Womankind with brute Beasts. 3 Inst. 58.

Bugeria is an Italian Word, and signifies this description; and it was
complained of in Parliament that the Lombards (Italians) had brought into the
Realm the shameful sin of Sodomy, inter Christianos non nominandum, as it is
said Rot. Parl. 50 E. 3. nu. 58.

The words of the Indictment be, Contra ordinationem Creatoris and naturae
ordinem, rem habuit veneream, dictumque puerum carnaliter cognovit, etc. so as
there must be penetratio, i. e. res in re, either with Mankind, or with Beast,
but the least penetration makes it Carnal Knowledge. See the Indictment of
Stafford, Coke, lib. Intr. for committing Buggery with a Boy, for which he was
attainted and hanged.

Emissio Seminis makes it not Buggery; but is an Evidence in that case of
penetration. 3 Inst. 59.

If the Party Buggered be within the age of discretion, it is no Felony in him,
but in the Agent only. ib.

Note the Words of Stat 25. H. 8. c. 6. that makes this offense Felony, are, No
Person offending, etc. which extends as well to a Woman as to a Man; and
therefore if she commit Buggery with a Beast, she is a Person that commits
Buggery with a Beast, to which end the Word Person was used, and the rather,
for that somewhat before the making of this Act, a great Lady had committed
Buggery with a Baboon, and conceived by it, etc. ibid.

And of late Years one Hick's was Indicted at the old Baily upon this Statute
having suffered a Dog to copulate with her, which being fully proved, and found
by the Jury, she was condemned, and hanged at Tyburn, and the Dog on a Tree by
3 Keeble 800.

See Hutton's Rep. 115. the Lord Audley's Case. He was Indicted that Deum prae
oculis non habens, nec naturae ordinem respiciens, sed instigatione Diabolica
motus, etc. Vi and Armis in quendam Florence Fitz-Patrick, Yeoman, insultum
fecit, and cum eodem felonice, and contra naturam rem veneream habuit, ipsumque
F. etc. carnaliter cognovit, peccatumque illud Sodomiticum, etc. cum eodem F.
commisit, etc. The like Indictment for the same offense, with the same Person
at another time; and being tried by his Peers, Twelve of the Lords acquitted
him, and Fifteen found him guilty; and so he had Judgment.

Felony, Rape, Burglary.
IF a Woman kill a Man that assaults her to ravish her, it is not Felony,
because he comes to commit a known Felony himself. Hales, Pla. cor. tit.
Felonies.

If a House be broken and entered with an Intent to commit a Rape, it is
Burglary, whether the Intent be executed or not: (Hales, tit. Burglary) For
note, Rape was Felony at Common Law; then by Stat. Westminster. 1. c. 13. made but
Misdemeanor; then by 13 E. 1. c. 34. restored to Felony again.

Rape is a violent deflouring of a Woman, or carnal Knowledge had of the Body
of a Woman against her Will.

If a Woman at the time of the supposed Rape do Conceive with Child by the
Ravisher, this is no Rape; for a Woman cannot Conceive with Child, except she
does consent. Dalton's Inst. cap. 160. page 392.

One W. D. was Arraigned in Banco Regis upon an Indictment of the Rape of a
Girl of the age of Seven Years, Scil. Quod ipsam felonice rapuit and carnaliter
cognovit, he pleaded Non Culp. but was found Guilty upon the Evidence of
several Matrons: But note, the Court doubted of a Rape in so tender a Child;
but had she been Nine Years old, and more, then it might be otherwise. Dyer.
304. pla. 51. Post.

(The Law is, That a Wife shall not be endowed, unless she be past the age of
Nine Years, at the time of the Death of her Husband, and the reason is Quia
Junior non potest dotem promereri neque virum Sustinere. Co. Lit. Sect. 36.
(which perhaps was the ground of the Opinion in the former Case.)

One Woman Principal to the Rape of another.
IF a Man and a Woman be present, with purpose that the Man shall by Violence
carnally know the Body of another Woman there also present, against her Will,
and the Man does the fact in the presence of the other Woman; she being present
shall be a Principal Ravisher as well as the Man; He the Agent, and She the
Co-adjutant: And so one Woman may be a Principal to the Ravishment of another.
Dod. 138. Dalton 392. cap. 160.

To Ravish a Harlot, Felony.
IT is a good Plea in an Appeal of Rape to say, That before the Ravishment
supposed, she was his Concubine, as Bracton says. And yet to ravish an Harlot
against her will is Felony; for Licet Meretrix fuerit ante, certe tunc temporis
non fuit, cum nequitiae ejus reclamando consentire noluit. Bract. l. 2. Dalton
ubi sup.

Consent to Rape.
NOTE, Though if a Woman prove with Child, it is no Rape, for that she cannot
conceive unless she consent, as it was observed before; yet if a Man Ravish a
Woman, who consents for fear of Death, this is Ravishment against her Will, for
that Consent ought to be voluntary and free. Dalton ubi sup.

To Ravish a Woman where she neither consents before nor after; or to Ravish
any Woman with force, though she do consent after, is Felony, and the offender
has no benefit of Clergy. ibid. 13 E. 1. 34. 6. R. 2. c. 6.

But if a Woman be under Ten Years, then, though she do consent before, yet by
Stat. 18. El. cap. 7. it is a Rape. Hales, tit. Felonies by Stat. Cromp. 47.
Dalt. 393.

By the Statute, 6 R. 2. c. 6. both the Ravisher and Ravished, where she
consents after the fact, are dissabled to have, or challenge any Inheritance,
Dower, or Joint Estate, after the death of her Husband, or Ancestor.

Note, Where Rape is, there must be penetratio, and emissio Seminis in the
Case. Co. 12. 37. For although there be emissio Seminis, yet if there be no
penetration, that is, res in re, it is no Rape; for the Words of the Indictment
be, Carnaliter cognovit, etc. 3 Inst. 60. But emissio Seminis may be an
Evidence in case of Rape of Penetration. 3 Inst. 59. See Hutton's Rep. 116. in
the Lord Audley's Case.

At what Age a Woman may be Ravished.
THE doubt that was made in 14 Eliz. Dyer, f. 304. (before) at what age a Woman
Child might be Ravished, was the cause of the making of the Act of 18 Eliz.
cap. 6. for plain declaration of the Law [That if any Person should unlawfully
know and abuse any Woman-Child under the age of Ten Years, every such unlawful
and carnal Knowledge should be Felony, and the offender therein being duly
convicted, shall suffer as a Felon, without allowance of Clegry.] 3 Inst. 60.

A Woman Attainted, Ravished.
IF a Woman attainted be Ravished, after Pardon she shall have an Appeal of
Rape. 3 Inst. 215.

We read in Story, that chaste Lucretia being Ravished, she was found in extreme
heaviness, and it was demanded of her, Salvan'? She answered, Quomodo Mulier
salva esse potest laesa Pudicitia? And yet thereof it is truly said, Duo
fuerunt, and unus commisit Adulterium.

Non compos Mentis.
A MAN Non sanae Memoriae gives to himself a mortal Wound, and before he dies,
he becomes of sound Memory, and after dies of this Wound; here he shall not be
felo de se; but if one gives himself such a Wound while he is of sound Mind,
and after becomes non sanae Memoriae, and dies thereof, there he shall be felo
de se.

Deodand.
IF a Man fall from a Ship, Cart, or other Vessel, in aqua dulci, fresh Water,
it is a Deodand; otherwise in salt Water, being any Arm of the Sea, though it be
in the body of the County; because of the dangers it is subject to upon the
raging Waves in Windy and Tempestous Weather. 3. Inst. 58.

If an Infant within the age of discretion, scil. Fourteen, be slain by a fall
from a Cart, Horse, Mill, etc. no Deodand; but if slain by a Horse, Bull, or,
etc. then a Deodand. ibid.

A Lodger kills one that assaults a House, no Felony.
IF one break a House with intent to rob it, or kill any therein, and one
within the House, though not the Master, (but a Lodger, or a Sojourner) kill him;
this is no Felony. Cro. Car. 544. Cooper's Case.

Physician kills his Patient.
IF one that is no Physician allowed, take upon him to give Physic, and kill
his Patient, this is Felony; but if he be a Physician allowed, and do so out of
Ignorance or Negligence, Contra. Stamf. lib. 1. page 16. Fitz. Coron. 163.

To provoke Love by Witchcraft, the Second offense Felony.
IF one shall the Second time use any Conjuration, or Witchcraft, to provoke
Love in a Maid, this will be Felony, by 1 Jac. cap. 12.

Servant kills one that has killed his Master.
IF one has killed my Master, and I in a hasty and fresh pursuit of him, kill
him, no Felony. Kytch. 25. If he be a Thief, 21 H. 7. 41.

Two Persons of the same Name pretend to a Legacy.
IF there be a dispute between two Persons pretending to the same Legacy; as if
the Devise be to Thomas Styles, without other distinction of the Person, and
there be two of that Name, of equal respect with the Testator, or both alike,
his Friends, or Acquaintance; here the Executor has his election to deliver
the Legacy to which of them he please. Yet some are of opinion, that in such
case the Legacy is void by reason of uncertainty. Orphan's Legacy 441. 10.

Faith and Troth.
A WRIT was ad Respondendum I. S. and Fidei Uxori ejus. The Defendant pleaded
in Abatement of the Writ, because the Name of the Wife was Faith in English,
and pretended it should be Fidi. Rhodes said, he knew a Wife who was called
Troth, and Named Trothia in Latin, and well: And the Writ was adjudged good in
the former Case. Goldsb. Rep. fol. 86.

Where Chattels shall go to the Heir.
SEE some instances hereof in Dr. and Stud. lib. 2. cap. 12. and 1 Inst. 8. a.
in fine. 18. b. in med. and 185. b. fine, and the office of an Executor 81. and
84.

If a Man be seized of a House in Fee, and a Window or Door of the House be
taken off to be mended, during which the owner of the House dies, yet his Heir
shall have them by descent, and not the Executors; for though in fact they are
for a time divided from the House, yet in judgment of Law they always remain
parcel of it. 1 Roll. Rep. 102.

Devise good to him in Remainder, though the particular Tenant die before the
Testator.
ALTHOUGH where a Legatary dies before the Testator, a Bequest of Goods or
Chattels to such Legatee becomes void to his Executors; yet if there be a
Devise of Land to one for Life, the Remainder to another in tail, and the
Devisee for Life die before the Testator, the Devise of the remainder continues
good. See Perk. Sect. 567, 568.

Where a Remainder may depend without a particular Estate.
A LEASE is made to A. for the Life of B. the remainder to C. in Fee; A. dies,
now before an Occupant enters, here is a Remainder without a particulur Estate,
and yet good. 1. Inst. 298. a. in medio.

Which Case disproves the opinion of Justice Clinch. Owen's Rep. 39. viz. That
every Occupant ought to be in possession at the time of the death of the
Tenant, and that otherwise the Law casts the Interest upon him in the
Reversion; which opinion is there likewise denied by Gaudy and Chute Justices:
And as my Lord Coke says, He is in Law called an Occupant, because his Title is
by his first Occupation, (which sure cannot be supposed in the time of the
particular Tenant) A Remainder is defined to be the residue of an Estate in
Land, depending upon a particular Estate, and created together with it, yet as
it may in some case depend without a particular Estate: So the continuance of
the particular Estate is not always requisite to support the Remainder; as if a
Lease be limited to an Infant, the Remainder over, and after the Infant
refuses, yet the Remainder is good. So if a Copyholder in Fee surrender to the
use of the Lord for Life, the Remainder over; So if Tenant for Life, and he in
the reversion, grant their Estate to the Tenant himself for Life, the Remainder
over, it is good. 1. Siderf. 360.

A Remainder vesting in an Instant, yet good.
A RENT is granted to the Tenant of the Land for Life, the Remainder in Fee,
this is a good Remainder, though the particular Estate continued not, for eo
instante that he took the particular Estate, eo instante the Remainder vested,
and the suspension in Judgment of Law grew after the taking of the particular
Estate. 1 Inst. 298. a. in medio.

A Rent is granted to B. for the Life of A. the Remainder to the Heirs of the
Body of A. this is a good Remainder, and yet it must vest upon an instant. 7 H.
4. 6. immediately upon the Death of A. who is cestuy que vie, the Remainder
vests in his Heir. See Finch's Law. 69.

Tenants in Common.
LEASE for Life, Remainder to the right Heirs of I. S. and I. D. who are
living, their Heirs shall take it in common; not Jointly, for that they cannot
take at the same time, for by intendment both Fathers will not die together. 18
E. 3. 28.

Felonious Taking.
A. SEEING the Horse of B. in his Pasture, and having a mind to steal him,
comes to the Sheriff, and pretending the Horse to be his own, obtains him to be
delivered unto him by a Replevin; yet this is a Felonious and Fraudulent
taking, for the Replevin was obtained in fraudem Legis. 3 Inst. 108. 1 Siderf.
254.

Felony to take his own Goods.
A MAN delivers Goods to another, and afterward the Bailor privately steals
them from the Bailee, with an intent to charge him, etc. this is Felony, and in
judgment of Law he is said in this case to take the Goods of another, the
Bailee having Jus possessionis, or a special property; and the Bailor Jus
Proprietatis. 3 Inst. 110. Keilway 70. Ha. Pl. Cor. 67.

One Far a Solicitor had obtained Judgment against the casual Ejector, upon
which he sued an Hab. fac. possessionem, and the Sheriff's Bailiffs entered the
House with him, and broke a Door where certain Goods were, and took the Woman
to whom they belonged, and required special Bail of her, for default whereof
they carried her to Newgate, and then Far took the Goods, which were of a
great Value: For which being Indicted, and it appearing he did all this with
intention to take the Goods, without any color of Title for his Client, he was
found guilty of Felony; and though he was a Solicitor, and had been convicted of
Forgery before, yet he could not read, and so he was hanged. 1 Sid. 254.

Felony to steal a Winding Sheet.
ONE William Haines dug up the several Graves of three Men and one Woman in
the Night, and took their Winding-Sheets from their Bodies, and buried them
again: 'Twas resolved, The property of the Sheets remained in the owner, scil.
in him (or them) who had property therein when the dead Body was wrapped
therewith ( viz the Executors, Administrators, or other owner of 'em) vide 11.
H. 4. If Apparel be put upon a Boy, it is a gift in Law, 'cause the Boy has
capacity to take it; but a dead Body being but a lump of Earth, has no
capacity: Also it is no gift to the Person, but bestowed on the Body for the
reverence toward it, to express the hope of Resurrection: Besides, one cannot
relinquish the Property he has to his Goods, unless they are vested in
another. Note, Haines had his Clergy, and escaped death. Co. 12. 113. and 3
Inst. 110.

Woman Bailiff.
A WOMAN may be sued in Account as Bailiff, for she may well discharge the
Office of a Bailiff. 19 H. 6. 5. b.

Felo de se, yet the killing involuntary.
A. GIVES B. such a Stroke, as he fells him to the Ground; B. draws his Knife,
and holds it up for his own defense, A. in haste meaning to fall upon B. to
kill him, falls upon B's Knife, whereby he is wounded to death; he is felo de
se, for B. did nothing but what was lawful in his own defense. 3 Inst. 54. Ha.
Pl. Cor. 28. and Bac. Elem. 4.

So if a Gun be discharged with a murtherous intent at I. S. and the Piece
break, and strike into the Eye of him that discharges it, and kills him, he
is felo de se, and yet his intention was not to hurt himself, but in
criminalibus sufficit generalis malitia intentionis cum facto paris gradus, for
if one persuade another to kill himself, and is present when he does so, he is
a Murderer: But Quaerae, If A. lay impoisoned Fruit for a Stranger, and his
Father or Mother come and eat it, Whether this be petty Treason, because it is
not altogether Crimen paris gradus. See Bacon's Elem. 59, 60.

A Non compos mentis wounds himself mortally, and dies Compos.
ONE during the time that he is Non compos mentis, gives himself a mortal
Wound, but dies not thereof till he has recovered his memory, he is not Felo de
se, because the Stroke which caused his death was given when he was not compos
mentis, Et Actus non facit Reum, nisi men's sit Rea. 3 Inst. 54.

A Man that is Non compos mentis kills another, this is no Felony; the same for
a Lunatic during his Lunacy. But Note, He that incites a Madman to kill
another, is a Principal Murderer.

A Non compos mentis cannot commit Treason.
THE ancient Law was, that if a Madman had killed, or offered to kill the King,
it was Treason. 4 Rep. 124. ( Nec veniam laeso numine casus habet. Ovid.) But
now by Stat. 25. E. 3. by force of these Words, Fait compasser ou imaginer la
mort. He that is not Compos Mentis, and totally deprived of all compassings and
imaginations, cannot commit High Treason by compassing, etc. 3 Inst. 4. 6.

Where Execution was done upon a Man for the death of a Child, the Child being
then alive.
IN the County of Warwick there were two Brethren, the one having Issue a
Daughter, and seized of Lands in Fee, devised the government of Her, and his
Lands, until she came to Sixteen Years, to his Brother, and died. The Uncle
brought up his Niece very well both at her Book and Needle, and she was eight
or nine Years old: Her Uncle for some offense correcting her, she was heard to
say, Oh good Uncle kill me not; after which time she could not be heard of,
though much enquiry made: Whereupon the Uncle being suspected of her Murder, and
the rather because her next Heir was upon Examination. 8 Jac. Regis committed
to Goal for suspicion of Murder, and admonished by the Justices of Assize to
find out the Child, and so bailed him until the next Assizes: Against which
time, (for that he could not find her) and fearing what would fall out against
him, took another Child as like unto her both in Person and Years as he could
find, and apparelled like the true Child, and brought her the next Assizes; but
upon view and examination, she was found not to be the true Child, and upon
these presumptions he was Indicted, found Guilty, had Judgment, and was Hanged.
But the truth of the case was, The Child being beaten over night, the next
morning when she should go to School, ran away into the next County, and being
well Educated, was received and entertained of a Stranger; and when she was
Sixteen Years old, at which time she should come to her Land, she came to
demand it, and was directly proved to be the true Child. Herein is a double
caveat; First, to Judges, that in case of Life they judge not too hastily upon
bare presumption. Secondly, to the innocent Man, that he never seek to excuse
himself by false or undue means, lest thereby offending God he overthrow
himself as the Uncle did. 3 Inst. 232.

A Non compos mentis shall not suffer Execution for Felony or Treason, etc.
IF a Man commit Treason or Felony, and confesses the same, or be thereof
convict, and after become De non sanae Memoriae, he shall not be called to
answer: Or if after judgment he become De non sanae Memoriae, he shall not be
executed, for it cant be an Example to others. 3. Inst. 4.

In Felony the Will was anciently taken for the Deed.
A YOUTH was arraigned, for that he would have stolen the Goods of his Master,
and came to his Master's Bed where he lay asleep, and with a Knife attempted
with all his force to have cut his Throat, and thinking he had indeed done it,
he fled; whereupon the Master cried out, and his Neighbors apprehended the
Youth, and all this Matter being found by special Verdict, in the end he was
adjudged to be hanged. 3 Inst. 5. Quia voluntas reputabitur pro facto. But
Note, For a bare compassing or plotting the death of a Man, either by Word or
Writing, he should not have died, but there must have been an overt deed
tending to the execution of his compassing, as in the case aforesaid. ibid.

If one beat another grievously, and leave him for dead, and he recover; this
is not Felony now.

Words not Treason unless set down in Writing.
SINCE the Stat. of 25 E. 3. diverse latter Acts of Parliament have ordained,
that compassing by bare Words or sayings should be High Treason, but all they
are either repealed or expired. And it is commonly said, That bare Words may
make an Heretic, but not a Traitor, without an overt Act. And the wisdom of
the makers of Stat. 25 E. 3. would not make Words only to be Treason, seeing
such variety amongst the Witnesses are about the same, as few of them agree
together. But if the same be set down in Writing by the Delinquent himself,
this is a sufficient overt act within this Stat. Note the Act says, per overt
fait, per apertum factum, and not per apertum dictum. 3 Inst. 14.

Cardinal Pool, although a Subject to H. VIII. and of the King's Blood, (being
descended from George Duke of Clarence, Brother to King Edw. IV.) yet in his
Book of the Pope's Supremacy, written about 27 H. 8. incited Charles the
Emperor, then preparing against the Turk, to bend his Force against his
natural Sovereign Lord and Country; the Writing of which Book was a sufficient
overt act within this Statute: and to move the Emperor the more, he made H.
VIII. almost as ill as the Turk, in these Words, In Anglia sparsum nunc est hoc
semen, ut vix a Turcico internosci queat, idque authoritate unius coaluit. ibid.

But Words without an overt deed are to be punished in another degree, as in
High Misprision, ibid. which is imprisonment during life, forfeiture of all
Goods, Debts, and Duties for ever, and the Profits of his Lands during his
Life. 3 Inst. 36.

Robbery.
IF a Theif command one to deliver his Purse, who does accordingly, and then
the Thief finding little in it delivers it back to him, this is Robbery.

If the true Man's Purse be fastened to his Girdle, and the Thief cut the
Girdle, whereby the Purse falls to the Ground, this is no taking to make it
Robbery, for the Thief had never any Possession thereof; but if the Thief take
up the Purse, though he let it fall again, (as in striving or, etc.) it is
robbery, though he never take it up more, for he had it once, and the continuance
of his possession is not required by Law.

If the true Man seeking to escape, for the safeguard of his Money, cast it
into a Bush, which the Thief perceiving, takes it, this is a taking in Law from
the Person, because done at one time.

So if the true Man had let fall his Hat, or thrown off his Coat, and the same
lying in his presence, a Thief assault him, and take the Hat, etc. this is
Robbery, for that which is taken in his presence, is in Law taken from his
Person.

If a Thief compel the true Man by fear to swear to fetch him a sum of Money,
which he does accordingly, and the Thief receives it, it is Robbery; for the
Oath and Fear continuing, made him bring the Money, which amounts to a Taking
in Law.

Note, Though it be under the value of Twelve Pence that is taken (as suppose One
Penny, or Two Pence) it is Robbery; but somewhat must be taken, for the Assault
only to Rob, without taking some Money or Goods, is no Felony, and such
Opinions as seem to the contrary, were mained by that, which then was anciently
holden, Quod voluntas reputabatur pro facto.

Nota, Taking a Man's Goods out of his Shop before his Face is Robbery, as if
he had taken it from the Person; and it is nothing to the purpose though the
Thief say, I have right to this, or, This is mine, if indeed he has no color.

Felonious taking of Goods to the value of 5 s. in the Day time, out of any
Dwelling House, or out-House, though no Person be within; oust of Clergy per
Stat. 39 El. cap 15.

See these several Cases in 3 Inst. 68, 69. and Hales Pl. Cor. tit. Robbery.

Cut Purses, their Nature and Punishment.
BOTH Cutpurse and Robber take from the Person, but the former takes it Clam
and Secret, without assault or putting in fear; and the Robber by violent
Assault, and putting in fear.

If one out a Purse with Money in it, above Twelve Pence, he shall be hanged,
and the benefit of Clergy is taken from him. 3 Inst. 68.

Give me leave to acquaint you here with an odd accident that happened in
Northamptonshire toward the end of the Reign of King James I. out of Wilson's
History, page 279. One Harman, a rich Man, having some bad Tenants, and being
informed that one of 'em which owed him Money, had furnished himself to go to a
Fair, walked (as by accident) to meet him in the way thither; when he saw his
Tenant, he asked him for the Rent; the Man (willing to dispose of his Money
otherwise) denied he had any; yes, I know thou have Money, said Harman,
(calling him by his Name) I prithee let me have my Rent, and with much
importunity the Man pulled out his Money, and gave all, or the most part of it
to his Landlord. This coming to some pragmatical Knowledge, the poor Man was
advised to indict his Landlord for Robbing him on the Highway, which he did,
and Harman for his sordid carriage being ill beloved in the Country, was found
Guilty, but reprieved by the Judges, and hearing the Lord Treasurer had a
Secretary of his Name, applied himself to him, promising to give him all his
Estate (having no Children) if his Lord would bring him out of the danger he
was in, which by his power with the King he did, and the Secretary within a
short time after, by the others death, enjoyed an ample Estate.

Stews, and Brothel-Houses.
KING Henry VIII. suppressed all the Stews or Brothel-Houses, which long had
continued on the Bank-side in Southwark, and those infamous Women were not
buried in Christian Burial when they were dead, nor permitted to receive the
rites of the Church whilst they lived. This was by Proclamation under the Great
Seal, 30 Martii 37 H VIII.

Before the Reign of H. VII. there were Eighteen of these Houses, and that King
for a time forbad them: But afterward Twelve only were permitted, and had
Signs painted on their Walls; as The Cardinal's Hat, The Boar's Head, The Cross
Keys, etc, Stow. and 3 Inst. 205.

Many wicked and common Women had seated themselves in a Lane called
Water-Lane, next to the House of the Friars Carmelites in Fleet Street; this
being known, King Edw. III. to the end these Friars might perform their Vows,
one of which was, To live in perpetual Chastity, took order for removing of
these Women. ibid.

So odious and dangerous was this Vice, (the fairest end whereof is Beggary)
that Men in making of Leases of their Houses did add an express Condition, That
the Lessee, etc. should not suffer, harbor, or keep any Feme putiene within
the said Houses. ibid. 206.

Nota, Though Adultery and Fornication be punishable by the Ecclesiastical Law,
yet the keeping of a Bawdy House, being as it were a Common Nuisance, is
punishable by indictment at the Common Law, by Fine and Imprisonment. ibid.

Accessory.
IF I. S. counsel or command one to kill a Man, and he kill another; or to burn
one Man's House, and he burn another's; or to steal a Horse, and he steal a
Cow; or to steal a black Horse, and he steal a white one; or to steal a
Goldsmith's Plate from him, going to such a Fair, and he go to his Shop in
Cheapside, and rob him there, and break open his House to do it; in these Cases
the Counselor shall not be Accessory, because this is another Felony. Plowd.
475.

But if one command a Felony, and it be done in another Fashion, Time, or Place
only than it was commanded, he may be Accessory to it.

As if one bid another to rob I. D. on Shooters-Hill, and he does it on
Gads-Hill; or to rob him one day, and he does it another day; or to do it
himself, and he does it by another; or to kill him by Poison, and he does it by
a Sword; in all these Cases he shall be an Accessory. ibid. See Stamf. 1. 45.

If one counsel a Woman to murder the Child in her Body, and after the Child is
born alive, and then she murders it in the absence of him that gave her the
Counsel; in this case he is an Accessory. Dyer 186. Plowd. 475.

One Saunders had Poison given him by another to poison his Wife; the Husband
gave it to his Wife in a roasted Apple, who eat part of it, and gave the rest
to her Daughter being an Infant; the Wife recovered, but the Child died; and it
was held, That he that gave it for the Wife was not accessory to the murder of
the Daughter: For the Consent must not be extended farther than it was given.
Plowd. 474. Saunder's Case.

Yet if I persuade or command one to go and beat another Man only, and he do
beat him, and kill him; by this I am made Accessory not only to the Beating,
but to the Murder, for I commanded the unlawful Act which caused his death. So
it is Murder to kill one, though the Malice be against another; as if I strike at
A. and kill B. because I had a malicious and felonious intent.

Felony to cut out Tongues, Eyes, etc.
BEFORE the Statute of 5. H. IV. cap. 5. which makes it Felony to cut out the
Tongue, or put out the Eyes of any of the King's Subjects, of malice prepensed,
the mischief was, that when one had been beaten, wounded or robbed, the
Misdoers, to the end the Party grieved might not be able to accuse them, cut
out their Tongues, or put out their Eyes, pretending the same to be no Felony,
which is therefore ordained and established to be so by this Act, which has so
terrified offenders, that where before it was every days practice, now it is
very rarely done. See 3 Inst. 62.

It extends not to cutting off Ears, which is no Felony, as appears by the
Stat. of 37 H. VIII. cap. 6.

The offender had the benefit of his Clergy, but that is now taken away by
Stat. 22 and 23 Car. II. cap. 11. which enacts that if any Person, on purpose
and of malice forethought, and by lying in wait, shall unlawfully cut out, or
disable the Tongue, put out an Eye, slit the Nose, cut off a Nose or Lip, or
cut off, or disable any Limb or Member of any Subject of his Majesty, with
intention in so doing to Maim or Disfigure him in any of these Manners, he is
declared a Felon, without benefit of Clergy: But Note, by this Act it is
provided, that he shall forfeit neither Lands, Goods, or Chattels.

The cutting off a Man's Privy Members was Felony by the Common Law, for
Bracton lib. 3. fol. 144. b. says, Quid dicitur si quis alterius virilia
absciderit, and illum libidinis causa vel convitii castraverit? tenetur sive
hoc volens fecerit vel invitus, and sequitur poena aliquando capitalis,
aliquando perpetuum exilium cum omni bonorum ademptione.

Agreeable to this is the Record in Bracton's time, viz. Henricus Hall and A.
uxor ejus capti and detenti sunt in Prisona de Evil-chester, eo quod rectati
fuerunt quod ipsi absciderunt virilia Johannis Monachi, quem idem Henricus
deprehendit cum praedicta A. uxore ejus, etc. But Fleta says, lib. 1. cap. 38.
Si quis Castratus fuerit, talis pro Mahemiato poterit adjudicari. And so was
the Law holden in my Lord Coke's time, as he says, 3 Inst. 63. and 118.

Where an Attaint lies, though every word of the Verdict be true.
A MAN shall have an Attaint in some special Case where every Word of the
Verdict is true: As if one has had Common Appendant to his Land, time out of
mind, and brings an Assise of the Common, and makes Title that he has had
Common time out of mind, etc. without speaking of the Appendancy, and it is
found for him. The Defendant shall have an Attaint, for the Plaintiffs Title is
for Common in Gross, and not Common Appendant; yet the words of the Verdict are
true, that he has had Common time out of mind, etc. but not in such manner as
shall be taken by the Title. Fitzh. N. B. 107 A.

So if one has a Rent as Forrester in Fee of such a Forest, time out of mind,
and in Assise he makes Title that he has had a Rent out of that Land time out
of mind, etc. without saying As Forrester in Fee, etc. and it is found for him,
the other shall have an Attaint, though the Words of the Verdict be true, for he
has not had such Rent by prescription as shall be intended and taken by the
Title he has made. ibid.

Where the taking of a Second Lease shall be no present Surrender of a former.
A LESSEE for 21 Years took a Lease of the same Lands for 40 Years, to begin
immediately after the death of I. S. it was holden, that the same was not any
present Surrender of the first Term, but if I. S. die within the term, then it
is a Surrender, for it may be he will survive it. 4 Leon. 30.

Surrender of Part.
A LESSEE for years of Land accepts a new Lease by Indenture of part of the
same Land, it is a Surrender only for this part, and not for all. Fish and
Campion's Case. 2 Roll 498. the last Case.

A Lessee for years grants all his Estate to the Lessor, excepting one day at
the end of the Term, yet this is not any Surrender, for this day is a
Reversion, and so shall hinder the Surrender as strongly as if it had been 20
Years; adjudged between Bacon and Waller. 2 Roll. 498.

Where there may be a Certainty in an Uncertainty.
THERE is a Maxim in Law, That no Distress can be taken for Services that are
not put into Certainty, or may be reduced to it, because upon the Avowry,
Damages cannot be recovered for what neither has nor can be reduced to any
Certainty: Yet in some Cases there may be a Certainty in Uncertainty, as one
may hold of his Lord to Shear all the Sheep depasturing within the Lord's
Manor, which is certain enough, though he has sometime a greater number, and
sometime a lesser there, yet this uncertainty being referred to the Manor
which is Certain, the Lord may destrain for it. 1 Inst. 96. a.

A Lease for 21 Years if I. S. live so long, is a good Lease for Years, yet is
certain in uncertainty; for the Life of I. S. is uncertain. 1 Inst. 45. b.

Condition Broken.
IF A. be obliged to permit B. to have ingress into his House, he ought to have
a common entrance at the usual door, and shall not be put to enter at a Hole, a
Backdoor, or a Chimney: And if they leave the common Door open, and make a
Ditch, so that B. cannot enter without skipping; the condition is broken. So if
I am obliged to suffer I. S. to have a way over my Land, and when I see him
coming, I take him by the Sleeve, and say to him, Come not there, for if you
do, I will pull you by the Ears, the Condition is broken. Latch. 47.

Note, One made a Lease of a House with free liberty of ingress, etc. through
part of the Lessor's House, and 'twas ruled, That in this Case the Lessee must
keep good hours and the Lessor is not bound to leave the Doors open for his
coming in at One or Two of the Clook at Night, but may shut up his Doors.
Modern Rep. 27.

Contract.
THE Lady Kent Articled with Sir Edward Herbert that he should come to her when
she sent for him, and stay with her as long as she would have him, to which he
set his Hand: Then he Articled with her, that he should go away when he
pleased, and stay away as long as he pleased, to which she set her Hand. This
(says Seldom) is the Epitome of all the Contracts in the World, betwixt Man and
Man, betwixt Prince and Subject, they keep them as long as they like them, and
no longer.

Conditional Bargain.
I. S. SENT a Letter by a Carrier to a Merchant for certain Merchandises to
send them to him, receiving for them a certain Sum of Money; the Merchant sent
the things by the Carrier without receiving the Money: The Court held the Buyer
should not be charged for the Money, for it was a conditional Bargain, and the
folly of the Merchant to trust the Carrier with the Wares. 4 Leon. 7. May's
Case.

An Estate for Life determinable at Will.
IF the King grant an Office to one at Will, and grant him a Rent for the
exercise thereof for the term of his Life; this is determinable upon the
determination of the Office. 1 Inst. 42. a. Finche's Law 8. 9.

Two Uses in Esse of the same Land at the same time.
IF A. disseise one to the use of B. and A. bargains and sells the Land for
Money to C. C. has an Use, and here be two Uses of one Land, but of several
Natures, the one, viz. upon the Bargain and Sale to be executed by the Statute
27 H. VIII. and the other not. 1 Inst. 271. b. 272. a.

Where one shall be punished in Trespass for hurting a Man, that shall not be
punished for killing a Man.
FELONY must be done Animo Felonico, and therefore if a Lunatic kill a Man,
it is no Felony, because he is sine Animo during his Lunacy: However, if a
Lunatic hurt a Person, he shall be answerable in Trespass, which tends only to
give damages according to hurt or loss, and therefore no Man shall be dispensed
with for a Trespass; (for this is the nature of an Excuse, and not of a
Justification, prout ei been licuit) except it may be judged utterly without
this Fault, as if one by force take my Hand, and strike you, etc. Hob. 134.
Weaver and Ward.

Cases of Excuse.
ALL Laws admit certain Cases of just Excuse when they are offended in Letter,
where the Offender is under necessity either of Compulsion or Inconvenience, or
else where he is under an invincible Ignorance, or where the offense is by a
mere Misfortune without Will or Purpose, or where there is a mere Impotency to
that that is required: By Compulsion, as in the case of Lucretia with young
Tarquin, of whom St. Austin says, Duo fuerunt, and unus commisit Adulterium;
and thereupon makes the Dilemma, Si casta, quare trucidata? Sin minus, quare
laudata? Necessity of avoiding greater Inconvenience, as where one kills a
Thief, or a Burgler in defense of his Person or House; the binding and beating
of a Person Lunatic; removing of a Person Leprous. In Ignorance, as in the
case of Jacob and Leah: Such also is the excuse of a Deed read amiss to one
that cannot read, or reported to one that is blind: Lunacy in him that kills a
Man. Of Impotency, as in the case of Mephibosheth accused by his Servant Ziba
to David, and by himself excused by his Impotency. Vide Hob. 96.

Uncertainty.
A LEASE is made to a Man and a Woman for their Lives upon condition, that
which of them two shall first Marry, that one shall have Fee; they enter Marry,
neither of them shall have Fee, for the Uncertainty. 1 Inst. 218. a.

Where one shall have Judgment to be hanged, after he is slain.
IN an Appeal of Death the Defendant waged Battle, and was slain in the Field,
yet Judgment was given that he should be hanged, which the Judges said was
altogether necessary, for otherwise the Lord could not have a Writ of Escheat.
1 Inst. 390. b.

One Attainted after his Death.
THE Lord Coke observes that in Eire it has been seen, that a Man has been
attainted after his Death by Presentment. 1 Inst. 390. b.

Execution before Judgment.
UPON Issue joined, and Trial thereupon, a Verdict was found for the Plaintiff,
and the Postea was delivered to the Clerk of the Judgments to enter the
Judgment; but through the Clerk's neglect Execution was taken out before it was
entered: Hereupon the Court was moved to supersede the Execution, because there
was no Judgment to warrant it. Roll said, it being but a neglect of the Clerk,
Judgment might well enough be entered, though the Execution were issued forth, and
because the Trial between the Parties is right. Styles 229.

Where a Grant to a Monk shall be good.
AN English Man goes into France, and there becomes a Monk, yet is he capable
of any Grant in England, because such Profession is not triable, and also
because all Profession is taken away by Statute, and by our Religion holden as
void, so adjudged in Ley's Case. p. tot. cur. 2 Roll. 43.

Nor will such Profession abroad disable him to bring any Action here, because
it wants Trial, so that of foreign Profession the Common Law takes no
knowledge. 1 Inst. 132. b.

The Freehold discontinued, and not the Reversion.
HUSBAND and Wife Lease the Lands of the Wife by Deed for Life, reserving a
Rent; the Husband dies: This was a discontinuance at Common Law for Life, and
yet the Reversion was not discontinued, but remained in the Wife: Otherwise if
the Husband had made the Lease alone. 1 Inst. 333. a.

Reversion Revested, yet the Discontinuance remains.
FEME Tenant for Life, the Baron makes a Feoffment, and the Lessor enters for
the Forfeiture; here is the Reversion revested, and yet the Discontinuance
remains at the Common Law, (for the Wife was put to her cui in vita, and could
not enter after her Husband's Death. 1 Inst. 335. a.

Where the Defendant may pray and have Judgment against himself.
IN Assumpsit to pay several Sums at several days, if the Action be brought
for default of payment at the first day, before any other day of payment is
incurred, and the Defendant plead Non Assumpsit, which is found against him,
but the Plaintiff will not enter Judgment for fear of being barred to have a
new Action upon the same promise, if default be in the other payments, yet may
the Defendant enter Judgment according to the Verdict if he will. 2 Roll. 97.
Shapeland and Curtis.

Vide Dyer. 194. n. 34. and 2 Roll. 97. That if a Verdict be found for the
Defendant, and he will not pray Judgment, yet Judgment shall be given for him
at the prayer of the Plaintiffs, because then he may have his Attaint against
the Jury.

Where the Plaintiff shall have Judgment, though the Issue be found against him.
IN Replevin, the Defendant avowed for a Rent of 20 l. supposing that I. S. was
seized in Fee of the place where, etc. and in 28th of Eliz. granted a Rent of
20 l. per annum, and for the Rent arrear an. 12 Jac. he avows, etc. it was
found specially upon issue, Non concessit, that T. S. was seized in Fee, and
let that Land an. 23 Eliz. to I. S. for 21 Years, and he so possessed granted
that Rent, and fi, etc. upon this Verdict, though the Issue be found Quod
concessit; and so for the Avowant, yet because it appears that the Estate out
of which the Rent is granted, was determined a long time before the distress
taken, so that the Defendant had not any title to avow; 'twas held, That
Judgment should be for the Plaintiff, though the Issue was found against him. 2
Cro. 442. Harrison and Metcalf. See 2 Cro. 221. 435. 640. Cro. Eliz. 157.

Agent and Patient.
IT is a Rule in Law that Idem non. potest esse Agens and Patiens, and
therefore a Man cannot present himself to a Benefice, make himself an Officer,
nor Sue himself; and therefore when one having right to Land, has the Freehold
cast upon him by a latter Title, he shall be said in of his ancient Title,
because there is none against whom he may Sue but himself, and he cannot Sue
himself. Littleton 147. b.

So no Man can summon himself, and therefore if a Sheriff suffer a common
recovery, it is Error, because he cannot summon himself. Dyer. 188. a. Owen 51.

A Man cannot be both Judge and Party in a Suit, and therefore if a Judge of
the Common Pleas be made Judge of the King's Bench, though it be but hac vice, it
determines his Patent for the Common Pleas; for if he should be Judge of both
Benches together, he should control his own Judgment; for if the Common Pleas
err, it shall be reformed in the King's Bench. (See Cro. Car. 600. Littleton
Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, made Lord Keeper, yet continued Chief
Justice; so Sir Orlando Bridgman was both Lord Keeper, and Lord Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas at the same time, for these places are not inconstent. 1
Siderf. 338, 365.)

A Bishop cannot hold a Parsonage by Commendam within his own Diocese, because
he cannot visit himself, or be Parson and Ordinary too. 1 Siderf. 305.

If a Fine be levied to a Judge of the Common Pleas, he himself cannot take the
Connsance, for he cannot be his own Judge. But if an Action be sued in C. B.
against all the Judges there, there for necessity they shall be their own
Judges. 2 Roll. 92, 93.

But Note, in many cases the same Person may be Agent and Patient, where the
Law cannot do otherwise; as a Feme Tenant in socage may endow herself de la
pluis beale. Lit. Sect. 48. So an Executor may pay himself by Retainer. So
where one may vouch himself. 1 Inst. 390. a. So where one limits a Remainder to
himself.

If one of the Chapter being sole seized enfeoffe the Dean and Chapter, by that
he himself shall take by his own Livery. Perk. Fol. 42. See Hob. 138, 139. A
Mittimus directed to the Bishop of Durham, commanding him to send a Record to
the Justices of the County Palatine to be tried there, is well enough, and may
be executed by the Bishop, though he himself be one of the Justices. So one may
be Judge and Officer diversis respectibus, as in a Redisseisin, the Sheriff is
Judge and Officer. Cro. Car. 138. So where a Mayor keeps the Goal. Cro. Eliz.
76.

Where one Impannelled on a Jury may challenge himself.
A PEER of the Realm, or Lord of Parliament, Scil. Baron, Viscount, Earl,
Marquess, and Duke, propter honoris respectum, are not to be sworn on Juries,
and if neither Party will challenge him, he may challenge himself, for it is
provided by Magna Charta, Quod nec super cum ibimus, nec super eum mittimus
nisi per legal^ judicium parium suorum, aut per legem terrae. Co. 6. 52, 53.
But note, If a Peer is to be tried by his Peers, he cannot challenge any of
'em. 1 Inst. 156. b.

Where an Infant shall not reverse his Fine.
IF an Infant being a Feme covert, or other Infant, levy a Fine by grant, and
render to her or him in tail, or for Life, and the Husband die, the Wife shall
not have a Writ of Error, because she is Tenant of the Land, and she cannot
have a Writ of error against herself, so that she is without remedy: So in the
case of the other Infant, per Catlyn. Owen 33.

Where one shall have a Formedon of Land that was never given.
IT IS holden in 42 Edw. III. 53. cited in Mary Pottington's Case. Co. 10. 37.
b. that in some case a Man shall have a Writ of Formedon of Land that was never
given, as if Lands in tail are lost, and the Tenant in tail recovers other Land
in value, the Issue in tail shall have a Formedon of the Lands recovered in
value, and yet those Lands were not given.

Livery and Seisin over a Wall.
IF one that is seized in Fee of an Orchard makes a Feoffment of it to I. S.
and goes into the Orchard, and cuts a Turf, or a Twigg, and delivers it in the
name of Seisin, to the Feoffee over a Wall of the same Orchard, the Feoffee
then being in other Land (not mentioned in the Feoffment) this is a void
Livery. 2 Roll. 6. numb. 5.

Note, If it appears that the Feoffor intends to make an actual Livery, it
shall never amount to a Livery in Law. 2 Roll. 7. n. 40.

Where a Man shall give and take by his own Livery.
IF there be Dean and Chapter, and one of the Chapter is sole seized of Land in
Fee in his own right, and thereof enfeoffs the Dean and Chapter by Deed, and
makes Livery and Seisin according to the Deed; here the Feoffor gives and takes
by the same Livery. Perk. Sect. 205. So of a Mayor and Commonalty, etc.

William the Conqueror 's Charter to Norman Hunter.
I WILLIAM the Third Year of my Reign
Give to thee Norman Hunter,
To Me that art both Leef and Dear,
The Hop, and the Hopton,
And all the Bounds up and down,
Under the Earth to Hell,
Above the Earth to Heaven,
From Me and Mine,
To Thee and Thine,
As good and as fair,
As ever they were:
To witness that this is Sooth
I bite the White Wax with my Touth;
Before Jug, Maud, and Margerie,
And my youngest Son Henry,
For a Bow, and a broad Arrow,
When I come to hunt upon Yarrow.
Vide Speed 424. b. 2 Roll. 181. Meriton's Anglorum Gesta in Vita. W. I.

Whether one can take, and loose a Fee by the same Livery.
TENANT in Tail makes a Lease for his own Life, the Remainder to the Donor in
Fee; this gift of the Fee is void, because the Donor had it before: But if
Tenant in Tail make a Lease pur auter vie, the Remainder to the Donor, this
vests a new Fee in him, because that by the discontinuance he divested the
ancient Fee out of him, and gave him a new Fee-Simple, by Marvine: But Knightly
denied this to be Law, and that there should not be a new Fee-Simple in the
Donor, because then he should take a Fee and loose a Fee by the same Livery at
an instant, which cannot be, ideo quaere Dyer. 8. a. 9. a.

Slander.
A. THE Attorney of B. brought an Action against C. for saying to B. Your
Attorney is a bribing Knave, and has taken Twenty Pound of you to cozen me:
Judge Warburton held the Words not Actionable, for an Attorney cannot take a
Bribe of his own Client: But Hobart said he might when the reward exceeds
measure, and the end against Justice, as to raze a Record, etc. and Hob. says,
after he had spoken, Justice Warburton began to stagger in his opinion, and so
the Plaintiff had Judgment. Hob. 8, 9. and 1 Roll. 53.

Infant.
AN Infant brought an Action of Trespass by her Guardian; the Defendant pleads
that the Plaintiff was above Sixteen Years old, and agreed for 6 d. in Hand
paid, that the Defendant have license to take two Ounces of her Hair, to which
the Plaintiff demurred, and adjudged for her; for an Infant cannot license,
though she may agree with the Barber to be trimmed. 3 Keb. 369. Scroggam against
Stewardson.

Trespass for shaking a Sword at him.
A WOMAN shook a Sword in a Cutler's Shop against the Plaintiff, being on the
other side of the Street, and in Trespass of Assault and Battery, there was a
Verdict of the Assault, and not guilty of the Battery: 'Twas prayed to give no
more Costs than Damages, and so granted, which was a Noble. 3 Keb. 283. Smith
and Newsam.

Where a Man shall be forced to spend his Money against himself.
I. S. PRAYED a Prohibition to the Ecclesiastical Court at Salisbury, because
his Wife Sued him there to be separated propter saevitiam, and Sentence was
given for him, and he enforced to pay all the Costs for his Wife; afterward
she appealed, and because he would not answer the Appeal against himself, and
pay for the transmitting of the Record, he was excommunicated, and now prayed a
Prohibition; it was thought by the Court a very hard case that he should be
obliged to spend his Money against himself; but because it was alleged that
the Course was so in the Spiritual Court, they would advise, etc. and
proceedings stayed in the mean time. Cro. Car. 16. Green's Case.

One Indicted for taking away a young Woman, and Marrying her.
ONE Brown was Indicted on Stat. 3 H. VII. cap. 2. for forcibly taking away and
marrying the Daughter of one Summers, a City Orphan in the Custody of the
Chamberlain: Note, The Child herself being about Fourteen Years old was held a
good Witness to prove the Fact; and the evidence was, that she was worth 5000
l. that she was menaced by the Defendant in a Vizard, and carried away in a
Coach to Westminster, and the next day, with her own consent, but caused by the
precedent menace, she married him, but was not defiled, having been surprised
that day; he was found guilty, and had judgment to die, and was accordingly
executed. 3 Keb. 193. See the Lady Fullwood's Case. Cro. Car. 482, 484, 488,
492. and Hales, Pla. Cor. tit. Felonies by Stat. that the taking a Woman
against her Will, and marrying her, is Felony by the said Statute: But such
Maid, Widow, or Wife must have Lands, Tenements, or Goods, or be Heir Apparent;
so that the Motive of taking away is Lucre, and the end Luxury, viz. Marriage
or Defilement.

Action against a Cook.
TRIN. 8. H. IV. Rot. 57. Willielmus Milburn recuperat per Juratam per Billam
suam in qua queritur versus Johannem Cutting, Cook, de eo quod ipse Johannes
apud Westmonasterium vendebat dicto Willielmo unum Caponem pistum corruptibilem
and recale factum, qui Capo assatus per quatuor dies in Hospicium Domini Regis,
and iterum calefactus and pistus extitit, de quo postquam edit, vomitum
horribilem fecit, ita quod infirmabatur per duas septimanas, recuperat inquam
Viginti Solidos pro damnis: And Roll says he was informed, that it appears upon
the Record at large, that the Judges increased the damages. 1 Roll. 89.

Burglary.
A. LEASES to B. a Shop, parcel of his dwelling House, to work in, where B.
works in the day, but never lodges in it; this Shop is broke open in the night,
and several Goods stolen out, yet not Burglary by the opinion of Tanfield,
Chief Baron, and Justice Hutton, because by the severence thereof by Lease to
him who had it as a Shop, and his not inhabiting therein, it was not any
Mansion House, and so no Burglary, but ordinary Felony. Hutton 33. Fine. and
Hales Pla. Cor. 83.

A Chamber in an Inns of Court, where a Person usually lodges, is a
Mansion House, within the Law; so is the Church; so is a Shop, (not severed by
Lease) Dalton's Justice, cap. 151. Hales ubi sup.

A Thief goes down a Chimney to rob, it is Burglary, though here was no actual
breaking: (for one is not bound to stop up his Chimney) ibid.

A Guest comes to a common Inn, and the Host appoints him his Chamber; and in
the night the Host breaks into his Guest's Chamber to rob him; this is
Burglary. Nota, Dalton cap. 151.

Challenges and Duels.
IT is against the Law of Nature and of Nations (as well as against the Law of
God) for a Man to be Judge in his own proper Cause, especially in Duello, where
Fury, Wrath, Malice, and Revenge are the rulers of the Judgment: And there is
nothing honorable (whatever some pretend) that is against the Laws of one's
Country, and the Law of Nature and Nations. 3 Inst. 157.

The Killer is in a worse Condition than the Killed.
HE that slays is in worse case than he that is slain, for the Murderer
loses not only his Lands and Goods, but his Life also, and his Honor, which
he so much respected; for by his Attainder his Blood shall be currupted, and if
he were Noble, or Genteel before, he thereby becomes Ignoble and Base, and he
that is slain by Law loses none of them; so as hereof it is truly said,
Infoelix pugna, ubi majus periculum incumbit Victori, quam Victo. ibid.

Bare Challenge punishable.
IF any Subject by Word, Writing, or Message challenge another to Fight with
him, this is an Offense before any Combat be performed, and punishable by Law,
and it is contra pacem, coronam, and dignitatem, for Quando aliquid prohibetur,
prohibetur and omne per quod devenitur ad illud ibid.

Much more if they Fight, (though no Death ensue, nor Blood drawn,) which being
an Affray, and a great breach of the King's Peace, is to be punished by Fine
and Imprisonment, and to find Sureties for their Good Behavior. ibid.

What Duel allowed by Law.
THERE is a Duellum allowed by Law depending a Suit for the Trial of Truth,
(see 2 Inst. W. 1. c. 40.) which kind of Battle in case of Appeals, and Writ
of Right is by public authority and course of Law, whereunto all the people by
an implied consent, are Parties; and (as some hold) has it is Warrant by the
Word of God, by the single Battle between David and Goliath, which was stricken
by public Authority. ibid.

Where Kings of England have offered to try their Title by single Combat.
KING Edward III. in the 16th. Year of his Reign, having War with the French
King for his right to the Kingdom of France, out of the greatness of his Mind,
for the love of his Subjects, the saving of Christian Blood, and a speedy Trial
of the right, offered the single Combat with the French King, but He refused it.

So after long and chargeable Wars between the Crowns of England and France,
for the right of the Kingdom of France, it was an honorable offer which King
R. II. made to Charles the French King for saving of guiltless Blood, and to
put an end to that bloody and lingering War; 1. Either a single Combat between
the two Kings. 2. Or a Combat between the two Kings, and three of their Unkles
on either side. 3. Or that a fit day and place might be assigned when under the
universal conflict of both their Armies, an end might be put to the War. The
Duke of Lancaster, according to his Commission, made these offers from the King
of England to King Charles of France, but he was auditus, sed non exauditus;
for King Charles liked none of these offers.

And in Anno Domini 1196. Philip, King of France sent this Challenge to our
Richard the First, That King Richard would choose him five for his part, and
He, the King of France, would appoint five for his part, which might fight in
Lists for trial of all matters in controversy between them, for the avoiding
of shedding of more guiltless Blood. King Richard accepted the Offer, with
condition that either King might be of the number; but this condition would not
be granted. See 3 Inst. 159

Justs and Tournaments.
IF at a Just or Turnament, or at the Play with Sword and Buckler by the King's
Command, one Man kills another, this is no Felony. It was enacted in the Reign
of King H. II. that if in such case one was slain, it should be no Felony, for
that in friendly manner they contended to try their strength, and to be able to
do the King service in that kind upon occasion. 3 Inst. 56. Otherwise of
fighting at Barriers, or running at Tilt or Justs, without the Kings Command,
whereby a Man is slain; and although it were by the King's Command, yet it was
holden Felony by the Justices, tempore, H. VIII. for it was against Law. Bro.
Coron. 228, 229. Dalton, page 352. But it is holden otherwise now, Hob. Rep.
134. in Weaver and Ward's Case.

Battle, Champion.
AN Approver that kills the party accused in Battle, or a Champion that kills
the other Champion in a Writ of Right; or the Plaintiff or Defendant in an
Appeal that kills the other in Duello; in these cases the party killing shall
forfeit nothing, for these Combats or Duels are such trials as the Law appoints
in such cases. 3 Inst. 221.

Whoever takes upon him to be a Champion for another, and becomes recreant, i.
e. a crying Coward, or Craven, he shall lose liberam legem for his perjury,
that is, become infamous, and of no credit, never to be a Witness or Juror.
ibid. You may read the form hereof, and the Oath he takes, 2 Inst. W. 1. cap
40. and Glanvil, lib. 2. cap. 3.

So if the Appellant join Battle, and cry Craven, he shall also lose liberam
legem; but if the Appellee cry Craven, he shall be hanged: But if they Combat
until Night come, and Stars appear, the Defendant in the Appeal goes quit, and
the Plaintiff in that case loses not liberam legem. 3 Inst. ubi surpra.

In a Writ of Right, if the Tenant wage Battle by his Champion, and the
Champion after become blind by infirmiry, and not ex stultitia, he shall he
discharged of the Battle. 3 Inst. 158. So of an Appellee. If the Appellant
after Battle waged become blind upon any occasion, the Appellee in favorem
vitae shall go quit. So where the Trial becomes otherwise impossible by the act
of God, or default of the Appellant. 3 Inst. 159.

Provocation to a Challenge.
IN the Lord Hobart's Book, Fol. 120. is this Case.

The Lord Darcy, and Gervase Markham were hunting together, and Markham and one
Beckwith (a Servant of my Lord's) fell together by the Ears in the Field, and
Beckwith threw Markham down, and was upon him, cuffing of him; the Lord Darcy
took his Servant off, and reproved him, and yet Markham chid my Lord, charging
him with maintaining his Man; the Lord Darcy replied, That he had used him
kindly, for if he had not rescued him from his Man, he had beaten him to Rags;
Whereupon Markham (after this) wrote five or six Letters to my Lord,
Subscribing his Name to 'em, but sent 'em not, but dispersed them unsealed in
the Fields, to this effect, That whereas the Lord Darcy had said, that but for
him his Man Beckwith had beat him to Rags, he lied, and as often as he should
speak it he lied, and that he would maintain with his Life; adding, That he had
dispersed those Letters that he might find them, or that somebody else might
bring them to him; and concluded, That if he were desirous to speak with him,
he might send his Boy who should be well used. My Lord Darcy sued Markham for
this in the Star Chamber, who was fined 500 l. for the Letter thus dispersed
was in the nature of a Libel, slanderous and defamatory to my Lord, and though
without any direct challenge to fight, yet there were plain provocations to it,
and as it were to call and challenge my Lord to challenge him: And Hobart in
his Sentence said, That the Law did not allow any Man to strike in private
revenge of ill Words, because there is no proportion between Words and Blows;
but he that is stricken may strike again. It Is true, there is a Judicial Combat
allowed before the Constable if a Man be called Traitor, where for matter of
satisfaction in point of Honor, (as it is called) it was left to the Lord
Marshal as a distinct Court and Consideration from the Star Chamber.

The Lord Hob. said also in this Case, That such Insolent Persons ( Challengers
and Duellists) take upon them to frame a Law and Commonwealth to themselves, as
if they had power to cast off the Yoke of Obedience to Peace and Justice,
enacting among themselves as an undoubted position, That a Man wronged may with
his Sword in his Hand, require satisfaction of any Man, being no Privy
Counselor, and with a mild Word to qualify the detestation of this kind of
Murder, they have made it a familiar Phrase, That he was killed fairly, and he
was killed in equal fight, which Arrogance and Rebellion must be subdued. And
Judges and Jurors must not give way to this impious distinction of fair and
foul Killing, but must execute the Law with severity upon all Murderers; for
the Law knows no such distinction: This he vowed publicly to do, taking it to
be the only Remedy against this damnable Presumption. The King approved this
Sentence, being pleased to say, The Lord Hobart did hit his own mind in it.
(King James, we know, was a most Peaceable Prince.)

Mr. Seldom says, a Duel may still be granted in some Cases by the Law of
England, and only there. That the Church allowed it anciently appears by this,
In their public Liturgies there were Prayers appointed for the Duellists to
say, the Judge used to bid them go to such a Church and Pray, etc. But whether
is this lawful? If you grant any War lawful, he makes no doubt to evince it:
War is lawful, because God is the only Judge between two, that is Supreme: Now
if a difference happen between two Subjects, and it cannot be decided by human
Testimony, (as I will give an instance presently) why may they not put it to
God to judge between them by the permission of the Prince? nay, what if one
should bring it down for Argument sake to the Swordmen; one gives me the Lie,
it is a great disgrace to take it, the Law has made no Provision to give remedy
for the Injury, (If you can suppose any thing an Injury for which the Law gives
no remedy) why am not I in this case Supreme, and may therefore right my self?

But now for the Instance I promised, it is in Fuller's Holy War, Page 44. Thus,

Whilst Godfrey, Duke of Bovillon, (afterward King of Jerusalem) lived in the
Court of Henry IV. the Emperor, there happened an intricate Suit betwixt him
and another Prince about Title of Land, and because Judges could not untie the
Knot, it was concluded the two Princes should cut it assunder with their Swords
in a Combat: Godfrey was very unwilling to fight, not that he was the worse
Soldier, but the better Christian: He made the Demurr not in his Courage, but
in his Conscience, as conceiving any private Title for Land not ground enough
for a Duel; yea, we may observe generally, that they who long most to fight
Duels, are the first that Surfeit on them; Notwithstanding he yielded to the
Tyranny of Custom, and after the fashion of the Country, (so it was used
elsewhere besides in England) entered the Lists, when at the first encounter his
Sword brake; but he struck his Adversary down with the Hilt, yet so that he
saved his Life, and gained his own Inheritance.

See the 3 Inst. fol. 157, 158, what Duels are lawful, and what not. And the 2
Inst. fol. 247.

Note, Though there be no Proportion between Words and Blows, so as to excuse a
Battery, yet if I am provoked by ill Language, and do thereupon draw my Sword,
and in heat of Blood kill the Party; whether the Words shall not be accounted
as a sudden Provocation to make it Manslaughter? to which purpose, vide the
following Case in Jones, 432.

David Williams, a Welsh-Man, having a Leek in his Hat on St. David's day,
being angry at one Redman a Porter in the Street for pointing at a Jack of Lent
there hanged with a Leek, and saying to the said David Williams, Look on your
Countryman, did suddenly take up a Hammer from a Stall, and violently threw it
at Redman, but missed him, and hit one Marbury, who was sitting in his Shop, so
as he died. This was agreed not to be within the Statute of Stabbing, but that
he might have his Clergy.

Vide 1 Siderf. 277. the Lord Morley's Case, where it was agreed by some of the
Judges That Words without Blows is not any Provocation, because it is not
answerable, but that to make a Provocation to fight, there must be Blows.

'Twas likewise agreed by them, That if there be a Provocation in a House,
whereupon they fight, before that their Reason had gained a Predominance over
their Passion, and one is killed, this is but Manslaughter: But that if after
the Provocation given, they say, that this is not a convenient Place, (and so
have reason to Judge of the Convenience) and appoint another Place, though they
fight presently after, if one be killed, this is Murder, for the Circumstance
shows their Temper.

A. and B. fall out, A. says he will not strike, but will give B. a Pot of Ale
to touch him; B. strikes, A. kills him. Murder. Hales Pla. Cor. tit. Felonies.

A. distorts his Mouth, and laughs at B. who thereupon kills him, Murder. ibid,
and cites 42 El. Brame's Case.

If there be a quarrel between A. and B. and A. Challenges B. who declines it,
but at length upon importunity, and to vindicate his reputation, meets and
fights, and kills A. Murder. 14. Jac. Taverner's Case.

A. and B. are in Malice, A. challenges the Field, B. refuses to meet, but says
he shall go to morrow to such a Town: A. meets him, and assaults him, B. kills
him, Manslaughter and no Murder. Hales ubi sup.

Two strive for the Wall, and one kills the other, Manslaughter. Two play at
Foils, and one kills the other, Manslaughter. Sir John Chichester's Case, ibid.

Testator nods one a Legacy.
NO Words, or Language, or Signs almost, but may serve for a Bequest, provided
that they be but sensible and intelligible, in regard of that vast extent and
latitude of Words, which the Law allows Testators in making Wills, and
bequeathing Legacies: Insomuch, that though the Testator should quite hold his
Peace, and but nod thee a Legacy, whether he can speak, or not, or whether
asked thereunto, or not, the Legacy is good. Understand not this of the
Testator nodding between sleep and wake, between sense and no sense, but when
by his nod he makes an intelligible sign of his mind and intention; the reason
hereof is, because the Law more favors a Testator's Will than his Words.
Orphan's Legacy, 444. 4.

Legacy to a Child unborn.
IF a Legacy be given to a Child in the Womb, and the birth prove monstrous, i.
e. very contrary to the common form and shape of Mankind, as with a Crow's Beak
instead of a Nose, or with the Face of an Ass instead of a better; in such an
ill favored case the Legacy is void: Otherwise if it is born only with some of
the less principal Members imperfect or supernumerary, as with half a Thumb, or
two Thumhs, or six Fingers on a Hand, or the like: But if the Birth (not
accidentally) be imperfect as to its integrals, or defective as to its more
noble and principal Parts and Members, as but with one Eye, or one Hand,
although the Creature has Life, the Legacy has none, for albeit an
amplification of the natural form shall not prejudice, yet a mutilation thereof
will. Note, this extends not to Hermaphrodites, who are not excluded a single
capacity, for that Sex which most prevails with them in nature, shall likewise
prevail in Law as to the Legacy bequeathed. Orphan's Legacy, 475.

Devise.
IF a Testator devises a House to A. and after gives it by deed to B. and then
buys it of B. again, and dies, and A. demands the House, he cannot recover it,
unless he proves that the Testator by a new declaration of his Will, intended
he should have it. So if a devised House be pulled down, and another built by
the Devisor in the same place, the devise is void, unless it can be proved that
the Devisor intended otherwise. Orphan's Legacy, 449. 15.

A Minister sworn of the Jury.
ONE Beecher, a Gentleman of the Middle Temple, was returned in an Attaint, and
before the Return of the Panel, he became a Minister of the Church, and at the
day of the Return he appeared, and prayed to be discharged according to the
Privilege of those of the Ministry. But the Court allowed not of his Prayer,
because he was a Layman at the time of the Panel made, and so he was sworn 4
Leon. 190. Beecher's Case.

Forgery of a Deed.
ONE Howel Gwin was convicted of Forging a Deed by putting a Dead Man's Hand
unto it, and condemned in 100 l. Fine, and to stand on the Pillory two hours
before the Hall Door: Memorandum, he cut off a dead Man's Hand, and put a Pen,
and a Seal into it, and so Signed, Sealed, and Delivered the Deed with the dead
Hand, and swore, that he saw the Deed Sealed and Delivered. Styles Rep. 362,
363.

Non Obstante.
THE Clause of Non Obstante was first used by the King in his Grants, and other
Writings in the time of Henry III. about the Year 1252. Matthew Paris calls it
an odious and detestable Clause; and Roger de Thrusby, then Justiciar, fetching
a deep Sigh at the fight hereof in the King's Grant, cried out of both the time
and it, saying, It was a Stream derived from the Sulphurous Fountain of the
Clergy. Speed 530.

Praesentia Corporis tollit errorem Nominis.
IF I give a Horse to I. D. being present, and say unto him, I. S. take this
Horse; it is a good gift, notwithstanding I call him by a wrong Name: Otherwise
if I deliver it to a Stranger to the use of I. S. where I meant I. D.

So if I say to I. S. here I give you my Ring with the Ruby, and deliver it
with my Hand, and the Ring bear a Diamond and no Ruby; this is a good gift,
notwithstanding I name it amiss.

Veritas nominis tollit errorem Demonstrationis.
IF I grant Prata mea in Sale, continentia 10. Acras, and they contain 20
Acres; the whole 20 pass.

If an obligation be made to I. S. filio and haeredi G. S where indeed he is a
Bastard, yet this Bond is good.

So if I grant Land Episcopo nunc Londinensi qui me erudivit in pueritia; it is
good, though he never instructed me.

The same Rule holds of Denomination of Times, and therefore if I oblige my
self to do some personal Attendance upon A. on Innocent's day, being the day of
his Birth, and A. were not born that day, yet shall I attend. Bacon's Elem. 87.
91.

What Acts may be done in the Night.
AN Arbitriment made and delivered in Writing the last day after Sun Set, is
good enough, for Judgments and Arbitriments require long Advice. Finch's Law,
72. and Cro. Eliz. 42. and 676. An Arbitration is a judicial Act, which may be
well done in the Night.

Goods may be distrained in the Night for damage feasant, otherwise they may be
gone before he can take them: But you cannot destrain in the Night time for
Rent behind. 1 Inst. 142. a.

A Rent is payable at a day, he has all the day 'till Night to pay it; but if
it is a great Sum, he must be ready to tell it before Sun set, for the other
is not bound to tell it in the Night. ibid.

Livery and Seisin in the Night by an Attorney, good. Cro. Eliz. 42. said there
to be so adjudged. Yet an Atturnment (which is in lieu of Livery, 1 Inst. 49
a.) cannot be made after Sunset. Styles Pract. Reg. 47. yet sure it is less
solemn than Livery, which must be upon the Land, or in view of it, whereas an
Atturnment is but an Assent which may be given any where. ergo Quaere.

License to sow Land, no Lease.
IN Sir William Essex his Case, Hob. Rep. 35. The Lord Hobart says, he is
clearly of Paston's opinion in 21 H. VI. 37. That if one license me to sow his
Land, that is no Lease of the Land, and therefore if I sow the Land, the Owner
shall reap it.

Gift.
A BORROWED 100 l. of F. and at the day brought it in a Bag, and cast it upon
the Table before F. and F said to A. (being his Nephew) I will not have it,
take it you, and carry it home again with you: Per Curiam, it is a good gift by
paroll, being cast upon the Table, for then it was in the possession of F. and
A. might well wage his Law: Otherwise if A. had only offered it to F. which had
been only a chose in Action. not to be given without a Writing. Noy, 67.
Flower's Case.

Where one that is no Party to a Record, shall have Error to reverse it.
A FEME covert was Sued as a Feme Sole, but by her Husband's Name; she appeared
and pleaded, and Judgment was given against her: The Baron and Feme join in a
Writ of Error. The Court said, a Stranger to the Record may not have a Writ of
Error to reverse it, but that is, because he may have another remedy to avoid
the prejudice: But in this case the Baron has no other remedy, for his Wife is
taken in Execution, and by this means he shall lose her Society, and so it was
reversed. Styles Rep. 254. 280. Hayward and Williams.

Where an Attaint may be brought by one that is no Party to the Issue.
IF two commit a joint Trespass, there can be but one Satisfaction; and
therefore if they be sued in one Action, though they may sever in Pleas and
Issues, yet one Jury shall assess damages for all; and note, as to the damages,
he that is no Party to the Issue, shall have an Attaint as well as his Fellows.
Hob. 66. Cock and Jennor. 2 Cro. 349. accord that if the damages be too great,
any of the Defendants may have an Attaint, though he be not the same Party
against whom the Verdict was found: The reason hereof is given in Sir J.
Heydon's Case. Co. 11.5. b. that although he be a Stranger to the Issue, yet
because that by the Law he is privy in charge, he shall have an Attaint.

Vessels go with the Wines as Accessories, in a Bequest.
A BEQUEST of Wines does convey the Vessels wherein they are, to the Legatary;
not as if a Man in his Liquor should think (for no Man else would) the Vessels
were part of the Wines (as Medals of Gold or Silver are part of such Metals)
but because the Testator's intention in the Eye of the Law, seems to bequeath
them as Accessories to the Principal; excepting such which by reason of the
greatness of their Bulk, and wide Capacity cannot without much difficulty be
removed out of the Cellars where they are. Orphan's Legacy, 474. 103.

A Legacy taken away under a Condition, is understood as given under the
contrary condition, as if a Testator says [A. B. shall not have 100 l. if my
Ship which I expect home should chance to perish in the Sea.] in this Case A.
B. shall have 100 l. if that ship shall safe arrive. Orphan's Legacy, 464. 24.

Christian Name.
DECLARATION in Assumpsit quod cum quidam...... Alison was indebted to the
Plaintiff for Wares sold; the Defendant in consideration the Plaintiff would
forbear, did promise to pay, if the said...... Alison did not pay: After
Verdict and Judgment for the Plaintiff, error was assigned that no Christian
Name was alleged. Chief Justice Rainsford, and Twisden were of opinion, That
the Plaintiff must averr the certainty of his Praenomen or Christian Name, and
that Verdict helps it not, no more in Suit against the third Person than
against the Party hiself to whom the Goods were sold; and it cannot be intended
that quidam was the Christian Name, it being with a blank. The other Judges
contra, because he may be a Jew, or an Anabaptist that has no Christian Name,
and the forbearance only is the ground of the Action. Indictment for stealing
Goods de quodam ignoto, good, because the stealing is the substance: And though
the Defendant might have demurred, yet after Verdict it is well enough. 3 Keb.
769. Bechino and Gumly. Adjornatur.

Bond not to exercise his Trade.
A MAN was bound in an Obligation to another, that he should not use his Art in
such a Town for two Years: Hull swore by God if the obligee were present he
should go to Prison 'till he had paid a Fine to the King, because the Bond is
contra Legem terrae. 2 H. V. fol. 5. b. See tit. Imprisonment. Fitz. 14.

Justice Reeve said ( March Rep. 193) he was confident you shall never find one
Report against this opinion of Hull, such Bond being void, because it takes
away a Man's livelihood, which is one reason against Monopolies, which is
grounded upon the Law of God, for in Deuteronomy, Chap. 24. Ver. 6. it is said,
No Man shall take the nether, or the upper Millstone to pledge, for he takes a
Man's Life to pledge. Which may also be the reason that the Utensils of a Man's
profession cannot be destreined, for thereby the means of his Livelihood should
be taken away. See Noy 180.

It may not be impertinent to set before you the following differences under
this Head: for some Books say, that a promise not to exercise ones Trade in
such a Town is good, but that a Bond in such case is void, March Rep. 77. pl.
121, and 191. pl. 238. Barrow and Wood.

Broad and Jollyffe's Case, 2 Cro. 596. is That one may Upon Consideration
agree; and promise, that he will not keep Shop in such a Vill or Street, for
that Volenti non fit injuria. And in the Case of Prugnel and Goss, Allen's Rep.
67. Roll. Just. takes these differences. Where a Bond or Promise restrains the
exercise of a Trade, although it be as to a particular place only; yet if it be
upon no consideration, the Bond and Promise is void: But if there were a
Consideration for the restraint, as if A. assign a Shop, or sell braided Wares
to B. there in respect of the apparent prejudice which may accrue to B. if A.
should continue the Trade; such a Bond or Promise is good, adjudged so in
Froward's Case upon a Writ of Error. But note, although there be such a
consideration, yet if the restraint be general throughout England, it is void.
Vide 1 Roll. 16, 17. and Moor, 115. and 242.

Cunning Practice.
A MAN was Arrested in an Action of Debt, and presently made a Warrant to an
Attorney to acknowledge a Judgment for him, upon which he was discharged; but
afterward he revoked the Warrant of Attorney, before the Judgment was
confessed; the Court observing this cunning practice, commanded the Attorney to
plead Non sum informatus, that Judgment might be entered, and said, they would
defend him against the Party, if he brought an Action against him. Latch 8.

Trick in the business.
THE Court was moved, that there might be a Rule of Court for I. S. upon
satisfaction made of a Judgment obtained by him, to acknowledge Satisfaction;
but the Court denied it, and said there was some Trick in the business, for no
doubt but the Party upon receipt of what is due to him, will acknowledge
Satisfaction without a Rule to compel him. Styles 164.

The River of Thames a Highway.
MR. Attorney General prayed Judgment in an Information against Smith for
laying Logs (which is a Nuisance) on the River Thames: The Defendant pleaded
the general Pardon, but Nuisances on the Highway being excepted therein, and
this being as much a Highway as the Road, and the Hundred answerable for
Robbery thereon, Judgment was given for the King. 3 Keeble 759.

Intention of the Parties.
A. CONTRACTS with B. for 18 Barrels of Ale, paying a certain sum of Money,
and A. would have kept the Barrels after the Ale was spent, but adjudged he
should not, for the intent of the Parties never was that the Vendee should have
them, but only the Ale, and the common usage is that the Vendor shall have the
Barrels again. 27. H. VIII. 27. b. cited 1 Bulls, 175.

So if one covenant with another, that if he come to his House, he will give
him a Cup of Wine, and he comes; he shall not have the Cup also, because it was
never the intent of the Party. ibid.

Countermand of Arrest.
A. DELIVERS a Writ to the Sheriff to arrest I S. and after forbids him, and
desires the Writ again; the Sheriff refuses, and arrests I. S. Quaere; if I. S.
may have faux Imprisonment against the Sheriff? It seems he may not: Whether
shall A. have an Action upon the Case against the Sheriff? it seems he shall,
for it may be he is prejudiced: Whether the Sheriff shall have an Action
against A. for his Fee? Latch Rep. 19.

Slander by an Infant, and against an Infant.
AN Action upon the case for Words lies against an Infant of Seventeen Years of
Age, for Malitia supplet aetatem. Noy 129.

An Infant brought an Action against one Child for these words, I charge thee
with Felony, and had a Verdict and Judgment, though moved in arrest, etc. because
not averred the Plaintiff was of an Age to commit Felony; for the Defendant
must plead that, and shall not be averred by the plaintiff to avoid his own
Action. Noy 124. Baily against Child.

Grant of the next avoidance by Letter.
I. S. BROUGHT a Quare impedit, declaring upon a grant of the next Avoidance;
the Defendant demanded Oyer of the Deed, and the Plaintiff showed a Letter
which was written to his Father by the Patron, wherein he tells the Father that
he had given to his Son (the Plaintiff) the next avoidance: Whereupon the
Defendant demurred, and adjudged for him, for the Letter was a mere banter, and
the grant not good without Deed. Owen 47. and Cro. Eliz. 163, 164.

A. granted the next Avoidance to B. and C. and was bound to B. in an
obligation that he should enjoy the said Presentment without any disturbance or
claim of the said A. C. released to A. his interest in the said Advowson; the
Church became void, A. offered to join with B. in the presentation: It was
holden the obligation was forfeited, notwithstanding that A. had a puisne Title
after the Bond entered into. 4 Leon. 18. Bluet's Case.

Legacy of Books.
A TESTATOR says [I give my Physic Books to my Son, if hereafter he shall
study Physic; but if he make the Law his Profession, then let him have my Law
Books.] the Son after studies Law and Physic both; he shall have the
Testator's Books of both Professions. Orphan's Legacy, 472, 89.

If the Testator says [I bequeath or commit my Estate as well as my Soul to
God.] whoever has his Soul, his parish Church shall have his Estate. Orphan's
Legacy, 471, 81.

Bequest of Horses.
IF a Man bequeath all his Horses, his Mares shall go too, but not e contra;
nor by a bequest of Geldings. ibid. 467, 53, 56. and fol. 441, 12.

Devise.
A. DEVISES that B. shall be his Heir, and C. devises Lands to A. and his
Heirs, B. shall have those Lands as Heir to A. for a Devise shall not be
construed void, when it possibly by any probable construction can be made good:
So note, a Man may be Heir ex vi Testamenti, before he is Heir ex vi Doni. 2
Siderf. 27.

Heir by descent of an Estate that by possibility could not be in his Ancestor.
LAND is given to A. and B. so long as they jointly together live, the
Remainder to the right Heirs of him that dies first; A. dies, the Remainder
vested not during the Life of A. (his Death must precede the Remainder) and yet
his Heir shall have the Land by descent. 1 Inst. 378. b.

Note, whenever the Ancestor takes a Freehold, and after a limitation is made
to his right Heirs, they shall not be Purchasers, though in Words it be limited
by way of Remainder: But if a Lease for Years be made to A. Remainder to B. in
tail, Remainder to the right Heirs of A. there the Remainder vests not in A.
but the right Heirs shall take by Purchase, if A. die during the Estate tail. 1
Inst. 22. b. 376. b. 319. b. 2 Roll. 417.

Where a Prisoner shall not be judged in Execution, though he yield himself unto
it.
A PRISONER having been in execution, was suffered by the Jailer to go out, and
then came into the Gaol again, and remained there till the time of another
Sheriff, and then escaped; the new Sheriff is not answerable for it, by Hobart:
For when he was let to go abroad voluntarily by the Jailer, the Execution was
utterly discharged, so as he could not be taken again legally, nor so judged in
Execution, though he would yield himself unto it, or the Creditor so allow him:
Neither can two Sheriffs be chargable Simul and Semel for two escapes out of
one and the same Execution at the same time. Hob. 202. Sheriff of Essex his
Case.

Note, it was agreed by the Court in the Case of Allanson and Butler, 1 Siderf.
330. that if a Prisoner in Execution escape by negligence, he may be retaken
either by the Sheriff, or the Plaintiff; but if he escape by the agreement of
the Sheriff, he cannot retake him, but the Plaintiff may, for otherwise by the
death or insufficiency of the Sheriff, he should be left without remedy.

Execution Discharged.
A. HAD a judgment and execution against B. who was thereupon taken, and in
custody in the King's Bench Prison; A. consented afterward that B* should come
to him out of Prison to the Horse Shoe Tavern, which was out of the Rules,
without a Keeper, or Rule of Court, thinking to make some agreement with him:
B. accordingly went to the Tavern, but because they could not agree the Matter,
A. took him up again upon the same Execution in the same Prison, whereupon B.
brought an Audita Querela, and adjudged well, for the Execution was discharged
by the Prisoner's going at large with the Plaintiff's consent, and so could not
be retaken upon it! Styles 117. Walker and Alder's Case, and 147 Accord.

Slander of a Midwife.
A MIDWIFE brought an Action upon the Case for saying, She is an ignorant
Woman, and has small practice, and is very unfortunate in her way, but goes
about feeling Women's Bellies, but there are few but are sick or die under her
Hands. Judgment was given for the Plaintiff. 2 Keb. 489. Wharton and Clover.

A Sheriff cannot upon private process rush into a House, which by Craft he
gets to be opened.
AN Undersheriff and others upon a private Process at the Suit of C. against
D. who lay in the House of A. came and knocked at A's. Door, whereupon A's Wife
came to the Door, and opened it a little to see who was there, upon which they
presently with their Swords drawn, rushed in upon her whether she would or no,
and bare her down, and brake open the Chamber Door where D. lay, and brake also
B's House adjoining to it, to get Instruments to break doors withal, and hurt
diverse in the House: The Lord Chief Baron, and Lord Hobart held the first entry
unlawful, for the opening of the Door was occasioned by 'em by craft, and then
used to the violence intended. Hob. 62. See Co. 5. 92. b. and 2 Cro. 556.

One Man kills another taking him in Bed with his Wife.
ONE Maddy taking of Nabor in the Act of Adultery with his Wife in his House,
killed him upon the spot, and the Court conceived it but Manslaughter, here
being a sufficient provocation, and no precedent Malice; so he had his Clergy,
and was gently burnt, etc. 2 Keb. 829.

Outlawry must be reversed in Person.
SIR W. Read being outlawed upon an Indictment for not repairing a Bridge,
brought a Writ of Error, and moved to pursue it by Attorney, and put in Bail,
and not to appear in Person: But all the Clerks of the Crown-Office affirmed
that none could assign Error upon Indictment but in Person, and so also to put
in Bail: The Court greatly pitied Sir William's Case, because he was Ninety
years of Age, and very infirm, having kept his Chamber for a year and more by
reason of his infirmity; and they conferred with the Attorney General how it
might be done; but all at length resolved it could not be admitted, being
against the course of the Court, and doubted if the King's Privy seal could
help him: Sir William was thereupon brought from his House ten miles from
London in a Horse Litter upon Men's shoulders to the Bar, and came into the
Court, and assigned his Error, and put in bail to prosecute, etc. The Error
was, that he was named in the Indictment and Exigent Willielmus Read Miles, de
Commit. Midd. without saying de such a place, alleging some place certain
within the County, and therefore reversed. 2 Cro. 616.

Note, some time before this Case, an Outlawed Person prayed to appear by
Attorney, and upon Affidavit made of his sickness, the Court ex gratia speciali
allowed him to appear by Attorney, but commanded the Clerk to enter it, Quod
venit in propria persona, the Law being clear that upon an Outlawry he must
appear in Person. 2 Cro. 462. vid. Styles 297.

See 4 Leon. 22. Taylor's Case, this difference agreed, where matter in Fact is
pleaded to avoid an outlawry, it ought to be in Person; but a matter of Record
might be pleaded by Attorney.

Scribere cum Dasho.
ONE Coswell outlawed, moved to reverse it, because instead of proxim. there is
used px. for it is abbreviation, without any dash; then instead of Infra scr.
the abbreviation of Infra scriptam, there is used Infra sr. for which
exceptions 'twas quashed. Styles 18.

Nonsense, how to be construed in giving a Legacy.
AN Imperfect Speech in bequeathing a Legacy may be reduced to such as is
equivalent to that which is perfect; if the Testator's mind and meaning may
rationally be presumed: For example, the Testator says, [ Let 10 l. to A. B.]
without the Words [Be given] Orphan's Legacy 464, 12.

A. devises, then takes the Devisee to Husband, etc.
ALICE Allen made her Will, and thereby devised certain Messuages to James
Amynde and his Heirs, and afterward she married the said James, and during the
Coverture she often said he should never have the Messuages by the said Will:
She died without Issue, he surviving, and adjudged that her marriage revoked
the Will, for it is against the nature of a Will to be irrevocable, since it
takes not any effect 'till the death of the Devisor, and her own Countermand
after marriage was of no force, because then she is wholly subject to the Will
of her Husband; therefore the taking of him to Husband being her own proper
Act, amounts to a Countermand in Law, otherwise it were very mischievous to
Women, that their Wills should be in force whether they will or no; and it is
not fit to leave it in the Wife's choice to Countermand, because the compulsion
of the Husband is to be feared. Co. 4. 60. b. Force and Hemblin's Case.

King Edgar's Law against Drinking.
THE Danes first brought into this Realm Excessive Drinking, and King Edgar
permitting many of them to dwell here, was at length constrained to make a Law
against this excess, (which never comes alone) driving certain Nails into the
sides of their Cups, as limits and bounds, which no Man upon great Pain should
be so hardy as to transgress. 3 Inst. 200.

If the excess of Drinking extend to the loathsome and odious vice of
Drunkenness, it is punishable by Act of Parliament: See 4 Jac. cap. 5. 7 Jac.
cap. 10. 21 Jac. cap. 7.

The Ancient Britains were free from this Crime. Ecce Britannorum mos est
laudabilis iste, Ut bibat Arbitrio Pocula quisque suo.

A Drunkard is voluntarius Demon, and what hurt or ill soever he does, his
Drunkenness aggravates it, Omne Crimen Ebrietas and incendit and detegit. 1
Inst. 247. a.

Offenses Capital and Civil.
IN many cases the Law will not punish Capital offenses in so high a degree,
except the Malice of the Will appears, and this in favorem vitae; but in Civil
trespasses and wrongs of a lower nature, the Law rather regards the damage of
the Person injured, than the Malice of the wrong-doer: And therefore the Law
makes a difference between killing one upon Malice prepensed, and upon present
Heat; but if I give a Man slanderous Language, and thereby damnify hi in his
Name and Credit, it is not material whether I use them upon sudden Choler and
Provocation, or of set Malice, for in an Action upon the Case, I shall render
Damages alike.

So if a Man be killed by Misadventure, as by an Arrow at Butts, it is pardoned
of course; but if a Man be hurt or maimed only, an Action of Trespass lies,
though it is done against the Parties Will, who shall be punished in the Law as
deeply as if it had been done maliciously. Hob. 134. the Case of Weaver and
Ward.

So if Baron and Feme commit a Felony together, she is neither principal nor
accessory, in respect of her obedience to her Husband's Will; but if they join
in committing a Trespass upon Land or, etc. the Action may be brought against
them both.

(See Dalton 104. that if Husband and Wife do both a Felony, it is Felony in
both, and both arraigned for it: But Hales in his Pla. Coron. says, Nota, that
Books old and latter, and practice is otherwise. fol. 65.)

If an Infant within years of Discretion, or a Madman kill another, he shall
not be impeached for it; but if they put out a Man's Eye, or do him any
corporal hurt, he shall be punished in Trespass. Hob. 134 and Bac. Elem. 32.

One born Deaf and Dumb, kills another.
IF one that is Dumb kills a Man, it it is Felony; yet Quaere, how he shall
be arraigned. Dalton cap. 147. page 351.

A Man born Deaf and Dumb kills another, that is no Felony, for he cannot know
whether he did evil or no; neither can he have a felonious intent: Otherwise if
not born so. ib. See Bro. Coron. 101. and 217. that a Man which can neither
hear nor speak may commit Felony, and shall be imprisoned, etc.

A Release of a right to one that has neither Freehold in Deed, or in Law, yet
good.
THE Demandant may release to the Vouchee, and yet the Vouchee has nothing in
the Land; but the reason is, because when the Vouchee enters into the
Warranty, he becomes Tenant to the Demandant, and may render the Land to him in
respect of the Privity. 1 Inst. 265. b.

If the Tenant alien hanging the Praecipe, the Release of the Demandant to the
Tenant to the Praecipe is good, and yet he has nothing in the Land. ibid.

If a Disseisor lets the Land for Life, the Disseisee may release all his right
to the Disseisor in reversion, though he has nothing in the Freehold, because he
has an Estate in him, viz. the Reversion. Lit. Sect. 449.

Courtesy of England.
IF a Woman seized of Lands in Fee takes Husband, and by him is big with Child,
and in her Travail dies, and the Child is ripped out of her Body alive, yet
shall not the Husband be Tenant by the Courtesy, because the Child was not born
during the Marriage, nor in the life time of the Wife; but in the mean time the
Land descended, and in pleading he must allege that he had Issue during the
Marriage. 1 Inst. 29. b. Co. 8. 35. a. b. in Pain's Case.

A Secret of Law.
LITTLETON says, In every Case where a Man takes a Wife seized of such an
Estate of Tenements, etc. as his Issue by her may by possibility inherit, As
Heir to the Wife, in such case after her Death he shall have 'em by the
Courtesy of England, and otherwise not.

In the Words [As Heir to the Wife] my Lord Coke has discovered a Secret of
Law, for except the Wife be actually seized, the Heir shall not make himself
Heir to the Wife, which is the reason that a Man shall not be Tenant by the
Courtesy of a Seisin in Law. 1 Inst. 40. a. Co. 8. 34. in Paine's Case.

Another reason is, because it lies always in his Power to reduce the Seisin in
Law by his entry to an a actual Seisin, and so it shall be accounted his own
laches; for it is otherwise in case of Rents and Advowsons, where if the Wife
die before the Rent became due, or the Church void, yet the Husband shall hold
by Courtesy, because he could by no Industry attain to any other Seisin; which
is likewise the reason why a Woman shall be endowed of a Seisin in Law of
Lands, because it lies not in her power to reduce it to an actual Seisin.

Corporalis injuria non recipit aestimationem de futuro.
THE Law in many Cases that concern Lands or Goods deprives a Man of his
present remedy, and turns him over to a farther circuit of remedy, rather than
to suffer an Inconvenience; but if it be a question of personal Pain, the Law
will not compel him to sustain it, and expect remedy, because it holds no
damage (that may be given) a sufficient recompense for a Corporal wrong.

Therefore if one menace me in my Goods, and that he will burn certain
Evidences of my Land, which he has in his Hand, if I will not make unto him a
Bond; yet if I enter into Bond by this Terror, I cannot avoid it by Plea,
because the Law holds it an Inconvenience to avoid a specialty by such matter
of Averment, and therefore I am put to my Action against such Menacer; but if
he restrain my Person, or threaten to beat me, or burn my House, which is a
safety and protection to my Person, and upon such menace or duress I make a
Deed, I shall avoid it by Plea.

So if a Trespasser drive my Cattle over the ground of I. S. and I pursue to
rescue them, yet am I a Trespasser to I. S. but if one assault my Person, and I
fly over another Ground, I am no Trespasser.

So if the Sheriff make a false return that I am summoned, whereby I lose my
Land, yet because of the inconvenience of drawing all things to incertainty and
delay, if the Sheriff's return should not be credited, I am excluded of my
Averment against it, and am put to my Action of Deceit against the Sheriff and
Summoners. But if the Sheriff upon a Capias return a Cepi Corpus, and quod est
lauguidus in prisona, there I may come in and falsify the return to save my
Imprisonment. 5 Edw. IV. 80. 3 H. VI. 3. Bac. Elem. 29, 30. 1. Roll 92.

Felony, and Chancemedley.
PLAYING at Hand-Sword, Bucklers, Foot Ball, Wrestling, and the like, whereby
one of them receives hurt, and dies thereof within a Year and a Day: In these
Cases some hold, that this is Felony of Death; others, that they shall have
their Pardon of course, as for Misadventure, for that such their Play was by
consent, and because there was no former Malice, but done only for disport, and
trial of Manhood. Dalt. 352. See tit. Justs and Chancemedley in hoc Libro.

Justification in case of Necessity.
THE Ferry-Man of Gravesend took Forty seven Passengers into his Barge to go to
London, amongst whom was one Mouse; the Barge being upon the Water, a great
Tempest arose, insomuch that the Barge, and all the Passengers were in danger
to be drowned, if a Hogshead of Wine, and other ponderous things were not cast
out; among which things there was a Casket with 113 l. of Mouse's, which I. S.
took and threw overboard; whereupon Mouse brought Trespass, etc. It was
resolved per Curiam, that in case of necessity for saving the Passengers lives,
it was lawful for I. S. being a Passenger, to cast the Plaintiff's Casket out
of the Barge, with what was in it, [Quod quis obtutelam corporis sui fecerit,
jure id fecisse videtur.] and 'twas directly proved that the Men had been
drowned if the things had not been heaved out: But 'twas agreed also that the
Owners in such Case shall have their Remedy upon the surcharge against the
Ferry-Man; and if there is no surcharge but the danger comes by the Act of God,
then every one must bear his own Loss. 12 Rep. 63. and 2 Roll. 567.

One may justify the felling of a Tree in the Ground of another in Case of
necessity. 6 E. 4. 8.

See 22 Assise 5, 6. that a Man may justify the beating another, if he be in a
Rage.

So Estrays may be fettered, if they are fierce and unruly. Hut. Rep. 67. and
Winch 67, 124.

If a Man has a way over my Land for his Cattle to pass, and they in passing
eat the Grass against his Will, this is justifiable. 2 Roll. 566, 567. Reeve
and Downs.

Note this for a Rule, That in all Trespasses there must be a voluntary Act,
and also a damage; otherwise an Action of Trespass lies not.

In Trespass for Ploughing his Land, the Defendant said, the Plaintiff's Land
is adjoining to his and that when he was Ploughing his own Land, the Horses
were unruly, and by violence carried the Plough into the Land of the Plaintiff,
contra voluntatem suam, and held a good Justification; for if a Man be doing a
lawful Act, which afterward becomes illegal, against his Will, that is damnum
sine injuria. 22 E. 4. 8.

One cannot justify a Trespass upon another for fear.
IN Trespass for breaking of a House and Close, the Defendant pleaded, that
Duodecem homines ignoti modo querrino armati tantum minabantur ei, quod de
vitae suae amissione dubitabat, and after requirabant and compulsabant the
Defendant to go with 'em to the House, quodque ob timorem minarum, and per
mandatum and compulsionem dictorum duodecem hominum, he did enter the said
Close and House, and returned immediately through the said Close, which is the
same Trespass, etc. Adj. no Plea upon demurrer, for one cannot justify a
Trespass upon another for fear, and the Defendant has remedy against those that
compelled him; the pleading too was naught, because he did not show that the
way to the House was through the Close. Allen 35. Gilbert and Stone. vide the
same Case Styles 72. with this further reason, that the Person injured shall
have no satisfaction (if such Plea be allowed) for he cannot have it of those
that threatened. But see Styles 65. in Trespass pedibus ambulando; the
Defendant pleads, he was carried upon the Land by force and violence of others,
and was not there voluntarily, which is the same Trespass, etc. upon Demurrer.
Roll. Justice said, it is the Trespass of the Party that carried the Defendant
upon the Land, and not the Defendant's Trespass; as he that drives my Cattle
into another Land is the Trespassor, and not I who am the owner of the Cattle.

Presumption of Law.
IN many Cases the Law will admit no proof against what it presumes: Therefore,
If a Rent be behind for 20. Years, and the Lord make an Acquittance for the
last that is due; all the rest are presumed to be paid, against which
presumption the Law will admit no proof. Dyer. 271. a. 11 H. IV. 55.

So if a Man be within the Four Seas, and his Wife has a Child, the Law
presumes it is the Child of the Husband, and will admit no proof to the
contrary. 7 H. IV. 9. 1 Inst. 373. a. unless the Husband be castrated. 1 Roll.
358.

An innocent person is accused of Felony, and being afraid, flies for it; though
he after judicially acquit himself thereof, yet if it be found that he fled for
the same, he shall forfeit (notwithstanding his innocence) all his Goods and
Chattels, Debts and Duties; for as to the forfeiture of these, the Law will
allow no Proof against the presumption in Law, grounded upon his flight. 1
Inst. 373. a. b.

So if the Uncle of the Issue releases with Warranty to the Discontinuee of
Tenant in tail, and dies without Issue; this is a collateral Warranty to the
Issue in tail, barring him without any Assets, or Estate descended from him
that made the Warranty, the Law presuming that the Uncle would not unnaturally
disinherit his Lawful Heir, being of his own Blood, of that right which himself
never had, without leaving him greater Advancements. 1 Inst. 373. a.

Forfeiture.
TWO Joynt-Tenants for Life, the one grants his Estate for the Life of his
Companion; it was held a Forfeiture, for first, it is a severance of the
Jointure, and then a Lease for another's Life. 4 Leon. 236.

Remainder for the Life of Tenant for Life, good.
IF a Remainder be limited to one for term of the Life of Tenant for Life, the
Remainder is good, but for this reason only, because that by possibility the
Tenant for Life may alien in Fee, and so forfeit his Estate, whereby the
Remainder shall enter for the Forfeiture, and enjoy the Estate during the Life
of the Tenant for Life, who committed such forfeiture. Co. 2. 50, 51.

The King of Spain Outlawed in Westminster Hall.
THE King of Spain was Outlawed in Westminster Hall, I being of Council
against him, (says Seldom) the Case was this; A Merchant had recovered Costs
against him in a Suit, which because he could not get, we advised to have him
Outlawed for not appearing, and so he was: As soon as Gondimer heard it, he
presently sent the Money, by reason that if his Master had been Outlawed, he
could not have the benefit of the Law, which would have been very prejudicial
to him, there being then many Suits depending betwixt the King of Spain, and
our English Merchants.

Vide Styles Pract. Reg. 382. that Mich. 22. Car. B. R. the King of Spain was
Nonsuit in England; for if a foreign Prince will have benefit of the National
Laws here, he must proceed and abide by the Rules and Orders of the Court
wherein he prefers his Action.

Where one shall be a Bastard though born in Marriage.
IF the Husband be Castrated, so as it is apparent that he cannot by any
possibility get a Child, and his Wife has Issue several years after, it shall
be a Bastard, though engendered in Marriage, for that it is a plain case it cannot
be legitimate: But Hobart contra. 1 Roll. 358. Initio.

If the Wife of an Infant of the Age of Nine Years has a Child, it is a
Bastard. 29. Ass. 54. quaere. 1 Roll. 359.

If a Man marry a Woman big with Child by another, who is delivered within
three days after, the Child is a Bastard by the Law Spiritual, (but by our Law
legitimate.) 18. E. 4. 30. 1 H. VI. 3.

If a Feme Covert has Issue by Adultery, yet if the Husband be able to get it,
and is within the Four Seas, it is not a Bastard. 1 Roll. 358. Hill. 14. Jac.
But see 40 E. 3. 16. that if a Woman covert continues in Avowtrie, and has
Issue, it is a Bastard.

Copy of Inscription, Evidence.
MEMORANDUM at a Trial at the Bar between Baxter and Foster, concerning the
Title of Land, a Copy of an Inscription upon a great Stone in London was
admitted in evidence to prove a pedigree. Mich. 1656. Banco super. Sti. Pract.
Reg. 177.

Jury throw up Cross and Pile.
THE Court set aside a Verdict in Northumberland on Affidavit, that the Jury
being divided in opinion, threw Cross and Pile, and ordered them to appear the
next Term to an Information; this being punishable by Wild, and as was said,
broke Sir James Altham's Heart, who was one of the Jury in the Lord Fitzwater's
Case. 3 Keble 805. Foy and Harder.

Church-Book, and Shop-Book, where Evidence.
A CHURCH- Book being entered, and made parcel of the Record, was given in
Evidence, and good; but not otherwise to be given in Evidence. 1 Brownl. 207. 1
Cro. 411.

A Tradesman's Shop Book may not be given in Evidence for Wares sold, or Work
done, a Year after the selling, etc. 7 Jac. c. 12. unless they have a Bond or
Bill for the Debt, or brought Action within the Year.

Barrister expelled the House for not paying his Commons.
MR. Boreman, a Barrister of one of the Temples, was expelled the House, and
his Chamber seized for non-payment of his Commons, whereupon he prayed to be
restored, bringing his Writ of Restitution into Court, ready framed, which was
directed to the Benchers of the said Society; but 'twas denied by the Court,
because there is none in the Inns of Court to whom the Writ can be directed,
because it is no Body Corporate, but only a voluntary Society, and submission
to Government; and they were angry with him for it, that he had waved the
ancient and usual way of Redress for any grievance in the Inns of Court, which
is, by appealing to the Judges, and would have him do it now. 17 Car. in B. R.
March r^p. 177. cited also in Styles 42.

Masters in Chancery.
MASTERS in Chancery in ancient time were Clerks of the Court, and called The
first Form, and their Office was, and now is, to sign Original Writs, and of
late time they have obtained a Commission to make them Judges: They are part of
the Latin Court in Chancery, and were formerly Priests, and from thence they
are called Masters; the Lord Chancellor had the Benefices under Twenty Marks,
to the intent to prefer these Masters to 'em, and they could not marry 'till
they were enabled by Stat. 14. H. VIII. cap. 8. They used anciently to frame
the Writs, and are this day offended with the Cursitors for their Office.
Latch. 39, and 133.

Husband and Wife in Affection resolve to die together, she buys Poison, both
take it, the Husband dies.
A MAN and his Wife had lived a long time together, and the Man having at
length spent his Substance, and living in great Necessity, said to his Wife,
That he was now weary of his Life, and that he would kill himself; the Wife
said, that then she would also die with him, whereupon he prayed her that she
would go and buy some Ratsbane, and they would drink it together; which she
accordingly did, and she put it into Drink, and they both drank of it; the
Husband died, but the Woman took Salad Oil, which made her vomit, and she
recovered: Quaere, if Murder in the Wife. Moor 754.

Prerogative.
PRAEROGATIVA is derived of prae i. e. ante, and rogare, to ask or demand
beforehand, being denominated of the most excellent part; because, though an Act
has passed both Houses in Parliament, yet before it be a Law, the Royal Assent
must be asked or demanded and obtained; this is the proper sense of the Word,
but legally it extends to all Powers, Preheminences, and Privileges which the
Law gives to the Crown. Fortescue 45. Stanf. Praer. 5. 10. 1 Inst. 90 b.

According to this latter sense then, the King's Prerogative is not his Will,
or (what Divines make it) a Power to do what he lists: The King's Prerogative,
that is, The King's Laws: For Example, if you ask whether a Patron may present
to a Living after six Months by Law? It Is answered, No* If you ask whether the
King may, it is answered, he may by his Prerogative, i. e. by the Law that
concerns him in that Case. Seldom.

Husband and Wife divorced causa Frigiditatis, or impotency in the Husband, he
marries again and has Issue, it is legitimate.
IN Ejectment between Whebster and Bury, a sp;ecial Verdict was given upon
Divorce between Bury and his Wife Causa Frigiditatis, and that his Wife for
Three Years after marriage, remansit Virgo intacta, propter perpetuam
impotentiam generationis in Viro, and quod Vir fuit ineptua ad generandum: And
in this special Verdict the whole examination of the Witnesses, upon which the
Judge in the Spiritual Court gave Sentence, whereby the perpetual dissability
of Bury ad generandum was manifest, was read, by which it was pretended, that
the Issue which he had by a Second Wife, was illegitimate, and this was the
doubt of the Jury: But 'twas adjudged that his Issue by the Second Wife was
lawful; for it is clear that by the Divorce causa frigiditatis, the Marriage is
dissolved a vinculo, and either might marry again, then admitting the Second
marriage voidable, yet it is good until dissolved, and by consequence the Issue
lawful (if no Divorce be in the life of the Parties) Et homo potest esse
habilis and in habilis diversis temporibus. Co. 5. 98. Burie's Case.

One refuses to be sworn after the usual manner.
DOCTOR Owen, Vice Chancellor of Oxford, being a Witness in a Cause for the
Plaintiff, refused to be sworn according to the usual manner, by laying his
Right Hand upon the Book, and kissing it after; but he caused the Book to be
held open before him, and he held up his Right Hand, and so was sworn:
Whereupon the Jury prayed the discretion of the Court, if they ought to esteem
his testimony as strong as that of another Witness? Glyn. Chapter J. answered, that
in his opinion the Dr. had taken as strong an Oath as any of the other
Witnesses; but that for his own part, if himself were to be sworn, he would,
according to the accustomed way, lay his Right hand upon the Book: The same
Answer which he gave before to another Jury. 2 Siderf. 6.

Jews sworn upon the old Testament only.
ON Evidence to a Jury, the Witnesses produced were Jews, and sworn upon the
Old Testament only: Per Cur. a good Oath by 5 Eliz. c. 9. to make Perjury: And
within the general Words of S. Evangelia; so of the Common Prayer Book that
has the Epistles and Gospels, Contra by Windham of a Psalm-Book only. 2 Keb.
314.

Murder of a Child in the Womb.
ONE beats a Woman great with Child, and after the Child is born alive, with
Signs and Bruises in his Body of the said battery, and after dies thereof:
Fenner and Popham held it to be Murder; for the difference is, where the Child
is born Dead, and where Alive; in the first Case it is not Murder, because Non
constat whether the Child were living at the time of the Battery, or not, or if
the beating were the cause of it is Death; but when it is born Alive, and the
Wounds appear in his Body, and then dies, the Batteror shall be arraigned of
Murder, for now it may be proved whether these Wounds were the cause of the
Death, or not; and therefore if it be found, he shall be condemned. Goldsb.
Rep. 176.

If a Woman quick with Child take a Potion to kill it, and accordingly it is
destroyed without being born alive; this is a great Misprision, but no Felony;
but if born alive, and after dies of that Potion, it is Murder. Dalt. c. 93.
Hales tit. Felonies.

Nemo tenetur prodere seipsum.
A MAN was sued for Incontinency in the Spiritual Court, and the Judges there
would have him answer upon his Oath if he ever had Carnal Knowledge of such a
Woman, upon which he prayed a Prohibition, and 'twas granted, for no one is
obliged to betray himself in such cases of Defamation, but only in causes
Testamentary and Matrimonial, where no discredit can be to the Party by his
Oath. Cro. Eliz. 201. Moor 906. 4 Leon. 194. Cullier's Case.

Dr. Hunt was indicted, that being Commissary to the Archdeacon of Norwich, he
caused I. S. to be Summoned before him, to compel him to take an Oath
concerning Incontinency, which touched himself: It being referred to the Chief
Justices, and Chief Baron, they certified, That where the Knowledge of the
matter did belong to the Court Christian, they may proceed according to the
Civil Law: Note, the King's Bench was of opinion in this case, that the Oath
cannot be ministered to the Party, but where the Offense is first presented by
Two Men. Cro. Eliz. 262.

If a Woman be Sued in the Eccl siastical Court upon a Contract of Marriage,
and enters into Bond to the Court with condition not to Marry or live in
Fornication with any one pendente lite, she cannot afterward be examined there
upon her Oath, whether she be a single Woman, for that tends to the Forfeiture
of the Obligation. 2 Roll. 305. Clifford and Huntley.

Bastardy.
IF Husband and Wife continue Man and Wife their whole Lives, their Issue
cannot be Bastarded by a Divorce after their Death, for the Divorce in the
Spiritual Court est pro peccatis, which cannot be after they are Dead, and
therefore such Divorce there is only to disinherit the Issue, which they cannot
do, 39 E. 3. 31. b. 32. for by such means any one may be disinherited. 31 Ass.
Pl. 10.

Bastardy.
IF the Wife of an Infant under Fourteen Years has Issue, it is a Bastard.
Noy's Rep. 142. 1 Roll. 359. 1 H. VI. 3. b.

If a Wife elope, and live in Adultery with another, and has Issue, yet by our
Law the Child is legitimate, agreed per Cur. in Edgerton's Case, 1 Roll. 358.
but the Husband must be within the Four Seas, so as by Intendment he may come
to her; otherwise such Issue is a Bastard. But vide 40 E. 16. 3 b. contra.

If a Feme Covert goes into another County, and takes Husband, and has Issue by
him, the first Husband being within the Seas, the Issue is legitimate. 7 H. IV.
9. b.

A Married Man takes another Woman to Wife, his Issue by her is Bastard by
Common and Civil Law, for the second Marriage is void. Co. 7. 44.

If there be an unlawful Marriage, as between Brother and Sister, and they have
Issue, and one of 'em dies before any Divorce had between them, the Issue
cannot now be Bastarded. (see Co. 7. 42. Kenn's Case) 1 Brownl. 42. and 2.
Roll. 357.

Upon a Motion to stay an Information brought against the Prosecutors of one
Brown for a Bastard, Justice Twisden said, that the Stat. 18 Eliz. cap. 3.
shall be taken by equity, and that although Bastards are intended Children
Born, yet the Justices may take security of such as are Big, or of reputed
Fathers during that time, lest they be gone before the Child is born, Curia
accord' sed adjornatur. Lamb. I. P. 119. 3 Keb. 708.

If a Man has Issue by a Woman, and after Marries her, by our Law the Child is
a Bastard; yet note, such issue shall be called their Child in Law, for a
Remainder limited to it by that name is good. Co. 6. 65.

If a Man Marry his Cousin within the degrees, the Issue between them is not
Bastard, until Divorce had, for the Marriage is not void; as it is where a
Husband takes a second Wife, living the first, and has Issue by her, it is a
Bastard, because the second Marriage is void.

An Idiot a nativitate may consent to Marry, and his Issue shall be legitimate.
Style and West. 1 Roll. 357. Fine.

Lease confirmed before it is made, yet good.
A BISHOP made a Lease for Years the second day of May, and the Dean and
Chapter confirmed it the first of May; Catlyne and Southcote held it a good
Lease after the Bishop's Death: Wray demanded, How a Lease could be confirmed
before it was made; the others answered, That the Assent before is a good
Confirmation after, Owen 33.

Vide 2 Roll. 26. Number 30. that if a Parson grant an Annuity, and the Patron
seals and delivers a Deed of Confirmation before the Grant, and after the Grant
delivers the Deed again, this second Delivery is void, for although by the first
Delivery it took not effect as a Confirmation, but was void in operation (quod
nota) yet it was his Deed, for he could not plead Non est factum. See 8 H. VI.
6. b. and 39 H. 6. 37. b. contra.

Where the Lord shall have the Land against his own Confirmation.
LORD and Tenant of a Carve of Land, the Tenant has Issue, and is attainted of
Felony, and the King pardons him, and after the Lord confirms his Estate, and
the Tenant dies, here the Lord shall have the Land against his own
confirmation, for it is ruled in Beaumont's Case, Co. 9. 141 b. that a
confirmation cannot add a discendible quality to him that is disabled to take
by descent. But vide Cro. Car. 478. by Jones and Croke, a Deed shall never be
void when by any Intendment it may be allowed good, and to have any operation,
and that although in Beaumont's Case the Heir in tail was barred by the fine of
his Ancestor, yet they hold he was restored to the Estate tail by the
Confirmation of him in the Reversion; for as the Fine was an Estoppel to the
Heir to claim against the Fine, so the Indenture of Confirmation is an Estoppel
to him in Reversion to say that the Heir shall not hold it in tail, and there
it is an Estoppel against an Estoppel, which sets the matter at large. See
Jones 394.

Fine levied by a Woman born Deaf and Dumb.
ONE Martha Eliot that was born Deaf and Dumb came before Chief Justice
Bridgman to levy a Fine; she and her three Sisters had a House and Land, and an
Uncle had maintained her, and was to buy the House and Land of them, and agreed
to maintain this Woman, if she would pass, her Land for Security: As to her
intelligence, the Sisters said, she knew and understood the meaning of all
this; the Chief Justice demanded what sign she would make for passing away her
Lands, and as 'twas interpreted to him, she put her Hands that way (spreading
them out) where the Lands lay. This matter being communicated by the Chief
Juslice to his Brethren, Judge Archer (with whom Tyrrel and Brown agreed) said,
that the rule in Law is, that in Fines and Feoffments, etc. if there be a good
intelligence, they may well do such Acts, they may be admitted to make
contracts for their good: They are allowed upon examination to Marry, and to
receive the Sacrament, they may make contracts for their Persons, and by the
same reason for their Lands; and so his Lordship took the Fine. Cartor's Rep.
53, 54.

Vide Perkins, Sect. 25. that one born Deaf and Dumb may make a gift, if he
have Understanding, but that it is hard such a Person should have Understanding,
for that perfect intelligence comes by hearing. And see 1 Inst. 8. a. that one
born Deaf and Dumb may be Heir to another (though it was otherwise held in
ancient time) and so if born Deaf, Dumb, and Blind, for in hoc casu vitio
parcitur naturali; but note, it is there said that such persons cannot contract.

Alien suffers a Common recovery.
LAND was given to an Alien in tail, the Remainder to I. S. in Fee; the Alien
suffered a Common Recovery, and died without Issue, all which being found by
Office, the Court resolved the Recovery was good, and should bind the
Remainder-Man. 4 Leon. 84.

Note, it has been adjudged, where an Alien and I. S. were Joint-Purchasers,
and the Alien died, that I. S. should not have the whole by Survivor, but that
the King should have the Moiety upon Office found.

The Wife of I. D. levies a Fine with I. S. as his Wife, and I. D. cannot
prevent it.
I. S. and the Wife of I. D. levied a Fine of her Lands, by the name of I. S.
and Jane his Wife, I. D. came into Court, and showed this matter, and prayed to
stay the Fine, but the Court would not stay it, for the Court shall not
determine loyalty of Matrimony; and if it be true that she is not the Wife of
I. S. it shall not hurt the rightful Husband. 2 Roll. 19. Keblethwaite and Wade.

Wife prays the Peace against her Husband.
ON a difference between the Lord Leigh and his Lady about Pin-Money, viz. the
settlement of 200 l. per annum in case of Separation; she upon Affidavit of
hard Usage, and that she went in fear of her Life, prayed security of the Peace
against him, and 'twas granted: Note, Hale Chief Justice said here, the Salva
Moderata castigatione in the Register is not meant of Beating, but only of
Admonition and Confinement to the House in case of her Extravagance, Curia acc'
she being not as an Apprentice, etc. but they were reconciled afterward. 3
Keb. 433.

See 1 Keb. 637. Bradley's Case. The Court refused to bind him to the Peace at
his Wife's Suit, unless her Life were in danger, because by the Law he has
power of Castigation; and the Bishop of London had certified that he used to
beat her, but that she used to provoke him.

Fine Sur Grant and Lender, Executory.
A MAN by Fine acknowledges all his right in certain Land to me, and I render
it back again to him in Fee, where neither of us has any thing in the Land,
and after I purchase the Land, this Fine shall bind me, for it was executory
upon me. 2 Roll. 20.

Witness excused from swearing the whole Truth.
IN a Cause between Spark and Sir Hugh Middleton, Mr. Aylet having been
Counsel for the Defendant, desired he might not be sworn on the general Oath,
as Witness for the Plaintiff, to give the whole Truth in evidence, which the
Court granted after some dispute; and that he should only reveal such matters
as he either knew before he was of Counsel, or that came to his knowledge after
from others; and the particulars to which he was sworn were particularly
proposed, viz. what he knew concerning a Will in question that P. G. made; and
the Court only put the question, Whether he knew of his own Knowledge? 1 Keble
505.

See Styles 449. Waldron and Ward, That a Counselor is not bound to make
answer to matters which may disclose the secrets of his Client's cause, by
Roll. Chief Justice; and so he was forborne to be examined.

Vide March 83. pl. 136. that a Lawyer of Counsel may be examined upon Oath as
a Witness to the matter of Agreement, not to the validity of an Assurance, or
to the matter of Counsel.

Extinguishment.
IF a Man Lessee for Years take the Feme Lessor to Wife, his Term is drowned,
for a Man cannot have a Term for Years in his own right, and a Freehold in
auter droit to consist together. 1 Inst. 338. b.

Baron Lessee for Years, and the Inheritance descends to his Feme, Resolved per
Cur. praeter Williams, That here the Term is not extinct. 2 Cro. 275. So note a
difference where the Feme has the Reversion before Marriage, and where the Fee
descends to her after Marriage. Jenkins cent. fo. 73. the first is the Act of
the Husband, the other the Act of the Law, which shall not prejudice him.

If a Man Lessor Marry the Feme Lessee, the term is not drowned, but he is
possessed of it in her right during the Coverture: So if the Lessee make the
Lessor his Executor, the term remains; for a Man may well have a Freehold in
his own right, and a Term in auter droit. Pl. Com. 418. 1 Inst. 338. b.

Feme Lessee for Years takes Husband, he purchases the Fee, the term there is
extinct by the Act of the Husband which destroys it, viz. the purchase, but
where he had the Reversion before, her Term shall continue, for the Act of the
Law shall not prejudice. 4 Leon. 212.

An Executor has a Term, and purchases the Fee, the Term is determined, by
Dyer. 4 Leon. 212.

Counselor and Client.
IF a Counselor say to his Client, that such a Contract is Simony, and the
Client makes answer, That Simony or not Simony he will do it, and thereupon the
Counselor makes this Simonaical Contract, it is no offense in him, by Reeve
Justice. March 83. pl. 136.

Carrier robbed, allowed a Witness to prove the Robbery.
IT was said by Chief Justice Glyn, that a Carrier who is robbed, may be
examined as a Witness at a Trial thereupon, to prove the Robbery, and what he
was robbed of, otherwise the truth cannot be known: But this is the only Case,
he said, where one may be admitted to give his testimony as a Witness in a
matter which concerns himself. Styles Pr. Reg. 571. Warren, and the Hundred of
Broadwater.

Examination of a Witness.
IN examining a Witness, Counsel cannot question all the Life of the Witness,
as whether he be a Whoremaster, etc. but if he has done any notorious fact,
which gives just exception against him, this may be taken, and he may be
excepted against. March 83. pl. 136.

What Sergeants Rings ought to weigh.
SEVENTEEN Sergeants being made the Fourth of November, 21 Car. II. Sergeant
Powis coming (a day or two after) to the King's Bench Bar, Chief Justice
Keeling told him, he had somewhat to say to him, viz. that the Rings which he
and the rest of his Brethren had given, weighed but 18 s. apiece, whereas
Fortescue says in his Book de laudibus Legum Angliae, that the Rings given to
the Chief Justices, and Chief Baron ought to weigh 20 s. a piece; and that he
spoke this not expecting a Cecompence, but that it might not be drawn into a
President, and that the young Gentlemen there might take notice of it. See the
Mod. Rep. 9.

Legatee allowed as a Witness to prove the Will.
ONE that has but a small Legacy given him by a Will, may be allowed as a
Witness to prove that Will, for the Law will not intend that any one will
forswear himself for a small matter. Styles Pr. Reg. 568. but see Styles Rep.
370. initio.

A Man brings Debt against his own Executors.
VIDE 1 Inst. 133. b. that in some Case a Man might have had an Action of Debt
against his own Executors; as if A. had been bound to the Abbot of Dale in an
Obligation, and afterward A. had been professed a Monk in the same Abbey, and
after were made Abbot thereof, he should now have had an Action of Debt upon
his own Bond against his own Executors.

Note, when a Man entered into Religion, he might make his Will and his
Executors, and they should have had an Action for a Debt due to him before his
entry into Religion, or any other Action that Executors may have, as if he had
been dead indeed, pari ratione they might be also sued, and in the Case supra,
the Bond being made to an Abbot by one who after became dead in Law, by entering
into Religion, whereby his Executors became chargeable, etc. when he himself
was afterward restored to legal Life by being made Abbot, the Debt being
unsatisfied, himself was then the only Person capable of suing for it.

Where a Feme Covert shall have both an Executor and Administrator.
THE Wife of I. S. having Debts due to herself, and being also Executrix to I.
D. makes (without her Husband's assent) I. N. her Executor, and dies: Here as
touching the Goods, and Credits, or Things in Action, pertaining to her as
Executrix of I. D. this Will stands good, and I. N. may prove it, contrary to
her Husband's Will: But as to the Credits to her self in her own right
pertaining, the Will is void, and thereof her Husband may take Administration:
So Note, she shall die both Testate, and Intestate; with a Will, and without a
Will; shall have both an Executor, and Administrator. Office of an Executor,
281.

Pleasant Custom.
BY a Custom which they have in the Town of Southampton, if a Bastard Child be
found within the Town, and the Father of it cannot be discovered, he that comes
next into the Town, after the Child was found, must keep the Child. Mich. 24.
Car. B. R. Styles Practical Register 105. It may be (says Styles) they of the
Town did time out of mind agree amongst themselves that it should be so, and
therefore it shant be adjudged an unreasonable Custom, though it seems a strange
one.

Custom to hang for Stealing a Capon, not for Stealing an Ox.
THERE are several Customs which are good ratione loci, that are not allowed
throughout England; as there is a Custom in the Isle of Man, that a Man shall
be hanged for stealing a Capon, yet he shall not be hanged for stealing an Ox.
12 H. VIII. 5. 1 Siderf, 267.

Custom in Cheshire.
THERE is a Custom in Cheshire, that if a Debtor come before the Chamberlain
of Chester, and there takes his Oath that he is not able to pay the Debt, but
that he will pay it as soon as he can, that he shall have a Protection. See 1
Roll. 566, 567.

Note, Whereas by the Custom of London, an Action upon the Case lies for
calling a Woman Whore; and so likewise in the Court of the Borough of
Southwark, (where they allege a Custom specially for Whipping and Carting of
Whores) it lies likewise for a Lodger, for she comes within the Customs, which
reach to all the Inhabitants.

One loses at Play more then 100 l. to several Persons.
DEBT upon Bond, the Defendant pleads the Stat. 16 Car. II. cap. 7. against
Gaming that he lost at [Most at Three Throws] 90 l. to the Plaintiff, and at
the same time 30 l. to A. at Cards, and 60 l. more to B. at Bett: The Plaintiff
demurred, because it does not appear that these were Parties together, or in
trust one for the other; and in Danver's Case the Act was held to extend only
to the security for more than 100 l. much less shall it extend to different
Gamesters. But the Court agreed, it was not material to whom the Party became
indebted; for the Statute is, That you shall not lose more than 100 l. at one
time or meeting upon Ticket; and Judgment was given for the Defendant, the
Statute being to be extended against Play. 3 Keb. 671. Hudson and Malim.

Danvers his Case was thus, (1 Siderf. 394.)

Bond was given for 100 l. lost at Play, there being lost at the same time a
Ring of 20 l. value, which was paid, and adjudged the Bond was not void within
the Statute, the design whereof was to avoid Securities, but did not regard
ready Money, as not presuming that Persons would carry their Estates in their
Pockets: Therefore Keeling said, If one lose 1000 l. in ready Money and also
give Bond for 100 l. it is not within the Statute.

Two Joynt-Tenants hanged in one Cart, the Survivor's Wife demands Dower.
IN a Writ of Dower, the Title of the Feme to recover Dower was this: Father
and Son were Joint-Tenants to them and the Heirs of the Son, they committed
Felony, and were both hanged in one Cart, but because the Son (as it was
deposed by Witnesses) did survive, as appeared by some Tokens, viz. his shaking
his Legs; his Wife thereupon demanded Dower, and upon issue nunques seisie que
Dower, it was found for her. Cro. Eliz. 503.

For the better understanding of which Case, I shall give you the following
Opinion: If there be two Joint-Tenants in Fee, and one of 'em is attainted of
Felony, and then the other dies in the Life of him that was attainted, his part
shall survive to him that was attainted, by Brampston, in the Case of Harris
and Wardell, 2 Roll. 88. and he held that the Lord of whom the Lands are holden
should not have this part by Attainder if he were afterward pardoned: But
Berkley conceived that he should forfeit by his Attainder all the Land which
comes to him during his Attainder, and so the Lord should have this Moiety also.

A. and B. Joint-Tenants, A. is attainted and hanged, yet there is no severance
of the Jointure, but the Land shall survive to B. until the Lord enter for the
forfeiture. Harris and Wardell's Case. 2 Roll. 88.

Plea in Bar of Dower.
A WOMAN brought a Writ of Dower in Kent, and demanded the third part of
certain Lands, whereof her Husband was seized; the Tenant pleaded in Bar, That
the Lands were of the nature of Gavelkind, whereof by Custom she is to have a
Moiety for her Dower, and adjudged a good Plea in Bar, quod nota, Savil's Rep.
91.

Where a Right of Freehold shall drown in a Chattel.
IF a Disseisor make a Lease for Years, the Disseisee cannot release to him,
because he has no Estate of Freehold: And yet in some case a right of
Freehold shall drown in a Chattel, as if a Feme has a right of Dower, she may
release to the Guardian in Chivalry, and her right of Freehold shall drown in
the Chattel, because the Writ of Dower lies against him, and the Heir shall
take advantage of it. 1 Inst. 266. a.

Coparceners, but one Heir.
A. MAKES a gift in Tail, reserving 2 s. Rent to himself during his Life, and
if he die, his Heir within age, then a Rent of 20 s. to his Heirs for ever; A.
dies, having Issue two Daughters, one of full age, the other within age; here
the Donee shall hold by Fealty only, inasmuch as the one Daughter as well as
the other is his Heir, and both of 'em make but one Heir, ergo his Heir is not
within age, neither is his Heir in that Case of full Age: But if the
reservation had been, and if he die, his Heir neither within age, nor of full
age, there it had been good; note, if it begins not in his next heir, it shall
never begin, because the precedence is not performed. 1 Inst. 164. a.

Special Tail.
LAND is given to I. S. and to the Heirs which he shall engender on the Body of
an English Woman, he Marries a French Woman, and she dies, and then he Marries
an English Woman; this is now a good Estate in special Tail, by Cataline.
Owen's Rep. 32.

One Tenant in Common takes all.
IF there be two Tenants in Common of Timber, or other Goods, and one of them
takes the Timber, and puts it into his several Land, the other cannot justify
his entry into the Land to retake it, for inasmuch as in Law 'twas no tort for
him to take it all to his own use, by reason of the Trust that is between them;
the other cannot justify a Trespass in the Land to retake it, but must take it
when he may without doing a Trespass. 2 Roll. 566. Masters and Polley.

One Ship takes another in the presence of a third.
THE Civil Law is, That if two Ships meet at Sea together, although they went not
forth as Consorts, yet if one of them in the presence of the other take a Ship
with Goods in it, the other shall have a Moiety of the Ship and Goods taken,
for her presence there at the time of the taking, was a Terror to the Ship
which is taken, sine quo the other Ship could not so easily have taken her. 2
Leon. 182.

Tenant in Common with himself.
IF Lands be given to John Bishop of Norwich, and his Successors, and to John
Overal, Doctor of Divinity, and his Heirs, being one and the same Person, he is
Tenant in Common with himself, for he takes both in his natural and politic
capacity, which in such case cannot stand in Jointure, therefore it is a
Tenancy in common: But note, This Rule holds not in Chattels reals and
personals; for if a Lease for Years be made, or a Ward granted to a Bishop and
a Secular Man, or if Goods he granted to them, they are Joint-Tenants, because
they take not in their politic capacity. 1 Inst. 190. a.

See 2 Roll. 91. between the Dean and Chapter of St. Peter's of York and Power:
One entered into an obligation to the Dean and Chapter of York, and to A. B. and
C. D. of 2000 Marks; the Dean and Chapter are Tenants in Common with A. B. and
C. D. for that the Body politic having a several capacity from the Body
natural, cannot take in Jointure with it. Vide Ley's Rep. 82, acc' that if an
Obligation be made to I. S. and a Corporation, and I. S. die, the Obligation
shall not survive, but the Corporation, and the Executors of I. S. must join in
Suit.

Where one may vouch himself.
A MAN shall not regularly vouch himself, as Assignee of a Fee-simple, for the
Law will not suffer things inutile and unprofitable; and yet if the Father be
enfeoffed with warranty to him and his Heirs, and he enfeoffeth his Heir
apparent in Fee, and dies, he (as it is said) shall vouch himself, and the Heir
in Borough English, by reason that the Act in Law determined the Warranty
between the Father and the Son. 1 Inst. 390. a.

See Plowd. Com. fol. 7. b. Manxel's Case, that if a Father being enfeoffed
with warranty, enfeoffeth his Son and Heir with warranty, and dies; the Son in
a Praecipe brought against him may vouch the Feoffor of his Father, for the Law
will not suffer him to vouch himself, and when he comes in as Vouchee, then to
deraign the first Warranty, for the circuit of Voucher. Vide Finch's Law. 55.

A. mixes his Money with B's at play, and B. keeps it all.
A. AND B. being at Play, A. thrust his Money into B's heap, and mixed it, and
B. kept it all, whereupon (they striving for the Money) A. brought Trespass of
Assault and Battery, and quod cumulum pecuniae, containing Five Marks, cepit;
and the whole Court was of opinion, in regard the Plaintiff's own Money cannot
be known, and this his intermedling is his own Act, and his own wrong, that by
the Law he shall lose all; for if it were otherwise, a Man might be made to be
a Trespasser against his Will, by the taking of his own Goods, to avoid which
inconvenience, the Law will justify the Defendant's detaining all: Querens
nihil capiat per Billam. 2 Cro. 366. Ward and Airs. and 2 Roll. 566.

So if I voluntarily intermingle my Corn with another Man's, he may take all.
ibid. and 1 Siderf. 38. the end, accord' by the Chief Justice.

Action for playing with false Dice.
A. ENTICED B. to play with him at Dice, at a Game called Passage, whereupon he
played with him, and when it came to B's turn to throw, A. delivered in true
and fair Dice, with which he played, but when it fell to his own turn, he threw
with false Dice, such as he knew would run Five or Six upon every Die, and so
B. lost 10 l. whereupon he brought an Acton upon the Case for this Deceit, and
recovered. 1 Roll. 100. Hartwell and Oak's Case.

Note, It was resolved in Martin Leeser's Case, That if common Players with
false Dice, to cousen the People at Play, do enter into the House of another
Man, and desiire him to play at Dice, and with their false Dice cousen him of
his Money by Play, although this be not Felony, nor an Offense for which he shall
lose Life or Member, yet he shall be set upon the Pillory where the Offense was
committed. 2 Cro. 497, 498.

Motion to quash an Indictment against two for being Common Players at Cards,
and defrauding the Plaintiff of 40. s. not saying Vi and Armis; but, per
Curiam, it is needless. 2. to say, Angl. a Trick at Cards, without a Latin Word,
there being none for it, is good. 1 Keb. 652.

Where the Owner may retake his Goods, though altered in Form.
A WRONG-Doer cuts down Trees, and carries them away, and makes Timber or
Boards of 'em, yet may the owner retake 'em in the Land of the Tort-feasor: For
in all Cases where a thing is taken wrongfully, and altered in Form, yet if
that which is the principal part of the substance remains, the notice of the
thing is not lost; as if a Man should tortiously take away my Cloak, and make
himself a Duoblet of it, yet I may retake it from him. So if one take from me a
Piece of Cloth, and after sow Silver or Gold into it, yet I may take it from
him, Quia major pars substantiae remanet. Moor. pla. 67.

Note, If I. S. bequeaths a Pack of Wool to I. D. and after the Testator
converts it into Cloth, and dies possessed of it, I. D. shall not have the
Cloth. Doderidge English Lawyer, 132.

Where Property shall not be altered by a Sale in Market Overt.
IT IS the opinion of some, that the Goods of a Bankrupt, though he has sold them
in Market Overt, are, notwithstanding that liable to the sale of Commissioners,
by Twisden: And it is clear they are liable if sold out of Market Overt. 1
Siderf. 272. initio.

See Dyer, fol. 99. placito. 68. A Man bought stolen Beasts out of Market, and
gave Five Shillings to have election to refuse in the Market to be holden the
next Day, and then in the Market he agreed to have the Beasts, and paid Toll:
It was held in this Case that the property was not altered, for that the
Agreement relates to the Contract out of the Market, quod nota.

In Trover by Gibbs against Basil for a Gelding, the Case was; one Porter stole
this Gelding from the Plaintiff, and sold him to the Defendant in open Market
by the name of Lister, and 'twas entered so in the Toll Book that Lister sold
him. This is no good sale to bar the Plaintiff, for the Stat. 2 and 3 Philip
and Mary, cap. 7. provides, that no property of stolen Goods shall be altered
that are sold, unless the Name and Surname of the Parties to the sale be entered
in the Toll Book. Owen 27.

Justification.
IF a Man has a heap of Corn by my heap of Corn, and he takes a handful out of
my heap, I may take a handful out of his, and justify, for he shall not take
advantage of his own wrong. 2 Roll. 566. n. 10.

To justify the taking another Goods without being a Trespasser.
IF one Saddles my Horse, and then puts him into his own Ground, I may well
come and take my Horse out, and keep the Saddle, and not be liable to Trespass
for so doing; and because he puts his Saddle upon my Horse, I may justify
keeping it, 'till he brings Action to recover it: So if one load my Cart with
his Corn, or my Boat with his Coals, or the like, I may well take my Cart, and
Boat away, and keep and detain the Goods without being a Trespasser, 'till he
bring a Detinue to recover 'em fron me. 1 Bulls. 96.

Demurr to a Demurrer.
NOTE, One may demur to a Demurrer for the doubleness of it, for a Demurrer
should be formal and certain to avoid Barbarism and inveigling the Court, but
if he demurs not to it when he may, but joins in the Demurrer, he has now
slipped the advantage, and he cannot demurr afterward.

A Demurrer is double, when he that demurrs assigns therein for cause of it,
one Error in Fact, and another in Law, which he ought not to do, for if either
of the Causes be true, it is sufficient to overthrow the Plea, and it is at his
liberty to insist upon that which is best for his own advantage, but not upon
both, for this were to puzzle the Proceedings. See Styles Pract. Reg. 133.

Accessory to an Accessory.
IF one feloniously receive another that is an Accessory to a Felony, the
Receiver is an Accessory. Stamf. lib. 1.

One of ill fame demands the Rent without Authority, etc.
LEASE for Years rendering Rent, with re entry for Non-payment; at the day a
Stranger came to demand the Rent, the Lessee asked him by what Authority, and
because he was a couzening Fellow, and notoriously infamous, and would not show
any Authority from the Lessor; the Lessee would not pay the Rent, and so the
Lessor entered, and adjudged lawful, for that a command to receive Rent may be
by Parole. Cro. Eliz. 22. Sir John Souch's Case.

Sergeant Moor reports a Case (without Name) in the same Year with this, but
another Term: A Lease for Years upon condition to re-enter for not-payment of
the Rent; at the last day there came upon the Land a Man of an ill fame, who
was Outlawed in Forty Actions, and conversed all the day with the Lessee, but
said not a Word for what cause he came, and at the last instant of the day, he
demanded the Rent; the Lessee asked him what authority he had to receive it, he
answered he was sent thither by the Lessor, but showed not any authority to
prove his message, nor was he known to be Receiver or Servant to the Lessor:
Upon the whole matter, the Judges were of opinion, that if any would swear this
to be true, the Lessor ought not to enter; whereupon one was immediately sworn,
who deposed that this Person was a Man of ill fame, and the Notes of the
Records of the Out-lawries were shown, and so the Lessee was discharged, quod
nota. Moor 141. numb. 282.

Verba fortius accipiuntur contra proferentem.
IF I grant a Rent of ten Pounds to Baron and Feme, and if the Baron die, that
the Feme shall have three Pounds Rent, here because these Words rest ambiguous,
whether I intend three Pounds by way of increase, or three Pounds by way of
restraint and abatement of the former Rent of ten Pounds, it shall be taken
strongliest against me that am the Grantor, that it is three Pounds addition to
the Ten: But if I had let Land to Baron and Feme for three Lives, reserving ten
Pounds per annum, and if the Baron die, reserving three Pound, this shall be
taken contrary to the former Case, to abridge my Rent only to three Pound. 8
Ass. p. 10. See Bacon's Elem. 11.

Deed good without Delivery.
IT IS commonly said that every Deed ought to have Writing, Sealing, and
Delivery, and when any thing passes from one that has no Understanding but by
his hearing, as a Blind and unlettered Man, the Deed ought to have Reading too;
yet Note, In some Case a Deed shall be good without any Delivery; as the Deed
of a Corporation aggregate, for the affixing of their common Seal gives
perfection to it without any Delivery; as if a Dean and Chapter put their
Chapter Seal to a Deed, it is a perfect Deed without any more. Davies Rep. 44.
b. Cro. Eliz. 167. 2 Roll. 23.

Vide Savil 49. where Manwood is of the same opinion, viz. that a Confirmation
by the Dean and Chapter to confirm Leases made by the Bishop, needs not any
Delivery of the Deed, but that it is good if it be Sealed, though it remain
continually in the Chapter House; but Baron Shute held, that such Deed is not
of any effect without Delivery, and it is there left a Quaere.

Slander, Daffidowndilly.
ONE said in the North-Country that I. S. was a Daffidowndilly, and adjudged
actionanable, because by this Word is meant there an Ambidexter, being a Flower
of party-colour. Hetl. 123. Noy 98. the end. See Cro. Eliz. 914.

Thus to say of one in Devonshire, and thereabouts, He is a Healer of Felons,
will bear an Action, for it is taken there for a hider or concealer of Felons,
and they usually say, The Healer is as bad as the Stealer. Yelv. 153. Noy. 133.

So to say of one in some Countries, He has strained a Mare, where it is taken
for, He has stolen a Mare, or Buggered a Mare. Yelv. 153. March pl. 3. 2. Bulls.
146. Cro. Eliz. 250. Moor 419. ca. 574.

So to say of a Man in Northumberland, Westmorland, etc. He is an out-putter,
where it is meant a Horse-stealer. 2 Bulls. 146.

See Hob. in several places, for such particular Words.

Where one shall lose his Goods without any default in him.
THERE be diverse Cases (says St. Jermyn) where one shall lose his Goods, and
no default in him; as where Beasts stray away from a Man, and are taken up and
proclaimed, and the Owner has not heard of 'em within the Year and the Day,
though he made sufficient diligence to have heard of 'em, yet the Goods are
forfeite^ and no default in him: So it is when one Man kills another with the
Sword (...) I. S. the Sword shall be forfeit as a De^dand, and yet no default
is in the owne^ Dr. and Stud lib. 2. cap. 51.

Note, In case of Deodands, as to things fixed to the Freehold, the Law is
taken to be clear otherwise now than it was when Briton and Horn wrote, who
say, That if a Man fall from a Mill, House, or Tree, these shall be forfeited,
for the Law will not suffe that a Man shall lose his Inheritance by another's
negligence, where there is no default in himself.

Tenant for Life makes a Lease for Years, and after enters upon the Termor, and
commits waste, and the Lessor recovers, the Lessee shall lose his Term.

Tenant by Courtesy.
A SEISIN in Law of Lands in Fee descends to a Feme Covert, and the Lands are
in the County of York, but the Husband and Wife are dwelling in Essex, and the
Wife dies within a Day after the descent, so that the Husband could not enter
during the Coverture for the shortness of time, yet it is said he shall not be
Tenant by the Courtesy, and yet there is no default in him according to common
pretense; but they say he might have spoken (before the Ancestor's Death) to
one dwelling near the place where the Lands lay, to enter in his Wife's right
immediately after the Ancestor's Death. Perk. Sect. 470.

See Perk. Sect. 469. that although the Day of payment of the Rent do incurr in
the Life of the Wife, and she die before any demand made of the Rent by the
Husband, that yet there he shall be Tenant by the Courtesy.

Exchange.
EXCHANGE of Land in Ireland for Land in England is good. 10 E. 3. 42. Palmer's
Rep 459.

A Man Indicted for maiming himself.
ONE Wright, a young, strong, and lusty Rogue, caused his Companion to strike
off his left Hand, to make himself impotent, and have thereby the more color
to beg, or be relieved, without putting himself to any labor; both of 'em were
indicted, fined, and ransomed for it: This was in my Lord Coke's Circuit, Anno
11. Jac. I. with the opinion of the other Judges. 1 Inst. 127. a. b.

The life and members of every Subject are under the safeguard and protection
of the King, to serve Him and their Country, when occasion shall be offered,
which is the reason that a Lord could not maim his Villain, but the King should
punish him for maiming his Subject by Fine, Ransom, and Imprisonment, etc.
because hereby he has dissabled him to do the King service. ibid.

One Fined for disturbing of the Court.
ONE Coxe was Fined, ad Curiam visus Franc. Plagii and Baronis, because he put
on his Hat in the Presence, and in Contempt of the Court, and of the Lord, and
said, He cared not what He could do, and hindered the Business of the Court,
Inciviliter se gerens. 1 Keb. 451. and 465.

Words Treason.
ARTHUR Crohagan, an Irishman, was arraigned of Treason for speaking these
Words at Lisbon, I will Kill the King [inuendo Dominum Carolum Regem Angliae.]
if I may come unto him; and about Two Years after, he came into England for the
same purpose: He pleading Not Guilty, was tried by a Middlesex Jury, and 'twas
directly proved by two Merchants, that he spoke those Words on Shipboard at
Lisbon, in great heat of Speech, with one Captain Bask, and added [Because he
is an Heretick] and because his Traitorous Intent, and the Imagination of his
Heart is declared by these Words; it was held High Treason by the Common Law,
and within the express Words of 25 Edw. III. and he being arrested by Warrant
for this cause, most insolently put his Finger into his Mouth, and scornfully
pulling it out said, I care not this for your King, etc. He was found guilty,
and had Judgment accordingly. He confessed he was a Dominican Friar, and made
Priest in Spain, and although this and his returning into England to seduce the
Liege People be Treason by Stat. 23 Eliz. yet the King's Attorney said, he
would not proceed against him for that, but upon 25 Edw. 3. of Treason. Cro,
Car. 332, 333. See Cro. Car. 125. that no Words are Treasonable unless made so
by some Statute. and 3 Inst. 14.

Whether it is a Nuisance for a Rope-dancer to erect a Stage, etc.
JACOB Hall the famous Rope-dancer had erected a Stage in Lincoln's Inn-Fields,
but upon a Petition of the Inhabitants, there was an Inhibition from Whitehal:
Now upon complaint to the Judges that he had erected one at Charing Cross, he
was sent for into Court, and the Chief Justice told him he understood it was a
Nuisance to the Parish, and some of the Inhabitants being in Court, said, it
occasioned Broils and Fightings, and drew so many Rogues to that Place, that
they lost Things out of their Shops every Afternoon. Hales said, that in 8 Car.
I. Noy prayed a Writ to prohibit a Bowling-Ally erected near St. Dunstan's
Church, and had it. Modern Rep. 76. Post.

Information for keeping a Cockpit.
ONE Howel being Convicted of keeping a common Cockpit six Days, was fined 12
l. the Court conceiving it an unlawful Game, and took their Measures by 33 H.
VIII. c. 9. of 40 s. a Day, though the Information were at Common Law. 3 Keb.
465. and 510.

Forfeiture of a Copyhold.
A. LORD of a Manor holding of his Court, and B. a Tenant being in the Court,
there arising a Question whether the Court were then legally held, B. was asked
if he appeared or not? he answered, If it be a legal Court I do appear, but if
it is not a legal Court, I do not appear: Quaere, if this be an appearance, or
such a refusal to appear, whereby the Copyholder shall forfeit his Copyhold,
or not. Roll Chief Justice said, if there was a real Controversy whether the
Court was well held or not, it would be hard to make it a Forfeiture, but if
not, and that the Words were used only as a Shift to avoid his Suit and
service, it is a Forfeiture for the Words are like Jack in a Box, and no body
knows what to make of 'em; the other Three Judges inclined it was no
forfeiture. Styles 241. Parker and Cook.

Rope-dancing. Ante.
THE Court being informed that Jacob Hall was building a Booth for dancing on
the Ropes at C. sent for him and the Workmen by a Tipstaff, and because he
would not enter into a Recognizance not to build on, they committed him, and
then he ceased. 2 Keb. 846.

Replevin of Goods not destreined.
REPLEVIN is the bringing of the Writ De Replegiari facias by one whose Cattle
or Goods are distreined, etc. and putting in Surety to the Sheriff, that upon
delivery of the Distress, he will prosecute the Action against the Distreinor.
Yet Note, In a special Case a Man may have a Replevin of Goods not destreined;
as if there be Lord Mesne and Tenant, and the Mesne put in his Cattle in lieu
of the Cattle of the Tenant paravaile, whom he is bound to acquit, he shall
have a Replevin of those Cattle, yet they never were distreined. 1 Inst. 145. b.

Replevin lies, notwithstanding a grant to keep the Distress against Gages and
Pledges.
IF a Rent be granted with clause of Distress, and further, that the Grantee
shall keep the Goods distreined against Gages and Pledges, 'till the Rent be
paid, yet shall the Sheriff replevy the Goods, for it is against the nature of
such a Distress to be irreplevisable, and by such an intention the Current of
Replevins should be overthrown, to the hinderance of the Commonwealth, and so
'twas dissallowed by the whole Court, and awarded that the Defendant should
gage deliverance, or else go to Prison, which the Lord Coke says, in his
opinion, is an excellent point of learning. 1 Inst. 145. b.

Witches.
THE Law against Witches does not prove there be any, but it punishes the
Malice of those People that use such means to take away Men's Lives. If one
should profess that by turning his Hat thrice, and crying Buz, he could take
away a Man's Life, (though in truth he could do no such thing) yet this were a
just Law made, that whosoever should turn his Hat thrice, and cry Buz, with an
intention to take away a Man's Life, shall be put to death. Seldom.

Note, To say of one Thou art a Witch, is not Actionable, because he may
bewitch you with his fair Countenance, or fine Discourse. (2 Cro. 150. and 306.
contra, because it brings him within danger of the Stat. 1 Jac. which makes
every witchcraft Felony) but to say Thou art a Witch, and deservest to be
hanged, will bear Action, because the last Words explain what manner of Witch
he intends. So to say Thou art a Witch, and have bewitched my Mother's Milk,
Drink, Hogs, etc. So it seems of Children: But to say -- and have bewitched I.
S. Quaere, because I. S. may be captivated with the amiableness of the
Plaintiff's Person: So Note, the difference between saying he has bewitched a
thing which has sense, and a thing which has not. 1 Siderfin 52. 53.

Trespassor ab initio.
A MAN comes into a Tavern, and will needs stay up all Night; the Vintner is
not bound in such Case to watch with him, nor attend upon him all the Night;
and therefore if he prays him to be gone, and he will not, but remains there
all Night, he is a Trespassor ab initio. 11 H. IV. 75. b.

Note, He that misuses an Authority which the Law gives him, as in that Case,
(so if one distrein for Rent, and kill the Distress) shall be a Wrong-doer ab
initio: Otherwise if he abuse an Authority that another gives him; as if I lend
my Horse to I. S to ride to York, and he ride farther, yet the riding to York
shall not be unlawful. Vid. Co. 8. 146. Perk. fo. 39. 40. 2 Roll. 561, etc. in
Abridgement.

Quaere, if a Distress be taken for a Rentcharge, and is misused, whether the
Destrainor shall be a Trespassor ab initio, because the Authority to distrain
comes from the Party.

Justice Hutton's Case.
MR. Justice Hutton having argued in the Exchequer Chamber in a Case adjourned
thither upon a Scire facias by the King against Hampden for Ship Money, wherein
he was of opinion, That as well for the Matter as Form upon diverse exceptions
to the pleading Judgment should be given against the King: After this, one
Thomas Harrison, Bachelor of Divinity, came to the Court of Common Pleas,
(Hutton and Crawley being then upon the Bench) and said, I accuse Mr. Justice
Hutton of High Treason; for which he was committed to the Fleet by Justice
Crawley, and after by the King's direction indicted in B. R. and Convicted, and
Fined 5000 l. to the King: And the Judge preferring his Bill against him there,
recovered 10000 l. damages. Hut. Rep. 131. Cro. Car. 503.

Trades.
IN the time of H. IV. when Sir William Gascoine was Lord Chief Justice, a
certain Vintner was indicted for selling of Wine, and also for selling of
Victuals to such as would resort to Dine and Sup at his House, and being
thereof Convicted, he was Fined; whereupon he consulted with some of his
Fraternity, and told 'em, If they would give five Pounds to Gascoine, all would
be well; and so they collected 5 l. between 'em to present him, which Gascoine
understanding, he caused the Vintner to be Indicted for this also, who was
after Fined for it, Palmer 396. 397.

Note, A Man could not by the Common Law use as many and what Trades he would
before the Stat. 5. Eliz.

Memorandum, John Walter Knight, Lord Chief Baron, a profound learned Man, and
of great Integrity and Courage, being Lord Chief Baron by Patent, primo Caroli,
quamdiu se been gesserit, fell into the King's displeasure, and being commanded
to forbear the exercising of his Judicial place in Court, never did exercise it
from the beginning of Mich. Term quinto Caroli until he died, viz. the
Eighteenth of November, 1630. But because he had that Office quam diu se been
gesserit, he would not leave his place, nor surrender his Patent without a
scire facias to show what Cause there was to determine, or forfeit it, so that
he continued Chief Baron until the Day of his Death. Cro. Car. 203.

One Indicted for behaving himself immodestly and Irreverently at Church.
A CERTIORARI was prayed to remove an Indictment at the Sessions at Hartford
against I. S. quod non reverenter and modeste se gessit during Divine Service,
but the Court refused to grant it; for although it is punishable by Ecclesiastic
censures, yet they conceived it a proper cause within the cognizance of the
Justices of Peace. 1 Keb. 491.

Slander.
ACTION upon the Case for Words against a Feme (on a question asked her per
quendam ignotum) Did I. S. the Plaintiff Ravish you? She answered Yes. Had he
the use of your Body? She answered Yes. Whereupon he brought his Action against
Baron and Feme. Foster conceived, that in regard the Person is found to have
done it falso and malitiose, without legal authority, it is a Scandal; contra by
Twisden in one Emme's Case; one that had a Child at Nurse came to a Surgeon,
with whom she was reported to be in cure for the Pox, who on enquiry told the
Father she had the foul Disease, which was held no Scandal, not being spoken
malitiose, with intent to Scandal her. 1 Keble 542. Host and Oakeman.

[Thou art a Thief, and have stolen my Maiden Head] no Action lies. 1 Brownlow
2.

Justa occasio Loquendi.
IN Fox's Book of Martyrs, there is a story of one Greenwood, who lived in
Suffolk, that he had perjured himself before the Bishop of Norwich, in
testifying against a Martyr that was burnt in Queen Mary's time, and had
therefore afterward, by the just Judgment of God, his Bowels rotted in him,
and so died: But it seems this story was utterly false of Greenwood, who after
the Printing of the Book of Martyrs, was living in the same Parish: It happened
after that one Prick, a Parson, was presented to the Living of that Parish
where this Greenwood dwelt; and some time after in one of his Sermons, happened
to inveigh much against the Sin of Perjury, to which his Text led him, and the
better to deterr the People from it, he told them this passage out of Fox, That
one Greenwood, being a Perjured Person, and a great Persecutor, had great
Plagues inflicted upon him, and was killed by the Hand of God; whereas in truth
he never was so Plagued, and was himself present at that Sermon, and thereupon
brought his Action upon the Case for calling him a Perjured Person; and the
Defendant pleaded, Not Guilty: And this matter being disclosed upon the
Evidence, Wray Chief Justice delivered the Law to the Jury, That this being
delivered but as a Story, and not with any Malice or Intention to slander any,
he was not guilty of the Words maliciously, and so was found Not Guilty.

This Case is cited by Coke, 2 Cro. 91. and affirmed to be good Law by Popham,
when one delivers ought after his occasion, as matter of Story, and not with
intent to Slander any; See the Case, 1 Roll. 87.

It Is cited too by Sir Robert Atkins in his Treatise of the Jurisdiction and
Privelege of Parliament, etc. fol. 11. If a Man (says he) be in discharge of
his Function, and lawful Calling, and discoursing of a subject proper for it,
in pursuit thereof tells a Story, which he takes up upon Trust, not knowing it
to be false, and it prove at last to be utterly untrue, and an innocent Person
is highly Slandered by it, yet he shall not be subject to an Action of Slander
for it, the occasion of speaking shall clear him from the Malice, without which
the Action will not lie.

One calling himself by a wrong Name is arrested, the Arrest is naught.
IN an Action of False Imprisonment by Coot against Lighworth, the Defendant
justified, because he had a Warrant to Arrest I. D. and he demanded of Coot
what his Name was? who answered, that his Name was I. D. and therefore he
arrested him; to which the Plaintiff demurred, and had Judgment; for the
Defendant at his peril, must take notice of the Party. Moor fol. 457. Agreeable
hereunto, see Doctor and Stud, 311. That if a Sheriff upon a Replevin deliver
other Beasts than were destrained, though by information of the Party that
destrained, yet Trespass lies, for he shall be compelled by the Law to execute
the King's Writ at his peril, according to the Tenor thereof, and to see that
the Act which he does be lawfully done.

Note, Grome's Case in Palmer's Rep. 395. I. S. knowing that Execution would be
made upon his Goods, procured I. D. by Covin to bring his Cart into his Yard,
to the intent that the Baily might take it in Execution, and so to have
Trespass against him, the Bailiff did take the Cart, but afterward having
knowledge of the matter, sent the Cart back, and I. D. brought Trespass, but
Lea Chief Justice held, that the Bailiff might plead the fraud in excuse.

Bond in a Book, good.
A MAN writes an Obligation in a Book, and in the same Leaf he puts his Seal to
it, and then delivers the Book to the Obligee as his Deed; this is a good
Obligation, for he delivered that which makes the Obligation and more, as his
Deed; and although the Delivery be void for the Surplus, yet it is good for the
residue. Cro. Eliz. 613. Fox and Wright's Case; cited also 2 Roll. 25.

Action upon the Case for inserting his Name in Letters of Excommunication.
ONE Harris was Excommunicated by Sentence, and the Letters of Excommunication
delivered to the Parson of the Parish, to be read and published in the Church:
But the Parson having malice against one Kenton, razed out the Name of Harris,
and put in Kenton, and pronounced him Excommunicate; whereupon Kenton brought
an Action upon the Case against the Parson, and adjudged maintainable, for
although the Excommunication be Spiritual, and the denouncing thereof; yet the
Rasure and Alteration is merely temporal, for which an Action well lies at the
Common Law, and this was not only an injurious Vexation, but also Scandalous to
Kenton. Cro. Eliz. 838. Kenton and Wallinger, and 1 Roll. 100.

Prince Henry committed to the King's Bench.
HENRY the Fifth, whilst he was Prince, did many things very incongruous to the
greatness of his birth; for he and his wild Companions would often way-lay, and
rob his Father's, and his own Receivers; and when one of his Servants was
arraigned at the King's Bench Bar for Felony; this Prince hearing of it,
posted thither, and commanded his Fetters to be struck off, and he to be set at
Liberty: When William Gascoigne Lord Chief Justice opposed him therein, and
commanded him upon his Allegiance to cease from such Riot, and keep the King's
Peace; the Prince in a Rage ascended the Bench, and gave the Judge a Blow on
the Face, who sat still undaunted, and boldly thus spoke unto him: Sir, I pray
remember your self, this Seat which I here possess is not mine, but your
Father's, to whom, and to his Laws, you owe double Obedience; if his Highness
and his Laws be thus violated by you who should show your self obedient to
both, who will obey you when you are a Sovereign, or Minister Execution to the
Laws that you shall make? Wherefore for this default, in your Father's Name, I
commit you Prisoner to the King's Bench, until his Majesty's pleasure be
farther known: With these Words, the Prince abashed, stood mute, laid by his
Weapons, and with obeisance done, went to the Prison. Medull. Hist. Angl. in
vita H. V. 3 Inst. 225.

He proved afterward one of our greatest Kings, being (as I find him
Charactered) a Prince Godly in Heart, Sober in Speech, Sparing of Words,
Resolute in Deeds, Provident in Counsel, Prudent in Judgment, Modest in
Countenance, Magnanimous in Action, Constant in Undertaking, a great Alms
giver, Devout to Godward, a Renowned Soldier, Fortunate in Field, from whence
he never returned without Victory.

Queen.
THE King cannot grant to another for Life the Office of making Saddles for the
Queen, for the Queen is a Feme sole, and so may choose her own Officers.
Dubitatur P. 6. Jac. C. B. between Auburcurmil and Cure. 2 Roll. 213. n. 12.

The Violating of a Queen Dowager, no Treason.
THE Stat. of 25 E. 3. says, Si homme violast la Compaigne le Roy, etc. which
signifies the King's Wife or Consort, for it is no Treason to violate her
unless it be done during the Marriage with the King, and therefore extends not
to a Queen Dowager, who after the King's death is not sa Compaigne. 3 Inst. 8.
9.

Action upon the Case for throwing Wine upon his Velvet Doublet.
ONE Carey brought an Action of Trespass, quare vi and armis, against Stevens
for casting Wine upon his Velvet Doublet, and well brought, though he might have
had an Action upon the Case. Noy 48.

Where one may justify the detaining of a thing 'till Satisfaction made.
IF a Tailor has a Suit to make for me, he is not compellable to deliver it,
until he is paid for the making; yet he cannot sell it for default of payment,
as an Innkeeper may an Horse where there is no special agreement; for the
keeping of the Horse is a charge, because he eats, but the keeping of Apparel
is no charge. Yelverton 67.

Note, If I contract with a Tailor to give him so much for making, etc. he
cannot detain the Cloths till he is satisfied, etc. (because he may sue me upon
the Contract) per Williams. 2 Roll. 92. initio.

See Popham's Rep. 127. Robinson and Walter, that an Innkeeper may detain the
Horse of I. S. till he be satisfied for the Meat he has eaten, though he were
brought to him by a Stranger.

A Wife entices another Man to marry Her.
COOPER brought an Action upon the Case against Witham and his Wife, for that
the Wife maliciously intending to marry him, did often affirm that she was sole
and unmarried, and importuned and strenue requisivit the Plaintiff to Marry
her, to which affirmation he giving Credit, married her, where in facto she was
Wife to the Defendant, so that the Plaintiff was much troubled in mind, and put
to great Charges, and much damnified in his Reputation: He had a Verdict but no
Judgment, for by Twisden the Action lies not, because the Thing here done is
Felony: No more than if a Servant be killed, the Master cannot have an Action
per quod Servitium amisit, quod Curia concessit; besides the ground of this
Action is the Communication and Contract of the Wife, which shall not bind the
Husband. 1 Siderf. 375.

Whether Trespass lies for Husband or Master for a Battery whereof his Wife or
Servant dies?
IF one beat my Servant, whereby I lose his Service for a long time, and he
afterward dies, I shall have an Action of Trespass, because it was a distinct
Trespass to me, by William's Justice: But if one beat my Wife, whereby she
languishes, etc. and after dies, I shall not have Trespass for this Battery,
because the Trespass was not done to me, but to my Wife, so that she was to
have joined in the Action, and I only for conformity. 2 Roll. 568. Huggin's
Case.

Note, that Case is reported by Yelverton, 89. 90. and warrants not the
diversity taken; for it is holden there by Three Judges (no mention of Justice
Williams) that the Master shall not have an Action for such Battery and loss of
Service; but that here as well as in the other Case, the Servant dying with the
extremity of the Battery, it is now become an Offense to the Crown, being
turned into Felony, which drowns the particular Offense and private wrong
offered to the Master, and so his Action is gone: Vide 1 Siderf. 375. Acc'. and
Styles 347. where Roll. himself being Chief Justice, cites the Case of Higgins
to have been adjudged, That Trespass lies not for the Battery of a Wife whereof
she died, because (says he) it is Felony; the reason given by the Three Judges
why it lies not for the Master. See 1 Brownl. 205.

Admiralty.
A MERCHANT has a Ship taken by a Spaniard, being Enemy, and sometime after an
English Merchant with a Ship named Little Richard retakes it from the Spaniard,
and the owner of the Ship sues for it in the Admiralty Court, but a Prohibition
was granted, for that the Ship was gained by Battle of an Enemy, and neither
the King, nor Admiral, nor the Parties to whom the Property was before, shall
have it. 2 Brownl. 11. Weston's Case.

Master and Servant.
A SURGEON in consideration of a Sum of Money, assumed to cure the Servant of
I. S. of a hurt which he had in his Leg, and afterward applied unwholesome
Medicines to it, on purpose to make the cure the greater, whereby I S. lost the
Service of his Servant for a long time, wherefore he brought an Action upon the
Case against the Surgeon, and recovered. 1 Roll. 98. Everard and Hopkins.

If a Drawer in a Tavern sell Wine that is corrupt, an Action upon the Case
lies for this against the Master, though he did not command his Servant to sell
it to any Person in particular: And no Action lies against the Drawer, though he
knew the Wine to be corrupt, because he sells it only as Servant to another. 1
Roll. 95.

Vide Dr. and Stud. 285. that if one send his Servant to Market with a thing
which he knows is defective, to be sold to a certain Person, and the Servant
sells it to him, an Action lies against the Master: But if he send it to be
sold generally to whom he can, no Action of Deceit lies against the Master. 1
Roll. 95. Accord'.

If my Servant be cozened of my Money, I may have an Action upon the Case for
the deceit against the Cozener. 1 Roll. 98. Paul Tracie's Case.

So I may justify the beating of another in defense of my Servant, for he is
in a manner my Chattel. 2 Roll. 546. the end. (The contrary admitted, Palmer
54.) See Owen 150.

A Servant shall justify the Battery of another in defense of his Master. 2
Roll. 546. Quaere 14 H. VI. 24. b.

Note, Though in the Case of Felony, if the Principal die, or be pardoned before
Attainder, the Proceedings against the Accessory fail ( Co. 4. 43. b.) yet in a
Trespass, if one command his Man to beat you, and the Servant after he has
beaten you, dies, yet your Action of Trespass stands good against the Master.
17 H. IV. 19 Bac. Elem. 32.

I. S. suffered a Soldier to get a Child upon the Body of his Maidservant, and
the Order of Sessions was, that I. S. should contribute to half the charge of
keeping it. Curia. It Is not within the Stat. of 18 Eliz. and the Order was
quashed.

Possession, how to be Defended.
IN Trespass of Assault and Battery, the Defendant pleaded De son Assault
demesne; the Plaintiff replied, the Defendant would have forced his Horse from
him, wherefore he did Molliter insultum facere upon the Defendant in defense of
his Possession: to which the Defendant demurred. Morton Justice: Molliter
insultum facere is a contradiction; suppose you had said, that Molliter you
knocked him down? Twisden: you cannot justify the heating a Man in defense of
your Possession, but you may say that you did molliter manus imponere, etc.
Keeling, You ought to have replied, that you did Molliter manus imponere, quae
est eadem transgressio. Curia: Quer' nil cap. per bill. Mod. Rep. 36. and 1
Siderf. 441. Jones and Tresilian.

Slander of a Counselor at Law.
PETER Palmer of Lincoln's End brought an Action upon the Case against Boyer,
and declared that he was an Utter-Barrester of the Law, and got his living by
practicing the Law, and was Steward of diverse Courts, and namely of one I. P.
Esquire and the Defendant praemissorum non ignarus, to the intent to prejudice the
Plaintiff in his good Name and Practice, said of the Plaintiff these English
Words, viz. Peter Palmer is a paltry Lawyer, and has as much Law as a
Jackanapes; 'twas moved in arrest that the Words would not maintain an Action;
because not slanderous, for it is not said, He has no more Law than has a
Jackanapes, that had been Actionable, for thereby he had abated the Opinion of
his Learning; but it is not so in this Case, the Words being, he has as much
Law as has a Jackanapes, which is no impeachment of his Learning, for every
Man that has more Law than a Jackanapes, has as much: Sed non allocatur, for
the Comparison is to be taken in the worst Sense, and tantamounts that he has
no more Law than a Jackanapes, which is a slander in his Profession, whereby he
acquires his Living. Owen 17. Cro. Eliz. 342. Goldsb. 126. Winch 40.

Vide March fol. 60. where Judge Berkley says, it had been adjudged, where one
said of a Lawyer, That he had as much Law as a Monkey, that the Words were not
Actionable, because he has as much Law, and more also; but if he had said, He
has no more Law than a Monkey, these Words were Actionable. See Hetley 71.

Words against an Attorney.
ACTION for these Words; Is Martyn (the Plaintiff) your Attorney? He is the
Foolishest and Simplest Attorney toward the Law, and if he does not overthrow
your Cause, I will give you my Ears. He is a Fooll and an Ass; and adjudged for
the Plaintiff, for these Words touch him in his Place. Cro. Eliz. 589.

Slander against a Parson.
SUIT in the Spiritual Court by a Parson for saying of him, That he was a Fool,
an Ass, and a Goose, for which, upon Motion, a Prohibition was granted, for
they are only Words of Choler, as Pocky Faced Knave, Jade, and Queen, and
relate not to his Profession. 3 Keb. 28. Newcombin and Kingerby.

Where Things shall not pass, though granted by express Words.
A MAN by Deed indented, bargains and sells, gives and grants his Manor of
Dale, and all his Trees growing upon it; but the Deed is not enrolled according
to the Statute; here, inasmuch as the Manor passes not for want of Inrolment,
the Trees shall not go to the Bargainee, although they are granted by express
Words; and that the Grant of every Man shall be taken most strongly against
himself; for the Law does not favor Fractions and Severances of Trees from the
Freehold and Inheritance of the Land, because by such means very often Trees
shall be wasted and destroyed. Co. 11. 48. a. in Liford's Case. 1 Roll. Rep.
100.

Besides, it was not the intent of the Parties that the Trees should pass as
Chattels without the Manor, and as one shall not frustrate or defeat his own
Grant by his own Act; so the Words of a Grant shall be construed according to a
reasonable and easy Sense, with regard to the meaning of the Parties by them;
and therefore 14 H. VIII. 1. if a Man grant all his Woods and Trees,
Apple Trees will not pass.

Note, that though by a grant of all my Trees, Fruit Trees will not pass, yet if
I except all my Apple Trees, all other Fruit Trees pass, as I suppose. Vide
Hob. 304.

Again, The Law construes things with equity and moderation, and therefore
restrains a general Grant, if there be any mischief or inconvenience in it, and
therefore if a Corody be granted to one, and his Servant to sit at his Mess, he
cannot bring a Servant that has some filthy or noisome Disease: So if a Common
be granted to one for all his Beasts, yet he shall not have Common for Goats,
nor Geese, nor other Beasts not commonable. Finch his Law 56.

So if a Man grant Common in all his Lands, the Grantee shall not have Common
in his Orchards, Gardens or Meadows. 3 Leon. 250.

Where one may have an Estate Tail, yet all the Issues barred to inherit.
BARON and Feme Tenants in special Tail, with Remainder to the Barons right
Heirs, they have Issue A. the Baron dies, A. in the Life of his Mother levies a
Fine with Proclamations to I. S. and resolved it should bar the Estate Tail,
though 'twas clearly admitted that the Feme remained Tenant in Tail. Co. 3. 50.

If the Son of Tenant in Tail levy such a Fine in his Fathers Life, it bars
the Tail from descending, yet the Father remains Tenant in Tail. Co. 9. 141.
for the Son is concluded, and cannot enter against his own Fine. See Stat. 32.
H. VIII.

Name.
DEBT upon Bond was brought against one Jaacob Aboab, by the Name of Jacob, he
pleaded that he was called and known by the Name of Jaacob, and not Jacob; but
it was overruled. Mod. Rep. 107. 3 Keb. 284.

See a notable Case in Styles Rep. 389. 390, etc. the Report of it is very
long, but this is the short on it. One [Mills] seized of Lands in Fee, devised
them to Elizabeth his Daughter in Tail, with a provisoe that if she Married one
of his own Surname, that then she should have the Lands in Fee-Simple: She
Married one [Mill] but commonly called and known by the Name of [Mills] also:
In this Case the Court held that Mills and Mill are not one and the same
Surname, for the Testator had a particular Eye to his own true Surname, and the
common reputation of Mill and Mills to be the same Name, shall not make Mill to
be the Testator's true Surname. Note, This is a special Case, and goes not
according to the ordinary Rules of Names that sound alike.

Hence I shall take occasion to treat of Names, what Names are the same in Law,
and what are not.

It is held that Sain John and Saint John are several Names: So are Elizabeth
and Isabel; so Margaret, Marget, and Margerie; so Gillian and Julian; so Agneis
and Anne; so Cozen and Cousin; so Edmund and Edward; so Randulphus and Randal;
and so Randulphus and Randolphus; so Randolph and Ranulph; so Isabel and Sibil;
for all which see 1 Anderson 211. 212. 2 Cro. 425. 558. 640. 2 Roll. 135.

But Piers and Peter are one Name, 2 Cro. 425. so Saunders and Alexander; so
Garret, Gerrard, and Gerald. 2 Roll. 135. so Joan and Jane. 2 Cro. 425.

Note, Though James and Jacob are several Names, yet Jacobus is Latin for both,
and will serve for either of 'em. 2 Roll. 136.

Sir John Hathwaie was bound in a Bond thus, Noverint Universi me Jean.
Hathwaie teneri, etc. this was a good Obligation, for [Jean.] shall be taken
for an abbreviation of Johannem, and so the same Name. Cro. Car. 416. 418. 2
Roll. 136.

Note, If the Name of the Obligor be subscribed, it is sufficient, though there
be a blank or blot for his Christian Name in the Bond. 2 Cro. 261. Dobson and
Key's. See more of Names, 1 Keb. 427.

What one cannot do by another.
THERE are some things personal, and so inseparably annexed to a Man's Person,
that he cannot do them by another, as the doing of Homage and Fealty. So it is
holden that a Lord may beat his Villain for cause or without cause, and the
Villain is without remedy; but if the Lord command another to beat him without
cause, who does accordingly, the Villain shall have an Action of Battery
against him. So if the Lord destrain his Tenant's Cattle, when nothing is
behind, yet the Tenant for the Reverence and Duty that appertains to the Lord,
shall not have Trespass vi and armis against him; but if the Lord command his
Bailiff or Servant to destrain in such case where nothing is behind, the Tenant
shall have an Action of Trespass vi and armis against them. Co. 9. 76. a. in
Comb's Case.

Where a Commoner shall have an Action upon the Case against the Lord.
If the Lord surcharge the Soil with Conies, the Commoner upon this particular
loss may have an Action upon the Case against him. Yelverton 104. 105. See Cro.
Car. 387. 388.

Words ending in Meant.
JUSTICE Doderidge says, It has been wittily observed, that all Words which
end in Meant, shall be taken and expounded according to the Intent, as
Parliament, Testament, Arbitrament, etc. Latch 41. 42.

Where one shall be remitted against his own Discontinuance and Reprisal.
BARON and Feme Tenants in special Tail; He aliens in Fee, and takes back an
Estate to them for their Lives, this is a Remitter to both, maugre the Husband,
for it cannot be so to the Wife, without also to him, because they are but one
Person in Law, though he be estopped to claim, and so it is a remitter in him
against his own alienation and reprisal. Lit. Sect. 672.

Note, if he had taken the Estate to him alone, he could not have been remitted
against his own alienation; but when the Estate is made to Husband and Wife,
though they are but one Person in Law, and no Moieties between 'em, yet because
she cannot be remitted unless he be remitted also, and because remitters are
favored in Law, the more ancient and better rights being thereby restored,
therefore in Judgment of Law both are remitted, quod nota. 1 Inst. 354.

Where a Wife may convert Goods to her own use.
THE common Doctrine is, That a Wife cannot convert Goods to her own use,
because she has no property during the Husband's Life; yet note, In some Case
there may be a Conversion of Goods by the Wife to her own use, as if she find,
or take Barley from another (as the Case was) and bake it into Bread, and eat
it herself. March fol. 60. and Jones 443. per Jones Justice.

Note, When the Baron and Feme join, it is the Act of the Baron only, and the
Feme in such Case cannot convert to her own use, But an Action of Trover well
lies for conversion by the Feme before Marriage, or by the Feme only during the
Coverture, for she may do a Tort solely, and the Husband shall he sued with
her, but not where she joins with the Husband. Cro. Car. 254. Rhemes and
Humphreys, and fol. 494. Perry and Diggs, acc'. See 2 Cro. 5.

Where a Wife may give Evidence against her Husband.
THE Lord Coke in his 1 Inst. fo. 6. b. says, It has been resolved that a Wife
cannot be produced either for or against her Husband, quia sunt duae animae in
carne una, and it might be a cause of implacable Discord between them, and a
mean of great inconvenience: Yet it was resolved in the Lord Audley's Case,
Hut. Rep. 116. that although in the Case of a Common Person between Party and
Party, the Wife cannot be produced as a Witness against her Husband, yet
between the King and the Party upon Indictment she may, although it concerns the
Feme herself; as in that Case the Lady Audley gave Evidence against my Lord,
who was accessory to her Rape, and was thereof found guilty.

Husband swears for his Wife's Debt.
DEBT against Baron and Feme for certain Barrels of Beer sold to her dum sola,
etc. they both waged their Law, and did both swear according to the form of the
Oath, quod nota, That the Husband swore for his Wife's Debt. Cro. Eliz. 161.
Weeks and Holms. See 1 Inst. 172. b. acc'. that the Husband and Wife of full
age, shall make their Law for the Debt of the Wife before the Coverture.

Whether a Wife shall be examined upon a common Recovery.
SEE 1 Siderf. 322. in Fine, where the Reporter says, Quaere, How a Wife can
be barred, unless by Fine, because she is not examined upon a common Recovery:
Yet vide the same Rep. fol. 11. that she shall be privately examined when she
suffers a Common Recovery, as well as where she levies a Fine, by Bridgman
Chief Justice, (though she was there permitted to do it without such examination)
And 1 Roll. 347 is, That if Baron and Feme suffer a Recovery, it shall bind
her, because she is examined in it: And Co. 11. 77. a. if a Feme Covert make
any Conveyance, unless by Fine or Recovery, it is avoidable, yet fol. 78. a. it
is said, That the Person of a Feme Covert is dissabled to convey her Land
unless by Fine upon due examination. Vide Styles 320. by Roll. Chief Justice.
It is not to be questioned whether a Recovery bind a Feme, for it is the common
Practice, and it is not necessary to examine her, though it be a prudential thing
to do it; but if it be not done, it is not averrable that it was not done.

Man and Wife but one.
A WRIT of Conspiracy for endicting one of Felony does not lie but against two
Persons at the least, therefore you shall not have such a Writ against Husband
and Wife, because they are but one Person. (and one only cannot be said to
conspire with himself) F. N. B. 116. K.

Payment.
IN Debt, the Condition was to pay 100 l. to I. S. and his Wife: per Curiam, if
the Defendant plead payment to I. S. alone, it is good, for payment to him
suffices, without naming the Wife. Goldsb. 73. May and Johnson.

Note, If one is obliged to pay Money to two actually, he can pay it only to
one of 'em, for he cannot pay the same sum to two several Persons at one and
the same time. 2 Siderf. 41.

Privilege.
IF the Wife of an Attorney of the King's Bench be arrested, she ought not to
claim the Privilege of that Court, not to put in bail to the Action, as her
Husband may; but he must put in bail for her, and for want thereof she shall go
to Prison. Styles Pract. Reg. 446.

Slander of a Justice of Peace.
ONE said of a Justice of Peace, He is a Logger-headed, and a Slouch-headed,
Bursenbellied Honnd; this is no cause of Indictment before Justices of Peace in
their Sessions, partly for want of Jurisdiction, and partly because the Words
are not Actionable. This was assigned for Error after Judgment. Adjornatur. 1
Keb. 629.

Pictures and Hangings.
A PICTUE nailed through the Frame to the Wall is fixed to the Freehold, and
cannot he removed, by Twisden: But note, such things as use not ordinarily to
be so fixed, though they are nailed yet may be removed, as Hangings, etc.
Contrary of a painted Cloth nailed round, by Hales and Rainsford. 3 Keb. 74.

Simony without the Privity of the Incumbent or Patron.
THE Father of the Incumbent contracted with the Patron's Wife to give her 100
l. if the Patron would present his Son, the Patron and Incumbent not knowing of
this Contract, as it was found by special Verdict, yet held within the purview
of the Stat. 31 Eliz. So note, Simony may be by compact betwixt Strangers
without the Privity of the Incumbent or Patron. Cited Cro. Car. 331. to have
been adjudged in Calver's Case.

An Incumbent being sick, the Father contracted for the next Avoidance for 100
l. in the presence of his Son, and after the Incumbent died, the Father
presented his Son, who was Inducted, and agreed clearly to be Simony: but all
the Judges (except Anderson) held, That if the Son had not been privy to the
bargain, it had not been Simony; yet they agreed, If a Stranger buy the next
Avoidance, and present one that is not privy 'till afterward, and after is
made privy, and then presented, that this is Simony: Not so where the Father
buys, because bound in nature to provide for his Son; Q. of the difference.
Moor 916. Smith and Sherborn's Case. Vid. Noy 22. Hob. 165.

Extinguishment.
LESSEE for Ten Years grants a Rentcharge to his Lessor for the said Years,
the Lessor grants the Remainder to the Lessee for Years: The Court held that
the Rent was gone, because the Lessor who had it was Party to the destruction
of the Lease, which is the ground of the Rent. 4 Leon. 2. Buckhurst's Case.

Lease.
A MAN made a Lease for Years by Indenture, reserving a Rent, and in the
Counterpart of the Lessor 27 l. was reserved, in the Counterpart of the Lessee
but 26 l. afterward a Controversy arose between them what Rent should be paid,
the Lessor would have 27 l. the Lessee would pay but 26 l. but after was
content to pay 27 l. and so agreed with the Lessor, and drew a Stroke in his
Indenture, and made it 27 l. this made his Lease void. 2 Roll. 29. Facman's
Case.

Simony, though no Admission nor Institution.
ONE was Simonaically promoted to a Benefice, but this was Anno 1659 when there
were no Bishops, and so there was no Admission nor Institution, and therefore
moved he could not be guilty of Simony within the Statute: This was offered to
be found specially, but dissallowed by the Court, for by this Argument none
could be guilty of Simony in the late times, because no Bishops to admit and
institute, which would be inconvenient. 1 Siderf, 221. Snow and Phillips.

Advowson.
A MAN presents to his own Church as Proctor to another, by this he loses his
Advowson. So if Lessee for Years of an Advowson be presented to the Church,
it is an Extinguishment of the Term. Owen 142. Rudd and Topsey's Case.

Property changed by Offerings.
IN the time of Popery here, if a Stranger had taken my Goods, and offered them
to an Image in a consecrated Church, this had made as good a change of the
property of my Goods, as if I had sold them in a Market overt; but if I found
the Goods after in the Wrong-doers possession, I might take them again. 34 H.
VI. 10. Co. 10. 91. a. Degg 147.

Property in Negroes.
IN the Case of Butts and Penny, 3 Keb. 785. it was resolved by the Court that
Negroes are by Usage tanquam bona, and shall go to Administrator until they
become Christians, and thereby they are infranchised: This was upon a special
Verdict in an Action of Trover, the Jury finding that Negroes are usually
bought and sold in India.

So Trover lies for Monkeys, because they are Merchandise, and valuable,
(without showing they are tame or reclaimed.) 2 Cro. 262.

Libel for Knave.
LIBEL for calling one Knave, Prohibition lies, because in the time of H. VI.
Knave was a good Addition. Week's Case. Trin 12 Jac. B. R. Latch 156. 1 Siderf.
149.

Attorney made a Knight.
IF I make I. S. my Attorney, and he (the Warrant of Attorney still continuing)
is made a Knight, yet the Warrant of Attorney is not determined, though the Word
Knight, which is now part of his Name, be not in it. By Brown Justice. Owen's
Rep. 31.

Creation of a Gentleman.
A GENTLEMAN is by Descent, yet (says the Lord Coke) I read of the Creation of
a Gentleman, and thus it was: A French Knight came into England, and challenged
John Kingston Yeoman (a good and a Strong Man at Arms, but no Gentleman) at
certain Points and Deeds of Arms, etc. Unde Rex (says the Record) ut dictus
Johannes honorabilius in praemissis accipiatur, ipsum Johannem in ordinem
Generosum adoptavit, and Armigerum constituit, and caetera honoris Insignia ei
concessit. 2 Instit. 595. and 668.

Addition.
A GENTLEMAN by Reputation that is neither Gentle by Birth, Office, or
Creation, but commonly called Gentleman, and known by that Name, is a
sufficient Addition within the Stat. 1 H. V. c. 5. Cater's Case, cited 6 Rep.
67. a. But if he is named Yeoman, he cannot abate the Writ. 2 Inst. 668.

'Twas moved to quash an Indictment of Forcible Entry, because the Addition of
the Parties was in English, scil. Weaver, Confectioner, etc. but the Court
overruled it, for many Persons have been hanged that have had no other
Addition in their Indictment: Note, It is the constant practice to put them in
English in Indictments. 1 Siderf. 101. the King against March, etc.

If a Gentleman by birth be a Mercer, or, etc. and be named so in an Original,
etc. he may abate the Writ, for he ought to be named by the degree of a
Gentleman, because it is worthier than the Addition of any Mystery. 2 Inst.
668. 669.

Wife loses Money at Play.
OUR Law excludes not the Wife from using her Husband's Goods in common with
him (which is the reason that a Wife cannot feloniously take her Husband's
Goods, and though she so take 'em, and deliver 'em to a Stranger, yet no Felony
in the Stranger: And that if a Feme Covert say of I. S. He stole my Plate out
of my Chamber; although she may not have Plate of her own, yet because in common
Speech it is well known that the Wife accounts her Husband's Goods her Goods,
the Words are Actionable, Cro. Car. 52.) yet for all this, she cannot dispose
of her Husband's Goods, and therefore 'twas adjudged in Stephens his Case, that
where a Wife played at Cards, and lost 40 l. of her Husband's Money, that the
Husband should recover it again in Trover against the Gamester. 1 Siderfin 122.
1 Keb. 340.

Quaere what Remedy for the Gamester if he loses to the Wife, or will the Law
construe it a Gift of the Money to her, etc.

A. takes B's Wife and Cloths her.
AN Adulterer takes away another Man's Wife, and puts her in new Clothes; the
Husband may take the Wife with her Clothes, for it is as it were a Gift of the
said Apparel unto her: Besides, the more worthy thing draws to it things of
less worthiness, as a base Mine where there is Ore, shall be the King's for the
worthiness of the Ore. Finch's Law 22, 23. Vide Cro. Car. 344.

Woman Indicted for copulating with a Dog.
ONE Hicks was Indicted at the Old Baily on the 12th of July, 1677. upon Stat.
25 H. VIII. cap. 6. for Buggery, having suffered a Dog to copulate with her,
which being fully proved against her, and found by the Jury, she was condemned
and hanged at Tyburn on the 18th of July following, and the Dog on a Tree by. 3
Keb. 800. The King and Hicks.

See Leviticus chap. 18. v. 23. Thou shall not lie with any Beast to defile thy
self therewith, neither shall any Woman stand before a Beast, to lie down
thereto: It is Confusion.

Woman promises never to Marry again.
A GENTLEWOMAN took her Husband's Death so heavily, that she said, She would
never Marry again; but her Son comforted her, saying, God will provide a new
Husband, and said, he would give her 10 l. to pay 100 l. when she married; she
accepted the Money, and within half a Year after Married, whereupon the Son
brought an Assumpsit for the 100 l. and this being brought into the Chancery,
the Master of the Rolls awarded him only 10 l. saying, he would give never a
Penny more, for that it was unreasonable to bar a Gentlewoman from Marriage.
Owen 34. Vide 2. Keble 865.

Bond not to sell his Wifes' Clothes.
A MAN was obliged with condition not to sell his Wife's Apparel, and held a
good Bond, though it was moved to be against Law, and contrary to the liberty of
a Husband so to oblige himself; but Coke held it clearly good, as if one should
oblige himself to a Stranger to pay to his Wife yearly 20 l. this without
question is good. 1 Roll. Rep. 334. Smith and Watson's Case.

Deed takes effect from the Delivery, not the Date.
IF A. covenant that B. shall have all his Trees now standing, this refers to
the Trees standing at the time of the delivery, and if any be felled after the
Date, and before the delivery, he has no remedy for them, by Flemming. 2 Cro.
264. Vide Dyer 139. a. and 2 Roll. 21.

In an Action of Debt upon a Bond, the Defendant pleaded Deins Age; the Case
was, That when the Obligation was Sealed and Delivered, the Defendant was of
full Age, but at the time when the Bond bore date, he was under Age 'twas ruled
that the time of making the Bond was when it was sealed, and not when it bore
date. 1 Brownl. 30. 31.

Deed enrolled the Day of the Date, yet good.
THE Stat. 27 H. VIII. c. 16. says expressly, That Bargains and Sales to an use
of Inheritance of Freehold must be by Deed indented and enrolled within six
Months after the date thereof, etc. yet it has been held that a Deed may be
enrolled the very Day of the date, which the Lord Hobart says is by reason of
the intent of the Law, and not by the Letter. Hob. 139. Moor 40. and 42. acc.'
though it is there said that such an Enrolment had been adjudged void. See Latch.
14.

Tender of 50 l. in Stone.
IN the Case of Hooks and Swain, 1 Siderfin 151. Twisden says he remembered this
nice Case; Sir William Fish was bound by Obligation to pay (such a Day) in
Gray's- Inn Hall, fifty Pounds, generally, without saying of Money; and
therefore upon the Day, when the Gentlemen were at Supper, Sir William came in,
and tendered fifty pound weight of Stone, and adjudged no tender. See Owen 64.
where Plowden says, Libra in Latin signifies a Weight; yet if one is bound in
Vigint. Libris, and forfeits his Bond, he must pay Money, and not Lead, or the
like.

Witnesses.
ONE burned in the Hand for a Felony may be a Witness in a Cause, by Rolls
Chief Justice, for he may purchase Land, and his fault is purged by his
punishment. Styles Rep. 388. and Pract. Reg. 571.

If an Action be brought against two, and at the Assizes the Plaintiff proceeds
only against one of them, the other may be allowed a Witness in the Cause. Godb.
Case 418.

The Sheriff arrests a Man looking out of his Window, etc.
WHEN an Execution is lawfully begun, or has a legal Commencement, the Sheriff
may justify the breaking of the Parties House to take him, otherwise if there
be no legal Commencement: This diversity was taken and agreed for Law in Sir
William Fish his Case; Sir William was looking out of his Window, and the
Sheriff per fenestram delivered to him a Capias ad Satisfac. to take the said
Fish, and apprehend him, and Fish escaped from him, and the Sheriff broke the
door of his House maintenant, and retook him, and adjudged lawful, because
there was a lawful beginning of the Execution before, which was presently
pursued. Palmer's Rep. 53.

Vide Hobart fol. 62. That a Sheriff cannot upon private process rush into a
House which by craft, as knocking at the Door, etc. he procured to be opened
unto him, and there the first entry was held unlawful, for the opening of the
Door was occasioned by craft, and then used to the Violence intended.

Sanlder.
IF a Man say to another, Thou art a Rogue, and a Pocky Rogue, and the Pox
haunts thee twice a Year; an Action lies, for hereby it is apparent he intended
the great Pox, because these are wont to grieve those that have them bis per
annum. viz in the Spring and Autumn. Prekington's Case. 1 Roll. 66, 67.

Where Circumstances show the apparent intention of Words doubtful in
themselves, that they are slanderous, an Action lies for them, as where one
said of a Woman [That she did lie with a Weaver of Colchester in a Dutch, and
the Weaver's Breeches were down, and they were at it] an Action lies, for
although the Weaver might lie with her in a Ditch without harm, yet the latter
Words show he intended that the Weaver had carnal Knowledge of her. Roll. 1
Rep. 420. Root and Molyne's Case.

[I know what I am, and I know what the Plaintiff is, [I never Buggered a
Mare:] Per. Cur' though no grammatical affirmation is a sufficient scandal, yet
being found with such intention, and so imagined by the Hearers, the Ironical
speaking will not excuse. Jud. pro Quaer'. 3 Keb. 546.

Slander.
A. SAYS to B. One of Us two is Perjured: B. says to A. It is not I; and A.
says again, I am sure it is not I: B. shall have an Action for these words, for
the subsequent Words show apparently that he intends Him. 1 Roll. 75. Coe and
Chambers.

Justice Twisden said, he remembered a Shoemaker brought an Action for saying
He was a Cobbler; and though a Cobbler be a Trade of it self, yet 'twas held the
Action lay; in Chief Justice Glyn's time. Mod. Rep. fol. 19.

Margaret Commings brought an Action for these Words, viz. Thou art a Whore,
and a base burnt Arse Whore, and adjudged Actionable. 2 Siderf. fol. 5. (the
French Pox usually comes of burning, Cro. Eliz. 2.) but it is left a Quaere
there, whether the Words [Thou art a burnt Whore] will bear an Action.

Not Guilty.
A MAN may plead Not Guilty, yet tell no lie, for by the Law no Man is bound to
accuse himself, so that when I say Not Guilty, the meaning is, as if I should
say by way of Paraphrase, I am not so guilty as to tell you; if you will bring
me to a Trial, and have me punished for what you lay to my charge, prove it
against me. Seldom.

Presentation.
IF I am seized of an Advowson, and I present to it as Procurator to a
Stranger, this shall be an Usurpation upon my self for the Stranger.

So if I present to an Advowson, whereof I my self am seized, as Attorney to a
Stranger, this is an Usurpation for him. 17 E. 3. 60.

Where a Child may choose his Father.
IF a Man has a Wife and dies, and within a very short time after the Wife
marries again, and within nine Months has a Child, so as it may be the Child
of the one or the other; some have said that in this Case the Child may choose
his Father, Quia in hoc casu Filiatio non potest probari; for avoiding of which
question, and other inconveniences; the Law before the Conquest was, Sit omnis
Vidua sine Marito duodecim mensibus, and si maritaverit perdat dotem. 1 Inst.
8. a.

See Finch his Law 117. that if one die, his Wife priviment enseint (i. e. so
with Child, as it is not discerned) and she take another Husband, the Issue
born within a Month (or such a time as it is impossible he should beget it)
shall be accounted the Son of her first Husband, and cites 21 E. 3. 29.

It Is said the Law now is, That if a Wife bring forth a Child begotten by a
former Husband, or any other before marriage, but born after marriage with
another Man, this latter must own the Child, who shall be his Heir at Law.

Assault.
IF a Man assault me, I am not bound to attend until he strikes, but I may lay
him on before in my own defense, for it may be I shall come too late
afterward. 2 H. IV. 8. per Curiam.

Wearing a Sword no breach of the Good Behavior.
THE Wearing of a Sword after one is bound to his Good Behavior, is no breach
of the Good Behavior now; as perhaps it was heretofore (see Cromp. Justice of
Peace 119. 126.) when Swords were not usually worn but by Soldiers, for then
they struck as great a Terror in People as a Blunderbuss does now. But since at
this Day Swords are usually worn by all sorts of People, this cannot now be
construed a breach of the Good Behavior: So that which heretofore was a Crime,
is now by Custom become none. Hawles Remarks, etc. 81.

Slander.
ACTION will lie for these Words, [ This is the Whore that my Man Thomas begat
a Bastard on, and spent all my Money upon, and the Queen has been too long in
Town to my ease.] Styles 274 277. ^. Roll. 38.

So for this [ He has got Mary Nab with Child, and the Child is his, and I
have tried it with a Sieve and a pair of Sheers.] Styles 379.

So for this, [ Thou art an Whoremaster, for thou have lain with Brown 's Wife,
and had to do with her against a Chair,] whereby he lost his Marriage; though
'twas objected, This was the first President where loss of Marriage was ever
said for Words spoken of a Man. 2 Cro. 323. Vide 3. Bulls. 48.

It will not lie for this, (A. is an errant Whore, and would have lain with me
Seven Years since, and I would not unless she would go to the Hedge.] for this
is a Spiritual Slander only.]

Wife a Chattel.
A MAN may justify the Battery of another in defense of his Wife, for she is
his Chattel. 2 Roll. 546. the end.

Prohibition.
A. WAS sued in the Ecclesiastical Court for beating his Wife, and calling her
Whore, and sentenced to pay her three Shillings a Week for Alimony, and diverse
Fines were imposed upon him for nonperformance, and provided he should enter
into a Recognizance; a Prohibition was granted. 2 Brownl. 36. Agar's Case.

Complaint in the Spiritual Court by the Wife against her Husband.
CLOBORN'S Wife complained against him in the Spiritual Court causa saevitiae,
for that he gave her a Box on the Ear, and spate in her Face, and whitled her
about, and called her Damned Whore: This was not by Libel, but verbal
Accusation, reduced after to writing: The Husband denied it, but the Court
ordered him to give her four Pound every Week pro Expensis Litis and Alimony;
whereupon he moved for a Prohibition, suggesting that he chastized his Wife for
a reasonable cause, as by the Law of the Land he well might, after which she
went from him, and that they were reconciled again, which took away the former
saevitia, as reconciliation after Elopement. Richardson Chief Justice said, The
Suit being held without Libel is no ground for a Prohibition, if they proceed
according to their Form, which we are not Judges of, but if they deny a Copy of
the Libel, a Prohibition lies by the Statute. For the matter; The Sentence in
causa saevitiae is a Mensa and Thoro, and we cannot examine what is cruelty and
what not: But without doubt the matter alleged is cruelty, for spitting in the
Face was punishable by the Star Chamber: But if Cloborn had justified, and set
forth a Provocation by the Wife to give her reasonable castigation, there would
be some color for a Prohibition: and they advised him to tender a
Justification, and if refused, then to move for a Prohibition. Hetley 149. 150.

Where a Horse shall be led to the Pound with his Rider on his Back.
A HORSE whereon a Man is riding cannot be destrained for Rent: But Chief
Justice Keeling was of opinion that such a Horse may be destrained Damage
Feasant, and that he shall be led to the Pound with his Rider upon him. 1
Siderfin 440.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books, some of them newly Printed for Sam. Briscoe over against
Will's Coffee-House in Russel Street in Covent Garden.
THE History of Polybius the Megalopolitan, containing a general Account of the
Transactions of the World, and principally of the Roman People, during the
first and second Punick Wars, with Maps; describing the Places where the most
considerable Engagement and Battles were fought, both by Sea and Land: Also an
Account of their Policies and Stratagems of War, of the Ancient Romans, in
Conquering the greatest part of the then known World, in Fifty three years:
Translated by Sir H. S. To which is added, a Character of Polybius and his
Writings: By Mr. Dryden, in Two Volumes. 8 vo. Price 10 s.

The Lives of the Twelve Caesar's the first Emperors of Rome. Written in Latin
by C. Suetonius Tranquillus. Translated into English by several eminent Hands,
with the Heads of the Emperors on Copper Plates.

Advice to a Young Lord, Written by his Father, under these following Heads,
viz. Religion, Study and Exercise, Travel, Marriage, House keeping,
Hospitality, of the Court, of Friendship, of Pleasure and Idleness, of
Conversation.

Aristotle's Rethorick, or the true Grounds and Principles of Oratory, showing
the right Art of Pleading and Speaking in full Assemblies and Courts of
Judicature. In four Books. Second Edition.

The Religious Stoic, or a short Discourse on several Subjects, Viz. Of
Atheism, Superstition, the World's Creation, Eternity, Providence, Theology,
Strictness of Churches, of the Scriptures, of the Moral and Judicial Law, of
Monsters, of Man and his Creation, of the Immortality of the Soul, of Faith and
Reason, of the Fall of Angels, and what their Sin was, of Man's Fall, of the
Style of Genesis, why Man fell, with a Refutation to the Millennaries, with a
Friendly Address to the Fanatics of all Sects and Sorts. The Second Edition,
by Sir George Mackenzie.

A Moral Essay, preferring Solitude to Public Employment, and all its
Appennages, such as Fame, Command, Riches, Pleasures, Conversation. By Sir
George Mackenzie. Second Edition.

Jovial Poems and Songs by several Hands.

Ovid's Epistles, Translated by several Hands, Adorned with Cuts.

Physical and Mathematical Memoirs. Written at the Royal Academy of Paris.

Where you may be furnished with most sorts of Plays.


