A COUNTERPOYSON: OR, SOVERAIN ANTIDOTE AGAINST ALL GRIEF.

AS ALSO, The Benefit of Affliction; and how to Husband it so, that the weakest
Christian (with blessing from above) may be able to support himself in his most
miserable Exigents.

TOGETHER WITH The Uictory of Patience.

Extracted out of the choicest Authors, Ancient and Modern, both Holy and
Humane.

Necessary to be read of all that any way suffer Tribulation.

The Second Edition, corrected and much enlarged By the Author.

All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution, 2. Tim. 3.
12. LONDON, Printed by J. B. and S. B. and are to be sold by Philip Nevill at
the Sign of the Gun in Ivie-Lane. 1641.

Courteous Reader.
IN the perusal of this Treatise (which as the Author has enlarged and
refined it, is become a new Work) thou shall find such variety of useful
matter laid down in an accurate and methodicall way, and embellished with such
Ornaments of delightful illustration, that it will be hard to say, whether the
Authors Reading and Pains, or thy Profit and Delight will exceed: But the Ear
tries Words, as the Mouth tastes Meat, Job 34. 3. Only read it (without
prejudice) and the Work will sufficiently praise it self; if either Matter or
Manner, Argument or Art can do it.

Thomas Westfield. D. D. Daniel Featley. D. D. Samuel Slater.


To the READER.
NO Humane action can be framed so persect, but it shall have some
delinquencies; to prove that more were in the Comprisor: and it is almost as
easy to find faults, as to make them. His bodily presence (say they) is
mean, and his speech contemptible, 2 Cor. 10. 10. To spy the inconveniences
of a House built, is nothing: but to lay the Plot well at first, requires the
Pate of a good Contriver. All Alehymists can do well ill they come to doing:
But there is a surther distance from nothing to the least thing in the World,
then between it and the greatest.

All public actions are subject to diverse, and uncertain Interpretations;
for a great many heads judge of them, and Men's censures are as various as their
palats, John 7. Our writings are as so many dishes; our Readers, Guests. Books
are like faces; that which one admires another slights. Why? Some will condemn
what they do as little understand as they do themselves: Others, the better a
thing is, the less they will like it. They hate him (says Amos) that rebukes
in the gate, and they abhor him that speaks uprightly, Amos 5. 10. You know
Herod's festered Conscience could not endure John Baptists plaster of truth; A
galled back, loves not the curry-Combe; A deformed Face, loathes the true
Glass: Yea, as nothing is more bitter than Honey to him that has the Jaundise,
so nothing more hateful to the desperately wicked, than good Counsel: with
Balaam, they grudge to be stayed in the way to death, and fly upon those that
oppose their perdition. And how should they other then miscarry, who have a
Pirate (the Flesh) for their guide? So that if a Man should observe the Wind
of Applause, he should never Sow, or regard the Clouds of Aspersion, he should
never Reap. But I had rather hazard the Censure of some, then hinder the good
of others: Wheresore I have added to the sormer selected flowers, as many more,
whence any sedulous Be may load himself with Honey.

To fore-relate their variety, and several worths, were to imitate an Italian
Host, meeting you on the way, and promising beforehand, your fare and
entertainment. Wherefore let it please you to see and allow your cheer. Only,
in general: my Book is a feast; wherein wholesomenesse strives with
pleasantness, and variety with both. Each Chapter is a several dish, stuffed
full of notable sayings and examples (sor that is the meat) by which a Man may
not only become more eloquent, but more wise; not alone, able to say well, but
to do well; for quaint and elegant Phrases on a good subject, are baits, to
make an ill Man virtuous. Pithy Sentences, curious Metaphors, witty
Apophthegmes, sweet Similitudes, and Rhetorical Expressions (which Aristotle
would have, as it were, sprinkled in the most serious discourses) are to the
mind, as Music to the body; which (next to sleep) is the best recreation. Or
as pleasant and delectable Sauce, which gives a more savory taste to wholesome
and profitable Divinity. And thou shall sinde but few here, which are not both
sinewy, and sharp: mucrones verborum, pointed speeches; either fit to teach,
or forcible to persuade, or sage to advise and forewarne; or sharp to reprove,
or strong to confirm, or piercing to imprint.

But alas! most Men regard not what is written, but who writes; value not the
Metal, but the Stamp which is upon it. If the Man likes them not, nor shall
the matter. To these, I say little, as they deserve little: and turn my speech
to all that reserve themselves open, and prepared, to receive each profitable
instruction, and continual amendment; to the Ingenuous Reader, that sucks Honey
from the self same flower which the Spider does poison; wishing him to conne
that out of this Treatise, which he did not know before; and well note what
speaks to his own sin: And perhaps he may, in this short journey make more
true gain, then Salomons Navy did from Ophir, or the Spanish fleet from the
West Indies; for in so doing, he shall greatly increase his knowledge, and
lessen his vices. In a few days he may read it, and ever after, he the better
for it.

But me thinks I am too like a careless Porter; which keeps the guests without
doors, till they have lost their stomachs; wherefore I will detain you no
longer in the Porch, but unlock the door, and let you in.

THE BENEFIT OF AFFLIction, and how to husband it so, that (with blessing from
above) the weakest Christian may be able to support himself in his most
miserable Exigents.
CHAP. I.
Why the Lord suffers his children so to be traduced, and persecuted, by his
and their enemies: and first, That it makes for the glory of his power.

IN the former Sin stigma tized.
Treatise, I have proved, that there is a natural enmity and a spiritu^ll
Antipathy between the Men of the World, and the children of GOD; between the
seed of the Serpent, and the seed of the Woman. And that these two Regiments
being the Subjects of two several Kings, Satan and Christ, are governed by
Laws opposite and clean contrary each to the other: whereby it comes to
pass, that grievous temptations and persecutions do always accompany the
remission of sins: That all men (as Austine speaks) are necessitated to
miseries, which bend their course toward the Kingdom of H^aven. For
godliness and temptation are such inseparable attendants on the same person,
that a man's sins be no sooner forgiven, and he rescued from Satan, but that
Lion fomes and roares, and bestirs himself to recover his loss. Neither can
Gods love be enjoyed, without Satan's distu^bance. Yea, the World and the Devil
therefore ^ate us, because God has chosen us. If a Convert comes home, the
Angels welcome him with Songs, the Devils follow him with uproare and fury, his
old acquaintance with scorns and obloquie; for they think it quarrel enough
that we will no longer run with them to the same excess of riot. 1 Peter 4.
4. That we will no longer continue miserable with them: they envy to see
themselves casheired, as persons infected with the plague will scoff at such
of their acquaintance, as refuse to consort with them as they have done
formerly.

It is not enough for them to be bad themselves, except they rail at, and
persecute the good. He that has no grace himself, is vexed to see it in
another: godly men are thorns in wicked men's eyes, as Job was in the Devils:
because they are good, or because they are deerly beloved of God: If a man's
person and ways please God, the World will be displeased with both. If God be a
man's friend, that will be his enemy; If they exercise their malice, it is where
he shows mercy: and indeed he refuses to be an Abel, whom the malice of Caine
does not exercise (as Gregory speaks;) for it is an everlasting rule of the
Apostles, He that is borne after the flesh, will persecute him that is borne
after the Spirit, Gal. 4. 29. not because he is evil, but because he is so
much better than himself, 1 John 3. 12. Because his life is not like other
men's, his ways are of another fashion, Wisd. 2. 15.

I have also In a Treatise not yet Printed.
showed the Original, continuance, properties, causes, ends, and what will be
the issue of this enmity; and therein made it plain, that as for the present,
they suite like the Harp and the Harrow, agree like two poisons in one
stomach, the one being ever sick of the other: so, to reconcile them together,
were to reconcile Fire and Water, the Wolf and the Lamb, the Winds and the
Sea together; yea, that once to expect it, were an effect of frenzy, not of
hope.

It remains in the last place that I declare the Reasons, why God permits his
dearest children so to be afflicted. Reasons, why The godly are so patient in
their sufferings.
With other Grounds of comfort, and Uses: and first of the first.

The Reasons why God suffers the same, are chiefly sixteen; all tending to his
glory, and their spiritual and everlasting good, benefit, and advantage: for
the malignity of envy (if it be well answered) is made the evil cause of a
good effect to us; God and our souls are made gainers by another sin.

The Reasons and Ends which tend to Gods glory are three:

1 It makes for the glory of his Power, 2 It makes for the glory of his
Wisdom. 3 It makes much for his glory, when those graces which he has
bestowed upon his children, do the more shine through employment.
1. It makes for the glory of his Power: Moses having declared, in what manner
the Lord permitted Pharaoh to oppress the children of Israel, more and more,
still hardening his heart, shows the reason of it in these words, That I may
multiply my miracles and wonders in the Land of Egypt, That I may lay my hand
upon Pharaoh, and bring out mine Armies, even my people by great judgments,
that my power may be known, and that I may declare my Name throughout all the
World, Exodus 7. 3, 4. and 9. 16.

When that multitude of Amonites and Moabites came to war against Jeh^saphat
and the Children of Israel, intending to cast them out of the Lords
inheritance, and utterly destroy them, to the dishonor of God; the Lord by
delivering them from that sore affliction, gained to himself such honor and
glory, That (as the Text says) the fear of God was upon all the Kingdoms of
the Earth, when they heard that the Lord had fought so against the enemies of
Israel. 2 Chronicles. 20. 29. The judgment was upon some, the fear came upon all;
it was but a few men's less, but it was all men's warning, 1 Cor. 10. 11. When
the Lord brought again the Captivity of Sion (says the Psalmist) Then said
they among the Heathen, the Lord has done great things for them, Psalm. 126. 1.
2.

God provides on purpose mighty adversaries for his Church, that their
humiliation may be the greater in sustaining, and his glory may be greater in
deliverance: yea, though there be Legious of devils, and every one stronger
than many Legions of men, and more malicious than strong: yet Christ's little
Floc^ lives and prospers; and makes not this exceedingly for our Makers, for
our Gardians glory?

Gods power is best made known in our weakens, 2 Cor. 12. 9. And our
deliverance is so much the more wondered at, by how much the less it was
expected. Impossibilities are the best advancers of Gods glory; who not seldom
hangs the greatest weights upon the smallest w^ars, as he does those bottles of
He ^ven (being of infinite weight and magnitude) in the ^of. (...) (where no
man can make a feather hang) and the massy substance of the whole Earth and
Sea upon nothing Job 26. 7. 8. Yea the whole frame of the He ^vens have no
other Columns or Supporters to lean upon, then his mighty and powerful word,
Genesis 1. 6, 7, 8. For what we le^st believe can be done, we most admire being
done; the lesser the means, and the greater the opposition, the more is the
glory of him who by little means does overcome a great opposition: yea, it is
greater glory to God to turn evils into good by over-mastering them, then
wholly to take them away.

Now, if thy very enemies thus honor thee, how should thy friends (bought with
thy precious blood) glorify thee? But the sweetest of honey lies in the
bottom. I pass therefore from the first to the second Reason.

CHAP. II.
That it makes for the glory of his Wisdom.

2. SEcondly, it makes for the glory of his marvellons and singular wis^dome,
when he turns the malice of his enemies to the advantage of his Church. I
would (says Paul) ye understood brethren that the things which have come unto
me, are turned rather to the furthering of the Gospel: So that my bonds in
Christ are famous throughout all the 'judgement-Hall, and in all other places;
Insomuch that many of the brethren in the Lord, are imboldned through my bonds,
and dare more frankly speak the word, Phil. 1. 12, 13, 14. The Apostles
imprisonment was not the Gospels restraint, but enlargement.

In all other cases a gentle resistance, heightens the desire of the seeker; in
this, the strength of opposition, meeting with as strong a faith, has the same
effect.

Again, how admirably did the Lord turn the malice of Joseph's brethren when
they sold him into Egypt: And that devilish plot of Hamm against Mordecay and
his people, to the good of his Church in general, and of Joseph and Mordecay
in particular? Genesis 45. 8. 11. Hester 9. 1, 2, 3. Their plots to overthrow
Joseph and Mordecay, wereturned by a Divine Providence to the only means of
advantaging them. And herein was that of the Psalmist verified, Surely the rage
of man shall turn to thy praise, Psalm. 76. 10. He who can do all things, will
do that which shall be most for his own honor: And it is not so much glory
to God to take away wicked men, as to use their evil to his own holy
purposes; how soon could the Commander of Heaven and Earth rid the world of
bad members? But so should he lose the praise of working good by evil
instruments: it suffices that the Angels of God resist their actions while
their persons continue.

Yea, as in the Creation out of that confused Chaos, he drew forth this order'y
and adorned world: so still out of Satan's Tragedies and Harliburlies, he
brings forth swe^t order and comeliness: for God (many times) works by
contrary means: as Christ restored the Blind man to his sight, with clay and
spittle; he caused the Israelites to grow with depression, with persecution to
multiply, Exodus 1. 12. The blood of the Martyrs is the seed of the Church.
Persecution enlarges the bounds of it, like as Palms oppressed, and Ca^omile
trod upon, mount the more, grow the faster.

Yea, it is admirable to consider, how the Gospel grew, mauger all the adverse
blasts, and floods, which the billows of Earth, and bellows of hell could
blow or pour out against it in those sanguinary persecutions: and as touching
Julians in particular, Italy never abounded more with students, than when he
had shut up all the School d^ores, and turned learning into exile.

And so on the contrary, the very means which wicked men use, to establish
their own power, proves (by Gods providence) the only means of their ruin.
Those Bahel^ projectors would build themselves a Tower, whose top should
reach unto Heaven, lest they should be scattered abroad: which act of theirs
proved the only cause of their being scattered, and dispersed all the world
over, Genesis 11. 4. 8. Joseph's brethren sold him into Egypt, that so they might
prevent his reigning over them: but God made it the only means of his
reigning over them. Genesis 37. 20. 36. Pharaoh and his deep Counselors would
deal wisely, in oppressing the Israelites; lest they should multiply and get
out of his Land: but by this they multiplied the more, and got out the sooner,
even to the ruin of him and his Country. Exodus 1. 9, 10, 11, 12. The chief
Priests and Pharisees would most wisely put Christ to death, lest all men
should believe in him. John 11. 47, 48, 53. When thereby chiefly all came to
believe in him. For says he, when I am lifted up from the Earth, I will draw
all men unto me. John 12. 32. And not seldom, does the Lord thus turn the
deepest Counsels of H^man and Achitophel into foolishness^.

He that could prevent our sufferings by his power, does permit them in his
wisdom, that he may glorify his mercy in our deliverance; and confi^me our
faith by the issue of our distresses.

It Is as easy for God to work without means, as with them; and against them,
as by either; but assuredly it makes more for the Makers glory, that such an
admirable harmony should be produced out of such an infinite discord. The World
is composed of four Elements, and those be contraries: the Year is quartered
into different seasons: the mind of man is a mixture of disparities, as joy,
sorrow, hope, sear, love, b^te, and the like: the body does consist and is
nourished by contraries; how diverse even in effect as well as taste (wherein
variety hits the humor of all) are the Birds and Beasts that feed us: And how
diverse again are those things that feed them? How many several qualities have
the Plants that they Brouze upon? Which all mingled together, what a well
tempered S^llad do they make?

Thus you see that though says be above ^e^son, yet is there a reason to be
given of our faith. Oh what a depth of wisdom may lie wrapped up in those
passages, which to our weak apprehensions may seem rid^cu^ous!

CHAP. III.
That the graces of God, in his children, may the more shine through employment.

3. THirdly, it makes for Gods glory another way, when those graces which he
has bestowed upon his children, do the more shine through employment, and are
the more seen and taken notice of by the World; surely if his justice get such
honor by a Pharaoh; much more does his mercy by a Moses: now Abraham's faith,
Jobs patience, Paul's courage, and constancy, if they had not been tried by the
fire of affliction, their graces had been smothered as so many lights under a
Bushel, which now (to the glory of God) shine to all the World; Yea, not only
their virtues, but the gracious lives of all the Saints departed, do still
magnify him even to this day in every place we hear of them, and move us
likewise to glorify God for them: wherefore happy man that leaves such a
president for which the future Ages shall praise him, and praise God for him.
And certainly, if God intends to glorify himself by his graces in us, he will
find means to fetch them forth into the notice of the World.

Who could know the Faith, Patience, and Valor, of Gods soldiers, if they
always lay in Garrison, and never came to the skirmish? Whereas now they are
both exemplary, and serve also to put to silence the ignorance of foolish men,
1. Pet. 2. 15. Yea without enemies, valor and fortitude were of noe use. Till
we have sinned, Repentance either is not, or appears not: Neither is patience
visible to others, or sensible to our selves, till we are exercised with
sufferings: whereas these virtues in time of misery and exigents, shine as
Stars do in a dark night. And what more glorious than with Noah's
Olive Tree, to keep our Branches green under water? Or with Aarons Rod, to
bring forth ripe Almonds, when in appearance we are clung and dry? or with
Moses Bush, not to consume though on a light fire?

One Jupiter set out by Homer the Poet, was worth ten set out by Phidias the
Carver, says Philostratus; because the former flew abroad through all the
world, whereas the other never stirred from his Pedistall at Athens: so at
first, the honor and splendour of Jobs integrity was confined to Uz, (a little
corner of A^abi^) yea, to his own Family; whereas by means of the Devils
malice, it is now spread as far as the Sun can extend his beams, or the
Moon her influence; for of such a Favorite of heaven, such a Mirour of the
Earth, such a wonder of the world, who takes not notice? Who could know whether
we be Vessels of gold, or dross, unless we were brought to the Touchstone of
temptation? Who could feel the odoriferous smell of these Aromaticall spices,
if they were not pownded and bruised in the Mortar of affliction? The Worlds
hatred and calumny to an able Christian, serves as bellows to kindle his
devotion, and blow off the ashes, under which his faith lay hid; like the
Moon, he shines cleerest in the night of affliction: If it made for the honor
of S^ul and all Israel, that he had a little Boy in his Army, that was able to
encounter that selected great Giant, Goliath of the Philistims, and overcame
him; how much more does it make for Gods glory, that the least of his adopted
ones should be able to encounter four enemies? The World. 1 John 5. 4. The
Flesh. Gal. 5. 24. The Devil. 1 John. 2. 14. and The Death. Romans 8. 36. 37.


The weakest of which, is 1 The Flesh. 2 The World.


Now the Flesh being an homebred enemy, a Dalilah in Samsons bosom, a Judas
in Christ's company; like a Moath in the Garment bred in us, and cherished of
us, and yet always attempting to fret and destroy us: and the world a
foreign foe, whose Army consists of two wings, Adversity on the lefthand;
Prosperity on the right hand;
Death stronger than either, and the Devil stronger than all; And yet that the
weakest child of God only through says in Christ (a thing as much despised
of Philistims, as David's s^ing and stone was of Goliath) should overcome all
these ^oure; wherein he shows himself a greater Conqueror, than William the
Conqueror; yea, even greater than Alexander the Great, or Pompey the Great, or
the Great Turk: for they only conquered in many years a few parts of the
World: but he that is borne of God overcommeth the whole World, and all things
in the world, 1 John 5. And this is the victory that overcommeth the World,
even our faith, Verse. 4. And makes not this infinitely for the glory of God?
Yea, it makes much for the honor of Christians. For, art thou borne of God?
have thou vanquished the World that vanquisheth all the wicked? Bless God for
this conquest. The King of Spaines overcomming the Indies was nothing to it. If
Satan had known his afflicting of Job would have so advanced the glory of God,
manifested Jobs admirable patience to all Ages, made such a president for
imitation to others, occasioned so much shame to himself, I doubt not but Job
should have continued prosperous and quiet; for who will set upon his Adversary
when he knows he shall be shamefully beaten? This being so, happy are they
who when they do well, hear ill: but much more blessed are they, who live so
well, as that their backbiting Adversaries seeing their good works, are
constrained to praise God, and speak well of them.

CHAP. IV.
That God suffers his children to be afflicted and persecuted, by ungodly men,
that so they may be brought to repentance.

NOW the Reasons which have chiefly respect to the good of his children in
their sufferings, being thirteen in number, are distinguished as follows:

God suffers his children to be afflicted by them. 1 Because it Brings them to
repentance. 2 Because it Works in them amendment of life. 3 Because it Stirs
them up to prayer. 4 Because it Weanes them from the love of the World. 5
Because it Keeps them always prepared to the spiritual combat. 6 Because it
Discovers whether we be true believers, or Hypocrites. 7 Because it Prevents
greater evils of sin and pun^shment to come. 8 Because it makes them Humble.
9 Because it makes them Coformable to Christtheir head. 10 Because it
Increases their Faith. 11 Because it Increases their Joy and thankfulness.
12 Because it Increases their Spiritual wisdom. 13 Because it Increases
their Patience.


First, the Lord suffers his children to be vexed and persecuted by the wicked,
because it is a notable means to rouse them out of careless security, and
bring them to repentance; be opens the ears of men (says Elihu) even by
their corrections, that he might cause man to turn away from his enterprise,
and that he might ke^pe back his soul from the pit, Job 33. 16, 17, 18. The
feeling of smart will teach us to decline the cause: Quia sentio paenam,
recogito culpam, says Gregory the Great: punishments felt, bring to my
consideration sins committed. Those bitter sufferings of Job toward his later
end, made him to possess the iniquities of his youth, Job. 13. 26. Whereby
(with Salomons E^is-dropper, Eceles. 7. 21, 22.) he came to repent of that
whereof he did not once suspect himself guilty; it made him not think so
much of what he felt, as what he deserved to feel: in like manner, how do
the clamours of S^tan, our own consciences and the insulting World constrain
us to possess even the sins of our youth? There needs no other Art of memory
for sin but misery.

Satan's malice not seldom proves the occasion of true repentance, and so the
devil is overshot in his own Bow, wounded with his own weapon. I doubt
whether that Syrophenician had ever inquired after Christ, if her daughter had
not been vexed with an unclean spirit; yea, whether the devil had been so
effectually cast out, if he had with less violence entered into her, Mark 7.
Our afflictions are as Benhadads best Counselors, that sent him with a cord
about his neck to the merciful King of Israel. The Church of God under the
Cross is brought to a serious consideration of her estate, and says, Let us
search and try our ways and turn again to the Lord, Lam. 3. 40. Manasses
also the King of Judah, that horrible sinner, never repented of his Idolatry,
Murder, Witchcraft, etc. Till he was carried away captive to Babel, and there
put in chains by the King of Ashur. But then (says the Text) he humbled
himself greatly before the God of his Fathers, 2 Chronicles. 33. 11, 12. Yea, read
his confession, (for he speaks most feelingly) and you shall see, that the
prison was a means of his spiritual enlargement. Even Vipers being lasht cast
up all their poison.

The body that is surfetted with repletion of pleasant meats must be purged
with bitter pills; and when all outward comforts fail us, we are willing to be
friend our selves with the comfort of a good conscience, the best of blessings.
Affliction is the Hammer which breaks our rockie hearts; adversity has whipped
many a soul to Heaven, which otherwise prosperity had coached to hell: was not
the Prodigal riding post thither, till he was soundly lasht home again to his
Fathers house, by those hard-hearted and pitilesse Nabals, which refused to
fill his belly with the husks of the swine? And indeed, seldom is any man
thoroughly awaked from the sleep of sin, but by affliction; but God by it, as
it were by a strong purge, ^^pties and evacuates those supersluities of malice,
envy, pride, security, etc. wherewith we were before surcharged.

The Serpents enmity may be compared to the Circumcision-k^ise which was made
of stone, unto Ru^ar^e which is full of choler, yet does mightily purge choler;
or to the sting of a Scorpion, which though it be arrant poison, yet proves an
excellent remedy against poison. For this, or any other affliction when we are
in our full careere of worldly pomp and jollity, pulls us by the ^are and
makes us know our selves: My wants (says one) kill my wantonness: my poverty
checks my pride: my being slighted quels my ambition and vain glory: and as
for sickness, it cuts the throat of vices: many says Saint Austin have been
wickedly well, that have been inocently and piously sick. Yea, I may call it
the sum of Divinity, as Pliny calls it the sum of Philosophy; for what
distressed or sick man was ever lascivious, covetous, or ambitious? He envies
no man, admires no man, flatters no man, dissembles with no man, despises no
man, etc. That with Governors or Friends can by no means effect, touching our
amendment, a little sickness, or trouble from enemies will, (as Saint
Chrysostom observes.) Yea, how many will confess, that one affliction has
done more good upon them, than many Sermons? that they have learned more good
in one days or weeks misery, than many years prosperity could teach them?
untouched estates, and touched consciences seldom dwell together; and it is
usual for them that know no sorrows, to know no God: repentance seldom meets
a man in jollity, but in affliction the heart is made pliable and ready for all
good impressions.

True, if gentleness would serve, we should not smart; for God like a good
Surgion, first strokes the Arm, before he opens the vein: he sends for us by
his Ambassadors of the ministry, yet we come not: Let him fire our field as
Absalom did by Joab, we come presently: Or perhaps he afflicts another, to
fright us: as great men's Children are corrected, by seeing others whipped, or as
Apollonius would tame Lions, by beating dogs before them; for as God
preaches to us, no less in his Judgments than his Word; so when he strikes
^ffendors, he would warn the standers by: and a wise man sees himself fallen,
or beaten in his neighbor. Yea, generous and ingenuous spirits, desire to be
taught, abide not to be forced. It is for Tyrants to compel, for Asses to be
compelled, says Erasmus. A good naturd Horse, says Seneca, will be governed
even by the shadow of the wande: whereas a resty Jade will not b^ ordered by
the spur.

But if his word will not r^le us (as many, till God come with a strong hand
will hold their corruptions as fast as Pharaoh the Israelites) his Rod
shall, or if his Rod will not yet serve, his sword shall be drencht in our
gall, and hathed in our blood, Deuteronomy. 32. 41, 42. Or if we escape for a time, yet
our preservation from one judgment, is but our reservation to seven more,
Levit. 26. Yea, he will send a succession of crosses, seven more* and seven
more, and seven to that, to the conversion of his own and the confusion of
his enemies, Verse. 14. to 39. When singing will not still the Child, the Rod
must. Hard knots, must have hard wedges; strong asfections, strong afflictious;
great corruptions, great calamities to cure them.

So that God (through thy stubbornness) is forced to let lose Satan and wicked
men upon thee, least thou should sleep in security till thou did sleep
in death eternal^y, even for thy good: And Affliction is but the shepherds
dog (as Chrysostom speaks) to fetch us into Christ's Fold, perhaps by
Barking only, and then we are more s^ard than hurt, perhaps in his mouth and
then the poor sheep thinks he will surely worry it: but he is taught to fetch
only, and therefore gripes not, but only carries and delivers it to his
ma(...)er. When Children have done a fault, Mothers use to fright them with
Bull-beggers; the Child thinks surely they will have him, but the mother has
a double policy, viz. to make them hate the fault, and love them the better:
for they run to the Lap to hide them, and then will she make her own
conditions: and so the very end which God aims at in setting those Adders upon
thee, is that thou should turn thine Eyes inward, that thou may see for
what thou suffer: pry narrowly into thine own forepast actions; which if
thou do, an hundred to one thou will find sin, it may be this very sin
the cause of thy present affliction: and until thou do si^t and try thine
own heart for this Achan, and find out which is thy Isaac, thy beloved sin,
look for no release, but rather that thy sorrows should be multiplied, as God
threatened Eve.

Wherefore lie thou on thy face, said God to Joshua: Israel has sinned, up,
search diligently, etc. Josh. 7. 10. 11. What evil have thou done said the
Mariners to the distressed Prophet, that this evil is come upon us? Let every
such Jonas reflect upon himself, and say, What evil have I done? what sin
have I committed or admitted? or what good have I omitted or intermitted? be it
but one single sin, whether spiritual pride, or railing upon honest men in a
handsome Language, or the like, and having found out the cause, greive for it,
turn from it. One flaw in a Diamond takes away the luster and the price: one
man in Law may keep possession: one Puddle if we wallow in it, will de^ile us:
one piece of Ward land, makes the Heir liable to the King: one sin keeps
possession for Satan as well as twenty: one poyson-full Herb amongst many
good ones, may put death in the pot; and so take away the goodness from the
rest, as if there were none in it wholesome.

Besides, how were the Angels in heaven punished for one fault? Achan for one
sa^reledge? Mirriam for one slander? Moses for one unbeleefe? Ana^^as for one
lie? Ely for his Indulgence only; David for his love to Bathshe^a only, etc.
Wherefore look to it, for if we spare but one Agag, it may cost us a Kingdom:
and such a Kingdom as is far beter than the Kingdom of Saul. 1 Pet. 1. 4.

Neither say of thy sin, as once Lot of Zoar; is it not a little one? for
though men may, yet God will not wink at small faults, especially in his own.
A little prick being neglected, may fester to a gangreene. As what is a
mountain of Earth but an accumulation of many little dusts? or what is a
flood, but a concurrence of many little drops? a small leake will sink the
Vessel, unstopt; whereas a great one will not do it, if well kalked. The
weakest Instrument, be it but a Bodkin, can pierce the flesh and take away the
life unarmed; whereas Armor of proose will even beat off Bullets. Besides,
whereas our greatest goodness merits not the l^ast glory, our least
wickedness deserves great pain. The wages of sin (small or great) is death,
Romans 6. 23. bad work, sad wages.

Wherefore let his correction bring forth conversion; cleanse your hands ye
sinners, and purge your hearts ye double minded, Jam. 4. 8. Not your hands
only, with Pilate, but your hearts with David; yea, and your eyes too, with
Mary Magdalen, if it be possible, (though dry sorrow may be as good as wet)
whose eyes were a Laver and hair a Towell, to wash and wipe the feet of
Christ. Humble thy self like the Ninivites, Jona. 3. 6. Who put sackcloth upon
their loins, and ashes on their heads, as those that had deserved to be as
far under ground, as they were now above it. An humble submission, is the
only way to disarme Gods indignation, and be rid of his Rod, 1 Pet. 5. 6. By
such a course as this, Jacob appeased that Rough man Esa^: Abigall diverted
David from his bloody purposes: the Syrians found favor with Ahab, that
Nonesuch; as the Scripture styles him, 1 King^ 20. 32, 33. Sin brings
judgment, and only Repentance preventeth it: Thy sin has kindled the fire
of Gods wrath, and only Repentance is as water to quench this fire.

King Edward the first riding furiously after a servant of his that had
displeased him, with a drawn sword in his hand, as purposing to kill him,
seeing him submit, and upon bended knee su^ for his life, not only spared him,
but received him into favor: go thou and do the like: be thou but thoroughly
sorry for thy sin^e, my soul for thine, God will be thoroughly satisfied; yea,
grow better by it and God will love thee the better for it: As Lovers are wont
to be best friends after falling out: for as bones out of joint, joined again,
are stronger than before: so when God and we are reconciled by repentance, his
asfections are stronger to us than before. The repenting Prodigal received
such tokens of favor as his elder brother, who never brake out into that Riot
never did. And whom did Christ honor with his first appearance, but Mary
Magdalen? and the Angel, but Peter? Go, says he, and tell his Disciples and
Peter that he will go before you into Galilee, Mar. 16. 7. Though Peter had
sinned above the rest, yet repenting he is named above the rest.

Otherwise contrition without reformation (which is but like the crouching of a
Fox, that being taken in a snare looks lamentably, but it is only to get out)
will not prevail with God; he will nevr leave pursuing thee, till the trayt^rs
head be thrown over the wall.

None so lewd but will seem conformable, when aprehended, or if they Riot in
the Goal of their durance, yet when the Session comes, they begin to be a
little calm, put off their disguises of dessolutenesse, and put o^ some
modesty, and semblance of humiliation: yea, then they change their App^rrell,
their garbes, their looks, and all to appear civil. Or let the Fox be
chayned up he will no more worry the Lambs, Pharaoh could relent when he felt
the Plagues; but when they were over, so was his repentance: but what says the
Scripture? He that confesses and forsakes his sin, shall find mercy. Prove.
28. 13. Confession and confusion of sin must go together: yea, there must
be a parting with the right Eye, in regard of pleasure, and the right Hand, in
regard of profit: As for example, have thou swallowed some unlawful gain and
would thou passifie God and thy Conscience? Vomit it up again by
restitution: for where is no restitution of things unjustly gotten, their
sins shall never be forgiven, as Saint Austin* speaks Non tollitur peccatum,
nisi restitutur oblatum, For Repentance without restitution, is as if a thief
should take away thy purse, ask thee pardon, say he is sorry for it, but
keeps it still; in which case, thou would say, he did but mock thee. But
Pallas with all the graces may call Briareus with his hundred hands to bind
this Jupiter; and all in vain. Wherefore I proceed. The skillful Surgeon,
when he is lanching a wound, or cutting off a Limb, will not hear the
Patient, though he cry never so, until the cure be ended: but let there be
once a healing of thy errors, and the Plaster will fall off of it self; for
the Plaster will not stick on when the soar is healed. If the Fathers word
can correct the child, he will ^^ing away the rod, otherwise he must look to
have his eyes ever winterly. Thus as the two Angels that came to Lot lodged
with him for a night, and when they had dispatched their errand, went away in
the morning: So afflictions which are the Angels or the Messengers of God, are
sent by him to do an errand to us; to tell us, we forget God, we forget our
selves, we are too proud, too selfe-conceited, and such like: and when they
have said as they were bid, then presently they are gone. Why then complainest
thou, I am afflicted on every side? like a child that cries out of his shoe,
when the fault is in his foot: or the sick Patient who faults his bed when he
should his back. Why groanest thou under thy burden, and cryest out of
unremedied pain? Alas, thou repentest not; trouble came on this message to
teach thee repentance, give the messenger his errand, and he will be gone.

But if thou refusest to be reformed, thou hate to be healed. Alas, every
Cain will groan under the penalty, whereas a David will grieve for the
iniquity: but the one trembles as a slave, whereas the other fears as a son,
and he that mournes for the cause of his punishment, shall mourn but a while;
but he that mourns only for the punishment, and not for the cause, shall
mourn for ever: the soul can not live while the sin lives; one of the two
must dye, the corruption or the Person; but Repentance is a Supersedeas, which
discharges both sin and sorrow, moving God to be merciful, the Angels to be
joyful, Man to be acceptable, and only the Devil and his to be melancholy.

True God does not merely (though mainely) smite and chastise his Children for
sin, without any other respect; all his afflictive acts, are not punishments;
some are for the benefit of the Creature, whether for probation or purgation,
or reformation: and for the praise, whether of his divine power, or justice, or
mercy, as appears by our Saviors words, touching him that was borne blind,
John 9. 3. For though his Parents had sinned in themselves, and the man had
sinned in his first parents, yet it was not the guilt of either, that was
guilty of this blindness: and the like we may collect from Jobs example.
Nevertheless, sin is still the Original; as when the headakes, and the
members are sick, the fault is in the stomach. For this cause, says the
Apostle, (of the believing Corinthians) many are weak, (by lingering diseases)
many sick, (by sharp and grievous maladies) and many sleep (are dead
outright, 1 Cor. 11. 30. Hence our so many diseases, miseries, maladies,
troubles without, terrors within; it is this thief in the Candle that wastes
us, this fly in the Box that corrupts us; this traitor in the heart, that
betrays and exposes us to all perils. In which regard it was a sound and
savory reply of an English Captain at the loss of Callice, who when a proud
Frenchman tauntingly demanded, when will you fetch Callice again? answered,
when your sin(...)es shall weigh down ours. What, says Saint Hierom, in the
like case? by our sins are these Infidels made strong; and therefore a mean
to lessen our punishments is, to lessen our sins, yea even Achior a very
Ammonite could say thus to Holef^rnes, Enquire if this people have offended
their God: otherwise all our warring will come to nothing.

And it is very rare in this case if there be not some Achan in the Army, some
Sheba in the town, some Jonas in the Ship, some distemper in the soul,
disorder in the life, that God would have removed and remedied: as for
instance; Jonas, how came he into the Whales belly? was it not his own
undutifulnesse? David, whence came all his troubles by Absalom, Ammon, Adoniah?
was it not his fondness and indulgence? and so of Ely. Jacob, what might he
thank for all his afflictions (whereof God gave him not a draught but made him
a diet drink: so that he had scarce a merry day, for one trouble or another:)
whom had he to thank for it? did he not thrust his own feet into the stocks
by that threefold lie of his, uttered in a breath to get the blessing?

Wherefore, if thou love thine own ease, deal freely and ingenuously with
God and thine own soul; for sin and punishment are inseparable companions,
and go tied together with chains of Adamant, as the Poet speaks, like
individual twins, they are borne together, live together, are attended one by
the other, as the body by the shadow: where sin is in the Saddle, there
punishment is on the Crupper; whence it is, that the Hebrews have but one and
the same word for them both.

Ob: But thou have repented and r^solvest to be reformed.

An: Many in time of distress have strong resolutions and promise fair, even
a Candle as big as a Mast: but trouble being over, one of ten in the pound
were well: which proves they never truly repented. Yea, in stead of being
better they grow worse, like one that falls into a relapse from an Ag^e, to a
burning fever, which peradventure would be thy case, if God should now release
the: at least thou may fear it: for to seek unto God only in affliction,
is suspicious, and such seekers commonly are rejected with scorn, Proverbs 1.
24. to 33. Indeed, if thou shall persevere (when thou art released) in doing
that which now thou purposest, it is an infallable sign thy repentance is
sound; Otherwise not.

CHAP. V.
That it serves to work in us amendment of life.

2. SEcondly, the malice of our enemies serves to work in us amendment of
life. Every Affliction sanctified, rubs off some rust, melts off some dross,
strains out some corruption, etc. which done, we rise out of trouble, as
Christ rose out of the grave: for when the gold is fined the fire shall hold it
no longer. The outward cold of affliction does greatly increase the inward
beat and fervor of the Graces of God in us. Indeed no Chastisement (says the
Author to the Hebrews) for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous; But
afterward it brings the quiet fruit of righteousness to them that are
thereby exercised, Heb. 12. 11.

We are dunged with reproaches, that we may prove a richer soil for grace, as
Nazianzen speaks, (alluding to the parable of the Figtree.) God beats us,
that he may better us: he hedgeth us about with thorns, that he may keep us
within compass, least we break over into Satan's pastures: which indeed will
fat us, but to the slaughter. Yea, he pricks us with Goades, that he may let
out our ill humors, and happy thorns or Landsets of tribulation are those,
which open a vein for sin to gush out at.

God strips the body of pleasures to cloth the soul with righteousness, and
o^tentimes strengthens our state of grace by impoverishing our temporal
estate: for commonly the more Prosperity, the less Piety. The poor (says
Christ) receive the Gospel though the rich are more bound. It was an
observation of Tacitus, that raising of the fortune, did rarely mend the
disposition; only Vespas^an was changed into the better; yea, if it makes us
not worse, it is a wonder. Evagrius gives it as a high praise of the Emperor
Mauritious, that in the height of all his Majesty, he retained his ancient
Piety. We serve God, as our servants serve us: of which many have too good
clothes, others too much wages, or are too fine fed to do work, as esops Hen
being over fed was (...) fat to lay, or perhaps too many under them; as a
Gentleman having but one servant, thought him over burdned with work, and
therefore took another to help him: but having two, one of them so trusted to
the others observance, that ofttimes they were both missing, and the work not
done, then he chose a third; but was worse served then, than before: whereupon
he told his friend: when I had one servant, I had a servant; when I had two, I
had but half of one: now I have three, I have never an one. Few men can
digest great felicity; Many a man has been a looser by his gains, and found,
that that which multeplyed his outward estate, has abated his inward, and so
on the contrary. David was never so tender, as when he was hunted like a
Partridge, 1 Samuel 26. 20. Jonah was at best, in the Whales belly. Stevens face
never shone so fair, as when he stood before the Counsel, Acts 6. 15. Whilst
the Romans had wars with Carthage, and enemies in Affricke, they knew not
what ^ices meant in Rome.

Now if the winter of the one is found to be the spring of the other, and the
corruption of prosperity the generation of piety; who will esteem those things
good which make us worse, or, that evil, which brings such gain and
sweetness? Before I was afflicted (says David) I went astray, but now do I
keep thy Commandments, Psalm. 119. 67. These evil^ do press us, but it is to
God and to holiness. Yea, how much lower our afflictions weigh us down on
Earth, so much the more earnestly our affections mount up to Heaven.

An Egg will swim in salt water, but sink in fresh: so we. King David among so
many public and private calamities and dysasters, kept his head above water,
and stood upright in his heart to God: but King Solomon his Son even sunk in
the midst of delights and pleasures. Too much rankness lays the Corn: and
Trees over-laden with Fruit, are their own ruin: Happy was he John 9. in
being borne blind, whose gain of bodily sight made way for the spiritual,
who of a Patient became an Advocate for his Savieur, who lost a Synagog^e and
found Heaven, who by being abandoned of sinners was received of the Lord of
glory; God rarely deprives a man of one faculty, but he more then supplies in
another. The defect of corporal sight, has not seldom mended the memory: for
what is taken from one Sense is divided amongst the rest. When Zachary was
dumb* John Baptist the voice was a breeding. Hannibal had but one ^ye, Appius,
Claudius, Timelon, and Homer were quite blind; So was Mul^asses King of Tunis,
and John King of Bohemia; But for the l^sse of that one Sense they were
recompensed in the rest, they had most excellent mem^ries, rare inventions, and
admirable other parts: Or suppose he send sickness, the worst Fever can come,
does not more burn up our blood than our lust; And together with sweating out
the Surfets of nat^^e, at the poares of the body, we weep out the sinful
corruption of our nature at the poares of the Conscience; Yea the Author to the
Hebrews says of Christ himself, that though he were the Son, yet (as he was
man) He learned obedience by the things which he^ suffered, Heb. 5. 8. As in
humane proceedings, Ill manners beget good Laws; So in Divine, the wicked by
their evil tongues beget good and holy lives in the godly: Whence Plutarch
advises us so circumsp^ctly to demean our selves as if our enemies did
always behold us. Nothing sooner brings us to the know^edge and amendment of
our faults, than the scoffs of an enemy, which made Philip of Macedon
acknowledge himself much beholding to his enemies (the Athenians) for speaking
evil of him, for (says he) they have made me an honest man, to prove them
liars: Even ba^^en Leah when she was despised, became f^uitfull.

So that we may thank our enemies, or must thank God for our enemies; Our
souls shall shine the brighter one day for such rubbing; the cold wind
cleanses the good grain: the hot fire refines the pure gold. Yea, put case we
be gold, they will but try us; If Iron, they will scow^r away our rust.

I say not that a wicked heart will be bettered by affliction: for in the same
fire that gold is made bright and pure, dross is burnt and consumed: and under
the same flaile that the grain is purged and preserved, the husks are broken
and deminished. Neither are the Lees therefore confounded with the Wine,
because they are pressed and tr^dden under the same press or planke: but I
speak of affliction sanctified, and of the godly.

Yet let not the wicked^st man be discouraged, for as when Christ called the
blind man, the Disciples said, be of good comfort, He calls thee: so may I
say to thee that art burdened with any kind of affliction, be of good comfort
Christ calls thee, saying, Come unto me by rep^ntance and amendment of life,
and I will ease thee of thy sins and sorrows, here and hereafter; only as
the blind man threw away his garment and followed Christ, so do thou answer
him, I will forsake my sin^es and follow thee. For if God like a prudent
Prince, makes offers and famos of war, it is but to mend the conditions of
peace.

But farewell, I am for the already resolved; to whom I say, if the needle of
affliction be drawn through us by reason of wicked men's malice, it is but to
conveigh with it the thread of amendment, and their worst to the godly serves
but as the Thorn to the breast of the Nightingale, the which (if she chance to
sleep) causes her to warble with a renewed cheerfulness. For as blows make
bals^ to mount, and lashes make tops to go, which of themselves would fall; so
with their malice we are spurred up to duty, and made persevere in it, for
commonly (like tops) no longer lasht, no longer we go. Yea, these very
tempestuous showers bring forth spiritual flowers and herbs in abundance:
Devotion (like fire in fr^sty weather) burns hottest in aflliction. Virtue
provoked, adds much to it self: With the Arc of Noah the higher we are
tossed with the blood of their malice, the nearer we mount toward Heaven. When
the waters of the blood came upon the face of the earth, down went stately
Turrets, and Towers; but as the waters rose, the Arc rose still higher and
higher. In like sort, when the waters of afflictions arise, down goes the
pride of life, the lust of the eyes; In a word, all the vanities of the World.
But the Arc of the soul arises as these waters rise, and that higher and
higher, even nearer and nearer toward Heaven.

I might illustrate this point by many observable things in nature: We see
W^ll-waters arising from deep Springs, are hotter in Winter than in Summer,
because the outward cold does keep in, and double their inward heat: And so
of man's body, the more extreme the cold is without, the more does the natural
heat fortify* it self within, and guard the heart. The Corn receives an
inward heat and comfort from the Frost and Snow which lies upon it: Trees
lopt and pruned slourish the more, and bear the fuller for it: The Grape when
it is most pressed and trodden, makes the more and better Wine; The drossie
gold is by the fire resined; Winds and Thunder cleares the air; Working Seas
purge the Wine; Fire increases the sent of any Perfume; Pounding makes all
Spices smell the sweeter; Linen when it is buckt and washed and wrung and
beaten, becomes the whiter and fairer; The earth being torn up by the Plough,
becomes more rich and fruitful; Is there a piece of ground naturally good? Let
it lie neglected, it becomes wild and barren; Yea, and the more rich and
fertile that it is of it self* the m^re waste and fruitless it proves for
want of Tillage and Husbandry. The Razor though it be tempered with a due
proportion of steel, yet if it pass not the Grindstone or Whetstone, is
nevertheless unapt to cut; yea, though it be made once never so sharp, if it
be not often whetted it waxes dull. All which are lively Emblemes of that
truth which the Apostle delivers, 2 Cor. 4. 16. We faint not, for though our
outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed daily: Even as a Lamb is
much more lively and nimble for sheering. If by enmity and persecution (as with
a knife) the Lord pareth and pruneth us, it is, that we may bring forth the
more and better fruit; and unless we degenerate, we shall bear the better for
bleeding: as Anteus, every time rose up the stronger when Hercules threw him to
the ground, because he got new strength by touching of his Moher.

O admirable use of affliction; health from a wound; cure, from a disease; out
of grief, joy; gain, out of loss; out of infirmity, strength; out of sin,
holiness; out of death, life: yea, we shall redeome something of Gods
dishonor by sin, if we shall thence grow holy. But this is a harder Riddle
than Samsons to these Philistims.

CHAP. VI.
That it stirs them up to prayer.

3. THirdly, because they quicken our devotion, and make us pray unto God with
more fervency, Lord (says Isaiah) in trouble they will visit thee, they
powered out prayers when thy chastening was upon them, Isay 26. 16. In their
affliction (says Hosea) they will seek thee diltgently, Hosea 5. 15. That we
never pray so feelingly, fervently, forcibly, as in time of affliction, may be
seen in the examples of the children of Israel, Judge. 3. 9, 15. Elisha, 2
Kings 6. 18. Hezekiah, 2 Kings 19. 15, 16. Stephen, Acts 7. 59, 60. And lastly,
in Jehos^phat, who being told that there was a great multitude coming against
him from beyond the Sea, out of Aram, it follows, That Jehosaphat feared, and
set himself to seek the Lord, and proclaimed a fast throughout all Judah:
Yea, they came out of all parts, and joined with him to enquire of the Lord, 2
Chro. 20. 3, 4, 13.

Neither does it make us alone which suffer, earnest in prayer, but it makes
others also labor in prayer to God for us, 2 Cor. 1. 10, 11. Acts 12. 5, 12.
As what true members participate not some way of the bodies smart. It is only
a Nero can sit and sing whiles Rome burns, whence we are taught to pray in the
plural number, Our Father: and certainly he cannot pray or be heard for
himself, that is no man's friend but his own. No prayer without faith, no
faith without Charity, no Charity without mutual intercession. But I proceed,
Crosses are the files and whetstones, that set an edge on our Devotions,
without which they grow dull and ineffectuall. Jonah sleeps in the Ship, but
prays hard in the Whales belly.

Prayer is the wing of the soul, wherewith it flies to Heaven, as meditation
is the Eye wherewith we see God. But our hearts are like ^lintstones, which
must be smitten ere they will cast out these sparks of devotion. Christ never
heard of the Canaanitish woman until her daughter was miserably vexed with a
Devil, but then she comes to him, and does not speak, but cry: need and
desire have raised her voice to an importunate clamor. The God of mercy is
light of hearing, yet he loves a loud and vehement solicitation: not to make
himself inclinable to grant, but to make us capable to receive blessings. And
indeed the very purpose of affliction is, to make us importunate: he that
hears the secret murmurs of our grief, yet will not seem to hear us till
our cries be loud and strong: as Demosthenes would not plead for his Client
till he cried to him, but then answered his sorrow, Now I feel thy cause.

Prayer is as an Arrow, if it be drawn up but a little; it goes not far: but
if it be pulled up to the head, flies strongly, and pearses deep; if it be but
dribled forth of careless lips, it falls down at our feet; the strength of
our ^j^culation sends it up into heaven, and fetches down a blessing. The
Child has escaped many a stripe by his loud crying; and the very unjust Judge
cannot endure the widows clamor. So unto servent prayer God will deny
nothing. Whereas heartlesse motions do but teach us to deny: Fervent suits,
offer violence both to earth and heaven. so that if we ask and miss, it is
because we ask amiss: we beat back the flame, not with a purpose to
suppress it, but to raise it higher, and to diffuse it. We stop the stream
that it may swell the more, and a denial does but invite the importunate, as
we see in the Canaanitish woman, Mat. 15. Our holy longings are increased with
delays; it whets our appetite to be held fasting, and whom will not Need make
both humble and eloquent? If the case be woeful, it will be expressed
accordingly; the despair of all other helps, sends us importunately to the
God of power; but while money can buy Physic, or friends procure enlargement,
the great Physician and helper is not sought unto, nor thoroughly trusted in. It
is written of the children of Israel, that so soon as they cried unto the
Lord, he delivered them from their servitude under Eglon King of Moab; yet it
is plain, they were eighteen years under this bondage undelivered, Judge. 3.
14, 15. Doubtless they were not so unsensible of their own misery as not to
complain sooner then the end of eighteen years: the first hour they sighed
for themselves, but now they cried unto God. They are words, and not prayers,
which fall from careless lips; if we would prevail with God, we must wrestle;
and if we would wrestle happily with God, we must wrestle first with our own
dullness; yea, if we felt our want, or wanted not desire, we could speak to
God in no tune but cries, and nothing but cries can pierce Heaven: the best
men's zeal is but like a fire of green wood, which burns no longer than
whiles it is blown. Affliction to the soul is as plummets to a Clock, or
wind to a Ship; holy and faithful prayer, as oars to a Boat, and ill goes
the Boat without oars, or the Ship without wind, or the Clock without
plummets. Now are some afflicted in reputation, as Susanna was; others in
children, as Elie; some by enemies, as David; others by friends, as Joseph;
some in body, as Lazarus; others in goods, as Job; others in liberty, as John.
In all extremities let us send this messenger to Christ for ease, faithful and
servent prayer; if this can but carry the burden to him, he will carry it for
us, and from us for ever.

Neither can we want encouragement to ask: when as the sick of the palsy but
asked health, and obtained also forgiveness of sins. When Solomon but
desired wisdom, and the Lord gave him wisdom, and honor, and abundance of
wealth. When Jacob asked but meat and clothing, and God made him a great rich
man. When Zacheus desired only to ^^ave a sight of Christ, and was so happy as
to entertain him into his h^use, into his heart, yea to be entertained into
Christ's kingdom.

We do not (yea in many cases we dare not) ask so much, as God is pleased to
give: Neither do thou O Savior measure thy gifts by our petitions, but by
our wants, and thine own mercies.

True, if the all-wise God shall foresee that thou would serve him as the
prodigal son served his father, who prayed but till he had got his
patrimony, and then f^rsooke him, and spent the same in Riot, to the givers
dishonor; as too many use (...) the Ocean of Gods bounty, as we do the
Thames; it brings us in all manner of provision: clothes to cover us, fuel to
warm us, food to nourish us, wine to che^re us, gold to enrich us: and we in
recompense soil it with our rubbish, filth, common shores, and such like
excretions: even as the Cloud that's lifted up and advanced by the Sun,
obscures the Sun. In this case he will either deny thee in mercy, as he did
Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9. and our Savior himself, Math. 26. 39. or grant
thee thy requests in wroth, as he did a King to the Israelites, and Quayles
wherewith he fed their bodies; but withal sending leanness into their
souls, Psalm. 106. 15. And well does that Child deserve to be so served, who
will lay out the money given him by his father to buy poison, or weapons to
murder him with. Wherefore let thy prayers not only be fervent, but frequent
for thy wants are so. And be sure to ask good things to a good end, and then
if we ask thus according to Gods will in Christ's name, we know that he will
hear us, and grant whatsoever petitious we have desired, 1 John 5. 14, 15.

CHAP. VII.
That it weanes them from the love of the world.

4. FOurthly, our sufferings weane us from the love of the world, yea, make us
loath and contemn it, and contrary wise fix upon Heaven, with a desire to be
dissolved. S. Peter at Christ's transfiguration, enjoying but a glimpse of
happiness here, was so ravished and transported with the love of his present
estate, that he breaks out into these words, Master, it is good for us to be
here; he would feign have made it his dwelling place: and being loath to
depart, Christ must make three Tabernacles, Mat. 17. 4. The love of this world
so makes us forget the world to come, that like the Israelites we desire rather
to live in the troubles of Egypt, then in the land of promise. Whereas S. Paul
having spoken of his bends in Christ, and of the spiritual combat,
concludes, I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is best of
all, Phil. 1. 22, 23. Yea, it transported him to heaven before he came
thither: as Mary was not where she was, but where her desire was, and that was
with Christ. Prosperity makes us drunk with the love of the world, like the
Gadereans, who preferred their swine before their souls: or him in the
parable, that would go to see his farm, and lose heaven: or the Rich glutton,
who never thought of heaven, till he was in hell: and thousands more, who if
they have but something to leave behind them, it is no matter whether they have
any thing to carry with them.

But as sleep composeth drunkenness, so the cross will bring a man to himself
again: for when the staff we so nourish to bare us, becom^ a cudgel to beat
us: when we find the world to serve us, as the Jews did Christ, carry us up
to the top of the hill, and then strive to throw us down headlong: Luke 4. 29.
When the mind is so invested with cares, molested with grief, vexed with
pain, that which way soever we cast our eyes, we find cause of complaint:
we more loath the world then ever we loved it, as Amnon did his sister Tamor:
yea, when life which is held a friend, becomes an enemy, then death which is an
enemy becomes a friend, and is so accounted: as who having cast Ankor in a safe
Road, would again wish himself in the storms of a troublesome Sea?

Yea, in case we have made some progress in Religion, and found a good
conscience sprinkled with the blood of Christ, (the marrow of all comforts,)
and resolved with Joseph to forsake our Coat rather than our Faith: yet if the
world but make new offers of preferment, or some large improvement of profits
and pleasures; we begin to drawback, or at least we know not whether to choose:
like a horse that would, and yet would not leap a ditch. And after a little
conflict, having half yielded to forsake that with joy, which cannot be kept
but with danger; we resolve thus: The same God which has made my crosses
cheerful, can as well make my prosperity conscionable. Why then should I
refuse so fair an offer: but alas, having made our obayce, it is not long ere
these pleasures and honors, these ^icbes and abundance, prove as thorns, to
choke the good seed of Gods word formerly sow^e in our hearts: as it is Math.
13. 22. For prosperity to Religion, is as the Ivy to the Oak, it quickly eats
out the heart of it: yea, as the Misselto and Ivy (sucking by their straight
embraces, the very sap, that only gives vigetation from the roots of the
Oak and Hawthorne,) will stourish when the Trees wither: so in this case, the
corr^ption of the good is always the generation of the evil: and so on the
contrary, crosses in the estate, diseases of the body, malladies of the mind,
are the medsons of the soul: the impayring of the one, is the repayring of the
other.

When no man would harbor that unthrift Son in the Gospel, he turned back
again to his Father, but never before. Lais of Corinth while she was young,
doated upon her glass, but when she grew old and withered, she loathed it as
much, which made her give it up to Venus. When Satan is let loose upon us to
show us our sins, and the danger we are in, then farewell profit, farewell
pleasure, treasure, and all, rather than I will endure such a rack, such a
hell in my conscience.

Whereas if we should only hear of misery, or read what is threatened in the
word: though it might a little fright us, it would never mend us. Birds are
frighted at first, with the husbandmans scar-crowes, but after a while,
observing that they stir not, are bold to sit upon them, and defile them.

Thus as harmonious sounds are advanced by a silent darkness, so are the glad
tidings of salvation. The Gospel never sounds so sweet, as in the night of
persecution, or of our private affliction.

When Virtue came down from heaven (as the Poets faigne) rich men spurned at
her, wicked men abhorred her, Courtyors scoft at her, Citizens hated her; and
being thrust out of doors in every place, she came at last to her sisters,
poverty and affliction: and of them found entertainment. When it ceased to be
with Sarah after the manner of the world, she conceived Isaac: so when it
cease to be with us after the manner of the worlds favorites, we conceive
holy desires, quietness, and tranquillity of mind, with such like spiritual
contentments. Yea, we make faith our only option: whereas before we kept open
house for all vices, as the States are said to keep open house for all
Religions: or if not, it fares with piety as with holy water, every one
praises it, and thinks it has some rare virtue in it; but offer to sprinkle
them with the ^^me, they shut their eyes, and turn away their faces: and no
marvel, for we never taste this manna from heaven, until we leave the leaven
of this Egypt.

Now better the body or estate perish, than the soul: though we are too
sensual to consent unto it, Plus pastor, in vulnere gregis, sui vulneratur.
The loss of a graceless child cannot but greive the father, though the
father himself were in danger of mischief by that child: as David mourned
for Absalom that would have cut his throat. True prosperity is hearty meat, but
not digestible by a weak stomach; strong wine, but naught for a weak brain:
The prosperity of fools destroys them, Prove. 1. 32. So that all temporal
blessings, are as they hit: but if the mind do not answer, they were better
mist. The more any man has, the more cause he has to pray, Lord lead us not
into temptation: for we cannot so heartily think of our home above, whiles we
are furnished with these earthly conten^ments below; but when God strips us of
them, straitwayes our mind is homewards. Whiles Naomies husband and sons
were alive, we find no motion of her retiring home to Judah; let her earthly
stays be removed, she thinks presently of removing to her Courstry: a
delicious life, when every thing about us is resplendent and contentfull, makes
us that we have no mind to go to Heaven; wherefore as a loving mother, when
she would weane her child from the dug, makes it bitter with Wormwood or
Aloes; so deals the Lord with us, he makes this life bitter unto us by
suffering our enemies to persecute and oppress us; to the end we may contemn
the world, and transport our hopes from Earth to Heaven; he makes us weep in
this Vale of misery, that we may the more eagerly long for that place of
felicity, where all tears shall be wiped from our eyes. Our wine (says
Gregory) has some Gall put into it, that we should not be so delighted with
the way, as to forget whither we are going. And this is no small abatement to
the bitterness of adversities, that they teach us the way to Heaven: for the
less comfort we find on earth, the more we seek above, and the more we
esteem the best things: and we are very ungrateful if we do not thank him
for that which so overcomes us, that it overcomes the love of the world in us.

Experience shows, that in Countries where be the greatest plenty of fruits,
they have the shortest lives, they do so surfeit on their abundance. Sicily is
so full of sweet flowers, if we believe Diodorus Siculus, that dogs cannot hunt
there; and it is questionable whether the enjoying of outward things, or the
contemning of them be the greatest happiness: for to be deprived of them is
but to be deprived of a Dye, wherewith a man might either win or lose; yea,
does not a large portion of them many times prove to the Owner like a
treacherout Dye indeed, which flatters an improvident Gantester with his ow^e
hand to thr^w away his wealth to another? Or to yield it the uttermost, gold
may make a man the richer, not the better; honor may make him the higher, not
the happier: and all temporal delights are but as flowers, they only have
their month and are gone; this morning in the bosom, the next in the Besome.

The consideration whereof, made the very Heathen Philosophers hate this world,
though they saw not where to find a better. Yea, it made Themistocles so
undervalue transitory things in comparison of virtue, that seeing rich
Brac^lots of previous stones, lie in his path, he ^ad his friend take them up,
saying, Thou art not Themistocles. And indeed in ^s Heaven only that has a
foundation, Earth has none, God has hanged it upon nothing: and the things
therein are very nothing.

Nothing feeds pride nor keeps off repentance so much as, prosperous
advantage. It Is a wonder to see a Favorite study for ought but additions to his
Greatness; God shall have much ado to make him know himself. The cloth that
has many stains must pass through many ^arders: no less than an odious
leaprosie will humble Naaman; wherefore by it the only wise God thought meet
to sawc^ the valor, dignity, renown, victories, of that famous General of
the Syrians. If I could be so uncharitable as to wish an enemies soul lost,
this were the only way, let him live in the height of the worlds
blandishments; for how can he love a second Mistress that never saw but one
beauty, and still continues deeply inamoured on it? Why is the Lapwing made an
Hieroglyphicke of infelicity? but because it has a little Corronet upon the
head, and yet feeds upon the worst of excrements. The Peacock has more painted
Plumes, yet is the Eagle accounted the Queen of Birds, because she flies
nearest he^ven. We often see, nothing carries us so far from God, as those
favors he has imported to us. It Is the misery of the poor to be neglected of
men; it is the misery of the rich to neglect their God: The B^dger being wounded
with the prickles of the Hedghog his invited guest, whom at first he welcomed
and entertained in his Cabbi^ as an inward friend, mannerly desiring him to
depart in kindness, as he came; could receive no other answer then that he
for his own part found himself very well at ease, and they that were not, had
reason to seek out another seat that might like them better. It is but a
fable, yet the morrall is true, perspicuous, profitable. Many shall one day
repent that they were happy too soon. Many a man cries out, O that I were so
rich, so healthful, so quiet, so happy, etc. Alas, though thou had thy wish
for the present, thou should (perhaps) be a loser in the sequoll. The
Physician does not hear his Patient in what he would, yet hears him in
taking occasion to do another thing more conducible to his health. God loves
to give us cooles and heats in our desires, and will so allay our joys, that
their fruition hurt us not: he knows that as it is with the body touching
meats, the greater plenty, the less dainty; and too long forbearance causes a
Surfeit, when we come to full food: So it fares with the mind touching worldly
contentments; therefore he feeds us not with the dish, but with the spoone,
and will have us neither cloyed nor famished. In this life, Mercy and misery,
grief and Grace, Good and bad, are blended one with the other; because if we
should have nothing but comfort, Earth would be thought Heaven: besides, if
Christ-tide lasted all the year, what would become of Lent? If every day were
Good Friday, the world would be weary of F^sting. Secundus calls death a sleep
eternal; the wicked man's fear, the godly man's wish. Where the conscience is
clear, death is looked for without fear; yea, desired with delight, accepted
with devotion: why, it is but the cessation of trouble, the extinction of
sin, the deliverance from enemies, a rescue from Satan, the quiet rest of the
body, and infranchizement of the soul. The woman great with child, is ever
musing upon the time of her delivery: and has not he the like cause, when
Death is his Bridge from woe to glory? Though it be the wicked man's shipwreck,
it is the good man's putting into harbor: And hereupon finding himself hated,
persecuted, afflicted, and tormented, by enemies of all sorts, he can as
willingly leave the world, as others can forgo the Court: yea, as willingly
dye as dine; yea, no woman with child did ever more exactly count her time. No
Jew did evermore earnestly wish for the Jubily, No servant so desires the end
of his years, No stranger so longs to be at home: as he expects the promise of
Christ's coming. It is the strength of his hope, the sweet object of his faith,
in the midst of all sorrows the comfort of his heart; the heart of all his
comforts, the encouragement of his wearied spirits, the common clasule, the
continual period and shutting up of his prayers, come Lord Jesus, come quickly.

Whereas the worlds favorites go as unwillingly from hence, as boys from the
midst of a game. Neither has the rich man so much advantage of the poor in
enjoying, as the poor has of the rich, in leaving. True, rich men may also
learn this slight: for the way to grieve less, is to love less. And indeed,
what should thou do in case thou see that the world runs not on thy side,
but give over the world, and be on Gods side? Let us care little for the world,
that cares so little for us; let us cross sail, and turn another way; let us
go forth therefore out of the Camp, bearing his reproach; for we have no
continuing City, but we seek one to come, Heb. 13. 13, 14.

CHAP. VIII.
That it keeps them always prepared to the spiritual combat.

5. FIfthly, the Lord permits them often to afflict and assail us, to the
end we may be always prepared for tribulation (...) as wise Mariners in a
calm, make all their tacklings sure and strong, that they may be provided
against the next storm, which they cannot look to be long without. Or as
experienced Soldiers in time of peace, prepare against the day of battle; and
so much the rather, when they look every day for the approach of the enemy.
They (says Socrates) that set sail into a calm Sea in a fair quiet weather,
have notwithstanding all instruments and materials ready, which may be of use
in a tempest: so he that enjoyes a prosperous and happy estate, if wise, does
even in that time prepare for the harder and more cross occurrents: and so
much the rather, because a great calm presageth a sudden storm. The people of
L^yish being rich and wanting nothing, grew careless and secure; and being
secure, and mistrusting nothing, they were smoate with the edge of the sword,
and had their City burnt, Judge. 18. The way to be safe is never to be secure.
The walls of a City that are not repaired in peace, will hardly be mended in
a siege. Alexander having set his Army in battle array, and finding a Soldier
then mending his Arms, casheered him; saying, that was a time of dealing
blows, not of preparing weapons.

We are often times se^ upon, to the end that we may continually buckle unto us
the whole Armor of God, prescribed by Paul, Ephesians. 6. 13. to 19. That we may
be always ready for the battle by walking circumspectly, not as fools, but
as wise. Ephesians. 5. 15. Therefore redeeming the time, because the days are
evil. Verse. 16. For as those that have no enemies to encounter them, cast
their Armor aside and let it rust, because they are secure from danger; but
when their enemies are at hand, and sound the Alarm, they both wake and sleep
in their armor, because they would be ready for the assault. So if we were not
often in skirmish with our enemies, we should lay aside our spiritual armor;
but when we have continual use of it, we still keep it fast buckled unto
us; that being armed at all points, we may be able to make resistance, that
we be not surprised at unawares.

Neither would it be good for us at present, if we had not these enemies to
stand in awe and fear of; but much more inconvenient in diverse resp^cts: as
wise Scipi^ (that mirror of wisdom) told some, who with no small joy
avouched that the commonwealth of Rome was now in safe estate, seeing they had
vanquished the Carthaginians, and conquered the inhabitants of Pontus. Neither
would he for that only reason have Carthage destroyed, because it should hinder
Rome from sleeping. Yea, God himself would have the Hittites, Gargesites,
Amorites, Canaanites, Peresites, Hivites, and Jebusites, (strong and warlike
Nations,) to be in the midst of Israel, least Israel should sleep in sin,
and want matter for exercise, fight, and conquest. Here may be felicity with
security; never with safety. The time when the envious man did sow his seed,
was whilst men were in bed. No servants more orderly use their M^sters tallent,
than those that ever fear their Masters sudden return. No Householder more
safe, then he who at every watch suspects the Thieves entering. Sampson could
not be bound, till he was first got asleep: Would thou not be overcome, be
not seoure. Fly from the works of darkness at a great distance, and consider
as well the bitterness of what will follow, as the sweetness of a momentany
pleasure: not unlike a great personage of this Land, who said to his Lady
(offering him a bribe in behalf of a suppliant) gentle Eve I will none of your
Apple: Yea, in vigilance and watchfulnes, imitate the Nightingale, which
sleeps with her breast upon a thorn for fear of the Serpent, which
continually studies her ruin. We would not willingly a Tempest should take us
without our Cloakes. Seneca reports of Caesar, that he did quickly sheath the
sword, but he never laid it off, The sight of a weapon discourageth a Thief.
While we keep our Javelins in our hands, we escape many assaults. So that a
Christians resolution should be like King Alfreds,

Si modo victor er as, ad crastina bell^ pavebas,
Si modo victus er as, ad ^rastina bella parabas.
If we conquer to day, let us fear the skirmish to morrow.
If we be overcome to day, let us hope to get the victory to morrow.
An assaulted City must keep a careful watch, or it will not long hold out*
yea, the provident Fenman mends his bank^s in Summer, least his ground be
drowned in Winter. And we must so take our leaves of all afflictions, that we
reserve a lodging for them, and expect their return. And so much the rather,
because what has been long expected falls the easier: and evils
precogitated, strike but weakly.

CHAP. IX.
How it discovers whether we be true believers or Hypocrites.

6. SIxthly, that we may experimentally know our selves, and be known of
others whet^er we be true believers or Hypocrites.

First our selves, diverse play Alexander on the stage, but few or none in the
field. Many can suffer Martyrdom in speculation, who being put to it cannot
concoct a foul word. We are all valiant soldiers, till we come to ^ight:
excellent Philosophers, till we come to dispute: Good Christians, till we come
to master our own ^usts: but it is opposition that gives the trial, when
Corruptions fight against the graces, and cause Argente to seem more bright in
a sable field. Many while wealth lasts are very honest men and square dealers,
at least seem so; yea, they will maintain that all hardness is to be endured
rather than Conscience violated, or God offended: but ^all they into poverty,
and then that they may maintain themselves, they will lie, deceive, steal,
prostetute their Chastity, sell their consciences, and what not. Even Hazael
before he met with an opportunity, could say, What? is thy servant a dog?
and Balaam could brag, Though thou would give me thine house full of gold I
would not, etc. Yet when it came to the trial he did as bad, for little or
nothing: but a man is in deed what he is in trial. If with the Pomecitron,
Limon, and Oreng-tree, we are always green and always fruitful, Summer and
Winter: if our souls shall like of Christ for a suitor when we find no other
Jointure but the Cross; we are sure we are Christians.

2. That others may know us. A soldier is best known in the front of a
Battle, a Pilate in a storm, a nimble active man in a Race, and a Champion in
the lists; How well the strings of an instrument are tuned and set, is best
known when they are touched by the hand of a skillful musition. There must be
differences among you (says Saint P^ul) that the approved may be known, 1
Cor. 11. 19. For as Thrashing separates the straw, and Wynowing the chafe from
the Corn; So persecution seperates the hypocrite from the company of
believers, Luke 22. 31. When a s^rvingman follows two men w^lling together,
we cannot tell which is his m^ste^ till they part: so when the Gospel and
outward prosperity go together, it is hard to judge which is most respected.
Our Churches are full (blessed be God) but come we not to please others as the
Poet made his Plays, or as Simon Magus was christened for company; or is it not
more for fear of the Law, than for love of the Gospel? It is a great
question, until persecution arising because of the Word, puts it out of
question; but then is that of Claudius Taurinensis more then verified, they
worship the dead Saints in a cold profession, while they w^orry the living in a
cruel persecution: so that if the Bramble had been the King of Trees, the
Vine could not have met with worse usage.

We all call our selves Christians: why? it is an honorable thing to be so
accounted: but who are such, is known only where the power of godliness is
in contempt. Where (as S. Austen speaks) a Christian in name will scoff at a
Christian indeed: for Christ, (says Nazianzen) is stoned by many that are
called Christians, th^ugh no otherwise then the Heathen Images are called Gods,
as Justine Martyr notes, or as another has it, many superstitiously adore the
Crucifix that are enemies to the Cross of Christ.

That Child (says old Simem, meaning Christ) is appointed for a sign to be
spoken against, that the thoughts of many hearts may be opened, Luke 2. 34,
35. O how wicked men manifest their hatred and enmity against God and his
people so soon as Persecution arises, because of the Word! Yea, it would put
a wise man into an ecstasy to think how profane men in such times will rail
upon those, whom one day they will wish they had imitated; as Justine Martyr
speaks.

But its well enough, for by this means both the malice of Satan and the
world are better known and avoided. Demetrius the Silversmith resisted Paul,
perhaps not so much for great Diana's sake, as the little Silver shrines by
which his gain came in. The carnal Cape^n^ytes followed Christ while he fed
them, Joh. 6. 26. Judas can be content to bear the cross, so he may bear the
bag: but Job will trust in God though he kill him. Job 13. 15. and David in
deepest distress, or desertion will hang on still, Psalm. 43. last. Now who
will not say give me the Bird that will s^ng in winter, and seek to my window
in the hardest frost.

There is no trial of friendship but in adversity: he that is not ashamed of
my bonds, not d^unted with my checks, not alienated with my disgrace, is a
friend for me: one dram of that man's love, is worth a world of inconstant
formallity. But that friend is false he^rted, who observes me only for his
own ends; like those the Philosopher speaks of, who were not his friends, but
friends to his wealth: or like him in Clements, not his, but ^is riches
kinsman. For these Waspes that make such Music about the Gally pot, show it
was but the boney* h^y came for. And even the most hoggish Gadereans, will
worship Christ during the spring-tides of Gods favors, not when they enjoy the
light of his countenance, but when his steps drop fatness, and their Corn and
Wine increases.

But alas, they are but bad works that need rewards to crane them up withal;
for neither pain nor loss, much less the censure of lewd persons, will
trouble a well planted mind.

An Hypocrite like a fresh water soldier, may be Seasicke in a calm, but the
sincere Christians stomach indures all weathers: great changes never change
him: Neither the Kings favors, or honors, nor the Lions den, could make
Daniell lose one dram of his integrity. Neither the preposterous affection of
the Lycaonians, when they would deifie Paul and Barnabas, nor their devilish
rage, when they go about to stone them, could procure either to yield one
hairs breadth; and so of all the Martyrs that noble Army, whom neither the
threatenings of fire, nor the fair and large promises of their cunning and
cruel adversaries could cause them to shrink from Christ.

Affliction tries whether a man has grace in his heart or no; Set an empty
Pitcher (the resemblance of a wicked man) to the fire, it crackes presently;
whereas the fall (which resembles the Child of God) will abide boiling; Gold
imbroydered upon Silk, if cast into the fire, loses his fashion, but not his
weight; Copper loses his fashion and weight also: Persecution is the sword
whereby our Solomon will try which is the true natural Mother, which the
pretended. Afflictions are the waters where our Gideon will try whether we are
fit Soldiers to fight the Battle of Faith. A faithful Wise (said Bradford)
is never tried so to be, until she be assaulted: nor a faithful Christian so
approved, till pro^ed by affliction. Peace and prosperity hides many a false
heart, as the snow drift covers an heap of dung: but when affliction like
Simmians ^^ror^, pierces through the soul, then the thoughts of many hearts
are discovered: then it appears plainly, that the love of Gods children was
not meritricious, nor their obedience mercenary.

Many a man will do f^r another, that will not suffer for him: slight siusse
will shrink when it comes to wetting: counterfeit c^yne will prove d^osse when
it shall be rubbed on the test, or cast into the c^usible. Behold (says the
Angel to the Church of Smyrna) it shall come to pass that the Devil shall
cast some of you into Prison, that you may be tried, Revel. 2. 10. Strong
drink tr^^th the brain, and hard meat the stomach. Gold and Silver are tried
in the fire, men in the f^rn^ce of adversity; As the f^rn^ce proves the
Potters Vessel, so do temptations try men's thoughts; Eccles. 27. 5.

None but a regenerate heart can choose rather to suffer affliction with the
people of God, then to enjoy the pleasures of sin. An easy imp^rtunity will
persuade Orpah to return from a Mother in law to a Mother in nature; from a
roylesome journey, to rest; from strangers, to her kindred; from a hopeless
condition, to likelyhoods of contentment: A little entreaty will serve to move
nature to be good to it self; but to persist in actions of goodness, though
tyranny, torment, death and hell stood in our way; this is that conquest which
shall be crowned with glory. Nature is like Glass, bright, but brittle; The
resolved Christian like Gold, which if we rub it, or beat it, or melt it, it
will endure the test, the touch, the hammer, and still shine more orient; For
Virtues like the Stars, shine brightest in the night, and fairest in the frost
of Affliction.

But this is not all: for affliction will try and make known the truth and
measure of each grace in particular. A temptation is like a question that
examines what is in a man: As Balaam was tried and examined whether he feared
God, or loved (...) world most? when Balack told him, am not I able indeed to
promote thee to honor? And Joseph no less, when in the arms of his tempting
Mistress: but the one basely yields, and is casheered for an hypocrite, the
other comes off with an holy scorn, and God seals him ch^ste, with a probatus
est.

2. Again secondly, Affliction is a not^ble means, to try whether we have
faith or not; The house built upon the sand, carries as good a show as the
house built on the Rock; and in a clear sunshine day glisters as gallantly:
but the winds, and tempests, when they are up, will quickly show the
differen^^. Nothing is more easy then to trust God, when our Barnes and
Coffers are full; And to say, give us our daily bread, when we have it in our
Cubbards: But when we have nothing, when we know not how nor whence to get any
thing, then to depend upon an invisible bounty, this is a true and noble act of
faith.

Thirdly, what our wisdom and humillity is. Plato being demanded how he knew
a wise man, answered; 3. 4.
When being rebuked he would not be angry, and being praised he would not be
proud: Our disposition is never well known, until it be crossed; nor did
Proteus ever change shapes, till he was straigtned and held fast. Magistracy
and misery will soon show what manner of men we be; either will declare us
better or worse then we seemed. Indeed, Prosperity (says one) best discovers
vice, but Adversity does best discover Virtue: but he that is not good in both
estates, would not be excellent in either; he who cannot bear honor with
moderation, cannot bear contempt with patience: whereas a true Moses can be a
moderate favorite at Court, and a well ^mtented sheepherd in the field can
turn and apply himself to any condition, and therewith be content, as S. Paul
was; Phil. 4. 11.

5. Fifthly, what patience we have; The Sea when it is calm weather, is as
still and quiet, as any river: but let the winds once arise, and you shall
soon see a di^ference; then appears nothing but raging, and foaming out mire,
and dirt. And that we are indeed, which we are in temptation: for can we not
abide a drawing plastor to draine away corrupt blood, and humors; much l^sse
can we find case in cutting ^ff joints and members, and pulling out eyes,
which Repentance must do.

6. Sixthly, a man is made known whether he be feeble or strong by the
provocation of an enemy: even calm tempers when they have been stirred, have
bewrayed impetuousnesse of passion. And indeed how shall a man show his
strength, unless some burden be laid upon his back. Now he tha^ overcommeth
his own anger (says Chilo) overcommeth a strong enemy, but he that is
overcome by it, is a whiteliver (says Hermes) for wrath proceeds from
feebleness of courage, and lack of discretion; As may appear in that, Women
are sooner angry then men, the sick sooner then the healthy, and Old men
sooner then Young. Again, its nothing to endure a small trial or affliction,
every Cock-boat can swim in a River, every Sculler sail in a Calm, every man
can hold up his head in ordinary Gusts; but when a black storm arises, a
tenth wave flows, deep calls unto deep; Nature yields, Spirit faints, Heart
fayles; Whereas grace is never quite out of heart, yea, is confident when hopes
are adjourned, and expectation is delayed.

7. Again seaventhly, how excellently was Jobs sincerity made known by Satan's
malice, when he brought sorth those Angelical words; What? shall we receive
good at the hand of God, and not receive evil? Jo^ 2. 10. When he stood like a
Center unmoved, while the circumference of his estate was drawn above,
beneath, about him, when in prosperity he could say, if my mouth has kissed my
hand; and in adversity, the Lord gives, and the Lord takes, blessed be the
name of the Lord. He was not so like the wicked as they are like dogs that
follow the meat, not the man.

8. Again eighthly, God suffers us to suffer much, more especially to try our
perseverance, which is a grace so good and acceptable, that without it there is
nothing good, nor acceptable; The Spaniell which sawneth when he is beaten,
will never forsake his Master; and Trees well rooted will bear all storms;
The three Children walked up and down in the fiery flames praising God; And a
Blade well tried deserves a treble price. How did the Church of Pergamus
approve her self; Yea, how was she approved of God which has the sword with
two edges; when she held out in her works even where Satan dwelt and kept his
Throne; I know thy works (says God) and that thou keep my Name, and have
not denied my faith, even in those days when Antipas my faithful Martyr was
slain among you, where Satan dwells; yea, where his Throne is, and where
some maintain the Doctrine of Balaam, and the Nicholaitans, and teach that men
ought to eat things sacrificed to Idols, and to commit fornication, etc.
Revel. 2. 13, 14.

But how can I lay down my life for Christ? when I cannot for his sake,
quietly digest a few reproachful speeches? he will scarce bare blows for
him; that will not quietly put up, and digest ill words.

Finally: Affliction, and Persecution, is both a whetstone, and a touchstone
to each particular grace: It humbles the spirits of the repentant, tries the
faith and patience of the sincere Christian, but hardneth the hearts of the
ungodly; for wicked men grow worse after afflictions, as water grows more cold
after an heat; yea like some Beasts, they grow mad with baiting; if crosses or
losses rush in upon them, they fall to the language of Jobs wife, Curse God and
dye, or to that of the King of Isreal's Messenger, Why should I serve God any
longer? 2 King. 6. 33.

CHAP. X.
That it prevents greater evils of Sin and Punishment to come.

7. SEventhly, the Lord by this evil of Chastisement for sins past,
preventeth the evils of sin, and greater punishments for the time to come. The
Lord (says Elihu) corrects man that he might turn away from his enterprise,
and that he might keep back his soul from the Pit, and that his life should
not perish by the sword, Job 33. 17, 18. This salt does not only preserve from
Corruption, but also eat out Corruption. We are chastened of the Lord (says
the Holy Ghost) that we might not be condemned with the world, (...) Cor. 11.
32. If we be not chastned here, we shall be condemned hereafter: Erring souls
be corrected that they may be converted, not confounded. If Paul had not been
buffetted by Satan and wicked men, he had been exalted out of measure, 2 Cor.
12. 7. Pride is so dangerous a poison, that of another poison there was
confected a counterpayson to preserve him from it: God would rather suffer this
chosen Vessel to fall into some infirmity, then to be proud of his singular
privileges, Least I should be exalted above measure through the abundance of
Revelations; (there was the poison of Pride insinuating it self) I had a
Thorn in the flesh, the messenger of Satan to bu^^et me; There wa^ the
Counterpoyson or Antidote which did at once make him both sick and whole.

And this is no unusual thing with God: who in mercy does so use the matter,
that he cures one sin by another: how many proud men have been healed, by
the shame of their uncleanness? how many furious men, by a rash bloodshed? and
so in many other cases: one Devil being used for the ejection of another.

Yea, we gain strength by every new fall; for hence issues deeper humility,
stronger hatred of sin, fresh indignation against our selves, more experience
of the deceitfulness of our hearts, renewed resolutions until sin be
brought under, etc. 2 Cor. 7. 11. The Lord sets some messenger of Satan and
our lusts together by the ears, as the Egyptians against the Egyptians: that
while two poisons wrestle, we may live. But my purpose is to speak of
affliction, not sin. Bodily sickness (says S. Gregory) cleanses away sins
committed, and curbeth, and hinders those, that in health might have been
committed. The flesh indeed is nourished by softnes, but the spirit by hardness:
that is fed by delights, and pleasures, this grows by bitterness. And hereupon
when a Religious man (as Rufinus relates) prayed John the Ankorite, to free him
of a certain Ague; he answered him, truly thou desire to have a very
necessary companion cast out of doors: for says he, as clothes are washed
with soap, so is the mind purified by diseases. And the same may be averred of
all kinds of crosses: For is it not commonly seen, that the pleasures of the
body are the poisons of the soul: heap riches and ^onours upon an evil man:
you do but minister wine to him that has a fever, says Aristotle: honey to
one oppressed with choler, and meat to one troubled with morbus cealiacus,
which increases the disease, says Plutarch. For as Noah was drunk with his
own wine, so the cup of prosperity has intoxicated many a soul: and God has
no worse servants in our Land, than they that can live of their Lands, and care
for nothing else.

Commonly, where is no want, is much wantonness. And as we grow rich in
temporals, we grow poor in spirituals. Naball cannot abound, but he must
surfeit; Turtullus cannot be cloquent, but he must turn the edge of his wit
against the Gospel. Many cannot have beauty, but they must love their faces,
more than their souls. We use Gods blessings, as Jehu did Jehorams
messengers: David, Goliahs sword: We turn them against their owner; and giver:
and fight against Heaven with that health, wealth, wit, those friends, means,
mercies that we received thence, abusing peace to security, plenty to ease,
promises to presumption, gifts to pride: for commonly, so much the more pr^^d,
idle, secure, wanton, scornful, impenitent: by how much the more we are
enriched, advanced, and blessed. And it is just with God, to make us know what
we had, by what we want; But I proceed:

The enjoyment of the Worlds peace might add to my content, but it will
endanger my soul; how often does the recovery of the body, state, or mind
occasion a Relaps in the soul? Turn but the Candle, and that which keeps me
in, puts me out; The younger brother shall not have all his portion least he
run Riot; All the life of Solomon was full of prosperity, and therefore we
find, that Salamon did much forget God; but the whole life of David had many
enemies and much adversity, and therefore we see by his penitential Psalms,
and others, that David did much remember God: And indeed, if God did not often
visit us, we should serve him as the Women of Tartary do their husbands: who
marry if they be absent but twenty days. But the fire of correction, eats out
the rust of corruption. And as Vinegar with its sha^pnesse, keeps flowers from
corrupting: so their malice keeps our souls from festering; Bees are drowned
in Honey, but live in Vinegar. Now if sweet meats breed surfets, it is good
sometimes to taste of bitter, it is good somewhat to unloade when the Ship is
in danger by too liberal a ballast. I will tell you a Paradox (I call it so
because few will believe it, but it is true) many are able to say, they have
learned to stand by falling, got strength by weakness. The burnt Child dreads
the fire, and a broken bone well set, is faster ever after; Like Trees, we take
deeper root by shaking; And like Torches we flame the brighter for bruizing and
knocking, God suffered Satan to spoil Job of his substance, rob him of his
Children, punish him in his body; Yet mark but the Sequel well, and you shall
find, that he was crossed with a blessing. As the Physician in making of Triacle
or Meth^id^te for his Patient, uses Serpents, Adders, and such like poison,
that he may drive out one poison with another; Even so our spiritual Physician
is pleased to use the malice of Satan, and wicked men, when he tempereth to
us the Cup of affliction, that hereby he may expel one evil with another;
Yea, two evils with one; namely, the evil of sin, and the evil of
punishment, and that both temporal and eternal.

Perhaps this biting plaster burns thee, but it heals thee. He suffers us
to be afflicted, because he will not suff^s us to be damned; such is the
goodness of our heavenly Father to us, that even his anger proceeds from
mercy; he scourges the flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of Jesus
Christ, 1 Cor. 5. 5 Yea, Joseph was therefore abased in the dungeon, that his
advancement might be the greater. It is true, in our thoughts we often speak
for the flesh, as abraham did for Ismael, O that Ismael might live in thy
sight! No, God takes away Ismael and gives Isaac; he withdrawes the pleasure of
the flesh, gives delight to the soul, crossing us in our wills, that he may
advance our benefit. The Man sick of a burning fever cries to his Physician
for drink; he pities him, but does not satisfy him; he gives him proper
physic, but not drink. A man is sick of a Plurisie, the Physician lets him
blood, he is content with it; the arm shall smart to ease the heart. The
covetous man has a plurisie of riches, God lets him blood by poverty; let him
be patient, it is a course to save his soul.

But we are so sensual, that no reason can prevail: We are sorry to lose the
proper cause of our sorrow; we are like whi^ing Children, that will not stay
until their milk be cold, but must have it, though they be scalded with it.
Yea, it fares with many, as with the mother of Nero: let them be damd, so they
may be dubd. But our heavenly Father will do us good, though we desire the
contrary: Wherefore if he scourge us any way, so we bleed not; or till we
bleed, so we faint not; or till we even faint, so we perish not; let us be
comforted: for if the Lord prune his Vine, he means not to root it up; if he
minister physic to our souls, it is because he would not have us dye in our
sins; all is for salvation. What if N^ah were pent up in the Arc, so long as
he was safe in it: what if it were his prison, so long as it was his Fort also
against the waters?

I might illustrate the point, and make it plain by sundry and diverse
comparisons. We know, one nail drives out another; one heat another; one cold
another: yea, out of admirable experience I can witness it, that for most
constitutions there is not such a remedy for a Cold in the head or extreme
tenderness, as a frequent bathing it (especially the temples) in cold water; I
can justly say, I am twenty years the younger for it. Yea, one sorrow drives
out another; one passion another; one rumor is expelled by another: and though
for the most part, contraries are cured by contraries; yet not seldom will
Physicians stop a Lask with a Purge; they will bleed a Patient in the Arm. to
stop a worse bleeding at Nose. Again, in some Patients they will procure a
gentle Ague, that they may cure him of a more dangerous disease. Even so deals
God with us: he often punishes the worser part of man (says Saint Hierome,)
That is, the body, state, or name, that the better part (to wit) the soul, may
be saved in the day of judgment. Neither are chastisements any whit less
necessary for the soul, than medicines are for the body: many a man had been
undon^ by prosperity, if they had not been undone by adversity; they had
perished in their souls, if they had not perished in their bodies, estates, or
good names. It is probable, Naamans soul had never been cleansed, if his body
had not been leaprous; but his leaprous flesh brought him to a white and
clean spirit; and though affliction be hard of digestion to the natural man;
yet the sheep of Christ know, that to feed upon this salt March is the only
preservative against the Rot: the experienced Christian knows, that it is good
for the soul, that the body is sometime sick; and therefore to have his inward
man cured, he is content his outward man should be diseased; and cares not so
the sins of his soul may be lessened, though the soars of his flesh be
increased. It is better says Saint Hierome, to have a sick stomach, than a
grieved mind. Yea, he desires with Saint Austin, that God will send him any
plague, rather than the plague of the heart.

And why is it not so with thee? I hope thou desire thy souls safety above
all; and thou know, the stomach that is purged must be content to part with
some good nourishment, that it may deliver it self of more evil humors. Of
what kind soever thy sufferings be, it is doubtless the fittest for thy
souls recovery; or else God (the only wise Physician) would not appoint it.
Now who would not be willing to bleed, when by that means an inveterate
sickness may be prevented? Yea, it is a happy blood-letting which saves the
life, which makes Saint Austin say unto God; Let my body be crucified, or
burnt, or do with it what thou will, so thou save my soul. And another, let
me swim a River of boiling brimstone to live eternally ^appy; rather than
dwell in a Paradise of pleasure to be damned after death.

CHAP. XI.
That it makes them humble.

8. Eighthly, that ^e may have an humble conceit of our selves, and wholly
depend upon God. We received the sentence of death in our selves (says the
Apostle) because we should not trust in our selves, but in God, who raises us
up from the dead, 2 Cor. 1. 9. When Babes are afraid, they cast themselves into
the arms and bosom of their mother. A Hen leading her Chickens into the
Sun, they fall a playing with the dust, she may clock them to her long
enough, they will not come: But when they see the Kite, then they come without
calling: And so it fares with Gods Children till affliction come. The Prodigal
never thought of his Father, till he wanted husks; the Peroni^ never made out
to Christ till all her money was gone. The Widow that is left alone trusts in
God, says the Apostle, 1 Timothy 5. 5. who while she had an husband, leaned too
much upon him. The poor man depends not upon the relief of others, until he
^inds nothing at home. Till our means is spent, we are apt to trust in
uncertain riches; but after, in the name of the Lord, Zeph. 3. 12. Asa bore
himself bold upon his forces, as being five hundred and fourscore thousand
strong: till he was overmatcht with an Army of a thousand thousand Ethiopians:
this made him cry, help us O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, 2 Chronicles. 14.

God crosses many times our likelyest projects, and makes the sin^ws of the
Arm of flesh to crack, that being unbottomed of the creature, we may trust in
the living God: who gives us richly all things to enjoy, 1 Timothy 6. 17.

The people of Layish, because they wanted nothing, would have business with
no man, Judge. 18. 7. Where is no want, is much wantonness: and to be rich in
temporals, hastens poverty in spirituals. The Moon is never eclipsed, but in
the full: but the fuller she is, still the more remote from the Sun. I
thought in my prosperity (says David) I shall never be moved, But thou did
hide thy face and I was troubled, Then turned I unto thee, etc. Psalm. 30. 6, 7,
8. It is high time to humble them, that do not find themselves to stand in
need of God.

When a stubborn Delinquent, being committed, was no whit mollified with his
durance, but grew more perverse than he was before; one of the Senators said to
the rest, Let us forget him a while, and then he will remember himself; Loving
Spaniels, the more they are beaten, the more tractable, and gentle do they
appear, and apply themselves more diligently to their masters call.

The Heart is so hot of it self, that if it had not the Lungs, as Fannes to
blow wind upon it, and kindly moisture to cool it, it would soon perish with
the own heat: and yet when that moisture grows too redundant, it again
drownes the Heart. Who so nourishes his servant daintily from his chil^hood
shall after find him stubborn. In prosperity, we are apt to think our selves
men good enough, we see not our need of God: but let him send the Cross, it
confutes us presently: and shows us our nothingnesse. Even Saint Paul was sick
of this disease, he began to be pu^t up, until the messenger of Satan was
sent to take him down, 2 Cor. 12. 7. And Saint Peter, Mat. 26. 33. Though all
men should forsake thee, yet I will never forsake thee, bravely promised: but
Peter the same night swore I know not the man; cowardly answered. It is one
thing to suffer in speculation, and another in practice.

It is a wonder to see, how the best men may be mistaken in their own powers:
When our Savior propounds to James and John, are ye able to drink of the Cup
that I shall drink of? and to be baptized with the baptism that I shall be
baptized with? out of an eager desire of the honor, they are apt to undertake
the condition: and answer accordingly, we are able, Math. 20. 22. But alas
poor men, no thanks to them that they were able to ruime away (as they did)
when their master was apprehended. For God must give us his daily bread to feed
us, and his daily breath to quicken us, or we quickly perish: yet how common
is it for men to brag and crack of what they can do: yea, one that has but a
wooden head and a leaden heart, how will he help it out with a brazen face,
and a golden hand; for being as great in pride, as he is small in desert: he
will keep ado in an audacious masterlinesse, as if with Simon Magus he would
bare down all with large proffers. But this cannot be so pleasing to nature,
as it is hateful to God. Neither can there be a worse sign, of ensuing evil,
then for a man in a carnal presumption to vaunt of his own abilities? how
justly does God suffer that man to be foiled; purposely that he may be ashamed
of his own vain selfe-confidence.

When a great Prelate durst write, Ego et Rex meus: I and my King: the King
subscribed in act; Ego and servus meus, I and my slave; and quickly took down
the maine Mast of his ambition: so will God do by all proud men, and make them
know, that all their worthiness, is in a capable misery: which he can soon
do, for let him but make our purses light, our hearts will soon grow heavy:
at least, let him with that, deprive us of his other blessings: we become as
dust, coagulated, and kneaded into Earth by tears. And certa^nely, if God own
such a man, he will quicken his sight with this Copris: Yea, he will leave him
to himself, and let hi^ fall into some foul sin, as he did Peter: And Saint
Austin is peremptory that it has been prositable for proud men, to fall into
some gross offense; for they have not lost so much by their fall, a^ they have
got by being down. It is better to be humble under sin, than be proud of
grace. Of the two, to be a Pharisee, is worse then to be a Publican: to be
proud of good endowments, is worse then to have neither pride, nor good
endowments. Yea in this case, the party is not only bettered, but others
learn humility thereby: for who can do other then yearne, and fear, to see
so rich, and goodly a vessel split, as David, or Solomon was.

Again, it makes us pitiful, and compassionate to others: They (says
Sophocles) are usually the most compassionate to others, who have suffered
miseries themselves. And what says that Tyrian Queen? evils have taught me
to bemoane, all that affliction makes to groan.

And lastly, the Devil hereby is cheated, who if he cannot beat us down to
sin, will blow us up with pride: he will undermine us, if he cannot overthrow
us: like a most cunning wrestler, who if he cannot crush a man to the ground
with plain strength, he will lift him up, that he may give him the greater
fall.

And nothing does more advantage Satan then pride: for first, a man shall never
be a proficient, that thinks himself already sufficient. Secondly, when he
can poison our good works with Pharisaisme; he makes us by overvaluing them,
to lose them.

Confidence in God, does only support us: without him we are like Vines
unpropt, which on the Earth do crawle. And suppose a man is exempt from many
vices, yet he is not beholding to himself for it: Lord, says S. Austin, thou
have forgiven me those sins which I have done, and those sins which only
by thy grace I have not done: they were done in our inclination to them, and
even that inclination needs Gods mercy, and that mercy he calls pardon. If we
escape temptation, it is his mercy; if we stand in temptation, it is his
mercy; if our wills consent not, it is his mercy; if we consent, and the act be
hindered, it is his mercy; if we fall and rise again by repentance, all is his
mercy. Neither are we sufficient of our selves to think, much less to speak,
least of all to do that which is good: 2 Cor. 3. 5. We have no good, we do
no good, but we may; we must thank grace for it: which is all in all. Ye
can bear no fruit (says our Savior) except ye abide in me: John 15. 4. Yea
more expressly, without me can ye do nothing. Verse 5.

So that we cannot put too much trust in him, not too little in our selves. O
God, let me ever be humbly dejected in the sense of mine own insufficiency:
let me give all the glory to thee, and take nothing to my self, but my
infirmities; least it fare with me, as it did with that Armenian Tigranes by
name: who being encamped upon a hill, with four hundred thousand men, and
discovering the A^my of the Romans, being not above fourteen thousand ma^ching
toward him: made himself merry with it, saying, yonder men are too many for
an Embassage, and too few for a Fight: when before the Sunset, he ^o^nd them
enough to give him the chase, with infinit^-slaughter. And Pride seldom speeds
better, especially if Hezekiahs heart be lift up, God will pull him down
again.

By this time we see, that there is danger in being without dangers: that
self confidence is pride without wit: that the best minds troubled, yield
inconsiderate motions: that as water violently stirred sends up bubbles, so the
vanities of our hearts, and our most secret and hidden corruptions (as dregs in
a glass) show themselves when shaken by an injury, though they lay ^id before.
And so the pride of man is beaten down, as Job speaks, Job 33. 17. The sharp
water of affliction quickens our spiritual sight. So proud are we by nature,
that before we come to the trial, we think that we can repel the strongest
assault, and overcome all enemies by our own power; but when we feel our
selves vanquished and foiled by every small temptation, we learn to have a
more humble conceit of our own ability, and to depend wholly on the Lord: as
is set down, Deuteronomy. 8. 2. and 13. 3. to the end. We esteem our Inches, Else,
till by trial of evils we find the contrary; but then alas, how full of
feebleness is our body, and our mind of impatience? If but a Beesting our
slesh, it swells; and if but a tooth ache, the Head and Heart complain. How
small trifles make us weary of our selves? What can we do without thee?
Without thee, what can we suffer? If thou be not (O Lord) strong in our
weakness, we cannot be so much as weak; we cannot so much as be. Yea
selfeconceit, and desire of glory, is the last garment that even good men lay
aside: Pride is the inmost coat which we put on first, and which we put off
last; but sore affliction will make us give all to Him, of whom whatsoever we
have, we hold. And we cannot ascribe too little to our selves, nor too much to
Him, to whom we owe more than we can ascribe.

Are we then molested with this guest, and would we be rid of him, return we
when we smart, to him that smites us, and not think to gain by standing out:
The Bird in the gin, the Fish upon the book, the faster she strives, the
firmer she sticks. The Child under his Fathers rod, the more he strugles,
the more stripes he gots.

God will not give his over, till he has broken their ston^acks, and made them
kiss that Rod which the wicked bite: so adding impatience to their
impen^tence, and passive disobedience to their active. And when he has brought
us to this, the greater submission, the more grace: if there be one hollow in
the valley lower than another, thither the waters gather. And the more lowly we
are in our own eyes, the more lovely we are in Gods: the more despicable in
our selves, the more acceptable in him. O that we could be but as lowly as we
are unworthy. If then I be not humbled enough, let me want the peace or pl^nty
I have; and so order my condition and estate, that I may want any thing, save
my self.

CHAP. XII.
How it makes them conformable unto Christ their Head.

9. NInthly, that we may be conformable to Christ our Head; and like our
elder Brother, who was consecrated through afflictions, reviled, buffeted, spit
upon, crucified, and what not? for the Scribes were against him, the Pharisees
against him, the Rulers banded themselves against him, the Atheists against
him, Herod and all the spiteful and envious Jews against him: whose birth was
mean, whose life was contemptible, and whose death was ignominious. Yea, his
Palace was a Stable; his Courtyers, Beasts; his Chair of state, a Manger; his
Royal roabes, a few rags: No Bells ring, no Bonefires proclaim his birth
through the populous streets; no great Ladies came to visit his Mother. And
answerable to his ingresse into the world was his progress in it; and his
egresse out of it. And we must suffer with him, that we may be also glorified
with him, Romans 8. 17. When the Jews offered Jesus, Gall and Vinegar, he tasted
it, but would not drink; he left the rest for his Church, and they must pledge
him. Whosoever (says our Savior) bears not his cross and comes after me,
cannot be my Disciple, Luke 14. 27. For hereunto are ye called, says S. Peter,
For Christ also suffered for us, leaving us an example, that we should follow
his steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21. Again, The Disciple (says Christ) is not above his
Master; but whosoever will be a perfect Disciple shall be as his Master, Luke
6. 40. Yea, S. Paul made this the most certain testimony and seal of his
Adoption here, and glory afterward; his words are these, having delivered, that
the Spirit of God bears witness with our spirit, that we are the children of
God: and having added, If we be children, we are also heirs, even the heirs
of God, and heirs annexed with Christ: if so be that we suffer with him, that
we may also be glorified with him; making suffering as a principal condition
annexed; which is as if he had said, it is impossible we should be glorified
with him, except we first suffer with him, Romans 8. 16, 17. Whereupon having in
another place reckoned up all privileges which might minister unto him
occasion of boasting; he concludes, that what things were gain unto him,
those he accounted loss for Christ, that he might know the fellowship of his
sufferings, and be made conformable to his death, Phil. 3. 10.

So that as he bear his cross, before he ware his crown, and began to us in
the cup of his fathers displeasure: so we must pledge him our part, and fill up
that which is behind of his sufferings, Colos. 1. 24.

Whence the Church (which is mystical Christ, 1 Cor. 12. 12.) is called Gods
threshing flower, Isay 21. 10. A Brand taken out of the fire, Zach. 3. 2.
compared to Noah's Arc, which was tossed too and fro upon the waves: to Moses
Bush burning with fire, Exodus 3. 2. to the stones of the Temple, which were
first hewne in the mountain, before s^t in the building. And set forth by that
white horse in the Revelation, that is ever followed and chased by the Red:
Apocalypse 6. 2. 4. by the sacrifices of the Law, which were to pass the fire
ere accepted, Romans 12. 1.

So that there is no heaven to be had without touching upon hell coasts: as the
Calendar tells us, we come not to Ascension day, till the Passion week be
past. Suffering is the way to reigning: through many tribulations must we
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, Acts 14. 22.

And indeed, who would not be ambitious of the same entertainment, which
Christ himself had: Godfrey of Boloigne refused to be crowned in Jerusalem
with 2 Crown of Gold, because Christ his master had in that place been
crowned with a crown of Thorns. It was told a poor Martyr in Queen Maryes
days for a great favor forsooth; that he should put his le^ge in the same
hole of the Stocks that John Philpot had done before. And yet thy sufferings,
as they are nothing to what thy sins have deserved, so they are nothing to
what thy Savior has suffered: for he endured many a little death all his life
long, for thy sake; and at length, that painful and cursed death of the
cross. To say nothing of the soul of his sufferings, which his soul then
suffered, when he sweat clots of blood in the Garden.

Now why must we pledge our Savior, and fill up the measure of his sufferings:
not that Christ's sufferings are incomplete, nor to satisfy Gods justice for
sin, for that's done already, once for all; by him who bare our sins in his
body on the Tree^ the just suffering for the unjust, and indenting for our
freedom; as the articles of agreement fitly, and fairly drawn out, by
himself declare, John 3. 15. 16. and 18. 8. And Gods acquittance, which we
have to show under his own ^and, Math. 3. 17.

Neither does God afflict his Church for any delight he takes in their trouble:
for he afflicts not willingly, Lament. 3. 33. Jer. 31. 20. Isay 63. 9. Nor yet
to show his sovereignty, Isay 45. 9. Romans 9. 20. 10 24.

Nor lastly, is it merely for his own glory, without any other respect: but
out of pure necessity, and abundant love to us; as the reasons both before and
after show.

Again, by suffering we become followers of our brethren, who went before us.
Brethren (says S. Paul) ye are become followers of the Churches of God, which
in Jude^ are in Christ Jesus, because ye have also suffered the same things of
your own Countrymen, even as they have of the Jews, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14. It was
the lot of Christ, and must be of all his followers to do good, and to suffer
evil. Wherefore let us be exhorted in the words of S. Peter, to rejoice in
suffering, forasmuch as we with all the Saints, are partakers of Christ's
sufferings, that when his glory shall appear, we may be glad and rejoice, 1
Pet. 4. 13.

And what greater promotion can flesh and blood be capable of, then a
conformity to the Lord of glory. Christ wore a Crown of Thorns for me, and
shall I grudge to ware this Paper cap for him, said John Husse, when they put a
cap upon him, that had ugly devils palnted on it, with the title of heresy.
And what said a French Martyr when a Rope was put about his fellow, give me
that Gold chain, and dub me a Knight of that noble order.

CHAP. XIII.
That it increases their faith.

10. TEnthly, because the malice of our enemies serves to increase our faith
for the time to come, when we consider how the Lord has delivered us formerly.
God has delivered me (says Paul) out of the mouth of the Lion, (meaning Nero)
and he will deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his
heavenly Kingdom, 2 Timothy 4. 17, 18. When Saul tells David, Thou art not able to
go against this great Philistine to fight with him, for thou art a Boy, and he
is a man of war from his youth: what says David? Thy servant kept his Fathers
Sheep, and there came a Lion, and likewise a Bear, and took a Sheep out of
the flock, and I went out after him and smote him, and took it out of his
mouth, and when he rose against me, I caught him by the beard, and smote him,
and slew him; so thy servant slew both the Lion and the Bear. Therefore (mark
the inference) this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them; Yea,
(says he) the Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the Lion, and out of
the paw of the Bear, he will deliver me out of the hands of this Philistine, 1 Samuel 17. 33. to 37. Observe how confidently he speaks.

That tree is deepest rooted in the Earth, which is most shaken by the winds:
and they weak usually, that are planted in pleasant valleys: so the Tree of
faith, the more it is shaken with the violent storms of trouble, the faster it
becomes rooted by pati(...). Alexander being trained up in huge and mighty
enterprises, when he was to fight with men, and beasts, haughty enemies, and
huge Elephants; said, Lo a danger somewhat equivalent to my mind. He can
never be a good soldier, that has not felt the toil of a battle; Ease and
plenty made Hanniball say, he brought men into Campani^; but carried women out
again. Yea, the more deliverances David had, the greater was his faith: for
after the Lord had delivered him often out of extreme exigents; namely, from
this great Goliath, the cruelty of Saul, the unnatural insurrection of Absalom,
and the unjust curses of Shemei, he was able to say, I trust in God, neither
will I fear what flesh can do unto me, Psalm. 56. 4. And in Psalm. 3. I will
not be afraid for ten thousand of the people that should beset me round about,
Verse. 6. And in Psalm. 18. 29. By thee I have broken through an host, and in thy
name I will leap over a wall. His experience had made it so easy to him, that
it was no more than a skip or jumpe. We men indeed therefore shut our hands,
because we have opened them, making our former kindnesses arguments of sparing
afterward: But contrarily, God therefore gives, because he has given; making
his f^rmer favors arguments for more. It is David's only argument, Psalm. 4.
Have mercy upon me (says he) and heark^n unto my prayer: Why? Thou have set
me at liberty when I was in distress, Verse. 1. I might likewise here show from
2 Chronicles. 20. 29. Phil. 1. 12, 13, 14. how the delivering of some; increases
the faith of others; but I pass that.

That we may live by faith, and not by sense, he first strips us of all our
earthly confidence, and then gives us victory, and not before; lest he should
be a loser in our gain, his help uses to show it self in extremity: he that
can prevent evils, conceales his aid till dangers be ripe, and then he is as
careful as before he seemed connivent. Daniel is not delivered at the
beginning of his trouble, he must first be in the Lions den, and then he finds
it. Those three Servants, Dan. 3. 26. are not rescued at the Ovens mouth; in
the Furnace they are. That is a gracious and well tried faith, that can hold
out with confidence to the last. Like Abraham who is said to hope, against
hope, Romans 4. 18. which with God is a thing much set by: Yea, such he accounts
his Champions, and Worthies. Whence it is, many are trained up in trouble all
their days, as it fared with David; for as a Bare came to David after a Lion,
and a Giant after a Bare, and a King after a Giant, and Philistines after a
King, and all to make him more hardy and confident in his God; so when they
that are intended for Christ's Champions, have fought with the Devil, and their
own lusts: they shall fight with Envy; when they have fought with Envy, they
shall fight with poverty; when they have fought with poverty, they shall fight
with infamy; when they have fought with infamy, they shall ^ight with
sickness; and after that with death. Like a Labourer that is never out of
work: and this not only proves, but mightily improves their faith: And
indeed, till we have been delivered out of a lesser trouble, we cannot trust
God in a greater. Resembling that peasant, who would trust God upon the Land,
but not upon the Sea; where should be but an inch-^^rd between him and death.

To hear a man in his best health and vigor, to talk of his confidence in
God, and assurance of devine favor, cannot be much worth: but (...) in
extremities, we can believe above hope, against hope; our hope is so much more
noble, as our difficulties are greater. For Jayr^s to believe, that his sick
daughter should recover, was no hard task: but Christ will scrue up his faith
to believe she shall again live, though he see with his eyes she is fully
dead. When we are in heavy Agonies, and feel a very hell in our conscience,
then to apprehend mercy; when with Jonas in the Whales belly we can call upon
God in faith, and see one contrary in another; in the very depth of Hell,
Heaven; in the very midst of Anger, Love: When with the woman of Canaan, Math.
15. we can pick comfort out of the reproachful name of dog, and when nothing
but war appears in Gods face, then by faith to pearce through all the thick
clouds, and behold the sweet sunshine of Gods favor, and grace in Christ,
Heb. 11. 1. we are believers indeed,

And he, says Saint Bernard, is to be reputed constant whose mind takes
fresh courage in the midst of extremities. Like the Palm tree, which grows
so much the higher and stronger, and more fruitful; by how much the more
weight it has hanging upon it.

Not that the strongest faith is free from doubting, for let a man look down
from the top of the strongest steeple, admit the Battlements be breast high,
and he is sure he cannot fall; yet a kind of fear possesses him. And well is
it for us, that our assu^^nce is mixed with doubting: Since the one makes us
live, as though there were no Gospel; the other, to dye as if there were no
Law.

The Lion seems to leave her young ones, till they have almost killed
themselves with roaring and howling, but at last gasp she relieves them,
whereby they become the more courageous. When the Prophet could say, Out of the
depths have I cried unto thee (instantly follows) and not till then, the Lord
heard me: the Lord saw him sinking all the while, yet lets him alone till he
was at the bottom. Every maine affliction is our Red Sea, which whiles it
threats to swallow, preserves us: now when it comes to a dead lift (as we say)
then to have a strong confidence in God is thankworthy. Hope in a state
hopeless, and love to God under signs of his displeasure, and heavenly
mindedness in the midst of worldly affairs and allurements, drawing a
contrary way; is the chief praise of faith: to love that God who crosses us,
to kiss that hand which strikes us; to trust in that power which kills us; this
is the honorable proof of a Christian, this argues faith indeed. What made
our Savior say to that Woman of Canaan, O Woman, great is thy faith: but this;
when neither his silence, nor his flat denial could silence her, Math. 15. It
is not enough to say, God is good to Israel, when Israel is in peace and
prosperity, and neither feels nor wants any thing: but God will have us
believe that he is good, even when we feel the smart of the rod, and at the
same time see our enemies (the wicked) prosper. It best pleases him when we
can say boldly with Job, Though he kill me yet will I trust in him. When our
enemies are behind us, and the Red Sea before us, then confidently to trust
upon God is much worth. When we are in the barren wilderness almost famished,
then to believe that God will provide Manna from Heaven, and water out of the
Rock, is glorious: when with the three Children we see nothing before us but a
fiery Furnace; to believe that God will send his Augell to be our deliverer,
this is heroical, Dan. 3. 28. And those which are acquainted with the
proceedings of God, well know; that cherishing ever follows stripes, as
Cordials do vehement evacuations, and the clear ^ight of the morning a dark
night: yea, if we can look beyond the cloud of our afflictions, and see the
sunshine of comfort on the other side of it: we cannot be so discouraged with
the presence of evil, as hartned with the issue. Cheer up then, thou drooping
soul, and trust in God, what ever thy sufferings be, God is no tyrant, to
give thee more than thy load; and admit he stay long, yet be thou fully
assured he will come at length. In thee do I trust (says the Psalmist) all
the day; He knew that if he came not in the Morning, he would come at Noone;
if he came not at Noone, he would come at Night; At one (...) of the day or
other he will deliver me: and then as the Calm is greater after the Tempest
than it was before; so my joy shall be sweeter afterward than it was before;
The remembrance of Babylon will make us sing more joyfully in Syon. If then I
find the Lords dealing with me to transcend my thoughts, my faith shall be
above my reason, and think, he will work good out of it, though I yet
conceive not how.

CHAP. XIV.
That it increases their joy and thankfulness.

11. BEcause our manifold sufferings and Gods often delivering us, does
increase our joy and thankfulness, yea make after-blessings more sweet; By
this we have new Songs put into our mouths, and new occasions offered to
praise the Author of our deliverance. When the Lord brought again the
Captivity of Sion (says David in the person of Israel) we were like them that
dream, meaning the happiness seemed too good to be true) Then was our mouths
filled with laughter, (says he) and our tongues with joy, The Lord has done
great things for us whereof we rejoice, Psalm. 126. 1, 2, 3, 4. And how could
their case be otherwise; when in that miserable exigent, Exodus 14. they saw the
Pillar remove behind them, and the Sea remove before them, they looking for
nothing but death? Is any one afflicted? I may say unto him as that harbinger
answered a Noble man complaining that he was lodged in so homely a Room; you
will take pleasure in it when you are out of it; For the more grievous our
exigent, the more glorious our advancement. A desire accomplished delights
the soul, Prove. 13. 19. We read how that lamentable and sad decree of
Ahasuerus through the goodness of God was an occasion exceedingly to increase
the Jews joy and thankfulness, insomuch, that (as the Text says) the days
that were appointed for their death and ruin were turned into days of
feasting and joy, and wherein they sent presents every man to his neighbor,
and gifts to the poor, Esther 9. 17. 22, to 28. And this joy and
thankfulness was so lasting, that the Jews cease not to celebrate the same
to this day. Gods dealing with us is often harsh in the beginning, hard in the
proceeding, but the conclusion is always comfortable. The joy of Peter, and
the rest of the Church was greater after he was delivered out of Prison by the
Angel, Acts 12. And the joy of Judith and the rest of Bethulia when she
returned with Holefernes head, then if they never had been in distress,
Judith 13. The Lord deprives us of good things for a time, because they never
appear in their full beauty, till they turn their backs and be going away.
Again, he deserres his aid on purpose to increase our desires before it
comes; and our joy, and thankfulness, when it is come, to inflame our
desires; for things easily come by, are little set by; to increase our j^y for
that which has been long detained, is at last more sweetly obtained; What
(think we) did he that was borne blind think, when his Eyes were first given
him; how did he wonder at Heaven and Earth, the strange and goodly varieties of
all the Creatures, and cheerfulness of the light; every thing did not more
please, than astonish him. Lastly our thankfulness, for suddenly gotten,
suddenly forgotten; hardly gotten, hardly forgotten. Philoxenus was wont to
say, it will taste sweeter, if it cost me sweetly. We love that dearly, that
cost us dear. As mothers love their Children, more tenderly than Fathers;
because they stood them in more. Abraham's Child at hundred years of age was
more welcome than if he had been given at thirty. And the same Isaac had not
been so precious to him if he had not been as miraculously restored, as
given; his recovery from death made him more acceptable: The benefit that comes
soon and with ease is easily contemned, long and eager pursuit endeeres any
favor: The wise men rejoiced exceedingly to find the S^arre; The Woman to
find her piece of silver; The Virgin Mary to find her and our JESUS: CHRIST
always returns with increase of joy; He may absent himself for a time, but
he intends it only as a preparative, to make us relish that sweet food the
better; he may keep us fasting, but it is on purpose, that our trial may be
perfect, our deliverance welcome, our recompense glorious. Yea, the delivering
of some, increases the joy of others, and causes them to praise God for, and
rejoice in their behalf that are delivered, Acts 12. 14. We never know the
worth of a benefit so well as by the want of it, want teaches us the worth of
things most truly. Contraries are the best Commentaries upon each other, and
there mutual opposition, the best exposition. O how ^eet a thing is peace to
them that have been long troubled with wars and tedious contentions? The
Thunder of the Cannon, is the best Rhetoric to commend it to us. How sweet is
liberty to one that has been long imm(...)ed within a case of walls? A very
Bird, never chants it so merryly, as when she is got loose into the open Ay^e,
having been long encaged. How dear a Jewel is health to him that tumbles in
distempered blood? For then only we begin to prize it, when we have lost it.
Let a man but fast a meal or two, oh how sweet is brown bread, though it
would not down before? Yea, when Darius in a flight had drunk puddle water,
polluted with dead Carcasses, he confessed never to have drunk any thing more
pleasant; the reason was, he always before used to drink ere he was a thirst.
We are never so glad of our friends company, as when he returns after long
absence, or a tedious voyage. The nights darkness makes the light of the Sun
more desirable; and brings of it letters of recommendations. A calm is best
welcome after a tempest, etc.

Yea, what serves others sorrows for, but to increase our joy, and
thankefulnes; Thou have eyes, ask the blind whether that be not a blessing:
thou have ears, ask the deaf whether that be not a great blessing: thou have
a tongue, what thinks the dumb of that: thou have feet, hands, health,
liberty, life, reason, etc. is all this nothing. Yea, others bleed, we sleep;
others beg, we abound; others starve, we surfeit; others groape in the dark,
our Sun still shines: and shall not we rejoice and be thankful. Bless (says
our Savior) when ye are cursed, and shall not we bless, when thus blessed.
Yet woe is me, we forfeit many of Gods favors, for not paying that easy Rent
of thankfulness: like those Nine, Luke 17. 12. to 19. we are more apt to
pray, then to give thanks: because we are more sensible of our own wants,
then of Gods glory. We can open our mouths when we want any thing, either to
pray, or at least to murmur: and why should not our thankes-givings be as
frequent as our blessings are. The Leppers voice was not more loud in his suit,
than in his thanks. It were happy for us Christians, if we could but learn
of this Samaritane.

And thus we see, that Good things then appear of most worth, when they are
known in their wants; When we have lost those invaluable comforts which we
cannot well be without, the mind has time to recount their several worths;
and the worths of blessings appear not until they are vanished.

No wonder then that our estates and conditions are so variable, like the face
of the Heavens, or the Sea; or like the weather about Michaelmas, which is now
fair, and presently again foul; or rather the hard winter, which for one
fair Sunshine day, has oftentimes ten foul. For God sees that it is very
good for us; for as seeds that are deepest covered with snow in Winter,
flourish most in the Spring; or as the wind by beating down the flame, rayseth
it higher, and hotter: and as when we would have some Fires flame the more, we
sprinkle water upon them; even so when the Lord would increase our joy and
thankfulness, he allayeth it with the tears of affliction: misery sweetneth
joy; yea, the sorrows of this life shall (lik^ a dark veil) give a luster to
the glory of the next, when the Lord shall turn this water of our earthly
afflictions into that wine of gladness, wherewith our souls shall be satiate
for ever. We deceive our selves to think on earth continued joys would
please; Plenty of the choycest dainties is no dainty. When Pearls grew common
at Rome, they wore them on their shoes, and they had much ado to save
themselves out of the dirt, as Tertullian speaks. Nothing would be more
tedious then to be glutted with perpetual Jollyties* were the body tied to
one dish always, though of the most exquisite delicate that it could make
choice of; yet after a small time it would complain of loathing, and saciety,
and so would the soul if it did ever epicure it self in joys. I know not
which is the more useful: Joy I may choose for pleasure, but Adversities are
the best for profit; I should without them want much of the joy I have. Well
then, art thou vexed, persecuted, and afflicted by some cruel and malicious
Saul? and is it grievous to thee for the present? Why, that which has been
heard to suffer is sweet to remember, at last our Songs shall be louder then
our Cries.

CHAP. XV.
How it increases their spiritual wisdom.

12 OUr sufferings make us teachable, and increase in us spiritual wisdom.
He delivers the poor in his affliction, and opens their ear in trouble,
Job. 36. 15. And again, He opens the ears of men, even by their corrections,
Job 33. 16. We are best instructed when we are most afflicted; Paul's blindness
took away his blindness, and made him see more into the way of life, then
could all his learning at the feet of Gamaliel. And what says Naaman upon the
cleansing of his Leprosy? Now I know there is no God in all the earth, but in
Israel. O happy Syrian that was at once cured of his Leprosy, and his
misprision of God. The Prodigal son regarded not his Fathers admonition, so
long as he enjoyed prosperity; when we smart not, we believe not, and God is
not feared, till felt: but that which makes the body smart, makes the soul
wise. It is good for me (says David) that I have been afflicted: that I may
learn thy Statutes. We grow wise by evils, whereas prosperity besottsus. Even
to lose is some ways profitable; it makes a man wary. Yea, S. Basil calls
want, and pennury, the inventer of all Arts. And S. Austin the mistress of all
Philosophy. The best wisdom is dearest bought: Algerius the Martyr could say
out of experience, he found more light in the dungeon, then without in all the
world.

The Scottish King, prisoner in Mortimers hoale, learnt more of Christ, then in
his palace he could all his life. Luther could not understand some Psalms,
till he was in affliction: the Christ's cross is no letter, yet it taught him
more learning then all the letters in the row. Yea, what will not affliction
teach us, when even the savagest Beasts are made quiet and docible with abating
their food, and rest, or by adding of stripes?

That Breefe-braynd fellow in Scaliger, had his ear boared with thunder: when
nothing else would do it. Yea (says Molineus) Bonifacias his silly reasons
for the Popes supremacy, did well enough, being propounded with a sword in the
hand. Even as the Clay with water, and the Iron with fire, are made pliable and
apt to receive impression from the workman; even so when we are soaked in the
floods of sorrow, and softened in the fire of affliction, we are aptest to
receive the impression of Gods Law into our hearts, when he speaks unto us by
his Ministers; If the Lord breaks us in peaces with the Plow of his Justice,
then let the Seedsmen (his Ministers) sow the seed of his Word; we shall
receive it through the furro^^es of our ears, into the ground of our hearts,
and grow up in wisdom, and saving knowledge. Or when the bard heart is grownd
to powder between the upper and the n^ther millstone of the two Tables: it will
see, and embrace that counsel, which before it slighted. We hear, and read
much, of the corruption of our natures, odiousness of our sins, necessity of
a Savior, sweetness of Gods love in Christ, etc. but we never fully apprehend
these things, or taste how good the Lord is, till some sharp affliction comes.
A man knows not where his house is ill covered, till winter: Crosses are like
pinching frosts, that will search us; we learn to know our selves by that we
suffer.

Yea, Affliction so brings down our stomachs, that we can see even matter of
thankefulnes, where our former pride found matter of complaining. And that
which formerly had no more taste, then the white of an egg, (viz. the glad
tidings of the Gospel) is now such a spectacle of unspeakable mercy, as
ravisheth our souls with admiration.

Many a good word is even spilt upon us, till God sets it on with his Rod:
Naomy will not look home-ward, nor we heavenward, till the Almighty have
dealt very bitterly with us. Zippora falls presently to circumcising her son,
when she sees her husbands life lies upon it.

Were it not for temptations, we should be concealed from our selves: like
t(...) (...)nchanted Ass in Lucian, which returned to his proper shape again,
when he saw himself in a looking-glass. So long as we prosper, like those
wives in Jeremy, Chap. 44. 17, 18. we judge of things by their events, and
raise our confidence according to the success we have: and so bless our
selves, without being blessed of God; like the Thief that applauded himself for
merciful, because he had never killed any; and yet rather then lose a Ring, he
would cut off the travelers finger; but strong affections will give credit to
weak reasons. O how blind and partial are we, before affliction has
humbled us: even so stupid, that Narsisus like, we are inamoured of our own
shadows: bragging, we discharge. 4 good conscience, when indeed we discharge
it quite away: and this righteousness in opinion, is almost the only cause of
all unrighteousness.

Before want came, poverty was more contemptible, then dishonesty: but now it
is disgraceful to none, except fools and knaves. Then we could censure things
indifferent, and pass by heinous crimes: now we are able to distinguish them,
and so judge righteous judgment. Before trouble came, we were either
ungrounded in the principles of Religion, or unconscion^ble in the practice:
and by virtue of our mother wit, could post and pass sin from our selves,
unto some other; as Adam laid the fault upon Eve his wife, she upon the
Serpent, and the Serpent upon God. Or excuse, or extenuate it: which (says
Fabius) is to dubble it.

As for Original corruption, that never troubled us, which now we bewail as
the mother, and nurse of all the rest: thinking it worthy our sighs, yea of
our tears, and not without need: it being the great wheel in the Clock, that
sets all the wheels a moving: while it seems to move slowest. Though not one
of a hundred takes it sufficiently to heart: as not seeing the evil of it.
But never did any truly and orderly repent, that began not here: esteeming it
the most foul, and hateful of all, as David, Psalm. 51. 5. and Paul, crying
out of it, as the most secret, deceitful, powerful evil, Romans 7. 23, 24. And
indeed, if we clearly saw the foulenes, and deceitfulnes of it, we would not
suffer our eyes to sleep, nor our eyelids to slumber, until a happy change
had wrought these hearts of ours, which by nature are no better then so many
styes of unclean devils, to be habitations for the God of Jacob.

Apt we were, to measure our own good, by another want of it, and to scoff
at others infirmities: but now other men's sins shall rather be the subject of
our grief, then of our discourse. Before fear of the law, shame of men, and
such like base ends, bare the greatest sway with us: yea, to please men, we
could be like certain pictures, that represent to diverse beholders, at diverse
stations, diverse forms: but now it is enough to regulate our thoughts, words,
and actions, that God sees: and indeed where are brains, there needs no
more. We read that paphnutius converted Thais, and Ephron another famous
strumpet, from uncleanness, only with this argument; that God sees all
things, in the dark, when the doors are fast, the windows shut, the curtens
drawn.

Before too much devotion, was made an argument of too little discretion: and
mischief called virtue, when it was happy in the success: as with the
Papists, the Ostentation of the prosperity of their estate, is the best
demonstration of the sincerity of their Religion: yea, and think also they
have clypt the wings of prosperity (as the Athenians did the wings of victory)
that she cannot fly away. Before, we thought drinking, and joviall company, the
best receipt to drive away sadness: but now, nothing like living well, as an
Heathen has confessed. Once we thought Earth, Heaven; but now we apprehend the
World, and glory thereof, to be (like a beautiful harlot) a Paradise to the
eye, a Purgatory to the soul.

Yea, he that before was indifferent in nothing but conscience, and no cause
so bad, but he would undertake it for gain, or glory, and think it well
done. As Satan prevails chiefly by deception of our Reason, whereby we
mistake virtue for vice, and vice for virtue; wherein he imitates Hanniball,
who having overcome the Romans, put on their Armor, and so his soldiers being
taken for Romans, won a City by that policy: and to this purpose, what stone
so rough, but he can smooth it: what stuff so pitiful, but he can set a
gloss upon it: like a Bear, he can lick into fashion, the most misshapen and
deformed lump: or like a dog, heal any wound he can reach with his tongue:
yea, what golden eloquence will he whisper in our ear; what brazen impudence?
what subtle shifts? what quaint querks? what cunning conveyances? what
juggling, shuffling, and packing will he use, to make any sin feazable? (like
the Hare, which if she dare not trust to her speed, she will try the turn;)
and so on the contrary to discourage us in good; showing each thing as it were
in triangular glasses among the optics, which will represent a way so foul,
so deep, that it is impassable; as if it were all covered with Tapestry. But as
he pleades now with eloquence, so when he sees his time, he will speak with
Thunder. Even such a man I say now, has his eyes opened to discern good and
evil, when God speaks, and when Satan; for Gods chastisements are pills made
of purpose, to clear the sight: and virtue if it be clearly seen, moves
great love and affection, as Plato speaks. Yea, when to our cost, we can (Adam
like) see good from evil clearly, the subtle Serpent can deceive no longer:
whereas before, we were easily deceived, and led away with the multitude into
innumerable errors. Yea, if the fish did know of the hook, or the bird did
but see the net, though they have but the understanding of fishes, and birds;
yet they would let the bait alone, fly over the net, and let the Fowler whistle
to himself.

Thus Gods corrections, are our instructions; his lashes, our lessons; his
scourges, our schoolemasters; his chastisements, our advertisements. And
commonly the soul waxes, as the body wayneth, and is wisest to prescribe,
when the bones and sinnewes are weakest to execute: neither do we hereby
become wise for our own souls good only, but affliction makes us wise and
able to do others good also that are in any the like affliction. Blessed be
God (says S. Paul) which comfort us in all our afflictions, that we may be
able to comfort them which are in any affliction, by the comfort wherewith we
our selves are comforted of God, 2 Cor. 1. 4. Yea, the whole Church, and every
particular member thereof have their wisdom and knowledge improved, even by
their greatest enemies. If Arius and Sabellius had not vexed the Church, the
deep mysteries of the Trinity had not bee^e so accurately cleared by the
Catholic Doctors. Subtle arguments well answered, breed a clear conclusion;
heresy makes men sharpen their wits the better to confute it; as Worme-wood
though it be bitter to the taste, yet it is good to clear the eyes: yea
further, the very storms of persecution make us look to our Tackling,
Patience; and to our Anchor, Hope; and to our Helm, Faith; and to our Card,
the Word of God; and to our Captain, Christ: whereas security, like a calm,
makes us forget both our danger and deliverer. Experience is the best informer,
which makes Martin Luther say, When all is done, tribulation is the plainest
and most sincere divinity. And another most emphatically, (showing that
knowledge is in many respects cumulative, as well as original; like water,
that besides his own spring head, is fed with other springs and streams.)
That Prayer, Reading, Meditation, and temptations, make a Divine. So that to be
altogether exempt from misery, is a most miserable thing.

CHAP. XVI.
How it increases their patience.

13 BEcause the malice of our enemies makes for the increase of our patience,
We rejoice in tribulation, says Paul, knowing that tribulation brings forth
patience, Romans 5. 3. My brethren, says S. James, count it exceeding joy when
ye fall into diverse temptations, knowing that the trial of your faith brings
forth patience, James 1. 2, 3. Thus the malice of our enemies does both prove
and improve our patience: see it exemplified in Job and David, whose practice
does most excellently confirm this point; you know Job was not so miserable in
his afflictions, as happy in his patience, Job. 31. 35, 36, 37. And David after
he had been so many years trained up in the School of Affliction, and
exercised with continual sufferings from innumerable enemies of all sorts;
became a wonder of patience to all succeeding Ages: as take but notice of his
carriage toward Shimei, and you will say so; when this his impotent Subject
cursed and cast stones at him, and all his Men of War, called him Murderer,
wicked man, etc. he was so far from revenging it, when he might so easily,
or suffering others, that you shall hear him make that an argument of his
patience, which was the exercise of it: Behold, my son (says he) which came
forth of my bowels seeks my life; how much more now may this Benjamite do
is, 2 Samuel 16. 11. The wickedness of a^ Absalom may rob his Father of comfort,
but shall help to add to his Fathers goodness: it is the advantage of great
crosses, that they swallow up the lesser. One man's sin cannot be excused by
another, the lesser by the greater: if Absalom be a Traitor, Shimei may not
curse and rebel; but the passion conceived from the indignity of a stranger,
may be abated by the harder measure of our own.

Indeed in the provocation of Naball, he had his lesson to seek: but even that
slip, made him stand the faster afterward. And Saint Paul, being taken upon the
sudden, reviled Gods High Priest: but he soon checked himself for it, Acts
23. 3. 5. A weak heart faints with every addition of succeeding trouble,
perhaps is like that maid in Scaliger, who swooned at the sight of a Lilly:
but the strong, recollects it self, and is grown so skillful that it bears
off one mischief with another. As in the Fable, when the new and old Cart went
together, the new made a creaking noise under the load, and wondered at the
silence of the old; which answered, I am accustomed to these burdens, therefore
bear them, and am quiet: So, what a degree of patience have some men attained
unto? What a load of injuries can some Christians digest, that have been
frequent in sufferings, and long exercised in the School of Affliction? Not
that they bear them out of baseness or cowardlinesse, because they dare not
revenge, but out of Christian fortitude, because they may not; they have so
conquered themselves, that wrongs cannot conquer them. Nay, we read of some
Ethnicks that could say this of themselves. When Alcibiades told Socrates that
he could not suffer the frowardness and scolding of Zantippe as he did;
Socrates answered, but I can; for I am accustomed to it. And we read, that
Aristides after his exile, did not so much as note them that were the cause of
his banishment, though he were now advanced above them. Yea Diogenes, rather
then want exercise for his patience, would crave al(...)es of dead men's
statues; for being demanded why he did so, he answered, that I may learn to
take denyals from others the more patiently. Now if we can therefore suffer,
because we have suffered, we have well profited by our afflictions, otherwise
not.

To show that there is nothing so hard and difficult, but may be attained to by
use and custom: give me leave to clear it by some familiar instances. We
know the custom of any hardship (whether it be labor, cold, or the like)
makes it easy and familiar: you shall have a common Labourer work all day,
like a Horse, without once sweating, or being weary: Let a Scholar or
Gentleman, but dig one quarter of an hour, you must give him leave to take
breath all the day after. The face that is ever open, yea, the eye that is
twice as much open as shut, is able perpetually to endure the coldest wind can
blow; when as the rest of the parts would complain of the least blast that is
cold. Let him that is next neighbor to the Belfrey tell me, whether ringing
does so molest his silent sleep now, as formerly. Yea, the fall of the River
Nilus which makes a new commer stop his ears; to the natural inhabitants is
not so much as heard. At Milton, near Sittingborne in Kent, is (or lately was)
one William Allen a Tailor, that eats between thirty and forty grains of
Opium every day, the tithe whereof would kill him that is not accustomed
thereunto; neither can he sleep (no not live) without it: he began but with
one grain, and so increased the quantity, as the operation and quality of it
decreased. But this is nothing, for you have slaves in the Turkish Galleys,
that will eat near an ounce at a time, as if it were bread. Neither, in my
judgment, is it less rare for men to drink a Pottle or a Gallon of the
richest old Canary every day, as is usual with some of our Sackdrinkers, and
Good-fellowes, without the least inflammation; it has no other operation in
them then a cup of Six has with me, or has had with them in diebus illis.

To conclude, as that Girl which Aristotle writes of, being nursed with poison
in her infancy, lived with it after as we do with meat; and as that young
woman at Cullen in Almayne, who was frequently seen picking spiders off the
wall, and eating them, digested the same into nourishment; as Albert an
eyewitness affirms: And as Mithridates by his accustomed eating of poison,
made his body unpoysonable: So the godly, notwithstanding they are by nature as
a wild Ass Colt, as Zophar speaks, Job 11. 12. Yet by their frequent and
accust^mary suffering of injuries, these wild Asses are made tame, and the
ablest to carry burdens of any creature: yea, though they were once as fierce
and cruel as Wolves, Leopards, Lions, and Bears; and as mischiev^us as Aspes,
and Cockatrices; yet Christ will so change their natures, partly by his word,
and partly by his rod of affliction, that they shall now be as apt to suffer
evil as they have been to offer it: What else means the Prophet, when he
tells us that the Wolf shall dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard with the
Kid, and the Lion with the Calfe, so that a little child shall lead them; that
the Cow and the Bear, and the Lion and the Bullock, shall eat straw together;
that the sucking child shall play upon the hole of the Aspe, and the wained
child shall put his hand upon the Cockatrice hole, Isay 11. 6. and so forward.

And so you see that according to the ancient proverbiall speech, Use makes
perfectness; and that custom is not unfitly called a second, or new nature.
Would thou then attain to an unconquerable patience, and be able to undergo
great trials hereafter; accustom thy self to a silent suffering of thy
present and smaller griefs, tongue provocations, and the like. If with Milo
thou shall but take up a Calfe, some small cross, and injoyne thy self to
carry the like every day a little; in process of time thou shall be able to
carry an Ox, the strongest and biggest affliction can come. For nothing is
miserable says Seneca, which once Custom has made natural. Familiarity even
with Lions, takes away the fear of them: and the being used to Tempests,
gives heart and courage to endure them: whereas any new disaster is tedious,
and irksome to the unexperienced: but hard occurrences fall heavy upon them,
for that the yoke is most cuntbersome, to a tender neck.

CHAP. XVII. Reasons of Patience.
That the godly are patient in suffering of wrongs, because innocent.

NOw that some may be persuaded to make this use of their sufferings, and that
we may also put to silence the ignorance of others; (foolishmen who are
mistaken in judging of this matter, supposing it a base thing to suffer
injuries unrevenged) see the Reasons which deservedly make Gods children so
patiently to suffer wrongs that the men of the world never dream of: And how
through the study of virtue and Christian prudence, they make the servile
passions of their minds (fear and anger) subject to the more worthy faculties
of their souls, reason and understanding.

We bear their reproaches and persecutions patiently,

Either in regard of Our Selves. Our Enemies. Our Selves and our Enemies. Our
Enemies and Others. GOD. CHRIST, and the Saints.


In regard of our selves, 1 Because We are innocent. 2 Because It is more
laudible to forgive, then to revenge. 3 Because Suffering is the only way to
prevent suffering. 4 Because Our sins have deserved it, and a far greater
affliction. 5 Because Our sufferings are counterpoysed and made sweet, with
more than answerable blessings. 6 Because Our patience brings a reward with it.


First, they bear the slanders and reproaches of wicked men patiently, for
that they are false, and so appertain not unto them. Socrates being rayled
upon, and called by one all to naught, took no notice of it, and being
demanded a reason of his patience, said, it concerns me not, for I am no such
man. Diogenes was wont to say, when the people mocked him, They deride me, yet I
am not derided; I am not the man they take me for. This reason is of more force
from the mouth of an innocent Christian. If a rich man be called poor, or a
sound Christian an hypocrite, he slights it, he laughs at it, because he
knows the same to be false, and that his Accuser is mistaken; whereas if a
Beggar be called bankrupt, or a dissembler, hypocrite; he will winch and kick,
and be most grievously offended at it. Yea, as soars, and ulcers, are grieved
not only at a light touch, but even with fear and suspicion of being touched:
so will an exulcerate mind, says Seneca. And as small letters offend bad
eyes, so least appearances of contradiction, will grieve the ill affected ears
of guilty persons, says Plutarch; for let men's tongues like Bells, give but an
indefinite, and not a significant sound, they imagine them to speak, and mean,
whatsoever their guilty consciences frame, in the fancy, and whisper in the
ear: which are those evil surmises of corrupt minds, the Apostle taxes: 1 Timothy 6. 4. When like Caius the humanist, one thinks every word spoken, tends to
his disgrace; and is as unwilling to bear, as forbear reproaches. But where
the conscience is clear, the case is altered. Marius was never offended with
any report that went of him, because if it were true, it would ^ound to his
praise; if false, his life and manners should prove it contrary. And indeed,
the best confutation of their slanders, is not by our great words, but by our
good works. Sophocles being accused by his own children, that he grew Dotard,
and spent their patrimonies idely; when he was summoned, did not personally
appear before the Magistrates, but sent one of his new Tragedies to their
perusal, which being read, made them confess, This is not the work of a man
that dotes. So against all clamours and swelling opprobries, set but thine
innocence and good life; thou need do no more. That body which is in good
health, is strong, and able to bear the great storms and bitter cold of
Winter, and likewise the excessive and intemperate heat of the Summer: but with
a crazie and distempered body, it is far otherwise. Even so, a sound heart and
clear conscience will abide all trials; in prosperity it will not be lifted
up; in adversity, it will not be utterly cast down: whereas the corrupt heart,
and festred conscience, can endure nothing; even a word if it be pleasing,
puffe^ him up with pride; if not, it swells him with passion. A guilty
conscience, (like Glass) will sweat with the least breath, and like a windy
Instrument, be put out of tune, with the very distemper of the air: but when
the soul is steeled with goodness, no assaults of evil can daunt it. No
greater sign of innocence when we are accused, than mildness: as we see in
Joseph, who being both accused and committed for forcing of his Mistress,
answered just nothing that we can read of, Genesis 39. 17, 18. And Susanna, who
being accused by the two Elders of an heinous crime, (which they alone were
guilty of) never contended by laying the fault upon them, but appeals unto God
whether she were innocent or no. The History of Susanna, Verse. 42, 43. And
Hannah, whose reply to Ely, when he falsely accused her of drunkenness, was
no other, but Nay my Lord, count not thine Handmaid for a wicked woman, 1 Samuel
1. 15, 16. Neither is there a greater Symptom of guiltiness, than our
breaking into choler, and being exasperated when we have any thing laid to our
charge, witness Cain, Genesis 4. 9. That Hebrew which struck his fellow, Exodus 2.
13, 14. Saul, 1 Samuel 20. 32, 33. Abner, 2 Samuel 3. 8. Jeroboam, 1 King. 13. 4.
Ahab, 1 Kings 22. 27. Amazia, 2 Chronicles. 25. 16. Uzziah, 2 Chronicles. 26. 19. Herod
the Tetrarch, Luke 3. 19. 20. The men of Nazareth, Luke 4. 28, 29. The
Pharisees, John 8. 47, 48. And the High Priest and Scribes, Luke 20. 19, 20.

Sin and falsehood, are like an impudent strumpet, but innocence and truth
will veil themselves, like a modest Virgin, (...) Pet. 2. 18. The more false
the matter, the greater noise to uphold it; Paul is nothing so loud as
Tertullus: The weakest cause will be sure to forelay the shrewdest counsel, or
the lowdest Advocates: Error has always most words; like a rotten house,
that needs most props, and crutches to uphold it. Simple truth evermore
requires least cost: like a beautiful face, that needs no painting; or a
comely body, which any desent apparel becomes. We plaster over rotten posts,
and ragged walls; substantial Buildings are able to grace themselves. So that
as sparks flying up, show the house to be on fire, and as corrupt spittle
shows exulcerate lungs, so a passionate answer argues a guilty conscience. Why
does the Hare use so many doublings? but to frustrate the scent of the Hounds.
And this is one reason why the former are compared to Sheep and Lambs (Emblems
of innocence) which being harmed will not once bleate; and the latter unto
Swine, which will roar and cry if they be but touched. But to leave these
Swine and return to the men we were speaking of.

A good Conscience is not put out of countenance with the false accusations of
slanderous tongues: it throws them off, as Saint Paul did the Viper, unhurt.
Innocence and patience are two Bucklers sufficient to repulse and abate the
violence of any such charge; the Breast Plate of Righteousness, the brazen
wall of a good conscience fears no such Canons. The Conscionable being railed
upon, and reviled by a foul mouth, may reply as once a Steward did to his
passionate Lord, when he called him Kav^, etc. Your Honor may speak as you
please, but I believe not a word that you say, for I know my self an honest
man. Yea, suppose we are circled round with reproaches, our consciences
knowing us innocent, like a constant friend, takes us by the hand and cheeres
us against all our miseries. A good spirit will be as Simon to Christ, its
Cross bearer. A just man, says Chrysostom, is imprognable, and cannot be
overcome; take away his wealth, his good parts cannot be taken from him, and
his treasure is above; cast him into prison and bonds, he does the more freely
enjoy the presence of his God; banish him his Country, he has his
conversation in Heaven; kill his body, it shall rise again: so he fights with
a shadow that contends with an upright man.

Wherefore, let all who suffer in their good names, if conscious and guilty of
an enemies imputations, repent and amend; if otherwise, contemn them, own
them not so much as once to take notice thereof: A wicked heart, is as a
Barrel of powder to temptation, let thine be as a River of water. Yea, seeing
God esteems men as they are, and not as they have been; although formerly thou
have been culpable, yet now thou may answer for thy self as Paul did for
Onesimus, Though in times past I was unprofitable, yet now I am profitable: and
oppose to them that sweet and divine sentence of sweet and holy Bernard, Tell
me not Satan what I have been, but what I am and will be. Or that of Beza in
the like case. Whatsoever I was, I am now in Christ a New Creature, and that is
it which troubles thee, I might have so continued long enough ere thou would
have vexed at it, but now I see thou do envy me the grace of my Savior. Or
that Apopthegme of Diogenes to a base fellow, that told him he had once been a
forger of money, whose answer was, It Is true, such as thou art now, I was once;
but such as I am now thou will never be. Yea, thou may say, by how much more
I have formerly sinned, by so much more is Gods power and goodness now
magnified. As Saint Augustine hearing the Donatists revile him for the former
wickedness of his youth, answered, The more desperate my disease was, so much
the more I admire the Physician: Yea, thou may yet strain it a peg higher,
and say, the greater my sins were, the greater is my honor: as the Devils
which Mary Magdalen once had, are mentioned for her glory. Thus if we cannot
avoid ill tongues, let our care be not to deserve them, and it is all one as if
we avoided them. For how little is that man hurt, whom malice condemns on
Earth, and God commends in Heaven, let the World accuse me, so long as God
acquits me, I care not.

CHAP. XVIII.
That it is more laudable to forgive, than revenge.

2. BEcause it is more generous and laudible to forgive, than revenge:
certainly in taking revenge a man is but even with his enemy, but in passing
it over he is superior to him; for it is a Princes part to pardon; yea, qouth
Alexander, There can be nothing more noble, than to do well to those that
deserve ill. And Saint Gregory, it is more honor to suffer injuries by
silence, than to overcome them by answering again. Princes use not to chide
when Ambassadors have offered them undecencies, but deny them audience; as if
silence were the way royal to correct a wrong. And certainly he injoyes a
brave composedness, that seats himself above the flight of the injurious
claw. Like the Emperor Augustus, who though of a most tenatious, and retentive
memory, would forget wrongs, as soon as they were offered. Or Agathocles,
Antigonus, and Caesar who being great Potentates, were as little moved at
vulgar wrongs, as a Lion at the barking of Curres; yea, the Orator gives it as
a high praise to Caesar that he could forge^ nothing but wrongs, remember
nothing but benefits; and who so truly noble as he that can do ill and will
not?

True, it is not rare to see, a great man vex himself at the neglect of a
peasant: but this argnes a poor spirit: A true Lion would pass it by, with an
honorable scorn. You Will confess then it is Princely to disdain a wrong; and is
that all? No, forgiveness, says Seneca, is a valiant kind of revenge: and
none are so frequent in pardoning as the courageous. He that is modestly
valiant, stirs not till he must needs, and then to purpose: Like the Flint, he
has fire in him, but it appears not until you force it from him: who more
valiant than Joshua? and he held it the noblest victory to overcome evil with
good: for the Gibeonites took not so much pains in coming to deceive him, as
he in going to deliver them. And Cicero more commends Caesar for overcomming
his own courage in pardoning Marcellus, than for the great victories he had
against his other enemies. Yea, a dominion over ones self, is greater than the
Grand Signiory of Turkey. For as the greatest knowledge, is truly to know thy
self, so the greatest conquest, is to subdue thy self; he is a wise man that
can avoid an evil, he is a patient man that can endure it, but he is a valiant
man that can conquer it. And indeed, for a man to overcome an enemy, and be
overcome by his own passions, is to conquer a petty Village with the loss of
a large City. What says a Father, miserable is that victory wherein thou
overcommest thine enemy, and the Devil in the mean time overcoms thee: thou
slayest his body, the Devil thy soul; now we deem him to have the honor of
the war, that has the profit of it. But as an Emperor said of the means
prescribed him to cure his Leprosy (which was the blood of Infants) I had
rather be sick still, than be recovered by such a medicine; so will thou in
this case, if thou have either Bowels, or brains. Yea, if the price or honor
of the conquest is rated by the difficulty; than to suppress anger in thy
self, is to conquer with Hercules one of the Furies: To tame all passions is
to lead Cerberus in chains: and to endure afflictions and persecutions
strongly and patiently, is with Atlas to bear the whole World on thy
shoulders, as says the Poet.

It is no shame to suffer ill, but to do it; to be evil, we are all
naturally disposed, to be holy and good, is the difficulty. Yea, every Beast
and Vermin can kill: It is true prowess and honor to give life, and preserve
it. Yea, a Beast being snarled at by a Cur, will pass by as scorning to take
notice thereof. I, but is it wisdom so to do? Yes, first, the ancient
received opinion is, that the sinews of wisdom, are slownesse of belief,
and distrust. Secondly, none more wise than Solomon, and he is of opinion; That
it is the glory of a man to pass by an offense, Pro. 19. 11. We fools think
it ignominy and cowardice to put up the lie without a stab; a wrong without a
challenge: but Solomon, to whose wisdom all wise men will subscribe, was of
another judgment; and to this of Solomon, the wisest heathen have set their
seal: Pittacus the Philosopher holds, That pardon is better than revenge,
inasmuch as the one is proper to the spirit, the other to a cruel Beast. But
how Socrates whom the Oracle of Apollo pr^nounced the wisest man alive, and all
the rest of Philosophers approved of it, both by judgment and practice* We
shall have occasion to relate in the reasons ensuing. No truer note of a wise
man than this; he so loves as if he were to be an enemy, and so hates as if he
were to love again. We know a spark of fire falling upon a solid body,
presently goes out, which falling upon combustable matter, kindles and burns:
Now as with fire, the light stuff and rubbish kindles sooner than the solid
and more compact, so anger does sooner inflame a f^ole than a man composed in
his resolutions. This the Holy Ghost witnesses, Eccles, 7. Be not thou of a
hasty spirit to be angry: for anger rests in the bosom of fools. Verse. 9.
So much fury, so much folly; the more chafing, the less wisdom.

Some have no patience to bear bitter scoffs: their noses are too tender to
endure this strong and bitter Wormwood of the brain. Others again like tyled
houses, can admit a falling spark unwarmed; it may be coals of Juniper
without any danger of burning: Now what makes the difference? the one has a
good head piece and is more solid, the other are covered with such light dry
straw that with the least touch they will kindle and flame about your troubled
ears: and when the house is one fire, it is no disputing with how small a
matter it came. I confess I find some wise men extremely passionate by
nature, as there is no general rule but admits of some exceptions: Even God
himself, had particular exceptions, from his general Laws, as the Cherubims
over the Arc, was an instance against the second Commandment: the Israelites
robbing the Egyptians, against the eight: the Priests breaking the Sabbath,
Math. 12. 5. against the fourth, and Phimiras killing Zimry, against the sixth,
Numb. 25. 8. And these as they are more taken with a joy, so they taste a
discontent more heavily. In whom Choler, like fire in stubble, is soon
kindled, and soon out, for they are stung with a Nettle, and alayed with a
Dock: being like Gunpowder, to which you no sooner give fire, but they

And lastly, this of all others is the most divine and Christian-like revenge;
witness our Savior Christ, who by death, overcame death; as David cut off the
head of Goliath, with his own sword: and even then tryumphed over his enemies,
when most they seemed to triumph over him, Col. 2. 15. And the Martyrs who are
said by the Holy Ghost to overcome the great Dragon, that old Serpent called
the Devil and Satan, in that they loved not their lives unto the death, Revel.
12. 11. There conquering, was by dying, not by killing: and can the back of
charity now bare no load; are the sinews of lov^ grown so feeble. And holy
David, who when he had S^ul at his mercy, in stead of cutting off his head, as
his servants persuaded him, only cut off the Lap of his Garment, and after,
thought that too much also. And at another time, when the Lord had closed him
into his hands, finding him asleep in the Fort, in stead of taking away his
life, as Abishai counseled him, he took away his Spear, and in stead of
taking away his blood from his heart, he takes a pot of water from his head.
That this kind of revenge for a man to find his enemy at an advantage, and
let him depart free, is generous and noble, beyond the capacity of an ordinary
man; you may hear Saul himself confess, 1 Samuel 24. 17. to 23. Again, when
the King of Syria sent a mighty Host to take Elisha, and the Lord had smote
them all with blindness, and shut them into Samaria, what does the Prophet?
Slay them? no. Indeed the King of Israel would saine have had it so, his
fingers itcht to be doing: but Elisha commanded bread and water to be set
before them, that they might eat and drink, and go to their Master, 2 King.
6. 22. So a Christian truly generous, will omit no opportunity of doing good,
nor do evil, though he have opportunity: for to may, and will not, is the
Christians lawde.

Which yet is not all, for besides that it is the most generous, noble,
valiant, wise, divine, and Christian-like revenge, to pass by, and forgive
injuries: our Savior Christ, in whom is the fountain of all wisdom, and
knowledge, as all the senses are in the head, Zach. 4. 12. alowes none for
magnanimous, but such as together with forgiving, Bless those that curse them,
and do good to such as hurt them, Math. 5. 44. which is true generosity
indeed. But how contrary is the opinion of the World, to the judgment of God,
and the wisest of men concerning valor: for should the greatest, and gravest
Bishop in the Land, Preach this; our impatient Gallants would not believe; but
that it consists in a brave revenge, and that an humble patience is an argument
of baseness, and that every wrong, or disgraceful word, is quarrel just
enough to shed blood: and least there should want offenses, or they give place
unto wroth as the Apostle advises, Romans 12. 19 they will strive for the way,
or contend for the wall, even to the death: which proves them to be as wise as
a wall, for they come short of the wisdom of Beasts: Pliny tells of two
Goats, (Mutianus being an eyewitness) which meeting on a straight, and
narrow Bridge, that the one could not pass by the other, nor turn aside to
return back again: neither made his way by overturning the other, but the one
lay down, that the other might go over him. I pray God their too much turning
to the right hand before man, cause them not to be set at Christ's left hand,
with those Goats which are destined to everlasting fire. But certainly, if
they amend not their course, God shall condemn them for invading his office;
for vengeance is his, and that they call courage, he shall judge outrage.

Woe is me, into what unhappy times are we fallen, and how has the devil
blinded and bewitched our Gallants; that the wretchedst, and basest cowardice,
should ruffle it out in the garb of valor: while the truly valiant pass for,
and are reputed cowards. And how great is the corruption of man's heart, which
is not ashamed of things shameful; and yet ashamed of things, wherein they
ought to glory. Is this courage, to kill one another for the wall, as though
either of their honors were of more worth then both their souls. Yea, suppose
they overcome, is not this power of theirs the greatest infirmity; for whether
they thus dye, or kill, they have committed murder; if they kill, they have
murdered another; if they die, they have murdered themselves: Surviving,
there is the plague of conscience; dying, there is the plague of torments: if
they both escape, yet it is homeside, that they meant to kill. O that they would
take notice of this, and lay it to heart.

But what is the reason of this their mistake; what makes them judge Job a
fool, and count David a coward, for their humble patience: this is the
difference; there was the faith, and patience of the Saints; here is the
infidelity, and impatience of sinners, whom the Devil has bewitched, to glory
in their shame; or in plain English, a reprobate judgment is the only cause;
for with them, every virtue is counted a vice, and every vice a virtue; as
their own words witness: in nicknaming each vice and grace with opposite
titles. But as when it was objected to a Martyr, that his Christ was but a
Carpenters son; he answered, yea, but such a Carpenter as built Heaven and
Earth: so we grant we are cowards, as they term us; but such cowards as are
able to prevail with God, Genesis 32. 26. 28. Exodus 32. 10. And overcome the
World, the Flesh, and the Devil, 1 John 5. 4. Galat. 5. 24. 1 John 2. 14.
which is as much Valor and Victory as we care for.

CHAP. XIX
That suffering is the only may to prevent suffering.

3. BEcause suffering is the only way to prevent suffering: Revenge being one
of those remedies, which, not seldom proves more grievous than the disease it
self? When once Zantippe, the wife of Socrates, in the open street plucked his
cloak from his back; and some of his acquaintance counseled him to strike
her: he answers, you say well; that while we are brawling and sighting
together, every one of you may clap us on the back and cry, hoe, well said, to
it Socrates: yea, well done Zantippe, the wisest of the twain. When Aristippus
was asked by one in dirision, where the great high friendship was become, that
formerly had bin between him and Estines? he answers, It is a sleep, but I
will go and awaken it; and did so, least their enemies should make it a matter
of rejoicing. When Philip of Macedon was told that the Grecians spoke evil
words of him, notwithstanding he did them much good, and was withal counseled
to chastise them; he answers, Your counsel is not good; for if they now
speak evil of us, having done them good only; what would they then, if we
should do them any harm? And at another time, being counseled either to
banish or put to death one who had slandered him; he would do neither of
both, saying, It was not a sufficient cause to condemn him; and for banishing,
it was better not to let him stir out of Macedonia, where all men knew that
he lied; then to send him among strangers, who not knowing him, might admit his
slanders for truth: better he speak where we are both known, then where we are
both unknown. And this made Chrysippus, when one complained to him, that his
friend had reproached him privately: answer, Ah, but chide him not, for then he
will do as much in public. Neglect will sooner kill an injury, than Revenge.
These tongue-squibs or crackers of the brain will die alone, if we revive them
not: the best way to have them forgotten by others, is first to forget them our
selves. Yea, to contemn an enemy, is better than either to fear him, or
answer him. When the Passenger gallops by, as if his fear made him speedy, the
Cur follows him with open mouth and swiftness; let him turn to the brawling
Cur, and he will be more fierce; but let him ride by in a confident neglect,
and the Dog will never stir at him, or at least will soon give over and be
quiet. To vex other men, is but to prompt them how they should again vex us.
Two earthen pots, floating on the water, with this Inscription, if we knock, we
crack: was long ago made the Emblem of England, and the Low Countries. When
two friends fall out, if one be not the wiser, they turn love into anger and
passion, passion into evil words, words into blows; and when they are
fighting, a third adversary has a fair advantage to insult over them both. As
have you not sometimes seen two neighbors, like two Cocks of the Game peck out
one another eyes, to make the Lawyers sport; it may be kill them: As while
Judah was hot against Israel, and Israel hot against Judah, the King of Syria
smote them both; at least Satan that common and Arch enemy will have us at
advantage. For as man delights when two Dogs, or two Cocks are a fighting, to
encourage and prick them forward to the combat. Even so does Satan deal with
us; controversies, like a pair of Cudgels, are thrown in by the Devil, and
taken up by malcontents, who baste one another while he stands by and laughs.
And we cannot please the Devil better: for as the Master of the Pit often sets
two Cocks to fight together, unto the death of them both; and then after
mutual conquest, suppeth perchance with the sighters bodies: Even so, says
Gregory does the Devil deal with men. He is an enemy that watches his time,
and while we wound one another, he wounds and wins all our sou^es. Thus, like
the Frog and the Mouse in the Fable, while men fight eagerly for a toy, the
Kite comes; that Prince and chief Foul, that rules in the Air, and
snatcheth away both these great warriors; or like two Emmets in the Mole-bill
of this earth, we sight for the mastery; in mean while comes the
Robin-red-breast and pickes both up, and so devoures them. But on the other
side, by gentleness we may as much pleasure our selves. It is said of
Aristides, when he perceived the open scandal which was like to arise, by
reason of the contention sprung up between him and Themistocles, that he
besought him mildly after this manner: Sir, we both are no mean men in this
Commonwealth; our dissension will prove no small offense unto others, nor
disparagement to our selves; wherefore good Themistocles, let us be at one
again; and if we will needs strive, let us strive who shall excel other in
virtue and love. And we read of Euclides, that when his Brother (in a variance
between them) said, I would I might dye if I be not revenged of thee; he
answered again, nay let me dye for it, if I persuade thee not otherwise before
I have done: by which one word he presently so won his brothers heart, that
he changed his mind, and they parted friends. And this was David's way of
overcomming, 1 Samuel 24. He whose Harp had wont to quiet Saul's frenzy, now by
his kindness does calm his fury, so that now he sheds tears instead of
blood: here was a victory gotten, and no blow stricken. The King of Israel set
bread and water before the host of the King of Syria, when he might have
slain them, 2 Kings 6. 23. What did he lose by it, or had he cause to repent
himself? No: he did thereby so prevent succeeding quarrels, that as the Text
says, The bands of Aram came no more into the Land of Israel; so every wise
Christian will do good to them that do hurt to him; yea, bless and pray for
them that curse him, as our Savior advises: neither is he a fool in it, for
if grace comes, (and nothing will procure it sooner than prayers and good
examples) though before they were evil enemies; now they shall neither be
evil, nor enemies. It was a witty answer of Socrates, who replied, when one
asked him, why he took such a man's bitter railing so patiently; It is enough
for one to be angry at a time. For if a wise man contend with a foolish man,
says Solomon, whether he be angry, or laugh, there is no rest, Prove. 29. 9.
Whereas gentle speech appeaseth wrath, and patience bridleth the secret
pratlings of mockers, and blunteth the point of their reproach. Had not Gideon,
Judge. 8. learned to speak fair as well as to smite, he had found work enough
from the swords of Joseph's sons. but his good words are as victorious as his
sword; his pacification of friends, better then his execution of enemies, Verse.
2. 3.

As it is not good to slatter, or lie; no more is it in some cases to speak
the truth: we know the Ass, and the Hownd in the Fable, were both killed by the
Lion: the one for his flattery in commending the sweetness of his breath, the
other for his plain dealing; when he affirmed, it had an ill savor: whereas
the Fox by pretending he could not smell, by reason of a cold he had got, saved
his life.

Rage is not engendered, but by the concurrence of cholers, which are easily
produced one of another; and borne at an instant. When the stone and the steel
meets, the issue engendered from thence, is fire: whereas the Sword of anger
being struck upon the soft pillow of a mild spirit, is broken. The shot of the
Cannon hurts not Wool, and such like yielding things; but that which is hard,
stubborn and resisting. He is fuller of passion than reason, that will flame
at every vain tongues puff. A man that studies revenge, keeps his own
wounds green and open, which otherwise would beale and do w^ll. Anger to the
soul, is like a coal on the flesh, or garment; cast it off suddenly it does
little harm, but let it lie, it frets deep. Wherefore says one, their malice
shall sooner cease than my unchanged patience. A small injury shall go as it
comes; a great injury may dine or sup with me, but none at all shall lodge with
me; for why should I vex my self, because another has vexed me? That were
to imitate the fool that would not come out of the Pownd, saying, they had put
him in by Law, and he would come out again by Law: or Ahab, who because he
could not have his will on Naboth, would be revenged on himself. As the mad
man tears his own hair, because he cannot come at his enemies: or little
children, who one while forbear their meat, if you anger them; another time,
if you chance to take away but one of their Gugawes, amongst many other toys
which they play withal, will throw away the rest, and then fall a puling and
crying outright. Or the Hedghog, which having laden himself with Nuts, and
fruits, if but the least Filberd chance to fall off, as he is going to
disburden them in his storehouse, will ^ling down all the rest, in a peevish
humor, and beat the ground for anger; as Pliny writes. Or Dogs, which set upon
the stone that has hurt them with such irefull teeth, that they hurt
themselves more than the thrower hurt them; and feel greater smart from
themselves, than from their enemy: which makes Archelaus say, it is a great
evil, not to be able to suffer evil. And a worthy Divine of ours, I will
rather suffer a thousand wrongs than offer one; I will suffer an hundred rather
than return one; I will suffer many ere I will complain of one; and endeavor
to right it by contending: for, says he, I have ever found, that to strive
with my superior, is furious; with my equals, doubtful; with my inferior,
for did and base; with any, full of unquietness. Satyrus, knowing himself
choleric, and in that whirty of mind apt to transgress, when he but
suspected ill language from any, he would stop his ears with wax; lest the
sense of it should cause his fierce blood to sees in his distempered skin. And
good reason; if not for wisdoms sake, yet for a man's own bodily healths
sake: for the Emperor Nerva by passionate anger got a Fever that killed him.
And the Emperor Valentinianus dyed by an eruption of blood through anger. And
Vincest^us King of Bohemia, in his rage of choler against his Cup Bearer fell
into a palsy that killed him. Again, Caesar, although he could moderate his
passions having in that civil garboyle intercepted a Packet of Letters written
to Pompey, from his Favorites, brake them not open but burnt them immediately.
And Pompey committed those Letters to the fire before he read them, wherein he
expected to find the cause of his grief. Both upon wise and mature ground,
that they might not play booty against themselves in furthering an enemies
spite. And certainly if we well consider it, we shall meet with vexations
enough that we cannot avoid if we would never so feign. We need not (like
Cercion in Swidas) wrestle, or (with foolish Pannu^) go to law with every man
we meet. And yet some (as if they did delight to vex their own souls like
the Ethiopians, who as Diodorus relates lame themselves, if their King be lame)
will be very inquisitive to know what such an one said of them in private: but
had they as much wit as jealousy, they would argue thus with themselves; small
injuries I would either not know, or not mind, or knowing them I would not
know the Author; for by this I may mend my self and never malice the person.

I might go on and show you that Greece and Asia wore set on fire for an
Apple. That not a few have suffered a sword in their bowels, because they would
not suffer the lie in their throats. As how few of these Salamanders who are
never well, but when they are in the fire of contention, are long lived? The
Raven, the Elephant, and the Heart, which have no gall. (Patient Christians) one
of them outlive many of the other. And lastly, I might show that if we suffer
not here with patience, we shall suffer hereafter with grief; for the wages of
anger is judgment, even the judgment of hell fire, Math. 5. 22. But two and
twenty yards is enough for a piece.

CHAP. XX.
That they bear injuries patiently, because their sins have deserved it, and
a far greater affliction.

4. HE suffers his enemies reproaches and persecutions patiently, because his
sins have deserved it, and a far greater affliction, David felt the spite of
his enemies, but he acknowledges his sin to be the cause, 2 Samuel 16. 11. and
God the Author, Psalm. 39. 8. From which consideration he draws this
inference, I should have been dumb, and not have opened my mouth, because thou
did it, Verse. 9. and so goes on; remove thy stroke from me, for I am
consumed by the blow of thine hand, Verse. 10. Whatsoever is the weapon, it is
thy blow. Whence it has always been the manner of Gods people to look up
from the stone to the hand which threw it; and from the effect to the cause.
What says Joseph to his envious brethren that sold him into Egypt; ye sent
not me hither, but God, Genesis 45. 8. And Job being robbed by the Sabeans, they
being set on by Satan, does not say, the Devil took away, or the Sabeans
took away, but the Lord has taken away, Job 1. 21. And David speaking of his
son Absaloms treason, I was dumb and said nothing; why? because it was thy
doing, Psalm. 39. 9. And what think you was the reason our Savior Christ held
his peace and answered nothing, as the Text says, but suffered his enemies,
The Chief Priest, Scribes, and Pharisees, and Pilate, to revile him, and
crucify him; but to approve the equity and justice of God the Author thereof?
for although it were blasphemy to say he was a sinner, yet taking upon him the
sins of the whole World, he knew those sins had deserved as much, and
therefore he is silent, Matthew. 26. 62, 63. It is true, other reasons are given;
as that he answered nothing, because it was now his time to suffer, not to
do; his work was now to be crucified, and not to be dignified; or as another,
he spoke not a word to Herod, because Herod had taken away his voice in
beheading John Baptist; but this without doubt was the maine reason. Even in
like manner it is with the truly gracious; they being wronged do not suffer
rage to transport them as it does beasts, to set upon the stone or weapon that
has hurt them, like little Children, who if they fall will have the ground
beaten: their false grief is satisfied with fained revenge. But they look
higher, even to God that occasioned it. Or if they be angry, they turn their
malice from the person which punishes them, to the sin by which and for
which he came to have leave and power to punish them; and to themselves for
committing such sins. The cause of their suffering does more vex them, than the
things which they suffer: and they grieve more for the displeasure of God, than
for the strips of his displeasure. It is not the punishment, but the cause of
it makes them sorrowful: And indeed, to speak home to every man's conscience,
why are we patient or impatient; it is worth the noting when sin lies light,
then reproaches and contempt lie heavy; whereas if we truly feel the weight
of sin all indignities will be as nothing. Or thirdly, in case they do
return an answer, it is after the manner of Epictetus, who would not deny the
sins his enemy taxed him with; but reproves his ignorance rather, in that
being unacquainted with the infinity of his crimes; he lays only two or three
to his charge; whereas indeed he was guilty of a Million: or according to
Philip of Macedon his example, who would not punish Nicanor, although he openly
spoke evil of him; saying, when he heard thereof, I suppose Nicanor is a good
man, it were better to search whether the fault be in us or no: so no sooner
shall an holy man's enemy accuse him of hypocrisy, pride, passion,
covetousness, etc. but he will go to God, and accuse himself, and complain,
I am so indeed; yea, with Paul, I am the chief of all sinners, I am more vile
than his terms can make me, and I much marvel my punishment is no greater
than to hear a few ill and bitter words. And indeed one would think
whatsoever is not pain nor sufferance, or admit it be pain and sufferance, so
long as it is not a curse, but a cross, may well be borne without grumbling.
What said that Gentleman in Athens to his friends, when Ashuerus came and took
away half his Plate, as he was at dinner with them, they admiring that he was
not a whit moved thereat? I thank God, quoth he, that his Highness has left
me any thing.

Yea, suppose we lose all we have, our goods are furthest off us, and if but in
these we smart, we must confess to find favor.

Or admit they hurt our bodies, or kill us, which they may soon do if God but
give leave; for our life (even the best of us) is but like a bubble, which
Boys blow up in the air, and presently again blow into mere air. Caesar
goes an Emperor to the Senate, is brought a Corpse home again. What ever I say
befalls us, this would be our meditation; he that afflicted me for a time, could
have hold me longer; he that touched me in part, could have stricken me in
whole: he that laid this upon my body, has power to lay a greater Rod both
upon my body and soul, without doing me the least wrong.

That all crosses, and curses, temporal, spiritual, and eternal, even from
the pains of the damned, to the very Itch as Moses sets down, Deuteronomy. 28. 27.
are deserved, and come not upon us against equity, (equity I say in respect of
God, not in respect of men, they come from a just Author, though from an unjust
instrument.) And that Sin is the ground of all our griefs, the source of all
our sufferings, wickedness the root of our wretchedness, that we are
disciplind is from our defects, is a truth undeniable, appears plainly: for
first God affirms it, Deuteronomy. 28. Isay 57. 17. Hosea 13. 9. Jer. 30. 15. and 4,
18.

Secondly, his servants confirm it, 1 Chronicles. 21. 17. Isay 64. 5. Dan. 9. 7, 8.
etc. Lam. 1. 5. 8. and 3. 39. etc. Ezra. 9. 13. Luke 23. 41.

Thirdly, good reason makes for it; sinful men smite not their dogs, much
less their children without a cause, and shall we think the just God will
smite without just cause: his Judgments (says a Father) are sometimes secret,
always just. No misery had ever afflicted us, if sin had not first infected
us.

What Is the reason we all dye, it could not be in justice if we had not all
sinned: and so of all other evils, even sickness originally proceeds from
sin, and all weakness from wickedness: one man languisheth of a
Consumption, another labors of a Fever, a third is rackt with the Gowt, a
fourth swollen with the Dropsy, a fifth has his soul let out with a sword;
every one has a several way to bring him to the common end, death: but sin
is the universal disease, Death passed upon all, for all have sinned, Romans 5.
12. James 3. 2. Yea, as we brought a world of sin, into the world with us; so
since, ^ach man has broken every one of Gods ten Laws, ten thousand times,
and ten thousand ways: which is far from a privative holiness, in reforming
that which is evil; and a positive holiness in performing that which is good,
Ephesians. 4. 22, 23. and every sin helps: for as original sin is the
original cause of death, so actual sins hasten it.

But to conclude in general, that sin is the cause we suffer, is not
sufficient; for commonly no judgment comes from God, but some particular
provocation of man went before it: the hand of Divine Justice seldom makes us
smart, without some eminent cause foregoing: therefore David seeing a famine
in the Land, inquires for the particular provoking sin, 2 Samuel 21. 1. so when
we suffer, our question should be what have we done: yea, what have we done
in the same kind; for oftentimes we may read our sin in our punishment, as
it fared with Adonibezeck, Judge. 1. 7. and many other mentioned in Scripture.
Sodom was burnt with fire unnatural, as they burned with lust unnatural.
Absaloms chief pride lay in his hair, and that became his halter. Solomon
dividing Gods Kingdom, had his own Kingdom divided. David has slain Uriah
with the sword, therefore the sword shall not depart from his house. Dives
would not give Lazarus a crum, Lazarus shall not bring Dives a drop. Judas was
the instrument of his Masters death, he shall be the instrument of his own
death. Proud Bajazet vows to imprison Tamberlaine in an Iron Cage, and carry
him about the world in triumph: But Tamberlaine having conquered that bragging
Turk, carried, and carted him through all Asia: to be scorned of his own
people. For instance, is any one censured, reviled, and persecuted of lewd
men, for being religious; let him reflect upon his life past, and happily their
revilings, and persecutions, will bring to his remembrance, that he himself
before his conversion, has likewise censured, reviled, or persecuted others.
It may be his natural, spiritual or political parents, in some kind or
other: as who can plead innocence herein? And he that is not humbled for his
sin, is not yet justified from his sin. Yea, so often as thou remembrest
thy sins without grief, so often thou repeatest those sins by not
grieving. Dion of Syracuse being banished, came to Theodorus Court a suppliant,
where not presently admitted, he turned to his companion with these words: I
remember I did the like when I was in the like dignity: He called his deeds
past to a new reckoning. So, when thou receivest an injury, remember what
injuries thou have offered: look not to be exempt from the same wrongs which
thou have done; for he that does wrong, may well receive it: we may well suffer
patiently, when we know we suffer justly. To look for good, and to do bad,
is against the Law of Retaliation.

Or secondly, is any one wronged in his good name, without giving the least
cause of scandal, either at present, or heretofore, which troubles him above
measure: let him nevertheless reflect upon himself, and perhaps he shall
find the cause lie lurking in his own bosom: as thus it may be, thou have
not defamed thy neighbor; but have thou not delighted to hear others speak
evil of him? have thou been tender of his reputation, and as much as thou
could, vindicated his good name.

Or thirdly, does not a proud heart make thee over apprehensive of the wrong;
does not the injury seem great to thee, because thou seem great to thy
self: if so, be but little and lowly in thine own eyes, and the wrong will
seem less: for no man can sweetlier put up disgraces from others, than he
who has first learned to despise himself. Yea, this Straw diadem hurts none,
but the proud, and impatient: for suppose thou find here but hard fare, and
as ill dressed; a poor, hungry, humble soul will down with all well enough.

Or fourthly, has not selfe-conceitednes broken thy credit; probably if thou
would think worse of thy self, thou should be better thought of: But
commonly all is well while we are well esteemed; yea, with many, their
reputation is more cared for, than their God. Neither would he be censured for
sin, that fears not to be damned for it. If this has been thy case,
hence-forward let it trouble thee more to d^ a fault, then to hear of it; and
when thou art evil spoken of by another, call thy self to account before him:
it may be thou deservest i^; be more sorry that it is true, then that it is
known.

Or lastly, admit men charge thee wrongfully, and thou can not find out thy
sin by thy punishment; yet know, that what thou suffer is most just in
respect of God, who is the Author; and who does not always punish sin in
kind: As for example, how many Murders have been punished in a mutenous
word: the tongue in some rash language, has scourged the iniquity of the hand.
One has done many robberies, escaped many searches, at last when all has been
forgotten, he has been hanged for accessory to a Theft, he never knew.
Suspected felony, has often paid the price of an unknown R^pe. And they that
have gone away with unnatural filthiness, have yet clipped off their days with
their own coin: so that still Gods Judgments are just; even when m^ns may be
unjust; which in all cases would be acknowledged, as the godly ever do.
Mauricius that good Emperor, when he, his wife, and his five sons were
taken, his wife and sons put to death, and himself waiting for the like
fatal stroke, could conclude thus; Just art thou, O Lord, in all thy ways,
and holy in all thy works, as it is in the Psalms. And a Martyr, when he was
burning at a stake; Welcome flames, my sin has deserved more than here I can
be able to suffer. And certainly they are angry with Heaven for justice, that
are angry with them for injustice. Wherefore if thou have been heretofore so
simple as to return like for like, hence-forward lay thy hand upon thy mouth,
and say with Job, Once have I spoken, but I will answer no more; yea, twice,
but I will proceed no further, Job 40. 4. 5. I will not so much consider how
unjust man is that gives the wrong, as how just God is that guides it. And
this would be our meditation in all other cases; namely, to think whose h^ud
strikes, whether by a Plurisie, or a Fever, or a Sword, or what ever the
Instrument be; and to conclude, the blow is Gods, whatsoever, or whomsoever is
used as the weapon: yea, it comes not without our desert, for God is just; nor
shall be without our profit, for God is merciful. And he that does not argue
thus, comes short of the very Heathen. For Socrates could tell the Athenians,
when they condemned him to dye, that they could do nothing but what the gods
permitted, and nature had before ordained. And in common reason, can a Clock
go without a weight to move it, or a Keeper to set it? no.

Now this being premised, namely, that we endure nothing from our enemies; but
that we have justly deserved from God. Yea, that we are more beholding to our
greatest enemies touching the knowledge of our selves, than the best friend we
have; how should we not with David, refuse to revenge our selves, in case any
wicked Shimei rail, curse, or cast stones at us, have we never so much power
and opportunity to do it? Yea, admit some Abishai would do it for us, how
should we not say, let him alone, suffer him to curse, for the Lord has bidden
him, 2 Samuel 16. 11.

Again secondly, if we make this use of our sufferings, what more precious
than the reproaches of an enemy? for thereby we shall sooner and more plainly
hear of our faults, than by a friend; although neither in a good manner, nor
to a good end. We have great need (quoth Diogenes) of faithful friends, or
sharp enemies: Every one has use of a Monitor, but friends in this kind are
so rare, that no wise man would willingly forgo his enem^ at any rate.
Wherefore sait^ one, he shall be no friend to me, that is a friend to my
faults; and I am no friend to my self, if I think him my enemy that tells me
of them.

CHAP. XXI.
They are patient because their sufferings are counterpoysed and made sweet
with more than answerable blessings.

5. HE bears the cross patiently, because it is counterpoysed and made sweet
with more than answerable blessings. Satan and the world may take many things
from us, as they did from Job, viz. health, wealth, outward peace, friends,
liberty, credit, etc. but they can never take God from us, who gives all: and
at the same time supplies the want of these, with comforts far surpassing,
and transcending them. And therefore in the midst of misery we say with Joh,
blessed be the name of the Lord.

Quest. But with what comforts does the Lord supply our losses.

Answer. The assurance of the pardon of sin alone, is able to clear all
storms of the mind: it teaches misery, as sickness, poverty, famine,
imprisonment, infamy, etc. to laugh: not by reason of some imaginary ^picycles,
but by natural and palpable reasons. Yea, let death happen, it matters not:
When a Malefactor has s^ed out his pardon, let the Assizes come when they
will, the sooner the better.

But to this is added, the peace of conscience, the marrow of all comforts,
otherwise called the peace of God, which passes all understanding, and
surpasses all commending: and never did man find pleasure upon earth, like
the sweet testimony of an appeased conscience, reconciled unto God, cleansed by
the blood of the Lamb, and quieted by the presence of the Holy Ghost. Yea,
had thou (who most dotest upon the world) but these comforts, thou would
not change them for all that Satan once offered to our Savior; and is now
accepted by many. O good life, (says an Ancient Father) what a Joy art thou in
time of distress: And another, Sweet is the felicity of that man, whose works
are just, and whose desires are innocent: though he be in Phaleris Bull. For
these are privileges which make Paul happier in his chain of Iron, than
Agrippa in his chain of Gold; and Peter more merry under stripes, then Caiphas
upon the Judgment Seat; and Steven the like: For though he was under his
persecutors for outward condition, yet he was far above them for inward
consolation. Neither had wealthy Cressus so much riches in his coffers, as
poor Job had in his conscience. Yea, how can he be miserable that has Christ,
and all his merits made sure to him; that has his name written in Heaven, yea,
that is already in Heaven: for where our desires are, there our selves are. And
the heavenly minded live not so much where they live, as where they love; that
is to say, in Christ: surely his soul must be brim full of brave thoughts,
that is able to refresh himself with this Meditation; God is my Father, the
Church my Mother, Christ the Judge my elder Brother, and Advocate; the Holy
Ghost my Comforter; the Angels mine attendance; all the Creatures mine for use;
the stock of the Churches Prayers mine for benefit; the world mine Inn; Heaven
my home; God is always with me, before me, within me, overseeing me; I
talk with him in Prayer, he with me in his word; etc. Sure if these be the
accustomed meals of a good soul, it cannot choose but keep natural heat from
decaying; and make it happy.

But behold yet a greater privilege; These comforts do not only support and
refresh us, and so supply our losses in common calamities: but even in the
midst of ^ortures and torments, which otherwise were intolerable: The natural
man's stomach cannot (of all enemies) endure hunger; yea a prison, where he
must always lie under hatches, makes him all amort: but worthy Hawks could
clap his hands for joy in the midst of the flames: and another that I read of
say, my good friends, I now find it true indeed, he that leaves all to follow
Christ, shall have in this world centuplum, a hundred fold more; I have it in
that centuplum, peace of conscience with me at parting. And Anaxarchus being
laid along in a Trough of stone, and smitten with Iron sledges by the
appointment of Nicocreon, the Tyrant of Cyprus, ceased not to cry out, strike,
smite, and beat; it is not Anaxarchus, but his veil you martyr so. And a
child in Josephus, being all rent to death with biting snippers at the
commandment of Antiochus, could cry with a loud, assured, and undaunted voice;
Tyrant, thou los^st time, lo I am still at mine ease, what is that smarting
pain; where are those torments, which whilome thou did so threaten me
withal? my constancy more troubles thee, than thy cruelty me. And how many
more of those Martyrs in Queen Maryes Reign, were even ravished, before they
could be permitted to dye: so great, and so passing all expressing, is the
peace and comfort of a good conscience.

Now as the Pri^sts of Mercury when they eat their sigges, and honey, cried
out, O how sweet is Truth: so if the worst of a Believers life in this world be
so sweet, how sweet shall his life be in Heaven: but I Will hold you no longer in
this.

A man that has his sins pardoned, is never completely miserable, till
conscience again turns his enemy: whereas on the contrary; take the most
happy worldling that ever was, if he have not his sins pardoned; he is
completely wretched, (though he sees it not) suppose him Emperor of the whole
world; as Adam, when he was in Paradise, and Lord of all, what did it avayle
him so long as he had a tormenter within, a selfe-condemning conscience: which
told him that God was his enemy, and knew no other then that hell should be his
everlasting portion: certainly this like a dampe, could not choose but put out
all the lights of his pleasure; so that Paradise it self was not Paradise to
him, which is the case of all wicked men, be they never so great, never so
seemingly happy.

True, wicked men think the godly less merry, and more miserable than
themselves: yea some, that mirth and mischief are only sworn brothers; but
this is a foundation less opinion. For first, no man is miserable, because
another so thinks him. Secondly, Gods word teaches, and a good conscience
finds, that no man can be so joyful as the faithful. Indeed carnal men
laugh more, but that laughter is only the hypocrisy of mirth: they rejoice in
the face only, and not in the heart, as the Apostle witnesses; 2 Cor. 5. 12.
or as another has it, Where O God there wants thy grace,
Mirth is only in the face.
Yea, their own consciences bare me witness, as that Spanish Judge well
considered: who when a murder was committed in a tumultuous crowde of people,
bared all their bos^mes, and feeling upon their brest^, discovered the guilty
Author by the panting of his heart* And Tully who makes it an argument of
Roscius Amerinus Innocence, that he killed not his Father: because he so
secu^ely slept. Yea, as in profane joy, even in laughter the heart is
sorrowful; so in godly sorrow, even in weeping the heart is light and
cheerful. The tears of those that pray, are sweeter than the joys of the
Theater, says Saint Augustine: For our cheeks may run down with tears, and
yet our mouths sing forth praises; the face may be pale, yet the heart may be
quiet; and cheerful: so Saint Paul as sorrowing, and yet always rejoicing, 2
Cor. 6. 10. Neither can it be solid comfort, except it has his issue from a
good conscience. Indeed we therefore are not merry enough, because we are not
Christians enough.

Now if all our sufferings are thus counterpoysed, and exceeded with blessings,
have we any cause to be angry and impatient. What says Job? Shall we receive
good at the hands of God, and not evil? He was content to eat the crust with
the c(...)mme. Indeed his wife (like the wicked) would only have fair
weather; all peac^ and plenty, no touch of trouble: but it is not so with the
godly, who have learnt better things. Who will not suffer a few stripes from a
Father, by whom he receives so much good, even all that he has? Diogenes
would have no nay, but Antisthenes must entertain him his Scholar, insomuch
that Aptisthenes to have him gone was fore'r to cudgel him, yet all would not
do: he stirs not, but takes the bl^wes very patiently; saying, Use me how
you will, so I may be your Scholar and hear your daily discourses I care not.
Much more may a Christian say unto God, Let me in joy the sweet fr^ition of thy
presence, speak thou peace unto my conscience, and say unto my soul, I am thy
salvation, and then afflict me how thou please, I am content, yea, very
willing to bear it: Yea, if we well consider the commodity it brings, we
shall rather wish for affliction, than be displeased when it comes, Col. 1. 24.
For it even brings with it the company of God himself, I will be with you
in tribulation says God to the disconsolate soul, Psalm. 91. 15. When Sidrack,
Mishack, and Abednego, were cast into the siery furnace, there was presently a
fourth came to bear them company, and that was God himself, Dan. 3. 23, to 27.
And his presence makes any condition comfortable; were a man even in Hell it
self: yea, as when S. Paul was wrapped up to the third heaven, he was so
ravished wi^h the joy ther^of, that he kn^w not whether he had his body about
him or not, 2 Cor* 12. 2. Whet^er in the body or out of the body I cannot tell,
God knows. So Gods presence so ravisheth the soul, that while a man suffers
the greatest pain, he knows not whether he be in pain or no. Yea, God is
not only (...) then to comfort them in all their tribulations, 2 ^^r. (...).
(...). but in them: for at the same ^ime when the Di^c^pl^^ were persecuted,
they are said to be filled with joy, and with the Holy Ghost, Acts 13. 52. And
(...) ^ur sufferings in Christ do abound, so our consolation also abound^th
through Christ, 2 Cor. (...). 5, And las^ly b^ (...) comsort us according to
the days we are aff^ct^d, and according to the years we have seen evil,
Psalm. 90* 15. So that a Christian gains more by his ^o^^es, (...) crosses,
then the happyest worldling by ^ll (...)is (...)nities: as it was said of
Demosthe^^s, tha^ ^ee got more by holding his peace, than o^^er Lawyers did by
their pleading.

And if so, our sufferings require patience with thankfulness, as it fared
with Job.

Ob. But what ever others find, thy sufferings are not thus counterpoysed and
sweetened?

An. What Is the reason; get but the light of grace to shine in thy heart, thy
prison shall be an heaven, thy Keepers, Angels; thy Chains thy glory, and thy
deliveran^e, Salvation: grow but heavenly minded, and thou shall be able to
extract gain out of loss, peace out of trouble, strength out of infi mity,
out of Tears, joy; out of sin, holiness; ^ut of persecution, profit; out of
affliction, comfort: For godliness in every sickness is a Physician, in every
contention an Advocate, in every doubt a Sch^oleman, in all heaviness a
Preacher, and a comforter unto whatsoever estate it comes, making the whole
life as it were, a perpetual h^l^luja^.

Besides we look for a Crown of glory, even that most excellent, and eternal
weight of glory, to succeed this wreath of Thorns: but if we are never tried
in the field, never set foot to run the race of patience, how can we look
for a Garland? Ten repulses did the Israelites suffer before they could get out
of Egypt, and twice ten more before they could get possession of the promised
Land of Canaan. And as many did David endure before he was invested in the
promised Kingdom: many lets came before the Temple was re-edified.

All men would come to Heaven, but they do not like the way; they like well of
A^rahams bosom, but not of D^ves door. But God sees it fit for us to taste
of that Cup of which his Son drank so deep, that we should feel a little
what sin is, and what his love was; that we may learn patience in adversity,
as well as thank^fulnesse in prosperity; while one s^ale is not always in
depression, nor the other lifted ever high; while none is so miserable, but he
shall hear of another that would change calamities with him.

CHAP. XXII.
That they are patient, because patience brings a reward with it.

6. BEcause patience in suffering brings a reward with it, in reason a man
would forgive his enemy even for his own sake, were there no other motive to
persuade him: for to let pass many things of no small moment, as that if we
forgive not, we can do no part of Gods worship that is pleasing to him: for we
cannot pray aright, 1 Timothy 2. 8. We cannot communicate in the Sacrament, but
we make our selves guilty of Christ's blood, 1 Cor. 11. 27. Mat. 5, 24. We
cannot be good hearers of the Word, James 1. 21. and that it makes a man
captive to Satan, Ephesians. 4. 26, 27* and many the like: If ye forgive men their
trespasses (says our Savior) your heavenly Father will also forgive you; but
if you forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your heavenly Father
forgive you your trespasses, Mat. 6. 14. 15. So he that will not be in charity
shall never be in Heaven: And why should I do my self a shrewd turn,
because another would. Yea, we desire pardon, as we give pardon, and we would
be loath to have our own lips condemn us. When we pray to God to forgive us
our trespasses, as we also forgive them that trespass against us, and do not
resolve to forgive our brethren; we do in effect say, Lord condemn us, for
we will be condemned: whereas he that does good to his enemy, even in that act
does better to himself. It is a singular sacrifice to God, and well pleasing
to him to do good against evil, and to succor our very enemy in his
necessity, But we may perchance heap coals of fire upon the others head, Romans
12. 20, though we must not do it with an intent to make his reckoning more,
but our reckoning less,

Again, Blessed is the man, says Saint James, that indureth temptation (viz.
with patience) for when he is tried, he shall receive the Crown of life, James
1. 12. And this made Moses not only patient in his sufferings, but joyful,
esteeming the rebuke of Christ greater riches than all the treasures of Egypt*
For says the Text, he had respect unto the recompense of the reward, Heb. 11.
26. And well it might; for whereas the highest degree of suffering is not
worthy of the least and lowest degree of this glory, Romans 8. 18. Saint Paul
witnesses, that our light affliction which is but for a moment (if it be borne
with patience) causes unto us a far most excellent and eternal weight of
glory; while we look not on the things that are seen, but on the things which
are not seen, 2 Cor. 4. 17, 18. Where note the incomparablenesse and infinite
difference between the work and the wages, light affliction receiving a weight
of glory, and momentany affliction^ eternal glory; answerable to the reward of
the wicked, whose empty delights live and dye in a moment; but their
insufferable punishment is interminable and endless: their pleasure is short,
their pain everlasting; our pain is short, our joy eternal. What will not
men undergo, so their pay may be answerable? The old experienced Soldier
fears not the rain and storms above him, nor the numbers falling before him,
nor the troops of enemies against him, nor the shot of thundering Ordnance
about him, but looks to the honorable reward promised him. When Philip asked
Democritus, if he did not fear to lose his head, he answered, No: for (quoth
he) If I dye, the Athenians will give me a life immortal; meaning, he should
be statuted in the treasury of eternal fame: if the immortallity (as they
thought) of their names, was such a strong reason to persuade them to patience,
and all kind of worthiness; what should the immortallity of the soul be to
us? Alas, virtue were a poor thing, if fame only should be all the Garland
that did crown her: but the Christian knows, that if every pain he suffers
were a death, and every cross an hell, he shall have amends enough. Why, said
Ambrose on his death bed, we are happy in this, we serve a good Master, that
will not suffer us to be losers. Which made the Martyrs such Lambs in
suffering, that their persecutors were more weary with striking, than they with
suffering. And many of them as willing to dye, as dine. No matter (quoth one of
them) what I suffer on earth, so I may be crowned in Heaven. I care not, quoth
another, what becomes of this frail Bark my flesh, so I have the passenger,
my soul, safely conducted. And another. If at night thou grant me Lazarus
boon,
Let Dives dogs like all my sores at noone.
And a valiant Soldier going about a Christian achievement; my comfort is,
though I lose my life for Christ's sake, yet I shall not lose my labor; yea, I
cannot endure enough to come to Heaven. Lastly, Ignatius going to his
Martyrdom was so strongly ravished, with the Joys of Heaven, that he burst
out into these words; nay, come fire, come beasts, come breaking of all my
bones, rackings of my body, come all the torments of the Devil together upon
me; come what can come in the whole earth, or in hell; so I may enjoy Jesus
Christ in the end.

They were content to smart so they might gain; and it was not long, but
light, which was exacted of them, in respect of what was expected by them, and
promised to them, 2 Cor. 4. 17. Neither did they think that God is bound to
reward them any way for their sufferings; no, if he accepts me when I have
given my body to be burned (says the believer) I may account it a mercy.

Thus hope refreshes a Christian, as much as misery depresseth him; it makes
him defy all that men ^o devils can do, saying, take away my goods, my good
name, my friends, my liberty, my life, and what else thou can imagine: yet I
am well enough, so long as thou can not take away the reward of all, which is
an hundred fold more even in this world, and in the world to come life
everlasting, Mark. 10. 29, 30 as when a Courtyer gave it out, that Queen Mary
(being displeased with the City) threatened to divert both Term and Parliament
to Oxford; an Alderman asked whither she meant to turn the Channel of the
Thames thither or no: if not, (says he) by Gods grace we shall do well
enough. For what are the things our enemies can take from us, in comparison of
Christ, the Ocean of our comfort; and Heaven the place of our rest: where is
joy without heaviness, or interruption; peace without perturbation;
blessedness without misery; light, without darkness; health, without
sickness; beauty, without blemish; abundance, without want; ease, without
labor; satiety, without loathing; liberty, without restraint; security,
without fear; glory, without ignominy; knowledge, without ignorance; eyes,
without tears; hearts, without sorrow; souls, without sin; where shall be
no evil present, or good absent: for we shall have what we can desire, and we
shall desire nothing but what is good. In fine, that I may darkelyshaddow it
out, since the lively representation of it is merely impossible; this life
everlasting, is the perfection of all good things: for fullness is the
perfection of measure, and everlastingnes the perfection of time, and
infinitenes the perfection of number, and immutability the perfection of state,
and immensity the perfection of place, and immortality the perfection of life,
and God the perfection of all; who shall be all in all to us: meat to our
taste, beauty to our eyes, perfumes to our smell, music to our ears, and
what shall I say more; but as the Psalmist says, Glorious things are spoken of
thee thou City of God: but alas, such is man's parvitie, that he is as far from
comprehending it, as his arms be from compassing it; Heaven shall receive us,
we cannot conceive Heaven. Do you ask what Heaven is, says one, when I meet
you there I will tell you; for could this care hear it, or this tongue utter
it, or this heart conceive it; it must needs follow, that they were translated
already thither.

Now if this be so, how acceptable should death be, when in dying we sleep,
and in sleeping we rest from all the travels of a toylesome life: to live in
joy and rest for evermore. Let us then make that voluntary, which is necessary,
and yield it to God as a gift, which we stand bound to pay as a due debt:
says Chrysostom. Yea, how should we not with a great deal of comfort and
security, pass through a Sea of troubles, that we may come to that haven of
eternal rest? How, should we not cheer up one another, as the mother of
Melitho did her son, when she saw his legs broken, and his body bruised,
being ready to yield up his spirit in Martyrdom: saying, O my son, hold on
yet but a little, and behold Christ stands by, ready to bring help to thee
in thy torments, and a large reward for thy sufferings. Or as Jewel did his
friends in banishment; saying, This world will not last ever? And indeed we do
but stay the tide, as a fish left upon the sands.

Ob. I but in the mean time my sufferings are intolerable, says the fainting
soul.

Sol. It is no victory to conquer an easy and weak cross; these maine evils
have crowns answerable to their difficulty, Rev. 7. 14. No low attempt a
starlike glory brings; but so long as the hardness of the victory shall
increase the glory of the triumph, endure it patiently, cheerfully.

2. Secondly, as patience in suffering brings an eternal reward with it in
Heaven, so it procures a reward here also: suffer him to curse, says David
touching Sh^m^i, (here was patience for a King to suffer his impotent subject,
even in the heat of blood and midst of war to speak swords, and cast stones
at his Sovereign, and that with a purpose to increase the rebellion, and
strengthen the adverse part;) but mark his reason: It may be the Lord will
look upon mine affliction, and do me good: Why? even for his cursing this day,
2 Samuel 16. 12. And well might he expect it, for he knew this was Gods manner
of dealing: as when he turned Balaams curse into a blessing upon the children
of Israel, Number. 23. And their malice who sold Joseph to his great advantage.
Indeed these Shemeis and Balaams, whose hearts and tongues are so ready to
curse and rail upon the people of God, are not seldom the very means to
procure a contrary blessing unto them; so that if there were no offense to God
in it, nor hurt to themselves, we might wish and call for their contempt,
cruelty, and curses, for so many curses, so many blessings.

I could add many examples to the former, as how the malice of Haman turned to
the good of the Jews: the malice of Achitophel to the good of David, when his
counsel was turned by God into foolishness: the malice of the Pharisees to
him that was borne blind, when Christ, upon their casting him out of the
Synagogue, admitted him into the Communion of Saints, John 9. 34. The malice of
Herod to the Babes, whom he could never have pleasured so much with his
kindness, as he did with his cruelty; for where his impiety did abound, there
Christ's pity did superabound; translating them from their earthly mothers
arms, in this valley of tears, unto their heavenly Fathers boso(...)e, in his
Kingdom of glory. But more pertinent to the matter in hand is that of Aaron
and Miriam to Moses, when they murmured against him, Numb. 12. where it is
evident, that God had never so much magnified him to them, but for their envy.
And that of the Arians to Paph^^ti^s, when they put out one of his eyes for
withstanding their Heresy: whom Constantine the Emperor, even for that very
cause, had in such reverence and estimation, that he would often send for him
to his Court, lovingly embracing him, and greedily kissing the eye which had
lost his own sight, for maintaining that of the Catholic Doctrine: so that we
cannot devise to pleasure Gods servants so much, as by despighting them.

And thus you see how patient suffering is rewarded both here and hereafter;
that we lose what ever we do lose by our enemies, no otherwise then the
husbandman loses his seed: for whatever we part withal, is but as seed cast
into the ground, which shall even in this life, according to our Saviors
promise, return unto us the increase of an hundred fold, and in the world to
come, life everlasting, Mark 10. 29, 30. But admit patience should neither be
rewarded here, nor hereafter; yet it is a sufficient reward to it self: for
hope and patience are two sovereign and universal remedies for all diseases.
Patience is a counterpoyson or antipoyson for all grief. It is like the Tree
which Moses cast into the wate^s, Exodus 15. 25. for as that Tree made the
waters sweet, so Patience sweetens affliction; it is as Larde to the lean
meat of adversity. It makes the poor beggar rich, teaches the bondsman in a
narrow prison to enjoy all liberty, and society; for the patient believer,
though he be alone, yet he never wants company; though his diet be pe(...)y,
his sauce is content: all his miseries cannot make him sick: because they are
disgested by patience. And indeed, it is not so much the greatness of their
pain, as the smalnesse of their patience, that makes many miserable; whence
some have, and not unfitly resembled our fancies, to those multiplying glasses,
made at Venice, which being put to the eye, make twenty men in Arms show like
a terrible Army. And every man is truly calamitous, that supposes himself
so; as oftentimes we die in conceit, before we be truly sick; we give the
battle lost, when as yet we see not the enemy. Now crosses are either
ponderous or light, as the Disciples, or Scholars esteem them: every man is so
wretched, as he believes himself to be. The taste of goods or evils does
greatly depend on the opinion we have of them, and contentation, like an old
man's spectacles; makes those characters easy and familiar, that otherwise
would puzzle* him shrewdly. Afflictions are as we use them; there is nothing
grievous if the thoug^t make it not so: even pain it self (says the
Philosopher) is in our power, if not to be disanulled, yet at least to be
diminished through patience: very Gally-slaves, setting light by their
captivity, find freedom in bondage. Patience is like a golden shield in the
hand, to break the stroke of every cross, and save the heart though the body
suffer. A sound spirit, says Solomon, will bear his infirmity, Prove. 18. 14.
Patience to the soul, is as the lid to the eye; for as the lid being shut,
when occasion requires, saves it exceedingly; so patience intervening between
the soul and that which it suffers, saves the heart whole, and cheeres the
body again. And therefore, if you mark it, when you can pass by an offense,
and take it patiently and quietly, you have a kind of peace and joy in your
heart, as if you had gotten a victory, and the more your patience is, still the
less your pain is; for as a light burden at the arms end weighs heavier
by much, than a burden of treble weight, if it be borne on the shoulders which
are made to bear; so if a man set patience to bear his cross, the weight is
nothing to what it would be if that were wanting: In a word, Patience is so
sovereign a m(...)dicine, that it cures and overcomes all: it keeps the heart
from envy, the hand from revenge, the tongue from contu(...)ely, the whole body
from smart; it overcomes our enemies without weapons: finally, it is such a
virtue, that it makes calamities no calamities.

But what needs all this, men commonly say in necessitated sufferings, what
remedy but patience: therefore patience is a confessed remedy. Wherefore, says
one, being unable to direct events, I govern my self; and if they apply not
themselves to me, I apply my self to them; if I cannot fling what I would,
yet I will somewhat mend it, by playing the cast as well as I can.

O that all implacable persons who double their sufferings through long study
of revenge, would learn this lesson, and bear what they must bear patiently:
then would they find that patience can no less mitigate evils, than
impatience exasperates them. A profitable prescription indeed (may some say)
but of an hard execution! hard indeed to an impenitent sinner, that has two
burdens on his back at once, (viz. his affliction, and his sin, which adds
weight to his affliction) to carry them so easily, as he that has but one;
namely his affliction. Yea, it is altogether impossible to flesh and blood; for
our hearts are like the Isle Pathmos, in which nothing will grow, but on earth
which is brought from other places. If the will be ours, the good will is Gods:
Wherefore if thou art only beholding to nature, and have naught but what thou
broughtest into the world with thee, well may thou envy at it, but thou
can never imitate it; for to speak the truth, faith and patience are two
miracles in a Christian. A Protestant Martyr being at the stake, in the midst
of furious and outrageous flames, cried out, behold ye Papists, whom nothing
will convince but Miracles; here see one indeed, for in this fire I feel no
more pain, than if I were in a bed of Down; yea it is to me like a bed of
Roses: and Cassianus reports, that when a Martyr was tormented by the
Infidels, and asked by way of reproach what miracle his CHRIST had done; he
answered, he has done what you now behold; enabled me so to bear your
contumelies, and undergo all these tortures so patiently, that I am not once
moved; and is not this a miracle worthy your taking notice of. Indeed, what
have we by our second birth, which is not miraculous in comparison of our
natural condition? It was no less than a miracle for Zacheus, a man both rich
and covetous, to give half his goods to the the poor, and make restitution
with the residue, and all this in his health. It was a great miracle, that
Joseph in the arms of his Mistress should not burn with lust. It is a great
miracle for a man to forsake Houses and Lands, and all that he has; yea, to
hate Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and his own life to be Christ's
Disciple. It is a great miracle to rejoice in tribulation, and smile death in
the face. It is a great miracle, that of fierce and cruel Wolves, Bears,
Lions, we should be transformed into meek Lambs, and harmless Doves: and
all this by the foolishness of preaching Christ crucified. Indeed they were no
miracles, if Nature could produce the like effects: but she must not look to
stand in competition with grace. Saint Paul before his conversion, could do as
much as the proudest natural man of you all; his words are, If any other man
thinks that he has whereof he might trust in the flesh, much more I, Phil.
3. 4. Yet when he speaks of patience, and rejoicing in tribulation, he
shows, That it was because the love of God was shed abroad in his heart by
the Holy Ghost, which was given unto him, Romans 5. 5. of himself he could do
nothing, though he were able to do all things through Christ which
strengthened him, Phil. 4. 13. Have thou then a desire after this invincible
patience? seek first to have the love of God shed abroad in thy heart by the
Holy Ghost; which love of God, is like that Rod of Myrtle, which (as Pliny
reports) makes the traveller that carries it in his hand, never to be faint or
weary. Would thou have the love of God? ask it of him by prayer; who says,
if any of you lack in this kind, let him Ask of God that gives to all men
liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him, James 1. 5. Would
thou pray that thou may be heard, Ask in faith and waver not, for he that
wavereth is like a wave of the Sea, tossed of the wind, and carried away, Verse.
6. Would thou have faith? be diligent to hear the Word preached, for Faith
comes by hearing, Romans 10. 17. Unto him therefore that is able to do exceeding
abundantly above all that we can ask or think, I commend thee.

CHAP. XXIII.
Because our enemies are ignorant.

2. Reasons in regard of our enemies are three. 1 because They are ignorant. 2
because They are rather to be pitied, than maligned or reckoned of. 3 because
Their expectation may not be answered.


1. HE well considers the ignorance of his enemies, who being carnal, fleshly,
unregenerate, cannot discern the spiritual objects at which they are
offended. Father forgive them (says our Savior of his enemies) for they know
not what they do, Luke 23. 34. Socrates being persuaded to revenge himself of
a fellow that kicked him; answered, if an Ass had kicked me, should I have set
my wit to his, and kick him again; or if a Mastife had bitten me, would you
have me go to Law with him? And when it was told him another time, that such
an one spoke evil of him, he replied; alas the man has not as yet learned to
speak well, but I have learned to contemno what he speaks. Diogenes being
told that many despised him, answered; It is the wise man's portion to suffer of
fools. Aristotle, being told that a simple fellow railed on him, was not once
moved, but said, let him beat me also being absent, I care not; we may well
suffer their words, while God does deliver us out of their hands: for if we go
on in a silent constancy, say our ears be beaten, yet our hearts shall be
free. And this heroical resolution had Saint Paul, that chosen Vessel; I
pass very little to be judged of you: (meaning blind sensualists) or of man's
judgment, he that judges me is the Lord, 1 Cor. 4. 3, 4. and indeed, an ounce
of credit with God is more worth than a tallent of men's praises. I regard not
(quoth Plato) what every one says, but what he says, that sees all things;
he knew well enough that the fame which is derived from fools and knaves, is
infamy. Cato was much ashamed if at any time he had committed any thing
dishonest; but else, what was reproved by opinion only, never troubled him:
yea, when a fool struck him in the Bath; and after, being sorry for it, cried
him mercy, he would not come so near revenge, as to acknowledge he had been
wronged: Light injuries are made none by a not regarding. The ignorant
multitude among the Jews said, that Saint John had a Devil; and that Christ
was a Glutton, and a Wine bibber: But what says he by way of answer, wisdom
is justified of her Children, Matthew. 11. 18, 19.

Let none object the Scribes and Pharisees joining with them, who were great
Scholars: for no man knows so much, but it is through ignorance that he does
so ill. Neither does our Savior enquire, what the Pharisees, or Priests
reputed him; but whom say men (meaning those who minded his Doctrine) that I
the son of man am, Mat. 16. 13. But this point I have handled at large in
another place; therefore to avoid a coincidence of discourse, I pass it.

If men shall hate and revile thee for thy goodness, it must needs ^ollow,
that they are as foolish as they be ungodly: Now ye suffer fools and Idiots
to jest, and play upon you; yea, you take pleasure in it, so should ye suffer
these fools gladly, because ye are wise, as the Apostle speaks: 2 Cor. 11.
19. And certainly if the whole world do contemn a generous Christian, he will
even contemn that contempt, and not think it worthy a room in his very
thoughts, that common receptacle or place of entertainment. Much more if a
single person, none of the wisest, will he hear with patience, and say with
Tacitus, you are able to curse, and I to contemn: Tu linguae ego aurium sum
Dominus, you are master of your tongue, and I of mine ears. What says one
advisedly? when we are provoked to fight with women, the best way is to run
away. And indeed, he that lets loose his anger upon every occasion, is like him
that lets go his Hawke upon every bayte.

True, our Gallants that have more heart than brain, and more pride than
either, think they play the men, when they dare one another to fight: like
boys, who shall go farthest into the dirt; or vie to see who can drop most
oaths, whereof the deepest is a winning Card in this their game of glory. But
what says Solomon, if a wise man contend with a foolish man, whether he be
angry, or laugh; there is no rest: Prove. 29. 9. Besides, we may apprehend it a
wrong, when it is none, if we take not heed: for those things pass many times
for wrongs in our thoughts, which were never meant so by the heart of him that
speaks. Words do sometimes fly from the tongue, that the heart did never
hatch nor harbor; wherefore, unless we have proofs that carry weight and
conviction with them, let not our apprehension grow into a suspicion of evil;
else while we think to revenge an injury, we may begin one; and after that,
repent our misconceptions: And it is always seen, that a good man's
constructions are ever full of charity and favor; either this wrong was not
done, or not with intent of wrong; or if that, upon misinformation; or if none
of these, rashness the fault, or ignorance shall serve for an excuse. And
indeed, in things that may have a double sense: it is good to think the better
was intended; for so shall we both keep our friends, and quietness.

CHAP. XXIV.
Because they are rather to be pitied than maligned, or reckoned of.

2. BEcause their adversaries are rather to be contemptuously pitied, than
maligned or reckoned of; and that whether we regard their present, or future
estate. Concerning the present; If a man distracted (and so are wicked men
touching spiritual things) do rail on us, we are more sorry for him, than for
our selves: Yea, who will take in evil part the reproaches and revilings of a
man in his fever: or who will be angry with a dog for barking. (And such an
one has but the mind of a beast, in the form of a man,) let us then do the
like, in a case not unlike: and not resemble Ctesipho the wrastler, who would
not put up a blow at the beeles of an Ass, but like an Ass kicked her again.
When Jullan in a mock asked Maris, Bishop of Chalcedon, why his Galilean god
could not help him to his sight; he replied, I am contentedly blind, that I
may not see such a Tyrant as thou art. Anger alone, were it alone in them, is
certainly a kind of b^senesse and infirmity, as well appears in the
weakness of those Subjects in whom it reigns, as Children, Women, Old
folks, Sick folks; yea, a ^oare disease of the mind. Socrates bidding good
speed to a dogged fellow; who in requital of his kind salutation, returned
him a base answer; the rest of his Company railing on the fellow, were
reprehended by Socrates, in this manner: If any one (quoth he) should pass by
us diseased in his body, or distracted in his mind, should we therefore he
angry? or had we not more cause to be filled with joy and thankfulness, that
we our selves are in better case. What need we return railing for railing?
All the harm that a common Slanderer can do us with his foul mouth, is to
shame himself. For his words are like dust, that men throw against the wind,
which flies back into the throwers face, and makes him blind: for as the
blasphemer wounds himself, by wounding Christ: so the rayler shames himself,
when he thinks to shame another. Neither have they power to hurt us; strong
malice in a weak breast, is but like a heavy house, built upon slender
crutches.

True, they conceit of their slanders as the Pope of his censures, who if he
put a Traitor into the Rubricke, he is presently a Saint in heaven; if he
curse, or excommunicate a Christian, he must needs be inroled in hell: but we
know their words, mere Idols, which as the Apostle witnesses, are nothing in
the world; and therefore trouble not thy self about them. What need had David
to load himself with an unnessary weapon? one sword can serve both his enemy
and him: Goliahs own weapon shall serve to behead the Master: so this man's
own tongue shall serve to accuse himself, and acquit thee. Yea, as David had
Goliath to bear his sword for him; so thy very enemy shall carry for thee both
sword and shield, even sufficient for defense, as well as for offense.

Wherefore in these cases it has been usual for Gods people, to behave
themselves like dead Images, which though they be railed on, and reviled by
their enemies, yet have ears, and hear not; mouths, and speak not; hands,
and revenge not; neither have they breath in their nostrils, to make reply*
Psalm. 115. 5, 6, 7. If you will see it in an example, look upon David; he was
as deaf and dumb at reproach, as any stock, or stone. They that seek after
my life (says he) lay snares, and they that go about to do me evil, talk
wicked things all the day, (sure it was their vocation to backebite and
slander) but I was as deaf, and heard not; and at one dumb, which does not
open his mouth. I was as a man that hears not, and in whose mouth are no
reproves, Psalm. 38. 12, 13. This innocent Dove was also as wise as a Serpent,
in stopping his ears, and refusing to hear the voice of these blasphemous
Inchanters, charmed they never so wisely.

And as their words are to be contemned by us, so are their challenges to
fight: when a young Gallant would needs pick a quarrel with an ancient tried
Soldier, whose valor had made him famous: it was generally held, that he
might with credit refuse to fight with him, until his worth should be known
equivalent to his: saying, your ambition is to win honor upon me, whereas I
shall receive nothing but disgrace from you. The Goshawke scorns to fly at
Sparrowes: Those noble Dogs which the King of Albany presented to Alexander,
out of an overflowing of courage, (...)temned to encounter with any Beasts, but
Lions, and Elephants: as for Stagges, wild Boares, and Bears, they made so
little account of, that seeing them, they would not so much as remove out of
their places. And so the Regenerate man, which fights daily with their King,
Satan: scorns to encounter with his servant, and slave the Car(...)ll m^^.
And this is so far from detracting, that it adds to his honor, and shows
his courage, and fo^ti^^d^, to be right generous, and noble.

Again secondly, the wager is unequal, to lay the life of a Christian,
against the life of a Ruffion, (and the blind sword makes no difference of
persons) the one surpassing the other, as much as Heaven, Earth; Angels, men;
or men, beasts: even Aristippus being derided by a fearelesse soldier, for
drooping in danger of ship(...)acke, could answer, thou and I have not the like
cause to be afraid: for thou shall only lose the life of an Ass, but I the
life of a Philosopher. The consideration whereof, made Alexander when he was
commanded by Philip his Father, to wrestle in the games of Olympia; answer, he
would, if there were any Kings present to strive with him, else not; which is
our very case: and nothing is more worthy our pride, then (that which will make
us most humble, if we have it) that we are Christians. When an Ambassador
told Henry the fourth, that Magnificent King of France, concerning the King of
Spaines ample Dominions; First said he, he is King of Spain: is he so, says
Henry? and I am King of France: but said the other, he is King of Portugal;
and I am King of France, says Henry: He is King of Naples; and I am King of
France: He is King of Sicily; and I am King of France: He is King of Nova
Hispaniola; and I am King of France: He is King of the West Indies; and I, said
Henry, am King of France: He thought the Kingdom of France only, equivalent
to all those Kingdoms. The application is easy, the practice usual with so
many, as know themselves heirs apparent, to an immortal Crown of glory. And
as touching their future estate, Fret not thy self (says David) because of
the wicked men, neither be envious for the evil doers; for they shall soon
be cut down like grass, and shall (...) as the green herb, Psalm. 37. 1, 2.
This does excellently appear in that remarkable example of Samaria, besieged
by Benhadad, and his Host, 2 Kings 7. 6, 7. As also in Haman, who now begins to
envy, where half an hour since he had scorned: as what could so much vex that
insulting Agagite, as to be made a Laqui to a despised Jew: yea, not to mension
that which followed, stay but one hour more, the basest slave of Persia will
not change conditions with this great favorite, though he might have his
riches and former honor to boot.

I might instance the like of Pharaoh, Exodus 15. ver. 9, 10, 19. Senacharib,
Esa. 37. verse. 36, 37, 38. Herod, Acts. 12. verse. 22, 23. and many other, but
experience shows that no man can sit upon so high a Cogu^, but may with
turning prove the lowest in the Wheel; and that pride cannot climb so high,
but justice will sit above her. And thus are they to be contemned and pitied
while they live; and when they dye.

3. After death, the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation
(says Peter) and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment to be
punished, 2 Pet. 2. 9. Alas, were thy Enemy sure to enjoy more Kingdoms then
ever the Devil showed Christ: to be more healthful than Moses; to live
longer than Methuselah: yet being out of Gods favor, this is the end; to have
his Body lie hid in the silent dust, and his Soul tormented in Hell fire. And
upon this consideration, when Dionysius the Tyrant had plotted the death of his
Master Plato, and was defeated by Platos escape out of his Dominions; when the
Tyrant d^sired him in writing not to speak evil of him, the Philosopher
replied: That he had not so much idle time as once to think of him, knowing
there was a just God would one day call him to a reckoning. The Moon looks
never the paler when Wolves howl against it; neither is she the slower in her
motion, howbeit some Sbeepheard or Lion may watch them a good turn. Wherefore
says Saint Gregory, pray for thine enemies; yea, says Saint Paul, be gentle
toward all that do thee evil, and instruct them with meekness, proving if
God at any time will give them repentance that they may know the truth, and
come to amendment of life, out of the snare of the Devil, of whom they are
taken prisoners to do his will, 2 Timothy, 2. 25, 26. Which thing himself had
formerly found of force, for with that contrary breath, I mean that one prayer
which Saint Steven made at his death, he was of a foe made a friend, of a Saul
a Paul, of a Persecutor a Preacher, of an imposter a Pastor, a Doctor of a
sedncer, of a Pirat a Prelate, of a blasphemer a blesser, of a thief a
shepherd, and of a Wolf a sheep of Christ's fold.

4. And lastly, if we consider our own future estate, we have no less cause
to contemn their evil words; for it is not material to our well or ill
being, what censures pass upon us; the tongues of the living avail nothing to
the good or hurt of those that lie in their graves; they can neither diminish
their joy, nor yet add to their torment (if they find any,) their is no Common
Law in the New Jerusalem; their truth will be received, though either
plaintiff or defendant speaks it. Yea, there shall be a resurrection of our
credits, as well as of our bodies. Nay, suppose they should turn their words
into blows, and (in stead of using their tongues) take up their swords and
kill us, they shall rather pleasure than hurt us. When John Baptist was
delivered from a double prison, of his own, of Herod's, and pl^ced in the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God, what did he lose by it? His head was
taken off, that it might be crowned with glory; he had no ill bargain of it,
they did but hasten him to immortality: and the Churches daily prayer is, Come
Lord Jesus, come quickly. Yea, what said blessed Bradford? In Christ's cause to
suffer death, is the way to Heaven on horseback; which has made some even
slight the sentence of death, and make nothing of it. It is recorded of one
Martyr, that hearing the sentence of his condemnation read, wherein was expressed
many several tortures, of starving, killing, boiling, burning, and the like,
which he should suffer; he turns to the people, and with a smiling countenance
says; And all this is but one death: and each Christian may say (of what kind
soever his sufferings be) The sooner I get home, the sooner I shall be at
ease. Yea, what ever threatens to befall him, he may answer it as once that
noble Spartan, who being told of the death of his Children, answered, I knew
well they were all begot mortal. Secondly, that his goods were confiscate, I
knew what was but for my use, was not mine. Thirdly, that his honor was gone,
I knew no glory could be everlasting on this miserable Earth. Fourthly, that
his sentence was to dye; that is nothing, Nature has given like sentence both
of my condemners and m^. Wicked men have the advantage of the way, but godly
men of the end: Who fear not death, because they feared God in their life.

So we see the cudgel is not of use, when the Beast but only barks: nay tell
me, how would thou endure ^ounds for thy Savior, that can not endure words
for him? if when a man reviles thee thou art impatient, how would thou
afford thy ashes to Christ, and write patience with thine own blood?

CHAP. XXV.
That their expectation may not be answered.

3. BBcause he will not answer his enemies expectation; in which kind he is
revenged of his enemy, even while he refuses to revenge himself. For as
there is no such grief to a Jester or Jugler, as when he does see that with
all his jests, tricks, and fooleries, he cannot move mirth, nor change the
countenances of them that see and hear him; so there can be no greater
vexation to a wicked and malicious enemy, than to see thee no whit grieved nor
moved at his malice against thee; but that thou do so bear his injuries, as
if they were none at all. Yea, he which makes the trial, shall find that his
enemy is more vexed with his silence, than if he should return like for like.

Dion of Alexandria was wont to take this revenge of his enemies; amongst whom
there was one, who perceiving that by injuring and rev^ling of him he could not
move him to impatience, whereby he might have more scope to rail; went and
made away with himself, as Brusonius reports. And Mount (...)else us of a
Citizen that having a Scould to his ^ife, would play on his Drum when she
brawled, and rather seem to be pleased with it, than angry; and this for the
present did so mad her, that she was more vexed with her self, than with him:
but when she saw how it succeeded, and that this would not prevail, in the
end it made her quite leave off the same, and prove a loving wife, that so she
might overcome him with kindness, and win him to her ^ow, by bending as much
the other way; that so, like a prudent Wife, she migh command her Husband by
obeying. And whosoever makes the trial, shall find, that Christian patience,
and magnanimious contempt, will in time either draine the gall out of bitter
spirits, or make it more overflow to their own disgrace.

At least it will still the barking tongue, and that alone will be worth our
labor.

Satan and his instruments cannot so vex us with sufferings, as we vex them
with our patience. It has been a torment to Tyrants, to see that they were no
way able, either with threats or promises, kindness or cruelty, to make the
Christians yield: but that they were as immovable as a Rock; it being true of
them which is but ^ained of Jupiter; namely, that neither Juno through her
riches, nor Mercury through his eloquence, nor Venus through her beauty, nor
Mars through his threats, nor all the rest of the gods, though they conspired
together, could pull him out of Heaven. Neither feared they to dye, knowing
that death was but their passage to a state of immortality. But to go on, you
cannot anger a wicked man worse than to do well, yea, he hates you more
bitterly for this and the credit you gain thereby, then if you had cheated him
of his patrimony with you^ own diseredit: nor do they more envy our grace,
then they rejoice to see us sin: For what makes God angry, makes them merry.
And they so hunger and thirst after our diseredit, that should we through
passion but overshoot our selves in returning like for like, or in doing more
than befits us, they would feed themselves with the report of it: for like
flesh-flyes our wounds are their chief nourishment, and nothing so glads their
hearts, or opens their mouths, with insolency and triumph.

Besides what is scarce thought a fault in other men, is held in us a hai^ous
crime: When they could not accuse Christ of sin, they accused him for
companying with sinners, and doing good on the Sabbothday. When the Rulers and
Governors could ^inde no fault in Daniel concerning the Kingdom, he was so
faithful, they aleadged his praying to God, and brought that within compass
of a Praemunire, Dan. 6. 4, 13.

The World is ever taxing the least fault (yea no fault, or rather the want of
faults) in the best men, because one imaginary cloud in a just man, shall in
their censure darken all the stars of his graces; yea, the smallest spot in
his face, shall excuse all the sores and ulcers in their bodies: so that by
answering their expectation, or by returning like for like; we shall both wrong
our selves, and pleasure them; which is like the setting of a man's own house
on fire through carelessness, in which case he not only bares the loss, and
scorches himself in it, but must give five pounds to the Sheriff also, if it
be in London. So that the best answer is either silence, or laughter; or if
neither of these will do, a Cudgel. The best answer to words of scorn and
petulancy, says learned Hooker, is Isaac's Apology to his brother Ismael, the
Apology which patience and silence make, (no Apology) and we have our
Saviors president for it: for when false witnesses rose up and accused him
falsely before the Priests, Scribes, and Elders, it is said, that Jesus hold
his peace: that infinite wisdom knew well, how little satisfaction there would
be in answers, where the Sentence was determined; where the Asker is unworthy,
the Question captious, words bootlesse, the best answer is silence. Let our
Answer then to their Reasons be, No; to their scoffs, nothing. And yet, when
the sla^^ders which light on our persons, rebound to the discredit of our
profession, it behooves us not to be silent in answering truly, when as our
adversaries are eloquent in objecting falsely; an indignity which only
touches our private persons, may be dissembled; as Austin replied to
Petillian, Possumus esse in his eopiosi pariter, sed nolumus esse pariter vani.
But in the other case, the retorting of a poisoned weapon into the adversaries
own breast, is laudable.

It is the weakness of some good natures (the more is the pity) to grieve and
to be angry at wrongs received, and thereby to give advantage to an enemy. But
what would malice rather have, than the vexation of them whom it perse^utes? We
cannot better please an adversary, than by burting our selves: and this is no
other than to humor envy, to serve the turn of those that malig^^ us, and
draw on that malice, whereof we are already weary: whereas carelessness puts
ill will out of countenance, and makes it withdraw it self in a rage, as that
which does but shame the Author, without hurt of the Patient. In a causeless
wrong, the best remedy is contempt of the Author.

CHAP. XXVI.
Because it is for our credit to be evil spoken of by them, and would be a
disparagement to have their good word.

3. REasons jointly respecting our selves and our enemies, are two. 1 Because
it Were a disparagement to have their good word. 2 Because it Is the greatest
praise to be dispraised of them.


THese two reasons being near of kin, in speaking of them, I will cast both
into the similitude of a Y, which is joined together at one end, brancht in the
middle. And first to join them both together.

The condemnation and approbation of wicked men, is equally profitable and
acceptable to good men: for every word they speak of the conscionable, is a
slander, whether it be good or evil: whether in praise or dispraise, his very
name is desiled by coming into their mouths; or if this do not hold in all
cases, yet (as a Reverend Divine says) it is a praise to the god'y, to be
dispraised of the wicked; and a dispraise to be praised of them: their
dispraise is a man's honor, their praise his dishonor: so that when deboysed
persons speak ill of a man, especially their Minister, the worse the better;
for to be well spoken of by the vicious, and evil by the virtuous; to have the
praise of the good, and the dispraise of the bad, is all one in effect, as
Solomon shows; They that forsake the Law (says he) praise the wicked; but
they that keep the Law, set themselves against them, Prove. 28. 4.

Thus much of both Reasons jointly, now of each severally; and first, That it
is a disparagement to a godly man to be well spoken of by the wicked.

When it was told Antisthenes, that such an one who was a vicious person, spoke
good words of him, he answered, What evil have I done, that this man speaks
well of me? To be praised of evil men (says Bion the Philosopher) is as
evil, as to be praised for evil doing: For such, like Garlic, suck only the
ill vapors from all they come near. Out of which consideration, our Savior
Christ rejected the evil spirits testimony, which though it were truth, yet he
would not suffer the Devil to say, Thou art the Christ the Son of God, or
that Holy One; but rebuked him sharply, and enjoined him to hold his peace,
Luke 4. 35. No he would not suffer the Devils at another time to say, That they
knew him, Verse. 41. And good reason, for he knew that the Devils commendations
would prove the greatest slander of all. Neither would Saint Paul suffer that
maid which had a spirit of Divination, to say, he was the Servant of the most
High God, which showed them the way of Salvation, Acts 16. 17, 18. well knowing
that Satan did it to this end, that by his testimony and approbation, he might
cause them (which formerly believed his Doctrine) to suspect him for an
Impostor and Deceiver, and that he did his miracles by the help of some
Familiar spirit. And indeed, if the good report of wicked men, who are set on
work by Satan, did not derogate from the godly, or from the glory of God,
Satan should be divided against himself; and if Satan be divided against
himself, says our Savior, how shall his Kingdom stand? Now we know he
seeks to advance his Kingdom by all possible means, and consequently in
this.

Wherefore if we enjoy any wicked man's love, and have his good word, we may
justly suspect our selves are faulty in one kind or other; for it is sure he
could not do so, except he saw something in us like himself. If every thing
were unlike him, how is it possible he should love us? Difference breeds
dis^^ion, and sweet congruity is the Mother of love. This made Aristotle, when
a Rakeshame told him, he would rather be hanged by the neck, than be so bated
of all men as he was, reply, And I would be hanged by the neck, ere I would be
beloved of all, as thou art; And Phocion, to ask, when the people praised him,
what evil have I done? It was a just doubt in him, and not an unjust in any
that are virtuous like him; which occasioned one to say, their hatred I fear
not, neither do I regard their good will.

Secondly, a wicked man's tongue is so far from being a slander, that it makes
for our credit, to be evil spoken of by them. To be evil spoken of by wicked
men, says Terence, is a glorious and laudable thing; and another, It is no
small credit with the vile, to have a vile estimation. As a wicked man's glory
is his shame, so the godly man's sh^me (for doing good) is his glory: and to be
evil spoken of for well-doing, is peculiar to good men; as Alexander used to
speak of Kings. Yea, says Epictetus, It is the highest degree of reputation,
for a man to ^eare evil when he does well. And Job is of his judgment, which
makes him say, If mine adversary should write a book against me, would I not
take it upon my shoulder, and bind it as a Crown unto me? Yes, I would, etc.
Job 31. ^5, 36, 37. And who having the use of Reason, (especially sanctified)
will not conclude, that Religion and Holiness must needs be an excellent
thing, because it has such enemies as wicked men, and wicked spirits? What
says that Ethnic in Seneca, in this behalf: Men speak evil of me, but
evil men. It would grieve me^ if Marcus Cato, if wise Laelius, if the other
Cato, or either of the Scipio^s, should speak so of me, but this as much
comforts me: for to be disliked of evil men, is to be praised for goodness.
Indeed, to hear that a good man speaks* evil of us, as its possible (though
rare) from him to credit a false report, and so crediting it, to report it too
goes to the very heart, and fetches from thence tears into the eyes; and into
the mouth words of passion, and admiration: as when Caesar saw that Brutus was
one of them that helped to stab him with bodkins in the Senate house, he cried
out, And art thou there my Son: but if a hundred other men do the same, if
wise, we value it not. Why, O happy art thou, says Pious Mirandula, who
live well amongst the bad; for thou shall either win them, or silence them,
or exasperate them* If thou win the^* thou shall save their souls, and add to
thy own glory; If thou silence them, thou shall diminish of their torment, and
prevent the contagion of their sin; If thou exasperate them thereby to hate
and traduce thee for thy goodness, then most happy: for thou shall not only
be rewarded according to the good which thou do, but much more according to
the evil which thou suffer. And S. Peter, If any man suffer as a Christian,
(that is, for righteousness sake) let him not be ashamed; but let him
glorify God in this behalf, 1 Pet. 4. 15, 16. The reason is given by Saint
A^stin, with whom this speech was frequent; They that backbite me, etc. do
against their wills increase my honor, both with God, and good men. Alas, the
durty feet of such Adversaries, the more they tread and rub, the more luster
they give the figure graven in gold; their causeless aspersions do but rub
our glory the brighter. And what else did Judas, touching Mary, when he
depraved her in our Saviors presence, for pouring that precious ointment on
his feet? John 12. which was the only cause, that in remembrance of her it
should be spoken to her praise, wheresoever the Gospel should be preached
throughout the whole world, Mar. 14. 9. O what a glorious renown did the
Traitors reproach occasion her? like as the treason of Pausanias, augmented the
fame of Themistocles.

Yea, their evil report may possibly enrich a man; A friend of mine came to
preferment by being reproached for his goodness, in the presence of a
religious Gentleman.

And this is the hurt which lewd men do to the godly, if they are godly wise
that hear them; when they think to tax, and traduce us; they do in truth
commend us, and we may say of their words, as he said of good fellows, the
better the worse, and the worse the better.

Indeed, swinish men may believe their mis-reports, because they are Judges;
which for the most part will enquire no farther, but believe at first: but the
wise know their tongues to be no slander; yea, they will either smell out the
Serpents enmity in the relator, or spy out in his lies one lame leg or other;
as lies are rarely without. And indeed, if ill tongues could make men ill, good
men were in a bad taking.

Now to make some use of this point: If the language of wicked men must be read
like Hebrew, backward, and that all good men do so for the most part, it being
a sure rule, that whosoever presently gives credit to accusations, is either
wicked himself, or very childish in discretion; then let us count their
slanders, scoffs and reproaches the most noble and honorable badges and
ensigns of honor and innocence that can be: And in case we are told that any
such person does rail on us, let our answer be, he is not esteemed, nor his
words credited of the meanest believer, which understands any thing of Satan's
wiles.

Secondly, care not to have ill men speak well of thee, for if thou were
worse, thou should hear better; if thou would be as lewd as they are,
thou should never hear an ill word from them.

Thirdly, look not to have every man's good word, since some are as deeply in
love with vice, as others are with virtue: Besides, a man may as well draw all
the air into his mouth with a breath, and keep it: as purchase every man's good
word.

Indeed, if a man were able, and willing to be at the charge; he might stop
their mouths with money: for Philip of Macedon having given a great reward to
one that spoke evil of him, was after that highly praised by him, which made
him conclude, that it lies in our selves, and in our own power, either to be
well, or ill spoken of; but this is not a remedy of Gods prescribing: besides,
a man had better endure the soar, than be at such cost for a plaster. And
thus we see, that a man of a good life needs not fear any who has an evil
tongue, but rather rejoice therein; for he shall be praised of Angels in
Heaven, who has, by renouncing the world, eschewed the praises of wicked men
on earth.

CHAP. XXVII.
Because our enemies may learn, and be won by our example.

4. IN the fourth place, one reason why we bear injuries so patiently, is,
That our enemies and others may learn and be won by our example, which often
prevails more than precept: As how many Infidels were won to the Christian
Faith, by seeing Christians endure the flames so patiently? when their enemies
were fore't to confess, slain they are, but not conquered. Those whom
precepts do not so effectually move, we see them sometim^s induced by
examples. Sozomen reports, that the devout life of a poor captive Christian
woman, made a King, and all his family, embrace the Faith of Jesus Christ.
Eusebius from Clement reports, that when a wicked accuser had brought S. James
to condemnation; seeing his Christian fortitude, he was touched in conscience,
confessed himself a Christian, and so was taken to execution with him: Where,
after confession, and forgiveness, they kissed, and prayed for each other, and
so were both beheaded together. In the Duel of Essendon, between Canutus, and
Edmond Ironside, for the prize of the Kingdom of England: after long and
equal combat, finding each others worth and valor, they cast away their
weapons, embraced and concluded a peace, putting on each others apparel, and
arms; as a ceremony to express the atonement of their minds, as if they made
transaction of their persons one to the other; Canutus, being Edmond; and
Edmond, Canutus. Wherefore in all things (says Paul to Titus) show thy self
an example of good works, Tit. 2. 7. Under the general of good works is
included Patience, as one maine special. The servant of the Lord must not
strive (says Paul to Timothy) but must be gentle toward all men, suffering
the evil men patiently, instructing them with meekness that are contrary
minded, proving if God at any time will give them repentance, that they may
know the truth, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25.

And it stands to good reason, for first every Christian is, or ought to be a
crucified man.

Secondly, love is Christ's badge, the nature whereof is to cover offenses, with
the mantle of peace.

And thirdly, Religion binds us to do good unto all, even our enemies; so
resembling the Sun, which is not scornful, but looks with the same face
upon every plot of earth; not only the stately Palaces and pleasant Gardens,
are visited by his beams; but mean Cottages, but neglected Boggs, and Moates.
And indeed, sincerity loves to be universal, like a light in the window, which
not only gives light to them that are in the house, but also to passengers in
the street; well knowing that the whole earth, and every condition is
equidistant from heaven: if God but vouchsafe to show mercy, in which case who
would not do his utmost. Aristippus being demanded, why he took so patiently
Dionysius spitting in his face, answered, the Fishermen to take a little
Gudgeon, do abide to be imbrued with slime and salt water; And should not I, a
Philosopher, suffer my self to be sprinkled with a little spittle, for the
taking of a great Whale?

The House of God, is not built up with blows. A word seasonably given, after
we have received an injury, like a Rudder, sometimes steares a man quite into
another course. The nature of many men is forward to accept of peace, if it be
offered them; and negligent to sue for it otherwise: They can spend secret
wishes upon that which shall cost them no endeavor; unless their enemy yields
first, they are resolved to stand out: But if once their desire and expectation
be answered, the least reflection of this warmth makes them yielding and
pliable: and that endeavor is spent to purpose, which either makes a friend,
or unmakes an enemy. We need not a more pregnant example than the Levites
father in Law: I do not see him make any means for reconciliation: but when
remission came home to his door, no man could entertain it more thankefully,
seeing such a singular example of patience, and good condition in his Son.
When Iron meets with Iron, there is a harsh and stubborn jarre; but let Wool
meet that ruffer mettle, this yielding turns resistance into embracing: Yea, a
man shall be in more estimation with his enemy, (if ingenous) having vanquished
him this way; then if he had never been his enemy at all. Thy greatest enemy
shall, if he have any spark of grace; yea, if he have either bowels, or
brains, confess ingenuously to thee, (as Soul once to David) Thou art more
righteous than I, for thou have rendered me good, and I have rendered thee evil;
as what heart of stone could have acknowledged less: Saul would have killed
David, and could not; David could have killed Saul, and would not. Besides, the
approbation of an enemy, (as one says) is more than the testimony of a whole
Parish; of friends, or neuters. And such a conquest is like that which Euagrius
records of the Romans, namely; That they got such a victory over Chosroes,
one of the Persian Kings, that this Cosroes made a Law, That never after any
Kings of Persia should move war against the Romans. Actions salved up with a
free forgiveness, are as not done: Yea, as a bone once broken, is stronger
after well setting; so is love after such a reconcilement.

Whereas by returning a bitter answer, he makes his enemies case his own: even
as a mad dog biting another dog, makes him that is bitten become mad too.

But this is not all, for happily it may (and not a little) further Gods glory,
and make Satan a loser: as thus, let us shake off their slanders, as Paul did
the Viper; and these Barbarians, which now conceive so basely of Gods people,
will change their minds, and say we are petty gods; Yea, will they say, surely
theirs is a good and holy, and operative Religion, that thus changes and
transformes them into new Creatures. The hope whereof should make us think no
endeavor too much. For if Zopyrus the Persian was content (and that
voluntarily) to sustain the cutting off his nose, ears, and lips, to further
the enterprise of his Lord Darius against proud Babylon; what should a
Christian be willing to suffer, that the Lord of Heaven and Earths cause may
be furthered against proud Lucifer, and all the powers of darkness? But
suppose thy pati^nt yielding produces no such effect, as may answer these or
the like hopes, yet have patience still, and that for three reasons.

1. First, seem you to forget him, and he will the sooner remember himself.

2. It often falls out, that the end of passion is the beginning of repentance.
Therefore if not for his sake, yet at least for thy own sake be silent; and
then in case thou hear further of it from another, if ill, beware of him,
but condemn him not, until thou hear his own Apology, for Who judgment
gives, and will but one side hear.
Though he judge right, is no good Justicer.


Or lastly, if not for his sake, nor thine own, then for Gods sake have
patience: and bear with him, because his maker bears with thee.

CHAP. XXVIII.
Because they will not take Gods Office out of his hand.

5. Reasons in regard of God are three. The 1 has respect to his Office. The 2
has respect to his Commandment. The 3 has respect to his Glory.


Reason,

1. BEcause he will not take Gods Office out of his hand, who says, avenge
not your selves, but give place unto wrath, for vengeance is mine, and I will
repay it, Romans 12. 19. Peter speaking of our Savior Christ, says, When he was
reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but
com^itted it to him that judges righteously. 1 Pet. 2. 23. And the Prophet
David of himself, I return not reviling for reviling, for on thee, O Lord, do
I wait, thou will hear me, my Lord my God; meaning, if I call to thee for a
just revenge, Psalm. 38. 13, 14, 15. If the Lord see it meet that our wrongs
should be revenged instantly, he will do it himself; as he revenged the
Israelites upon the Egyptians: and so that all standers by shall see their
fault in their punishment, with admiration. Now I know, says Jetbro, that the
^^rd is greater than all the gods, for ^s they have dealt proudly with them, so
are they recompensed, Exodus 18. 11. And as once he revenged David's cause upon
Nabal, For about ten days after, the Lord smote Nabal that he dyed, says the
Text: and it follows, when David heard that Nabal was dead, he said, Blessed
be the Lord, that has judged the cause of my rebuke at the hand of Nabal, and
has kept his servant from evil; for the Lord has recompensed the wickedness
of Nabal upon his own head, 1 Samuel 25. 38, 39. And that infinite wrong of
railing Shimei, being left to the Lord, he did revenge it; in giving Shimei up
to such a stupidity, that he ran himself wilfully upon his own deserved and
shamefull-death.

Or if God do it not himself by some immediate judgment, nor by the hand of
the Magistrate, yet he will see that some other shall do it, though the
wronged party be willing to put it up: as for example, Samsons Father-in-Law
for taking away his Wife, and she for her falsehood, though they were not
punished by him that received the wrong, yet the Philistims burnt both her, and
her Father, Judge. 15. Again, though the Philistims were not punished by the
Timnite, or his daughter whom they burnt with fire; yet they were by Samson,
who smote them ^ip and thigh with a mighty plague, Judge. 15. From which
examples we may draw this argument, If the Lord thus revenge the cause of men's
particular, and personal wrongs, much more will he revenge his own cause:
for in this case I may say to every child of God which suffers for Religions
sake, as Jahaziel by the Spirit of God said unto all Judah the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, and King Jehosaphat; The battle is not yours, but Gods, wherefore
you shall not need to fight in this battle, stand still, move not, and b^hold.
the salvation of the Lord toward you, 2 Chronicles. 20. 15, 17. Yea, it stands upon
Christ's honor to maintain those that are in his work. And Gods too, to
defend such as suffer for his sake; and he that traduceth, or any way wrongs
thee for thy goodness, his envy strikes at the Image of God in thee; because
he has no other way to extend his malice to the Deity it self; as is
apparent by these Scriptures which will be worth thy turning to: Psalm. 44. 22.
and 69. 7. and 83. 2. to 10. Prove. 19. 3. Romans 1. 30. Math. 10. 22. and 25. 45.
Luke 21. 17. Zach. 2. 8. 1 Samuel 17 45. Psalm. 74. 22, 23. Acts 5. 39. Psalm. 139.
20. Isay 54. 17. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 8. John 15. 18. to 26. Numb. 16. 11. Saul, Saul,
says Christ, seeing him make havoc of the Church, why persecutest thou me; I
am Jesus whom thou persecutest: Acts 9. 4, 5. and Jesus was then in Heaven.
Cain imbrewes his hands in the blood of his own (...)other, because he was
better, and better accepted than himself: God takes upon him the quarrel, and
indeed it was for his sake that Abell suffered.

Now if we may safely commit our cause, and our selves to God in the greater
matters: much more in petty things, as are evil words.

I but, says the weak Christian, I am so wronged, reviled, and slandered,
that it would make a man speak, like Aeagles that famous wrestler, that never
spoke before in his life. Answer, There is no such necessity.

For first: Who ever was, that was not slandered?

Secondly: let him speak evil of thee, yet others shall not believe him; or
if the evil and ignorant do, yet report from wise and good men shall speak
thee virtuous.

Yea, Thirdly: though of some the slanderer be believed for a while, yet at
last thy actions will outweigh his words; and the disgrace shall rest with the
intender of the ill. The constancy of a man's good behavior vindicates him from
ill report.

Fourthly, there is no cause of thy answering, innocence needs not stand upon
its own justification; for God has undertaken to vindicate it, either by
friends, as when Jonathan and Michael, both son and daughter, opposed their own
Father in his evil intents to take David's part, and vindicate his reputation, 1 Samuel 19. 4. 5. 11. 12. or by enemies, as when Pilate pronounced him innocent,
whom he condemned to die: which shows that innocence cannot want abettors: and
when Caiaphas was forced to approve that Christ in the chair, whom he
c^ndemned on the bench. And when Julian was compelled to cry out, O Galilean,
t^ou have overcome. And when Balaam was forced to bless those for nothing,
whom he was hired to curse. They that will speak the evil they should not,
shall be driven to speak the good they would not.

Or by strangers that stand by, as when young Daniell stepped up to clear
Susanua, of that foul aspertion.

Or lastly, by himself, as he often vindicated Mary; O holy Mary, I admire thy
patient silence; thy Sister blames thee for thy piety; the Disciples
(afterward) blame thee for thy bounty, and cost; not a word falls from thy
lips in a just vindication of thine honor, and innocence; but in an humble
taciturnity, thou leavest thine answer to thy Savior: How should we learn of
thee, when we are complained, of for well doing; to seal up our lips, and
expect our righting from above. And how sure, how ready art thou O Savior, to
speak in the cause of the dumb: Martha, Martha, thou art careful, and
troubled about many things; but one thing is needful, and Mary has chosen the
better part. What needed Mary to speak for her self, when she had such an
Advocate; she gave Christ an unction of thankfulness, he gave her an unction
of a good name; a thing better than ointment, Eccles. 7. 1. Again, the Leaper
praises God, Christ praises the Leaper.

True, ill tongues will be walking, but we need not repine at their insolency;
why should we answer every dog that barks, with barking again.

But admit God should omit to revenge thy cause, yet, revenge not thy self in
any case: for by revenging thine own quarrel, thou make thy self, both the
Judge, the Witness, the Acouser, and the Executioner: only use for thy
rescue, Prayer to God, and say as Christ has enjoined, lead me not into
temptation, but deliver me from evil, Matthew. 6. 13. and it suffices. Yet if
thou will see what God has done, and what he can, and will do, if there be
like need: hear what Ruffinus and Socrates write of Theodosius, in his wars
against Eugenius.

When this good Christian Emperor saw the huge multitude that was coming
against him, and that in the sight of man there was apparent overthrow at hand,
he gets him up into a place eminent, and in the fight of all the Army, falls
down prostrate upon the Earth, beseeching GOD, if ever he would look upon a
sinful creature, to help him at this time of greatest need: whereupon there
arose suddenly such a mighty wind, that it blew the Darts of the enemies back
upon themselves, in such a wonderful manner, that Eugenius with all his Host,
was clean discomfited; and seeing the power of Christ so fight for his people,
was forced in effect to cry out, as the Egyptians did, God is in the cloud,
and he fights for them.

No forces are so strong as the spiritual; the prayers of an Eli^h, are more
powerful than all the armies of Flesh: which made the Queen mother of
Scotland confess, that she feared more the prayers, and fasting of M^ Knox,
and his assistants; then an Army of twenty thousand men.

Thus God either preventeth our enemies, as here he did; or delivers his
servants out of persecution, as he did Peter; or else if he crowns them with
Martyrdom, as he did Stephen; he will in his Kingdom of Glory give them
instead of this bitter, a better inheritance; pro ver^t^te morientes, cum
verit^te viven^es.

Wherefore in this and all other cases, cast thy burden upon the LORD, and say
with the Kingly Prophet; I will lay me down in peace, for it is thou Lord only
that make me dwell in safety, Psalm. 4. 8.

CHAP. XXIX.
Because they have respect unto Gods Commandment.

2. BEcause they have respect unto Gods Commandment, who says, By your
patience possess your souls, Luke 21. 19. Be patient toward all men, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14. And Let your patient mind be known unto all men, Phil. 4. 5.
More especially, Let not the Sun go down upon your wroth, neither give
place to the Devil, Ephesians. 4. 26, 27. From whence observe this by the way;
that he which lies down in wroth, has the Devil for his bedfellow.

See, says Paul, that none recompense evil for evil unto any man, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 15. And again, Be not overcome with evil, but overcome evil with
goodness, Romans 12. 21. Yea, says our Savior, Love your enemies, do well to
them that hate you, bless them that curse you, and pray for them which hurt
you; Luke 6. 27, 28. And in case thine enemy hunger, instead of adding to his
affliction, give him bread to eat; if he thirst, give him water to drink; or
else thou breakest Gods Commandment touching patience: Prove. 25. 21. Romans 12.
20. and consequently, art in the sight of God a transgressour of the whole Law;
and stand guilty of the breach of every Commandment. James 2. 10, 11. We
know the frantic man, though he be sober eleaven months of the year, yet if
he rage one, he cannot avoid the imputation of madness.

Now as Gods Children should do whatsoever he commands cheerfully, and take
whatsoever he does thankefully: so God suffers such wrongs to be, that he may
exercise thy patience; and he commands thee to forgive those wrongs, that thou
may exercise thy charity, and approve thy sincerity: Many say, Lord, Lord,
but if you love me, says Christ, keep my Commandments. It is an idle
Ceremony to how at the name of Jesus, except we have him in our hearts, and
honor him with our lives. Phraates sent a Crown as a present to Caesar,
against whom he was up in Arms; but Caesar returned it back with this answer,
let him return to his obedience first, and then I Will accept of the Crown, by
way of recognizance. God admits none to Heaven (says Justine Martyr) but such
as can persuade him by their works, that they have loved him.

And indeed, take a man that truly loves God, he will easily be friends, not
easily provoked. True, take him unexpectedly, he may have his lesson to seek,
(even he that was the meekest man upon Earth, threw down that in a sudden
indignation, which in cold blood he would have held faster then his life,
Exodus 32. 19.) but when he bethinkes himself what God requires, it is enough.
When Teribazus a noble Persian was arrested, at first he drew his sword, and
defended himself; but when they charged him in the Kings name, and informed
him they came from his Majesty, he yielded presently, and willingly.

If then we will approve our selves true obedienciaries, let our revenge be
like that of Elisha's to the A^ramites, in stead of smiting them, set bread and
water before them: Or like that of Pericles, who as Plutarch reports, when one
had spent the day in railing upon him at his own door, least he should go
home in the dark, caused his man to light him with a Torch. And to do
otherwise is Ammonite-like, to entreat those Ambassadors ill, which are sent
in kindness and love: for these afflictions are Gods Ambassadors, and to
handle them ruffely; yea, to repine or grudge against them, is to entreat them
evil. And certainly, as David took it not well when the Ammonites ill
entreated his Ambassadors; so God will not take the like well from thee, 1 Chronicles. 19. But secondly, as the Law of God binds us to this, so does the Law of
Nature: Whatsoever you would that men should do unto you, even so do you unto
them, Matthew. 7. 12. Our Savior does not say, do unto others, as others do
unto you; but as you would have others do unto you. Now if we have wronged
any man, we desire that he should forgive us, and therefore we must forgive
him. Lex Talionis was never a good Christian Law. If I forgive not, I shall not
be forgiven, Mar. 11. 26. So to say of our Enemies, as Sampson once of the
Philistims: even as they did unto me, so have I done unto them, is but an ill
plea. For the Law of God, and the Law of Nature forbids it; and does not the
Law of Nations also? Yes, throughout the whole world, either they have no Law,
or else a Law to prohibit men from revenging themselves. Oppression or injury
may not be righted by violence, but by Law: (and to seek revenge by Law, when
it is not expedient to pass it by, is lawful) the redress of evil by a
person unwarranted, is evil.

O^. But thou will say, the Law does not provide a just remedy in all cases of
injury, especially in case of reproach and s^ander, which is now the Christians
chief suffering; or if in part it does, yet he that is just cannot be quit in
one Term, or two. Nay, if he have right in a year, it is counted quick
d^spatch; and he is glad that he met with such a speedy Lawyer.

Answer. If thou know the remedy to be worse than the disease, I hope thou will leave it, and commit thy cause to God; who, (if thou will give him the
like time) will clear thy innocence, and cost thee nothing.

When we have suffered some evil, the flesh, our own wisdom, like the King
of Israel, 2 Kings 6. 21. will bid us return evil to the doer; but the Spirit
or wisdom of God, like Elisha, opposes, and bids us return him good,
notwithstanding his evil: But the flesh will reply, he is not worthy to be
forgiven; I, but says the Spirit, Christ is worthy to be obeyed, who has
commanded thee to forgive him. Now, whethers counsel will thou follow? It is
not always good to take our own counsel; our own wit often hunts us into
the snares, that above all we would shun. We often use means of preservation,
and they prove destroying ones. Again, we take courses to ruin us, and they
prove means of safety. How many flying from danger, have met with death? And
on the other side, found protection even in the very jaws of mischief, that
God alone may have the glory. It fell out to be part of Mithridates misery,
that he had made himself unpoysonable. All humane wisdom is defective; nor
does the Fools Bolt ever miss: whatsoever man thinks to do in contrariety,
is by God turned to be an help of hastening the end he has appointed him. We
are governed by a power that we cannot but obey, our minds are wrought
against our minds to alter us. In brief; man is often his own Traitor, and
maddeth to undo himself. Wherefore take the Spirits and the Words direction,
Render good for evil, and not like for like, though it be with an unwilling
willingness: as the Merch (...) casts his goods overboard; and the Patient
suffers his arm or leg to be cut off, and say with thy Savior,
Nevertheless, not my will, but thy will be done.

But yet more to induce thee hereunto; consider in the last place, That to
avenge thy self, is both to lose Gods protection, and to incur his
condemnation. We may be said to be out of his protection, when we are out of
our way which he has set us; he has promised to give his Angels charge over
us, to keep us in all our ways, Psalm. 91. 11. that is, in the ways of
obedience, or the ways of his Commandments. But this is one of the Devils
ways, a way of sin and disobedience; and therefore has no promise or
assurance of protection: we may trust God, we may not tempt him: if we do,
what s^conds soever we get, Christ will not be our second. Where is no
commandment, there is no promise; if we want his word, in vain we look for
his aid. When we have means to keep our selves, Gods omnipotency is for the
present discharged. If Eutichus had fallen down out of a saucy malipartnesse, I
doubt whether he had been restored by S. Paul, Acts 20. 9. Weftes and
strayes, are properly due to the Lord of the soil: and you know what the
Devil said to our Savior, Luke 4. 6. which in a restrained sense is true. And
therefore when one in Gods steed rebuked Satan, touching a Virgin whom he
possessed at a Theater, saying, how durst thou be so bold, as to enter into my
house: Satan answers, because I found her in my house: as Chrysostom delivers
it. I am sure Din^h fell into foul hands, when her Fathers house could not
hold her: and Sampson the like, when he went to Dali^ah; and Jonah, when he
went to Tarshish; and the seduced Prophet, when he went beyond his Commission,
set him by God: and many the like, who left the path of Gods protection, where
the Angels guard and watch, to walk in the Devils by-way of sin and
disobedience. The Chickens are safe under the wings of their mother, and we
under the providence of our Father; so long as we hold the tenure of obedience,
we are the Lords subjects; and if we serve him, he will preserve us: neither
need we vex our selves with cares, as if we lived at our own cost, or
trusted to our own strength: but when a man is fallen to the state of an
Outlaw, or Rebel; the Law dispenses with them that kill him; because the
Prince has excluded him from the benefit of his protection. Now this being our
case, say there shall happen any thing amiss, through thy taking revenge, what
may thou not expect to suffer, and in thy suffering, what comfort can thou
have? Whereas, if God bring us into crosses, he will be with us in those
crosses, and at length bring us out of them more refined. You may observe,
there is no such Coward, none so vali^nt as the believer: without Gods warrant
he dares do nothing; with it, my thing. Nothing without it, Those says Basil
(to a great man that persuaded him to yield) who are trained up in the
Scriptures, will rather dye in an holy quarrel, than abate one syllable of
divine truth. When the Tormentors of Mar(...)s Arethusius (which laid to his
charge the pulling down of an Idolatrous Temple) offered him his pardon, in
case he would give so much as would build it up again, he refused it; and
being further urged to give but half, he still refused it: at last, being
told that if he would give but a little toward it, they would release him; he
refused to give them so much as an half penny: saying, no not an half penny;
for it is as great wickedness, faid he, to confer one half penny, in case
of impiety, as if a man should bestow the whole. A good conscience being in the
greatest torture, will not give one half penny to be released, with hurt to
his conscience: he scans not the weight of the thing, but the authority of the
Commander; and such have no good consciences, that dare gratefie Satan in
committing the least sin, or neglect God in the smallest precept. The
conscionable Nazarite, Numb. 6. did not only make scruple of guz^ing, and
quassing whole Flagons of Wine, but of eating only an husk, or a kernel of
the grape: knowing the one was as well forbidden as the other. Will any man eat
poison, because there is but a little of it. A small Bullet may kill a man,
as well as a great one. Goliath was as much hurt by David's little stone, as
Sampson by the weight of a whole house. And Ely dyed as well by falling back in
his Chair, as Jesabell by being thrown down from an high window. And what
says our Savior to the unjust Steward, he that is faithful in that which is
least, is faithful also in much; and he that is unjust in the least, is unjust
also in much; Luke 16. 10. He that will corrupt his conscience for a pound,
what would he do for a thousand. If Judas will sell his Master for thirty
pence, what would he not have done for the Treasury.

Alas, there are no sins small but comparitively, these things (speaking of
Mint and Cummin) ought ye to have done says our Savior, and not have left
the other undone, Luke 11. 4^. Wherefore it is with a good and tender
conscience, as it is with the Apple of the Eye, for as the least hair or dust,
grieves and offends that which the skin of the Eyelid could not once compl^ine
of: so a good and tender conscience is disquieted not only with Beams but
Moats, even such as the World accounts trifles: it strains not only at
Cammels, but Gnats also.

A sincere heart is like a neat spruce man, that no sooner spies the least
speck or spot on his garment, but he gets it washed or scrapt off: the common
Christian like a nasty sloven, which though he be all foul and besmeared, can
endure it well enough: yea, it offends him, that another should be more ne^te
than himself. But such men should consider, that though they have large
consciences, that can swallow down any thing, yet the sincere and tender
conscience is not so wide. A strait sho^e cannot endure the least pibble stone,
which would hardly be felt in a wider; neither will God allow those things in
his Children which he permits in his enemies, no man but will permit that in
another man's Wife or Child, which he would abhor in his own. A box of
precious ointment, may not have the least fly in it; nor a delicate Garden the
least weed, though the Wilderness be overgrowne with them.

I know the blind World so blames the Religious, and their Religion also, for
this niceness; that they think them hypocrites for it: but this was Jobs
comfort in the aspersion of hypocrisy, my witness is in heaven, and my record
on high. And as touching others that are offended, their answer is, take thou O
God (who need not our sin to further thy work of grace) the charge of thy
Glory, give us grace to take charge of thy Precepts. For sure we are, that what
is absolutely evil, can by no circumstance be made good; poison may be
quallified and become medecinall: there is use to be made of an enemy;
sickness may turn to our better health, and death it self to the faithful,
is but a door to life, but sin be it never so small, can never be made good.

Thus you have seen their fear, but look also upon their courage, for they
more fear the least sin, than the greatest torment.

All the fear of Satan and his instruments, arises from the want of the due
fear of God: but the more a man fears God, the less he fears every thing
else. Fear God, honor the King, 1 Pet. 2. 14, 1^7. He that fears God, does
but honor the King, he need not fear him, Romans 13. 3. the Law has not power
to smite the virtuous.

True, many have an opinion not wise, that Pie^y, and Religion abates
fortitude, and makes valor Feminine: but it is a foundation-lesse conceit.
The true believer fears nothing but the displeasure of the high^st, and runs
away from nothing but sin.

Indeed he is not like our hot-spurs, that will sight in no cause but a bad;
that fear where they should not fear, and fear not where they should fear;
that fear the blasts of men's breath, and not the fire of Gods wrath; that
fear more to have the World call them Cowards for refusing; then God to judge
them rebels for undertaking: that tremble at the thought of a Prison, and yet
not fear Hell fire: That can govern Towns and Cities, and let a silly woman
overruled them at home; it may be a servant or a Child, as Themistocles Sun
did in G^eece: What I will, said he, my Mother will have done, and what my
Mother will have my Father does. That will undertake a long journey by Sea in
a wherry, as the desperate Mariner hoyseth sail in a storm, and says none
of his Ancestors were drowned: That will rush fearelesly into infected houses,
and say the Plague never seaseth on valiant blood, it kills none but cowards:
That langushing of some sickness, will strive to drink it away, and so make
have to dispatch both Body and Soul at once: that will run on high
battlements, gallop down steep hills, ride-over narrow Bridges, walk on weak
Ice, and never think what if I fall, but what if I pass over and fall not.

No, he is not thus fearelesse, for this is presumption, and desperate
madness, not that courage and fortitude which arises from faith, and the true
fear of God; but from blindness and invincible ignorance of their own
estate: as what think you? would any man put his life to a venture, if he knew
that when he dyed he should presently drop into hell? I think not. But let
the believing Christian (who knows he has a place reserved for him in
Heaven) have a warrant from Gods Word, you cannot name the service, or danger
that he will stick at. Nor can he lightly fail of success. It is observed
that Trajan was never vanquished, because he never undertook war without
just cause. In fine, as he is most fearful to offend, so he is most
courageous in a good cause; as abundance of examples witness, whereof I Will but
instance two, for the time would be too short to tell of Abraham, and Moses,
and Caleb, and David, and Gideon, and Barack, and Sampson, and J^ph^ha, and
many others; of whom the Holy Ghost gives this general testimony, that by
faith, of weak they were made strong, waxed valiant in Battle, turned to
slight the Armies of the Aliants, subdued Kingdoms, stopped the mouths of
Lions, quenched the violence of the fire, etc. Heb. 11. 22. to 35. Nor will I
pitch upon Joshua, whom neither Caesar, nor Pompey, nor Alexander the Great,
nor William the Conqueror, nor any other ever came near, either for valor or
victories: but even Jonathan before, and the Martyrs after Christ, shall make
it good. As what think you of Jonathan, whom neither steepness of Rocks, nor
multitude of enemies, could discourage, or dissuade from so unlikely an
assault: Is it possible if the d^^ine power of faith, did not add spirit, and
courage, making men more than men, that two should dare to think of
encountering so many thousands, and yet behold Jonathan and his Armourbearer put
to flight, and terrified the hearts of all the Philistims, being thirty
thousand Charrets, six thousand Hose-men, and Footmen like the sand of the
Sea shore, 1 Samuel 14. 15. O divine power of faith, that in all attempts and
difficulties makes us more than men, and regardes no more Armies of
adversaries, than sworntes of flies.

A natural man in a project so unlikely, would have had many thoughts of
discouragement, and strong reasons to dissuade him, but his faith dissolves
impediments, as the Sun does dewes; yea, he contemnes all fears, over-lookes
all impossibilities, breaks through all difficulties with a resolute courage,
and flies over all carnal objections with celestial wings; because the
strength of his God, was the ground of his strength in God.

But secondly, to show that their courage is no less passive, then active;
look upon that Noble Army of Martyrs, mentioned in Ecclesiastical History,
who went as willingly, and cheerfully to the stake, as our Gallants to a Play;
and leapt into their beds of flames, as if they had beeue beds of Downs: yea,
even weak women, and young striplings, when with one dash of a pen, they might
have been released. If any shall yet doubt which of the two (the Religious o^
Profane) are most valiant and courageous; let them look upon the demeanor of
the twelve spies, Numbers the 13. and 14. Chapters; and observe the difference
between the two faithful, and true hearted, and the other ten: then will they
conclude, that Piety and Religion does not make men Cowards; or if it do, that
as there is no feast to the Churles, so there is no fight to the Cowards. True,
they are not soon, nor easily provoked; but all the better, the longer the
cold fit in an Ague, the stronger the hot fit.

I know men of the Sword will be loath to allow of this Doctrine: but truth is
truth, as well when it is not acknowledged, as when it is: and experience tolls
us, that he who fears not to do evil, is always afraid to suffer evil.
Yea, the Word of God is express; that none can be truly valorous, but such as
are truly religious. The wicked fly when none persueth, but the righteous are
as bold as a Lion: Prove. 28. 1. The reason wheroof is, If they live, they know
by whom they stand; if they dye, they know for whose sake they fall.

But what speak I of their not fearing death, when they shall not fear even
the day of Judgment, 1 John 4. 17. Have not thou O Savior bidden us when the
Elements shall be dissolved, and the Heavens shall be flaming about our
ears, to lift up our heads with joy, because our redemption draws nigh, Luke
21. 25. to 29. Wherefore says the valiant believer, come death, come fire,
come whirlewind, they are worthy to be welcome that shall carry us to
immortality. Let Pagans and Infidels fear death, says Saint Cyprian, who
never feared God in their life, but let Christians go as travelers unto their
native home; as Children unto their loving Father; willingly, joyfully. Let
such fear to dye, as have no hope to live a better life; well may the brute
beasts fear death, whose end of life is the conclusion of their being: well
may the Epicure tremble at it, who with his life looks to lose his felicity:
well may ignorant and unrepentant sinners quake at it, whose death begins their
damnation: well may all those make much of this life, who are not sure of a
better; because they are conscious to themselves that this dying life will but
bring them to a living death; they have all sown in sin, and what can they
look to reap, but misery, and vanity; sin was their traffic, and grief
will be their gain; detestable was their life, and damnable will be their
decease.

But it is otherwise with the godly, they may be killed, but cannot be hurt;
for even death that fiend, is to them a friend, like the Red Sea to the
Israelites, which put them over to the Land of Promise: while it drowned their
enemies. It is to the faithful as the Angels were to Lot, who snatched him out
of Sodom, while the rest were consumed with fire and brimstone. Every believer
is Christ's betrothed Spouse, and death is but a messenger to bring her home to
her husband: and what chaste or loving Spouse, will not earnestly desire the
presence of her Bridegroom, as Saint Austin speaks. Yea, the day of death to
them, is the day of their Coronation: and what Princely heir does not long for
the day of his instalment, and rejoice when it comes. Certainly it was the
sweetest voice that ever the Thief heard in this life, when Christ said unto
him, this day shall thou be with me in Paradise, Luke 23. 43. In a word, as
death to the wicked, puts an end to their short joys, and begins their
everlasting sorrows: so to the Elect, it is the end of all sorrow, and the
beginning of their everlasting joys.

The end of their sorrow; for whereas complaint of evils past, sense of
present, and fear of future, have shared our lives amongst them; death is

1. A Supersedius for all diseases; the Resurrection knows no imperfection.

2. It is a writ of ease, to free us from labor, and servitude; like Moses,
that delivered Gods people out of bondage, and from brick-making in Egypt.

3. Whereas our ingresse into the world, our progress in it, our egresse out
of it, is nothing but sorrow, (for we are borne crying, live grumbling, and die
sigthing) death is a medicine, which drives away all these, for we shall rise
triumphing.

4. It shall revive our reputations, and clear our names from all Ignominy,
and reproach; yea, the more contemptible here, the more glorious hereafter. Now
a very duellist will go into the field to seek death, and find honor.

5. Death to the godly is as a Jail delivery, to let the Soul out of the
Prison of the body, and set it free.

6. Death frees us from Sin, an Inmate that (spite of our teeth) will Roust
with us, so long as life affords it house-roome: for what is it to the
faithful, but the funeral of their vices, and the resurrection of their
virtues.

And thus we see, that death to the Saints is not a penalty, but a remedy; that
it acquits us of all our bonds, as sickness, labor, sorrow, disgrace,
imprisonment, and (that which is worse than all) sin; that it is not so much
the death of nature, as of corruption, and calamity. But this is not half the
good it does us; for it delivers us up, and let us into such Joys, as eye has
not seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered into the heart of man to
conceive: 1 Cor. 2. 9. Yea, a man may as well with a coal, paint out the Sun
in all his splendour, as with his pen, or tongue express; or with his heart
(were it as deep as the Sea) conceive, the fullness of those joys, and
sweetness of those pleasures, which the Saints shall enjoy at Gods right hand
for evermore: Psalm. 16. 11. In thy presence is the fullness of joy, and at thy
right hand are pleasures for evermore. For quality, they are pleasures; for
quantity, fullness; for dignity, at Gods right hand; for eternity, for
evermore: and millions of years multiplied by millions, make not up a minute
to this eternity.

Our dissolution is nothing else but aeterni natalis; the birthday of
eternity, (as Seneca calls it, more truly than he was aware) for when we are
borne, we are mortal; but when we are dead, we are immortal: yea, even their
mortal wounds make the sufferers immortal; and presently transport us from
the contemplation of felitity, unto the fruition. Whereas if the corn of our
bodies be not cast into the earth by death, we can have none of this increase:
which is the reason, first, that we celebrate the memory of the Saints, not
upon their birth-dayes, but upon their death-dayes; to show how the day of our
death, is better than the day of our birth: And secondly, that many Holy men
have wished for death; as Jeremy, Job, Paul, etc. As who can either marvel, or
blame the desire of advantage: for the weary traveller to long for rest, the
prisoner for liberty, the banished for home; it is so natural, that the
contrary disposition were monstrous.

And indeed it is our ignorance, and infidelity; at least our impreparation,
that makes death seem other than advantage. And look to it, for he hardly
mournes for the s^^nes of the time, who longes not to be freed from the time of
sin: he but little loves his Savior, who is not willing to go unto him: and
is too fond of himself, that would not go out of himself to God.

True, he that believes will not make haste; Isay 28. 16. that is, he will not
go out by a back door; seek redress by unlawful means, for though here he
has his pain, and in Heaven he looks for his payment, yet he will not make
more haste than good speed. Though he desires to be dissolved, and to be with
Christ, which is best of all: Phil. 1. 23, 24. Yet he is content to live, yea,
he lives patiently, though he dies joyfully: In his wisdom he could choose
the gain of death, but in his obedience he refuses not the service of life:
and it is to be feared, that God will refuse that soul, which leaves the body
before himself calls for it: as Seneca speaks like a Divine.

Now, what are we to learn from this double lesson, but a twofold instruction;
Is a calling a good warrant, and can it not want danger to go unsent; is death
to the godly no other then the Brazen Serpent to the Israelites; which was so
far from hurting them, that contrarily it healed them. And would thou not
fear death; (for to labor not to dye is labor in vain, and Kings in this,
are Subjects.)

First, look through death at glory, as let but the unfolded heavens give way
to Stevens eyes, to behold Christ in the glory of his Father: how willing is he
to ascend by that stony passage, Acts 7. 56. 59.

Secondly, fear to commit the least sin, which is forbidden by so great a
God, and suffered for, by so loving a Savior.

Now God has so far forth forbidden revenge, that he has forbidd^n all
kind of hatred, and malice; for the Law in every Commandment is spiritual,
and binds the heart as well as the ^and; and to thy power thou have slain him,
whom thou batest: he is alive, and yet thou have killed him, says S. Augustine:
and therefore these two, hatred, and inurther, are coupled together as
yoake-fellowes, in that long Teame of the fleshes beastly works, which draw
men to perdition: Romans 1. 29. Gal. 5. 21. and wherein do they differ, but as
the Father and the Sanne, or as Devil and evil, only in a letter. Yea, says
Christ, in the places before coated, Love your enemies, do well to them that
hate you, overcome evil with good, etc. Luke 6. 27. Romans 12. 21. Be so far
from snatching Gods weapon out of his hand, that you rather master unkindnesse,
with kindness.

And as this is Gods word, so hearing what the word speaks, is an eare-marke
of Christ's sheep, as witnesses the chief shepherd; John 8. He that is of
God, bears Gods word: and he is of an uncircumcised ear, and one of the
Devils Goats, that wants this mark: for he hears it not, because he is not
of God. Verse. 47. Wherefore lay it to heart, lose not the privilege of Gods
protection, by an unwarrantable righting of thy self: Do not like the Fool,
that leapt into the water, for fear of being drowned in the Boat. But above
all fears, fear him which after he has killed, has power to cast into hell:
Luke 1* 2. 5. compare the present with the future, the action with the reward;
think thou see beyond pleasing thy appetite, and doing thine own will,
sin against God: beyond that, death; beyond death, judgment; beyond
judgment, bell; beyond that, no limits of time, or torments; but all
easelesse, and endless. Thou cryest, God me merciful to me; but be thou also
merciful to thy self: Fear God, fear sin, and fear nothing; for sin is
the sting of all troubles: pull out the sting, and deride the malice of the
Serpent. Yea, have but Gods warrant for what thou go about, and then let
death happen, it shall not happen amiss; for the assurance of Gods call and
protection, when a man's actions are warranted by the Word, will even take away
the very fear of death: for death (as a Father well notes) has nothing
terrible, but what our life has made so. He that has lived well, is seldom
unwilling to dye; life or death is alike welcome unto him; for he knows,
whiles he is here, God will protect him; and when he goes hence, God will
receive him. I have so behaved my self (says Saint Ambrose to the Nobles of
Millaine) that I am not ashamed to live; neither having so good a Lord, am I
afraid to dye. And old Hilarion, these seaventy years and upwards, thou have
served the Lord; therefore now go forth my soul with joy, etc. Whereas he
that has lived wickedly, had rather lose any thing, even his soul, than his
life: whereby he tells us, though his tongue express it not, that he expects
a worse estate hereafter. How often does guiltiness make one avoid, what another
would wish in this case? Yea, death was much facilitated by the virtues of a
well-led life, even in the Heathen. Phocion being condemned to dye, and the
e^ocutioner refusing to do his office, unless he had twelve Drachmes paid him
in hand; Phocion borrowed it of a friend, and gave it him: ne mor a fieret
morti. Again, Cato was so resolute, that he told Caesar, he feared his
pardon, more than the pain he threatened him with. And Aristippus, as I take
it, (though I may be mistaken) told the Sailors (that wondered why he was not,
as well as they, afraid in a storm) that the odds was much; for they feared
the torments due to a wicked life, and he expected the reward of a good one.
Its a sollid and sweet reason, being rightly applied. Vice draws death with a
horrid look, with a whippe, and stames, and terrors, but so does not virtue.
Whence it was that death was ugly and fearful unto Cicero; wished for, and
desired of Cato, and indifferent to Socrates.

Objection. But a violent and painful death, is by far more terrible and
intolerable then a Natural.

Answer. Seldom have the Martyrs found it so, but often the contrary: which
made them kiss the wheel that must kill them, and think the stayres of the
scaffold of their Martyrdom, but so many degrees of their ascent to glory.
Besides Elias his fiery Chariot, or they which stoned Steven, took no more
from them, than an ordinary sickness did from Lazarus; and let death any way
crumble the Body to dust, the Resurrection shall restore it whole again.
Indeed if we live (and God by some lingering sickness, shall in mercy stay,
till we make us ready) we shall do well, but if we dye as the Martyrs did,
half burnt, and half blown up, we shall do better. And thus much to prove
that the godly endure reproaches and persecutions patiently, because God has
commanded them so to do.

CHAP. XXX.
That they are patient in suffering of wrongs, for Gods glory.

3. THe Children of God are patient in suffering wrongs, for Gods glory; left
Philosophy should seem more operative in her Disciples, than Divinity in hers;
lest nature and insidelity should boast it self against Christianity. It is a
saying of Sen^^a, He that is not able to set light by a sottish injury, is no
Disciple of Philosophy. And the examples before rehearsed show, that Socrates,
Plato, Aristippus, Aristotle, Diogenes, Epictetus, Philip of Macedon, Dion of
Alexandria, Agathocles, Antigonus, and Caesar, were endued with rare and
admirable patience; whereunto I will add four other examples: Philip of
Macedon asking the Ambassadors of Athens how he might most pleasure them;
received this answer, It were the greatest pleasure to Athens that could be, if
you would hang your self; yet was not moved a jot, for all his might was
answerable to his patience: why? he cared not so much to revenge the evil, as
to requite the good.

Polamon was not so much as appalled at the biting of a Dog that took away the
brawne or calfe of his leg; nor Harpalus to see two of his Sons laid ready
dressed in a silver Charger, when Astiages had bid him to Supper. And lastly,
when it was told Anaxagoras (from the State) that he was condemned to dye, and
that his Children were already executed, he was able to make this answer, As
touching, said he, my condemnation, nature has given like sentence both of my
condemners and me; and as touching my children, I knew before that I had begot
mortal creatures. But what of all this? Let every natural man know, that a
continued patience may be different from what is goodness: for as Austin well,
there is no true virtue, where there is no true Religion; neither is it a
natural meekness which proceeds from a good constitution, nor a morrall
meekness which proceeds from good education, and breeding; but spiritual
meekness which is a fruit of the spirit, Galat. 5. 22. to 25. That is the
subject of our discourse and will carry away the blessing.

But to give them the utmost advantage, let the virtues of all these
Philosophers be extracted into one Essence, and that spirit powered into one
man (as Zeuxis pourtraying Juno, chose the ^ive Daughters of Croton, out of all
the Agrigentine Virgins, that from there several perfections, he might compose
one excellent, and most beautiful picture:) Yet this Philosopher must be
acknowledged to fall short of a complete Christian guided by the Spirit of God.
Or if you will gather out of Histories the magnanimity of Hector, of Alexander,
of Caesar, of Scipio, and of S^aevola, put them to the rest; yet for patience
and constancy, they come not near that one president laid down in the example
of that holy man Job, and other servants of God in succeeding ages; and that in
five maine particulars.

1 One notable difference between the patience of a Philosopher and a
Christian, is, They lacked a pure heart, truly sanctified by the Holy Ghost,
which is the Fountain of all well doing. Now if the Fountain be corrupt, the
str^ames cannot be pure; but the best of them were but in the state of nature
unregenerate, and consequently unreconciled to God in Christ, and so enemies to
him, Romans 5. 10. And our persons must first be justified, and accepted of God,
before our actions can please him: as of necessity the Tree must be good,
before it can bare good fruit. Yea, says our Savior, as the Branch cannot
bare fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no more can ye, except
you abide in me, John 15. 4. Christian virtues are not natural; a man is no
more borne with Grace in his Soul, than with Apparel on his Back.

Again, the best of our Works are imperfect, and mingled with corruptions;
and therefore cannot abide the examination of Gods exact justice; till they be
covered with Christ's righteousness, and their corruption washed away with his
most precious blood. Neither can those works please God, which are done
without him: for as it will be no excuse before God, when the matter of the
work is ill, to plea^e the goodness of the heart: So, neither when the heart
is naught, to plead that the matter of the work is good; as many notable
examples prove, namely the Jews urging God with their fasting, Isay 58. and
yet sent away empty. And those reprobates, Matthew. 7. who allege there
Preaching in Christ's name, casting our Devils, etc. but receiving that
fearful answer, depart from me ye workers of iniquity, I know you not. As
also Caine, whose outward works in sacrificing, were the same with his
brothers; and yet Saint John says, Gains works were evil, and his brothers
good: which may se^ve to comfort poor Publicans, and confound all proud
Pharisees, as Saint Austin observes: qui viret in soliis venit a radicibus
humor.

2. As the Christian bears injuries patiently, so he does it and all other
performances in knowledge of, and in obedience to Gods word and Commandment;
which obedience also proceeds from a true love of God, and an humble heart:
thinking when he has done that, he falls far short of performing his duty.
Whereas they had neither knowledge in, nor love to, nor the least respect of
God, or his word, in their bearing injuries: and therefore as God said once to
the Jews in matter of Fasting, have ye fasted to me; so he will say to them
in the matter of suffering, have ye suffered in love and obedience to me, and
my word? no: but in love to your own credit, and other the like carnal
respects. And indeed, how can they expect a reward from God, when they have
done him no service: If in bearing with, or serving of men, we serve our
selves, and seek our selves rather than God: when we come for our reward,
Gods answer will be, let him reward you whom ye have served; thou servedst thy
self, therefore reward thy self, if thou will; for I never reward any service
but mine own. As, why will Christ at the later day remember, and reward the
duties of love, and liberality done to men: but because they were done for his
sake, and as to himself, Matthew. 25. 40. Ye have done them unto me, there is
the cause of the reward. Whence it is, Saint Paul wills Christian servants,
yoaked with cruel Heathnish misters, to he obedient unto them, as unto
Christ; serving the Lord, and not men: Colos. 3. Verse. 22, 23, 24.

3. What ever they did, or suffered, was either to purchase fame to themselves,
or to merit reward by it; their aim and end was not Gods glory, but their own
honor and glory, and virtues are to be judged, not by their actions, but by
their ends. Yea, they called virtue, Bonum Theatrale: as if a man would not be
virtuous if he had not spectators to take notice of him: but it is false, for
virtue will be as clear in solitudine, as in Theatro; though not so
conspicuous: only it may grow more strong by the observation, and applause of
others; as an heat that is doubled by the reflection.

But, O the difference between these natural, and mere moral men, and a
true Christian: the Christian loves goodness for it self, and would be holy,
were there no heaven to reward it; he does all, and suffers all, out of sincere
affection, and a zeal of Gods glory, and the Churches good: Math. 5. 16. to
the end his name may be magnified, and others won and edisied. 1 Pet. 2. 12.
as most fit it is, that the profit being man's, the honor should be Gods. And
this his sincerity the rather appears, in that he holds out, maugre all
opposition, disgrace, persecution, etc. Whereas the other like winde-mills,
would not turn about to do any good service, but for the wind of men's
praises.

Now it is one method to practice swimming with Bladders, and another to
practice dancing with heavy shoes. We read of some that in the Monastery
could fast whole days together with ease, but in the dezart, they could not
hold out until noone; but their bellyes would be craving presently.

4. The one does it in faith, which only crowns good actions; for whatsoever
is not done in faith, is sin: Romans 14. 23. and therefore cannot please God,
Heb. 11. 6. the reason is this, If our best actions be not the fruits of a
lively faith, they spring from Ignorance and I^ fidelity; as herbs may do
from a dunghill. And its evident they have not faith; for how should they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard. Romans 10. 14.

And it were well if all that are mere civil and moral men would look to
the Rock, where-out their works are hewn; and to the Pit, where-out they were
dug: for God looks at no action further, then it is the work of his
spirit, but the spirit is nowhere but in the sons of God: Galat. 4. 6. and no
sons but by faith in Christ: Gal. 3. 26. So that obedience without faith, is
but as the shell without the kernel, the husk without the corn, the carcass
without the soul, which the Lord abhorres, as the sacrifice of Fools, Isay
66. 3. Whence it is, that all the virtues of the Heathen are called by Divines
splendida peccata; shining or glistering sins, sins as it were in a silken
Robe.

5. The sum of all Moral Philosophy is included in these two words,
sustain, and abstain, and a wicked man may restrain evil as do the godly;
but here is the difference, the one keeps in corruption, the other kills
corruption.

6. The Philosopher, and so all civil and moral men, can forbear; the
Christian forgive; they pardon their enemies, we love ours; pray for them, and
return good for evil. And if not, we no whit savor of Heaven: For if you
love them which love you, (says our Savior) what thanks shall you have, for
even the sinners do the same? (such as see not beyond the clouds of humane
reason) But I say unto you which hear, Love your enemies, bless them that
curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which hurt you,
and persecute you* Matthew. 5. 44. Luke 6. 27. 32, 33. showing, that if we will
ever hope for good our selves, we must return good for evil unto others. In
which words you may note a tripple injunctio^, one to the heart, the treasury
of love; another to the tongu^, loves interpreter; the third and principal to
the hand, which is loves Factor, or A(...)oner. Wherein our Savior seems to
set man like a Clock, whose master wheel must not only go right within, nor
the bell alone sound true above; but the ^and also point straight without: as
for the motion and setting of the wheel within, he says to the heart, love
your enemies, for the stroke and sounding of the Bell above, he says to the
tongue, bless them that curse you; and for the pointing of the hand, or Index
without, he says to the hand, do good to them that hurt you.

Now, well may natura^l men sail with the wind of their natural passions,
and corrupt affections, in rendering evil for evil; but Christ the Master,
and Pylot of his Ship, the Church; has charged all passengers bound for
Heaven, the Haven of their hope, and Harbor of their rest; like Paul's
Mar^iners, Acts 27. to sail with a contrary wind and weather, of doing good
for evil: and like the Disciples on the Lake of Genazareth, Row through the
raging waves of their enemies reproaches, with a contrary breath, not rendering
rebuke for rebuke; but contrariwise, to bless: 1 Peter 3. 9. And the better to
teach us this lesson, he practiced it himself; adding example to precept: for
his word and his work, like mercy and truth, met together; his precept and his
pract^se, like righteousness and peace, kissed each other: for when they in
devilish malice sought nothing but his condemnation, he in great love went
about the work of their salvation: when they shed his blood to quench their
malice, he sweat water and blood to wash their souls. Yea, when the Jews
were crucifying of him, he at the same time (though the torments of his passion
were int(...)able, incomparable, unconceiveable) solliciteth God for their
pardon, Luke 23. 34. Now his prayer could not but be efficatious, and a pardon
for such murth^rers was no mean good turn. And this likewise is the practice
of the Saints, who strive to imitate their Master in all things which he did,
as man: S. Steven, at the instant while his enemies were stoning of him,
kneeled down and prayed, Lord lay not this sin to their charge, Acts 7. 60.
Where is one thing very remarkable; he stood when he prayed for himself, but
kneeled when he prayed for hi^ enemies; herby showing the greatness of their
impiety, which easily could not be forgiven; as also the greatness of his
piety. And indeed, as to render good for good, is the part of a man, and to
render evil for evil, the part of a beast; and to render evil for good, the
part of a devil; so to render good for evil, is only the part of a Saint: be
merciful, as your heavenly Father is merciful. Luke 6. 36. It were easy to
abound in examples of this kind; how often did Moses return good unto Pharaoh
for his evil, in praying and prevailing with God for him, to the removal of
nine several plagues; notwithstanding his cruel oppression? And David, what
could he have done for Saul, that he left undone; notwithstanding he so
cruelly persecuted him, and hunted after his life. And the like I might show in
that man of God to Jero^oam, and they that went to Heaven by the bloody way of
Martyrdom, who prayed for others, even their persecutors, and murderers; an
easier passage to Heaven: Yea, Gods people account it a sin, to cease praying
for their worst enemies, 1 Samuel 12. 23.

But what do I tell them of these transcendent examples? when I never yet
heard or read of that Philosopher, which could parallel Doctor Cooper, Bishop
of Lincoln, in an act of patient suffering; who, when his wife had burnt all
his Notes, which he had been eight years a gathering, least he should kill
himself with overmuch study, (for she had much ado to get him to his meals)
showed not the least token of passion, but only replied, Indeed wife it was
not well done; so falling to work again, was eight years more in gathering
the same Notes, wherewith he composed his Dictionary: which example, I
confess, more admires me, than any that ever I heard of from a man, not
extraordinarily and immediately inspired and assisted by the Holy Ghost: and
sure he that could endure this, could endure any thing, whether in body, goods,
or good name: for of necessity there must be in that man that can patiently
bear such a loss, somewhat more than man. I know there are some men (or
rather two legged Beasts) that esteem no more of Books and Notes, than Esops
Cock did of the Pearl he found; and these accordingly will say, this was
nothing in comparison of what they suffer; as when once a Hot-spur was
persuaded to be patient as Job was, he replied, What do you tell me of Job?
Job never had any suits in Chauncery.

Yea, indeed the meanest of Christ's royal Band, for patience puts down all the
generations of natural men: as even their enemies will confess. Consalvus a
Spanish Bishop, and Inquisitor; wondered, how the Protestans had that
Commandment, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self, so indelibly Printed
in their hearts, that no torture could blot it out, and make them confess, and
betray one another. And indeed, how should it be otherwise: for

First, if Moral Principles cherished and strengthened by good education, will
enable the soul against vicious inclinations; so that though some influence of
the heavens do work upon the air, and the air upon the spirits, and the
spirits upon the humors; and these incline the temper, and that inclines the
soul of a man, such and such ways: Yet breeding in the refineder sort of
evil persons, will much prevail, to draw them another way; what may we
think of grace, and faith, and Gods spirit, which are supernatural.

Secondly, every Christian suffering for Christ's sake, and for righteousness
sake, has Gods mighty power to support him; and Christ to suffer with him, and
bear a part in his misery: whereas the natural man suffers all himself as a
delinquent, or malefactor; whose guilty conscience adds weight to his
punishment. A woman called F^licitas, (whom Saint Austin much praises) being
brought to bed in the time of her imprisonment for the truth; and by reason of
the great pains she had in her labor, that she could not forbear
schre^ching: one of the Officers hearing her cry out, tauntingly, mocked her
thus; Ah woman, if thou can not bear these sorrows without such crying^,
how will thou endure, when thou shall be burnt, or cut in pieces, or torn
asunder; What thou now suffer is but sport, but the Tragedy is to follow:
whom she answered; Now, said she, I suffer for my self, and for sin; but
then Christ is to suffer in me, and I for him. And it fell out as she said, for
when she was thrown to the wild beasts, she neither sent out screechings, nor
so much as a sigh or groan; but entertained death with so merry, and cheerful
a countenance, as if she had been invited to a Feast.

And thus you see in the first place, that Nature has but a slow foot to
follow Religion close at the heels: that grace and faith transcends reason, as
much as reason does sense; that patience (rightly so called) is a Prerogative
royal, peculiar to the Saints. It is well if Philosophy have so much wisdom,
as to stand amazed at it.

2. That it is not true Christian patience, except it flow from a pious and
good heart, sanctified by the Holy Ghost. 2 Be done in knowledge of, and
obedience to Gods command. 3, That we do it in humility, and sincere love to
God. 4, That it be done in faith. 5, That we aim at Gods glory, (not our
own) and the Churches good in our sufferings. 6, That we ^orgive, as well as
forbear; yea, love, pray for, and return good to our enemies for their evil:
which being so, what has the Swashbuckler to say for himself? And what will
become of him, if he repent not; who can afford no time to argue, but to
execute? Yea, what has the more temperate worldling to say for himself, who
has some small piece of reason for his guide? arguing thus, I would rather
make show of my passions, than smoother them to my cost; which being vented and
expressed, become more languishing and weak: better it is to let its point work
outwardly, than bend it against our selves; and in reason, Tallying of injuries
is but justice. To which I answer, it is not reason, especially ^arnall reason,
but Religion, which all this while has been disputed of, which is Divine and
supernatural; and that teaches how good must be returned for evil, and that
we should rather invite our enemy to do us more wrong, than not to suffer the
former with patience; as our Saviors words do imply: If (says he) they
strike thee on the one cheek, turn to him the other also; If they sue thee at
the Law, and take away thy Coat, let him have thy Cloak also, Mat. 5. 39, 40.
He speaks comparatively as if he should say, rather suffer two wrongs, than
do one.

Indeed, the difficulty of the duty, the seeming danger and want of Faith in
carnal men, weakneth the force of the strongest reasons; for no more, among
Ru^^ins, but a word and a blow, among civil men a word and a writ can you
expect. But as thrice Noble Nehemiah said to that false Belly-god
betraying-Priest Shemaiah, should such a man as I flee: So the true Christian
will encounter all discouragements and frightning Alarums thus; should such a
man as I fear to do that which my Master, King, and Captain Christ Jesus
has commanded me, which is of more necessity than life it self.

Yea, seeing Heathens could go so far as to subdue their passions; for shame
let so many of us, as would be accounted Christians go further, even to the
mortifying of ours: or if we go not before Publicans and Sinners, in the
Kingdom of grace, Publicans and Sinners shall go before us into the Kingdom
of Heaven. And seeing the duty of the Child is the Fathers honor, let us that
are Christians be known from Worldlings by our practice: as once the Grecians
were known from the Barbarians by their virtuous lives; as Quintus Curtius
notes. Shall a wild Olive Tree, growing upon the barren mo(...)s of Gilboa; and
nature, where neither dew of the spirit, nor rain of grace faleth, bare such
fruit; and shall not thou a green Olive Tree in the house of God, planted
beside the waters of comfort, bring forth this fruit of the spirit.

We see that civil honesty, severed f^^m tr^e piety, humility, saving
knowledge, sincere love to God, true obedience to his word, justifying faith, a
zeal of Gods glory, and desire to edify and win others, God accepts not, as
proceeding from the love of our selves, and other carnal respects; namely, to
obtain praise or profit thereby. So that to suffer as the Heathen did, without
observing other circumstances, is but to imitate that foolish Patient, who when
the Physician bade him take that prescript, eat up the paper. Wherefore do
not only subdue thy passions, but sail with that contrary breath of the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. 12. We are reviled, and we bless, and with that of Saint
Steven, who rowed both against wind, and tide, not only through the raging
waves of his enemies reproaches, but even in a storm^ of stones, being as
earnest to save their souls, as they were to slay his body.

Mere Civil and morrall men have speculative knowledge, if thine be saving it
will take away barre^nes, and make thee fruitful in the works of obedience;
who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof; we expect this of
the Earth that has only nature, and shall not God expect it of us, who have
sense to govern nature, Reason to govern sense, grace to govern reason,
Jesus Christ to govern all.

The little World, Man, is so the compendium, and abridgement of all creatures,
that whatsoever is imprinted with Capital Letters in that large Volume, as in
Folio, is sweetly and harmoniously contracted in decimo sexto, in the brief
text of man, who includes all: Planets have being not life, Plants have life
not sense, Beasts have sense not reason, Angels have being, life, reason, not
sense, man has all, and contains in him more generality than the Angels,
being with Planets, life with Plants, sense with Beasts, reason with Angels:
But the believer has over and above Gods spirit, and faith, which are peculiar
prerogatives belonging to the godly which no man (being a mere man) is capable
of.

Here also, if it were as orderly as pertinent, I might take occasion to show
another peculiar and proper adjunct belonging to the patience of a Christian,
which a Philosopher may sooner envy than imitate; yea, it must put him besides
his reason, before he can conceive it possible, namely, That a Christian
rejoices in his sufferings: We rejoice in tribulation (says Saint Paul,)
knowing that tribulation brings forth patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope, etc. Romans 5. 3. Yea, he goes yet further and says, I am
filled with comfort, I am exceeding joyful in all our tribulation, 2 Cor. 7.
4. Which is to over abound exceedingly with joy, such an e^uberation of joy, as
brake forth into thankfulness; And Saint James the like saying, My brethren,
count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations; knowing that the
trying of your faith, brings forth patience, and let patience have her
perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire, lacking nothing, James 1. 3,
4.

Gods people do not only acknowledge that they suffer justly from God, even
when they suffer unjustly from men, as Joseph's brethren did, who were no Spies,
nor eozoners as they were accused; yea, they had faithfully presented their
Moneys for their Wheat, neither had they stolen their Lords Cup: yet say they,
justly is this evil come upon us, because we have sinned against our brother,
Genesis 42. 21. A^ a trespass being committed, perhaps thirty or forty years
ago, and no punishment till now inflicted; behold thy Creditor is now come,
and thou must pay the debt, have thou any wrong done thee, I trow not. But this
is not all (though nature will scarce acknowledge so much) for we must
proceed, and not always continue in the nethermost Form, like drones: he is
not uppermost in this School of patience, who suffers things patiently, that
must be suffered: but he who does it willingly, cheerfully, and thankefully.

Paulus Dioconus relates, how the Empress Irene being deposed from ruling, by
her own servant; said, I thank God, who of his free mercy advanced me an
unworthy Orphane to the Empire, but now that he suffers me to be cast down;
I ascribe it wholly to my sins, blessed be his name for his mercy in the one,
in the other for his justice. And Saint James being cut into pieces limb by
limb, was heard to say, God be thanked upon the cutting off of each member,
or joint. The very Heathen says Saint Hierome, know that thanks are to be
given for benefits received, but Christians only give thanks for calamities
and miseries.

But because this path leads from the way of my intended discourse, and you
affect not to have me digress: come we to the sixteenth Reason.

CHAP. XXXI.
T(...)at they may follow Christ's examples, and imitate the patience of the
Saint in all Ages.

16. Reason,

6. IN the sixth and last place, they bear the slanders and persecutions of
wicked men patiently, that they may follow Christ's example, and imitate the
patience of the Saints in all ages.

Christ also suffered for you (says Saint Peter) leaveing you an example, that
you should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2. 21. And it is written of him, that When
he was reviled, he reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not, 1
Pet. 2. 23. He was called of his enemies, Conjurer, Samaritane, Wine-bibber,
etc. was scoft at, scorned, scourged, Crucified, and what not: yea, he suffered
in every place, in every part.

First, In every place, hunger in the desert, resistance in the Temple, sorrow
in the Garden, contumelyes in the Judgment Hall, Crucifying without the City,
and so forth.

Secondly, in every part, his eyes run down with tears, his temples with
blood, his ears tingled with buffettings, glowed with reproaches; they
afflicted his taste with Gall, spit in his face, pearst his head with thorns,
his hands with nails, his side with a spear: his heart was full of sorrow,
his soul of anguish, his whole body was sacrificed as an offering for sin:
and yet he suffered all for us; to the end he might leave us an example, that
we should follow his steps. Neither was it so much what he suffered, as with
what affection, willingness, and patience he suffered, that did Nobilitate the
merit of his sufferings. As touching the first, why descended he to take our
flesh? but that we might ascend to take his Kingdom; he descended to be
crucified, that we might ascend to be glorified; he descended to Hell, that we
might ascend to heaven.

Touching the second, what King ever went so willingly to be Crowned, as he to
be crucified; Who so gladly from execution, as he to it: What man was ever so
desirous to save his life, as Christ was to lose it; witness that speech, I
have a Bap^isme to be baptized with, and how am I pained till it be
accomplished, Luke 12. 50. His mind was in pain, till his body and soul,
came to it: And to him that dissuaded him from it, he used no other terms than
avoid Satan.

And thirdly, with what patience he suffered all, let both Testaments
determine; he was oppressed and afflicted, yet did he not open his mouth; he
was brought as a Sheep to the slaughter, and as a Sheep before the Shearer is
dumb, so opened he not his mouth, Isaiah 53. 7. His behavior was so mild and
gentle, that all the malice of his enemies, could not wrest an angry word from
him. Yea, when his own Disciple was determined to betray him; I see not a
frown, I hear not a check from him again: but what thou do do quickly. O
the admirable mecknesse of this Lamb of God: Why do we startle at our petty
wrongs, and swell with anger, and break into furious revenges, upon every
occasion, when the pattern of our patience lets not fall one harsh word, upon
so foul and bloody a Traitor. When the Jews cried out crucify him, as before
they cried out, his blood be upon us and upon our Children, he out cries,
Father, pardon them; being beaten with Rods, crowned with Thorns, pierced with
nails, nailed to the Cross, bathed all his body over in blood, filled with
reproaches, etc. in the very pangs of death; as unmindfull of all his great
griefs, he prays for his persecutors, and that earnestly, Father forgive
them, Pendebat, and tamen petebat, as Saint Augustine sweetly: O patient and
compassionate love. Ye wicked and foolish Jews, you would be miserable, he
will not let you: His ears had been still more open to the voice of grief,
then of malice; and so his lips also are open to the one, shut to the other.

Thus Christ upon the Cross, as a Doctor in his chair, read to us all a
lecture of patience; for his actions are our instructions: and the same that
Gideon spoke to Israel, he speaks still to us: as ye see me do, so do you:
And no man be he never so cunning, or practiced, can make a straight line, or
perfect circle by steadiness of hand, which may easily be done by the help
of a Rule of Compass. Besides, is Christ gone before us in the like
sufferings, what greater encouragement, when we read that Caesar's example
(who not only was in those battles, but went before them) yea, his very Eye
made his Soldiers prodigal of their blood, When we read that young King
Philip, being but catryed in his Cradle to the Wars, did greatly annimate the
Soldiers. Besides, what servant will wish to fare better than his Lord; is it
meet that he who is not only thy Master, but thy Maker, should pass his time
in continuali travel, and thou in continual case.

When a lewd Malefactor being condemned to dye with just Phocion, rayled at the
Judge, the Law, his Accusers, and looked on Death with terror, and amazednes;
he thus cheered him with encouragement, Do thou grudge to dye with Phocion:
so say I to thee, Do thou grudge to suffer with thy Savior: O blessed Jesu!
O thou Coeternall Son of thine Eternal Father, why should I think strange
to be scourged with tongue, or hand, when I see thee bleeding: what lashes can
I fear, either from Heaven, or Earth, since thy scourges have been borne for
me; and have sanctified them to me.

True, it is Satan's policy to make men believe, that to do, and suffer, as a
Christian is so extremely difficult for them, that it is altogether
impossible; where in he deals like the inhospitable Salvages of some
Countries, who make strange fires, and a show of dismal terrou^s upon the
shores, to keep passengers from landing: But if Christ be gone before us in
the like, and it is for his sake that we smart; then we may be sure to have him
present with us (even within us by his spirit, 1 Peter 4. 12, 13, 14.) to
assist us, and prevent our enemies: and is not be able enough to vindicate all
our wrongs.

Learn we therefore from him, to suffer Innocently. Patiently.


Will thou (says one) look to reign, and not expect to suffe^? Why, Christ
himself went not up to his glory, until first he suffered pain: Or will thou (says Saint Cyprian) be impatient, by seeking present revenge upon thine
enemies, when Christ himself is not yet revenged of his enemies? Do thou
bear with others, God bears with thee; is there a too much, which thou can
suffer for so patient a Lord? But to go on; will thou follow Gods example?
Then note, whereas Christ has in many particulars commanded us to follow his
example; yet in no place (says Saint Chrysostom) he infers we should be
like our Heavenly Father, but in doing good to our enemies. And therein
resemble we the whole three Persons in Trinity. God was only in the still
wind; Christ is compared to a Lamb, the Holy Ghost to a Dove. Now if we will
resemble these three Persons, we must be softly, Lombes, Doves; but if on the
contrary we be fierce, cruel, and take revenge, so using violence, we
resemble rather the Devil, who is called a roaring Lion; and the wicked, who
are termed Dogs, Wolves, Tigers, etc.

3. To add to the precept of God, and the practice of our Savior, the example
of Gods people; they are patient in suffering of injuries, that they might
imitate the Saints in all ages. They were so, and we are likewise commanded to
follow their steps, as in all things which are good; so especially in this.
Take my brethren the Prophets (says Saint James) for an example of suffering
adversities, and of long patience. James 5. 10. Brethren, says Saint Paul to
the Thessalonians, Ye are become followers of the Churches of God, which in
Judes are in Christ Jesus, because ye have also suffered the same things of
your own Contrymen, even as they have of the Jews, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 14. And to
the Philippians, Be ye followers of me, Brethren, and look on them which walk
so, as ye have us for an example, Phil. 3. 17. And see how he followed his
Masters example; for which amongst us so loves his Benefactors, as Saint Paul
loved his Malefactors? he would do any thing (even be rased out of the book
of life) to save them that would do any thing to kill him. Amongst many
examples recorded for thy imitation, and mine; behold the patience of Job,
James 5. 11. of Abraham, Genesis 20. 17, 18. of Isaas, Chap. 26. 15. of Joseph,
Chap. 37. 32, 33. who notwithstanding his brethren hated him for his goodness,
and could not speak peaceably unto him, conspired to kill him, stripped him of
his Coat, cast him into a pit, sold him for a slave, recompenst them good for
evil; when he was armed with power to revenge: for when these his enemies did
bunger, he fed them; when they were thirsty, he gave them drink; whereas they
stripped him of his parti-coloured-coat, he gave them all change of raiment;
whereas they sold him for twenty pieces of money, he would not sell them
corn, but gave it them freely, and put their money again into their sacks;
whereas they cast him into a pit, without either bread or water, he brought
them into his own lodging, and feasted them sumptuously with delicate fare;
and gave them of the best Wine: Thus he gave them a good measure, pressed
down, and shaken together; yea, running over into their bosoms, of kindness
for unkindnesse. And thus holy David trod in the steps of good Joseph, Psalm.
38. 12. to 15. 1 Samuel 26. 20. For when Saul had bent his how, and made ready
the arrows within his quiver, to shoot at this upright in heart, and sweet
singer of Israel: Yea, when this Fowler hunted him like a Partridge to the
mountains; so that his soul was feign to ask for the wings of a Dove, that
he might fly away and be at rest: Yet see when his mortal foe was delivered
into his hand in the Cave, he would not lay hands on his enemy, nor suffer his
bloodthirsty followers to fall upon him, but only to give him notice what he
could have done: cut off the lap of his garment, and rendered him good for
evil; as Saul himself confessed: 1 Samuel 24. 18. Yea again, when he found
him asleep in the field, he spared his life which was in his hand; and to give
him a second warning, only took away his pot of water, and his spear: 1 Samuel
26. And lastly of Steven, who when the Jews were stoning him to death, kneeled
down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge,
Acts 7. 60. A true Scholar of CHRIST: for first, he prayed for enemies;
secondly, for mortal enemies that stoned him; thirdly, in hot blood, at the
time when they wronged him most; as being more sorry for their ryat, then for
his own ruin. Now what is it that we suffer, being compared with their
sufferings? even nothing in a manner: Ye have not (says Saint Paul to the
Hebrews) yet resisted unto blood: We have passed (says the Prophet) through
fire and water; not fire only, as the three Children; nor water only, as the
Israelites; but fire and water, all kind of afflictions and adversities. For
shame then let us pass through a little tongue-tryall, without the least
answering, or repining.

Now all ye scoffers, behold the patience of the Saints, and stand amazed. That
which you (not for want of ignorance) esteemed base, sottish, and unworthy, ye
see has 16. sollid Reasons, as so many pillars to support it; and these hewn
out of the Rock of Gods Word. Ye see the Child of God is above nature, while
he seems below himself; the vilest creature knows how to turn again; but
to command himself, not to resist being urged, is more than Heroical. Here
then is matter worth your emulation, worthy your imitation.

Again, behold the reasons why God suffers you to deride, hate, and persecute
his people, which are likewise declared to be 16. in number, and those no less
weighty; of which three concern his own glory; thirteen our spiritual and
everlasting good, benefit, and advantage. Yea, reflect yet further you seed of
the Serpent, and see In the cure of prejudis.
the Original, continuance, properties, causes, ends; and what will be the
issue of your devilish enmity against the seed of the Woman? And then you will
acquit the religious with Christ, and his Apostles for well doing; or confess
that you condemn Christ and his Apostles with them: as Erasmus said in his
own defense. But if of the two, you will choose to go on and perish, your
blood be on your own heads, and not on mine; I have discharged my duty.

CHAP. XXXII.
Rules to be observed touching thoughts, words, and deeds, when we are wronged.

I Must needs confess (may some say) you have showed sixteen solid and
substantial reasons of patience, sufficient to persuade any reasonable
creature to embrace it, at least in affection; but is it therefore in all cases
necessary we suffer injuries, without righting of our selves, or being angry.

No: he that makes himself* Sheep, shall be eaten of the Wolf. In some cases
tolerations are more than unexpedient; they inspire the party with boldness,
and are as it were pullies to draw on more injuries, hear one wrong, and
invite more; put up this abuse, and you shall have your belly full of them.
Yea, he that suffers a lesser wrong, many times invites a greater; which he
shall not be long without. As how does David's patience draw on the insolence of
Shimei? Evil natures grow presumptuous upon forbearance. In good natures and
dispositions, injury unanswered grows weary of it self, and dies in a
voluntary remorse; but in those dogged stomachs, which are only capable of the
restraints of fear: the silent digestion of a former wrong, provokes a second;
neither will a Beefe-braine fellow be subdued with words. Wherefore mercy has
need to be guided with wisdom, least it prove cruel to it self.

Neither does Religion call us to a weak simplicity, but allows us as much of
the Serpent as of the Dove. It is our duty indeed to be simple as Doves, in
offending them; but we are no less charged to be wise as Serpents, in
defending our selves: lawful remedies have from God, both liberty in the use,
and blessing in the success; no man is bound to tender his throat to an unjust
stroke. Indeed, when the persecuted Christians complained against their
adversaries, to Julian the Emperor, desiring justice; he answered them, as
some of our s^offers may do in the like case, It is your Masters commandment
that you should bear all kind of injuries with patience. But what did they
answer? It is true, he commands us to bear all kinds of injuries patiently,
but not in all cases; besides, said they, we may bear them patiently, yet
crave the Magistrates aid for the repairing of our wrongs past, our present
rescue, or for the preventing of what is like to ensue. But to make a full
Answer to the Question propounded: There are Rules to be observed, 1 touching
our Thoughts. 2 touching our Words. 3 touching our Actions.


1. First, touching our Thoughts: He that deceives me often, though I must
forgive him, yet Charity binds me not, not to censure him for untrusty; and
though Love does not allow suspicion, yet it does not thrust out discretion; it
judges not rashly, but it judges justly: it is not so sharp sighted, as to
see a moat where none is; nor so purblinde, but it can discern a beam where
it is; the same spirit that says, Charity believes all things, 1 Cor. 13. 7.
says also, that a fool believes all things, Prove. 14. 15. and charity is no
fool, as it is not easily suspicious, so neither lightly credulous. It is
neither simple, nor subtle, as Bi^s spoke wisely of her: or rather not only
simple as a Dove, to think no evil; but also wise as a Serpent, to discern
all things, and see what is evil.

2. For our tallying of words, as it argues little discretion in him that does
it, so it is of as little use, except the standers by want information of thy
innocence, and his guiltiness which gives the occasion. Wherefore in hearing
thy own private and personal reproaches, the best answer is silence; but the
wrongs and indignities offered to God, or contumelies that are cast upon us in
the causes of Religion, or the Church, may safely be repayed. If we be
meale-mouthed in Christ, and the Gospels cause, we are not patient, but
zeale-lesse. Yea, to hold a man's peace when Gods honor is in question, is to
mistake the end of our Redemption; 1 Cor. 6. 20. What says the Apostle? join
with patience, godliness, 2 Pet. 1. 6. for else patience without godliness,
while it receives injury of man, may do more injury to God. Neither is there a
better argument of an upright heart, than to be more sensible of the
indignities offered to God, then of our own dangers. And certainly no
ingenuous disposition can be so tender of his own disgrace, as the true
Christian is at the reproach of his God; as we see in Moses, who, when Aaron
and Miriam offered him a private injury, it is said, his meekness was such,
that he gave them not a word, Numb. 12. But when the people had fallen to
idolatry, and he heard them murmr against their Maker, he spares neither
Aaron, nor the people, but in a godly ^it of zeal takes on at them; yea,
breaks the Tables in pieces, Exodus 32. A meek Lamb in his own cause, a
fierce Lion in Gods. Yea, it was always his manner to plead the peoples cause
to God, with prayers, and tears; but Gods cause against the people, with
sword, and revenge. And thus it fared with David, who was a man deaf and dumb,
and wholly senseless at Shemei^ private reproach; when he cursed him, cast
stones at him, called him murderer, and wicked man, (...) Sam. 16. But not so
at Goliahs public revilings of God, and his Church; no, not at Michols
despising his holy zeal in the public service of God, 2 Samuel 6. In these
cases how full of life, and spirit, and holy impatiency did he show himself to
be? And our Savior Christ, who suffered himself to be spit upon, buffe^ed,
crowned with Thorns, etc. without giveing an angry word s but when he saw the
Temple abused, he burned in a zealous anger against them; took a s(...)rge,
and whipped the buyers and sellers ou^, saying, Ye have made my Fathers house a
den of thieves: Matthew. 21. 12, 13.

3. Touching our actions; whether it be in thine own cause, or in the cause of
God, and Religion, thou m^ist not be a revenger. All that private persons can
do, is either to lift up their hands to Heaven for redress of sin, or to
lift up their tongues against the sin, not their hands against the person.
Who made thee a Judge, is a lawful question, if it meet with a person
unwarranted. True, Phin^as in the case of Zimry, and Cozby, lift up his hand,
and thrust them both through with a Spear: And when Moses saw the Egyptian
smiting the Hebrew, he smoate the Egyptian: but they had peculiar warrants
signed from Heaven, either by instinct, or special command; which we shall
expect in vain.

Well may we flee from danger, as Jacob fled from Esau, Moses from Pharaoh,
David from King Saul, Elias from Jesabel, Paul from the Damascens, and Christ
himself from the Jews: And expect to find comfort in our flight, even a City
of refuge; as Jacob found favor in Labans house, Moses a rich Fatherin-Law,
Elias an Angel to feed him, Paul spiritual brethren to comfort him; besides
the Holy Ghost the true Comforter. But the weapons of a Christian in adversity,
ought only to be patience, and prayer; f^r as Theodoret says, if Muentius,
and Maximinian in the heat of zeal, shall rail on wicked Julian at a Feast;
justly may their deaths be cast upon their petulancy, but not upon their
Religion. Yea, the Counsel of Eleberis decreed, that if any man did take upon
him to break down the Heathens Idols, and were slain in the place: that he
should not be reckoned among the Martyrs.

Indeed, God so loves this heat of zeal in all the carriages of his servants,
that if it transport us too far, he pardons the errors of our fervency,
rather than the indifferences of lukewarmenesse: as may be seen in that act of
Moses, when being wroth with the people about the malten Calfe, he brake the
Tables in pieces: Exodus 32. Nevertheless, if we shall either out of
superstition, or presumption, do that we have neither calling, nor warrant
for, out of the word; such our works (be our intention what it will) are but
the blind whelps of an ignorant zeal, and an unadvized zeal (when knowledge
is not made the Pilot of devotion) may be more prejudicial, than a cold
r^misnesse, Swift horses without a skillful waggon^^, and full sails without a
good Pilot, endanger more.

Objection. Every base nature will be ready to offer injuries, where they
think they will not be repaid: he will many times beat a Coward, that would
not dare to strike him, if he thought him valiant: as a Cur that goes through a
Village, if he clap his tail between the legs, and run away, every Cur
will insult over him; but if he bristell up himself, and stand to it, give but
a counter-snarle, there is not a Dog dares meddle with him.

Answer. Nevertheless, avenge not thy self, but give place unto wrath; and
that for conscience sake, Romans 12. 19. If thou receivest wrong in thy person,
goods, or good name, it is the Magistrates office to see thee righted; and For
this cause ye pay also tribute. He is the Minister of God for thy wealth, to
take vengeance on him that does evil; and for the praise of them that do
well: neither does he bear the sword for naught, Romans 13. 4, 5, 6. 1 Peter 2.
14. Now in this case, he that has endammaged me much, (as you have some that
will deprive men of their possessions, and then persuade them to be content)
cannot plead breach of charity in my see^ing his Restitution: and because
patience without discretion wrongs a good cause, I will so mit wrongs, as I may
not encourage others to offer them; and so retain them, that I may not induce
God to retain mine to him. Have you not seen a Crow stand upon a Sheep
back, pulling off wool from her side: even creatures reasonlesse know well
whom they may be bold with; that Crow durst not do this to a Wolf, or a
Mastiffe: the known simplicity of this innocent beast, gives advantage to this
presumption; meekness of spirit commonly draws on injuries, and the cruelty
of ill natures usually seeks out those, not who deserve worst, but who will
bear most. Wherefore patience, and mildness of spirit is ill bestowed, where
it exposes a man to wrong and insultation: Sheepish dispositions are best to
others, worst to themselves. I could be willing to take injuries, but I will
not be guilty of provoking them by lenity; for harmelesnesse, let me go for a
Sheep; but whosoever will be tearing my fleece, let him look to himself.

Diogenes the Stoicke, teaching his auditors how they should refrain anger,
and being earnest in pressing them to patience, a waggish boy spit in his face,
to see whether he would practice that which he taught others: but Diogenes was
not a whit moved at it; yet said withal, I fear I shall commit a greater
fault in letting this boy go unpunished, than in being angry. In some cases,
for reason to take the rod out of the hands of wrath, and chastise, may be both
lawful and expedient. The same which Aristotle affirmed in Philosophy, viz.
That choler does sometime serve as a whetstone to virtue, is made good
Divinity by Saint Paul, Be angry, but sin not, Ephesians. 4. 26. that is, be
angry with sin only.

For Cautions and Rules to be observed, when we appeal to the Magistrate. 1.
First, let it be in a matter of weight, and not for trifles.

True, thou can not be more forward to cast away thy money, then some Lawyers
are to catch it: but the Physician, and Lawyer, are for necessity, not for
wantonness. What said one to a Lawyer, offering to right his wrongs, and
revenge him of his adversary, by Law: I am resolved rather to bear with
patience an hayleshower of injuries, than seek shelter at such a thicket;
where the brambles shall pluck off my fleece, and do me more hurt by
scratching, than the storm would have done by hayling. I care not for that
Physic, where the remedy is worse than the disease.

2. Secondly, let it be in case of necessity; after we have assayed all good
means of peace and agreement: using Law, as a Father does the Rod, full sore
against his will. As whatever our wrongs be, true wisdom of the spirit will
send the Apostle lenity, as admonitions harbinger, with offers of peace, before
she takes out prosses: 2 Timothy 2. 25.

3. Thirdly, let not our aim and end be the hurt of our enemy: but, first, the
glory of God; secondly, the reformation of the party himself, that so he which
is overcome, may also overcome; and (if it may be) others by his example,
whereby more than one Devil shall be subdued. And thirdly, to procure a
further peace and quiet afterward; as Princes make war to avoid war: yea,
in case we see a storm inevitably falling, it is good to meet it, and break the
force. Fourthly, let us not be transported either with heat or hate, but begin
and follow our suits without anger* or using the least bitterness or extremity
against the person of our adversary: as Tilters break their Spears on each
others breasts; yet without wrath or imention of hurt; or as Charles the French
King made war against Henry the seventh, King of England, rather with an
Olive Branch, than a Lawrell-branch in his hand, more desiring peace than
victory; not using bribery, or any other means to corrupt or hinder justice;
but to seek our own right. Fifthly, and lastly, having used this ordinary
means that the Lord has given us for the righting of our selves, in case we
find no redress, let us rest with quietness and meekness therein, without
fretting, or desire to right our selves by private revenge; knowing assuredly,
that the Lord has thus ordered the whole matter, either for our correction, or
for the exercise of our patience and charity; or that he will take the matter
into his own hand, and revenge our cause of such an enemy, far more
severely: or for that he means to deal far better with us, if we commit
our cause to him, than either our selves, or any Magistrate could have done.

To conclude this argument in a word. If thou go to Law, Make Conscience thy
Chauncery. Make Charity thy Judge. Make Patience thy Councellor. Make Truth thy
At^urn^y. Make Peace thy Soliciton.
And so doing, thou shall be sure to find two friends in thy suit, that will
more bestead thee, than any (...) Judges; namely, God and thy Conscience. God,
who being Chief Justice of the whole world, can do for thee whatsoever he
will, and will do for thee whatsoever is best: thy Conscience, which is
instead of a thousand good Witnesses, a thousand good Advocates, a thousand
good Juries, a thousand Clerks of the Peace, and Guardians of the Peace to
plead, procure, pronounce, record, and assure to thee that peace which passes
all understanding.

But I fear I have incited your impatiency by standing so long upon patience.

CHAP. XXXIII.
Use and Application of the ^^rmer Reason.

1. Use.
THese latter Reasons being dispatched, return we to make use of the former;
for I may seem to have left them, and be gone quite out of sight, though
indeed it cannot properly be called a digression: seeing the last point
proved, was; That God suffers his children to be persecuted and afflicted for
the increase of their patience.

First, if God sends these afflictions, either for our Instruction, or
Reformation, to scowre away the rust of corruption, or to try the truth of our
sanctification, either for the increase of our patience, or the exercise of our
faith, or the improvement of our zeal, or to provoke our importunity, or for
the doubling of our Obligation: seeing true gold flies not the touchstone; let
us examine whether we have thus husbanded our afflictions to his glory, and our
own spiritual and everlasting good. I know Gods fatherly chastisements for
the time, seem grievous to the best of his Children; Yea, at first they come
upon us, like Samps^^s Lion, look terrible in show, as if they would devour
us; and as Children are afraid of their friends when they see them masked, so
are we. But tell me, has not this roaring Lion prevailed against thy best
part? have thou kept thy head whole? I mean thy soul free? For as Fencers
will seem to fetch a blow at the leg, when they intended it at the head; so
does the Devil, though he strike at thy name, his aim is to slay thy soul.
Now instead of being overcome, do thou overcome? Has this Lion yielded thee
any honey of Instruction, or Reformation? Has thy sin dyed with thy fame, or
with thy health, or with thy peace, or with thy outward estate? D^est thou
perceive the graces of Gods Spirit to come up, and flourish so much the more in
the spring of thy recovery, by how much the more hard and bitter thy winter of
adversity has been? Then thou have approved thy self Christ's faithful
Soldier, and a Citize^ of that Jerusalem, which is above: (...)a, I dare
boldly say of thee, as Saint Paul of himself, That nothing shall be able to
separate thee from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 8.
39. To ^in ^e this honey in the Lion, more than makes amends for all former
fear and griese: and in case any man, by his humiliation under the hand of
God, is grown more faithful and conscion^ble; there is honey out of the Lion:
or is any man by his temptation or fall, become more circumspect after it?
there also is honey out of the Lion, etc. For there is no Sampson, to whom
every Lion does not yield some honey; for as affliction sanctified, ever leaves
some blessing behind it, like the River Nilus, which by overflowing the Land
of Egypt, fattens, and ^ils it, with flowers, and fruits; so a sine wit, and a
Christian will, makes use of any thing: like the little Be, which will not off
the meanest flower, till she has made somewhat of it. Even Saul's malice shall
serve to enhaunce David's zeal: and the likelihood of losing Isaac, shall both
evidence and improve Abraham's love to God: or has the Lord made Hannah barren,
and does her adversary vex her sore, year by year; and grievously upbraid her
for it, so that she is troubled in her mind: why, even that shall make her
pray, and weep sore unto the Lord, and make vows: yea, and when God gives
Samuel to her, she will give Samuel back again to God. Lastly, Saint Paul in
this school of Affliction, will learn in what estate soever he is,
prosperous, or adverse, therewith to be content: Phil. 4. 11. And thou may
foulely suspect thy self, (if thou be not the better) for thy being the
worse. He is no true borne Christian, who is not the better for his evils,
whatsoever they be; no price can buy of the true believer the gain of his
sins. Yea, Satan himself, in his exercise of Gods Children, advantageth
them. And look to it, if the malice and enmity of wicked men has beaten thee
off from thy profession, thou were at the best but a counterfeit, and none of
Christ's own Band. A little faith, even so much as a grain of Mustard Seed,
would be able to remove greater mountains of fear and distrust out of thy
soul, than these: for know this, that Good men are like Diamonds, which will
shine in the dirt: yea, they resemble Glow-wormes, which shine most in the
dark; or Juniper, which smells sweetest in the fire; or Pummander, which
becomes more fragrant by chafeing; or Roses, which are sweeter in the Still,
than on the stalk.

2. Use.
2. If the malice of our enemies, as it is husbanded to our thirst (by a divine
and supreme providence) does make so much for our advantage and benefit here,
and hereaf^er; as namely, that it op^ns our eyes no less, than peace and
prosperity had formerly s^ut them; that nothing does so powerfully call home
the conscience, as affliction; and that we need no other art of memory for
sin, besides misery; if commonly we are at variance with God, when we are at
peace with our enemies, and that it is both hard and happy, not to be the worse
with liberty, as the sedentary life is most subject to diseases: if vigor of
body, and infirmity of mind, do for the most part lodge under one roof, and
that a wearish outside is a strong motive to mortification: if God, the
all-wise Physician, knows this the fittest medicine for our souls sickness,
and that we cannot otherwise be cured; if our pride forces God to do by us,
as Sertorius did by his Army, who perceiving his Soldiers puffed up through many
victories, and hearing them boast of their many conquests, led them of purpose
into the lap of their enemies, to the end that stripes might learn them
moderation.

If this above all will make us pray unto him with heat and fervency; as
whither should we fly but to our Joshua, when the powers of darkness, like
mighty Aramites, have besieged us? If ever we will send up our prayers to him,
it will be when we are beleager'd with evils.

If true and saving joy is only the daughter of sorrow; if the security of any
people is the cause of their corruption, as no sooner does the Holy Ghost in
sundry places say, Israel had rest; but it is added, They committed
wickedness: Even as standing waters soon grow naysome, and Vines that grow
out at large, become wild and fruitless in a small time; if it weanes us from
the love of worldly things, and makes us no less inamored with heavenly: as
Zeno, having but one Fly-boat left him, hearing news that both it and all
therein was cast away, said, O Fortune, thou have done well to send me again to
our School of Philosophy: Whereas if we find but a little pleasure in our
life, we are ready to doat upon it. Every small contentment glewes our
affections to that we like, neither can we so heartily think of our home
above, whilst we are furnished with these worldly contentments: But when God
strips us of them, straightwayes our mind is home-ward; if this world may be
compared to Athens, of which a Philosopher said, that it was a pleasant City to
travel through, but not safe to dwell in: if by smarting in our bodies,
states, or names, we are saved from smarting in our souls. If it was good for
Naaman, that he was a Leaper; good for David, that he was in trouble; good for
Bartimeus, that he was blind; if with that Athenian Captain, we should have
perished for ever, in case we had not thus perished for a while; if our peace
would have lost us, in case we had not a little lost our peace: then refuse
not the chastening of the Lord, neither be grieved with his correction, as
Solomon advises, Proverbs 3. 11. And so much the rather,

1. First, because our struggling may aggravate; cannot redress our miseries.

2. Secondly, because the Lord will be sancti^ied either of us, or on us; one
of the two as Saint Austin speaks.

3. Thirdly, because that is little which thou suffer, in comparison of what
thou deservest to suffer; for thou have deserved to be destroyed: and he that
has deserved hanging, may be glad if he escape with whipping. Besides, as David
told Saul, he could as easily have cut his throat, as he had his coat: or as
Caesar boasted to Metellus, he could as soon make him hop headless, as bid it
be done: so the Lord may expostulate with thee, and much more.

Wherefore be patient I say, but not without sense; be not of those Stoics,
(stocks rather you may style them) who like beasts, or rather like blocks, lie
under their burden, and account it greatest valor to make least ado: and lay
it as little as may be to heart. For if you mean to be the Kings sons, you
must bring him the fore-skins of a hundred Philistims: show him the fruit of
your former sufferings. But above all, let us not resemble the wicked; who if
affliction comes to them, receive the curse with cursing; and if the Devil
throw but one cross to them, they will take their souls and throw them again
to him; for they presently break out, either into some cursed rage, or into the
rage of cursing, or into some cursed action.

A usual thing, when men are crossed by the creatures (I might say, their own
husbands or children) to fall a cursing, and blaespheming them, to whom we may
say, as the Prophet did to Senacharib: 2 Kings 19. 22. Whom have thou
blasphemed, and against whom have thou exalted thy self; even against the holy
one of Israel. Whom are you angry withal, does the rain, and waters, or any
other creature displease you: Alas, they are servants; if their master bid
smite, they must not forbear: They may say truly what Rabshakeh usurped, are we
come without the Lord, Isay 36. 10. Yea, are we not sent of the Lord in love,
and to do you good, and to give you occasion of rejoicing afterward, if you
bear the cross patiently, and make that use of it which others do, and the
Lords intends: Yea, Saint Paul could rejoice even in tribulation.

But alas, these are so far from rejoicing with that blessed Apostle, that
they rave in tribulation; and like some beasts, grow mad with bayting; or like
frantic men wounded, who finding ingredients prepared to dr^sse them, tear
them all in pieces. But let us not be ^^ke them, if Satan robs us of a bag of
silver, let not us call after him, and bid him take a bag of gold also. If he
afflict thee outwardly, yet surrender not to him the inward; rail not at the
hangman, but run to the Judge; fret not with Joash, 2 Kings 6. 33. but submit
with Hezekiah: Isay 39. 8. When Gods hand is on thy back, let thy hand be on
thy mouth: If thou be wronged, call not thine adversary to account, but thy
self; and let it trouble thee more to do ill, than to hear of it; be more
sorty that it is true, than that it is known.

Yea, neither rage at the Surgion as madmen, nor swoone under his hand as
milke-sops; but consider with whom thou have to do: The Lord, the Lord,
strong, merciful, and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and
truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and
sin; and that will by no means clear the guilty, but visit the iniquity of
the fathers upon the children, and upon childrens children, unto the third and
fourth generation: Exodus 34. 6. 7. And this (if any thing) will do: It was
before the Lord, faith David, and therefore I will be yet more vi^e. Reproach
in Gods service, is our best preferment; the Lord so noble, the servant cannot
be too humble: even Bucep^alus, that disdained any other rider, in all his
trappings would kneel down to his Master Alexander, and go away proud of his
burden.

Yea, to go yet father; let us with good old Ely, (who was a good s^nne to
God, though he had been an ill Father to his sons) even kiss the very ^od
we smart withal; and say, It is the LORD, let him do what seems him good:
for whatsoever seems good to him, cannot but be good, how soever it seems to
us. Yea, let us receive his stripes with all humility, patience, piety, and
thankfulness; resolving as that holy Martyr John Bradford, who said to the
Queen (how much more did he mean it to the great King of Heaven and Earth?)
If the Queen will give me life, I will thank ^et; if she will banish me, I
will thank her; if she will burn me, I will thank her; if she will condemn
me to perpetual imprisonment, I will thank her. A man will easily swallow a
bitter pill, to gain health. The stomach that is purged, must be content to
part with some good nourishment, that it may deliver it self of more evil
humors: and the Physician knows what is best for the Pati^nt, the Nurse
better than the Infant, what is good and fit for it: Now the Tenant is more
noble than the House; therefore why are we not more joyed in this, then
d^j^cted in the other: since the least grain of the increase of grace, is more
worth, then can be equalled with whole pounds of bodily vexation. Yea, let us
take them as tokens and pledges of Gods love and favor, who loves his Children
so, as not to make wantons of them. They that would tame pampered Horses, do
add to their travel, and abate of their provender; as Pharaoh served the
Children of Israel. Which of us shall see pieces of Tamber cut and squared, and
plained by the Carpenter; or Stones hewne and polished by the Mason; but will
collect and gather, that these are Stones and Timber which the Master would
employ in some building? If I suffer, it is that I may reign. And how
profitable is that affliction, which carries me to Heaven? Oh, it is a good
change, to have the fire of affliction for the fire of H^ll: Who would not
rather sinart for a while, than for ever? Its true, these Waspes, wicked men,
sting shrewdly, but the Hornet Satan would sting worse a great deal. And not
seldom does the infliction of a less punishment, avoyde a greater.

Neither must any man think, to be always free from censure, aspertions, and
wrongs; nor sometimes from faults: The very Heathen could say, It is for none
but God, to feel or want nothing. Indeed, many are too apt to expect it, and
therefore can bear nothing, like Minderides the Sibarite, who was grieved for
that some of the Rose-leaves which he lay upon, were rumpled together: But
this is to vilipend, and ^^dervalue his kindness; to make no repute, nor
reckoning of his deepest indulgencies, whereas the contrary approves our
sincerity beyond all exceptions. Every man can open his hand to God while he
blesses, but to expose our selves willingly to the astlicting hand of our
M^ker, and to kneel to him while he scourges us, is peculiar to the faithful.

3. Use.
3. Thirdly, if the sharp sufferings, and bitter conflicts, and sore travells
of Gods children, are usually the forerunners of a joyful issue; even the
happy birth of saving repentance: and that the sharp pain of the Sur^ions
cutting them, is only to ease them of a more durable, and dangerous, yea a
far heavier pain, the stone of the heart: If while their enemies go about
to rob them, they do but enrich them. As that Sexton, who in the night went to
rob a Gentlewoman, that had been buried the day before with a gold Ring, and
having opened the coffin, loosed the sheet, and chased her finger to get it
off, she having been but in a swoone before: her spirits returning, she
revived, and for many years after lived comfortably. If they may be resembled
to the sive loaves in the Gospel, which by a strange Arethmetick, were
multiplied by Division, and augmented by Substraction; then let none dare to
flatter, or flesh themselves, because their estate is prosperous; especially in
an evil way, as it fared with Leah, whom we may hear thus chanting her
happiness: God, says she, has given me my reward, because I have given my
maid to my husband: Genesis 30. 18. when she should rather have repented, then
rejoiced: and the like with Mic^h, Judges 17. 13. and Saul, 1 Samuel 23. 7. and
Dionysius, when he found the winds favorable in his navigation, after he had
dispoiled the Temple of all the gold therein. Neither let such as suffer not,
censure their brethren that do; as those three misjudged of Job, that he was
an hypocrite, and a greater sinner than others; and God had cast him off, or
else it could not go so ill with him. Or as the Jews censured our Savious,
Isay 53. 3, 4. And those Barbarians, Saint Paul, Acts 28. 4. which is to
condemn the generation of Gods Children, Psalm. 73. 15. But rather mistrust
themselves, which was the use our Savior warned those to make of it, who told
him of the Galileans, whose blood Pilate had mingled with their sacrifices,
Luke 13. 1. to 6.

And indeed, he is blind that judges of man's felicity by his outward
prosperity, or concludes of ones misery from his calamity: Eccles. 9. 1, 2. The
Sun of prosperity shines no less upon brambles in the wilderness, than
fruitful trees in the Orchard. The cold frost and show of adversity, lights
upon Gardens, as well as the wild waste. Ahab and Josiah's end, concur in the
very circumstances, the one destroys Religion, the other restores it; yet
both shot with an Arrow. Saul and Jonathan, though different in dispositions,
yet in their deaths they were not divided. Zedekiah a wicked man, had his eyes
put out: so had Sampson the valiant Judge of Israel, and Type of Christ; Moses
and Aaron, both were shut out of Canaan, as well as the Searchers: so that if we
judge of men's persons by their outward conditions, we must needs err.

Yea, usually God does most afflict those, whom he best affects; dealing with
his children as the good husband deals with his Trees; those in the Garden he
is ever and annon meddling with them, either lopping off the superfluous
branches, or scraping off the moss, or paring of the root, or digging and
dunging them; so using all good means to make them fruitful: whereas he lets
them alone which grow in the hedge row, or Forest, till at length he comes
with his Axe, and cuts them down for the fire. He was not the best Disciple
that had the bag: and fatted ware, you know, is but fitted for the shambles.
God puts money indeed (as some Hoorders do) into these earthen boxes, that
have only one chinke to let in, but none to let out, with purpose to break
them when they are full. What was Human the better for his honor, while the
King frowned on him; or the happier for being lift up the ladder, when he was
to come down again with a roape.

And for ought thou know, (at least if thou take not heed, for prosperity
is the more dangerous enemy of the two, and skillful to destroy;) thy
preservation is but a reservation; as it fared with Sodom and her sisters,
which were preserved from the slaughter of the four Kings, that God might
rain down Hell from Heaven upon them. And Senacharib, who escaped the stroke
of the destroying Angel, that he might fall by the sword of his own sons,
Isay 37. 37, 38. say then one woe, the woe of adversity, (as thou accountest
it) has passed thee, perhaps there is a second and a third, worse behind:
Revel. 9. 12. and 8. 13. The Philosopher would see a men's end, before he
pronounst him happy. Yea, it may be that which thou accountest thy primest
privilege, may prove to thee a snare, and may be granted thee rather out of
anger than love; as the Devil left Jobs tongue untouched of all the rest, but
why? in hope that therewith he would have cursed God; or charged him with
folly and cruelty: so that we may say of prosperity, as Antigonus did of his
garment; O noble, rather than happy privilege; but of adversity, O happy
rather then noble favor.

4. Use.
4. Fourthly, if Affliction be so profitable, and prosperity so dangerous as
has been shown; if it be our Isaacks use, first to feel us by tribulation,
and then to bless us; then away with those foolish queries, why does God this,
and why that? why does he punish the innocent, and acquit the peccant? why does
he permit so many, and such notorious crimes? why is he so severe toward his
own, so gentle to others. Ask not (says Salvianus) why one is greater,
another less; one wretched, another happy; I know not Gods intent, but it is
sufficient satisfaction to me, that this is done by God. Why does a Physician
give more Wormwood, or Hellebore to this sick party, than to that; even
because, either his disease, or his constitution so requires it.

Neither let us value things as they seem, or according to sense; but rather
when we are best pleased, let us be most suspicious: let us desire and choose
blessings, as he chose his friend; not him that would be plausible to his
humor for a day, but him that should be profitable to his mind during life.
Let us imitate Bees, that pass over Roses, and Violets, to set upon Time: If
crosses are not toothsome, let it suffice they are wholesome; it is not required
in Physic that it should please, but heal: unless we esteem our pleasure
above our health.

Experience tells us, that those things (for the most part) which are least
pleasing, are most wholesome: Rue is a herb most bitter to the taste, yet in
regard of the virtue, which is in it, we call it herb of grace: And
Methridate, though of all other electuaries it be most distasteful; yet of all
others it is the most wholesome.

The world hates thee, and deals most spitefully with thee; a good sign, it
has always been the portion of good men, to suffer at the hands of evil
men; as appears both by holy, and humane Writers: as for Divine Authority, you
know how it fared with the Prophets, Apostles, and our Savior Christ himself,
whose whole life, by reason of spiteful enemies, was but one continued cross.
And as touching, secular, examples are infinite; whereof a few: In Athens, we
read of wise Socrates, good Phocion, just Aristides, victorious Miltiades; but
how unworthily were they dealt withal: At Rome they had Marcus Cato, the
pattern of a wise and prudent man, a lively emblem of ver^ue; how was he
hated, thrust down, spit upon, stripped both of his Senator-ship, and
Pretor-ship, cast into prison, etc. Rutilius and Camillus were both exiled,
Pompeus and Cicero both yielded their necks to their Clients: Who so often
cursed by the Popes, with Bell, Book, and Candle, as Queen Elizabeth of
blessed memory; though she outlived seven of them.

But to leave examples and come to reason, Is it not an evident sign, that if
the world hates thee, thou art none of the world; yea, therefore it hates thee,
because thy practice shames the world; and because thou discoverest, and
opposest her treasons and deceits. Wicked men are like dogs in condition, who
will let a man amble a fair pace quietly, but if he gallop through the Town,
though his errand be of importance, and to the King, perhaps, they will bark
and fly at him, which is a token to them of perdition, but to thee of
salvation: Phil. 1. 28. yea, it is an evident sign, that they are of the stock
of Ishmael, and not the seed of Israel. I find many acts of deception in the
Saints, I find^ infi^mity in those acts, but that any one of them has scoft
at, and hated another for goodness, I find not: much less that any after
regeneration, have in this case been cruel. If we would know (says
Chrysostom) a Wolf from a Sheep (since their clothing is alike) look to
their fangs, and their mouth, if they be bloody: for who ever saw the lips of a
Sheep besmeared with blood? which being so, no matter though the gate be
straight, and the w^y narrow, if the end to which it leads be everl^sting
life.

5. Use.
5. Fifthly, if in conclusion the most malicious and damnable practices of our
worft and greatest enemies, prove no other in effect to us, than did the malice
of Joseph's bret^ren, Mistrisse, and Lord to him: the first, in selling of him;
the second, in falsely accusing him; the third, in imprisoning him; (all which
made for his inestimable good and benefit;) than the mal^ce of H^man to
Morde^^i, and the Jews; whose bloody decree obtained against them, procured
them exceeding much joy and peace: than Balacks malice to the Children of
Israel, whose desire of cursing them, caused the Lord so much the more to
bless them, Numbers 23. Than the Devils spite to Job, who pleasured him more
by his soar afflicting him, than any thing else could possibly have done,
whether we regard his name, children, substance, or soul; than Judas his
treason against the Lord of life* whose detestable fact served not only to
accomplish his will, but the means also of all their salvations, that either
before or after should believe in him: this should move wonder to astonishment,
and cause us to cry out with the Apostle; O the deepnesse of the riches both of
the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearch^ble are his judgments, and his
ways past finding out! Romans 11. 33. O the wonderful and sovereign goodness
of our God! that turns all our Poisons into Co(...); that can change our
terrors into pleasures, and make the greatest evils beneficial unto us; for
they are evil in their own nature, and strong temptations to sin: James 1.
2. also fruits of sin, and part of the cu^se; and work those former good
effects, not prop(...)y by themselves, but by accident; as they are so disposed
by the infinite wisdom, goodness, and power of God, who is able to bring
light out of darkness, and good out of evil: yea, this should tutor us to
love our enemies; we love the medicine, not for its own sake, but for the
health it brings us; and to suffer chearefully whatsoever is laid upon us: for
how can Gods Church in general, or any member in particular but fare well,
since the very malice of their enemies benefits them? How can we but say, let
the world frown, and all things in it run cross to the grain of our
minds? Yet, with thee, O Lord, is mercy, and plenteous redemption: thou make
us better by their making us worse.

Objecti^n. But perhaps thou have not proved the truth of this by thy own
knowledge, and particular ^xperience.

Answer. If thou have not, thou shall in due time, the end shall prove it; stay
but till the conclusion, and thou shall see that there is no Cross, no enemy,
no evils can happen unto thee, that shall not be turned to good, by him that
dwells in thee. Will you take Saint Paul's word for it, or rather GODS own
word, who is truth it self, and cannot lie? His words are, We know that all
things work togethe^ for the best, unto them that love God: even to them that
are called of his purpose, Rom 8. 28. And in Verse 3^, 36. after he has
declared that Gods chosen people shall suffer tribulation* and anguish, and
pers^c^tion, and famine, and nakedness, peril, sword, etc. be killed all the
day long, and counted as Sheep for the slaughter; he concludes with
N^verthelesse, in all these things we are more than conqu^^ours, through him
that loved us: and so goes on, even to a challenge of our worst enemies,
Death, Angels, Principalities, and Powers, things present, and to come;
height, depth, and what other creature besides, should stand in opposition.
What voluminous waves be here, for numb^r, and power, and terror; yet they
shall not separate the Arc from Christ, nor a soul from the Arc, nor a body
from the soul, nor an hair from the body, to do us hurt. What says David?
Mark the upright man, and behold the just; for the and of that man is peace:
Psalm. 37. 37. Mark him in his setting out, he has many oppositions; mark him
in the journey, he is full of tribulations: but mark him in the conclusion,
and the end of that man is peace. In Christ all things are ours, 1 Cor. 3. ^2.
How is that? Why, we have all things, because we have the h^ver of all things.
And if we love Christ, all things work together for our good; yea, for the
best: Romans 8. 28. And if all things (quoth Luther) then ^ven sin it self.
And indeed, how many have we known the better for their sin? That Magdalen
had never loved so much, if she had not so much sinned: had not the incestuous
person sinned so notoriously, he had never been so happy. God took the
advantage of his humiliation for his conversion. Had not one foot slipped into
the mouth of Hell, he had never been in this forwardness to Heaven: sin
first wrought sorrow, (says Saint Austin) and now godly sorrow kills sin; the
daughter destroys the mother: neither do our own sins only advantage us,
but other men's sins work for our good also.

Objection. But may some say, can any good come out of such a Nazarite?

Answer. Yes: The advantage we have by Christ, is more than the loss we had by
Adam. If Ariu^ had not held a Trinity of Substances, with a Trinity of Persons;
and Sabellius an Unity of Persons, with an Unity of Essences; the Mysteries of
the Trinity had not been so clearly explained by those great lights of the
Church. If Rome had not so violently obtruded her merits, the doctrine of
Justification only by faith in Christ, might have been less digested into
men's hearts. We may say here, as Augustine does of Carthage and Rome; If some
enemies had not contested against the Church, it might have gone worse with the
Church. Lastly, suppose our enemies should kill us, they shall not hurt, but
pleasure us: yea, even death it self shall work our good. That Red Sea shall
put us over to the Land of Promise, and we shall say to the praise of God, we
are delivered, we are the better for our enemies, the better for our sins, the
better for death; yea, better for the devil: and to think otherwise even for
the present, were not only to derogate from the wisdom; power, and goodness
of God, but it would be against reason; for in reason, if he have vouchsafed us
that great mercy to make us his own, he has given the whole army of
afflictions a more inviolable charge concerning us, than David gave his Host
concerning Absalom; See ye do the young man, my son Absalom, no harm. Now
if for the present thou lackest faith, patience, wisdom, and true judgment
how to bear, and make this gain of the cross, Ask it of God, who gives to
all men liberally, and reproacheth no man, and it shall be given thee; James 1.
5. For every good giving, and every perfect gift is from above; and comes
down from the Father of lights: Verse 17.

6. Use.
6. Sixthly, (for this point calling more for practice than proof, it behooves
us to be larger here, briefer there.) If that which is one man's meat, proves
another man's poison; let it be acknowledged, that the fault is not in the
meat, but in the stomach: and that it is the wickedness of our hearts, and
want of a sincere endeavor, to make good use of Gods corrections, which
causes him to withdraw his blessing from them. Wherefore let it provoke us as
we love our selves, as we love our souls, through all the transitory,
temporary, momentary passages of this world; first, to strive after, and then
to preserve the life of our lives, and soul of our souls sincerity, and
integrity.

Again, if Afflictions (which are in their own nature evil, and unto others
strong temptations to sin) by the goodness of God, do make so much for our
advantage, and benefit here, and hereafter: If our Heavenly Father turns all
things, even the malice of Satan, and wicked men; yea, our own sins to our
good: Romans 8. 28. If for our sakes, and for his name sake, he even changes the
nature and property of each creature, rather than they shall hurt us; as it is
the nature and property of fire to burn, yet tha^ ^^hement fire in
Nebuchadnezzars furnace, did not ^urne the three servants of God. It is proper
to the Sea to drown those that be cast into it; yet it did not drown the
Prophet in the very depth of it. It is proper for bungry ravenous Lions to
kill, and devour, yet they did Daniel no harm. And the like, when we need
their help. It is proper for the Sun to move, yet it stood still at the prayer
of Joshuah, proper for it to go from East to West; yet for Hezekiahs
confirmation, it went from West to East: It is proper for Iron to sink in the
Water, yet it swoom when the children of the Prophets had need of it. In like
manner it is proper for affliction to harden, and make worse, as well as for
riches and prosperity to ensnare: But as some simples are made by Art
medicinable, which are by nature poyson^ble: So afflictions, which are in
nature destructive; by grace become preservative. And as evil waters when the
Unicornes horn has been in them, are no longer poysonable, but heal^hfull;
or as a waspe when her sting is out, may awaken us by buzzing, but cannot hurt
us by stinging: so fares it with affliction, when God pleases to sanctify the
same, as he does to all that love him, Romans 8. 28. For of God it is, (without
thanks to Affliction, or our selves, or our sins) that we are bettered by
them: All the work is thine, let thine be the glory.

But l^stly (for though we can never be thankful enough for this, yet this is
not all) that we should find him a Savior, whom our enemies find a just
revenger; That we should be loosed from the chains of our sins, and they
delivered into the chains of Plagues; That the same Christ should with his
precious blood free us, that shall with his Word sentence them.

Again, if we were by nature the Seed of the Serpent, children of the Devil,
and Subjects to that Prince which rules in the Air; even that spirit which
now works in these children of disobedience, Ephesians. 2. 2. We may learn by
it, to be humble and thankful, if changed to be the woman's Seed, children of
God, and members of Christ, since we were once in so vilde a condition; for God
found nothing in us but Enmity, 1 Cor. 15. 10. Romans 7. 18. 25. We are not
borne, but newborn Christians. And whereas he might have left us in that
perishing condition (being bound to none) and have chosen others; he has of
his free grace adopted us, and left others* What Is the reason? surely no reason
can be given, but O the depth! only this I am sure of, it is a mercy beyond all
expression: O my soul, thou have not room enough for thankfulness.

Wherefore let it provoke us so to love him, that we show forth the virtues,
and fruits of him that has called us, and done all this for us, 1 Pet. 2. 9.
But I fear we forfeit many of Gods favors, for not paying that easy rent of
thankfulness.

For conclusion, If we be the seed of the Woman, and our enemies the seed of
the Serpent, let us go before them in goodness, as far as God has
preferred us before them in mercy: let us be able to say of our enemies, as Job
of his, I have not suffered my mouth to sin, by wishing a curse unto his soul,
Job 31. 30. Yea, let us send down water from our compassionate eyes, and weep
for them by whom we bleed. In brief, let us hate their opinions, strive
against their practice, pity their misguidings, neglect their censures, labor
their recovery, and pray for their salvation.

CHAP. XXXIV.
That though God disposes of all their malice to his Childrens greater good,
yet they shall be rewarded according to their mischievous intentions.

Ob. IF it be so, that the malice of wicked men makes so much for the behoof
of Gods people; and that whatsoever they do unto us, is but the execution of
Gods will, and full accomplishment of his just decree; it may seem to make on
their side, and not only extenuate their evil, but give them occasion of
boasting.

Ans. Although God disposes it to the good of his children, that he may bring
about all things to make for his own glory; yet they intend only evil in it,
as namely; the dishonor of God, the ruin of men's souls (as I have proved in
the Drunkards Character) and the satisfying of their own serpentine enmity,
and thirst of revenge. We must therefore learn to distinguish betwixt the act
of God and of an enemy, as indeed Gods people do; When ye thought evil
against me (says Joseph to his brethren) God disposed it to good, that he
might bring to pass as it is this day, and save much people alive, Genesis 50.
20. God had no hand in doing the evil, but God will have a hand in the
disposing of it: When Satan and wicked men have their wills, even therein also
is Gods will fulfilled; for Gods will is the highest cause of all things, Psa.
115. 3. 4. Yea, the holy God challenges to himself whatsoever is done in the
City, Amos 3. 6. but so, as neither wicked men's sins shall taint him, nor his
decree justify them: the sin is their own, the good which comes of it is
Gods, the benefit ours; He does well, in suffering to be done, whatsoever is
evil done, says Saint Austin, and is just in their injustice. God wills the
same action, as it is a blessing, trial, or chastisement of his children,
which he hates as the wickedness of the agent: because in the same thing which
they did, there was not the same cause for which they did it. The lewd tongue,
hand, or heart, moves from God, it moves lewdly from Satan: wicked men are
never the freer from guilt and punishment, for that hand which the holy God
has in their offensive actions. To instance in some examples; Satan did
naught touching Job, but what the Lord upon his request gave him leave to do;
what then? Did God and Belial join in fulfilling the same act? no; sooner
shall Stygi^n darkness blend with light, the frost with fire, day with night:
true, God and Satan willed the self same thing, but God intended good, Satan
ill; Satan aimed at Jobs, and God at his confusion. God used the malice of
Pharaoh and Shemei unto good; what then? God afflicted his people with another
mind than Pharaoh did; God to increase them, Pharaoh to suppress them. The
sin of Shemeis curse was his own, the smart of the curse was Gods; God wills
that as David's chastisement, which he hates as Shimeis wickedness. God owed a
revenge to the house of Ely, and by the delation of Doeg he took occasion to
pay it, when the Priests were slain: It was just in God, which in Doeg was
most unjust, Saul's cruelty, and the treachery of Doeg, do not lose one d^am of
their guilt, by the counsel of God: Neither does the holy counsel of God,
gather any blemish by their wickedness: If it had pleased God to inflict death
upon them sooner, without any pretense of occasion; his justice had been
clear from all imputations: Now if Saul or Doeg be in stead of a Pestilence or
Feavor, who can cavil. The judgments of God are not ever manifest, but are
always just. Again, the curse of the Serpent bestowed blessedness on Man;
yea, our first Parents had been less glorious, if they had not wanted a
Savior. What then? Does Satan merit thanks? No, but the contrary; for he only
intended the final ruin and Destruction of them and all mankind, with the
dishonor of their Maker. Lastly, the Devil does us good in this particular
case, for while he assaults us with temptations, and afflicts us with crosses,
he in effect helps us to Crowns. Yet still no thanks to Satan, for to be
charitable is more than his meaning; it is that Divine and overruling
providence of God, which we are beholding unto, and to him give we the thanks.

But above all, our Saviors example will most excellently distinguish the ends
of God, Satan, and wicked Men; for if we observe, Judas delivered him to death
for gain, the Jews for envy, Pilate for fear; the Devil provoked each of
them through this enmity; Christ himself to obey his Fathers will, God the
Father in love to sinners, and for their Redemption: each furthered one and the
same thing, but to contrary ends: so when this enmity breaks forth in the
wicked, Satan has a hand in it as a malicious author; as when he entered into
Judas and made him betray Christ, Luke 22. 3. Man himself as a voluntary
instrument, as when Pharaoh hardened his own heart against the children of
Israel, Exodus 9 34. God as a most righteous Judge, and avenger, as when he also
hardened Pharaohs heart, so punishing his former hardness, with further
obdur^^ion, Exodus 9. 12. But how in this case? even by permitting the seed of
the Serpent, from their own malicious inclination, to hate the Seed of the
Woman, not by infusing this malice, but by withdrawing his grace when he sees
it abused, he does not infuse corruption, he does not withold the occasion;
as when the Rider gives his horse the raynes, we say he puts him on.

Whence that distinction of adversities, as they come from Satan, they are
usually called temptations; as they come from Men, presecutions; as from God,
afflictions.

Now as God turned the treachery of Judas, not only to the praise of his
justice, mercy, wisdom, power, etc. but to the good of all believers: so he
turns this enmity of Satan, and wicked men, to his childrens great advantage
(in stopping them in their course of sin, and keeping them in exercise) and
his own glory; And well may he work good by evil instruments, when every
Prince and Magistrate has the feat to make profitable instruments, as well of
evil persons, as of good: yea, when there is nothing in the World, be it gall
it self; yea, the excrement of a ^og, or the poison of a Serpent, but man's
shallow invention can find it is good for something: neither do two contrary
poisons mingled together prove mortal.

And thus you see that the will of God may be done thanklessely, when in
fulfilling the substance we fail in the intention, and err in circumstances.

Now see with the like patience, how it will fare with these men in the end.
Pomponius Atticus being destined to famishment, and receiving no manner of
sustinance for many days, contrary to the intention; was freed by means of
that abstinance from a violent pain, and recovered of a disease; which
otherwise had cost him his life. Prometheus being run in with a Rapier, and
Jason receiving a great blow on the breast, each was restored to health, from
dangerous and deadly impostume^, which otherwise were thought incurable. And
this is our case, for even as that cured them, which their enemies intended
should have killed them; so this enmity of the Serpent and his Seed, cures our
souls, and makes us everlastingly happy. Yet they intending only evil in it;
or at least, the satisfying of their own wicked wills, as they know better than
I (wherein they imitate the Weesell, which does a man pleasure in destroying of
Vermin, yet only intends the satisfying of her own hunger, not his good that
keeps the house) can no way assume the least praise to themseldes, nor expect
the more favor. That which is ill of it self, is not to be ventered on for
the good which comes by accident. It is no privilege to be an instrument of
good, by evil means: Nor can you expect to fare better without a healing of
your errors, then the Worm in the stomach, which when it has devoured all
the matter proper for it, dies it self: or Heleborus, which after it has
wrought the cure within the body, is cast up again, together with the Mallady.

The Lord often does good to his Church, even by those Instruments whom for
their sins, he means to cast into Hell fire. Asser was his Rod to scourge
Is^ael; that done, they fell under a sharper lash themselves. Those Nations,
says God, shall serve the King of Babell Seventy years, and when the Seventy
years are accomplished, I will visit the King of Babell and that Nation for
their iniquities, and will make it a perpetual desolation, etc. Jer. 25. 11,
12. and 30. 16. When iniquity has played her part, vengeance leaps upon the
Stage; the Comedy is short, but the Tragedy is longer.

We use rubbish to scour our vessel, when those vessels are cleared, we
fling away the rubbish. Bridges that help men over the stream, at last
themselves rot and sink in. When Balaams Ass had done speaking, humana voce,
she lived an Ass, and dyed an Ass: So when God has sufficiently afflicted
the righteous, by the rod of the wicked, he will fling the Rod into the fire
which is unquenchable, Isay 33. 1.

And it stands with the strength of reason, for if God, says Saint Gregory,
strike so smartly those whom he spares; how heavy will his blows be on them
whom he condemns; and with what severity shall Castawayes be punished, when
his own children are so visited and afflicted. If Gods own Children, who are
as dear and near to him, as the Apple of his eye, or the signet on his right
hand, suffer so many and grievous afflictions here; what shall his adversaries
suffer in Hell? undoubtedly, when the Patient is made whole, he shall be
preserved; but the Plaster shall be thr^wen away: For as God does turn evil
to good to them that love him, so he turns good to evil to those that hate
him.

Again secondly, if the wicked are punished for doing wrong to the wicked,
much more for wronging the j^st, and innocent: But we have many examples of the
former, as that of Adonibezeck, who having cut off the Thumbes and great ^oes
of Seventy Kings that were wicked like himself, had also his own Thumbes and
Toes cut off, Judge. 1. 5, 7. And Moab of whom the Lord says he has burnt the
bones of the King of Edom into lime, therefore will I send a fire upon Moab,
and it shall devour, etc. Amos 2. 1. 2. If the greater Serpent devoures the
less, there is a Dragon to devour him; therefore the enemies of Gods Church,
have no hope to escape. The everlasting punishments of the ungodly, are
deferred, not remitted.

But all the evil thou do to the godly, is with thy tongue?

Answ. That Is bad enough, the Serpents hissing betrays his malice; and
Ishmaels tongue made him a Persecutor, as well as Doegs hands; he did but
flout Isaac, yet Saint Paul says, he persecuted him, Gal. 4. 29. C^am only
scoft at Noah, yet it brought upon him his Fathers curse, and Gods upon that.
The Athenians but scoft once at Sillas wife, and it had welny cost the razing
of their City, he was so provoked with the indignity. And what ever thou
conceivest of it, let this fault be as far from my soul, as my soul from
Hell. For assuredly, God will one day laugh you to scorn, for laughing his to
scorn: and at last d^spise you, that have despised him in us.

CHAP. XXXV.
Other grounds of comfort to support a Christian, in his sufferings. And first,
that God is specially present with his servants in their afflictions, takes
notice of their sufferings, and allayes their grief.

THis rub being removed, and the passage made clear, proceed we to other
grounds of comfort which the Word of God affords in this case, for the better
upholding, and strengthening of a weak Christian in his sufferings: Wherein,
that we may not exceed, I will select out only five, because instructions, if
they exceed, are wont like Nails, to drive out one another.

First, we shall bear the Cross with the more patience and comfort; if we
consider, that God is specially present with his servants in their afflictions,
takes no^ice of their sufferings, and allayes their grief. The troubles of a
Christian are very great for number, variety, and bitterness; yet there is one
ingredient that sweetens them all, the promise of God, I will be with thee in
trouble, and deliver thee, Psalm. 91. 15. And thou shall not be tempted above
thy strength, 1 Cor. 10. 13. Again, Fear not; for w^^^ thou passest through
the waters, I will be with thee, and through the floods, that they do not
overflow thee; when thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt,
neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, Esaias 43. 1, 2. Lo, here are promises
like Flaggons of Wine, to comfort the distressed soul. Wherefore as Caesar
said to the trembling Mariner, Be not afraid for thou ^arriest Caesar; so, O
Christian, be not afraid, for he that is in thee, for thee, with thee, that
guides thee, that will save thee, is the invincible King Jehovah. And upon this
ground David was so comforted and refreshed in his soul, Psalm 94. 19. that
he was able to say, Though I should walk through the valley of the shaddo^ of
death I will fear no evil: Why? For thou art with me, thy Rod and thy Staff
shall comfort me, Psalm 23. 4. Yea, our Enemies can no sooner assault us with
their tongues, but God comes in to our rescue. If ye be railed upon for the
name of Christ, (says Saint Peter) blessed are ye, for the Spirit of God
rests upon you, 1 Pet. 4. 14. God is never so much enjoyed of us, as when we
are in the deep with David, Psalm. 130. 1. and when we are worst of all
bestead with Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. When did Jacob see a vision of
Angels, but when he fled for his life, making the cold earth his Bed, and a
stone his Pillow; or when was his heart so full of joy, as now that his head
lay hardest. When was Paul wrapped into the third be^ven to hear words from
Christ not fit to be uttered, 2 Cor. 12. 2. 4. but as some of the learned
conceive, when he was bereaved of his sight. Stephen saw great happiness by
Christ, in his peace: but under that shower of stones, he saw Heaven it self
open, Acts 7. When we are slain all the day long for his sake with the
Martyrs, then we are given to see him with our eyes, as Job did, who till that
time had only heard of him by the hearing of the ear. Then we come to know
that the Lord he is God with Manasses, 2 Chronicles. 33. 13, and that he is our
hope, and strength, and refuge, and a very present help in troubles, ready to
be found of all that seek to him, 2 Chronicles. 15. 4, 15. Psalm 9. 9, 10. and 46.
1.

The Israelites never fared so well, as when they lived at Gods immediate
studing, and night expected their morrowes breakefast from the Clouds: When
they did daily ask, and daily receive, their daily bread. Yea, even when they
were wandering in a forlorn Wilderness, how did God as it were attend upon
them in their distress, to supply their wants: They have no guide, therefore
God himself goes before them in a pillar of fire; they have no shelter, the
Lord spreads a Cloud over them for a C(...)opy; are they at a stand and want
way, the Sea shall part and give them passage; do they lack bread, Heaven it
self shall power down the food of Angels; have they no meat to their bread;
a wind shall send them innumerable Quails; do they yet want drink, behold a
hard Rock smitten with a little wand, shall power them out water in abundance;
have they no supply of Apparel, their Garments shall not wax old on their
backs; be their Enemies too strong for them for want of Engines, the Walls of
Jeri^ho shall fall down before them; are their enemies yet too many and
potent, Hailestones shall fall and brain them: Lamps, Pitchers, and Dreams
shall get them victor; the Sun shall stand still in Gibeon, and the Moon in
the valley of Ajalon; lack they yet a Land to inhabit, the Lord will cast out
all the Inhabitants, and give them a Land which flows with milk and honey,
etc. Afflictions have this advantage, that they occasion God to show that mercy
to us, whereof the prosperous are incapable; as we further see in Hagar: Genesis
21. 17. 18. 19. And Manoah^ Wife, Judges 13. 3. To whom the Angel of the
^o^enant had not been sent, if they had not been in distress.

It would not become a mother to be so indulgent to an healthful child, as to
a sick: and indeed some have found their outward castigations so sweetened with
the inward consolations of Gods Spirit, that they have found and confessed
their receipts of joy and comfort, to be an hundredfold more than their
payments, even in this present life, according to that promise of our Savior,
Mark 10. 29, 30. So that a Christian is still a gainer in all his losses; yea,
he gains by his losses.

Now if we could but remember and lay to heart these promises, thus backed with
examples; when we feel the greatest assaults or pangs, how could we want
courage? But alas, most of us are like the Prophets servant, 2 Kings 6. who saw
his foes, but not his friends: we are like Joseph's brethren, who saw him,
converst with him, were fed by him, yet knew him not. Like Peter, who when the
Angel brought him out of prison, and went before him; wist not that it was so,
but thought he saw a vision: Acts 12. 9. Christ at his Resurrection was so
changed, that his own Disciples knew him not; much more since his Ascension
may he pass by us, as he did by Job: Chap. 9. 11. or meet us as he did Saul,
in the way to Damaseus; or walk and talk with us, as he did with the two
Disciples in the way to Emaus: Luke 24. 16. or stand by us while we are seeking
him, as he did by Mary in the Garden: John 20. 14. and yet we be ignorant that
it is he. Yea, he may be in us by his spirit; even whiles we feel him not.
Jacob saw him both asleep and awake, yet (says he) the Lord was in this
place, and I was not aware of it: Genesis 28. 16. at least we are apt to think,
that God is removed from us, when we any way suffer calamity; as the Israelites
do but want water, and presently they cry, Is the Lord among us, or no? Exodus
17. 7 as if God could not be with them, and they a^hirst; either he must humor
carnal minds, or be distrusted.

(...) both his presence and love, is the same in adversity, as it is in
prosperity; our sense only makes the difference, even as a Church, Castle, or
Town is unmovable, and keeps one place; though to us it may s(...)e
sometime on our right hand, otherwhile on our left: as we change our standing,
sitting, or walking. Yet if some unusual crosses disturb our peace, presently
there breaks out a voice mixed with murmuring, and despair, God has forsaken
us. It was a common complaint with David, The Lord both forsaken us; those have
cast off, and abhorred us: why have thou forsaken me? etc. Yea, the only Son
of God came to this; my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Yet consider,
did God forsake either of them; he might be angry with David, more angry with
Christ, for the sins of all the world; and in their present sense, that anger
might work in them an apprehension of his forsaking them: but he did not
forsake them, nor will he forsake thee, if thou do not first forsake him.
Thou may think so, but God will not do so; but in the mean time, how can
this be well taken? we see our wretchedness, we do not see our blessedness:
No talk of his presence, of his absence we complain. Our cowardly spirits
give him for quite gone; yet he is not far from every one of us: Acts 17.
27. Yea, this confession could Seneca make, (but like a Divine) God is near
unto thee, he is with thee, he is within thee: and surely if he had not
been with these Israelites, they had not lived; if he had been in them, they
had not murmured. We can think him absent in our want, and cannot see him
absent in our sin; yet wickedness, not affliction, argues him gone: yea, he
is then most present, when he most chastises; for as the sufferings of Christ
abound in us, so our consolations abound through Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 5.

Again, God may be present with us, and yet we not be pleased; as the
Israelite^ repined for a King, when the Lord was their King: or Christ may be
with us, and yet we want something that we desire. Christ was in the Ship, and
yet (say the Apostles) we h^ve no bre^d. Jesus was at the Marriage, yet, says
his Mother, They have no Wine: John 2. 3. We may want Bread and Wine, and yet
have Christ's company: but if food fail, it is because Manna is to come; if
Wine be absent, yet grace and salvation is present: if God take away flesh, and
gives Manna; deny Sun and M^one, and give us himself; he does us no wrong.

Now why does God by his promise tie himself to be present with us; more
especially in affliction, but that he may resist our enemies, sustain us when
we faint, and Crown us when we overcome; but that he may be exact in taking
notice of our particular sufferings: and as David says, Count our wanderings,
put our tears into his bottle, and enter all into his Register: Psalm. 56. 8.
9. All our afflictions are more noted by that God that sends them, than of the
patient that suffers them; every pang, and stitch, and guird, is first felt of
him that sends it: could we be miserable unseene, we had reason to be
he^rtlesse* but how can it be but less possible to endure any thing that he
knows not, than that he inflicteth not? As he said to Manoah by an Angel,
Thou art barren: Judge. 13. 3. so he says to one, thou art sick; to another,
thou art poor; to a third, thou art defamed; thou art oppressed to another;
that all-seeing eye takes notice from Heaven of every man's condition, no less
than if he should send an Angel to tell us he knew it: and his knowledge
compared with his mercy, is the just comfort of all our sufferings. O God, we
are many times miserable and feel it not; thou know even those sorrows
which we might have, thou know what thou have done, do what thou please.

CHAP. XXXVI.
That all afflictions, from the least to the greatest, do come to pass, not
by accident, chance, or fortune, but by the especial providence of God.

Section 1.
2. WE shall bear the cross with more patience and comfort. If we consider,
that all afflictions, from the least to the greatest, do come to pass, not by
accident, chance, or fortune, but by the special providence of God; who not
only decrees and fore-appointeth every particular cross: Eccles. 3. 1. Romans
8. 28. 29. but even effects them, and brings them into execution, as they are
crosses, corrections, trials, and chastisements: Isaiah. 45. 7. Amos 3. 6. and
also orders and disposes them; that is, limiteth and appoints the
beginning, the end, the measure, the quality, and the continuance thereof: yea,
he orders them to their right ends; namely, his own glory, the good of his
servants, and the benefit of his Church: Jeremy 30. 11. Genesis 50. 19. 20. 2 Samuel
16. 10. Psalm. 39. 9. God uses them but as Instruments, wherewith to work his
good pleasure upon us. As what are our enemies but Gods Axes to cut us down,
not for the fire, but for the building: Gods Masons to hew us here in the
Mountain, that we may be as the pollished corner stones of the Temple,
Ps(...). 144. 12. Or admit the M^son pulls down the House, it is not with an
intent to destroy it, but to reedifie it; and raise it up again in better
form^ and fashion. Gods skullains to scowre up the vessel of his House, that
they may be me^t for the Masters use.

If then they be but as Instruments, or To^les in the hand of the worke-man, we
must not so much look to the Instrument, as to the Author: Genesis 45. 5. and 50.
30. Well may the Priests of the Philistims doubt whether their plague be from
God, or by Fortune: 1 S^m. 6. 2. 9. but let a Joseph be sold into Egypt, he
will say to his enemies, Ye sent not me hither, but God; when ye thought evil
against me, God disposed it to good, that he might bring to pass as it is
this day; and save much people alive: or let a David be rayled upon by any
cursed Shimei, he will answer, Let him alone, for he curses, even because the
Lord h^th bid him curse David: Who dare then say, wheresore have thou done so?
2 Samuel 16. 10. Or let a Micha be trodden upon, and insulted over by his enemy,
his answer shall be no other than this, I will bear the wr^th of the Lord,
be(...)se I have sinned against him, until be plead my cause, and execute
judgment for me: Micha. 7. 9. The believer that is conversant in Gods book,
knows that his adversaries are in the hands of God, as a Hammer, Axe, or Rod,
in the hand of a smiter; and therefore as the Hammer, Axe, or Rod, of it self
can do nothing, any further than the force of the ^and using it, gives
strength unto it: so no more can they do any thing at all unto him, further
than it is given them from above; as our Savior told Pilate: John 19. 11. See
this in some examples; you have Laban following Jacob with one troop, Esau
meeting him with another, both with h^stile intentions; both go on till the
utter most point of their execution, both are prevented ^re the execution: for
stay but a while, and you shall see Laban leave him with a kiss, Esau meet him
with a kiss; of the one he has an oath, t^^res of the other, peace with
both; GOD makes sooles of the enemies of his Church, he lets them proceed that
they may be frustrate; and when they are gone to the uttermost reach of their
teather, he pulls them back to the stake with shame. Again, you have
Sen^ch^rib let loose upon Hezekiah and his people, who insults over them
intolerably: 2 Kings 18. Oh the lamentable and (in sight) desperate condition
of distressed Jerusalem! wealth it had none, strength it had but a little, all
the Country round about was subdued unto the Ass^rian: that proud victor has
begirt the walls of it with an innumerable army, scorning that such a
shovell-full of earth should stand out but one day: yet poor Jerusalem stands
alone blockt up with a world of enemies, helpless, friendlesse, comfortless,
looking for the worst of an hostile sury; and on a sudden, before an Arrow is
shot into the City, a hundred fourscore and five thousand of their enemies were
sl^ine, and the rest run away: 2 Kings 19. 35. 36. God laughs in Heaven at the
Plots of Tyrants, and befooles them in their deepest projects. If he undertake
to protect a people, in vain shall Earth and Hell couspire against them.
Nothing can be accomplished in the Lower House of this world, but first it is
decreed in the Upper Court of Heaven; as for example, what did the Jews ever
do to our Savior Christ, that was not first both decreed by the Father of
Spirits, and registered in the Scriptures for our notice and comfort? They could
not so much as throw the Dice for his Coat, but it was prophesied: Psalm. 22.
18. and in Psalm. 69. 21. It is ^ore-told that they should give him gall in his
meat, and in his thirst, vinegar to drink; the very quality and kind of his
drink is prophesied: yea, his face could not be spit upon without a prophecy;
those filthy excrements of his enemies fell not upon his face, without Gods
decree, and the Prophets relation: Isay 50. 6. Yea, let the Kings of the earth
be assembled, and the Rulers come together; Let Herod and Pontius Pilate, with
the Gentiles and the people of Israel, gather themselves in one league against
him, it is in vain; for they can do nothing, but what the hand of God and his
Council has before determined to be done: as Peter and John affirmed to the
rest of the Disciples, for their better confirmation and comfort: Acts 4. 26.
to 29. No, notwithstanding the Devil raged, the Pharisees stormed, Herod and
Pilate vexed, Cayaph^s prophesied, all combined, and often sought to take him:
yet no man laid hands on him, (until his hour was come that God had
appointed): so that by all their Plots, they were never able to do him any
more hurt, then only to show their teeth: John. 7. 30. If we are in league
with God, we need not fear the greatest of men.

Indeed, it was Pilates brag to Christ, know thou not that I have power to
cruci^ie thee: John 19. 10. And L^bans to Jacob: G^^. 31. 29. I am able to do
you hurt; but they were but vain cracks: for does not Pharoabs overthrow tell
all boasting Champions, that an Host is nothing without the God of Hosts. Yea,
Satan himself was saine to say unto God, in Jobs case, stretch out now thine
hand, etc. Job 1. 11. and 2. 5.

Now it must needs comfort and support us exceedingly, if in all cases we do
but duly consider, that inequalit^ is the ground of order, that superior
causes guide the subordinate, that this subluna^y Globe depends on the
celestial; as the lesser wheels in a Clock do on the great one, which I
^inde thus expressed:

As in a Clock one motion does convay
And carry diverse wheels a several way,
Yet altogether by the great wheels force,
Direct the hand unto his proper course.
Who is he that says, and it comes to pass, when the Lord commands it
not? Lament. 3. 37. Suppose the Legions of Hell should combine with the
Potentates of the Earth to do their worst, they are all nothing without God:
as in A^ithmeticke, put never so many Ciphers together, one a^ore another, and
they make nothing; but let one figure be added, it makes them infinite. So is
it with men and devils; if God be not with them, they are all but Ciphers: And
yet for the praise of his glory, and the good of his Church; these enemies of
his, whether they rise or sit still, shall by an insensible ordination perform
that will of the Almighty, which they least think of, and most oppose: The
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, and their Rulers, (because they knew him not, nor yet
the words of the Prophets which are read every Sabbath day) have fulfilled them
in condemning him: Act* 13. 27. so that as Saint Austin speaks, by resisting
the will of God, they do fulfill it: and his will is done by, and upon them,
even in that they do against his will.

That even Satan himself is limited, and can go no fur^her than his chain
will reach, we may see, Revel. 20. 2. More particularly; he could not touch so
much as Jobs body or substance, no not one of his servants, nor one limb of
their bodies, nor one ^aire of their heads, nor one beast of their herds, but
he must first beg leave of God, Job 2. 6. Nay Satan is so far from having
power over us living, that he cannot touch our bodies being dead; yea, he
cannot find them when God will conceal them, (witness the body of Moses:) and
I doubt not, but as the Angels did wait at the Sepulcher of their and our Lord;
so, for his sake, they also watch over our graves: he could not seduce a false
Prophet, nor enter into a Hog without license; the whole Legion sue to Christ
for a sufferance, not daring other than to grant, that without his permission
they could not hurt a very Swine.

And when he has leave from God, what can he do, he cannot go one hayres
breadth beyond his commission: Being permitted, he could bring Christ
himself, and set him on the Pinnacle of the Temple, but he could not through
hi^ down; which even a little Child might have done with permission. As the
Lion, 1 Kings 13. killed the Prophet, but neither touched the Ass whereon he
road, nor yet the dead carkas contrary to his nature.

True, Satan could boast even to Christ himself, that all the World was his,
and all the Kingdoms thereof, but when it came to the push, he could not enter
into a very Hog, without asking him leave, and having leave given him, he
presently carried the whole heard headlong into the Sea: Why did he not so to
the man possessed? no thanks to him, he had leave for the one, not so for the
other; and therefore a whole Legion of them were not able to destroy one poor
simple man, Matthew, 8. verse. 31, 32.

So that all our enemies are curbed and restrained by the divine providence of
our heavenly Father: Satan may be his executioner, but God is the Judge, and
the Executioner cannot lay on a stroke more, than the Judge appoints.

I confess, Satan is so strong comparatively, and withal so crafty and
malicious, that we may with reverence and love, wonder at the mercy of God in
our delivery: But this is our comfort; first, that Spirit (as we have shown)
can do nothing without the God of spirits. Secondly, we have the Angels aid
as the Prophet Elisha against that bloody King, 2 Kings 6. 17. Lot against the
Sodomites, Genesis 19. 10. Jacob against the fear of Esa^, Genesis 32. verse. 24, 28.
Hezekiah against Zenacharib, Esaias 37. 36. and England against that invincible
Navy of the Spaniards in Eighty eight. True, they appear not ordinarily, what
then; no more do the evil Angels, but the Word of God assures us it is so,
the Angel of the Lord pitcheth round about them that fear him, and delivers
them, Psalm. 34. 7. And do but thou get spiritual eyes, whereby thou may
see, as with Moses the invisible God, so the invisible Angels: do but pray as
Elisha for his servant that thine eyes may be opened, and then thou shall see
more with thee, than against thee, 2 Kings 6. 16, 17.

Yea, had wicked men their eyes opened, as Balaam once had, they would at every
turn see an Angel stand in their way, ready to resist what they go about, as
he did: for this is one of the noble employments of those glorious spirits, to
give a strong, though invisible opposition to lewd enterprises: Many a
treacherous act have they hindered, without the knowledge of the Traitor. Yea,
O God, many are the dangers which we see and fear; innumerable, those we
neither see nor fear; Therefore to take away all attribution to our selves,
even when we know not thou do deliver us.

Now if it be fearful to think how great things evil spirits can do with
permission; it is comfortable to think how they can do nothing without
permission: for if GOD must give him leave, he will never give him leave to do
any harm to his chosen, he will never give him leave to do the least hurt to
our souls. Now as by way of concession every greater includes the less, be
that can lift a Talent, can easily lift a Pound; so by way of denial, every
greater excludes the less. If Satan himself cannot hurt us, much less his
instruments, weak men: but for proof of this, see also an instance or two,
that a Sparrow cannot fall to the ground without our Heavenly Father; and that
without l^a^^ from him, our enemies cannot diminish one hair of our heads, we
have our Saviors express testimony: Matthew. 10. 29. 30. Let the
Powder-Traytors plot and contrive the ruin of our State never so cunningly and
closely, let them go on to the utmost, (as there wanted nothing but an Actor
to bring on that Catholic doomes-day;) yet before the Match could be brought
to the Powder, their artificial fire-workes were discovered, their projection,
prodition, deperdition, all dis^l^sed, and seasonably returned on their own
heads: And the like of their invincible Navy. Let Jesabel fret her heart out,
and swear by her gods that Eliah shall die, yet she shall be f(...)strate;
Eliah shall be safe. Let the red Dragon spout forth slouds of venom against
the Church, the Church shall have wings given her to fly away, she shall be
delivered: Revelat. 12. Let the Scribes and Pharisees, with their many false
witnesses accuse Christ never so, yet in spite of malice innocence shall find
abbetors: and rather than he shall want witnesses, the mouth of Pilate shall
be opened to his justification. Yea, let Jonas through frailty run away from
the execution and embassage of GODS charge, and thereupon be cast into the Sea,
though^ the Waves require him of the Ship, and the Fish require him of the
Waves, yet the Lord will require him of the Fish: even the Sea and the Fish had
as great a charge for the Prophet, as the Prophet had a charge for Niniveh: for
this is a sure rule, if in case God gives any of the creatures leave to afflict
us, yet he will be sure to lay no more upon us than we are able, or he will
make us able to bear: yea, than shall make for our good and his glory. He has
a provident care over all the Creatures, even Beasts and Plants: and certainly
we are more precious than Fowls or Flowers; yet the Lord cares for them. Will
the Householder take care to water the Herbs of his Garden, or to fodder his
Cattle, and suffer his Men and Maids to famish through hunger and thirst? Or
will he provide for his Men and Maids, and let his own Children strave?
Surely if a man provide not for his own, He has denied the faith, and is
worse than an Infidel: 1 Timothy 5. 8. Far be it then from the great
Householder, and Judge of all the Earth; not to provide for his dear Children
and Servants, what shall be most necessary for them. Indeed, we may fear our
own flesh, as Saint Paul did; but God is faithful, and will not suffer us to
be tempted above our strength, but will even give the issue with the
temptation, and in the mean time support us with his grace: 2 Corinthians. 12. 9.
You have an excellent place to this purpose: Jeremiah 15. 20. 21.

Section 2.
Objection. But we see by experience, that GOD gives wicked men power
oftentimes to take away the very lives of the godly.

Answer. What then? If we lose the lives of our bodies, it is, that we may
save the lives of our souls; and attain the greater degree of glory: Luke 9.
24. and so we are made gayners even by that loss. Now if God takes away
temporal, and gives eternal life for it, there is no hurt done us; he that
promises ten pieces of silver, and gives ten pieces of gold, breaks no
promise. Peace be unto this house was the Apostles salutation, but it was not
meant of an outward peace with men of the world: and Christ says, You shall
have rest, Matthew. 11. 28 but it is rest unto your souls. Again, then have
m^rited a threefold death, if thou art freed from the two worser, spiritual
and eternal; and God deal favorably with thee touching thy natural death,
he is merciful: if not, thou must not think him unjust. Though the Devil
and the World can hurt us, as well as other men, in our owtward and bod^ly
estates: as the Devil had power over Job in his Ulcers, over his Children in
their death, over Mary Magd^len that was possessed, and over that daughter of
Abraham, Luke 13. whom he kept bound lo^ 18. years: Verse. 16. yet they can do
us no hurt, nor endanger our souls; they shall lose nothing but their dross,
as in Zachary 13. 9. Isaiah 12. Let them s^uce out our blood, our souls they
cannot so much as strike; let wild beasts tear the body from the soul, yet
neither body nor soul are thereby severed from Christ. Yea, they can neither
deprive us of our spiritual treasure here, nor eternal hereafter; which makes
our Savior say, Fear ye not them which kill the body, but are not able to
kill the soul; but rather fear him which is able to destroy both soul and
body in Hell: Matthew. 10. 28. The body is but the Bark, Cabinet, Case, or
Instrument of the Soul; and say it falls in pieces, there is but a Pitcher
broken; the soul a glorious Ruby, held more sit to be set in the Crown of
glory, than here to be trodden under foot by dirty Swine; and therefore so
soon as separated, the Angels convey her hence to the place of everlasting
bliss. Alas, what can they do? they cannot separate us from the love of God in
Christ Jesus: Romans 8. 38, 39. Yea, they are so far from doing us harm, as
that, contrariwise, we are much the better for them; In all these things we
are more than conquerours, through him that loved us: Verse 37. Whatsoever then
becomes of goods, or lives, happy are we so long as (like wise Soldiers) we
guard the vital parts, while the soul is kept sound from impatience, from
distrust, etc. Our enemy may afflict (...), he cannot hurt us.

Objection. Nevertheless, that which I suffer, is exceeding grievous.

Answer. Not so grievous as it might have been, for he that has afflicted
thee for a time, could have held thee longer; he that touches thee in part,
could have stricken thee in whole: he that laid this upon thy body, has power
to lay a greater Rod both upon thy body and soul. Again, there is no
chastisement not grievous; the bone that was disjoynted, cannot be set right
without pain; no potion can cure us, if it work not; and it works not,
except it makes us sick* Nay, my very disease is not so painful for the time,
as my remedy: how does it turn the stomach, and wring the intrayles, and work
a worse distemper than that, whereof I formerly complained: neither could it be
so wholesome, if it were less unpleasing; neither could it make me whole, if it
did not first make me sick. But we are contented with that sickness which is
the way to health; there is a vexation without hurt, such is this: we are
afflicted, not overpressed; needy, not desperate; persecuted, not forsaken;
cast down, but perish not: how should we, when all the evil in a City comes
from the providence of a good God, which can neither be impotent, nor
unmercifull? It is the Lord, let him do what he will. Woe worth us, if evils
could come by chance, or were let loose to light where they list; now they are
overruled, we are safe. In the name of God then, let not the tall stature of
the Anakims, nor the combination of the Edomites, nor the politic counsels of
all the Achitophels and Machivilians, nor the proud looks, no^ the big words
of all the Amaziahs, combining themselves together, deter or dismay you. Let
not the overtopping growth of the sons of Zerviah seem too hard for you; for
God is infinitely more strong and mighty to save us, than all our enemies are
to d^stroy us; and he has his O^re in their Boat, he has a special stroke
in all actions whatsoever, and can easily overreach and make stark fools of
the wisest; by making their own counsels and endeavor like Hushais, to
overthrow those intentions which they seem to support.

As touching the continuance of afflictions, God so orders and tempereth the
same, in his merciful wisdom, that either they be tolerable, or short;
either our sorrows shall not be violent, or they shall not last; if they be
not light, they shall not be long: grievous and sore trials last but for a
season, 1 Peter 1. 6. A little while, John 16. 16. Yea, but a moment, 2 Cor. 4.
17. He endures but a while in his anger, (says the Psalmist) but in his
favor is life; weeping may abide for a night, but joy comes in the morning:
Psalm. 30. 5. And this had he good experience of; for if we mark it, all those
Psalms whose first lines contain sighs and broken complaints, do end with
delight and contentment; he began them in fear, but they end in joy: you shall
see terrible anguish sitting in the door, irremediable sorrow looking in at
the window, despair bordering in the margent, and offering to creep into the
Text; yet after a sharp conflict, nothing appears but joy and comfort. God
loves to send relief, when we least look for it; as Elisha sent to the King
of Israel, when he was rending his clothes: 2 Kings 5. 8. Hear what the Lord
thy Redeemer says by Isaiah, For a moment in mine anger, I hid my face from
thee for a little season, but with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on
thee: Isaiah 54. 8. It is but a little, for a moment that his anger lasts, his
mercy is everlasting: and I hid my face, never turned my heart from thee.
Joseph when he lay down to sleep, was full of care about his Wives being with
child; Matthew 1. 20. but he awakened well satisfied: Verse 24. To day a
measure of fine flower is lower rated in Samaria, than yesterday of dung.
Although Christ's Star left the Wise Men for a time, yet instantly it appeared
again, and forsook them not till they had found CHRIST; which was the mark
they aimed at: Matthew 2. 9. Afflictions are like running waters, which make
many grounds fruitful, but tarry with none of them. Yea, its a Rule in nature,
that violent things cannot last long: The Philosophers could observe, that no
motion violent is wont to be permanent; and Seneca concludes, That if the
sickness be tedious and lasting, the pain is tolerable; but if violent,
short: and so of spiritual temptations, the which were so vehement upon
Luther, that the very venom of them drank up his spirits, and his body seemed
dead; so that neither speech, sense, blood, or heat, appeared in him; but this
sharp fit lasted but for one day: so if we suffer much, it shall not be long;
if we suffer long, it shall not be much. Some misery is like a Consumption,
gentle, but of long continuance; other like a Fever, violent, but soon over.
If our sorrows be long, they are the lighter; if sharper, the shorter. The
sharp North-East wind (says the Astronomer) never lasts three days; and
thunder, the more violent, the less permanent. Wherefore cheer up thou
drooping soul, if the Sun of comfort be for the present clouded, it will ere
long shine forth bright ag^ine: if now with the Moon thou art in the wayne,
stay but a little, thou shall as much increase; for as days succeed nights;
Summer, Winter; and rest, travel; so undoubtedly, joy shall succeed and exceed
thy sorrow. Thy grief shall dissolve, or be dissolved; yea, it is in some
measure dissolved by hope for the present. The Portingals will rejoice in foul
weather; why? because they know fair will follow; and so may the believer in
his great^st exigents: because God will shortly tread Satan under our feet;
Rom* 16. 20. Here also the distressed soul may raise comfort to himself out
of former experience; who is he that has not been delivered out of some
miserable exigent? which if thou have, thou may well say unto God with the
Psalmist, Thou have showed me great troubles and adversities, but thou will
return and revive me, and wilt come again, and take me up from the depth of
the earth, and comfort me: Psalm 71. 20, 21. For Gods former actions are
patterns of his future; he teaches you what he will do, by what he has
done: and nothing more raises up the heart in present assiance, than the
recognition of favors, or wonders passed: he that has found God present in
one extremity, may trust him in the next: every sensible favor of the
Almighty, invites both his gifts and our trust.

Objection. But thou will say with the Psalmist, thine enemies have long
prevailed against thee, and God seems altogether to hide his face, and to
have clean forgotten thee: and so thou fear he will for ever: Psalm 13.
1, 2.

Answer. It is but so in thy apprehension, as it was with him; Gods deliverance
may over-stay thy expectation, it cannot the due period of his own counsels:
for know first, That Gods works are not to be judged of, until the fifth act.
The case deplorable and desperate in outward appearance, may with one smile
from Heaven find a blessed issue: Dotham is besieged, and the Prophets servant
distressed, they are in a grievous case; (as they think) yet a very apparition
in the clouds shall secure them: not a squadron shall be raised, and yet the
enemy is surprised: 2 Kings 6. here was no slacknesse. The Midianites invade
Israel, and are suddenly confounded by a dream: Judges 7. Mistress Honywood,
that Religious Gentlewoman, famous for her virtues, after she had been
distressed in her mind thirty years, without feeling the least comfort, not
being able to hold out any longer, (as a wounded spirit who can bear?) flung a
Venice-glasse against the ground, and said to a grave Divine that sought to
comfort her, I am as sure to be damned, as this Glass is'to be broken; but
what followed, the Glass was not broken, but rebounded and stood upright: at
the sight whereof she was so confirmed, that ever after to her dying day, she
lived most comfortably: much like that of Apelles, who striving to paint a drop
of foame falling from a Horse mouth, after long study how to express it, even
despairing, flung away his Pensill, and that throw did it. How opportunely does
God provide succors to our distresses. It is his glory to help at a pinch, to
begin where we have given over; that our relief might be so much the more
welcome, by how much it is less looked for: superstuous aid can neither be
heartily desired, nor earnestly looked for, nor thankefully received from the
hands of mercy. Besides, our infirmity best sets off the glory of his strength:
2 Cor. 12. 9. Spiritual consolations are commonly late and sudden; long before
they come, and speedy when they do come, even preventing expectation: and our
last conflicts have wont ever to be the forest, as when after some dripping
rain, it powers down most vehemently, we think the weather is changing. When
he means to ease us of our burden, he seems to lay on beavier; wherefore
trust in God killing, and love God chiding, it is a good sign of our recovery.

Section 3.
Again, in the next place thou must know, that man's extremity is Gods
opportunity; well may he forbear, so long as we have any thing else to rely
upon: but we are sure to find him in our greatest exigents, who loves to give
comfort to those that are forsaken of their hope^, as abundance of examples
witness. When had the Children of Israel the greatest victories, but when they
feared most to be overcome? 2 Kings 19. 35. Exodus 14. 28, 29. When was Hagar
comforted of the Aagell, but when her child was near famished, and she had
cast it under a Tree for dead? Genesi^ 21. 15. to 20. When was Eliah comforted
and releeved by an Angel, with a Cake baked on the coals, and a Cruse of
Water, but when he was utterly forsaken of his hopes? 1 King. 19. 4. to 7.
When was the Sarepta^ releeved, it was high time for the Prophet to visit her
poor soul, she was now making her last meal, after one mean morsel, she
was yielding her self over to death. As long as Aegypts flower lasted, Manna
was not rained. When did God answer the hopes of Sarah, Rebeckah, Rachel, the
wife of Manoah, and Elizabeth, touching their long and much desired issues? but
when they were barren, and past hope of children, by reason of age, Genesis 18.
Judges 13. Luke 1. 6. 7. When did our Savior heal the Woman of her bloody
issue; but after the Physicians had given her over, and she becoming much
worse, had given them over, when she had spent all she had upon them: for to
mend the matter, poverty, which is another disease, was superadded to make her
completely miserable. When man's help fails, then Gods begins. When did Moses
find succor, but when his Mother could no longer hide him: and he was put
into the River among the Bullrushes? she would have given all she was worth to
save him, and now she has wages to nurse him: she does but change the name of
Mother into Nurse, and she has her son without fear, not without great
reward. When Israel was in so hard a straight, as either to be drowned in the
Sea, or slain by the Sword, how miraculously did God provide an evasion by
dividing the waters? When Rochel, like Samaria, had a strong enemy without, and
a s^re famine within; how miraculously did God provide an evasion, by making
the tide their Purveyor, to bring them in an Ocean of shellfish? the like of
which was never known before, nor since. We read how Merline, during the
Massacre at Paris, was for a fortnight together, nourished with one Eggs a day,
laid by a Hen, that came constantly to a Haymow, where he lay hid in that
danger. When the English had left Cales, and the Spaniard was again repossest
of it; by some neglect or oversight there was an Englishman left behind, but
how did God provide for his escape? its worth the remembering, he was no sooner
crept into a hole under a pair of stairs, but instantly a Spider weaves a web
over the hole, and this diverted them; for when one of them said, Here is
surely some of them hid: another replies, What a fool art thou, do thou not
see, its covered with a firm cobweb? and so past him, that in the night he
escaped. O Savior, our extremities are the seasons of thy aid: even when Faux
was giving sire to the Match, that should have given fire to the Powder, which
should have blown up Men and Monuments, even the whole State together; thou
that never sleep did prevent him, and disclose the whole design: yea,
thou did turn our intended Funeral into a Festival. And why does the
goodness of our God pick out the most needful times for our relief and
comfort? but because our extremities drive us to him that is omnipotent; there
is no fear, no danger, but in our own insensiblenesse: but because when we
are forsaken of all succors and hopes, we are fittest for his redress; and
never are we nearer to help, than when we despair of help; but because our
extremities giv^ him the most glory, and our comfort is the greater, when the
deliverance is seen before it is expected, his wisdom knows when aid will
be most seasonable, most welcome: which he then loves to give, when he finds
us left of all other props. That merciful hand is reserved for a dead lift,
and then he fails us not; as when Abraham had given Isaac, and Isaac had
given himself for dead; then God enterposed himself: when the knife is
falling upon his throat, then, then comes the deliverance by an Angel,
calling, forbidding, commending him. When things are desperate, then look most
for Gods help; for then is the time: Psalm 119. 126. Isay 33. 9, 10.

And indeed, our faith is most commendable in the last act; it is no praise to
hold out until we be hard driven, but when we are forsaken of means, then to
live by faith in our God, is thought worthy of a Crown. O wretched Saul, had
thou held out never so little longer without offering, and without distrust,
Samuel had come, and thou had kept the favor of God, whereas now for thy
unbelief thou art cast off for ever! 1 Samuel 13. 10. to 15. To shut up all in a
word, were thy soul in such a straight, as Israel was between the Red Sea,
and the Egyptians; the spirits of vengeance, (like those enemies) pursuing
thee behind; Hell and death (like that Red Sea) ready to ingulfe thee before;
yet would I speak to thee in the confidence of Moses, Exodus 14. 13. Stand
still and see the salvation of the Lord. Thy word, O God, made all, thy word
shall repair all; hence all ye diffident fears, he whom I trust is omniponent.

Again Secondly, Thou must know that God in his wisdom has set down a
certain period of time, within which he will exercise his Children more or
less: and at the end whereof, and not before, he will relieve and comfort them
again. As we may perceive by Eccles. 3. 1. Acts 7. 25. Exodus 12. 41. Genesis
15. 13. Daniel 12. 1. 4. 11. Jer. 25. 11. Genesis 6. 3. Four hundred years he
appointed to Abraham and his seed, that they should be Sojourners in a strange
land, where they should be kept in bondage, and evil entreated: Genesis 15. At
the end of which time, even the self same day, they returned from the land of
Egypt: that was the precise time appointed, and the selfsame day it was
accomplished: and till then Moses undertook it in vain. Why were they so long
kept from it? the land was their own before, they were the right heirs to it,
lineally descended from him who was the first Possessor of it after the flood:
God will do all in due time, that is, in his time, not in ours; if at any time
the Lord deliver us, it is more than he owes us. Let him (says Saint
Augustine) choose his own opportunity that so freely grants the mercy. Again,
he appointed that the Jews should serve the King of Babylon seventy years;
not a day, not an hour to be abated, Jeremy 25. 11. but at the end thereof,
even that very night: Daniel 9. it was accomplished; neither did Daniel, (who
knew the determinate time) once pray for deliverance, till just upon the
expiration. Thirty eight years he appointed the sick man at Bethesda's Poole,
John 5. 5. Eighteen years to that daughter of Abraham, whom Christ loosed
from her disease: Luke 13. 16. Twelve years to the Woman with the bloody
issue, Matthew. 9. 20. Three months to Moses, Exodus 2. 2. Ten days tribulation
to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, Apocal. 2. 10. Three days plague to
David, 2 Samuel 24. 13. Each of these groaned for a time, under the like burden
as thou do; But when their time which God had appointed, was come; they were
delivered from all their miseries, troubles, and calamities: and so likewise
ere long, if thou will patiently tarry the Lords leisure, thou shall also be
delivered from thy affliction and sorrow, either in the Morning of thy trouble
with David, Psalm. 30. 5. or at the Noone of thy life with Job, Chapter 42. 10.
to 17. or toward the Evening, with Mr Glover, that holy Martyr, who could have
no comfortable feeling, till he came to the sight of the stake: but then he
cried out, and clapped his hands for joy to his friend, saying, O Austin, he is
come, he is come, meaning the feeling joy, of faith, and the Holy Ghost: Acts
and Monuments, Fol. 1555. Or at night with Lazarus, at one hour or another
thou are sure to be delivered, as time will determine. Many were the troubles
of Joseph, but the Lord delivered him out of all. Many were the troubles of
Abraham, but the Lord delivered him out of all. Many were the troubles of
David, but the Lord delivered him out of all. Many were the troubles of Job,
but the Lord delivered him out of all: therefore he can and will deliver thee
out of all. But if he do not, (says Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego) yet we
will not do evil, to escape danger; because Christ has suffered more for us:
therefore if I perish, I perish, says Hester. Be our troubles many in number,
strange in nature, heavy in measure, much in burden, and long in continuance;
yet Gods mercies are more numerous, his wisdom more wondrous, his power more
miraculous; he will deliver us out of all: Many are the troubles of the
Righteous: Yea, he rises higher, and calls them millions, for so the words may
be rendered; but the Lord delivers them out of all: Psalm. 34. 19. How many,
or how great soever they be, or how long soever they continue, yet an end they
shall all have: F^r the LORD either takes troubles from them, or takes them
from troubles, by receiving them into his heavenly rest; where they shall
acknowledge that GOD has rewarded them as far beyond their expectation, as
he had formerly punished them less than they did deserve.

Objection. Oh! but my condition is so desperate, and irrecoverable, that its
impossible I should ever get out of it.

Answer. There is no impossibility (says Ambrose) where God is pleased to give
a dispensation. But bethink thy self, is it worse with thee than it was with
those before mentioned? and yet they were delivered: Or is thy case worse than
that of Jonas in the Sea, yea in the Whales belly? and yet he was delivered:
Worse than Nebuchadn^zzars grazing in the Forest among beasts, even until his
hairs were grown to be like Eagles feathers, and his nails like Birds
claws? Daniel 4. 31. to 36. and yet he again reigned in Babell: Worse than
Joseph's? when he was thrown into a Pit^, and left hopeless; or when sold to
the Ishm ^elitish Merchants, and then cast into prison? yet after all this, his
said brethren were feign to become petitioners to him. Worse than Job, when he
sat scraping his soars on the dunghill, had all his houses burn^, all his
cattle stolen, and his children sl^ine? yet he was far richer afterward,
than before.

How rashly then have thou judged of thy Makers dealing with thee? It were more
agreeable to reason, and religion, to conclude the contrary; for both
experience, and reason teaches, that violent pressures, like violent motions,
are weak^st at the furthest. When the morning is darkest, then comes day: yea,
usually after the lowest ebb, follows the highest spring-tyde: And Religion
teaches, that if we love God, all things, even the worst of Afflictions shall
so concur, and cooperate to our good, that we would not have wanted them for
any good. Wherefore hold but fast to God, and my soul for thine, neither
Affliction, nor ought else shall hurt thee. You know, while Adam was at peace
with God, all things were at peace with Adam.

Now this Doctrine well digested will breed good blood in our souls, and is
specially useful to bound our desires of release; for though we may be
importunate, impatient we may not be; stay he never so long, Patience must not
be an Inch shorter than Affliction: If the Bridge reach but half way over the
Brook, we shall have but an ill-favored passage. We are taught in Scripture
to praise Patience, as we do a fair day at night; He that endures to the end
shall be saved: Matthew. 24. 13. Whereas coming but a foot short, may make us
miss the prize, and lose the wager we run for: and then as good never have
set f^o^ out of doors. Much the better for that light, which will not bring us
to bed; perseverance is a kind of all in all; continuance is the Crown of all
other graces; and Heaven shall be the Crown of continuance.

But not seldom does the Lord only release his Children out of extreme
adversity here, but withal makes their latter end so much the more prosperous,
by how much the more their former time has been miserable and adverse. We have
experience in Job: You have heard, says Saint Ja(...)es, of the patience of
Job, and what end the Lord made with him. What end is that, the Holy Ghost tells
you: That the Lord blessed his latter end, more than his beginning; and gave
him twice as much as he had before. For whereas at first he had but 7000 Sheep,
3000 Camels, 500 yoke of Oxen, and 500 she Asses: after his reparation he had
14000 Sheep, 6000 Cammels, 1000 yoke of Oxen, and 1000 she Asses, every one
double: and whereas the number of his Children remained the same they were
before, namely, seven Sons, and three Daughters, the number of them were
also doubled, as the learned observe; for whereas his Beasts, according to the
condition of beasts, utterly perished; the souls of his Children were saved:
so that he had twice so many Children also, whereof ten were with him on
Earth, and the other ten with God in Heaven. Job. 42. 10. to 14. And in Joseph,
who was bred up in the School of Affliction from his infancy; yet when his
turn was come, one hour changes his fetters of Iron, into chains of Gold;
his rags into Roabes, his stocks into a Chariot, his Prison into a Palace,
the noise of his Gives into a breach; and whereas he was thirty years kept
under, he ruled in the height and luster of all honor and glory the space of
eighty years. And one minute made in Lazarus a far greater change, and
preferment. And in David, who for a long time was in such fear of Saul, that
he was forced to fly for his life, first, to Samuel where Saul pursues him;
then to Jonathan, where his grief is doubled, than to Abim^lech, where is Doeg
to betray him; after that he flies to Achish, King of Gath; where, being
discovered, he is in greatest fear of all, lest the King should take away his
life; and lastly, when he returns to his own Ziklag, he finds it smitten and
burnt with fire, and his Wives taken prisoners, and in the midst of all his
grief, when he had wept until he could weep no more; the people being vexed,
intend to stone him; so that, as he had long before complained, there was but a
step between him and death; but mark the issue, though his heart were now not
only brim-full, but ran over with grief: yet within two days the Crown of
Israel is brought unto* him, and he is anointed King: 2 Samuel 1. and for the
present he was able to comfort himself in the Lord his God: 1 Samuel 30. 6. Yea,
after^his, when by that foul sin of Adultery, and Murder, he had brought
more enemies about his ears, (God, and Men, and (...)ils) having once repented
his fault, he was able to say with confidence, O God, thou have showed me great
troubles and adversities, but thou will take me up from the depth of the earth,
and increase my honor: Psalm 71. 20. 21. He knew well enough that it is Gods
use to bring comfort out of sorrow, as he brought water out of the Rock, and
that cherishing was wont to follow stripes: And indeed, how often has a Tragic
entrance had a happy end? Like that we read of Michael, who was condemned to
death by the Emperor Leo, upon a false accusation; but before the execution,
the Emperor dyed, and Michael was chosen in his stead. And of Mordecay, who
being in the forenoone appointed to the Gibbet, was in the afternoon advanced
next of all to the Throne. And Queen Elizabeth of blessed memory, who Reigned
at the same time that she expected to suffer, and was Crow^ed when she looked
to be beheaded. God loves to do by his Children, as Joseph did by his Father;
first, we must have our beloved Joseph a long time detained from us, then he
robbes us of Simeon; after that sends for our best beloved Benjamin, and makes
us believe he will rob us of all our Children at once, all the things that are
dear to us: But why is it? even that when we think to have lost all, he might
return himself, and all again with the greater interest of joy and felicity.
The LORD says Hannah, kills, and makes alive; first kills, and then
makes alive; brings down to the grave, and raises up; the Lord makes
poor, and makes rich; brings low, and exalts; he raises the poor out of
the dust, and lifts up the beggar from the Dunghill; to set them among
Princes, and to make them inherit the seat of glory: 1 Samuel 2. 6, 7, 8. And
why all this, but that in his own might no man might be strong? Verse 9. That
which Plutarch reports of Dionysius, how he took away from one of his Nobles,
almost his whole estate, and seeing him nevertheless continue as jocund and
well contented as ever, he gave him that again, and as much more, is a common
thing with the Lord: and thousands can witness, that though they went weeping
under the bur^hen, when they first carried the prceious seed of Repentance; yet
they still returned with joy, and brought their sheaves with them: Psalm 126.
5, 6.

Objection. But thou think thou shall not hold ou^, if God should long delay
thee.

Answer. If he d^lay thee never so long, he will be sure to support thee as
long: 1 Cor. 10. 13. which is much at one upon the matter. If he suffer thee
to be sorely temp^ed, he will not suffer* thee to be tempted above thy
strength: 2 Cor. 4. 8. 9. 16. His grace shall be sufficient for thee at the
least: 2 Cor. 12. 9. Phil. 1. 29. which was Paul's answer, and it may suffice
all suitors; the measure of our patience shall be proportionable to our
suffering, and our strength equalled to our Temptations, 1 Cor. 10. 13. Now if
God do either take away our appetite, or give us meat* it is enough.

True, a Ship of never so great a burden, may be overladen till it sink
again; or if we shall wear away all the steel with whetting, the Tool is
left unprofitable. But my thoughts (says God) are not as your thoughts, nor my
ways as your ways: Isaiah 55. 8. God is n^ Tyrant to asflict thee
unmeasurably, neither will he draw a sword to kill Flies; or call for Scorpions
when a Rod is too much. He that made the vessel, knows her burden, and how
to ballast her; yea, he that made all things very good, cannot but do all
things very well. Indeed, God seems to wrestle with us, as he did with Jacob;
but he supplies us with hidden strength, at length to get the better: And grace
to stand in affliction, and to gain by it, is better then freedom or
deliverance. The Bush, which was a Type of the Church, consumed not all the
while it burned with fire; because God was in the midst of it. The Ship at
Anchor is shrewdly tossed to and fro, but cannot be carried away, either by
waves, wind, or weather: Sin, Satan, and the world may disturb us, but they
can never destroy us: Our head Christ being above, we cannot be drowned. There
can be no disjunction; unless we could be plucked from his arms, that is
almighty: for our life is bid with Christ in God, Colos. 3. 3. He does not
trust us with our own souls life; but hides it in his Son Jesus: because,
if it were in our own hands; we should easily be tempted to sell it; as Adam
did for an Apple, and Esa^ for a mess of P^^t^ge* whereas now we are safe, for
to pluck us out of his hands that is almighty, requires an adversary stronger
then himself. Neither wants he care; he that numbers our very hairs, what
account does he make of our souls? Nor love; for if he has bought us with his
blood, and given us himself, will he deny us any thing that is good for us?

Wherefore silence your Reason, and exalt your Faith, (how pressing, or
peircing soever your sufferings be) which pulls off the vizard from his face,
and sees a loving heart, under contrary appearances. Trust the mercy of God,
which is of infinite perfection; and the merits of Christ, which are of perfect
satisfaction: and then hope will bear up thy heavy heart, as bladders do an
unskilful swimmer. Otherwise, if thou shall walk by sense, and not by says,
2 Cor. 5. 7. fear will no less multiply ^oils, then faith would diminish
them: and thou shall resemble Buc^phalus, who was not afraid of his burden;
the shadow only frighted him.

Section 4.
Objection. Although Christ in the Gospel has made many large and precious
promises, yet there are none so general which are not limited with the
condition of Faith, and the fruit thereof unfeigned Repentance: and each of them
are so tied, and entayled, that none can lay claim to them but true believers;
which repent, and turn from all their sins, to serve him in holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord: Hebrews 12. 14. Isay 59. 20. But I
want these qualifications, without which, how can I expect supportation in my
sufferings; or an happy deliverance out of them* however it fares with
believers, whom Christ has undertaken for: yea, I have such a wicked heart,
and my sins are so many, and great; that these comforts nothing concern me*
for they that plow iniquity, and sow wickedness, shall reap the same: Job.
4. 8.

Answer. So our failings be not wilful, though they be many and great, yet
they cannot hinder our interest in the promises of ^od.

Admit thou art a great sinner, what then? art thou a greater sinner then
Matthew, or Zache(...), who were sinful Publicans, and got their livings by
(...)ling, and polling; oppression, and extortion? then Mary Magdalen, a common
strumpet; possessed of many Devils? then Paul, a bloody persecutor of Christ and
his Church? then the Thief upon the Cross, who had spent his whole life to
the last hour, in ab(...) enable wickedness? then Manasses, that outrageous
sinner, and most wicked wretch that ever was; an Id^later, a malicious
Persecutor of the truth, a desiler of Gods holy Temple, a sacrificer of his
own children unto Idols, that is, Devils; a notable witch, and wicked
^orcer^r; a bloody murderer of exceeding many the dear Saints, and true
Prophets of the Lord; and on who did not run headlong alone into all hellish
impiety, but led the people also out of the way to do more wickedly then did
the Heathen, whom the Lord cast out and destroyed? I am sure thou will not say
thou art more wicked then he was; and yet this Manasses, this wretch more like
a Devil incarnate, then a Saint of God, repented him of his sins from the
bottom of his heart, was received; (I cannot speak it without ravishing
wonder of Gods bottomless and never ^^fficiently admired mercy) was received,
I say, to grace, and obtained the pardon of all his horrible sins, and most
abominable wickedness; and are not these, and many the li^e (...), written for
our learning; and recorded by the Holy Ghost, to the end, that we may gather
unto our selves assurance of the same pardon, for the same sins, upon the
same repentance, and believing?

Are thy sins great? his mercies are infinite; had thou committed all the
sins that ever were committed, yet in comparison of Gods mercy, they are
less then a most in the Sun to all the world, or a drop of water to the whole
Ocean: for the Sea, though great, yet may be measured; but Gods mercy cannot be
circumscribed: and he both can, and will, as easily forgive us the debt of ten
thousand millions of pounds, as one penny; and as soon pardon the sins of a
wicked Manasses, as of a righteous Abraham, if we come unto him by unfaigned
repentance; and earnestly desire and implore his grace and mercy: Romans 5. 20.

The Tenure of our salvation is not by a covenant of works, but by a covenant
of grace; founded not on our worthiness, but on the free mercy and good
pleasure of God; and therefore the Prophet well annexeth blessedness to the
remission of sins; Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven: Psalm. 32. 1.

Yea, the more miserable, wretched, and sinful we are, the more fit objects we
are, whereupon he may exercise, and show the infinite riches of his bounty,
mercy, virtue, and all sufficiency. And this our spiritual Physician, can
as well, and as easily cure desperate diseases, even the remediless
Consumption, the dead Apoplex, and the filthy Leprosy of the soul, as the
smallest malady, or least faintness. Yea, he can as well raise the dead, as
cure the sick; and as well of Stones, as of Jews, make Abraham's children. Did
he not without the Sun at the Creation, cause light to shine forth; and
without rain at the same time, make the earth fruitful? Why then should you
give your self over, where your Physician does not? Besides, what sin is
there whereof we can despair of the remission, when we hear our Savior pray
for the forgivenes of his murderers, and blasphemers? And indeed, despair is
a sin which never knew Jesus.

It was a sweet saying of one at his death, When mine iniquity is greater then
thy mercy, O God, then will I fear and despair; but that can never be:
considering our sins be the sins of men, his mercy the mercy of an infinite
God. Yea, his mercies are so great, that among the thirteen properties of God,
mentioned Exodus 34. almost all of them appertain to his mercy; whereas one
only concerns his might, and only two his justice. Again, shall it ever
enter into our hearts to think, that God gives us rules to keep, and yet
break them himself? Now his rule is this, Though thy brother sin against
thee seven times in a day, and seven times in a day turn again to thee,
saying, it repents me; thou shall forgive him. The Son angers his Father,
he does not straight dis-inherit him; but Gods love to his people, exceeds a
Fathers love to his son, Matthew. 7. 11. and a Mothers too, Isay 49. 15.

I hear many menaces and threats for sins, but I read as many promises of
mercy, and all they indefinite; excluding none whose impenitency and infidelity
excludes not themselves: every sin deserves damnation, but no sin shall
condemn, but the lying and continuing in it.

Wherefore if our clamorous conscience, like some sharp fang'd officer, arrest
us at Gods suit, let us put in bail, two subsidy virtues, Faith and
Repentance, and so stand the trial: the Law is on our side, the Law of grace
is with us, and this Law is his that is our Advocate; and he is our Advocate,
that is our Judge; and he is our Judge, that is our Savior; even the head of
our selves jesus Christ.

For the first of these, do but rep^^t, and God will pardon thee, be thy
sins never so m^^y, and innumerable for multitude; nev^r so h^ynous for
quality and m^gnitud^: I say 55. 7. Ezekiell 18. and 33. 11. Yea, sins (...)
Repentance are so remitted, as if they had never been committed: I have put
away thy t^ansgressions as a cloud, and thy sins as a mist. (...) 44. 22. and
what by c^rrup^ion has been done, by repent me is (...); ^s the former
examples, and many other witness Come and let us reason together, says the
Lord; though your sins he as sc^rl^t, they shall be as white as snow: Isaiah
1. 18. yea, white^; for the Prophet David laying open his bloud-guiltinesse,
and his original imp^^ity, uses these words; Pu^ge me with H^s^^p, and I
shall he clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter then Snow: Psalm. 51. 7.

And in reason, did he come to call sinners to repentance, and shall he not
show merey to the penitent? Or, who would not e^st his burden upon him, that
does desire to give ease? As I live, says the Lord, I would not the death of a
sinner: Ezekiel. 18. 32. and 33. 11.

Section 5.
Objection. Ay, but I cannot R^peat!

Answer. In time of temptation a man is not a competent Judge in his own case:
In humane Laws, there is a nullity held of words and actions extorted, and
wrung from men by fear: because in such cases a man is held not to be a
freeman, nor to have power or command in some sort of himself. A troubled
soul is like troubled waters, we can discern nothing clearly in it; wherefore
(if thou can) lay aside p^ejudice, and tell me in cold blood how it fares
with thee at other times, though indeed thy words at present, are enough to
convince thee: For first, thou sindest sin a burden too heavy for thee to
hear, which thou did not formerly; what is the reason, are thy sins more
and greater? no, but the contrary: for though they appear more, yet they are
less; for sin, the more it is se(...)e and selt, the more it is hated: and
thereupon is the less. M^ates are in a room before the Sun shines, but they
appear only then.

Again secondly, the very complaint of sin, springing from a displeasure
against it, shows that there is something in thee opposite to sin: viz. that
thou art penitent in affection, though not yet in action; even as a Child is
ration^ll in power, though not in act. Yea, more thou acc^sest, and condemn^st
thy self for thy sins; and by accusing our selves, we p^^^ent Satan; by
judging our selves, we pre^ent God. Neither was the Centurion ever so worthy,
as when he thought himself most unworthy: for all our worthiness is in a
capable misery; nor does God ever think well of him, that thinks so of
himself. But to let this pass.

Are not your faylings your grief, are they not besides your will, are they
not contrary to the current of your desires, and the maine bent of your
resolutions, and endeavors? Do thou determine to continue in the practice of
any one sin? yea, do thou not make conscience of all Gods Commandments,
one as well as another; the first table as well as the second, and the second
as well as the first? Matthew. 5. 19. Do thou not grieve for sins of all
sorts, secret as well as known, original as well as actual, of omission as of
commission, lesser (viz. thoughts) as well as greater: yea, as well for the evil
which cleaves to thy best works, as for the evil works, Romans 7. 21. and as
heartily, and unfaynedly desire, that thou may never commit it, as that God
should never impute it? 2 Timothy 2. 19. Do thou not fear to displease him, not
so much because he is just to punish, as for his mercy and goodness sake; and
more fear the breach of the Law, then the curse? Do thou not love rather to
be, then seem, or be thought good; and seek more the power of godliness,
then the show of it? Job. 1. 1. If so, well may Satan and thine own conscience
accuse thee of impenitency, and unbelief; but Christ thy Judge never. Yea,
then, notwithstanding your failings, you may say with David, I have kept thy
Word: Psalm. 18. 21, 22, 23. for though this be not such a measure of keeping,
as the Law requires; yet is it such a keeping, as God in Christ acc^pteth: for
suppose thy knowledge is still small, thy faith weak, thy charity cold, thy
heart (...)ll and hard, thy good works few and imperfect, and all thy zealous
resolutions easily hindered, and quite overthrown with every small temptation:
yet God that works in us both the will and the work, will accept the will
for the work; and that which is wanting in us, Christ will supply with his
own righteousness. He respects not what we can do, so much as what we
would do; and that which we would perform, and cannot, he esteems it as
though it were performed: whereas, take away the will, and all acts (in Gods
sight) are equal.

As the wicked sin more then they sin, in their defire, so the Righteous
do more good then they do, in their will to do it. If there be a ^aratum
cor, though there be not a perforatum cor, a profser of blood, though no
expense of blood for the honor of Christ, it is taken for M^^tyrdome, as
Origin testified of one: Non ille Martyrio, sed Martyrium illi defuit. I know
thy poverty, but thou art rich, says the Spirit to the Church of Smyrua: poor
in thy condition, rich in thy affection to goodness: Facultas secundum
voluntatem, non voluntas secundum facultatem aestimanda est; God esteems our
charitable beneficence, not only secundum quod habemus, but secundum quod
tribuere velimus. We are charged to forsake all, houses, lands, friends,
liberties, lives, for Christ; yet many die with houses, lands, and riches, in
their possession, whom Christ receives and Crowns in Heaven, because they did
part with all secundum animae praeparationem: What we would have done, shall be
reckoned to us as done; we do it quoad conatum, though non quoad effectum: In
like manner God takes a heart desirous to repent, and believe, for a penitent
and believing heart; volens and dolens, The vehement desire of godly sorrow, or
a sorrow because we cannot sorrow, goes for godly sorrow with God: so that to
sigh and grieve for what we cannot do, is to come short, and yet to do it
too: for God likes the will so well, that in his Son what we would do, is
in acceptance done, 2 Cor. 8. 12. Which text one brings in thus: O what an
unspeakable comfort was this cordial verse to my afflicted soul! And well it
might, for if we hate our corruptions, and strive against them, they shall not
be counted ours. It is not I (says Paul) but sin that dwells in me: Romans
7. 20. for what displeases us, shall never hurt us; and we shall be esteemed
of God to be what we love, and desire, and labor to be.

The comfort of this Doctrine is intended, and belongs to troubled consciences,
and those that would feign do better: but let no presumptuous sinners meddle
with it; for what have thou to do to take (I say not the Childrens bread to
ea^e, Matthew. 15. 26. but even) the least parcel of Gods word into thy mouth,
seeing thou ha^est to be reformed: Psalm. 50. 16, 17. But if thou be a
weary, and heavy laden sinner, thou may comfort thy self thus: I do
hateful things, but I have that I do; I break the Law, but yet I love the
Law, as holy, just, and good: Flesh is in me, but I am not in the Flesh. I must
not six mine eyes only upon mine own resistance* or f^yling^, but on Gods
^ssistance and acceptance in his Son, by which I shall be able to leap over
all walls, and impediments* Psalm 18* 29. The Law is given, that grace may be
required; grace is given, that the Law may be fulfilled: by us evangelically,
for us by Christ (whose righteousness is ou^s) perfectly, as Saint Austi^
speaks. The L^w is a glass to show us our spots, the Gospel a foun^aine to
wash them away. Wherefore cast not both thine ^y^s upon thy sin, but r^serv^
one to behold the ^emedy: look upon the L^w to keep* thee from presumption,
and upon the Gospel to k^^pe thee from despair.

Can not thou aggr(...) thine own sins, but thou (...)st ext^nu^te, and
call in question Gods mercy, and Christ's all sufficiency, spoil him of his
power and glory? Though the grievousnesse of our sins should in^re^se our
repen(...), ye^ they should n^^ diminish our faith, and assurance of pardon,
and forgiveness. As the plaist^r must not be less then the so^r^, so the tent
must not be bigger then the wound. It was a sweet and even course which Saint
Paul took, who when ^e^ would comfort himself against corruption, and evil
actions, Romans 7. 20. then not I, b^^^ sin dwelling in me; when he would
humble himself, notwithstanding his graces, then not I, but the grace of God
in me: 1 Cor. 15. 10.

Section 6.
Objection. But I am not worthy the least mercy, I have so often abused it, and
so little prosi^ed by the means of grace.

Answer. I think so too, for if thou refusest the offer of mercy until thou
deservest it, woe be ^o thee: But if thou will take the right course, renounce
the broken Reed of thine own free will, which has so often deceived thee; and
put all thy trust in the grace of Christ: The way to be strong in the Lord, is
to be weak in thy self; be weak in thy self, and strong in the Lord: and
through faith thou shall be more then a Conqueror. Leave ^ugging and struggling
with thy sin, and fall with Jacob to wresile with Christ for a blessing; and
though thy self go limping away, yet shall thou be a Prince with God, and be
delivered from Es^ues hondage. But thou stand^st upon thine own seet, and
therefore fallest so soulely: thou will like a Child, go alone, and of thy
se^fe, and therefore gettest so many knocks. And thou would accept of a
pardon too, if thou might* p^y for it: but Gods mercies are free, and he
bids thee* come and buy without silver, and without price; or el^^ he says,
thou and thy money perish. Thou would go the natural way to work, What
shall I do to inherit etonall life? but it is impossible to inherit it* by any
thing that we can do; for all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags:
Isaiah 64. 6. Yea, if our doings could have done it, Christ dyed in vain;
whereas, if Christ had not dyed, we had perished every mothers child of us: 1
Cor. 15. 22. and 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Ephesians. 2. 1. Colos. 2. 13. Ezekiel. 18. 4. John
11. 50. Romans 5. 6. 8. and 14. 9. 1 Cor. 15. 3. Matthew. 18. 11.

O fool! do thou not know that our sins are his sins, and his
righteousness our righteousness: Jer. 23. 6. P^al. 4. 1. and that God
esteems of faith above all other graces, deeds, or acts of thine? as what did
our Savior answer, when the people asked him, What shall we do that we might
work the works of God? The work of God is, that ye believe on him whom he
has sent: John 6. 28, 29. and yet thou talkest of thy worthiness, and thou
take this for humility too, but it is pride; for if thou would deny thy
self, and be nothing in thine own eyes, renounce thine own righteousness,
and wholly and only rest on thy Savior Jesus Christ for thy salvation, thou
would not hope the more in regard of thine own worthiness, nor yet doubt
in respect of thine own unworthiness. But thou would first be worth^, and
deserve of God; and then accept of Christ, and deserve Christ at Gods hands, by
thy good works, and graces: which pride of thine, and opinion of merit, is a
greater sin then all thy other sins which thou complainest of: And except
you do abandon it, and wholly rely upon the grace, and free mercy of God for
salvation, Christ shall profit you nothing: Gal. 2. 16. and 5. 1. to 7. Colos.
3. 11. for nothing is avaylable to salvation but faith, which works by love,
Gal. 5. 6. whence it is called righteousness through faith: Verse 5. Faith is
the staff, whereupon we stay our selves, in life and death; by faith we are
blessed: Gal. 3. 9. by faith we rejoice in tribulation: Romans 5. 2. by faith we
have access unto God: Eph^s. 3. 12. by faith we overcome the world: 1 John 5.
4. the flesh: Gal. 5. 24. and this is the shield whereby we quench the fiery
darts of Satan, and resist his power: Ephesians 6. 16. Yea, whosoever seeks to be
justified by the Law, they are abolished from Christ, and fallen from grace,
Gal. 5. 4. Stand fast therefore in the liberty, wherewith Christ has made us
free, and be not taugled again with the yoke of bondage. And say, Lord we are
not worthy to be servants, and thou make us sons; nay, heirs, and cohe^res
with thee, of everlasting glory.

Objection. I grant the Lord is merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and
abundant in goodness and truth, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin:
but he is just as well as merciful, and therefore he will not acquit the
wicked, Exodus 34. 6, 7. but reward them according to their works: Revelations
20. 12, 13. and 22. 12.

Answer. He will therefore pardon all thy sins, (if thou unfaignedly repent,
and wholly rely upon Christ for thy salvation by a lively faith) because he is
just: for as the Lord cannot in justice let sin go unpunished, (for the wages
of sin is death: Romans 6. 23. Death in the person, if not in the surety; and
therefore has punished the sins of all men, either in his Son, or will
thoroughly punish them in the parties themselves) so the same justice will not
admit, that the same sins should be twice punished; once in our Savior, and
again in the faithful: or that a debt once paid, should be required the
second time: 1 John 1. 9. Now that Christ has sufficiently satisfied for all
the sins of the faithful, and paid our debt even to the utmost farthing; it
is evident by many places of Scripture, as Isay 53. 4, 5. 2 Cor. (...). 21.
Heb. 9. 26. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Romans 3. 25, 26. 1 John 1. 7. 9. and sundry others.

Are we bound to perform perfect obedience to the Law? he performed it for us:
were we for our disobedience subject to the sentence of condemnation, the curse
of the Law, and death of body and soul; he was condemned for us, and bor^ the
curse of the Law; he dyed in our steed an ignominious death: did we deserve the
anger of God; he endured his fathers wrathful displeasure, that so he might
reconcile us to hi^ Father, and set us at liberty. He that deserved no sorrow
s^lt much, that we who deserved much might feel none: and by his wounds we
are healed, Isaiah 53. 5. Adam ^ate the Apple, Christ paid the Price. In a
word, whatsoever we owed, Christ discharged; what soever we deserved, he
suffered; if not in the self same pun^shments: (for he being God could not
suffer the eternal torments of Hell) yet in propo^tio^, the dignity of his
person (being God and Man) giving value unto his temporary punishments, and
making them o^ more value and worth, then if all the world should have suffer^d
the eternal to^ments of Hell: so^ it is more sor one that is etern^ll to die,
then for others to d^e (...)ally. Therefore was the Son of God m^de the S^^n^
of man, that the Sons of men might be made the S(...)s of God; and therefore
was he both G^d and M^n: lest being in every respect God, he had been too great
to suffer for man; or being in every respect man, he had been too weak ^o
satisfy God.

Seeing therefore our Savior Christ has fully discharged our d^bt, and made
full satisfaction to his Fathers justice: God cannot in equity exact of us a
second payment, no m^re than the Creditor may justly require that his debt
should be twic^ paid; once by the Su^ety, (...) by the Principal.

Again (...), (...) ^he Lords Covenant made with his Church, and committed to
writing, Jer. 31. 34 (...) ^6, 17. ^s^lm. 32. 10. Isay. 55. 7. Ezck. 18. 21,
22, 23. and 33. 11. Mal. 3. 17. Consirmed and ratified by his seals, the
Sacraments; together with his Oath, that there might be no place left for
doubting: for God willing more abundantly to show unto the Heirs of promise,
the stablenesse of ^is counsel; bound himself by an Oath, that by two
immutable things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might have
strong consolation, as the Apostle speaks, Heb. 6. 17, 18.

And lest the asslicted conscience should object, that he entered into covenant,
and made these promises to the Prophets, Apostles, and holy men of God; but not
to such heinous and rebellious sinners, who have most justly deserved, that God
should power out upon them the Vials of his w^ath, and those fearful
punishments threatened in the Law: All the promises made in the Gospel are
general, ind^f^^ite, and universal, excluding none that turn from their
sins by unf^ined repentance, and believe in Christ Jesus, resting on him
alone for their Salvatino, as appears, Isay 55. 1. Ezekiel. 33. 11. Mark 16. 16.
John 3. 14, 15, 1. 5, 36. and 6. 37, 40. Acts 10. 43. 1 John 2. 1. Neither is
there any limitation or execption of this or that sin; for be they never so
grievous and manifold, yet if we perform the condition of faith and
repentance, they cannot debar us from receiveing the benefit of Gods mercy,
and Christ's merits, as appears (...)y 1. 18. Titus 2. 14. 1 John 1. 7, 9.

And theresore unless thou conceivest of God, that he is unjust in his
dealing, untrue in his word, a covenant breaker; yea, a perjured person (which
were most ho^^ible bl^sphemy once to imagine) thou must undoubtedly assurethy
self, that he will pardon and forgive thee all thy sins, be they in number
never so many and innumerable, or in nature and quality never so heinous and
damnable, if thou turnest unto him by unfaigned repentance, and layest hold
upon Christ by a true and lively faith. For consider, does the Lord say he will
extend his mercy unto all that come unto him? does he invite every one? does he
say I would have all men saved, and none to perish? and do thou say, nay but
he will not extend his mercy unto me, he will have me to perish, because I am
a grievous sinner? What is this but in effect, and at a distance to contradict
the Lord, and give the lie to truth it self?

Indeed God says not, Believe thou John, or Thomas, and thou shall be saved,
but he says, Whosoever believes, and is baptized shall be saved, which is as
good. And yet thou exceptest thy self, he excludes none, and do thou exclude
one, and that one thy self? he would have all men saved, and thou come in
with thy exceptive, all but me; why thee? A precious singularity, but beware
of it: For whereas others that believe not the threatenings, flatter away their
souls in a presumptuous confidence; thou by not believing the promises wilt
cast away thine, in a sullen prodigious desperateness, if thou take not heed.
For Insidelity on both sides is the cause of all, of presumption in them, of
despair in thee, of impiety in every one.

But be better advised, believe the Lord who never brake his word with any
soul. Thou will give credit to an honest man's bare word, and have thou no
assiance in the merciful promises of God, past to thee by Word, Oath, Scales,
Scriptures, Sacraments, the death of his own Son, and (I presume) the
spirits testimony, if not now yet at other times; take heed what thou do, for
certainly nothing offends God more, then the not taking of his word.

Section 7.
Ob. I know well that Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness, unto
every one that believes, Romans 10. 4. But I want says.

Answ. This is the objection I expected (for the true Christian is as fearful
to entertain a good opinion of himself, as the false is unwilling to be driven
from it.) But is it so? or does Satan only tell thee so? I know it is not so, I
know that thou beleevest with some mixture of unbelief, and that this is but a
slander of Satan's; for as Satan slandereth us to God, Job 1. 9. and God to us,
Genesis 3. 4, 5. so he slandereth us to our selves, Job 16. 9. But least thou
should think I slander Satan; Know, that you believe, even whiles you
complain* of unbelief: for as there could be no shadow, if there were no
light, so there cannot be this fear, where there is no faith. They that know
not Christ, think it no such great matter to lose him. But if God once say,
this is my Son, Satan will say, if thou be the son of God, Matthew. 3. 17.
and 4. 3. That Divine testimony did not allay his malice, but exasperate it.
Neither can the happy building of, Lord I believe, stand without that column
to under-prop it, Help thou mine unbelief. And he that doubts not of his
estate, his estate is much to be doubted; doubting and resolution are not meet
touch-stones of our success: a presumptuous considence common^y goes bleeding
home, when an humble fear returns in triumph. As it fared between the
Philistims and Israel, 1 Samuel 17. 10, 11. The Philistims and Goliath were
exceeding confident of the victory, but Saul and all Israel much discouraged,
and greatly afraid: yet Israel got the victory, and the Philistims with their
great Goliath were overcome. Verse. 51, 52. They that are proudly secure of their
going to Heaven, do not so frequently come thither, as they that are afraid of
their going to Hell.

As it is in this world for temporal things, so for the world to come in
spiritual things; Cantant pauperes, lugent divites, poor men sing, and rich
men cry. Who is so melancholy as the rich worldling? and who sings so merry a
note, as he that cannot change a groat? so they that have store of grace,
mourn for want of it; and they that indeed want it, chante their abundance.
But the hopes of the wicked fail them when they are at highest, whereas Gods
children find those comforts in extremity, which they durst not expect.

As there is nothing more usual, then for a secure conscience to excuse when
it is guilty, so nothing more common then for an afflicted conscience to
accuse, when it is innocent; and to lay an heavy burden upon it self, where
the Lord gives a plain discharge: but a bleeding wound is better then that
which bleeds not. Some men go crying to Heaven, some go laughing and sleeping
to Hell. Some consciences as well as men, lie speechless before departure, they
spend their days in a dream, and go from Earth to Hell, as Jon as from
Israel toward. Tarsh sh, fast a sleep: And the reason is, they dream their
case is passing good; like a man which dreams in his sleep that he is rich,
and honorable, and it joys him very much; but awaking, all is vanished like
smoke: yea, they hope undoubtedly to go to Heaven, as all that came out of
Egypt hoped to go into Canaan, and inherit the blessed promises: when only
Caleb and Joshua did enter, who provoked not the Lord. And the reason of this
reason is, whereas indeed they are Wolves, the Devil and their own credulity
persuades them that they are Lambs.

The Philosopher tells us, that those Creatures which have the greatest hearts,
as the Stag, the Do, the Hare, the Coney, and the Mouse, are the most
fearful: and therefore it may be God refusing Lions, and Eagles, the King of
Beasts, and Queen of Birds, appointed the gentle Lamb, the fearful Dove for
his sacrifices: A broken and contrite heart, O God, thou will net despise:
Psalm. 51. 17. And sure I am, Christ calls to him only weary, and heavy laden
sinners: Matthew. 11. 28. not such as feel no want of him, Mark 2. 17. and will
fill only such with comfort, as hunger and thirst after righteousness; not
such as are in their conceit righteous enough without him: Luke 1. 53. Matthew.
15. 24. And yet it is strange, (yea a wonder) to see how many truly humbled
sinners, who have so tender consciences, that they dare not yield to the least
evil, for the worlds goods, and refuse no means of being made better, turn
every probation into reprobation, every dejection into rejection, and if they
be cast down, they cry out they are cast away: who may fitly be compared to
Arteman in Plutarch, who when ever he went abroad, had his servants to carry a
Canopy over his head, least the Heavens should fall and crush him: or to a
certain foolish melancholy Bird, which (as some tell) stands always but upon
one leg, least her own weight should si^ke her into the Center of the Earth;
holding the other over her head, least the Heavens should fall.

Yet he not offended, I cannot think the worse of thee; for good is that fear
which hinders us from evil acts, and makes us the more circumspect. And God
has his end in it, who would have the sins to die, but the sinner to live.

Yea, in some respect thou art the better to be thought of, or at least the
less to be feared, for this thy fear: for no man so truly loves, as he that
fears to offend; as Salvianus glosses upon those words, Blessed is the man
that fears always: And which is worth the observing, this fear is a
commendation often remembered in Holy Scripture, as a special and Infallible
mark of Gods Children: as for example, Job (says the Holy Ghost) was a just
man, and one that feared God, Job 1. 1. Simeon a just man, and one that feared
God: Luke 2. 25. Cornelius a devout man, and one that feared God: Acts 10. 3.
And so of Father Abraham, a man who feared God: Genesis 22. 12. Joseph, a man who
feared God: Genesis 42. 18. The Midwives in Egypt feared God: Exodus 1. 17. so
that evermore the fearing of God (as being the beginning of wisdom) is
mentioned as the chief note, which is as much as to say, if the fearing of God
once go before, working of righteousness will instantly follow after,
according to that of the wise man: He that fears the Lord will do good.

And this for thy comfort, when Mary Magdalen sorrowed, and wept for her
sins: Luke 7. 50. Christ tells her, Thy faith has made thee whole:
intimating, that this wesping, this repenting faith, is faith indeed. And the
like to the Woman with the bloody issue, who presuming but to touch the hem of
his garment, fell down before him with fear and trembling: Mark 5. 27. to
35. And that humble Canaanite, Matthew. 15. 22. to 29. And that importunate
blind man, Luke 18. 38. to 43. as if this humble, this praying faith, were
only the saving faith, Neither can thy estate be had, for as Saint Ambrose
told Monica weeping for her seduced Son, Fieri non potest, ut filius istarum
lachrymarum pereat: It cannot be that the Son of those tears should ever
perish.

Wherefore lift up thy self thou timorous fainting heart, and do not suspect
every spot for a plague token; do not die of a mere conceit, for as the end
of all motion is rest, so the end of all thy troubles shall be peace: even
where the days are perpetual Sabbaths, and the diet undisturbed feasts.

But as an empty vessel bung'd up close, though you throw it into the midst of
the Sea, will receive no water, so all pleas are in vain to them that are
deasened with their own fears: for as Mary would not be comforted with the
sight and speech of Angels, no not with the sight and speech of Jesus himself,
till he made her know that he was Jesus; so until the holy spirit sprinkleth
the conscience, with the blood of Christ, and sheddeth his love into the heart,
nothing will do. No Creature can take off weath from the conscience, but he
that set it on. Wherefore the God of peace give you the peace of God, which
passes all understanding. Yea, O Lord, speak thou Music to the wounded
conscience, Thunder to the seared; that thy justice may reclaim the one, thy
merey releeve the other, and thy favor comfort us all, with peace and
salvation in Jesus Christ.

Section 8.
But secondly, if this will not satisfy, call to thy remembrance the times
past, and how it has been with thee formerly; as David did in thy very case:
Psalm. 77. 2. to 12. And likewise Job, Chap. 31. for as still waters represent
any object in their bottom clearly, so those that are troubled, or agitated,
do it but dimly, and imper^ectly. But if ever thou had true faith begotten in
thy heart, John 1. 13. by the ministry of the word, Rom* 10. 17. James 1. 18,
21. and the Spirits powerful working with it, John 3. 3. 5. 8. whereby thine
heart was drawn to take Christ, and apply him a Savior to thine own soul;
so that thou were forced to go out of thy self, and rely wholly and only on
his merits: and that it further manifested it self by working a ha^red of
sin, and an apparent change in thy whole life, by dying unto sin, and
living unto righteousness; and that thou have not since, returned to thine old
sins, like the Dog to his vomit: if it has som^time brought forth in th^e
the sweet fruit of heavenly and spiritual j^y, if it has purified thine heart
in some measure from noisome lusts, and affections; as secret pride,
self-love, hyp^c^isie, carnal confidence, wrath, ma^ic^, and the like: so
that the spirit within thee sighteth against the slesh. If thou can now say,
I love the godly, because they are godly, 1 John 3. 14. and have an hungring
after Christ, and after a greater measure of heavenly and spiritual graces;
and more lively tokens of his love, and favor communicated unto thee: My soul
for thine, thou have given ^alse evidence against thy self; for as in a gloomy
day there is so much light whereby we may kn^w it to be day, and not night; so
there is something in a Christi^n under a cloud, whereby he may be discerned to
be a true believer, and not an hypocrite. But to make it manifest to thy self,
that thou art so:

Know first, that where there is any one grace in truth, there is every one in
their measure. If thou art sure thou have love, I am sure thou have says: for
they are as inseparable as fire and ^eat, life and motion, the root and the
sap, the Sun and its light: and so of other graces. Or do thou feel that
Christ is thy great^st j^y, sin thy greatest sorrow; that when thou can not
feel the presence of the spirit in thy heart, thou go mourning;
notwithstanding all other comforts? assuredly as that holy Martyr said, If thou
were not a wedding Child, thou could^st never so heartily mourn for the
absence of the B(...)-groom. Thus I might go on, but a few Grapes will show
that the Plant is a Vine, and not a Thorn. Take but notice of this, and
several graces will one strengthen another, as stones in an A^ch. As for
example, Mr Peacock Fellow of a House, being asslicted in consci^nce, (as thou
art) and at the point of despair; when some Ministers asked whether they should
pray for him, answered By no means do not so dishonor God, as to pray for
such a Reprobate as I am: but his young Pupi^^ standing by, said, (with tears
in his eyes) Cert^inly a Reprobate could never be so tender of Gods dishonor;
which he well considering, was thereby comf^rted and restored: when neither he
with his learning, nor any other Ministers with their sage advice, could d^e
any good.

Again secondly, if ever thou had true faith wrought in thy heart, be not
discouraged; for as the former graces show, that thou have with Mary made
choice of that better part, which shall never be taken from thee: So this
grace of faith is Christ's wedding Ring, and to whomsoever he gives it, he gives
himself with it; we may lose the sense, but never the essence of it: It may be
eclipsed, not extinguished: Fides concussa, non excussa: The gifts and calling
of God are without repentance: as it is Romans 11. 29. Friends are unconstant,
riches, honors, pleasures, are unconst^nt; the world is unconstant, and life
it self is unconstant; but I the Lord change not: Malachi 3. 6.

In a swoune the soul does not exercise her functions; a man neither ^e^res,
nor sees, nor feels, yet she is still in the body. The F^anticke man in his
m^d fits, does not exercise reason; yet he has it: he loses the use for a
time, not the habit. Yea, a Sober man has not alway^s the (...) of his senses,
reason, and understanding, as in his sleep: shall we therefore conclude that
this man is senseless, unre^son^ble, and without unde^st^nding? it were most
absurd: for if we have pationce but a while, our argument will appear
manifestly false.

Trees (and so we are fitly called) be not dead in winter, (which resembles
the time of adversity) because the s^p is shut up in the root; and confined
thither by the cold f^osts, that they cannot show themselves in the production
of leaves and fruits: for by experience we know, that for the present they
live, and secretly suck nourishment out of the Earth; which makes them spring
and revive again, when Summer comes: Yea, even whiles they are grievously
shaken with the winds, and nipped with cold frosts, they are not hurt thereby;
but contrarily they take deeper root, have their worms and ka^kers killed by it:
and so are prepared, and made fit to bring sorth more fruit, when the
comfortable Spring approaches, and the sweet showers, and warm Sunbeams
fall, and descend upon them. Elementary bodies, lighten and darken, cool and
warm, die and revive, as the Sun presents, or absents it self from them. And
is not Christ to our souls the only Sun of righteousness, and fountain of
all comfort? so that if he withdraw himself but a little, we become like
plants in the Winter, quite withered; yea in appearance stark dead: or like
Trees, void both of leaves and fruit; though even then there remains faith in
the heart, as sap in the root, or as fire ranked up in the ashes.

Which faith, though it be not the like strong, yet it is the like precious
faith to that of Abraham's: whereby to lay hold, and put on the perfect
righteousness of Christ. The Woman that was diseased with an Issue, did but
touch, and with a trembling hand, and but the hem of his garment, and yet went
away both healed, and comforted.

Well might I doubt of my salvation, says Bradford, feeling the weakness of
my faith, love, hope, etc. if these were the causes of my salvation, but there
is no other c^use of it; or his mercy, but his mercy. Wherefore have thou but a
touch of sorrow for sin, a spark of hope, a grain of faith in thy heart;
thou art safe enough. The Anchor lies deep and is not seen, yet is the stay
of all. The Bladder blown, may sloat upon the sloud,
But cannot sink nor stick in silthy mud.
But thou dreamest of a faith without doubting, which some doatingly boast they
have: but as no righteousness can be perfect without sin, so no assurance
can be perfect without doub^ing: Take the evenest balances, and the most
equal weights; yet at the first putting in, there will be some inequality,
though presently after they settle themselves in a just poyse. Sin is a cloud
that often hinders the Sun from our eyes, yet it is still a Sun; the vision
or feeling of this comfort may be sometime suspended, the Union with Christ is
never dissolved.

A usual thing with (...)eleevers to have their ebbing and flowing, waxing and
wayning, Summer and Winter; to be sometimes so comfortable and courageous, that
we can say with David, Though I were in the valley of death, yet would I fear
none ill: Psalm 23. 4, other whiles again so deaded, and dejected in our
spirits, that we are like him when he said, One day I stall dye by the hand of
Saul: 1 Samuel 27. 1. sometimes* so strong in faith, that we can overcome the
greatest assaults; and with Peter can walk upon the swelling waves: by and by
so faint, and brought to so low an ebb, that we fall down even in far
less^r dangers; ^s Peter began to sink at the rising of the wind, Matthew. 14.
29, 30. And indeed, if the wings of our faith be clipped, either by our own
sins, or Satan's temptations, how should not our spirits ly grovelling on the
ground?

Section 9.
But thirdly and lastly, (for I hasten) suppose thou art at the last cast, even
at the very brinke of despair; and that thy conscience speaks nothing but
bitter things of Gods wrath, hell and damnation; and that thou have no feeling
of faith, or grace: yet know-that it is Gods use (and I wish we could all take
notice of it) to work in, and by contraries: For inst^nce, in creating of the
world, he brought light out of darkness, and made all things not of
something, but of nothing; clean contrary to the course of Nature.

In his preserving of it, he has given us the Rainebow, which is a sign of
rain, as a certain pledge that the world shall never the second time be
drowned. He caused Elias his sacrifice to burn in the midst of water, and
fetches hard stones out of the midst of thin vapors. When he meant ^o
bless Jacob, he wrestled with him as an Adversary, even till he lamed him:
When he meant to prefer Joseph to the Throne, he threw him down into the
Dungeon; and to a go^den chain about his neck, he laded him with Iron ones
about his legs. Thus Christ opened the eyes of the blind, by anointing them
with elay and spittle; more likely to put them out: And would not cure Lazarus
till after he was dead, buried, and stunke again; no question to teach us,
that we must be cast down by the Law, before we can be raised up by the
Gospel: that we must dye unto sin, before we can live unto righteousness:
and become fools, before we can be t^uly wise.

In the work of Redemption he gives life, not by life but by death, and that a
most cursed death; making that the best instrument of life, which was the worst
kind of death: Optimum fecit instrumentum vitae, quod ^rat pessimum mortis
genus.

In our effectual vocation, he calls us by the Gospel unto the Jews a
stumbling-bl^cke, and unto the world mere foolishness: And when it is his
pleasure that any should depend upon his goodness, and providence, he makes
them feel his anger, and to be nothing in themselves; that they may rely
altogether upon him.

Thus God works joy out of fear, light out of darkness; and brings us to
the Kingdom of Heaven, by the Gates of Hell: according to that 1 Samuel 2. 6, 7.
And wherein does thy case differ? he sends his Sergeant to arrest thee for thy
debt; commands thee and all thou h^ft to be sold, but why? only to show thee
thy misery without Christ, that so thou may seek to him for mercy: for
although he hides his fatherly affections, as Joseph once did his brotherly,
his meaning is in conclusion to forgive thee every farthing: Matthew 18. 26, 27.

And do thou make thy slight sufferings an argument of his displeasure? for
shame mutter not at the matter, but be silent: It is not said, God will not
suffer us to be tempted a^ all, but that we shall not be temp^ed above that we
are able to bear; 1 Cor. 10. 13. And assure thy self, what ever thy
sufferings be, thy faith shall not fail to get the victory; as oil
over-swimmes the greatest quantity of water you can power upon it. True, let
none presume; (no not the most righteous) for he shall searcely be saved: 1
Pet. 4. 18. yet, let him not despair, for he shall be saved: Romans 8. 35.

Only accept with all thankfulness the mercy offered, and apply the promises
to thine own soul: for the benefit of a good thing, is in the use; wisdom
is good, but not to us, if it be not exercised; cloth is good, but not to us,
except it be worn; the light is comfortable, but not to him that will live in
darkness: a prefervative in our pocket never taken, cannot yield us health;
nor bags of money being ever sealed up, do us any pleasure; no more will the
promises, no nor Christ himself, that only summum bonum, except they are
applied: Yea, better there were no promises, then not applied. The Physician is
more off^nded at the contempt of his Physic in the Patient, then with the
loathsomenesse of the disease. And this I can assure thee, if the blood of
Christ be applied to thy soul, it will soon stench the blood of thy
conscience; and keep thee from bleeding to death: 1 John 1. 7.

But secondly, in stead of mourning continually, as the tempter bids thee;
rather rejoice continually, as the Apostle bids thee: 1 Thessalonians. 5. 16. Neither
think it an indifferent thing, to rejoice, or not rejoice; but know that we
are commanded to rejoice, to show that we break a Commandment if we rejoice
not: Yea, we cannot believe if we rejoice not; for faith in the commandments
breeds obedience, in the threatenings fear, in the promises comfort. True, thou
think thou do well to mourn continually; yea, it is the common disease of
the innocentest souls: but thou do very ill in it; for when you forget to
rejoice in the Lord, then you begin to muse, and after to fear, and after to
distrust, and at last to despair: and then every thought seems to be a sin
against the Holy Ghost. Yea, how many sins does the afflicted conscience record
against it self; repenting for breaking this Commandment, and that
Commandment; and never repents for breaking this Commandment, Rejoice
evermore?

But what is the reason? Ignorance: thou think thy self poor and miserable,
and only therefore think so, because thou know not thy riches and
happiness in Christ: for else thou would say with the Prophet Habbakuk, in
the want of all other things, I will rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in the God
of my salvation: Habbak 3. 17, 18. Thou would rejoice that thy name is
written in the books of life, as our Savior injoynes, Luke 10. 20. though thou
had nothing else to rejoice in.

But it is nothing to be blessed, until we understand our selves to be so:
wherefore

Thirdly, wait Gods leisure with patience, and hold fast to him in all
pressures: Time (says Seneca) is the best Physic for most diseases, for the
body, and so likewise for the soul. If it be an afflicted conscience, waiting
Gods leisure; for the assurance of his love is the best remedy: and so in all
others cases.

Section 10.
Objection. But when will there be an end of this long disease? this tedious
affliction? this heavy yoke of bondage? etc.

Answer. It is a sign of cold love, scarce to have begun to suffer for Christ,
and presently to gape for an end: It was a far better speech of one, Lord,
give me what thou will, as much as thou will, when thou will: Thou art Gods
Patient, prescribe not thy Physician. It is the Goldsmiths skill to know how
long his gold must be in the Crusible: neither takes he it out of that hot
bath, till it be sufficiently purified.

What if the Lord for a time forbear coming, as Samuel did to Saul; that he
may try what is in thee? and what thou will do, or suffer for him, that has
do^e and suffered so much for thee? as why did God se^ Noah about building the
Arc, an hundred and twenty years, when a small time might have finished it?
It was for the trial of his patience. Thus he led the Israelites in the
Deserts of Arabia, forty years; whereas a man may travel from Ramesis in
Egypt, to any part of Canaan in forty d^yes: this God did to prove them, that
he might know what was in their hearts: Deuteronomy. 8. 2. He promised Abraham a
Son, in whom he should be blessed; this he^ p^rformed not in thirty years
after. He gave David the Kingdom, and anointed him by Samuel; yet was he not
possessed of it in many years: insomuch that he said, Mine eyes fail for thy
Word, Psalm. 119. 123. Joseph has a promise that the Sunn^ and Moon should do*
him r^verence, but first he must be boun^ in the Dungeon. This God does to ^ry
(...) for in (...) (...) we show our selves, and our (...).

Wh^^ says God to his (...) Psalm. 75. When (...) I ^ee (...) ^ime, I will
execute jud(...)meant (...) Verse a. he does not ^^y, (...) you think the time
convenient. Let us tarry a little the Lords leisure, deliverance will come,
pear will come, joy will come; in mean while to be patient in misery, makes
misery no misery.

Again secondly, he may delay his coming for other ends of greater
consequence: Marthae and Mary send to Christ, as desiring him to come and
restore Lazarus their sick brother to health^ John 11. 3. expecting him
without delay; now he loved both Martha, and her Sister, and Lazarus: Verse 5.
yet he neglects coming for many days, lets him dye, be put in the grave
until he stanke, but what of all this? he that would not restore sick Lazarus
to health, restored dead Lazarus to life; which was a greater mercy then they
either did, or durst ask. Neither did this only increase their joy, and
thankfulness, give them occasion ever after to believe, and hope; above, and
against all hope: but it made many of the Jews believe in him, which before
did not. Verse 45.

Thirdly and lastly, he delays thee the longer, that when he comes, he may
bring with him the greater recompense of reward: for he will comfort us
according to the days we have been afflicted, and according to the years
that we have seen evil: Psalm. 90. 15.

Neither will he stay overlong; for behold, says he, I come quickly, and my
reward is with me; to give every man according as his works shall be: Revel.
22. 12. and suffering is accounted none of the meanest works. So that the
harder the conflict, the more glorious the conquest. Wherefore hold out yet a
little, and help shall not be wanting to the co(...)batants; nor a crown to
the conquerours. Yea, sight to the last minute, for the eye of thy Savior is
upon thee; if thou faint, to cheer th^e; if thou stand to it, to second thee;
if thou conquer, to crown thee: whereas no combat, no conquest; no conquest,
no triumph.

Objection. But my sufferings are so great, that if they continue, I shall
never be able to hold out.

Answer. True, if thou trust^st to thine own strength, for perseverance is the
gift of God; yea, it is he that works in us both to will and to do at his
good pleasure: Phil. 2. 13. first man's will is a fugitive Onesimus, and God
must call home that runnagate, subdue that rebel, besore we can choose that
which is good. Neither when we have begun, can we continue: perficit qui
efficit, He that begun a good work in (...), will perform it: Phil. 1. 6.
Jesus is the founder and finisher of our faith, Hebr. 12. 2. Neither can we of
our selves suffer for him: Datur pati. It is given to us to suffer for his
sake: Phil. 1. 29. Without me ye can do nothing, John 15. 5. not parum, but
nihil; But in him, and through him all things. I can do all things through him
that strengthens me: Phil. 4. 13. In our selves we are weak Captives, in him
we are more then Conquerours: Romans 8. 37. Whence it is, many sick men
undergo patiently such pressures, as when they were in health, they would not
have believed they could have borne.

The truth of grace (be the measure never so small) is always blessed with
perseverance; because that little is fed with an everlasting spring. Yea, if
grace but conquer us first, we by it shall conquer all things else, whether it
be corruptions within us, or temptations without us: for as the fire which came
down from Heaven in Elias time, licked up all the water, to show that it came
from God; so will this fire spend all our corruptions: No affliction without,
or corruption within, shall quench it. Wherefore do but thy endeavor to hold
out, I mean with patience; (for that Spirit which came in the likeness of a
Dove, will not come but upon a Dove) and pray for divine assistance, this
sadness shall end in gladness, this sorrow in singing.

But above all pray unto God, for Prayer is the Key of Heaven, as Saint Austin
terms it; and the hand of a Christian, which is able to reach from Earth to
Heaven, and to take for^h every manner of good gift ou^ of the Lords Treasury.
Did not Elias by turning this Key one way, lock up the whole Heaven from
raining for three years and six months; and another while by turning the same
Key of Prayer, as much another way, in the turning of a hand, unlock all the
doors and windows of Heaven, and set them wide open, that it rained; and the
Earth brought forth her fruit.

Yea, as all Sampsons strength lay in his hair, so all our strength lies in
Prayer: Prayers and tears are the Churches Armor, Prayers and patience her
weapons; and therefore when Peter was imprisoned by cruel Herod, the
Congregation joined their forces to pray for him; and so brake his chains,
blew open the Iron Gates, and fetched him out: Acts 12. 4. to 18. Arm^
Christianorum in adversis, alia esse non debent quam patientia, and precatio,
says Salmeren.

Yea, Prayer is so powerful, that it commands all things in Heaven and
Earth: It commands all the four Elements, Air, James 5. 17, 18. Fire,
Ecclesiasticus 48. 3. Dan. 3. 27. Water, Exodus 14. 21. and 15. 25. Earth,
Numbers 16. 31, 32, 33. Nay, the Prayer of one devout man, is able to conquer
an host of enemies in battle: Exodus 17. 11. What shall I say? it has made
the Sun stand still in the Firmament one while, go back another; setcht fire
and haylestones from Heaven, thrown down the walls of Jericho, subdued
Kingdoms, stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of Fire, etc. Yea,
Prayer is so potent, that it raises the dead: 1 Kings 17. 21. overcomes
Angels: Genesis 19. 23. casts out Devils: Matthew. 17. 21. and that which is yet
more wonderful, overcomes him that cannot be overcome; and mastereth even God
himself: for does not the Lord say to Moses, let me alone? and Moses would not
let him alone, till he had obtained his petition: Exodus 32. 10. 14. And again
to Jacob, wrestling with him, let me go; and Jacob would not let him go,
until he had prevayled* Genesis 32. 16.

Wherefore Pray upon all occasions, and that without doubting: say not to God,
as the Leaper said to Christ, If thou will, thou can make me clean* for he
both can, and will, as that very text Matthew. 8. 2, 3. proves. Yea, I would to
God we were but so willing as he is; for he desires to be desired: Neither has
he his own will, except we have ours. Christ does ask no more of us, but only
that we would vouchsafe to ask him. True, the fainting heart that has waited
some time, may with the Psalmist mutter out some such speech as this, Has God
forgotten to be gracious? Psalm. 77. 9. But if he forgets any of his, he has
lost his old wont; for who can nominate one, that ever came unto Christ with
any lawful suit, that received a repulse? Who ever asked any thing of him,
which was profitable for him to receive, and did not obtain his suit? Did not
the sick ever receive their health? the lame their limbs? the blind their
sight? Did ever any sinner implore the forgiveness of his sins, which did
not receive full remission and pardon? Yea, did not this our gracious King, and
Redeemer, prevent his poor miserable subjects with his grace, in giving before
they had the grace to ask; or more then they desired? The sick of the Palsy
asking but cure of his disease, received not only that, but the remission of
his sins also: Matthew. 9. Zacheus desired but to see his face, he became his
guest; and gave him salvation to bo^^e: Luke 19. The Woman of Samaria requested
but elementall and common water, he offered unto her the water of life: John
4. The people followed him to be fed by miracle with corporal food, he
offered unto them the bread of life: John 6. The poor blind man desired but
his bodily sight, Christ illuminated the eyes of his soul: John 9.

Neither has honors changed manners with him, as is usual amongst men; for
he is a God immutable in goodness, and without change, or shadow of turning:
James 1 17. so that if thou speak, he will hear; and answer thy suit in
supporting thee: so that thou shall be sure to persevere, and hold out unto the
end.

Section 11.
Objection. But I have no evidence of divine assistance, nor can I pray for it
to purpose.

Answer. We have the presence of Gods Spirit, and grace many times, and feel
it not; yea, when we complain for want of it, (as Pilate asked Christ what was
the truth, when the Truth stood before him.) The stomach finds the best
digestion, even in sleep, when we least perceive it; and whiles we are most
awake, this power works in us, either to further strength, or disease,
without our knowledge of what is done within; and on the other side, that man
is most dangerously sick, in whom nature decays without his feeling, without
his complaint. To know our selves happy, is good; but woe were to us
Christians, if we could not be happy, and know it not. As touching Prayer,
every one is not so happy as Steven was, to be most servent when they are most
in pain; yea, many in time of sickness (by reason of the extremity of pain)
can hardly pray at all: whence Saint James wishes us in affliction to pray our
selves, but in case of sickness to send for the Elders; that they may, as
those in the Gospel, offer up the sick person to God in their prayers, being
unable to present their own case: James 5. Verse. 13, 14, 15. Yea, it were
miserable for the best Christian, if all his former Prayers and Meditations did
not serve to aid him in his last straights, and meet together in the Center of
his extremity; yielding, though not sensible relief, yet secret benefit to the
soul: whereas the worldly man in this case, having not laid up for this
hour, has no comfort from God, or from others, or from himself.

Besides, thou art happy in this, there is not the poorest and meanest of Gods
Children, but as he has the benefit of Christ's intercession in Heaven: Romans 8.
34. John 16. 26. so has he also the benefit of the Prayers of all the Saints
on Earth: w^e have the graces and gifts, each of other in common.

Yet, because thine own Prayer is most proper; and seeing it is the minds
Ambassador to God, and never fails of success, if it be servent; (as if our
prayers want success, they want heart, their blessing is according to their
vigor) pray that thou may pray better: If thy Leg be ben(...)ed, go upon
it a little, and it will come to it self again. To which, if thou join
fasting, thou shall do well; for Prayers are made fat with fasting, as
Tertullian speaks: Yea, pray often, though thy prayers be the shorter; weak
stomachs which cannot digest large meals, feed often, and little. O faith holy
Bernard most sweetly, How often have thou (^eaning prayer) found me lamenting,
and despairing; and left me rejoicing, and triumphing!

And what though thou can not pour out thy soul in a (...)ud of words? The
Woman diseased with an Issue of blood, said but within her self, she did not
speak to be heard of others, and yet Christ heard her, and answered her
request: Matthew. 9. Verse. 21, 22.

The Lord esteems the will for the deed, and the affection for the action;
Man sees the countenance, God the heart; man the deeds, but God the meaning.
Have thou but thoughts and desires, and can thou only express them with
sighs, and groans? these s^eechlesse words, or rather no words, but a few
poor thoughts, conceived aright, pass all the flowing eloquence of
Demo^^^enes and Tully, yea, Turtullus and all the Orat^rs that ever were in in
the world; for this matter is not expressed with words, but with groanings; and
these groanings are from the blessed Spirit. A Father delights more in the
stammering of his little Child, then in the eloquence of the best Grator.

Neither is hearty prayer in our own power, but it is the gift of God, which
at some times in plentiful measure he bestows upon his children, and at
other times again he pulls back his liberal hand: that by the want
thereof, we may learn to ascribe the glory and praise of this grace to the
giver, who works in us the will and the deed: which praise otherwise, in
pride of heart, we would arrogate unto our selves, as being in our own power.
Also that we may more highly esteem it, and with more joy and diligence use
it, when we have it bestowed on us.

If it be a^ked why God reckons so highly of a few sighs and groans? and why
the prayers of the faithful are so powerful? it is, because they be not ours,
but the intercession of Gods own Spirit in us, powered out in the name of
Christ, his own Son in whom he is ever well pleased: for as for us, we know
not what to pray us we ought, but the Spirit it self makes request for us,
with sighs which cannot be expressed: Romans 8. 26. It is the Spirit whereby we
cry Abbu Father: Verse. 15. Gal. 4. 6.

Now if thou would have the Spirits assistance, and be heard of God, when
thou make supplication to him; do not (as too many do) fall into prayer
without preparation, and utter a number of words without devotion, or
affection: for no marvel if we ask and miss, when we thus ask amiss:
James 4. 3.

Neither do as Children, which never look after their Arrow; but like Daniel,
Dan. 9. take notice of thine inlargements in prayer, and of thy success after.

Nor only pray, and no more; for to pray, and to do nothing else, is in effect
to do nothing less. But let your Prayers be ushered in by Meditation, and
attended by zealous devotion; and then believing that you shall receive
whatsoever you ask in Christ's name, and according to his will, 1 John. 5. 14.
John 16. 23. God will be sure to give you that you desire, 1 John 5. 14, 15.
Mark 11. 23, 24. or that which is better for you, Deuteronomy. 34. 4, 5.

And suppose thou art not presently heard: yet continue asking still; as Peter
continued knocking till the door was opened: for after an ill harvest we must
sow, and after denyals we must woe God. Yea, if it be possible with the Woman
of Canaan, let delays, and seeming denyals, increase the strength of thy
cries. And commonly they be earnest suits, which issue from a troubled soul,
like strong streams in narrow straights, which bear down all that stands in
their way. Nothing so strong as the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, for it overcame
the roaring Lion; yet the Prayer of Faith, from the knees of humility; and a
broken heart, will conquer even that Conqueror: Matthew. 15. 28.

And thus you see that nothing can befall us without the special appointment
of our good God, who not only takes notice of our sufferings, but sweetneth
them with his presence, takes our part, stintes our enemies, and so orders
the whole, that our grief is either short, or tolerable; and that though he
is oftentimes harsh in the beginning, and progress, and late in coming; yet
he comes on the sudden, and is always comfortable in the conclusion. And
lastly, that if he defer his help, it is on purpose that our trials may be
perfect, our deliverance welcome, our recompense glorious. And may not this
comfort thee?

CHAP. XXXVII.
That stripes from the Almighty, are special tokens and pledges of his
adoption and love.

3. WE shall bear the Cross with more patience and comfort; if we consider,
that stripes from the Almighty are so far from arguing his displeasure, that
contrarily there are no better tokens and pledges of his Adoption and love; As
many (says God) as I love, I rebuke, and (...)sten: Revel. 3. 19. My Son,
says the Author to the Hebrews, out of Solomon's Proverbs, Despise not the
c^^stening of the Lord, neither faint when thou art rebuked of him: for w^^m
the Lord loves, he c^^steneth; and he (...) son whom he receives. If you
endure chaste(...), God offers himself unto you, as unto sons: for (...)
so^^e is it whom the Father chasteneth not? If therefore ye be without
correction, whereof all are partakers; then are ye ^^sta^d^, and not sons:
Heb. 12. 5. to 13. Prove 3. 11, 12. He is a Thist^^ and not good Corn, that
comes not under the Flayle. Yea, what use of the Grain it self, if it pass
not the edge of the Sickle, the stroak^ of the Flayle, the wind of the Fan^^,
the weight of the Millstone, the heat of the Oven?

Many a man's felicity drives him from God; and where happiness domineereth,
virtue is commonly banished. And does not experience show, that fear and joy,
sweet and sower, sharp and flat, one with another, do better then either
alone: for if you be too harsh, you make the Child a fool; if too f^nd, a
wanton. The bridle governes the horse, the spur quickens him; the weight upon
the line makes the Jack go, the oil upon the wheel makes it go glib, and
nimble: The sails give the speed, the ballast steadiness to the motion of the
Ship. And hereupon God weighs out to us our favors and crosses in an equal
balance; and so tempers our sorrows, that they may not oppress; and our
joys, that they may not transport us. Each one has some matter of envy to
others, and of grief to himself.

Thou dealest mercifully with us, least we should fall from thee; and
despair; thou beatest us, least we should forget thee, and so perish, (says
Saint Austin:) He that knows our frame, knows we are best when we are worst,
and live holiest when we are miserablest: wherefore by affliction he separates
the sin that he hates, from the sinner whom he loves; and we are by much the
better for this scowring. It is the wont of Fathers to hold in their own
Children, when they suffer the Children of bondmen to go at large, and do as
they list; yea, when diverse children are playing the wantons, if we see a man
take one from the rest, and whip him soundl^; we conclude, that alone to be his
Child. Yea, wise and discreet Fathers will force their Children earnestly to
apply themselves to their study, or labor; and will not let them be idle,
although it be Holy Day: yea, constrain them to sweat, and oftentimes to
w(...), when their Mothers would s^t them on their l^pp^^, and keep them at
home all day in the shadow, ^o^ ^u^ning their white. Jacob is bound prentise,
while proph^^e Esau rides a hunting: Of Elkana^ his two wives, (...) was in
more esteem with God, yet barren; and Peninnah less, yet she was fruitful. 1 Samuel 1. They were all gross inconsequences; for Gedeon to argue Gods absence
by affliction, his presence by deliverances, and the unlikelihood of success,
by his own disability: Judges 6. 13. 15. The valiant man was here weak; weak
in faith, weak in discourse; for rather should he have inferred Gods presence
upon their correction; for wheresoever God chasti^eth, there he is; yea, there
he is in mercy: nothing more proves us his, then his stripes; he will not
bestow whipping, where he loves not: fond nature, indeed, thinks God should
not suffer the wind to blow upon his dear ones, because her self makes this
use of her own indulgence; but none (out of the place of torment) have
suffered so much as his dear Children. If he had said we are Idolaters,
therefore the Lord has forsaken us, because we have forsaken him; instead of
(the LORD has delivered us unto the Midianites, therefore he has forsaken us)
the sequel had been as good, as now it is faulty; for sins, not afflictions,
argue God absent: Yea, commonly, the measure of our sufferings is according to
the measure of grace in us, and Gods love to us; He is a chosen vessel unto me
(says God to Ananias touching Paul;) therefore he must suffer great things for
my sake: Acts 9. 15, 16. Job, for a righteous and upright man, had no fellow;
by the testimony of God himself: Joh 1. 8. Yet the next news we hear of him,
Joh is afflicted in his Sons, in his substance, in his body; from the crown
of the head, to the soale of the foot. Saint Austin, when God called him, was
far more assaulted by Satan, th^n Alippius, because God had endued him with
greater learning and gifts; and intended him an instrument of bringing more
glory to his Name. And lastly, as Christ was anointed with the oil of
gladness above his fellows, Psalm. 45. 7. so he was anointed with the oil of
sadness above his fellows: as was his back, so was his burden; as were his
parts, so were his passions, and his strokes, answerable to his strength.

Never any have had so bitter draughts upon earth, as those he loves best: and
that of Saint Austin is a sure Rule, Whom God s^^ites not, be loves not: If he
do not think thee worthy of his Rod, he will never think thee worthy of his
Crown. Yea, where he uses not the Rod, he means to use the Sword. Never was
Jerusalems condition so desperate, as when God said unto her, My fury shall
depart from thee; I will be quiet, and (...) more angry: Ezekiel. 16. 42. Thus not
to be angry, was the greatest anger of all. Never were the Jews more to be
pitied, then when their Prophet delivered these words from the Lord, Why should
ye be stricken any more? Isaiah 1. 5. Not to be afflicted is to be forsaken,
and as the sick man is in small hope of his life, when the Physician gives
him over; so his soul is in a desperate case, whom God forbeareth to chastise
for his sins. As many therebe, who never knew what any sorrow meant, unless
it were such as Am(...)s, such as Ababs, when they are crossed in their
corruptions, curbed in their lewd courses, or restrained of their wicked wills.
But let them take it for a fearful sign of some sore judgment to come:
Saint Ambrose, Bishop of Millaine, as Paulinus relates, took into a Rich man's
house as he traveled; who that he might bid him thoroughly welcome,
entertained him both with great cheer, and courteous discourses: and amongst
other matters, told of his continued happiness, and that he never suffered any
ill all his days, but had all things as he would; and happiness so flowing
in upon him, that he kn^w not what calamity meant: which conference did so
startle Saint Ambrose, that presently he took his leave, telling his company
that he feared to stay in that place, which never felt any dysaster; and was no
sooner gone thence, but suddenly the house fell down, and proved a grave to
all her inhabitants. Poly^^ates, King of the Samians, never felt any ill all
his life, his hopes never fell short of his expectation, he could not wish for
the thing which was not fulfilled; what he wille^, he did: Yea, having but once
a Ring of excellent ra^ity that fell into the water, this loss was recovered;
for the Pish was taken which had swallowed it, and was presented to Polycrates:
but at length all this his happiness epilogized in a gallows. None more happy
then great Pompey all his life, yet at last he was made to drink his own
blood by the hands of the Executioner. Who but Andronicus, Emperor of the East
for many years? but at length he was set upon a sc^bbed Camel, with a Crown
of Onions platted on his head, and in great mockery carried in triumph through
the City. And does not sacred Writ certify, how H(...), whose command e^ewhile
almost reached to Heaven, was instantly adjudged by the King to the Gibbet;
while Mordecay who was condemned to the hal^e^, was all of a sudden made
second in the Kingdom.

Nevertheless, as H^man rejoiced in his preferment to the Queens Banquet,
which was the pathway to his destruction: so many (...) it the only argument
of Gods love, and that they are in favor with him, because they prosper in all
their ways: which would make a wise man the more suspicious, for (as Seneca
that wise Roman faith) he that has been longest happy, shall at length have
his portion of misery; and who so seems to be dismissed, is but deferred.

And commonly their change is not more (...)ull, then sudden; for as it often
happens, that in very fair weather a storm does arise: and as I have read of
certain Trees, which on Monday have been growing in the Forest, and before
Sunday following, und^^ ^ayle on the Sea: so the same hour has seen the knee
bowed to the head; and again, the head stooping, and doing reverence to the
knee, as every age gives instance: for else I might muster up a multitude of
examples for proof of the point. Or in case it seems better, yet it is worse
with them, when their life and happiness shall end together: as it fared with
Belshazz^r, who was sitting at a Feast merry, while on a sudden, Death came
like a Voyder to take him away.

Neither are men of this world, whose bellyes God fills with his hid
treasure, upon occasion of their outward prosperity, only apt to be brought
into a fools paradise, of thinking themselves to be the special darlings of
God: but even the godly themselves have oftentimes their eyes so dazzled, with
the outward glittering and flourishing estate of the wicked, that thereupon
they are ready to say of them, The generation of Gods children, as i^ fared
with David: Psalm. 73. 15. But these are not sober thoughts, yea, they are
rather the dreams of men, drunk with the love of the world: for although it
be as common a phrase, as it is foolish, when any great matter falls to a man,
O he is made! yet experience proves, that it rather marres then makes him; for
not seldom do men possess riches, as sick men do fevers (...) which
indeed rather possess them. And certainly, if riches were such pearls, as
most men esteem them; it is not likely the LORD would cast them to such
S^^ine, as mostly he does: if such happy things, he would not throw them to
such Dogs. But the truth is, what men think most pleasing, (viz. to have
their wills, and their lusts granted) is most plaguing: Psalm. 81. 12. So I gave
them up unto their own hearts lusts, and they walked in their own counsels;
so that the greatest temptation, is to be without temptation: and the greatest
affliction, not to be afflicted: 2 Cor. 12. 7.

Wherefore lift up your hands which hang down, because of some sore
affliction, and your weak kn^es, Hebr. 12. 12. and know, that the worst of
temporal afflictions, are an insufficient proof of divine displeasure: yea,
that stripes from the Almighty, are tokens of his love, and seals of his
Sonship.

Yea, since he that has most grace, commonly complains of most discomfort;
confess that the palate is but an ill Judge of the favors of God: as it is in
great love no doubt, however it be taken; that the tender Father medicines his
Child for the Worms, gives him Aloes, or the like: the Child cries, and
spi^tters, and ^eakes, as if it were poisoned; yet still the Fathers love is
nevertheless: say it be bitter, yet bitter potions bring sweet health; and
who will not rather take a vomit, then hazard life? In the Sweating sickness
in England, their friends would stand by them, and strike them over the faces
with sprigs of Rosemary, to keep them awake: the poor souls faint, and full
of pain, would cry out, you kill me: but yet they must do it, or else they
killed them indeed: for all that slept, dyed. Look we (says S^int Ambrose)
with the eyes of our body, upon Lazarus estate, and we think it miserable; but
if with the eyes of the mind, it will be otherwise; for how did the Angels do
by him, but as Nurses are wont to do by their little children; all the day
long they carry them about in their arms, and at night they lay them down in
their beds to rest.

But the supernatural works of God, when we look upon them with our own
eyes, are subject to a dangerous misprision; the very Sunbeams, to whom we
are beholding for our sight, if we eye them directly, blind us: Miserable men!
we are ready to suspect truths, to run away from our safety, to be afraid of
our comforts, to misknow our best friends.

We usually think it a great sign of Gods displeasure, when he ruins our
estate, and brings us to nothing; when he in his wisdom knows, that these
riches would shipwreck the soul, were they not cast overboard: and his love
only forces him to it. A Mother seeing her little Son brustled at by
Turkicocks, catches him up, and strippeth him of his Red Coat, at which those
Birds are offended; the Child cries for his Coat, but she regarding his
good, leteth him weep, but satisfies him not. And the like of Enemies, we
think our selves mightily wronged by them: but God finds it to fare with us,
as it does with the Oak, which gains by the maymes, and wounds given it; and
thereupon spreads out thicker then before. Whence it is God suffers them to
live, and domineere, as some Countries suffer Ravens, enacting Laws to
prohibit the killing of them; that they may devour the Carrions, which else
would corrupt the air. And so in all other trials: for be the root of this
tree never so bitter, yet the fruit is pleasant. Well may we catch a mayme as
Jacob did, but such a blessing comes withal, that we would not (if wise) be
without it. Say it be a sore, and fiery trial, yet better this fire to purge
us, then Hell fire to burn us. But all the skill is in making men see this;
wherefore he that opened the eyes of Paul, open ours.

But furthermore, as not to be afflicted, argues an absolute defect of
goodness; so, if our troubles be light and few, it is because we are weak
and tender, for therefore God imposes no more upon us, because he sees we
can bear no more: The Physician will not suffer a milke-sop to see his vein
opened, but makes him wink, or look another way: The Master gives not to his
sick Servant strong meats, as he does to the rest, but more dainty fare; not
because he is worthier than the rest, but because he is weaker, and in greater
need. The skillful Armourer tries not an ordinary Piece with musket shot. The
wise Lapidary brings not his softer stones to the Stithy.

So that freedom from affliction is not a sign of potency, but of impotency.
Wherefore, when I am stronger, I will look for more; when I am a vessel fit
for this strong and new wine, I shall be filled with it; but not before: Mar.
2. 22.

Indeed, the calling of God never leaves a man unchanged, nor do^s he employ
any in his service, whom he does (...)able to the work he sets them about.
Will any m^^^ choice of a weak Champion? no more will God: he will either find
us fit, or make us fit to discharge the place he puts us in; as when he called
Saul to be a King, he gave him a Kings heart: 1 Samuel 10. 9. And when he called
the Apostles to that function, he gave them gifts answerable; so when he calls
any to suffer for him, be it Martyrdom; he gives them the courage of
Martyrs, as the times of Queen Mary witness. But yet, for the most part, he
traynes us up by degrees; (as we eat diverse things by morsels, and easily
digest them; which if we should eat whole, would choke us) and does not make
us fit to undergo great matters on the sudden. We must learn to fence in the
School, before we sight in the Field; and with wooden weapons men learn to
sight at the sharp; we must encounter with some beasts or other, (I mean
unreasonable men) before we sight with that fearful Goliath, death. And indeed,
if we do not learn to give entertainment to smaller crosses, the harbingers,
messengers and servants of death; how shall we be able to entertain the Lord
and Master, when he comes? Wherefore, as Jehoram said to Jehu, when he
marched furiously; Come thou peaceably? As if he should say, if thou come
peaceably, march as furiously as thou will: so let us say unto God, provided,
thy afflictions and chastisements be directed to us as messengers of peace, and
love; let them march toward us as furiously as thou please, but in any case
let us not be without correction: for as Mariners at Sea find, that of all
storms a Calm is the greatest; so we, that to be exempt from misery, is the
most miserable condition of all other.

Objection. But thou fear that God has not pardoned thy (...), and this
makes him so severe against thee.

Answer. Many times after the remission of the sin, his very ^^^stisements
are deadly; as is clear by David's example: and Lots, who had a sharp misery
clapped on the heels of a sweet mercy: for he that was so beloved of God, that
he saved a whole City, could not save his own Spouse.

When God delivers us from destruction, he does not secure us from all
affliction. Grace was never given us for a Target against external evils.
Though we be not condemned with the world, yet we may be chastned in the world.
Neither the Truth nor strength of Jobs faith could secure him from the outward
and bodily vexations of Satan, against the inward and spiritual they could;
and did prevayle: so no repentance can assure us that we shall not smart with
outward afflictions, that can prevent the eternal displeasure of God; but
still it may be necessary and good we should be corrected: our care and suit
must be, that the evils which shall not be averted, may be sanctified.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
That Christ and all the Saints are our Partners, and partakers with us in the
Cross; yea, our sufferings are nothing in comparison of theirs.

4. WE shall bear the cross with more patience and comfort, if we consider
that Christ and all the Saints are our partners, and partakers therein; yea,
thy sufferings are nothing in comparison of what others have suffered before
thee. Look upon righteous Abel, thou shall see his elder brother Cain had
dominion and rule over him by Gods appointment, Genesis 4. 7. Yea, in the next
Verse thou shall see him slain by his brother: After him look upon Noah, a
most calamitous person as ever lived, as the Chronologer computes him: as for
Let, he had his righteous soul vexed from day to day. Look upon Job, thou
shall see that miseries do not stay for a mannerly succession to each other,
but in a rude importunity throng in at once, to take away his children,
substance, friends, credit, health, peace of conscience, etc. leaving him
nothing but his Wife, whom the Devil spared on purpose to vex him, as the
Fathers think: so that in his own apprehension, God was his mortal enemy; as
hear how in the bitterness of his soul he complaynes of his Maker, saying,
He teareth me in his wrath, he hates me, and gnasheth upon me with his teeth,
he has broken me asunder, taken me by the neck, and shaken me to pieces, and
set me up for his mark: his Archers compass me round about, he cleaves ^y
raines asunder, and does not spare to power out my gall upon the ground; he
breaks me with breach upon breach, and runs upon me like a Giant: Job 16.
Now, when so much was uttered, even by a non-such for his patience; what may we
think he did feel, and endure? Look upon Abraham, thou shall see him forced
to forsake his Country, and Fathers house, to go to a place he knew not; to
men that knew not him; and after his many removes, he meets with a famine, and
so is forced into Egypt, which indeed gave relief to him* when Canaan could
not; showing, that in outward things, Gods enemies may fare better than his
friends: yet he goes not without great fear of his life, which made it but a
dear purchase; then he is forced to part from his brother Lot, by reason of
strife and debate among their Heardsmen: after that, Lot is taken prisoner, and
he is constrained to wage w(...)rre with four Kings at once, to rescue his
Brother; then Sarah his wife is barren, and he must go childl^sse, until (in
reason) he is past hope: when he has a Son, it must not only dye, but
himself must slay him. Now if that bosom wherein we all look to rest, was
assaulted with so many sore trials, and so diverse difficulties, is it likely we
should escape? Look upon Jaoob, you shall see Esau strive with him in the
womb, that no time might be lost; after that you shall see him fly for his
life, from a cruel Brother, to a cruel Uncle; with a staff goes he over
Jordan, alone, doubtful, and comfortless; not like the son of Isaac. In the
way he has no bed but the cold earth; no pillow, but the hard stones; no
shect, but the moist air; no Canopie, but the wide Heaven: at last he is come
far to find out an hard friend, and of a Nephew becomes a servant; after the
service of an hard Apprentiship, has earned her whom he loved; his Wife is
changed, and he is not only disappointed of his hopes, but forced to marry
another against his will: and now he must begin another Apprentiship, and a
new hope, where he made account of fruition: all which fourteen years he was
consumed with beat in the day* with frost in the night; when he has her whom
he loves, she is bar^en: at last being grown rich, chiefly in wives and
children, accounting his charge his wealth, he returns to his Fathers house,
but with what comfort? Behold Laban follows him with one troop, Esau meets
him with another, both with hostile intentions: not long after, Rachel, the
comfort of his life dies; his children, the slaffe of his age, wound his soul
to death: Reuben proves incestuous, Judah adulterous, Dina is ravished, Simeon
and Levi are murtherous, Er and Onan are stricken dead, Joseph is lost, Simeon
imprisoned, Benjamin (his right hand) endangered, Himself driven by famine in
his old age, to dye among the Egyptians; a people that held it abomination to
eat with him: And yet before he was borne, it was, J^cob have I loved; and
before any of this befell him, God said unto him, Be not afraid, I am with
thee, and will do thee good: Genesis 28. 15. And he did so, even by these
crosses; for that's my good (says the Proverb) that does m^ good. Now, what
Son of Israel can hope for any good days, when he hears his Fathers were
so evil? It is enough for us, if when we are dead, we can rest with him in the
Land of Promise. Again, hear what David says of himself, Thy Arrows stick
fast in me, and thy hand presses me sore: Psalm. 38. 2. and see what cause he
had so to say; what what were these Arrow^s? to let pass those many that Saul
shot at him, which were sharp and keen enough: and those other of Doeg, when
he slew fourscore and five of the Priests; and the whole City of Nob, both
man and woman, child and suckling, for showing him kindness: Likewise Shimeis
carr^age toward him, also his distress at Ziglag, and those seventy thousand
which perished by the Pestilence, upon his numbering the people; and the like.
First, Nathan tells him from the Lord, that The sword should never depart from
h^ horse; and that he would raise up evil against him, out of his own loins*
here were as many Arrows as words. Again, the Child which he had by
Bathsheba, was no sooner borne, but it dyed; there was another Arrow: Tamar his
daughter being marriageable, was deslowred by his own Son Amnon; there was
two more: Amnon himself being in drink, was killed by Absalom at a Feast;
there was another: This Absalom proves rebellious, and rises in Arms against
his own Father, and makes him fly beyond Jordan; there was one more: He lies
with his Fathers Concubines, in the sight of all Israel; there was another: And
how much do you think, did these Arrows wound the Kings heart, and pierce
his very soul? Lastly, look upon Lazarus, though Christ's bosom friend, John
11. thou shall see him labor under a mortal disease, etc. though many souls
were gained to the Gospel, and cured by his being sick: Si amatur, (says
Saint Austin) quomodo inflrmatur?

Thus it were easy to show the like of Joseph, Jeremy, Daniel, John Baptist,
Peter, Paul, and all the generation of Gods children, and servants: For as the
Apostle gives a general testimony of all the Saints in the Old Testament;
saying, That some endured the violence of the fire, some were rackt, others
were tried by mockings and scourgings, bonds and imprisonments; some stoned,
some hew^e in sunder, some slain with the sword, some wandered up and down in
Sheepskins, and Goat Skins, b^ing destitute, afflicted, and formented; some
forced to wand^r in Wildernesses, and Mountains, and hide themselves in Dens,
and Caves of the earth; being such as the world was not worthy of: Hebr. 11. So
Ecclesiastical History gives the like general testimony of all the Saints in
the New Testament, and succeeding ages; for we read, that of all the Apostles,
none dyed a natural death save only Saint John, and he also was banished by
Domi^^an to Pathmos* and at anoth^r time thrust into a Tun of seething O(...)
at Rome: as Tertullian, and Saint Jerome do report. As for other believers,
there was such a mul^itude of them suffe^ed Ma^tyrdome for professing the
Gospel; whereof some were stoned, some crucified, some beheaded, some thrust
through with spears, some burnt with fire, and the like; (for we read of
twenty nine several deaths they were put unto) that Ecclesiastical History
makes mention of two thousand which suffered the same day with Nicanor. And
after that, in the time of the Ten Persecutions, were such an innumerable
company of innocent Christians put to death, and tormented; that Saint Jerome
in his Epistle to Chromatius, and Heliodorus, says, There was not one day in
the whole year, unto which the number of five thousand Martyrs might not be
ascribed; ecxept only the first day of January: who were put to the most
exquisite deaths, and torments, that ever the wit or malice, of Men or Devils
could invent to inflict upon them. Since which time, the Turk and the Pope
have acted their patts, in shedding the blood of the Saints, as well as the
Jews and Roman Emperors, as appears in the Book of Acts and Monuments, and
Revela. 17. where the Holy Ghost has foretold, that the Whore of Babylon
should fight with the Lamb, and they that are on his side, called, and chosen,
and faithful, until she were even drunk with the blood of the Saints, and
with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; which in part was fulfilled in England,
under the Reign of Queen Mary: when in one year a Hundred seventy six
persons of quality were burnt for Religion, with many of the common sort; and
in France, where before these late bloody M^ssacres, there were two Hundred
Thousand which suffered Martyrdom about Transubstantiation. And it is well
known, that our Savior Christ's whole life, even from his Cradle to his Grave,
was nothing else but a continued act of sussering; yea, he was the person, upon
whom as upon one Center all our sorrows met: He that had all, possessed
nothing, except the punishment due to our sins, which l^y so heavy* upon him
for satisfaction, that it pressed his soul as it were to the nethermost Hell,
and made him cry out in the anguish of his spirit, My God, my God, why have
thou forsaken me? So that there is nothing befils us, but has befalne our
betters before us: and to be free from crosses and afflictions, is the
privilege only of the Church triumphant. For, qui non est Crucianus, non est
Christianus, says Luther: there is not a Christian, that carries not his
Cross.

Now the way not to repine at those above us, is to look at those below us; we
seldom or never see any man served with simple favors. It is not for every
one, to have his* soul (...)knight out of his mouth with a kiss, as the Jews
tell of Moses.

It is a great word that Zozomen speaks of Apollonius, That he never asked
any thing of God in all his life, that he obtained not. This is not our
Pa^adise, but our Purgatory; not a place of pleasure, but a Pilgrimage; not a
Triumph, but a Warfare: We cannot say of this World as Tully reports of
Si^acuse in S^cily, and others of Rhodes, that not one day passes in which the
Sun shines not clearly on them. Yea, we think he speeds well, that lives,
as it were, under a perpetual Equin^ct^all, having night and day equ^ll, go^d
and ill success in the same measure: for these compositions make both our
crosses tolerable, and our blessings wholesome. We that know not the
afflictions of others, call our own the heavi^st; every small current is a
torrent; every Brook a River; every River a Sea: we make our selves more
miserable than we need, than we should, by looking upon our miseries in a
multiplying glass; we measure the length of time, by the sha^pnesse of our
afflictions, and so make minutes seem bowres, and days months. If we be
sick, and the Physician promises to visit us to morrow with his best relief,
with what a tedious longing do we expect his presence? Our imagination makes
every day of our sorrow appear like Josuahs day, when the Sun stood still in
Gibeon. The Summer of our delights is too short: but the Winter of our
affliction goes slowly off; we are so sensible of a present distress, and so
ungrateful for favors past, that we remember not many years health so much,
as one days sickness: it is true, former meals do not relieve our present
hunger, but this cottage of ours ruins straight, if it be not new daubed every
day, new repair^d. What then? shall to days Ague, make us forget yesterdayes
health, and all Gods former favors? if he do not answer us in everything,
shall we take pleasure in nothing? Shall we slight all his blessings, because
in one thing he crosses us, whereas his least mercy is beyond our best*
merit? but if we think of our deliverance from the fire of Hell, this is cause
enough to make us both patient and thank^full; though the trifles we delight in
be taken from us. Lord take away what thou please for thy glory and my good,
so long as thou savest me from the fire of Hell, and thy everlasting wr^th.
Neither is there a better remedy for impati^nc^, then to cast up our r^ceipts,
and to compare them with our deservings. If thou look upon thy sufferings,
thou shall find them far easier than thy sins have deserved; nothing to
what thy (...) S(...)s, and Christ thy elder brother has suffered (...) thee:
at a Lyon^ den* or a fiery f^rnace not to turn tail^, were a commendation
worthy a Crown: do but compare thy own estate with theirs, and thou shall
find cause to be thankful that thou ar^ above any, rather than of envy or
malice, that any is above thee, to domineere and insult over thee; yea, compare
thine own estate with thine enemies, thou shall see yet greater cause to be
thankful; for if these temporary dolors which God afflicts his people with,
are so grievous to th^e, how shall thine and Gods enemi^s (though they suggest
to themselves that God is all mercy, as if he wanted the other hand of his
justice) endure that devouring fire, that everl^sting burning? Isaiah 33. Verse.
14. Psalm. 68. 21. Does he make bloody wayles on the backs of his Children,
and shall Bastards escape? does he deal thus with his Sons, what will he do
with his Slaves? cannot all the obedience of his beloved ones bear out one sin
against God, as we see in Moses, David, Zachary, etc. Where will they appear
that do evil, only evil, and that continually? The meditation whereof may
be of some use to thee, Thales being asked how adversity might best be borne,
answered by seeing our Enemies in worse estate than our selves.

CHAP. XXXIX.
That the more we suffer here (so it be for righteousness sake) the greater
our reward shall be hereafter.

FIfthly, We shall bear the Cross with more patience and comfort; if with
Moses we shall have respect unto the rec^mpence of reward, which is promised
to all that (notwithstanding what they shall suffer) persevere in well doing.
Great are our trials, but salvation in heaven will one day make amends, when we
shall have all tears wiped from our eyes, when we shall cease to grieve, cease
to sorrow, cease to suffer, cease to sin; when God shall turn all the water
of our tears into the wine of endless comfort; Yea, when our reward shall be
so much the more joyous, by how much more the course of our life has been
griev^us.

First, see what promises are made to suffering, Blessed are they which mourn,
s^ith our Savior, for they shall be comforted, Ma^th. 5. 4. Blessed are they
which suff^^ persecution for righteousness, for theirs is the Kingdom of
Heaven, Verse 10. They that suffer here for well doing, shall be Crowned
hereafter for well suffering. Blessed shall you be when men revile you, and
persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you for my sake falsely.
Rejoice and be glad, for great is your reward in Heaven, V^rs. 11. 12. And
nothing we s^ffer here, can be compared either with those woes we have deserved
in Hell, or those joys we are reserved to in Heaven.

When Marcus Marcellus who was the first that saw the back of Hanniball in the
field, was asked how he durst enter into battle with him, he answered, I am a
Roman borne, and a S^uldier, and by him I shall make my renown everlasting:
How much more should the hope of life immortal, which is the life of our lives
m^^t^^l when our sortitude, and encourage us in the Christian warfar^?

Yea, it has not only been common for men in a bravado, to encounter death,
for a small flash of honor, but you shall see a hired servant venture his life,
for his new master that will scarce pay him his w^ges at the years end. And
can we suffer too much for our Lord and Master, who gives every one that
serves him, not Fields and Vineya^ds, as Saul pretended, 1 Samuel 22. Nor Towns
and Cities, as Cicero is pleased to boast of Caesar: but even an hundredth fold
more than we part withal in this life, and eternal mansions in Heaven? John
14. 2. And certainly nothing can be too much to endure, for those pleasures
which endure for ever. Yea, if the love of gain makes the Merchant refuse no
adventures of Sea, if the sweetness of Honey makes the Bears break in upon
the Hives, contemning the stings: Who would not get Heaven at any rate, at any
cost or trouble whatsoever? Bu^ to go on, Behold, says God, it shall come to
pass, that the Devil shall cast some of you into prison, that ye may be
tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten days; yet fear none of those
things which thou shall suffer. For be but thou faithful unto death, and I
will give thee the crown of life, Revel. 2. 10. And again, Blessed is the man
that endures temptation; for when he is tried he shall receive the crown of
life, James 1. 12. A Crown without cares, without rivals, without envy,
without end.

Now if you consider it, The gain with hardness makes it far less hard;
The danger's great, but so is the reward.


The sight of glory future, mitigates the sense of misery present: For if Jacob
thought not his service tedious, because his beloved Rachell was in his Eye,
what can be thought grievous to him, that has Heaven i^ his eye?

Lastly (not to enlarge my self as I might in promises of reward) Whosoever
shall forsake Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or F^^her, or Mother, or Wife,
or Children, or Lands, for my names sake, he shall receive an hundred fold
more, and shall inherit everlasting life, Matthew. 19. 29. This is a treasure
worthy our hearts, a purchase worth our lives. Wherefore eye not the stream
thou wadest through, but the firm Land thou tendest too.

And indeed, who is there that shall hear these promises, and compare the
seed-time with the Harvest, look up from the root to the f^uit; consider the
recompense of the reward, and will not choose rather to suffer adversity with
the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season? Heb. 11.
25. Who will not be willing to suffer with Christ, that he may also reign with
him? 2 Timothy 2, 12. Who will not suffer these light afflictions which are but
for a m^ment, when they cause unto us a far more excellent and eternal weight
of glory? 2 Cor 4. 16, 17. Was Lazarus for a time extreme miserable? he is now
in Abraham's bosom. Yea, blessed Lazarus, thy soars and sorrows soon ceased,
but thy joys are everlasting. Now me thinks if thou but considerest that thy
pain will shortly pass, but thy joy shall never pass away; it should prove a
notable sovereign Cordial to strengthen thee; not only against reproaches
which attend thy profession, but even against fire and faggot. Who would not be
a Philpot for a month, or a Lazarus for a day, or a Stephen for an hour, that
he might be in Abraham's bosom for ever? nothing can be too much to endure for
those pleasures which endure for ever.

It is true, If in this life only we had hope in Christ, we were of all men
the most miserable, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 15. 19. But thou must
consider, that as this life is our Hell, and the wickeds Heaven, John 16. 20.
So the next life shall be their Hell, and our Heaven, Verse. 21. 33. Prove. 16.
4. As Dives was in Abraham's bosom, when Lazarus was in torments; so Lazarus
was in Abraham's bosom, when Dives was in torments, Luke 16. 23, 25. And herein
we fare no worse than Christ; Did not his spirit pass from the Cross into
Paradise? Did not he first descend into Hell, and then had his ascension?
Suppose thy suff^rings be great, what then? Assure thy self, that every pang
is a prevention of the pains of Hell, and every respite an earnest of Heavens
rest; and how many stripes do thou esteem Heaven worth? It is true, flesh
and blood is so sensual, that it feels a little pain in the finger, a great
deal more than the health of the whole body. But let us better consider on it,
and behold at once the whole estate of a Christian, we shall see his peace
exceed his pain; yea, we shall see both the torments present, and the glory
following: hope makes absent joys present, wants, plenit^des, and beguiles
calamity, as good company does the way. The poor Traveller in thinking of his
In^e, goes on more cheerfully, and the bondman in calling to mind the year
of Jubilee. When the Apprentice calls to mind that his years of covenant will
now shortly expire, and then he shall have his freedom confirmed, the very
remembrance thereof makes many laboursome works seem more light, and less
grievous unto him, neither does he afterward repent it. Did it ever repent
Jacob, when he came to inherit his Fathers blessing, that he had endured a long
exile, and tedious bondage? Or Joseph, when he was once made Ruler in Egypt,
that he had formerly been sold thither, and there imprisoned? and he had never
been a Courtier, if he had not first been a prisoner? Or did it repent the
Israelites when they came to inherit the Land of promise, that they had
formerly been forty years passing through a forlorn Wilderness. Or which of
Gods servants did ever repent that they had passed the apprentiship of their
service here, and were now gone to be made free in glory? If so, let us do and
suffer chearefully, pa^iently, courageously, what God imposes upon us: knowing
that after we have swet and smarted but six days at the utmost, then comes
our Sabbath of eternal rest, which will make amends for all; knowing that
death ends our misery, and begins our glory, and a few groans are well
bestowed for a Preface to ^n immortal joy. Let then our eyes be continually on
the joys which follow, and not on the pain which is present; the pain
neglected and unregarded cannot be very discomfortable.

But that there is reward promised to those which suffer in Christ's cause, is
not all; for our reward shall be answerable to our sufferings: the greater our
sufferings are here, the greater shall our reward be hereafter: Matthew. 16. 27.
The deluge of calamites may assault us, but they shall exalt us. By our crosses
sanctified, weight is added to our Crown of bliss: for according to the
measure of our afflictions, God weighs unto us of his graces, that we may be
able to bear them; and according to the measure of our graces, he
proportioneth our glory, and future happiness. Suffering for the Gospel is no
inferior good work, and every one shall be rewarded; though not for, yet
according to his works: Psalm. 62. 12. Romans 2. 6. Revel. 22. 12. The Apostles
tell Christ, we have left all and followed thee: Matthew. 19. 27. Christ tells
them, when I sit on my Throne, ye shall sit on Thrones with me: Verse. 28. They
that turn many unto righteousness, shall shine as the stars in the Kingdom
of Heaven: Dan. 12. 3. And they that suffer Martyrdom, shall be clothed with
long white roabes, and have Palms in their hands: Revel. 6. 9, 11. Now, there
be three sorts of Martyrs; Re and intention; intention, non re; re, non
intention: in both deed and intention, as was Saint Steven; in intention, not
deed, as was Saint John; in deed, not in intention, as were the Innocents. But,
where the conflict is more hard, the conquest obtained shall be more glorious:
for as Chrysostom speaks, according to the tribulations laid upon, and born
by us; shall the retribution of glory be proportioned.

Yea, ever where more work is done, there more wages is given; and when the
fight, or conflict is sharper, and the victory harder, the glory of the triumph
is greater, and the Crown of reward more glorious. Whence it was that those
Saints in the Old Testament, which were racked and tortured, would not be
delivered, or accept of their enemies fair offers, to the end they might
receive a better resurrection, and a more glorious reward: Heb. 11. 35. Neither
would we wish our work easier; or our burden lighter; if we looked up to the
recompense of reward: for it may be well applied here, which was mis-applyed
in the trial of that holy man Job, We do not serve God for nothing. Though we
must not serve him merely for reward, as hyrelings, nor for fear, as
servants; but as children for love.

O that (when we suffer most) we could but meditate, and look upon with the
eye of faith, the fullness of those joys, and sweetness of those pleasures;
which (having once finished our course) we shall enjoy at Gods right hand for
evermore: Psalm. 16. 11. being such as eye has not seen, (...) ear heard,
neither has entered into the heart of man to conceive: 1 Cor. 2. 9. For
certainly the remembrance^ thereof, would even raise up our souls from our
selves, and make us contemn and slight what ever our enemies could d^e; as it
did our Forefathers: much more to slight reproaches, which are such bugbeares
to a great many. And no marvel, if that which has made so many contemn fire
and faggot, make us contemn the blasts of men's breath.

But I hope enough has been said, in showing that our enemies instead of
robbing, enrich us; and in lieu of hurting, pleasure us; ^ith they greate^ our
graces, and augment our glory: since, if the conflict be more sharp, the Crown
will be more glorious. Wherefore, if our trials be small, let us bear them
with patience, which makes even great burdens easy; if they be great and
grievous, let us bear them patiently too; since great is the weight of glory
that ensues them: whereas, no suffering, no reward; yea, if we be not c^^sined
here, we shall be condemned hereafter: 1 Cor. 11. 32. And whether had you
rather rejoice for one fit, or always? you would do both, which may not be;
you would be both Dives and Lazarus, have happiness both here, and hereafter:
pardon me, it is a f^nd covetousness, and idle singularity to affect it: What,
that you alone may fare better than all Gods Saints? That God should straw
Carpets for your feet only, to walk unto your Heaven; and make that way
smooth for you, which all Patriarchs, Prophets, Evangelists, Confessors, and
Christ himself have found rugged, and bloody? Away with this self-love, and
come down you ambitious sons of Zebedee; and ere you think of sitting near the
Throne, be contented to be called unto the Cup. Now is your trial: Let your
Savior see how much of his bitter potion you can pledge; then shall you see
how much of her glory he can afford you. In all Feasts the coursest (...) are
(...) first: be content to drink of his Vinegar and ^all, and after you shall
drink new Wine with him in his Kingdom. Besides, without some kind of
suffering, how shall your sincerity be approved? Even nature is jocund and
cheerful whiles it prospers, but let God withdraw his hand, no sight, no
trust: The Mother of Micha, while her wealth lasts, can dedicate a good part
of her silver to the Lord, but now she has lost it, she falls a cursing:
Judges 17. 1, 2, 3. Cataline, whiles poor, had many seeming virtues, but
having feathered his nest, you could hardly say, whether he was most lavish of
his money, or his modesty. But to be equally good in a prosperous, and adverse
condition, deserves praise: When our resolution and practice is like that
Maids in Plutarch, who being set in the Market to be sold; when a Chapman
asked her, Will thou be faithful if I buy thee? said, Yea that I will, though
you do not buy me.

We all are never weary of receiving, soon weary of attending; we are ready
to shrink from Christ, so soon as our profits or pleasures shrink from us:
but if with the Needle of the Compass, in the midst of tempestuous weather, we
remain always unmovable, and stayed upon one point, it is a sign the
Loadstone of the Gospel has changed our hearts; and we are governed by
Christ, as the Needle is by the North Pole. Wherefore, if God should not frame
outward things to thy mind, do thou frame thy mind to endure with patience
and comfort what he sends; and this will be an Odor smelling sweet, a
Sacrifice acceptable, and p^easant to God: yea, herein thou shall approve thy
self with David, a man after Gods own he^rt; and you know, that as David was
unto God according to his heart, so was God unto David according to his.

CHAP. XL.
Application of the sormer grounds.

ANd so you have the residue of the grounds of comfort; it remains that I
should apply them: For this Doctrine, though it be better understood than
practiced; as Cassandr^ was better known than trusted: yet being both known,
applied, and duly trusted to, will (like the Sun) not only delight our
understandings with its contemplation, but also warm and quicken our
affections. Wherefore, is there any weak Christian so white-livered with
Nicodemus, that the reproaches and persecutions which attend his profession,
make him ashamed of Christ; or cause him to think that it is in vain to serve
the Lord: whereby he is frighted out of the narrow way that leads to life?
Let him draw near, for (...) chiefly direct my speech unto him: Are
afflictions and persecutions so necessary and profitable, as has been showed?
Does not God only gain glory by our sufferings, but do they also bring (...)
to repentance, and amendment of life? stir us up to prayer, weane us from the
love of the world, keep us always prepared for our enemies assaults, discover
whether we are sincere or no, make us humble, improve all Christian graces in
us? Is God more specially present with us in afflictions? Cannot our enemies
diminish one hair of our heads, without Gods special leave and appointment?
Has he promised that we shall not be tempted above our strength? Are these
stripes the chiefest tokens and pledges of Gods love and adoption? Were none of
his children ever exempted from the like? And lastly, shall our momentany
sufferings be rewarded with overlasting glory? Yea, shall our glory be
increased, as our sufferings have been m^re? Then let them serve as so many
restoratives to thy fainting spirit; yea, lift up thy hands which hang down,
and strengthen thy weak knees: Heb. 12. 12. For I suppose thy fainting and
drooping is from fear, and thy fear from doubting, and thy doubting from
unbelief, and thine unbelief chiefly from ignorance of these things: and
whence is thine ignorance of th^se but this? Thou have never been conversant
in the book of God; or if thou have, thou did never seri^us^y ponder these
Scriptures which have formerly been rehearsed: for had thou seriously
considered them, thou would not have dared to make that an occasi^n of grief
and prejudice, which the Spirit of God makes the greatest c^use of joy and
confirmation that can be. For what can be spoken more express, direct, and
significant? What demonstrations can be given more sollid? What Fortisications
or Bulwar^es so strong and safe against the affronts of Satan, and the World?
Thou say thou art persecuted for well-doing, and therefore think it a
strange thing. God says it is, and ever has been common to all his children,
not Christ himself excepted.

Take notice of these things, (for it is the God of all truth and blessedness
that speaks them) and apply them to thy self, as if they were particularly
spoken to thee by name, even as when twenty be in a room, where is a fair
well-drawne picture; every one thinks the picture looks upon him: and have
not more modesty or manners (in leaving those dishes for thy betters) then will
do thee good. Be not like a Monkey, which looking in a Glass, thinks he sees
another Monkeys face, and not his own: and know withal, that it is no small
sin even to doubt, when we have Gods command and warrant to secure us.

Thou think thy self miserable; God says, thou art blessed: Thou say,
thou art hated of the world; God says thou art beloved of Christ, who has
chosen thee out of the world: Thou think it a shame to be reproached, God
says, it is thy glory: Thou grievest at it, God says, thou have great cause
to r^joyce; for it shows thee to be borne of God, thine enemies to be the
seed of the Serpent: Thou say that all things go cr^sse with thee, God
says, that all things shall work together f^r the best; it may be, the
increase of thy temporal happiness: however, that it shall be for the
improvement of thy graces here, for the advancement of thy glory hereafter.
Thou think it a sign of displeasure, God says, it is to thy Enemies a
token of perdition, but to thee of salvation: Thou think thy self near
forsaken, God s^ith, The spirit of glory, and of God, rests upon thee: Thou
say, thou shall one day perish; God says, that neither things present, nor
things to come, shall ever be able to separate thee from the love of God, which
is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Thou think the Lord does not hear thee,
because he does not presently answer thee in the things that thou requirest: I
tell thee, it were ill for the best of us, if we were permitted to be our own
choosers: Let Peter have his desire, and his Master shall not dye, so Peter
himself and the whole world had been lost; in unfit supplications we are most
heard, when we are repelled: our God oftentimes does answer our prayers with
merciful denyals, and most blesses us in crossing our desires. We may ask
either bad things to a good purpose, or good things to a bad purpose, or good
things to a good purpose, but in an ill season. Now, if we ask what is either
unsit to receive, or unlawful to beg, it is a great favor of our God, to be
denied: granting is not always the effect of love; if so, then had Paul been
less loved then Satan: Satan begged but once, and had his pr^yer granted,
conce^ning Job: S. Paul begged thrice, that he might not be bufferted; yet was
d^nyed: Satan begged his shame, who envied his success? Saint Paul, that
freedom from temptation, which would have been wo^se, had then wanted: yea,
if granting were always an effect of love, then was our ^^^ssed Savior less
loved than Satan; for the Lord would not let the Cup of his passion pass from
him upon his earnest prayer, which he made as he was Man. But you must know,
that denyals in some cases, are better than grants; the Lord will not take away
the body of sin from us, upon our earnest prayers, yet he grants us that
which is equivalent, viz. Grace, to subdue our corruptions; and withal, takes
away the occasion of pride, which is better: for certainly he is more supported
of God, that has grace given him to conquer a temptation; as had the Martyrs,
in b^ing able to suffer those tortures; than another who is excused to fight.

Again, we must not measure Gods hearing of our suit, by his present answer,
or his present answer by our own sense: touching the first, Zachary a long
time failed of a Son for all his Prayer, but when he had even forgot that
Prayer, he had a Son; the Angel brings him good news: Luke 1. 13. Thy
prayer is heard: When did he make this Prayer? Not lately; for then he was
grown old, and had given over all hope of a child: so that his request was
past over many years, and no answer given.

The like example we have in H^nnah, who pouring out her soul before the Lord,
in the trouble of her spirit; God did not immediately tell her by r^velation
that she should conceive a Son, but he gave her for the present faith; which
did work in her j^y, and peace of conscience: for (says the text) she looked
no more sad; and when she had waited his leisure a certain time, The Lord
remembered her with a Son: 1 Samuel 1. There is nothing between God and thee
but time; prescribe not his wisdom, h^sten not his mercy, his grace is enough
for you n^w, his glory shall be more than enough hereafter. Tarry a little the
Lords leisure, deliverance will come, peace will come, joy will come* thy
tears are reserved, t^ine hunger shall be sati^fied, thy sorrow shall be
comforted. In the mean while, to be patient in misery, makes misery no misery*
while we consider that when a little brunt is once past, troubles will cease;
but joys shall never cease.

Wherefore, let us never give over, but in our thoughts knit the beginning,
progress, and end together; and then shall we see our selves in Heaven, out of
the reach of all our enemies.

2. To prove that we are not to judge of GODS answering our prayers by our own
sense, I need but to instance the Woman of Canaan, (as what can speed well, if
the prayer of says from the knees of humility succeed not?) and yet behold,
the further she goes, the worse she fares; her discouragement is doubled with
her suite: it is not good (says our Savior) to take the Childrens bread, and
cast it to dogs; here was cold comfort: yet, stay but a while, he cleares up
his brows, and speaks to her so comfortably, that 'twere able to secure any
heart, to dispell any seares. O Savior, how different are thy ways from ours,
when even thy severity argues savor! The try^ll had not been so sharp, if
thou had not found the faith so strong, if thou had not meant the issue so
happy: it is no unusual thing for kindness to look sternly for the time,
that it may indeare it self more, when it lists to be discovered.

It was cold comfort that the C^iple heard from Peter and J^hn, when he begged
of them an alms, Silver and Gold have I none: but the next clause, Rise up and
walk, made amends for all. O God, we may not always measure thy meaning by
thy semblance; sometimes what thou most intendest, thou show least: in our
afflictions thou turn'st thy back upon us, and hidest thy face from us, when
thou most mindest our distresses. So Jonathan shot the arrows beyond David,
when he meant them to him: So Joseph calls for Be^jamin into bands, when his
heart was bound to him in the strongest affection; so the tender mother makes
as if she would give away her crying Child, whom she hugges so much closer in
her bosom. If thou pass by us whiles we are struggling with the tempest, we
know it is not for want of mercy, thou can not neglect us. Oh let not us
distrust thee! if thou come, it is to relieve us; if thou stayest, it is to
try us: howsoever, thy purpose is to save us. Surely God will work alone, and
man must not be of his council. Wherefore many times he deals with wicked
men, as Eutrapllus sometimes did with his Subjects; who, when he was minded to
do a poor man a mischief, would give him abundance of wealth; whereas
contrarily his Children s(...)de themselves crossed with a blessing. As when
Isibel Queen of England was to re-passe from Zealand into her own Kingdom,
with an Army, in favor of her Son against her Husband, had utterly been cast
away, had she come unto the Port intended, being there expected by her enemies:
but providence, against her will, brought her to another place, where she
sasely landed. Yea, this I have seen, two men striving for the way, one
receiving a switch over the face, draws his Rapier to kill the other; but by a
providence in making the offer, his sadle swayed to the horse belly; whereby in
all likelihood the one was saved from killing, the other from hanging: for
before he could make after him, he was rid a mile. And have not some been
detained (by a violent storm) from coming home, whereby they have been
exempt from feeling the d^wnefall of their house. Sure I am, the letting fall
of my Glove in the dark, once proved a means of saving me from drowning;
while another stepping before me, found the danger to his cost. And indeed, how
infinitely should we entangle our selves, if we could sit down and obtain
our wishes! do we not often wish that, which we after see would be our
confusion; because we ignorantly follow the flesh, and blinded appetite, which
looks on nothing but the shell and outside; whereas God respects the soul,
and distributeth his favor for the good of that, and his glory? It is an
argument of love in the Father, when he takes away the Childs knife, and gives
him a book. We cry for riches, or liberty, or peace, they are knives to cut
our fingers; wherefore God gives us his word, the riches of Verity, not of
Vanity; He gives us that glorious liberty to be the Sons of God, he gives us
that peace which the world cannot give, nor take away: wherefore let the
Christian understand, God his Physician, Tribulation his Physic; being
afflicted under the Medicine, thou cryest; the Physician hears thee, not
according to thy will, but thy weal; thou can not endure thy malady, and
will thou not be patient of the remedy? No man would be more miserable, than
he that should cull out his own ways: What a sp^cious show carried Midas his
wish with it; and how did it pay him with ruin at last? Surely, I have seen
matters fall out so unexpectedly, that they have tutored me in all affairs,
neither to despair, nor presume; not to despair, for God can help me; not to
presume, for God can cross me: One day made M^rius Emperor, the next saw him
rule, and the third, he was slain of his Sould^ers. Well then, if with Paul
thou have besought the Lord often, that thy present affliction might dep^rt
from thee, and can not be heard in the thing which thou d^strest, know that
thou art heard in that which is more conducible to thy Profit; and consequently
rejoice more in that thy petition is denied, than if it had been granted. This
was the use which Saint Paul made of Gods denial, and he knew what he did;
though he had as much to boast, and rejoice of, as any one living: yet, says
he, Of my self I will not rejoice, except it be of mine infi^mities: That is,
afflictions, repreaches, persecutions, inward temptations, fears, distrusts,
etc. But in these I will very gladly rejoice; Why? That the power of Christ may
dwell in me: Note his reason, he had heard God say, that his power was made
perfect through weakness, 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9. Neither had he only cause to
rejoice in his infirmities, but all Gods people have the same cause to rejoice;
for what the spirit of comfort speaks in this, and in all the former places
recited, do equally belong to thee for thy consolation, with all the
regenerate; for whatsoever was written afore-time, was written for thy
learning, and mine; that we through patience, and comfort of the Scriptures,
might have hope: Romans 15. 4. And accordingly, will a good hearer apply to
himself whatsoever is written in the Word, for as the stomach sends the
strength of the meat into every member of the body, so we should send to the
eye that which is spoken to the eye, and to the ear that which is spoken to
the ear, and to the tongue that which is spoken to the tongue, and to the hand
that which is spoken to the hand; and so to the heart, and every faculty and
member of soul and body: if we hear comfort, we should apply it to fear; if
we hear a promise, we should apply that to our distrust; if we hear a
threatening, we should apply that to our presumption; and so fill up the gap
still where the Devi^l would enter. And indeed, had it not been for this
A(...)ua Coeles^is, David had surely fainted in his affliction: Psalm. 27. 13.
and 119. 72. but this good word from He ^^en fetched him again when he was
ready to sink: and indeed, if Moses and the Prophets, the Evangelists and the
Apostles will not comfort us in this case, then as Abraham told Dives in
another case, nothing will persuade, nor prevayle. Beleevest thou the former
Scriptures spoken by Christ, and his Apostles? I know that thou beleevest, with
some mixture of unbelief; and art almost persuaded, not only to do, but to
suffer chearefully for well doing. But why do thou not altogether believe,
that it is a blessed and happy thing thus to suffer: Matthew. 5. 10, 11, 12. That
thou have great cause to rejoice and be glad, that thou art counted worthy to
suffer shame for Christ's Name? Acts 5. 41. Thou see it is not for nothing
that David acknowledges it was good for him that he was afflicted, Psalm. 119.
71. that Job blesses the time that ever he was corrected, Job 42. that Jeremy
prayed for correction as a good thing, Jer. 10. 24. that a whole Church voted
the same, Lament. 3. 27. It is not for nothing that Christ says, Blessed and
happy are yes when men revile you, and p^rsecu^^ you; That Saint James says,
Count it exceeding joy, when ye fall into diverse temptations: James 1. 2. It
is not for nothing that Saint Paul says, I take pleasure in infirmities, in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in inguish, for Christ's sake; etc.
2 Cor. 12. 10. That Peter and John, when they were beaten and imprisoned,
departed from the Council, rejoicing that they were counted worthy to suffer
rebuke for Christ's Name, Acts 5. 41. For even bearing the Cross with Christ,
is as great a preserment in the Court of Heaven, as it is in an earthly Count
for the Prince to take off his own Roabe, and put it on the back of one of
his servants; as you may perceive by the Lords speech to Paul: Acts 9. 15, 16.
and 23. 11. and our Savior Christ's words to his Apostles, Acts 1. 8. yea, to
suffer for Christ (says Father Latimer) is the (...) privilege that God gives
in this world: and the story of (...) is a (...)k-case to prove it: for did not
God by him, as sometimes a Schoolmaster with his Pupil, who when he has
polished and perfected a good Scholar, bring^ him sorth, provokes adversaries
to set upon him with hard questions, and takes a pride to see the fruit of his
own labors. And in the wars, to have the hottest and most dangerous
services imposed upon them by their General, is accounted the greatest honor:
neither will he confer the same upon any, but the stoutest and most valiant.
This Rod of the Lord (like Ah^suerus his Scepter) is never stretched forth
toward any of his, but in great love and favor. It is like the kiss, which
Cyrus in Zenopho^ gave to Chrysanthas, which was accounted a greater and more
special favor, then the Cup of Gold which he gave to Artabazus: Which being
so, let us in this particular imitate the Musc^vitish women, who will not
think their husbands love them, unless they chastise them; and the Indians,
who are ambitious to be burnt with them; and the Thracians, who are proud to
wear their scarres. Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ greater riches then
all the treasures of Egypt: Heb. 11. 25. 26. and the Apostles esteemed it a
grace, to be disgraced for him: and shall we grumble, or think much at it? No:
in the greatest extremity of straights, let us acknowledge it a favor, and
give him thanks: and so much the rather, for that it is more acceptable to
God, to give him thanks once in adversity, then six hundred times in
prosperity, as a grave Divine well observes: and indeed, it is the sum of all
Religion to be thankful to God in the midst of miseries.

True, it is hard for J^b, when the terrors of God fight against him, and the
Arrows of the Almighty stick so fast in him, that the venom thereof has
drunk up his spirit, Joh 6. 2^3, 4. to think it a special favor and
dignity; but so it was, being rightly considered. It was hard for Joseph's
brethren to hear him speak roughly unto them, take them for spies, accuse
them of theft, and commit them to prison, Genesis 42. 30. and think it is all out
of love; much more hard for Simeon to he cul'd out from the rest, and committed
to ward, while his brethren are set at liberty; V^rse 24. and yet it was so;
yea, he loved him best, whom he seemed to favor least: yet such is the
infirmity of our nature, that as weak eyes are dazzled with that light which
should comfort them; so there is nothing more common with Gods Children, then
to be afflicted with the causes of their joy, and astonished with that which is
intended for their confirmation. Even Manoah conceives death in that vision of
God, wherein alone his life and happiness did consist: Judges 13. 22. And the
Shepherds, Luke 2. who were sore afraid, when the Angel of the Lord came to
bring them good tidings of great joy to all people: viz. their Saviors Birth,
which was Christ the Lord. V^rs. 9, 10. But what has been the answer of GOD
always to his children in such their ecstasies, but this? Fear not Gideon,
Judges 6. 23. Fear not Joseph, Matthew. 1. 20. Fear not Zachary, Luke 1. 12,
13. Fear not Abraham, for I am thy shield, and thine exceeding great reward:
Genesis 15. 1. Fe^re not Paul, for I am with thee, and no man shall lay hands
on thee to do thee hurt, etc. Acts 18. 9, 10. The words are often repeated
(as Pharaohs dreams were doubled) for the surenesse. Yea, to the end, that we
should be fearlesse in all our sufferings, so long as we suffer not as evil
doers: 1 Peter 4. 15. Fear not, as one well notes, is the first word in
th'Annuntiation of Christ's conception; and the first word in the first
Annuntiation of his Birth; and the first word in the first Annuntiation of his
Resurrection; and almost the last words in his last exhortation, a little
before his death, are, Let not your hearts be troubled, and be of good comfort;
strengthening his followers, and sweetning his cr^sse by diverse forcible
reasons: Luke 21. Mark 13. And the words of dying men have ever been most
emphaticall, most effectual. Nay, more than all this, if yet thou will not be
comforted, look but John 16. 20. and thou shall have thy Savior assure thee by
a double bond; his Word I say* Oath Verily, verily, I say unto you;
that though for the present you do fear, and sorrow, and weep; yet all
shall be turned into joy, and that joy shall no man be able to take from you:
Verse 22. And so much of the Patience of the Woman's seed. And so much of the
Innocence, of the Woman's seed. And so much of the Felicity, of the Woman's seed.
If you will see the Malice, of the Serpents seed: If you will see the
Subtility, of the Serpents seed: If you will see the Misery, of the Serpents
seed:
Read two late Treatises, SIN STIGMATIZED, and THE CURE OF PREJUDICE.

FINIS.
Three Prayers for a Family, if at any time they shall be thought too long,
read only the English letter and pass by the Roman; or you may continue any
one part which goes between.
Jer. 10. 25. Power out thy sury upon them that know thee not, and upon the
Familyes that call not on thy name. Psalm. 145. 18. Romans 10. 12. The Lord is
nigh, and rich unto all that call upon him in truth. Isay 65. 24. Before they
call I will answer, and whiles they are yet speaking I will h^^re. Jer. 33. 3.
Call unto me and I will answer thee, and show thee great and mighty things,
which thou know not. 1 John 5. 14. If we ask any thing according to his
will, he hears us. John 16. 23. Mat. 21. 22. Whatsoever ye shall ask the
Father in my name, believing he will give it you. Psalm. 55. 17. Evening and
Morning, and at Noone will I pray.
A Prayer for the Morning.
O Lord prepare our hearts to pray;
O Most glorious Lord God, and in Jesus Christ our most mercisull and loving
Father in whom we live and mo^e and have our being: in the multitude of thy
mercies, we desire so approach unto thee, from whom all good things do
proceed; who know our necessities before we ask, and our ignorance in
asking. It is true, O Lord, if we should consider only our own
unworthiness, and how we have heretofore abused (...) goodness and long
suffering toward us; (...)ht rather despair with Judas, and like Adam run
from thee, then dare to approach thy glorious presence, For we confess O Lord,
to the shame and confusion of our own ^ares, that as we brought a world of
sin into the World with us, and deserved to dye so soon as we began to live;
so ever since that thou have spared ^s, we have done nothing but add (...) unto
sin, as thou have added mercy to mercy: For we have been no less rebellious
unto thee, then thou have been beneficial unto us. We do daily and hourly
break all thy commandments, adding unto that our original corruption which
we were conceived and ^orne (...), all manner of ac^uall transgressions, by
sins of Omissi^n, sins of Commission, sins of Ignorance, sins of
Knowledge, sins against conscience; yea, sins of Presumption and
Wilfulness, and that in thought, word, and (...), We have sinned against thy
Law, and against thy Gospel, against thy mer^ies, and against thy judgments,
against the many warnings, and the abundance of means, afforded by thee to
reclaim us, against the spirit of grace continually knocking at the doors of
our hearts, with infinite checks and holy motions: Our ears have been always
open to the Tempter, shut unto thee; we have abused our eyes to want^nnesse,
our mouths to filthiness, and our feet have been swift to all evil, slow to
ought that is good.

And as we have committed one sin on the neck of another, so we have
multiplied, and many times repeated them, by falling often into the same
wickedness, whereby our sins are become for number* as the sands of the Sea,
and as the Stars of Heaven.

Thus as our first Parents left us a large stock of sin, so we have improved
the same beyond measure; O that we could have so improved that stock of grace
which we have rec^ived from thee! But whereas thou gave us as large a
portion, we suddenly lost it. We were created indeed by thee after thine own
Image, in righteousness, and holiness, and in knowledge of the truth: But
alas! now our understandings are so darkened and dulled, our judgments so
blinded, our wills so perverted, our affections so corrupted, our reason so
^xiled, our thoughts so surprised, our desires so entrapped, and all the
faculties and functions of our Souls so disordered, that we are not
sufficient of our selves to think, much less to speak, least of all to do
ought that is good. And yet usually like Bladders, we are not more empty of
grace, than we are blown up with pride: whereby with Laodicea, we not once
see our own spiritual misery and nakedness; But think we are rich and good
en^ugh, as wanting nothing; when as scarce any spark of grace yet appears in
us. Yea, so far have we be(...) from loving and serving thee, that we have
hat^d those that do it, and that for their so doing. And so far have we
been from performing that vow; which we m^de to Christ in our Baptism, when
we took his pres^e money to be his soldiers, and serve him in the f^^ld of
this world, against his and our enemies; that we have renounced our vow made
to him, and fled from his standard; yea, sought for Satan and the Wo^ld,
seeking to win all we could from Christ, by rempting to sin, and by
persecuting such as were better than our selves; so that all our recompense of
thy love unto us, has been to do that which thou hate, and to hate those
whom thou love. Ye^, we cannot deny but we have persecuted thee with Paul,
denied thee with Peter, be(...)ayed thee with Judas, and crucified thee with
those cruel Jews.

Now Lord it being thus with us, how can we expect that th^n should^st hear
our prayers, and grant our ^^qu^sts? yea, how can we look for other at thin^
hands, then great and g^i^vous, yea, then double damnation? as most justly we
have deserved.

Yet most merciful Father, being that thou have given thy Son, and thy Son
himself for the ransom of so many as shall tru^ly (...), (...) unfainedly
believe in him, who h^th (...) sakes fulfilled all righteousness; (...), (...)
on the Cross, and there made full satis(...)on f^r the sins of all thine
Elect: and s^^ing thou ha^^ ^ppoynted Prayer, as one special means for the
obtaining of thy grace, unto which thou have annexed this comfortable promise,
that where two or three be gathered together in thy name, thou will be in the
^idst of them, and grant their requests; and since our Redeemer has assured
us, that whatsoever we shall ask thee in his name, thou will give it us:

And likewise knowing, that mercy pleases thee, and that the sole perfection
of a Christian, is the imputation of Christ's righteousness, and the not
imputation of his own unrighteousness:

We are emboldened to sue unto thee our God, for grace, that we may be able to
repent, and believe.

Wherefore for thy promise sake, for thy Sons sake, and for thy great names
sake, we befeech thee send down thine holy Spirit into our souls, regenerate
our hearts, c^ange and purify our natures, subdue our reason, rectify our
^udgements, strengthen our wills, renew our affections, put a stop to our
madding and ^^ra^ing fancies, beat down in us whatsoever st^nds in opposition
to the S^epter of jesus Christ; and enable us in some measure, both to
withst(...) that which to evil, and perform that which is good and pleasing
in thy sight: Yea, ^ive us repentance never to be repented of, and possess
ou^ souls with suc^ a dreadful awe of thy (...), that we may fear as well to
commit small sins a^ great ones; considering that the least sin is mo^^all
without our repentance, and thy mercy: as well fear to sin in secret as
openly, since there is nothing hid from thee; as well condemn our selves for
evil thoughts as evil deeds, considering that the Law is spiritual, binding
the heart no less then the hands; as well abstain from the occasions of
sin, as sin it self; and consider that it is not enough, to abstain from
e^ill, unless we hate it also, and do the contrary good.

And because every day which does not abate of our reckoning, will increase it;
and that by procrastinating, we shall but heap unto our selves wrath against
the day of wrath: Good Lord, suffer us not, we beseech thee, to defer our
repentance, lest the custom of evil makes it altogether unalterable in us: or
lest we dye before we begin to live: or lest thou ^esusest to hear us another
day, calling upon thee for mercy: because we refuse to hear thee now, calling
to us for repentance.

Wherefore, if we be not yet converted, let this be the happy hour of our
conversion; that as our bodies are risen by thy power, and providence from
sleep, so our souls may daily be raised from the sleep of sin, and the
darkness of this world; that so we may enjoy that everlasting light, which
thou have prepared for thin^; and purchased with the blood of thy dear Son,
our Savior Jesus Christ.

Give unto us, we beseech thee, a true, lively, and justifying faith; whereby
we may lay hold upon those gracious promises, which thou have made unto us in
him; and wherewith we may vanquish all our spiritual adversaries. Seal up
unto us the assurance of our salvation, by the testimony of thy blessed Spirit.
Give to us thy servants, that wisdom which descends from above, that we may
be wise unto our eternal salvation: so shall our hearts (instead of a
Commentary) help us to understand the Scriptures, and our lives be an
Exposition of the inward man. Give us grace, to account all things in this
world even as dross, and dung, that we may win Christ Jesus; and Heaven and
happiness by means of him. Give us single hearts, and spirits without guile,
that we may love goodness for it self, and more seek the power of
godliness, then the show of it; and love the godly for thy sake: and because
they are godly. Grant that in the whole course of our lives, we may do unto
all others, as we would that they should do unto us: considering, that whether
we do good or evil, unto any one of thy members, thou take it as done unto
thy self. Discover unto us all our own sins, that we may not be so forward
t^ ^^nsure others, as we have been heretofore. Give us patience to bear thy
Fatherly chastisements, which through thy grace sanctifying them to us, become
both Medicines to cure us, and Antidotes to preserve us from the sickness of
sin: considering, that all the afflictions of this life, are not worthy those
joys, which shall be revealed unto us.

Finally, good Father we beseech thee, enable us so to walk in thy fear, that
in mirth we be not vain, in knowledge we be not proud, in zeal we be not
bitter; instruct us by thy wo^d, direct us by thy Spirit, mollify us by thy
grace, humble us by thy corrections, w^^ us by thy benefits, reconcile our
nature to thy will; and teach us so to make profit of every thing, that we may
see thee in all things, and all things in thee.

And as we are ^uiters unto thy Majesty, for these thy blessings spiritual: so
likewise we humbly beg at thy merciful hands, all necessaries appertaining to
our temporal welfare: beseeching thee to bless us in our persons, with
health, strength, and liberty: in our estates, with sufficiency, and the right
use of it; considering that if we spend what we have (...) our own lusts, we
may ask, but we shall not receive: in our good names, with an unreproveable
report: and so bless and sanctify unto us all the things of this life, that
they may be furtherances of us in the way to a better.

And now O Lord, since thou have safely brought us to the beginning of this
day, we beseech thee to defend, and direct us in the same: and as thou have
blessed us in our lying down, and in our rising up, so protect and prosper us,
in our going forth, and in our coming home: shield and deliver us from the
snares of the Hunter, who lies in wait for our souls; and is continually
laboring our everlasting destruction. And no less arm us against the
allurements of the world, wherein we shall meet with many provocations, and
temptations: and that we may not lead our selves, nor be led into temptation;
give us wisdom to beware of men, even of associating our selves with the
vicious, like Joseph: le^t otherwise with David, we be drawn to dissemble; or
with Peter, to deny thee: for sin is of a catching, and infectio^s quality;
and our corrupt hearts are like tinder, which will kindle with the least
spark: especially O Lord, keep us from yielding to their solicitations, or
following their customs, of drinking, swearing, s^andering, and making the
worst construction of things: of mocking, and scoffing a^ religion, or the
religious: let not custom and example any whit prevayle with us, without, or
against thy written word; lest we miss of the narrow way, which alone leadesh
unto life: only give us wisdom, and grace, to look upon thy Sons whole
life, and see how he would speak, and do, before we speak or do any thing:
and then having thy word for our warrant, and thy glory for our aim; let no
ceusures, nor ^^owtes of any discourage us.

And seeing that it is in vain for us to labor, except thy blessing go along
with it: neither can our endeavors succeed well, except thou prosper them:
bless every one of us in our several places and callings, and so direct us in
all we shall take in hand, that whatsoe^er we do, may tend to thy glory, the
(...) of others, and (...) comfort of our own souls: when we shall come to
make our final account unto thee for them.

And in these our prayers we are not mindful of our selves alone, but
forasmuch as then have commanded us to pray one for another; as being the
members of one and the same mystical body: we beseech thee to bless^ thy
whole Church Universal, wheresoever dispersed, and howsoever distressed, or
despised, far and wide over the face of the whole earth: and vouchsafe unto
thy Gospel such a free and effectual passage, that it may sound throughout
all Nations. Yea, we humbly pray thee, let it convert and reclaim the Turks,
sewes, Infidels, Indians, Atheists, Epicures, Heretics, and Schismatics.
Prevent all plots, and projects against the Kingdom of thy Christ: let thy
Word and Spirit alone, bear rule in all places. Extend thy tender mercy O
Lord, to all Protestants beyond the Seas; to all Christians under the Turks,
or other Infidels: strengthen all such as suffer for thy cause, and let thy
presence with them counterpoyse whatsoever is laid upon them, and enable them
to continue constant in thy faith and truth to the end. More particularly, be
good unto that part of thy Church planted here amongst us, in this sinful
Land, which is even sick with long peace, and prosperity: and indue us with
thy grace as thou have already with other blessings; that they may not rise up
hereafter in judgment against us. In a more special manner, be propitious to
thy Servant Charles, our gracious King and Governor; to his Royal Consort, to
the Noble Prince Charles, and the re^t of that Royal Race; together with the
Nobility, Gentry, and Communalty. Bless the Tribe of Levi, all Ministers of
thy Word and Sacraments: let their lips, O God, preserve knowledge, and their
lives righteousness; and forever bless thou their labors: increase the
number of those that are faithful and painful; and reform, or remove such as
are either scandalous, o^ idle: and for a constant and continual supply of
their mortality, bless all Schools of learning, and good literature;
especially the Universities. Remember in much m^r^y all that are afflicted,
whether in body, or in mind, or in both; whether in conscience, groaning under
sin; or for a good conscience, because they will not sin: and as thou
make them examples to us, so teach us to take example by them, and learn
wisdom by thy hand upon them.

And as we pray unto thee, so we desire also to praise thee: rendering unto thy
Majesty upon the bended knees of our hearts, all possible laud, and
thankesgiving, for all thy mercies and ^a^ours, spiritual, and corporal;
temporal, and eternal: for that thou have freely elected ^s to salvation from
all eternity: when thou have passed by many millions of others, both Men and
Angels, whereas we deserved to perish no less then they; and thou might
^^stly have chosen them, and le^t us: for that thou have created ^s Men, and
not Beasts; in England, not in Aethiopia, or any other savage Nation: in this
clear and bright time of the Gospel, not in the darkness of Paganism, or
Popery. For thine unexpressible love, in redeeming us out of Hell; and from
those unsufferable and endless forments, by the precious blood of thy dear
Son: who spared not himself, that thou might spare us. For calling us
home to thee by the Ministry of thy Word, and the work of thy good Spirit. For
the long continuance of thy Gospel with us, (the best of blessings.) For
sparing us so long, and giving us so large a time of repentance. For
justifying, and in some measure sanctifying us, and giving us ground for
assured hope of being glorified in thy heavenly Kingdom. For preserving us
from so infinite many perils and dangers, which might easily have befalne us
every day, to the taking away of either our estates, our limbs, or our lives.
For so plentifully and graciously blessing us, all our life long, with many,
and manifold good things; both for necessity and delight. For peace of
conscience, and content of mind. For our health, wealth, limbs, senses,
food, raiment, liberty, prosperity. For thy great mercy in correcting us, and
turning thy corrections to our good. For preserving us in the night past, from
all dangers of body and soul: and for infinite more mercies, of which we could
not well want any one: and which are all greatned, by being bestowed upon us,
who were so unworthy; and have been so ungrateful for the same. O that we
could answer thee in our thankfulness, and obedient walking, one for a
thousand.

Neither are we unmindfull of those national blessings, which thou have
vouchsafed unto our Land in general: as namely, that deliverance from the
Spanish Invasion in 88, and from that devilish designs of the
Gun-powder-Treason: for preserving us from the noisome, and devouring Plague
and Pestilence. Lord grant, that our great unthankefulnesse for these thy
mercies, may not cause thee to deli^er us in^^ the hands of our enemies: and
although we have justly thereby deserved the same, yet we beseech thee, give
us not up unto their wills, neither suffer Popery ever to bear rule over us;
nor thy blessed Word and Sacraments to be taken away from us: but continue them
unto us, and so our posterity after us, if it be thy good pleasure; until the
coming of thy Christ.

These, and all things else, which thou know we stand in need of, we humbly
^ra^e at thy merciful hands, and that for the alone worthiness, and
satisfaction of thy Son; and the honor of our only Redeemer, and Advocate
Jesus Christ: to whom with thee O Father, and thy blessed Spirit, ^e given, as
is most due, all praise, glory, and dominion, the residue of this day, and for
evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer for the Evening, which would be performed before Supper, and not when
we are more prone to sleep, then to pray.
O Eternal, Almighty, and incomprehensibl^ Lord God; who art great and
terrible, of most glorious Majesty, and infinite purity: Creator, and Preserver
of all things, and Guider, and Governor of them being created: who ^^^lest
Heaven and Earth with thy preseues, and art every where at hand to receive, and
hear the prayers of all that repair to thee in thy Christ.

Thou have of thy goodness bestowed so many, and so great mercies upon us,
that we know not how to express thy bounty herein. Yea, we can scarce think
of any thing more to pray for, but that thou would continue those which thou
have bestowed on us already: yet we covet still, as though we had nothing, and
live as if we knew nothing of all this thy beneficence. Thy blessings are
without number, yet our sins strive with them which shall be more: if we
could count the numberless number of thy Creatures, they would not be
answerable to the number of thy gifts: yet the number of our offenses which we
return in lieu of them, are not much inferior thereunto. Well may we confess
with Judas, we have sinned, and there stop; but we cannot reckon their number,
nor set forth their nature. We are bound to praise thee above any Nation
whatsoever: for what Nation under Heaven en^oyes so much light, or so many
blessings as we? above any Creature, for all the Creatures were ordained for
our sakes: and yet Heaven, Earth, and Sea, all the Elements, all thy Creatures,
obey thy Word, and serve thee as they did at first: yea, call upon us to serve
thee: only men for whom they were all made, ingratefully rebel against thee.

Thou might have said before we were formed; let them be Toades, Monsters,
Infidels, Beggars, Criples, or Bondslaves, so long as they live, and after
that, Cast-awayes for ever and ever: but thou have made us in the ^e^t
(...)nesse, and nursed us in the best Religion, and placed us in the best Land,
and appointed us to the best and only Inheritance, even to remain in bliss
with thee for ever: so that thousands would think themselves happy, if they
had but a piece of our happiness.

Why should thou give us thy Son for a Ransom, thy Holy Spirit for a
pledge, thy Word for a guide, thy Angels for our guard; and reserve a Kingdom
for our perpetual inheritance? Why should thou bestow health, wealth, rest,
liberty, limbs, senses, food, raiment, friends, and the means of salvation
upon us, more then upon others, whom thou have denied these things unto? We can
give no reason for it, but that thou art merciful; and if thou should draw
all back again, we had nothing to say but that thou were just: which being
considered, why should any serve thee more then we, who want nothing but
thankfulness? Why should we not hate the way to Hell, as much as Hell it
self? and why should we not make every cogitation, speech, and action of ours,
as so many steps to Heaven? Yet, if thou should now ask us what lust is
assuaged, what affection qualified, what passion expelled, what sin repented
of, what good performed, since we began to receive thy blessings to this day?
We must needs confess against our selves, that all our thoughts, words, and
works, have been the service of the World, the Flesh, and the Devil: Yea, it
has been the course of our whole life, to leave that which thou command,
and to do that which thou forbiddest: yet, miserable wretches that we are, if
we could give thee our bodies and souls, they should be saved by it; but thou
were never the richer for them.

Perhaps we have a form of godliness, but thou who searchest the heart, and
try^st the reins, know that too often we deny the power of it: and that our
Religion is much of it hypocrisy, our zeal envy, our wisdom policy, our
peace security, our life rebellion, our devotion deadness; and that we live so
securely, as if we had no souls to save.

Indeed, thy Word and Spirit may work in us some ^^^shes of desire, and
purposes of better obedience; but we are constant in nothing, but in perpetual
offending, only therein we cease not: for when we are waking, our flesh tempts
us to wickedness; if we are sleeping, it sollicites us to filthiness; or
perhaps when we have offended thee all the day, at night we pray unto thee: but
what is the issue of one praying? first we sin, and then we pray thee to
forgive it; and then return to our sins again, as if we came to thee for no
other end, but to ^rave leave to offend thee: Or, of thy granting our requests,
we even dishonor thee, and blaspheme thy name, while thou d^st support and
relieve us; run from thee, while thou do call us; and forget thee, while
thou art feeding us: so thou sparest u^, we sleep; and to morrow we sin
again. O how justly might thou forsake us, as we forsake thee; and condemn
us, whose consciences cannot but condemn our selves! but who can measure thy
goodness, who give (...), and forgiv^st all? though we be sinful, yet tho
^lov^st us; though we (...) miserably ungrateful, yet thou most plentifully
bless^s^ us: what should we have, if we did serve thee, (...) have done all
these things for thine enemies? O that thou who have so ind(...)d us to serve
thee, would also give us hearts and hands to serve th^e with thi^e own
gifts!

We no sooner lived, then we deserved to (...); neither n^^d we any more ^o
cond(...)e us, th^n w(...)t we brought into (...) world with (...) spared us to
this (...), to try if we (...) (...) thee (...) we (...) turned (...) by sin:
yet (...) seems to (...) in (...) to no end: for wh(...) (...) by thy Word, we
would not ^uffer if in (...) many ^^ve (...) ^^t we would not suffer it (...)
moved by thy ben(...)s, but (...) wo^ld not suffer them to (...) with the
Devil, that we Devil, that we would (...) so fast as they come; thy (...) thy
riches covetous, thy ^^ace wan^on, thy (...) ^^temperate, thy mercy secure; and
all thy benefits serve (...) but as weapons to rebel against thee. We have
prop^aned thy days, contemned thy ordinances, resis^ed thy Word, greeved thy
Spirit, misused thy Messengers, hated our Reprovers, slandered and persecuted
thy people, seduced our friends, given ill example to our Neighbors, op(...)ed
the mouths of thine and our adversaries, to blaspheme that glorious name after
which we are named; and the truth we profess: whereas meaner mercies and far
weaker means, have provoked others no less to honor thee, and the Gospel;
who may justly rise up in judgment against us. Besides, (which makes our case
far more miserable) we can scarce resolve to amend; or if we do, we put off
our conversion to hereafter: when we were children, we deferred to repent till
we were men: now we are men, we defer until we he old men: and when we be
old men, we shall defer it until death, if thou prevent us not: and yet we
look for as much at thine hands, as they which serve thee all their lives.

Thus while we look upon our selves, we are ashamed to lift up our eyes unto
thee; yea, we are ready to despair^ with Cain: yet when we think upon thy Son,
and the rich promises of the Gospel, our fear is in some measure turned into
joy: while we consider that his righteousness for us, is more then our
wickedness against our selves; only give us faith we b(...)ch (...), and
settle it in thy beloved, that we may draw virtue from his death and
resurrection, whereby we may be enabled to dye unto sin, and live unto
righteousness; and it suffices for all our iniquities, necessities, and
infirmities.

It is true, O Lord, as we were made after thine own Image; so by sin we
have turned that Image of thine, into the Image of Satan: but turn thou us
again, and we shall be turned into the Image and likeness of thy Son: And
what though our sins be great, yet thy mercy is far greater then our
sins either are, or can be: we cannot be so bad, as thou art good; nor so
infinite in sinning, as thou art in pardoning, if we repent. O that we could
repent! O that thou would give us repentance! for we are weak, O Lord, and
can no more turn our selves, then we could at first make our selves: ye^, we
are altogether dead in sin, so that we cannot stir the least joint, no not
so much as feel o^^ deadness, nor desire life, except thou be pleas^d to
raise and restore our souls from the death of (...), and grave of long
custom, ^o the life of (...) we are to all evil, but reprobate and (...)sed
to all grace and goodness; yea, to all the means thereof. We are altogether
of our se^ves unble to resist the force of our mighty advers(...), but do thou
free our wills, and set to thy (...) hand, in (...) ^owne by thy Spirit our
(...): (...) by thy grace subdue our unt(...) (...), (...) we ^^all henceforth
as much honor (...), as (...) our wickedness we have ^ormerly disho(...).

Wherefore of thy (...), and for thy great names sake, we bes^^ch thee, t^ke
away our stony hearts, and (...) of ^l^sh: enable us to repent what we (...)
done, and never more to do what we have once repented, not fostering any one
sinue in our souls: reform and change our minds, wills, and affections, which
we have corrupted; remove all impediments which hinder us from serving of thee,
and direct all our thoughts, speeches, and actions to thy glory, as thou have
(...)ted our eternal salvation thereunto. Let not Satan any longer prevayle,
in causin^ us to defer our repentance; sicce we know, that late repentance is
seldom sincere, and that sickness is no (...) time (...) so great a work: as
many have found that are now in Hell: Neither is it reasonable, thou should
accept of our feeble and decrepit old age, when we have spent all the f^ower,
and strength of our youth, in serving of Satan: not once minding to leave
sin, until sin left us.

Yea, O Lord, give us firmly to resolve, speedily to begin, and continually to
persevere, in doing, and suffering thine holy will: Inform and reform us so,
that we may neither misbeleeve, nor mis-live: subdue our lusts to our wills,
submit our wills to reason, our reason to faith; our faith, our reason, our
wills, our selves, to thy blessed word and will. Dispell the thick mists and
clouds of our sins, which corrupt our souls, and darken our understandings;
separate them from us, which would separate us from thee: Yea, remove them out
of thy ^ight also, we most humbly beseech thee, a^ far as the East is from
the West; and in the merits of thy Son, pardon and forgive us all th^se
evils, which either in thought, word, or deed, we have this day, or any time
heretofore committed against thee: whether they be the sins of our youth, or
of our age; of omission, or commission; whether committed of ignorance, of
knowledge, or against conscience, and the many checks and motions of thy Spirit.

And because infidelity is the bitter root of all wickedness, and a lively
faith the true mother of all grace and goodness: nor are we Christians indeed,
except we imitate Christ, and squ^re our lives according to the rule of thy
Word: Give us that faith which manifests it self by a godly life; which
purifyeth the heart, works by love, and sanctifyeth the whole man throughout.
Yea since, if our faith be true and saving, it can no more be severed from
unfeigned repentance, and sanctification, then life can be without motion, or
the Sun without light: give us spiritual wisdom, to try and examine our
selves, whether we be in the faith or not: that so we may not be deluded with
opinion only, as thousands are.

Discover unto us the emptiness, vanity, and insufficiency of the things here
below, to do our poor souls the least good; that so we may be induced, to
set an higher price upon Jesus Christ, who is the life of our lives, and the
soul of our souls: considering, that if we have him, we want nothing; if we
want him, we have nothing.

Finally, O Lord, give unto us, and increase in us all spiritual graces:
inlighten our minds with the knowledge of thy truth, and inflame our hearts
with the love of whatsoever is good; that we may esteem it our meat and
drink, to do thy blessed will. Give us religious thoughts, godly desires,
zealous affections, holy endeavors, assured perswasion^ of ^aith, steadfast
waiting through hope, constancy in suffering through patience, and hearty
rejoicing from love: regenerate our minds, purify our natures, turn all our
joys into the joy of the Holy Ghost; and all our peace into the peace of
conscience; and all our fears into the fear of sin, that we may love
righteousness, with as great good will, as ever we loved wickedness; and go
before others in thankfulness toward thee, as far as thou go in mercy
toward us before them.

Give us victory in temptation, patience in sickness, contentment in poverty,
joy in distress, hope in troubles, confidence in the hour of death: give us
always to think and meditate of the hour of death, the day of judgment, the
joys of Heaven, and the pains of Hell; together with the ransom which thy
Son paid, to redeem us from the one, and to purchase for us the other: so
shall neither thy benefits, nor thy chastisements, nor thy word return
ineffectuall: but accomplish that for which they were sent, until we be wholly
renewed to the Image of thy Son.

And now O Lord, seeing the time approaches which thou have appointed for
rest; and because we can neither wake nor sleep without thee, who have made
the day and night, and rulest both: therefore into thy hands we commend our
souls and bodies, beseeching thee to watch over us this night, and preserve us
from all our spiritual, and bodily enemies; from thieves, fire, and from all
other dangers.

These things we humbly beg at thy fatherly hands and whatsoever else thou
know in thy divine wisdom to be needful, and necessary for our souls, or
bodies or estates, or names or friends, or the who^^ Church, better th^n we our
selves can either ask or think: and that for thy names sake, for thy promise
sake, for thy mercies sake, for thy Sons sake, who suffered for sin, and
sinned not; and whose righteousness pleads for our unrighteousness: in him
it is that we come unto thee, in him we call upon thee, who is our Redeemer,
our Preserver, and our Savior; so whom with thee, and thy blessed Spirit, be
ascribed as is most du^, all honor, glory, praise, power, might, majesty,
dominion, and hearty thankes-giving, the rest of this night following, and for
evermore.

Amen.
A Prayer to be used at any time.
O Almighty, Eternal; most Glorious, and only wise God, giver to them which
want, comforter of them which suffer, and forgiver of them that repent; whom
truly to know, is everlasting life: We thy poor creatures acknowledge and
confess unto thee, who know the secrets and desires of all hearts: that of
our selves, we are not worthy to lift up our eyes to Heaven, much less to
present our selves before thy Majesty with the least confidence, that thou
should hear our prayers, or accept of our services: but rather that thou
should take these our confessions, and accordingly condemn us to the lowest
place in Hell: for our continually abusing thy mercy, and those many means of
grace, which in thy long-suffering thou have afforded for our reclayming. We
are the cursed seed of rebellious Parents, we were conceived in sin, and
borne the Children of wrath: And whereas thou might have executed thy fierce
displeasure upon us, so soon as thou gave us being; and so prevented our
further dishonouring thee: we have instead of humbling our selves before thee
our God, and ^^^king reconciliation with thy Majesty: none nothing from our
infancy, but added sin unto sin, in breaking every one of thine holy Laws,
which thou have given us as rules and directions to walk by, and to keep us
from sinning. Yea, there is not one of thy righteous precepts, which we have
not broken more times, and ways, then we can express: so far have we been
from a privative holiness, in reforming that which is evil; and a positive
holiness in performing that which is good: which thou may justly require of
us, being we had once ability so to do, if we had not wilfully lost it: for
thou did form us righteous and holy, had not we deformed our selves;
whereas now like Satan, we can do nothing else but sin, and make others
sin too, who would not so sin, but for us: for we have an Army of unclean
desires, that perpetually fight against our souls; whereby we are continually
tempted, drawn away, and enticed through our own concupiscence. Yea, thou
know, that the heart of man is deceitful above all things; and that the
imaginations thereof, are only, and continually evil. O the infinitely
intricate windings and turnings of the dark Labyrinths of man's heart! who
finds not in himself an indisposition of mind to all good, and an
inclination to all evil?

And according to this our inclination, has been our practice: we have
yielded our hearts as cages to entertain all manner of unclean spirits, when
on the contrary we have refused to yield them as temples for thine holy Spirit
to dwell in. We have used all our wisdom, to commit the foolishness of
sin: our whole conversation has been to serve Satan, and fulfill the lusts
of the flesh. We even suck in iniquity like water, and draw on sin as it
were, with cart-ropes.

Neither is there any part, power, function, or faculty, either of our souls
or bodies, which is not become a ready instrument to dishonor thee: for as our
heart is a root of all corruption, a seedplot of all sin; so our eyes, are
eyes of vanity; our ears, ears of folly; our mouths, mouths of deceit; our
hands, hands of iniquity: and every part does dishonor thee, which yet would
be glorified of thee. The understanding which was given us to learn virtue, is
apt now to apprehend nothing but sin; the will which was given us to affect
righteousness, is apt now to love nothing but wickedness; the memory which
was given us to remember good things, is apt now to keep nothing but evil
things: for sin (like a spreading leaprosie) is so grown over us, that from
the crown of our heads, to the soale of our feet, there is nothing whole
therein, but wounds, and swellings, and soars full of corruption. Yea, our
souls and bodies are even a very sink of sin; for like the common shore,
we have not refused to welcome any, the most loathsome pollutions: that either
the world, our own corruption, or the Devil at any time has offered unto us.

Or, admit we are exempt from some evils, we may thank thee, and not our
selves for it: for we are ready without thy restrayning grace, to run out into
all manner of enormities whatsoever: we are swift to all evil, but to all good
immovable* when we do evil, we do it chearefully, and quickly, and easily;
but if we do any good, we do it faintly, and rawly, and slackly. When did we
talk without vanity? when did we give without hypocrisy? when did we bargain
without deceit? when did we reprove without anger, or envy? when did we hear
without wearisomnesse? when did we pray without ^^diousnesse? such is our
corruption, as if we were made to sin, in deed, in word, or in thought. O the
pride, passion, lust, envy, ignorance, awkwardnes, hypocrisy, infidelity,
vain thoughts, unprofitableness, and the like; which cleaves to our very best
actions! and how full of infirmity are our primest performances! for we have
not done any one action legally justifyable all our days: neither can ought we
do, abide the examination of ^hy strict justice, until it be covered with thy
Sons righteousness; and the corruption thereof washed away in his most
precious blood. Yea, if thou should behold these our prayers, as they be in
themselves, without having respect unto us in Christ Jesus; they would appear
no better in thy sight, then a menstruous cloth.

Yet, miserable wretches as we are, we like our own condition so well, that we
are not willing to go out of our selves unto thee; who would new make us,
according to the Image of thy Son: for by long custom, we have so turned
delight into necessity, that we can as willingly leave to live, as leave our
lusts: yea, we love our sins so well, and so much above our souls, that
(except thou change our hearts) we shall choose to go to Hell, rather then part
with them. Thou have used all manner of means to reclaim us, but nothing will
serve; neither the menaces and terrors of thy Law, nor the precepts and sweet
promises of thy Gospell^ can do it: We are neither softened with benefits, nor
broken with punishments; thy severity will not terrify us, nor thy kindness
mollify us. No, should thou send an Angel from the dead to warn us, all
persuasions would be in vain, since we hear Moses and the Prophets, Christ
and his Apostles daily, and are never the better.

True, O Lord, there is a maine reason of it, which we cannot now help; for
naturally we have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, hearts and understand
not. Yea, we are quite dead in sin, until thou do boar our ears, soften
our hearts, and break in upon our consciences by the irresistible power of thy
Spirit, and by going along with thy Word, shall quicken our souls, and
regenerate the whole man anew: In the mean time we are re^dy to receive all,
and return nothing but sin and disobedience; wherein we more then abound:
for we have done more against the^ this week, then we have done for thee ever
since we were borne. And whereas the least of thy mercies, is greater th^n all
the ^urte^^es of men, we are not so thankful to thee for them all, as we are
to a friend for some one good turn.

Neither do we alone lay the fault upon our inability, or want of ^upply from
thee; but upon our own pe^v^rsnesse, and want of endeavor, and putting forth
that strength and ability, which thou have given us: for how long have thou (O
most gracious God) stood at the doors of our hearts; and how often have thou
knocked, when we have refused to open, and let thee in? And if at any time we
have been overruled by the good motions of thy holy Spirit* yet have we still
returned (with the Dog) to our vomit, and (with the Sow) refused the clear
streams of thy Commandments, to wallow in the mire of our filthy sins:
whereby we have justly deserved, that thou should have called us to an
account in the dead of our sleep, and have judged us to eternal destruction;
and never have suffered us again to have seen the light of the Sun: the
remembrance of which, together with our other rebellions; when we rightly
consider them, makes us even speechless like him in the Gospel: as neither
expecting mercy, nor daring to ask it.

Howbeit, when we call to mind thy manifold mercies, showed to Manasses, Paul,
Mary Magdalen, the Thief, and the Prodigal Son, with many others; who were
no less vile then we, and who notwithstanding found thee more ready to hear,
then they were to ask; and to give above what they durst presume to begg^: we
stay our selves, and receive some encouragement from the application of the
merits of Christ Jesus; which thou have promised, shall be a sufficient
satisfaction for all our sins: and the rather, for that thou ^allest all that
are weary and heavy laden, with the burden of their sins unto thee; with
promise that thou will ease them: and have promised, that though our sins be
as red as scarlet, thou will make them white as snow; and that thou will not
the death of a sinner, but that he turn from his wickedness and live: and
that at what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins, from the
bottom of his heart, thou will blot out all his wickedness out of thy
remembrance. And least we should yet be discouraged, thou who did no less
accept the will of David, then the act of Solomon, have further promised, that
if there be but first a willing mind, thou will accept of us according to that
which we have, and not according to that which we have not.

But forasmuch O Lord, as thou know, that it is not in man to turn his own
heart, unless thou do first give him grace to convert; for thou, O Lord,
must work in us both the will and the deed: and being that it is as easy with
thee to make us righteous and holy, as to bid ^s be such, O our God, give us
ability, and willingness to do what thou command, and then command what
thou will; and thou shall find us ready to do thy blessed will. Wherefore
give to us, and increase in us all Christian graces, that we may know, and
believe, and repent, and amend, and persevere in well doing. Create in us, O
Lord, a new heart, and renew a right spirit within us: take away from us our
greedy desire of committing sin, and enable us by the powerful assistance of
thy grace, more willingly to obey thee in every of thy Commandments, then ever
we have the contrary. Yea, let thy Spirit bear such rule in every one of our
hearts, that neither Satan that foreign enemy, and roaring Lion; which seeks
to devour us, may invade us; nor our own? concupiscence, that h^mebred
traitor, may by conspiring with the world, work the ruin and overthrow of our
poor souls: but that all our wills which have been altogether rebellious, our
hearts which have been the receptacles of unclean spirits, and our affections
which are altogether carnal; may be wholly framed according to thy holy and
heavenly will. And that we may the better know how to avoyde the evil, and do
the good, let thy Word as a light, discover unto us all the ^^eights and snares
of our spiritual adversaries: yea, make it unto us as the Star which led unto
Christ; and thy benefits like the Pillar, which brought to the Land of Promise;
and thy Cross like the Messenger, that compelled guests unto the Banquet.

Give us, O Lord, to consider, that although sin in the beginning seem never
so sweet unto us, yet in the end it will prove the bane, and ruin both of body
and soul: and so assist us with thy grace, that we may willingly part with our
right eyes of pleasure, and our right hands of profit, rather then sin against
thee, and wrong our own consciences: considering that it would be an hard
bargain, for us to win the whole world, and lose our own souls.

Bless, preserve and keep us, from all the temptations of Satan, the world,
and our wicked hearts: from pride, that Lucifer-like sin, which is the
forerunner of destruction; considering that thou resistest the proud, and
give grace to the humble: from covetousness, which is the root of all evil;
being taught out of thy Word, that the love of money has caused many to fall
into diverse temptations, and snares, which drown them in perdition and
destruction; from cruelty, that infernal evil, of which thou have said, that
there shall be judgment merciless, to him that shows not mercy: ^^om
hypocrisy, that sin with two faces, whose reward is double damnation; and
the rather, because wickedness does most rankle the heart, when it is kept in,
and dissembled: and for that in all the Scriptures, we read not of an
hypocrites repentance; from whoredom, which is a sin against a m^ns own
body, and the most inexcusable; considering the remedy which thou have
appointed against it: for the punishment whereof, the Law ordained death, and
the Gospel excludes from the Kingdom of Heaven: from prophana^ion of thy
Day, considering thou have said, that whosoever sanctifies it not, shall be
cut off from thy people; and did command that he should be stoned to death,
who only gathered a few sticks on that day: from swearing, which is the
language of Hell; considering, that because of oaths the Land does mourn, and
thou have threatened that thy curse shall never depart from the house of the
swearer: from drunkenness, that monster with many heads, and worse then
beast-like sin; which in thy Word has many fearful woes denounced against
it: and the rather, for that it is a sin (like the pit of Hell) out of which
there is small hope of redemption.

Finally, O Lord, give us strength to resist temptation, patience to endure
affliction, and constancy to persevere unto the end in thy truth; that so
having passed our pilgrimage here, according to thy will, we may be at rest
with thee hereafter, both in the night of death, when our bodies shall sleep
in the grave, and in the day of our resurrection, when they shall awake to
judgment, and both bodies and souls enjoy everlasting bliss.

Be favorable to thy people every where; look down in much compassion upon
thy Militant Church, and every several member thereof: bless it in all places
with peace and truth, hedge it about with thy providence, defend it from the
mischievous designs, and attempts of thine, and her malicious enemies: let thy
Gospel go on and conquer, maugre all opposition; that Religion and
uprightness of heart may be highly set by with all, and all profaneness may
be trod under foot. More particularly, be merciful to this sinful Land; thy
Servant, our dread Sovereign; his Honorable Counsel; the Civil Magistrates,
the painful Ministers, the two Universities; those people that sit yet in
darkness; all the afflicted members of thy Son. Lord, comfort the
comfortless, strengthen the weak, bind up the broken hearted, make the bed of
the sick, be a father to the fatherless, and an husband to the widow; cloth
the naked, feed the hungry, visit the prisoners, relieve the oppressed;
sanctify unto them all their afflictions, and turn all things to the best to
them that fear thee.

Prosper the Armies that fight thy battles, and show a difference between thy
servants, and thine enemies, as thou did between the Israelites, and the
Egyptians; that the one may be confirmed, and the other reclaymed.

These, and all other good things, which for our blindness we cannot ask,
vouchsafe to give us thine unworthy servants, not for our sakes, but for thy
mercies sake; and for thy Son our Savior Jesus Christ's sake, in whom thou
art well pleased; and in whom thou wast fully satisfied upon the Cross for our
sins: who with thee and the Holy Ghost, lives and reigns ever one God,
world without end.

Let thy mighty hand, and outstretched arm, O Lord, be still our defense; thy
mercy and loving kindness in Jesus Christ thy dear Son, our salvation; thy
true and holy Word our instruction; thy grace and holy Spirit our comfort,
consolation, illumination, and sanctification, now and for ever.

Amen.
Babes that are inexpert in the Word of righteousness, use milk: But strong
meat belongs to them that are of full age. Heb. 5. 13, 14.
THE STATE OF A CHRISTIAN, lively set forth by an Allegory of a Ship Prove.
31. 14. Job 9. 26. ^say 23. 1. Rev. 8. 9.
under Sail.
MY body is the Hull, the Keele my back, my Ne^ke the Stem, the Sides are my
Ribbe^, the ^e (...)es my bones, my flesh the plankes, Gr^stles and ligaments
are the (...) and ^n^e-^im^^rs; Arter^es, veins, and sinews, the several se
(...) of the Ship; my blo^d is the ballast, my heart the principal Hold, my
stomach the Co(...)e, my Liver the Cisterne, my Bowels the Sink, my Lungs the
Bellows, my Teeth the Chopping-knives (except you divide them, and then they
are the 32, p^ints of the Sea-card, both agreeing in number;) Co^coction is the
Caldron, and hunger the Salt or Saw(...), my belly is the lower Deck, my
Kidnyes Close Ca^^ins, or recep^acles; my thighs are long Galleries for the
grace of the Ship, my arms and hands the Can^ookes, my Midriff^ is a large
Partition, or Bulk-head; within the circumference of my head is placed the
Steeridge room, and chief Cabb^ns, with the Round house where the Master
lies; and these for the more safety and decency, are enclosed with a double
fence; the one Dur(...)ter, something hard and thick; the other Pi(...)matter,
very thin and soft, which serves instead of hangings: The cares are two
doors or Seuttles, fitly placed for ^ntertainment; the two Eyes are Casements
to let in light, under them is my mouth the Stowidge or Stewards room; my
lips are Hatches for receipt of goods, my two Nostrils serve as Gratings to
let in air; at the one end stands my chin, which is the Beakehead; my forehead
is the upper deck; all which being trimmed with my fat instead of pitch, and
hair instead of O^kham, are colored with my skin.

The fore-decke is humility, the stearne charity, active obedience the sails;
which being hoysed up with the several Yards, Halliers, and Bowlings of holy
precepts and good purposes, are let down again by fickleness, faintings, and
inconstancy; Reason is my Rudder, experience the Helm, hope of salvation my
Anchor, passive obedience the Capstaine, holy revenge the Cat and Fish to hawle
the sheate Anchor, or last hope; fear of osfending is the Buoy, virtues are
the Cablo^, hol(...) d(...)ires, and sudden ejaculations the shrouds; the
zeal of Gods glory is my Mainmast, pr^meditation the fo^e-m^st, desire of
mine own salvation the Mizz^n-mast, saving knowledge the B(...)sprit,
Circumspection a sounding line, my Light is illumination, Justice is the ^ard,
Gods Word the Compass, the meditation of life's brevity a Foure-houreg^asse,
Contemplation of the Creatures the Crossestaffe or Jacobs stasfe, the Creed a
Sea-grammar, the life of Christ my Load-starre, the Saints falls are Seamarkes,
Good examples Land-markes; Repentance Pumps out the sink of my sins, a good
Conscience keeps me clean, imputative righteousness is my Flagge, having
this Motto (BEING CAST DOWN WE PERISH NOT) The Flag-staffe is since^ity, the
Ship is vict(...)led afresh by reading, hearing, receiving; Books are
Long-boates, Letters are little Sciffes to carry and re-carry my spiritual
merchandise, Perseverance is my speed, and Patience my name, my fire is lust,
which will not be clean extinguished; full feeding and strong drink is the
fuel to maintain it, whose slame (if it be not suppressed) is jealousy, whose
sp^rkes are evil words, whose ashes is envy, whose smoke is infamy;
Lascivious talk is as ^^int and steel, Concupiscence as tinder, opportunity
is the match to light it, Sloth and idleness are the Servants to prepare it.

The Law of God is my Pilot, Faith my Captain, Fortitude the Master, Chasti^y
the Masters mate, my will the Coxen, Conscience the Preacher, Application of
Christ's death the Surgeon, Mortification the Cook, Vivi^ication the Calker,
Selfe-denyall is an Apprentice of his, Temperance the Steward, Contentation his
Mate, Truth the Purser, Thankfulness the Pursers mate, Reformation the
Boatswam, The 4. humors, Sanguin, Choler, etc. are the Quarter Masters,
Christian vigilance undertakes to supply the office of Starbord and Larbord
watch* Memory is Clerk of the Check, Assurance the Corporal, the Armor
Innocence, the Mariners Angels, Schismatics are searchers sent aboard; my
understanding as Master Gunner culls out from those two Budgecaskes of the New
and Old Testament, certain threats and promises, which is my only Powder and
Shot; and with the assistance of the Gunners mate, holy anger against sin,
charge my tongue, which like to a Piece of Ordnance shootes them to the shame
and overthrow of my spiritual Adversaries.

My Noble Passengers are Joy in the Holy Ghost, and the peace of Conscience,
whose re^inue are divine graces; my ignoble, or rather mutinous passengers are
worldly cogitations and vain delights, which are more then a good many;
besides some that aee arrant thieves and traitors, namely pride, envy,
prejudi^e; but all these I Will bid farewell when I come to my journeys end,
though I would, but cannot before.

Heaven is my Country, where I am registered in the Book of life; my King is
Jehovah, my tribute Almesdeeds, they which gather it are the poor; Love is my
Countries badge, my language is holy conference, my fellow companions are the
Saints.

I am poor in performances, yet rich in Gods acceptance; The foundation of
all my good, is Gods free Election; I became bound into the Corporation of the
Church, to serve him in my baptism; I was enrolled at the time when he first
called me; my freedom is Justification, it was purchased with the blood of
Christ, my evidence is the earnest of his Spirit, my privileges are his
sanctifying Graces, my Crown (reserved for me on high) is Glorification.

My Maker and Owner is God, who built me by his Word, which is Christ; of
earth, which was the material: he fraught it with the essence of my soul,
which is the Treasure; and has set me to sail in the Sea of this world, till
I attain to the Port of Death* which lets the terrestrial part into the
(...)ur of the grave, and the celestial into the Kingdom of Heaven; in which
voyage convenience of estate is as Sea-roome, good affections serve as a tide,
and prayer as a prosperous gale a wind, to help forward.

But innumerable are the impediments and perils, for here I meet with the
proffers of unlawful gain, and sensual delights as so many Sirens; the
baytes of prosperity (as high banks) on the right hand or weather-shoare, and
there with evil suggestions, and crabbed adversity (as Rocks) on the left
hand, or Leeshore, ready to split me; the fear of Hell, like quickesands,
threatens to swallow me; Original sin, like weeds, clogge me; and actual
transgressions like so many Barnacles, hang about me: yea, every sin I commit
springs a new leake; my senses are as so many storms of rain, hail, and
snow, to sink me; lewd affections are roaring billows and waves;
selfe-confidence, or to rely upon any thing but divine assistance, is to lose
the Boltsprit; Restitution is heaving goods overboard to save the Ship;
Melancholy, is want of freshwater; the scoffs of Atheists, and contempt of
Religion in all places, is a notable becalming; the lewd lives, and evil
examples of the most, a contagious air; Idleness furs it, and is a shrewd
decay, both of Hull and Tackling. Moreover sailing along, and keeping watch,
(for they that are Christ's friends, you know, must look for all they meet to
be their enemies) we no sooner look up, but presently we ken a man of war,
and then we must be for war too, and provide for a skirmish.

Now the Gallyon that has our Pinnace in chase, and always watches for
advantages to surprise it, is the Piracy of Hell, the Synagogue of Satan; her
freight is Temptations and Persecutions, with all the Engines of mischief; in
which the Devil is Master, malice the Masters mate, cruelty the Captain,
Murder the Cook, Flattery the Calker, Profaneness a Quartermaster, Riot the
Steward, Never-content his mate; Pride the Cockeson, Superstition the Preacher,
Hypocrisy the Boatswain, Covetousness the Purser, Lust the Swabber, Fury the
Gunner, Presumption the Corporal, Sedition the Trumpeter, Drunkenness the
Drummer, Vices are the Sails, Custom the Mainmast, Example of the multitude
the Foremast, Lusts and passions the Cables, Blindness of mind the Rudder,
Hardness of heart the Helm, the wisdom of the flesh the Card, the mystery
of iniquity the Compass, the five senses, or if you will, scosling Atheists,
profane fowle-mouthed drunkards, and all the rabble of Hell, are the Mariners;
lewd affections the Passengers, little conscience the Load-starre; she has two
Tire of great Ordnances planted in her, heresy, and irreligion, (being either
for a false God or none) Oaths, Blasphemy, and Curses, are the Powder and
Shot, which they spit against all that worship the Lamb, or fight under the
ensign of faith; her Armor is carnal security, the Flag in her top is
infidelity, the Motto (There is no God but Gain;) Her ballast which keeps her
upright, is ignorance; most of her Tackling she has from Rome; Antichrist as
Pilot steares her in such a course, that she goes on swiftly, proudly,
securely, scorning and scoffing (Senach^rib-like) to hear that any Lord should
deliver this poor Pinnace out of her hands; yet in the sequel this silly
Pink^ having the insurance of Gods omnipresence, finds not only succor from
the Stock of the Churches prayers, which like another Merchant man comes in to
the rescue; but likewise that Gods Almighty ^owe^ and providence is near at
hand, as a strong Castle of defense to free her, whereby she escapes, even as a
Bird out of the snare of the Hunter, to praise the Lord, who has not given her
as a prey unto their teeth, that would have swallowed up all quick; but
delivered her from such swelling waters, floods of affliction, and streams of
persecution, as else had gone over her, and even drowned her soul; as it is
Psalm 124. while this great Gallion (though it seem like that Invincible
A^mado) flies, and (having no Anchor) when the storms of Gods wrath arise,
down she sinkes to desperation, and perishes in the bottomless pit, or
burning lake of fire and brimstone; where we will leave her, to receive a just
recompense of reward.

December. 4. 1640. Imprimatur

Th: Wykes.



I have transiently found (in making up the Index) some literal mistakes,
points misplaced, etc. which in viewing of the proofs escaped me, though
obvious enough: and I doubt not but the Reader may find others, when perhaps
be shall not find the very same: yet none are (I hope) of such consequence,
as to a charitable or intelligent Reader, shall need an Errata.

The Table.
A
ABsent, we are apt to think God absent, when he is most present, 255.
wickedness, not affliction argues him absent. ibid. Adversaries, in vexing our
selves, we please them. 156 Adversities, distinction of them. 247 Affliction
brings to repentance, 12. works amendment of life, 24. sti^s up to Prayer, 30.
weanes from the world, 35. keeps us prepared, 43. discovers hypocrites from
true believers, 46. tryes the truth and measure of each grace, 51. prevents
sin, 55. panishment here, ibid, hereafter, 55. makes humble, 61. conformable
to Christ, 68. increases our says, 72. our joy and thankfulness, 78.
spiritual wisdom, 83. Patience. 90 Affl(...), a good sign of Gods call, 28.
though the root be bitter, the fruit is pleasant; 329. it brings the company
of God himself, 128. God is more specially present with his in ^ffliction,
251. though we see him not, 254. God usually most affl^cteth whom he most
affects, 233. Affliction sanctified ever leaves some blessing behind it,
224. no Sampson to whom this Lion does not yield honey, ibid. use of trial,
whether we have well husbanded our afflictions, 223. freedom from affl^ction,
a sign of Impotency, 329. the greatest affl^ction not to be afflicted, 324,
and 327. where God uses not the Rod, he means to use the Sword; 324. he will
lay no more upon us, then we shall be able to bear, and make for our good;
265. it shall be either short, or tolerable; 269. God takes good things from
us, that when we think to have lost all, he may restore them double; 288. no
repentance can secure us that we shall not smart with outward afflictions, 331.
the wicked worse for affliction. 27. and 54 Allegory, an Allegory wherein is a
hundred resemblances between a Man and a Ship. 39^ (...) guard the faithful.
263 A(...)y between the Men of the world, and the Children of God. 1
Application of Scripture all in all, 150. a good hearer will apply ^o himself
whatsoever the Word speaks, 357. no benefit by Christ, or the promises, except
applied. 310 Assurance of the pardon of sin, what a comfort? 124
B
Bear injuries, that we may imitate Christ, 207. and the Saints, 211. ^eare
with them, because they know not what they do^; 143. and that we may win them.
163 Bele^vers discove^ed from Hypocrites by affliction. 46 Bene^^^s best known
by the want of them. 80 Bl^ssings, God seldom dep^ives us of one, but he more
then supplies it in another. 26
C
CAlling of God, never leaves a man unchanged. 330 charity, if we will not be
in Charity, we shall never be in Heaven. 131 Chastening, refuse not the
chastening of the Lord. 227 Ch^ldren; if Gods Ch^ldren so smart, how can
Bastards look to escape. 339 Christ, whatsoever we owed, he discharged; what
we des^rved, he suffered. 295 Christians in patience out-st(...)p Philosophers
in seven particulars, 193. dishonorable for a Christian to contend with a
Russian. 148 Church, prospers by being persecuted. 5 Comfort, the less we
find on earth, the more we seek for it above. 35 Confidence, nor always
alike. 307 Conscience, good, supports in greatest extremities, 126. festered,
will not endure the Plais^er of truth: Epistle. a ^eared conscience will excuse
when guilty, an afflicted will accuse when innocent. 300 Contraries, God works
in and by contraries, 3^8. Contraries the best Commentari^s on each other. 80
Cowards, no such Coward, none so valiant as the believer. 178 Credit, our
credit more cared for then our God, 121. an ounce of credit with God, is more
then a talent of men^ praises. 143 Cross, Christ and all the Saints partners
with us in the Cross^, 332. by small crosses we become able to endure great.
330 Custom makes any thing easy. 92
D
DEath, the wicked man's fear, the godly man's wish, 42. nothing more welcome to
the believer, 185. the many advantages and commodities by it. 186 Delay, if God
delay us never so long, he will support u^ (...) long; 282. reasons why he
delays hi^ people. 312 Deliverance ^omes when we least look for it, 271.
many are the troubles of the righteous, but God del^vers out of all; 277.
Examples of such as were delivered, when in reason they were past hope. 278
Denial, Selfe-denyall a prime grace. 293 Desire, God but desires to be
d^sired. 316 Deservings, to compare our receipts and deservings, the best
(...)medy for impatiente. 339 Disgrace to be well spoken of by the wick^d, 157.
we should esteem it a grace to be d^sgraced for Christ 358 D^ubting, tender
consciences apt to doubt, 300. he that does not sometimes doubt, did never
believe. 299
E
ENds, the several ends of God, Satan, and wicked men, in willing the same
thing. 246 Enem^es are limited, and can go no farther then their chain will
reach; 262. without leave from God they cannot diminish one hair of our head^,
^bid. let them take all, they cannot take Christ from us; 134. they are rather
to be pitied then reckoned of, 146. our enemies do us good, when they do us
the greatest evil; 244. they g^eaten our graces, and augment our glory; 346.
but vengeanc^ shall be their reward, 244. we must love our enemies, 173. pray
for them, ibid. do^ them good for evil, 197. he that does good to his enemy,
^^es better to himself. 13^ (...), nothing too much to ^^dure for those
pleasures which (...) for ev^r. 343 (...), n^ (...) bo^ne Christian but i^ the
better for his e^ils, 225. ^^yne (...) have Crowns answerable. 136 Example,
men are sooner won by ex^mple then by precept, 163. a King and all his Family
won to the Christian ^aith by the devout life of a po^^e Captive woman. 163
Experience, comfort from ^ormer experience. 271. 303 (...), Man's extr(...)y is
Gods opportunity. 273
F
FA(...) ever lo(...)t. 98 F(...)s, be (...) t^oubled to do^ one, th^n to
hear of it. 121 (...), increased by trials, ^2. signs of it, 304. it may be
eclipsed, not extinguished 30^. that ^aith most commendable that holds (...)
when (...)nes are wanting, 275. the strongest faith not free from doubying, 75.
opinion of ^a^th without doubting a do^age, 30^. judge by says, and not by
sense. 327 (...), God is no^ s^^^ed till ^elt, 83. the wicked s^are where they
(...) not, and (...) not where they should, 181. sear mo^e the blasts of men's
breath, then the fir^ of Gods wrath, (...)* he that s^^^es not to do evil, is
always ^^^aid to su^fer evil, 184. ^eare God, ^ea^e sin, and s^^re nothing;
189 the g(...)y (...)re not death, 181. many commands not to fear, 3^0 ^^e
make them causes of sear^, which the Holy Ghost make^ the greatest causes of
joy; 350. our f^are shall be turned (...) joy, which cannot be taken from us:
360. good is that (...) which hinders us from evil, 300. men are less to
(...) (...) for their (...), ^0^. ^eare often mentioned in Scripture as an
infallible ma^k^ of a godly man, 302. an humble fear^ ^^tter then a
pres^mptu^^s confidence. 299 Flee we may ^^om danger. 218 For^^^, none so
strong as the spiri^uall. 1^^ Forg^v^ ^swell as (...), 202. if we forgive not,
we shall no^ be ^orgiv^n. 1^5
G
GE(...)sse, if it or the word would serve, we should not sma^^. 15 Glorious,
if the conflict be more sharp, the Crown will be more glorious; 345. the
sight of glory future, mitigates the sense of misery present. 341 God, his
stripes are special tokens of his love, 321. nothing can happen to us but by
his special providence, 257. who limiteth the measure, continuance, etc. and
orders it to his own glory, and our good: ibid. wicked, but used by him as
instruments for our good, 258. who in resisting his will do fulfill it, 261.
if we are in league with God, we need not fear either men or Devils, 259. God
will change the nature of each Creature, rather then they shall hurt us, 241.
to admire his wisdom, goodness, etc. who turns all our poyson^ into
cordials, 237. God resists our enemies, fustaineth us when we faint, and
crowns us when we overcome, 256. two famous Strumpets converted only by this
argument, That God sees all things: 87. if we wrong one for his goodness, our
envy strikes at the Image of God in him, 169. God will not give, if we abuse
his gifts; 34. we should suffer injuries patiently for Gods glory, 166. 192.
and because he commands us, 173. and because revenge is Gods office, 167. we
should commit our cause to God, 167. to be more tender of Gods dishonor then
of our own disgrace. 217 Godly may s^^^er from Satan, etc. in their bodies,
outward estates, or lives, as well as others. 266 Go(...)sse is a Physi^ian in
sickness, a Preacher in heaviness, etc. 130 Good must be rend^ed for evil,
199. a common thing with Christians, 211. 199. Death wo^kes our good, 240. yea,
our sins, 230. and Satan himself, 246. A man's good behavior will best
vindicate him from evil report. 170 G(...)e, the worlds hatred a good sign of
it, 235. those that have ^^o^e of grace mourn for the want of it, 300. God
must both begin and per^ect all our grac^s, 314. the graces of Gods children
shine most in affliction, 8. Grace was never given as a Target against
external evils, 331. we have a share in each others graces. 3^8 G(...)sse
discovers it self by impatience. 97
H
HAppy, the most happy worldling completely miserable. 127 Heaven, a glymps of
it, 135. this life our Hell, and the wickeds Heaven, 343. the next shall be
their Hell, and our Heaven. ibid. Hope against hope the only, 74. the hopes of
the wicked fail them at highest. 300 Humble, affliction makes humble. 61
I
IOnorance the cause of fear, unbelief, etc. 350 In^idelity the cause of all
evil. 298 Ungrateful, we grudge at a present distress, are ungrateful for
favors past. 338 Instructed best, when afflicted most. 83 Innocence, mildness
a true sign of it. 95 Joy; none so joyful as the faithful, 127. solid joy
issues only from a good conscience, 128. sorrow increases our joy and
thankfulness, 78. we are afflicted with the causes of our joy. 359 Judge not
of men's persons by their outward conditions, 233. nor of the Lords dealing by
sense, 234. we should judge of men as they are, and not as they have been. 99
Justice, God in justice will pardon such as repent and believe. ^95
K
KNow, we learn to know our selves by that we suffer. 46. 83
L
LAw, rules to be observed in going to Law. 121 Lives, if we lose our lives, it
is that we may save our souls. 266
M
MAlice of our enemies, God turns to the glory of his power, 3. wisdom, 5
and goodness. 8 Martyrdom for Religion. 336 Means which wicked men use to
establish their power, hastens their ruin. 7 Mercy of God exceeding great,
286. no cause of Gods mercy but his mercy, 307. he lets us see our misery, that
we may seek to him for mercy. 309. Misery makes after-blessings more sweet.
78
O
OVercome; whiles we overcome our enemy, the Devil overcomes us, 102. the
Martyrs overcame by dying. 105
P
Partial we are in prosperity. 85 Patience, sixteen reasons of it, 95.
First, the godly are patient, because innocent, 95. Secondly, because it is
more generous, 101. more noble, ibid. more valiant, 102. more wise, 103. more
divine and Christian like to forgive then revenge, 105. Thirdly, because
suffering is the best way to prevent suffering, 108. Fourthly, because their
sins have deserved more, 115. Fifthly, because their sufferings are
counterpoysed with more then answerable blessings, 124. Sixthly, because
patience brings a reward with it here, 136. hereafter, 132. and is a reward to
it self, 138. Seaventhly, because their enemies are ignorant, 142. Eighthly,
and are to be pitied rather then maligned, 14^. Ninthly, that their
expectation may not be answered, 153. Tenthly, for that it would be a
disparagement to have their enemies good word, 157. Eleventhly, and is a prayso
to have their evil report, 159. Twelfthly, that their enemies may learn, and
be won by their example, 163. Thirteenthly, because it is Gods office to
revenge, 167. Fourteenthly, God has commanded the contrary, 173. Fifteenthly,
for Gods glory, 192. Sixteenthly, that they may follow Christ's example, and
imitate the patience of the Saints, 207. our patience is proved and improved by
enemies, 90. the impatient man has two burdens on his back, the patient but
one, 140. Faith and patience two miracles in a Christian, 140. patience as
Larde to the lean meat of adversity, 138. the more guilty the more impatient,
96. Philosophers endued with great patience, 192. yet come not near a
Christian, 193. how to know whether our patience and other graces be right,
202. rules to be observed in bearing, 2^4. touching thoughts, 216. words, ibid.
actions. 217 Pain, we feel more the fingers pain, then the health of the
whole body, 344. our pain will soon cease, our joys never. 343 Peace of
conscience, what a great blessing. 125 Perseverance, the truth of grace always
blessed with perseverance, 314. it is the gift of God, ibid. the crown of all
(...). 279 Pleasures of the body are poisons to the soul. 56 Poverty before
affliction more contemptible then dishonesty. 86 Prayer the key of Heaven, 315.
the hand of a Christian, ibid. all our strength lies therein, 315. prayers and
tears the Churches Armor, ibid. patience and prayer the weapons of a
Christian, 218. prayer can do all things, 3^5. it even overcommeth God
himself, 316. pray in faith, ibid. inducements to prayer, 362. Prayer for the
Morning, 363. a Prayer for the Evening, 373. a Prayer for all times, 382. none
ever came to Christ with a lawful suite and was denied, 316. yea, he gives
before we ask, ibid. and more then we ask, 33. and 317. hearty prayer not in
our own power, it is the gift of God, 319. which he does not always bestow
in the sam: measure, ibid. not fall into prayer without preparation, 320. we
must not only pray, ibid. seeming de^yalls must increase the strength of our
cries, 321. in affliction pray our selves, in sickness get others to pray for
us, 318. because in extremity we may not be able to pray, ibid. we have the
benefit of Christ, intercession in Heaven, 318. and of all the Saints prayers
on Earth, ibid. affliction makes us servent in prayer, (...). granting our
suites, not always an effect of love, 352. denyalls better then grants in some
cases, ibid. in unfit supplications we are most heard when repelled, 351. we
must not measure Gods hearing us by his present answer, 352. not his present
answer by our own sense. 353 Praise to the godly to be dispraysed of the
wicked, 157. and a disprayse to be praised of them. ibid. Prepared affliction
keeps us prepared to the spiritual combat. 43 Presence of Gods Spirit and
grace many times, yet perceive it not, 317. yea, when we complain for the want
of it. ibid. Pride, how proud we are by nature, 63. an humble pride, 350.
selfe-confidence is pride without wit, 66. we think too well of our selves,
till the Cross confute^ us, 63. God lets proud men fall into some soul sin,
that they may the better know themselves, 64. if we would think worse of our
selves, we should be better thought of, 121. Pride makes us over apprehensive
of wrongs. 121 Profit, we are apt to shrink from Christ, when our profits or
pleasures shrink from us. 348 Promises are all general, excluding none that
repent and believe, 297. where is no Commandment, there is no Promise, 177. if
we want Gods Word, in vain we look for his aid. 177 Prosperity makes us
drunk with the love of the world, 35. but the Cross brings us to our selves
again, 36. Prosperity is ^o Religion as the ^vy to the Oak, 37. nothing
carries us so far from God as his favors, 41. riches, honor, health, etc.
would shipwreck the foul if they were not cast overboard, 328. it were ill
for us if permitted our own choosers, 351. the more prosperity the less
piety, 25. Prosperity no sign of felicity, 232. not to judge the better of men
for prosperity, nor the worse for their misery, ibid. long continued prosperity
a fearful sign of judgment, 324. of which, many examples, 325. how apt men
are to deceive themselves in thinking God favors, them, because they prosper;
326. what we think most pleasing, is most plaguing; 327. nature is jocund while
it prospers, 347. but to be equally good in a prosperous and adverse
condition, deserves praise; ^48. if outward things frame not to us, let us
frame our minds to them. ibid. Punishment, we may often read our sin in our
punishment, 120. the punishment of our enemies, 248. it is deferred, not
remitted. 250
R
RA^gning, the way to it is by suffering. 69 Railing. in railing at us they
shame themselves. 147 Release, God not only releaseth his, but makes their
latter end more prosperous. 279 Religion, no true virtue where is no true
Religion. 193 Repentance, how to know whether we have repented, 23. signs of
trial touching repentance, 289. true repentance begins at original sin, 86.
affliction brings to repentance. 13 Report, crediting of evil reports, a sign
of wickedness or ^olly. 161 Restitution, without it no forgiveness. 20
Revenge, we are commanded not to revenge, 173. if we do, we lose Gods
protection, 177. neglect will sooner kill an injury then revenge, 109.
forgiveness the most noble, valiant, wise, divine, and Christian-like revenge.
101 Reward for suffering great, 340. the greater our sufferings, the greater
our reward; 345. let us look up to the recomp^nce of reward, and we shall not
with our burden lighter. ibid.
S
Sadness, nothing will drive it away like living well. 87 Safe, the way to be
safe is never to be secure. 43 Salvation, nothing availeable to salvation but
faith. 294 Sanctify, God will either be sanctified of us, or on us. 227 Satan
chiefly prevayles by deception of our reason, 87. he will set a f^ire gloss on
the foulest sin. 87 Scoff, a Christian in name will scoff at a Christian in
deed, 47. Scoffi^g at Religion no mean sin. 250 Sickness, we remember not
many years health, so much as one days sickness. 338 Silence, nothing more
vexes an enemy then silence, 153. the best answer to reproaches is no answer.
155 Sin and punishment inseparable, 23. sin the ground of all griefs, 118.
the sting of all troubles, 189* God does not merely, though mainly, chastis^
for sin, 21. our sins weaken us, strengthen our enemies, 2^. one sin
keeps possession for Satan, as well as twenty; 17. and is enough to condemn,
ib. small sins bring great danger, 18. small sins not to be ventured on, 179.
a godly man fears more the least sin, then the greatest trouble, 181. be our
sins great, Gods mercies are infinite; 286. be they great and many, so they be
not wilful, they shall not condemn us; 285. what displeases us shall never
hurt us, 290. sins upon repentance are so remitted, as if they had never
been committed; 288 Christ calls only heavy laden si^ners, 300. Original sin
the most soul and hateful of all. 86 Sivill honesty, how short it comes of
Christianity. 203 Sorrows shall not be violent, or shall not last. 269 Soul,
neithe^ Satan nor our enemies can hurt our souls. 266 Speak, the wors^ evil
men speak of us, the better, 157. and the better the worse, 159. if another
speak evil of thee, call not him, but thy self to account. 121 Spirit, a
sound spirit will bear his infirmity, 139. a good spirit will be a man's
Crosse-bearer, 98. the palate but an ill judge of spiritual things 327
Suffering, when thou suffer, look up from the instrument to God the author,
and to sin the cause; 116. it is nothing to what we have deserved, 339. our
sufferings do not satisfy Gods justice for sin, 71. A blessed and happy
thing to suffer for Christ, 357. it is the greatest preferment that God gives
in this world, 358* an ^^ard matter to think suffering a special favor, but
so it is; 359. God loves those best, whom he seems to favor least, ibid.
commonly the measure of o^r sufferings is according to the measure of gra^e in
us, and Gods love to us; 324. our sufferings require patience with
thankfulness, 129. we must suffer willingly, cheerfully, and thankfully, 206.
a Christian rejoices in his sufferings, 205. our sufferings are counterpoysed
with answerable blessings, 124. and as our sufferings exceed, so do our
comfort^, 313. Satan makes suffering seem more difficult then it is, 210.
suffering the way to prevent suffering, 108. we must suffer patiently, because
we suffer justly, 221. our sufferings shall be either short or tolerable, 269.
our sufferings are nothing, compared with Christ's; 332. or the Saints in former
ages. ibid.
T
TEmptation, the greatest not to be tempted, 32^. in time of temptation a man
is not a competent judge in his own case. 288 Thankfulness, we must suffer
with thankfulness, 228. to give God thanks once in adversity, more
acceptable then to do^ it many times in prosperity; 359. we ar^ more apt to
pray then give thanks, because we are more sensible of our own wants, then
Gods glory. 81 Time, when the time which God has appointed is come, he will
deliver us, and not before; 276. w^ must not prescribe him the time, but wait;
312. he will release us in due time, that is, in his time, not in ours; 276. he
forbeares to try what is in us, and what we will do or suffer for him. 312
Trials, small, a sign of weakness in grace. 329 Tribulation, we must not
rave in tribulation like the wicked, nor be patient without sense as the
Stoics; 228. but kiss the R^d we smart withal. 230
V
VAlorous, non^ truly valorous, b^t such as are truly religious. 184
W
WAnt, where is no want is much wantonness. 57 Way^ examples of such as
miscarried, being our of their way. 177 Wait Gods leisure. 311 Weary, we are
never weary of receiving, soon weary of attending. 348 Will, the will is all
in all with God, 290. God accepts the will for the dee^, 319. the affection
for the action. ibid. Wise, that which makes the body smart, makes the soul
wise. 83 Wish, we should strangely entangle our selves, if we could sit down
and obtain our Wishes; 355. none would be more miserable then he that should
cull out his own ways. 356 World, we are weaned from it by calamities. 35
Works, the tenure of our salvation is not by a covenant of works, but by a
covenant of grace. 286 Worthy, we are most worthy when we think our selves
most unworthy. 289
Z
Zeal must be mixed with knowledge and discretion: 218
FINIS.

