A declaration of the Right Honorable ROBERT, Earl of Warwick, Lord High
Admiral of ENGLAND, and of all the Plantions belonging to any his Majesty's,
the King of ENGLANDS Subjects upon the Coasts of AMERICA, Governor of the
Company of LONDON for the Plantation, of the Summer ISLANDS; And of the said
Company: To the Colony and Plantation there
AS the Happiness of a Christian People is ever best advanced, by their
constant Progress in the ways of Peace and Holiness: So are they in nothing
more miserable themselves, and offensive to others, then in their uncharitable
Contentions, and Discords interrupting the same. We have therefore thought
meet, out of our most affectionate desires of your Welfare, to make this
ensuing Declaration; wherein, first, and above all things, we do, with all
earn^^^nesse, bespeake all, and every one, That in their several Places and
Conditions, they will endeavor, by following the Truth in Love, to advance the
Glory of God, and of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

We intend not to anticipate, or prevent the Honorable Houses of Parliament,
in any their Determinations, in matters Ecclesiastical, or Civil; but with
Prayer, and Patience attend that Resolution, which it shall please the Lord to
direct them unto. And whilst we thus wait, we desire, and hope that you will
do the like.

What the thoughts of the Parliament have been, and are, for all the
Plan^^tions upon the Coasts of AMERICA, The Ordinance of Parliament therewith
sent, will abundantly declare; And what our endeavors are for your happiness,
this writing is a Witness; wherein we shall express our Desires in some
particulars.

We have thought meet, for the present, to continue the Government, as now it
stands, by Commission, together with all Officers, and Commanders formerly
chosen by us, until we shall give further direction therein; as to prevent
that disturbance which an alteration might occasion; so for the better
moderation, and improvement of Authority, to encourage Piety, Goodness, and
Industry, and to suppress Profaneness, wickedness, and idleness in all
sorts of People, and places of the Colony.

We think it not meet, for the present to give any intimation, either to
Ministers or People, touching the the public Administration of Gods Worship,
being in expectance of that Directory, which the Parliament, with the advice,
of the Assembly of Divines, shall hold forth according to sacred Scriptures. In
the mean time, we desire you would follow Peace with all men, and Holiness,
without which no man shall see the Lord; looking diligently, lest any man fail
of the grace of God, lest any root of Bitterness springing up trouble you, and
thereby many be defiled.

As a good means to promote Piety in the minds of all, and to prevent
Profaneness: we do, in a special manner, recommend unto your best care, the
observance of the Lords day; whereon, as we hope the Ministers will so improve
their Labors at every Church within their several Tribes, that all the people
may have the best convenience to hear the Word of God Preached: So we also
trust, that Masters of Families will be careful by Catechizing, and otherwise,
so to instruct their Children, and Servants, that all may come to the knowledge
of God, and of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, whom rightly to know is life
eternal. And that both Magistrates, and Masters of Families will restrain
them under their Commands, from careless and sinful expense of that precious
time, in sloth, idleness, or any way to Gods dishonor, and their own hurt.
For your better direction herein, we herewith send you an Ordinance of
Parliament.

The Company is very sensibly affected with your want of a Minister: And that
thereby any particular person, or part of the Colony should suffer a Famine of
the Word of God, is very grievous unto us. We intend, God willing, by the very
first opportunity, to supply your want herein. In the mean while, we earnestly
desire the Ministers would double their diligence in teaching the knowledge of
God through the Land; knowing, that as their Labor therein cannot be in vain
in the Lord; So shall they thereby exceedingly indeare themselves into the good
Affections of the Company, who desire nothing so much as the Salvation of your
souls.

For Counselors, Captains, and all other Officers, as we require all due
honor, and respect to be given them: So, as a means thereof, we desire they
may be as a Sanctuary, and City of refuge to all such as love the Lord Jesus
Christ in sincerity; improving all their Power, and Authority, as for the
securing of the Islands, preserving of Peace, and promoting the power of
Godliness in all places, and Persons; so, for suppressing of all manner of
sin and wickedness. And, for that Tippling Houses, Idleness, and ill
Company, are those Anvils, whereon Satan, with our own Lusts, Forgeth out all
manner of sin and wickedness; We desire great care be taken to prevent the
same: That so, by the Officers faithful performance of their Duties in their
several places, The people being kept in Peace and Amity, The multitude of
Indictments and P^esentments, commonly brought to the publi^^ Assize^, may be
prevented. And though we would not encourage Appeals, which proof so
troublesome, and chargeble to them that make them: Yet in that case, we shall
expect to receive from the public Officers what ever may clear the business
to us; who, by Gods Grace, shall proceed according to the merit of the Cause,
without respect of Persons.

In all Causes wherein Oaths are Administered, we desire great care may be
used to inform both the Jury, and Witnesses, of the horrible sin of
Perjurie, with the dreadful severity of Gods punishments thereupon, That so
they may not adventure to swear, but in Truth, Judgment, and Righteousness.

We had good hope that ere now, by the small quantity, mean condition, and
short returns you have found of Tobacco, you would have been put upon that
diligence and industry, which might have introduced some more profitable and
staple Commodity: whereunto, as we formerly have, so we are still ready to
afford all possible encouragement, and assistance. We shall now desire all
those that have made any essays therein, with such others as have affection
thereunto, That they would improove their best Observations, and Experience, to
find out somewhat which may be of more benefit to you, and satisfaction to us;
which, as we shall accept as an evidence of Affection to the Public Good; So,
we shall consider of some way for compensation, according to their charge, and
endeavors therein.

We have just cause to complain of the wrong we have suffered in the Case of
Wrecks; not only by more private persons, but by public Officers. And, truly,
we are much troubled to find so great injustice among you, as might occasion
us to revoke that Law, which, in great favor, allows a Moitie to the
Recoverers. We shall expect, and hope for better Accounts then yet we have
received, both of that which lately happened, and what hereafter may.

We have seriously considered of the want of Linen Cloth, and other
necessaries, by the public Letters, intimated to be in the Colony; which
seems the more strange unto us, when we hear the Adventurers declare, that of
great Proportions of Goods which they have sent to you, they have received very
short Returns. If there be a scarcity, we conceive it arises from your
selves, ^^^^est Factours are so unfaithful in making returns; private Persons
so backw^r^ in paying their dues; public Officers so remiss in executing
Justice herein; and all or most so desirous to trade rather with Strangers then
with the Company, which appears by keeping their Tobaccoes until our Ship be
come away; whereby, both the Merchant is discouraged from sending, and the
Company prevented of the duties. If any complain, that the Adventurers, or
their Factours do overprise their Commodities, we fear your slow payments are
accessory to that error, which we are so far from excusing; that, when you
have taken order, that speedy Returns be made, we shall endeavor, what is in
our power, that no oppression be used. And, because we would remove all colors
of complaint, we have desired particular Members of our Company, that they
will, at present, send such Proportions as may supply your occasions; We hope
they shall receive such Returns by this Ship, as may both manifest your good
Affection, and encourage their future (...) others.

We are not unmindful of your desires for a free Trade, which you have both
intimated to us, and sought for from the Governors with you: But the truth, is
for the present, the Constitution of the Company, the Obligations upon them,
and the propriety of the Owners are such, as be inconsistent with that freedom
of Trade which is required.

When, upon a serious consideration of all particulars, with a dis-ingaged
respect to the common good, it shall appear, that what is required, is
according to Right and Justice, and such as the Company can in faithfulness
assent unto, you may rest assured, That we shall be most ready to manifest our
Affection to any Liberty or Privilege, which is for the good of the Colony: In
the mean time whilst we concur in allowing freedom of Trade for such
Proportions of Cattle, Hogs, Fruits, and other Provisions as may be very well
spared, without damage to the Colony, danger of a Famine, prejudice to the
poorer sort, or preventing the Owners of their dues; and, until farther order
hence, only restrain Trade for Tobacco, which (as necessity compels) we do
hereby absolutely prohibit; That so, both we may receive our Rents; and by the
duties thereupon, the Ministers may have their exhibitions, Ammunition, and
other necessaries for the safety of the Islands, satisfaction of the Officers
there, and the charge of the Company be provided for, we hope no man will find
just cause of Offense.

But however, we desire to approve our selves to every man's conscience in the
sight of God, and so to carry on al matters, as that we may be free from each
man's want, and from neglect of any thing, which is in our power to procure, for
the good and happiness of the Colony; whereto, as we are in neerenesse of
relation, so we desire to manifest our good will and affection in every kind
of way.

We shall conclude with that of the Apostle, Finally, Brethren, Fare ye well,
be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in Peace; and the God of
Love and Peace shall be with you.

Given under the Hands, and common Seal of the Governor and Company at a
general Court, the 23 of October, 1644. Warwick Governor. Will: Say and
Seal. Arthur Wodenoth, Deputy. Thomas Allen, Tresurer. Perien Trot, Husband,
Gilbert Gerard. I. Danvers. Ben. Rudyerd. Richard Knightley. (...) Holland.
John Heydon. Anthony Wither. Edw. Carter. Owen R^e, Gabriel Barber. Richard
Casewell. Gedeon de Lawne. Maurice Thompson. Fancis Allein. John Iohnstoun.
William Iessop. John Grant. Robert Coytmor. William Felgate. George
Turbervile. John Alcock. Robert Haughton. George Prynne. Anthony Pennyston.
Elias Roberts. John Welden. William Web. William Burges. Nath. Hawes. Tho.
Turner. George Ward. William Price. Will. Wilkinson. Joseph Todd. Michael
Evans. Richard Hunt. Abra. Sheeres. John Bardwell. Charles Calley.


(...) which have (...) her breat^ and ^ved as their natural, so the^ (...)
birth (...), ^f ever they were newborn.

We ought to acknowledge, with thankesgiving the abundant grace and mercy of
God toward the Church of England; who has made it no less honorable then
any other Reformed Church whatsoever, whether we consider the first Reformers,
being men of singular Piety, and blessed Martyrs of Christ; Or the purity of
Doctrine there publikly professed even to this present. Or the number of holy
Martyrs who have advisedly sealed that Doctrine with their blood: Or the
eminent lights in the Ministry successively shining there in great number: Or
the many and sincere Professors and Practisers of Religion there, ever since
the Reformation; Or lastly, if we consider the many great Deliverances which
the Lord has vouchsafed us, from the wicked plots and hostile attempts of the
common adversary, crowning all with much prosperity, and causing the fame and
glory of it to be spread throughout the world. These and the like have not
been seen in their separate and Independent Churches. In the mean time, we
deny not, but that besides our many other grievous sins, there have been
also many gross faults and intolerable in the Ecclesiastical Policy and
Discipline, as it was abused by those that were entrusted with it, and many
foul effects have thence proceeded, which have (especially of late years)
corrupted Religion, eclipsed our glory, and laid it in the dust, caused the
Lord to hide his gracious and loving countenance from us: And was like to have
proved the remidilesse ruin of Church and Common Wealth: Of which sins
though we all stand guilty before God, as having been Authors or Procurers of
them; yet it becomes not any, that is, or lately was a member of that Church,
to upbraid her with these things in a despightfull manner: Such men according
to that saying of the Apostle, Are jealous over us amiss, yea, they would
(alienate our affections, Gal. 4.1^
and) exclude us (from the Church of England) that we should altogether love
them. But these corruptions as they have been for the most part forced upon
the Church, by the usurped power of those which were entrusted, and pretended
the greatest care of the Church; so they have been, and we trust will be
cast out and Reformed by the present Parliament.

How I would not be mistaken, as if I desired to derogate any thing from the
dignity of that most eminent calling of the Ministry; I have no such mean^ng,
neither do I think a worthy Minister to be unworthy or unfit for ^^ther the
most eminent Offices or callings in Church or Common-wea^th, were it not that
he has a most eminent calling already sufficient ^o take up ^he whole man, and
unmeete to be yoaked with other callings, as the Apostle says, who is
sufficient for these things; 2 Cor. 2.16*
And the Apostles do reject such employments with a kind of contempt saying.
It is not meet that we should leave the word of God to serve Tables, and a
little after, Act. 6.2^
we will give our selves continually to prayer, and to the Ministry of the
Word, intimating that these things would hinder them from prayer and the
Ministry of the Word; whereby it appears, they would not be De^cons, nor take
upon them any other Office in or over the Church, but ^pend themselves wholly
in the (...) and prayer; the like might be manifested by s^nd^^ other
Scriptures. And the evil of it has been so generally observed in England,
that (as I heard) Queen Elizabeth, when she had conferred upon a Ministers
authority and power to rule, was wont to say, I have spoiled a good Preacher to
day. And surely (if we observe it) the desire of Superiority and Dominion in or
over the Church, in Ministers and Clergymen, and the readiness of Princes and
people to confer it upon them; has been a principal, if not the principal
cause in corrupting Religion from time to time, and of setting up the great
Antichrist, and many others, as might easily be showed if it were not an
argument too long for this place.

Thus far (through the gracious assistance of God) I have expressed my mind
in this matter, to the intent I might stop, so much as in me lies, the setting
up of a new Discipline and Government of our own framing, seeing we are
already freed of all those things that have usually been burdensome and
offensive to good Christians in England; and that we expect daily the further
determination and decree of the Honorable Assembly of Parliament in these
things. Or if I cannot prevail so far as to stop it, yet that we might
look before we leap, and understand well what we do before we do it. O^ if
neither that may be obtained, yet hence it will appear, that my self and some
others deserve no blame, much less such evil speeches as are usually vented
against us by some, because we will not rashly run with them we know not
whither. And lastly, I desire that this may be a public testimony of my
judgment in these things. For to be present, and hear them daily pressed, and
to be always silent, is taken for a sign of consent and approbation.

March 1. 1642. RICH. NORVVOOD

Postscript.
SInce this Advertisement of mine came abroad (though but a month,) what
horrible forespeakings, threatenings, imprecations, and censures have been
publicly denounced against me in several parts of the Country, (...) not
need to repeat, being too well known. Neither will I answer t^^^ accordingly
lest I also be like them; I will only in the fear of God, (...) by the
comfortable assistance of his holy Spirit apply that saying, Number. 23.8.
How ^^^^ld they curse where God has not cursed? Or how should they detest
wher^^ (...) Lord has not detested? 2 Samuel 16.12.
And those words of David, It may be that the Lord will look on mine
affliction, and do me good for his cursing this day. A desperate thing it is
for men to blaspheme against some good light; and what is it, to acknowledge
the good gifts and graces of God in those which they so bitterly preach
against; and to overwhelme them all with most foul and feigned susspicions and
aspersions without cause? As when they say, Satan will not use profane and
wicked men, but he makes choice of those that are of good and able parts, men
of a religious life, of a blameless conversation; these close hypocrites ^e
makes his instruments to oppose the Kingdom of Christ (that is their intended
Discipline) etc. with other like speeches. I say it is very dangerous for men
thus to give way to wrath and malice. The Scribes and Pharisees did see, and
would no doubt have acknowledged the eminent gifts and graces that shined in
our Savior, if he would have applied them to the establishing of their
Faction. But because he would not do so, they maliciously traduced him, and
said he had an unclean spirit; but he reproves their desperate wickedness,
showing how nearely they did approach, or became guilty of the sin against
the Holy Ghost. And let every man take heed how they do cunningly fasten
slanders, or otherwise show despite unto the spirit of Grace, because it would
not be subordinate unto their ends. I could wish also they would consider the
words of Marsilius Patavinus, in his Book entitled, Defender of the Peace.
Where speaking of those that presume to frame or press Orders, Decrees, and
other parts of Discipline, without license of the true Lawgiver or Prince, and
endeavor to draw people to the observation of them by surreptitious words, as
it were compelling them by threatening eternal damnation to such as transgress
them, or denouncing execratio^^* reproachful speeches, excommunications,
slanders, revilings, or other maledictions against them, or any of them, in
word or writing; such (says he) are to suffer corporal punishment in a most
high degree, as conspirators and stirrers up of civil schism, or division in
a Commonwealth. For it is says he, a most grievous kind of treason, because
it is committed directly against the Royal Majesty of the Prince and his
Sovereign Authority; and tends to set up a plurality of supreme authorities
or powers, and so of nec^ssity to the dissolution or overthrow of every civil
Government.

They object also, that I am but a Layman, and therefore should not meddle
with matters of Divinity, applying that Proverb Ne suitor ultra crepidam, and
saying, that even the Sun, Moon, and Stars, wherein he has skill, should
teach him that lesson, which always move in their own spheres, except they
be wandering stars, for whom the blackenesse of darkness is reserved for
ever, with many other bitter expressions. But this is an old plea of the Popish
Clergy, to hold the people in ignorance and thraldom, and should not be taken
up by those that would seem to be more opposite to Pope^y then Protestants
are. That eminent and blessed Divine Doctor Sibbes was of another mind, who
speaking in commendation of Mr. Sherland (that was no Preacher) disdaines not
to say he had good skill in controverted points of Divinity, and that he was a
good Divine. And surely the calling of a Christian is of that importance, that
he must, if need so require, omit whatsoever calling he have besides, to make
good that one most necessary, neither can he justly be charged to move out of
his sphere whenever he meddles with matters of Christianity and Religion,
especially such points as he is pressed to embrace and submit unto. The Apostle
exhorts us all, that we should earnestly contend for the faith which was once
delivered unto the Saints. And I may fitly answer them in the words of that
renouned Soldier of Christ Doctor Bastwicke, who being checked by the Bishop
of Canterbury in like sort as I am by these that he being a Physician, a
Layman, should (...) points in Divinity, answers in Latin, to this purpose
(...)

I writ a Book (says he) not to find my self employment, or to stirr^ (...)
strife, but of a Christian mind and affection, according to my duty to Go^ and
my Prince. The reproach of a Layman touches not me, for he which has vowed
himself to Christ is one of Gods Clergy. The ancient Church does not
acknowledge that surname of a Layman, but reckons it among the Soloecismes of
the Beast. We have given, promised, and vowed unto Christ in Baptism our name
and faith; and have solemnly denounced battle against the flesh, the world,
the devil, heresy, etc. against which we must fight unless we put off the
reverence and respect of our Vow. How unseasonable is it then to ask by what
authority we fight against these? (And a little after) shall that be a fault in
me, which is a praise to Divines? They exercise Physic, Grazing, merchandise,
they husband their grounds, plant, gather in their fruits, they all may do
(...) things, I envy not; yet I wonder we should be so straightened, whilst
they have such liberty. But if some blunt fellow should ask a Divine, Hear'st
thou good man, what have thou to do with the Court, with privy Council, with
seats of Judgment? wha^ have thou to do with renting lands, with planting
vineyards, with breeding cattle, with money the provocation of al^ evils?
would he not check such a bold question with some sharp answer? yes,
doubtless he would. What then should we do when we are asked, What we have to
do with God, with Christ, with Religion, with the Truth? We will laugh to
scorn such envious questions, and perform with diligence what God calls us
to. We will endeavor with all cheerfulness the defense of the truth, the
conservation of Religion, the observation of our fidelity and allegiance to
that Sovereign Authority which is over us; rendering an account of our
endeavors to him, to whom we have vowed our selves etc. He that desires to see
his defense more at large, may peruse his Apology to the English Prelates.

Romans 16.17.
Now I beseech you brethren, mark them diligently which cause division and
offenses, contrary to the Doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them

18. For they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but ^^^ir own
bellies; and with fair speech and flattering, deceive the hearts of the (...)


March 30. 1643.

