THE YOUNG Soldier:

London, Printed by J R. for Joseph Hunscott. 1642.

To the Right Honorable, and his endeared good Colonel, WILLIAM, Lord
Viscount SAY and SEAL, Master of the Court of Wards, and one of His Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council.
RIght Honorable, Having this last year wanted Action in the Field, Mars (not
willing to see His sons want employment) makes me one of his Tutors to direct
His Youth, and being now commanded to leave the School, and lead my youth to
Field, have, (for the help of their Memory) written a Copy of what I formerly
taught them, which I call The young Soldier) it being a Work, though very
small, yet very necessary both for the present and future times.

Having been lately presented to your Honor, from whom I received a place of
Soldier and Servant to Command your Honors Company, I am enboldned to present
this small Work, humbly desiring your acceptance and View: For which your kind
Favors I shall endeavor to instruct your Soldiers in the right use of their
Arms, Distances, Motions and Firings, (so long as I live under your Command)
Thus, hoping your Honor will pardon the boldness of a Soldier, which knows
better the postures and use of the Pike than the Pen, I rest in hope of your
Honors acceptance and favorable Construction, by which you shall ever obliege

Your Honors unworthy Cap. Lieutenant, John Raynsford.

Words of Command, and other Rules and Orders to be observed by all the
Captains of Horse-Troops, and their Officers, within the Army, in the
Exercising and Government of their several Troops.
FOr the Horse, the Captain is to teach his Troop, (by his Trumpetter) these
six several sounds,
1 The Watch, 2 To Saddle, 3 To Horse 4 A March, 5 A Charge, 6 A Retreat.
THe Horse are to be four deep, and so, well mounted, brought to a Body in
their Close Order, and Armed: The Cuirassiers, with Gorget, Back, Breast,
Culottes, Cuisses, Pouldrons, Vambrace, Gantlet, Casque, a Case of good
Pistolls, and a good Sword; And the Carabines, with Gorget, Back, Breast, Round
Tasses, Headpiece, Carabine, the Barrel two Foot seven Inches long, hung in a
strong Belt, a Case of good Pistolls, and a good Sword.

The words of Command to be used in exercising them, are as follow:
Silence. Stand right in your Ranks, stand right in your Files. This must
always be downwards.
Ranks open to six foot. Files to the Right hand, open to six foot. To the Left
hand. To the Right hand. When you are commanded to be as you were, you are ever
to return by the contrary hand.
As you were. To the Right hand, about. As you were. To the Left hand, close.
Files to the Left hand, open to six Foot. To the Right hand. To the Left hand.
As you were. To the Left hand, about. As you were. To the Right hand, close:
Files to the Right and Left hand, open to six Foot. To the Right and Left hand
to your Leader. Files to the Right hand, double. As you were. Files to the left
hand, double. As you were. Files to the Right hand, Countermarch. To the Left
hand, about.
Thus, it is to be observed, That the fourth Rank which before was the Rear,
now becomes the Front; and the Front, the Rear. And then to the intent that the
whole Troop may be (as occasion shall be offered able, and knowing to lead
their Files, and take their just Distance^, as well as only to follow,
according to the Motions of the first Rank the Captain shall exercise them over
again, in this manner:

And to the intent the second and third Ranks nay know how to lead, as well as
the Front, and Rear; the Captain, or his Officer, when he begins to exercise
them, shall do well, sometimes to put the second Rank in the Front, and the
third Rank in the Rear. So shall he make every man in the Troop not only more
ready to follow, but able also to be the Leader of his File.
To the Right and Left hand, close from the Center. As you were. To the Right
hand. As you were. To the Right hand, about. As you were. To the Left hand,
about. As you were. Files to the Right hand, double. As you were. Files to the
Left hand, double. As you were. Files to the Left hand, Countermarch. Now is
your Front the same it was at first.
To the Right hand, about. To the Right and Left hand, close to the Center. It
is to be observed, That upon closing of Ranks, they are to take their Distance
within three foot at least, and in Marching, not to be above six soot in
Distance at most.
Ranks, close up to your order. To the Right hand, Wheel. To the left hand,
Wheel. To the right hand about, Wheel. To the left hand about, Wheel. Ranks
open to six foot.
It will be fit for the Captains in all exercises of their Troops, to accustom
their Horsemen to Drums, Colors, naked Swords, and to give fire one upon
another; the Cuirassiers in Files, the Carabins in Ranks, and both of them in
Body, as well upon the Foot, as upon one another, to the intent they may the
better understand what they have to do, and their Horse made more bold upon all
occasions of Service.

Orders to be observed in Marching of a Troop of Horse.
FIrst, the Ledd horse of the Captain.

Next the Trumpets.

Then the Captain.

After whom marches the first Squadron, the eldest Corporal marching on the
right hand thereof, even with the first Rank.

Then the second, having the Standard in the Middle of the first Rank, the
second Corporal leading it.

The third Squadron marches next, the youngest Corporal leading it.

In the Rear marches the Lieutenant and the Quartermaster.

When the Troop is embattelled, the eldest Corporal marches on the right hand
Flank, even with the first Rank, moving nevertheless upon the Flank, to look
to the orderly marching of the Ranks, as occasion shall serve.

The second, in like manner, on the left hand Flank.

The third marches on the left hand Flank of his own Corporallship, even with
the last Rank thereof.

If there be any Servants or Baggage, they, or it, march in the Rear of all.

The Captain of Foot is to teach his Soldiers these six once a day, till they
are perfect in knowing them.
1. A Call. 2. A March. 3. A Charge 4. A Retreat. 5. A Troop. 6. An Alarm.
These 3 Figures or Forms following, are to practice the Foot Company before
the words of Command be taught.
The 1. Figure. The manner of Marching of a Company.


The 2 Figure The way and manner to bring them to a Body in their 4. Divisions.


3 Figure. The Company standing in a complete Body to be exercised.


Words of Command, and other Rules and Orders to be observed by all the
Captains of Foot-Companies, and other Officers within the Army, in exercising
and government of their several Companies.
Because the measure of the said Distances cannot be taken so justly by the
eye, we take the Distance of six foot between File and File, by commanding the
Soldiers as they stand, to stretch forth their arms, and so stand so removed
one from another, that their hands may meet. And for their Ranks, we make
account we take the same Distance of six foot, when the Butt-end of the Pikes
do always reach their heels that march before them.
FIrst of all, It is to be understood, There are three sorts of Distances, to
wit, Open Order, and Close Order. The first Distance is commanded by this Word,
To your Open Order; and is, when the Soldiers, both in Rank and File, stand
six foot removed one from another.

We take the second Order of Distance of three foot between File and File, by
bidding the Soldiers set their arms a Kenbow, and set themselves so close,
that their elbows may meet And we reckon we take the same Distance in Ranks,
when they come up almost to the Swords point.
The second distance is commanded by this word, To your Order, which is, when
the Soldiers stand three foot removed, both in Rank and File, one from
another. And this Distance is to be used when they are embattelled, or march in
the face of the enemy, or when they come to stand, or when you wheel. But when
you march through any Country, you must observe three foot only from File to
File, and Six from Rank to Rank.

The third Distance is commanded by this word Close, which is, when there is
one foot and an half from File to File, and three from Rank to Rank. And this
for the Pikes only, and must never be used, but when you will stand firm to
receive the Charge of an enemy.

The Musquettiers must never be closer then the second Distance, of three foot
Square, because they are to have a free use of their Arms.

In exercising your Motions, you are always to observe your Open Order, in
which the Company being first placed, and armed, the Pike-men with Gorger,
Back, Breast, Tasses, Headpiece, a good Sword, and a Pike sixteen foot and a
half long, with a good Steel head; The Musquettiers, with Sword, Bandoleers,
Rest and Musket, the Barrel whereof to be four foot two inches long, of a
Bore to receive twelve Bullets to the pound running, and ten rammed down: You
are to exercise them with these words of Command:

Silence. Stand right in your Files. Stand right in your Ranks. To the right
hand. It is to be noted, when you are commanded to be, as you were, you are ever
to return by the contrary hand; as for example, if you did turn to the right
hand, you are to return as you were, to the left hand. and so in the rest.
As you were. To the left hand. As you were. To the right hand, about. As you
were. To the left hand, about. As you were. Ranks to the Right hand, double. As
you were. Ranks to the Left hand, double. As you were. Files to the Right hand,
double. As you were. Files to the Left hand, double. As you were. Half Files to
the Right hand, double your Front. As you were. Half Files to the Left hand,
double your Front. As you were. Ranks to the Right or Left hand, In
Counter-marching, though both are set down here for Distinction sake, you are
to name neither Ranks nor Files, but are only to lay, To the Right hand
Countermarch; Or, To the Left hand Countermarch.
Countermarch. To the Right or Left hand, as you were. Files to the Right or
Left hand, Countermarch. To the Right or Left hand, As you were.
When you will Exercise a Company Single, you Double your Ranks, before you
Wheel, in regard the Body is small. But in Division, or a Greater Body, you
Close first, both your Files, and your Ranks, to your Order of Three foot, and
omit the Doubling, and so Wheel. When you will Wheel to the Right hand, double
your Ranks to the Left hand, and when you will Wheel to the Left hand, Double
your Ranks to the Right. For so the Right and Left hand Leaders will keep their
places on that Corner, toward which they Wheel.
Before you Wheel: --
Ranks to the Right or Left hand, Double. Files to the Right or Left hand,
close to your Order. Files to the Middle, Close to your Order. Ranks Close to
your Order. Which you list, and each as often as you list.
To the Right hand, Wheel To the Left hand, Wheel Or Wheel about.
This manner of opening, is used only in a Single Company; for in Greater
Bodies, where the Doubling is omitted, you open first your Ranks, and then your
Files, to your Open Order of Six foot, to bring them back again as they were.
By double Distance is meant 12 foot, for so the Ranks which did before Double,
falling out again into their first places, come just to the Distance of their
open Order of 6. foot in which they were before they Doubled.
After you have wheeled:
Ranks backward, open in double Distance. Files open to your Order, viz. to
Three foot. Ranks as you were.
In Opening Ranks, or Files, you must make all the Files, or Ranks (saving the
uttermost on that hand, from whence you mean to open, which must Stand) to Move
all together, till the Second Rank, or File, from that which Stands, has
gotten its Distance, and so subsequently the rest.

If you will have them Close their Files to the Right, or Left hand, the
uttermost File on that hand you purpose to Close, must be commanded to Stand,
and all the rest to Close to it.

For the Pike.
When Pikemen are to double Ranks, or Files, or to use any other Motion, they
are ever first to be commanded to advance their Pikes.
ADvance your Pike Order your Pike. Shoulder your Pike. Port your Pike. Shoulder
your Pike. Trail your Pike. Check your Pike. In Charging, half the Ranks only
must Charge their Pikes, the other hindermost half of the Ranks do Port their
Pikes, that is, they carry them so couched over the heads of the foremost, as
may give them no offense, either in Charging, or Retiring: Besides, this way
the Pikes are not so apt to be broken by the Short of the Enemy, as when they
are Advanced. All these Motions, except Ordering and Checking, are to be
performed, either Standing or Marching: And they must likewise observe, when
they Charge Standing, to fall back with the Right leg, and Marching to step
forward with the left.
Charge your Pike. Shoulder your Pike. Charge to the Right, or Left hand, or
Rear. Order your Pike.
For the particular use of the Musket.
PLace your Musket, and Rest to the ground, in either hand. Slip down your
hand, and take your Musket, and Rest, in either hand from the Ground. Bring
your Rest to your Musket. Peize your Musket, and hold your Rest in the other
hand. Rest your Musket. Take out your Match. Blow your Match. Cock your Match.
Try your Match. Guard your Pan. Blow. Open your Pan. Present. Give Fire. Come
up to your Musket. Return your Match. Clear your Pan. Prime. Shut your Pan.
Cast off. Take up your Rest. Blow. Cast about. Trail your Rest. Open your
Charger. Charge with Powder and Bullet. Take out your Scowrer. Shorten your
Scowrer. Ram down your Bullet and powder. Pull out your Scowrer. Shorten your
Scowrer to a handful. Return your Scowrer. Recover your Musket. Peize your
Musket, and Recover your Rest. Shoulder your Musket, and with your Musket
carry your Rest. Slip your Musket. Peize your Musket. Join your Rest to your
Musket. Take out your Match. Blow your Match. Cock your Match. Try your Match.
Guard your Pan. Blow. Open your Pan. Present. Give Fire. Take up your Rest, and
Musket, and join them. Return your Match. Clear your Pan. Prime your Pan. Shut
your Pan. Cast off. Blow. Cast about. Trail your Rest. Open your Charger.
Charge with Powder and Bullet. Take out your Scowrer. Shorten your Scowrer. Ram
down your Bullet and Powder. Pull out your Scowrer. Shorten your Scowrer to a
handful. Return your Scowrer. Recover your Musket. Peize your Musket, and
Recover your Rest. Shoulder your Musket, and with your Musket carry your
Rest. Slope your Musket. March.
In Exercising, use these three Terms of Direction.
Make Ready. Present. Give Fire.
Your Musketeers must observe in all their Motions, to turn to the Right hand.
And that they carry the mouth of their Pieces high, when they are shouldered,
when they are Priming, when they Cast about, and also when they hold their Pans
guarded, and come up to Give Fire.

In Advancing toward an Enemy, when they do not skirmish Loose and Disbanded,
they must The Right and Left Wing in all occasions of Giving Fire by Ranks, are
to have a principal Respect to the Pikes, to make their Front equal with
them, and to take their distances from them accordingly as when they stood
first in Battle; And this may be the more certainly done, if the Ranks of the
Right Wing take their Distances from the Pikes, by observing the Left hand man,
as the Ranks of the Left Wing do by observing the Right hand man.
Give Fire by Ranks, after this manner following.
TWo Ranks must always make ready together, and with a Who is to March Even
with the Left hand man of the first Rank.
Sergeant (or, if the Body be greater, with some better qualified Officer)
Advance ten Paces forwards before the Body, viz. The first Rank is to Advance
eight Paces, the second Rank six Paces, coming on with their Right Legs first,
and there Stand: When the Officer bids them Present, the first of the two Ranks
advances two full Paces, moving with the Right Leg first, and Lays on; The
second Rank following them with two Paces in like manner, keeping their
Muskets close to their Rests, their Pans guarded, and their first Rank having
Given Fire, and falling off to the Rear; The second being bid to Present,
Advances in like manner two full Paces, Presents, Gives Fire, and falls off as
the former.

When the two first Ranks Advance forward as aforesaid, the two next Ranks (the
whole Wing moving after them) March up into their places, and keeping Even with
the two first Ranks of the Pikes, unshoulder, and make ready; And as soon as
the two former Ranks are fallen away, they are to Advance, and to do in all
points as aforesaid; And so all the other Ranks successively, two after two,
through both the Wings.

A manner, there is, to Give Fire retiring from an Enemy, which is performed
after this sort.
THe whole Body, being turned from the Enemy to the Right or Left hand about,
the Rank then in the Rear, keeping still with the Body, makes ready; and being
ready, the whole Rank turn about to the Right hand, and stepping forward each
with the Left leg, Present, and Give Fire, marching presently away, a good
round pace to the Front, and there, placing themselves in Rank before the
Front, fall even in their march with the first Rank of the Pikes. As soon as
that Rank in the Rear as aforesaid, turns to Give Fire, the Rank next it makes
ready, and does as the former, and so the rest.

We Give Fire by Flanks thus:
THe Uttermost File next the Enemy, must be commanded to make Ready, keeping
still along with the Body, till such time as they be ready, and then they
return to the Right or Left hand, (according to the sight of their Enemy,
either upon their Right or Left Flank) and Give Fire all together, when they
have discharged, they stir not, but keep their ground, and Charge their Pieces
again, in the same place they stand. Now as soon as the aforesaid File does
turn to Give Fire, the uttermost next it makes ready, always keeping along
with the Body, till the bringer up be past a little beyond the Leader of that
File, that Gave Fire last, and then the whole File must Turn, and Give Fire,
and do in all points, as the first did, and so all the rest, one after the
other. A Sergeant, or (if the Body be Great) some other better qualified
Officer must stand at the head of the first File, and as soon as the second
File has Given Fire, and has Charged, he is to lead forward the first File,
up to the second File, and so to the rest, one after another, till he has
gathered up again the whole Wing, and then he is to join them again in Equal
Fronts with the Pikes.

Last of all, the Body, or whole Wing of Musketeers, make ready all together
upon their Rests, and the first Rank falling back two steps, Gives Fire, and
speedily, as it may, yet orderly, falls away. All the Ranks doing the same
successively, one after another.

And we do especially Require all Captains of Foot, in Exercising their
Companies, to accustom their Musketeers, to Give Fire, according to all these
several manners before prescribed.

Orders to be observed in the Marching of one single Company, or of many joined
together in one Body.
WHen a Regiment is drawn into Battle, the Officers shall be thus placed. It
being first understood that the Coronell, Lieutenant Coronell, and Sergeant
Major, are to be on Horseback, only they are to alight when they Marrh by the
General.

The Coronell is to March in the Front of the middle of the Pikes.

The Lieutenant Coronell in the Rear of the Pikes.

The Sergeant Major a little behind the Coronell, on his left hand; from him to
receive Orders, and to Move accordingly as the occasion is offered.

The First Captain marches in the Head of the Pikes.

The Second Captain in the Rear of the Pikes.

The Third Captain in the Front of the Right Wing of Musketeers.

The Fourth Captain in the Rear of the Left Wing of Musketeers.

The Fifth Captain in the Front of the Left Wing of Musketeers.

The Sixth Captain in the Rear of the Right Wing of Musketeers.

The Seventh Captain in the Front of the second Division of Pikes.

The Eight Captain in the Rear of the second Division of Pikes.

In case there be not a full number of Captains, then these places are to be
supplied, for the time, by the Lieutenants, according to the Seigniority of
their Captains; And where the number of Captains is full, in that case the
Lieutenants are to march, and serve with their own Captains.

But it is to be observed that when the Regiment marches; then the place of
the Coronell is in the Van of the Right wing of Musketeers.

The Lieutenant Coronell in the Rear of the left wing of Musketeers.

The Sergeant Major near the Coronell, as before.

The other Captains keep their places.

And if the Regiment be put into two Divisions; The Coronell leads the first,
and the Lieutenant Coronell the second: If put into three Divisions, then the
Sergeant Major leads the third. The Captains and Lieutenants to be placed
according to their several Antiquities, respectively, as aforesaid.

When a Regiment marches, half of the Musketeers shall march before, and the
other half in the Rear of the Pikes, marching at least ten in Front, if the
ground afford it.

The Officer who leads the Regiment, shall not be above six foot before the
first Rank of the same; and he that marches in the Rear of any part, or
division of the Regiment, shall not likewise be further than six foot, behind
the last Rank of those which march before him.

If the Regiment be divided, the second division shall march within ten paces
of the last rank of the first division.

If one Regiment march after another, the distance is to be eighteen paces, to
wit, six foot for the Officer that marches in the Rear of the former
Regiment, six foot for the Officer that leads the Front of the next Regiment;
and the rest of the space to be left between those Officers.

The distance of the Van, Battle, and rear of the whole Army in marching, is
to be behind one another twenty five paces, where the ground affords it; the
Regiment shall march close, and in one Body, the Files three foot, the ranks
six foot, in distance one from another.

Between every five Files of musketeers at the most, and three Files at least,
there shall be left a space of six foot.

When the Regiment stands in Battle, being ready to fight, the distance
betwixt ranks shall be brought to three foot, as also the Files of musketeers,
but the Files of Pikes are to stand at a foot and a half.

If the Regiment consists of two divisions, each division shall stand in
Battle, fifty foot distance one from the other.

All the Captains and other Officers of the Army, in all their marchings,
whether it be in single companies, in divisions, or Regiments, to take care,
that all the Soldiers of that company, Division, or Regiment, move together,
as well rear, as Front, observing their due distances.

All Troops and Companies, marching either in greater or lesser Bodies,
respectively, shall not only take care their Files and Ranks keep their true
distance, and move equally, even, and together; but in case the Files fall off
too much one from another, to either hand, the Soldiers are to be instructed
to recover their true ground and distance, not all at once, but by degrees in
their march, insensibly, closing to either hand, as there is occasion: Likewise
for the Ranks, those which find themselves to be behind, by marching a little
faster, must set themselves even with their Right hand man, and if they find
themselves before, must by the slownesse of their march, take up their Right
hand man even to them, but not to do it by standing still, and less by falling
back; for so their own disorder does not only appear the more, but they
likewise fall foul upon the Ranks behind them.

FINIS.

