The Young-mans Ramble.
OR The Horse can trot, and the Mare can amble.
Here Is clipping and kissing, with store of delight,
With Frisking, and Frolicks, as seldom is seen,
To sport all the daytime, and play in the night,
Where Young Men and Maids, do meet on a Green.
To a gallant new Tune, called Andrew and Maudlin.




ANdrew, Maudlin, Rebecca and Will,
pretty Peg, with Joseph and Mary,
Peter the Plymmer, and Miles of the Mill:
Bese of the Buttery, and D^ll of the Dary;
They went and gathered young Primroses,
To make them sundrey sorts of Posies.
William put on his Holiday Iacket,
Gryssel put on her Russet Gray;
Meg had a Ribon hung down to her Placket,
and so they went gingling all the way:
To solace their lips, and sweeten their labor,
They met on a Green, with a Pipe and a Tabor.
Frinkham Frankham is a fine dance,
young Ti^ did trip it on her Toes;
And Jo^n came into the place by chance,
whose cheeks were like the Crimson Rose:
They coupled themselves like Birds of a feather,
And footed it finely altogether.
Jane bagan to justle with Thomas,
Humphrey thought to find her there;
Yet Nelly forsooth did fail in her promise,
because she did not like his ware:
It Is a dainty thing to dandle a Baby,
And Joan in the dark, is as good as my Lady.
Kester took Hester by the hand,
come play us a Tune thou trusty Trout:
A match (quoth Roger) and if it does stand,
and so they jumbled round about,
With Salingers round, and the French Canaries,
That passed Iack-pudding, and all his Fegaries.
Ralph got Rachel about the middle,
and Simon sucked up all the Eggs:
Philip did play with his Bag-pipe and Fiddle,
while jumping Joan did shake her Legs,
Her Apron was white, and her Peticoat red,
And they were most sweetly brought to Bed.
The second Part,
to the same Tune.




PAul the Peddler is a boon Blade.
but the Broom-man is another,
For they belong to the Tribe of Cad,
and learned this Action from their Mother
Tom Tinkers Ware is special Mettle,
And Dennis did smile like a Furmity-kettle
Richards Feather will never leave wagging
James and Nan in the Cole-hole are gotten
And simple Nick will never leave bragging,
because his Father is dead and rotten.
When Jack from Mary her Portion had got,
It Is need that make the Old-woman trot.
Robins nose will never leave dropping,
hang up sorrow, cast away care:
And Cupi^ caught young Sarah napping,
as Moss by chance did catch his Mare,
Her Apron is to short before,
Which made poor Margery cry full sore.
Old smel-smock Sam delights to vow,
for love will creep, where it cannot go:
Neds nose will serve for a poore-mans Sow
and Kate did tread upon his toe:
Young Men do love to be with Maids,
And Gillian was like the Queen of Spades.
Clim the Carrier is come home,
and brought to town good Fish and Mustard,
Precilla did dance a Iig with Tom,
which made his buttocks quake like a Custard,
With clipping and kissing, and kind embraces
The young men tumbled about with their Lasses.
Iocky and Ienny with Arthur of Bradly,
Roger of Coverly and his consort,
Did trick and trim it wonderful madly,
and so they concluded, and ended their sport,
The Horse can trot and the Mare can amble
And so I end my Country Ramble,
Finis.
London, Printed for Thomas Vere, at the Angel without Newgate.


