THE Earl of VVarwick's LETTER From aboard His Majesty's Ship, called the
James, in the Downs, to an Honorable Lord in Parliament; Dated July 4. 1642.

Concerning His calling a Council of War, and how His Rear-Admirall, and four
other Captains refused to obey his Lordships Summons.

With many other passages of great consequence.

ALSO, Another LETTER from aboard the same Ship to Master Nichols a Member of
the House of COMMONS; Dated July 5. 1642.

With many Remarkable Passages amongst the Captains and Officers.

Read in the House of Commons, and commanded to be forthwith Printed.

LONDON, Printed by Luke Norton and John Field, for Edward Husbands and John
Franck. July 7. 1642.

THE Earl of VVarwicks LETTER To an Honorable Lord in Parliament.
My very good Lord;
BEfore these shall come to your Lordships hands, I make no doubt but Master
Nichols of the House of Commons has made both Houses a Relation of what has
passed here, since I received His Majesty's Letters for the discharging me of
the Command of the Fleet wherewith I was entrusted; how I called a Council of
War, and acquainted them with His Majesty's Letters, and likewise with the
Ordinance of Parliament sent from the Houses, for me to continue my Charge; I
confess it was a great straight that I was put in between two Commands that
have so much power over me, But when I consider the great care which I have
ever seen in the Parliaments of the Kingdom, for the good and safety of the
King and Kingdom, and every man's particular in them; and that they are that
great Council by whose Authority the Kings of England have ever spoken to
their Subjects. And likewise, that the trust of this Fleet for the defense of
His Majesty and the Kingdoms, was committed to me by them, and know the
integrity of my own heart to His Majesty and Parliament, I resolved not to
desert that Charge committed to my trust, wherein God (blessed be his name for
it) has made me hitherto so successful, but to continue it until I shall be
revoked by that Authority that has entrusted me with it, which having declared
to my Captains at the Council of War, all of them unanimously, and cheerfully
took the same resolution, excepting five, which was the Rear-Admirall Captain
Fogge, Captain Burley, Captain Slingsby, and Captain Wake; a^l which five
refused to come upon my Summons, as having no ^uthority over them, and got
together round that night to make their defense against me, only Captain
Burley came in and submitted to me; whereupon in the morning I waighed my
Anchors, and caused the rest of my ^ips so to do, and came to an Anchor round
about them, and besieged them, and when I had made all things ready, I summoned
them; Sir John Menues and Captain Fogge came in to me, out Captain Slingsby and
Captain Wake stood out, whereupon I let fly a Gun over them, and sent them
word I had turned up the Glass upon them, if in that space they came not in,
they must look for me aboard them, I sent to them by my Boat, and most of the
Boats in the Fleet; their answer was so peremptory, that my Masters and Sailors
grew so impatient on them, that although they had no Arms in their Boat at all,
yet God gave them such courage and resolution, as in a moment they entered them,
took hold on their shroud, and seized upon these Captains being armed with
their Pistols and Swords, and struck their Yards and Top-masts, and brought
them both to me, the like courage and resolution was never seen amongst unarmed
men, so as all was ended without effusion of blood, which I must attribute to
the great God of heaven and earth only, who in the moment that I was ready to
give fire on them, put such courage into our men to act it, and so saved much
blood. I hope the Parliament will think of some course for all our
Indempnities, and especially for the Officers of the Navy, my Vice Admiral a
very able and good man; for my self, I doubt not but they that put me in this
employment, will preserve me for serving them faithfully.

I send your Lordship herewith enclosed a Letter to Captain Wheeler Captain of
the Greybound. I beseech your Lordship be a means that some money may be sent
us, for it has been often promised, but we hear not of it; the weather
continuing stormy so long together, that we spend our Masts and Top-Masts, or
some detriment or other befalls us daily, so that we are in great extremity for
want of money.

Thus, having nothing else to trouble your Lordship, only that you will be
pleased to acquaint the Parliament of our proceedings here, I take leave, and
remain

Your Lordships most humble servant, WARWICK.
From aboard His Majesty's ship, the James, in the Downs, this fourth of July,
1642.
Another Letter to Mr. Nichols.
SIR,
I Am sorry it was my ill hap to be employed from aboard of your Ship when you
took your leave of my Lord, for I was then employed by his Lordship to those
refractory persons with a second summons unto them to come aboard his Lordship;
all of them that I spoke with used me civilly, and gave me a reasonable
satisfaction, that they would attend my Lord within few hours, which they made
good; but Captain Slingsby used other language, that he would live and die in
his Ship, and that he made a great deal of difference between John Brown and
Charles Rex: I replied unto him that John Brown did write his name there by the
authority not only of Charles Rex, as he termed it, but that he had also the
Great Seal of England for it, besides the authority of the Peers and Commons of
this Kingdom, I desired him that I might see the Kings Letter which he had; he
answered me, that he had received none, whereupon I demanded of him by what
color he could refuse to obey my Lord: I having then showed him the Ordinance
of both Houses of Parliament; his answer unto me again was, that by all the
Laws that he had read he could not find that an Ordinance of Parliament was
Law; and that it wat sufficient for him, that he had seen the Kings Letters to
others in the Fleet, by which he did understand His Majesty's pleasure, and
should be a sufficient warrant for him; Captain Burley Captain of the Antilop
did promise me to submit himself forthwith to my Lord, and writ his letters by
me to that effect, and indeed he durst do no other ways, for the Muster, the
Officers, and all the company of the said Ship would have cast him over board
if he had done otherwise, for they were unanimously for my Lord, whereupon his
Lordship did send the Captain of his own Ship for him, and he came with him
immediately to my Lord; the next morning my Lord Commanded His Anchors to be
weighed, and came very near those four Ships that stood out, and Commanded the
rest of His ships to do the like and so these four ships were closely
surrounded by the whole Fleet: Whereupon Sir John Menues the Rear-Admirall, and
Captain Fog Captain of the Constant Reformation came aboard unto my Lord
according to their promise unto me over night, and submitted themselves unto
his Lordship; whereupon his Lordship called a general Counof War of all the
Captains and Masters, as the day before when you were there, and then it was
resolved that they would turn up the glass, and if these two Ships would not
yield obedience unto his Lordship within that time, they would board them. In
the mean time, the Vice Admiral Captain Butler who is a most discreet and
resolute gentleman, made this proposition to my Lord and the Council of War,
that all the Masters that were there should take their Boats all unarmed and go
and summon them once more, and to let them know that the glass was turned upon
them. Captain Slingsby who they first summo'nd, and Master Hadock Master of
the Victory the Rear-Admirall would not brook to hear the language from a
Captain to their Admiral, entered the Ship immediately, and Captain Slingsby
came forth upon the Deck, and presented a Pistol at his breast, but he laid
hold of it before he could discharge it, so all the common men did board him
also, These 2 Captains, Slingsby and Wake, are both prisoners aboard some of
the Ships here, and there my Lord will keep them until he does hear from
both Houses of Parliament.
and did strike his top-masts and let fall his yards, and so they took him away
in their Boats, and went from him to the Expedition where Captain Wake
Commanded; and all these naked men entered a board of him presently and struck
his yards and Top-masts, and took him likewise, and so brought them both a
board without any effusion of blood, God be praised for it, so that now I hope
my Lord has weeded away those ill members that would make a devision between
the King and His Parliament here at Sea: We have too many of them on shore,
and therefore we need the less of them at Sea.

I doubt not but you and the rest of the discreet members of Yonr House of
Commons will take notice of the resolution of those Sea men that stands so
unanimously for the King and Parliament.

The last night Sir John Penington came to Deal with between 30 and 2 Cavaliers
in his company as the report goes, Captain Edwin Sands who lives withins 2
mile of Deal, hearing of Sir John's coming there in that posture, did summon the
Countries thereabouts to watch all night and came himself between one and two
in the morning aboard my Lords Ship to acquaint His Lordship that Sir John was
there with that Company, and said that if he did but offer the least breach of
the Peace he would raise the Country upon him, for he is one of the Deputy
Lieutenants, presented by the Earl of Leister to Your House for the County of
Kent; but I believe he has no Commission from His Lordship nor any Order from
the House to Act any thing for the good of the King Parliament and Kingdom, I
hope that you and the rest of the discreet members of Your House of Commons
will not only return him thanks but give him authority to have care of his
Countey. And so this is all that has passed since you have been here: And
craving your pardon for being thus tedious I take my leave and rest.

Yours to command, ROB: COYTMORE.
From aboard the James in the Downs, this 5. of July, 1642.
FINIS.

