A SHORT AND SURE Way to Grace and Salvation; Being a necessary and profitable
Tract, upon Three Fundamental Principles of Christian Religion: which few do
indeed know, and yet he who knows them not, cannot be saved: Viz.

How Man was at first Created.

How he is now Corrupted.

How he may be again restored.

Together with the conditions of the Covenant of Grace, and to whom the
promises of the Gospel belong.

The which well learned, would keep millions out of Hell, that blindly throng
thither.

By R. YOUNG of Roxwell in Essex.

If our Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost: in whom the god of
this world, has blinded the minds of them which believe not: least the light
of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto
them, 2 Cor. 4. 3, 4. Sect. I.
AS when God created the World, the first thing he made was Light, Genesis 1. 3.
so when he makes us new creatures, he first creates light in the
understanding, whereby the poor soul may see his spiritual misery and
wretchedness; which before (by reason of that vail or curtain which is drawn
over every natural man's heart, 2 Cor. 3. 14, 15, 16.) he is so far from
discerning, that with Laodicea he thinks himself rich, and to want nothing;
when yet he is wretched and miserable, and poor, and blind, and ^aked of all
spiritual endowments, Rev. 3. 17. 1 Timothy 6. 4. As for instance, it (...) to be
observed, (can never be enough bewailed) that generally through^ut the Land
people of all sorts ( young and old, rich and poor) especially the poor; are so
invincibly ignorant, that (remaining so) it is impossible (so far as I am able
to judge by the word of God;) that ever they should be saved.

As ask them these questions, How do you hope to be saved? They will answer, By
my prayers and good endeavors. Have you never broke this or that Commandment?
Thou shall have no other gods but the Lord. Thou shall not kill. Thou shall not
steal. Thou shall not commit Adultery? No, never they thank God. Are you proud?
No, not they, What should they be proud of? and many the like. As for Original
sin, they know not what it means. Nor is there any convincing them, that they
were born sinners into the world. Yea, let a Minister come to them upon their
deathbed, and question with them about their estates, or ask them how their
souls fare, and what peace they have? What will be their manner of answering?
(especially if they have not been notorious offenders) Are they a whit troubled
for Sin, either Original or Actual? Or will they acknowledge themselves in a
lost condition without Christ? No, their consciences are at quiet, and they are
at peace with themselves and all the world; and they thank God, no sin troubles
them, not ever did. They have been no Murderers, no Adulterers, no common
Drunkards; neither have they been Oppressers. (For they are so blind and
ignorant, that they think the Commandment is not broken, if the outward gross
sin be forborne.) Yea, will they say, I do not know that I have wronged man,
woman, or child. I have been a Protestant, and gone to Church all my days.

Sect. II.
2. Yea, so far are they from being sensible of their wants, that you shall hear
them brag of their faith, works, and good meaning; of their just and upright
dealing, the goodness of their hearts, the strength of their faith, hope; and
that they never doubted in all their lives. Yea, that it were pity they should
live, if they did not believe in Christ, and hope to be saved by him. The usual
expressions of formal Christians, and Protestants at large; who know not what
faith, hope, or a good heart means, no more then Nicodemus knew what it was to
be born again.

All which answers and brags of theirs do imply, that they are as righteous as
Christ himself, or Adamin the state of innocence: for he that can clear himself
from pride, or the breach of any one Commandment, or from Original sin; may
clear himself from all sin whatsoever; and if so, what need of Christ? Yea,
what possibility is there that ever such a soul should have any benefit by
Christ? who came not to call the righteous, (viz. such as think themselves so)
but weary and heavy laden sinners to repentance, Mat. 10. 6. ^* and 15. 24. and
18. 11. 9. 12. 13. 1 Timothy 1. 15. Luke 1. 53.

Sect. III.
Again, this is an infallible truth, that without repentance there is no being
saved; and what hope of their serious and unfeigned repentance? For sin must be
seen, before it can be sorrowed for. A man must know himself sick, before he
will seek to the Physician. Yea, where is no discovery of the disease, the
recovery of the health is in vain hoped for. Which makes Cyp^ (...) say, that
it is as mere lost labor, to preach unto a man the things of God, (...) fore
he is humbled with the fight o^ his wants: as to offer light to a blin^ (...)
man, to speak to a deaf man, or to labor to make a bruit beast wise.

Besides, if we look to be saved by any thing that we can do; Christ can profit
us nothing. For the Son of man is come to seek, and to save only that which
was lost: the lost sheep of the house of Israel, Mat. 18. 11. Luke 19. 10. 1 Timothy 1. 15. even such as utterly despair in regard of all other helps. Nor is
he any way fit for absolution, who finds not himself worthy of condemnation. We
shall find no sweetness in Christ's blood, till we feel the smart of our own
sins. Yea, no men under Heaven are in so hoplesse a condition as they, who
think to be saved by their performances, or any other thing or means, then by
the righteousness of Christ alone. faring with them as it does with unskilful
swimmers: who when they begin to sink, if they catch hold of weeds in the
bottom, the faster they hold, the surer they are to be drowned.

Sect. IV.
Fourthly and lastly, there needs no more to condemn these men, then their
ignorance of such saving truths: especially in such glorious times of light and
grace as these are; wherein they may hear the. Word preached every day in the
week, if they did not slight and disregard it, which aggravates their sin
exceedingly: For though it be enough, that God has set down his will in his
word most plainly, and we may read, or hear it read, (were it at any rate) and
that the Epitome of the whole Law is writ in every man's heart. Whatsoever ye
would that men should do unto you, even so do ye unto them, Mat. 7. 12. (As it
servs not a male factors turn, to plead ignorantiam juris, he knew not the Law
of his Prince which he has broken: for if the King have once proclaimed any
thing, and the subject after sufficinet time of notefying his will, be ignorant
of it; at his own peril be it.) Yet to be affectedly ignorant, and to shut
their eyes against the light of the Gospel, is by far more damnable: this is a
sin with a witness. As what says our Savior? John 3. 19. This is the
condemnation: that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather
then light, because their deeds were evil. And so on the contrary, This is life
eternal, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent,
John 17. 3. Besides, without knowledge, the mind cannot be good, as wise
Solomon affirms, Prove. 19. 2. A man may know the will of God, and yet not do
it; but he cannot do it, except he know it. Neither can he be born of God,
that knows him not, 1 John 4. 7. nor can he love God, verse. 8. Whence that
terrible text, Jer. 10. 25. Power out thy fury upon the Heathen that know thee
not, Psalm. 79. 6. And that other more terrible, 2 These. 1. 7, 8. The Lord Jesus
shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fly, to take vengeance on them that
know not God. Whence the Prophet Isaiah is peremptory, It is a people of no
understanding, therefore he that made them, will not have mercy upon them; and
he that formed them, will show them no favor, Is a. 27. 11.

Observe these Scriptu^es you ignorant souls, that think your ignorance will
excuse you: and let not Satan, nor your deceitful hearts so delude you, as to
think that God is in jest, where he says, My people are destroyed for lack of
knowledge; and because thou have rejected knowledge, I will also re^ect thee,
Hosea 4. 6. Or if you do, you shall one day find him in earnest. For as you
know not Christ here, so when you shall look for entrance into his Kingdom
hereafter, he shall say unto you, Depart from me, I know you not, Mat. 25. 12,
41. which will be but a sad saying; And far better were it, that you were
ignorant of all other things: which makes Saint Paul say, I desire to know
nothing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified, 1 Corinthians. 2. 2.

Sect. V.
Now this being the case of millions in this City, and so all the Land over:
what can we other then conclude, That few (even amongst us) shall be saved, as
our Savior affirms, Matthew. 7. 13, 14. and 20. 16. And that the whole world
lies in wickedness, as Saint John speaks, 1 John 5. 19. And that the number
of those whom Satan shall deceive, is as the sand of the Sea, Revel. 20. 8. and
13. 15, 16, 17, Isa. 10. 22. Romans 9. 27.

Which being so, I hold my self bound to acquaint them, what every one must of
necessity know, or they cannot be saved: the which I will do in a few lines,
that all (who will) may have the benefit thereof. Wherefore let all such ( if
they hve ears) hear what I shall say unto them out of God's Word, in laying
open those three fundamental principles before mentioned.

Sect. VI.
Touching the bounty and goodness of GOD in Man's Creation, these things would
be known.

1. That God in the beginning made Man in Paradise, after all his other works;
that he might come as to a Sumptuous palace ready furnished.

2. That he was made a compendium, and abridgment of all the other creatures:
as being a little world of himself; for whereas Planets have being, not life:
Plants have life, not sense; Beasts have sense, not reason; Angels have being,
life, reason, not sense; Man has all, and contains in him more generality then
the Angels; viz. being, life, sense, reason.

3. That as he was made Lord of, and had dominion over all; so he did excel
all other visible creatures.

1. In that he had a reasonable soul,

2. In that he has a speaking tongue,

3. In that he was made upright, with his face lifted up to heavenward,

4. In that all things were made subject to him,

5. In that he was made after the Image of God,

6. In that his soul is immortal,

7. In that he was ordained to eternal glory.

More especially we are to know, that as God made all things else for man's use
and service: so he created man (male and female) more immediately for his own
honor, and service; and did accordingly adorn him with gifts, and abilities
above all other visible creatures. For God made us, (had not we un-made our
selves) after his own Image, endowing us (as with reasonable, and immortal
souls, so) with perfection of all true wisdom, holiness, and righteousness;
writing his Law in our hearts, and giving us ability to obey, and fulfill the
same in every point; and withal a power to stand, and for ever to continue in
a most blessed and happy condition, free from all misery, and to enjoy a sweet,
and blessed Communion with his Creiter. So that man was created very good, did
clearly and perfectly know the whole will, and works of his Maker; was able out
of the integrity of his soul, and fitness of all the powers; fully, willingly
and cheerfully to love, observe, and obey his Maker, in every tittle and
circumstance he required, and to love his neighbor as himself: so that neither
the mind did conceive, nor the heart desire, nor the body put in execution any
thing, but that which was acceptable, and well pleasing unto God; as these
ensuing Scriptures do plainly prove, Genesis 1. 26, 27. 30. Eccles. 7. 29. Romans 2.
14, 15.

Sect. VII.
Which being so, how should it humble us, and make us ashamed of our present
condition; and withal set us on fire with a holy zeal, to outstrip and go
before all the rest of the Creatures in obaying our Creator; as far as he did
make us outstrip them all in spiritual and divine excellencies? whereas
hitherto, they have out-stript and gone before us in a high degree: as for
instance, Though we are bound to praise and serve God above any creature
whatsoever: in that all the creatures were ordained for our sakes: yet heaven,
earth, and sea; all the elements, all the creatures, obey the word of God, and
serve him as they did at first; yea, call upon us to serve him; only men for
whom they were all made, most ingratefully rebel against him. As if you
consider it rightly, the obedience of insensible and bruit creatures unto the
will of God, is a great check and reproof unto the disobedience of man. Man is
the chiefest of creatures, and they the lowest; yet do they as far exceed him
in obedience, as he does them in natural eminency. The Stork, and the Swallow
know their appointed times. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters
crib; the Sea moves in a settled, and unmoving course; the Stars fit their
many changes, to a steady rule answerable to the will of him that never
changes. The Lord by Moses but spoke to the rock, and it gave water to the
thirsty Israelites; he but commanded the clouds to rain down Mannah; and the
wind to bring them in Qu^ils, for the satisfying of their hunger, and they did
so. Yea, he but had the Ravens bring bread and flesh to Elijah, and they did
it. In like manner did ^he wind and sea, Mat. thew 8. 27. the Lions, Dan. 6.
22. those two shee-Bears, a Kings 2. 24. the Fire, Dan. 3. 27. the Earth, Numb.
16. 29, to 37. obey the voice of the Lord, and many the like spoken of in
Scripture. But Man is wholly gone astray from his rule; and not onley runs
from it, but against it: so that he is far worse, then things worse then
himself.

Which were it rightly considered, would be enough to melt an heart of Adamant:
For was this the principal end, for which men were created in such a glorious
condition? That we might honor, love, and serve our Creator and enjoy
communion and happiness with him for ever; and are we so far from excelling
the rest of the creatures, that we are become more disobedient, and rebellious
to God, then any one of them, except Satan himself? One would think it should
make all, ( that thirst not after their own damnation) not only to hate, and
dislike themselves for it: but force us with all possible speed and industry;
to seek out the cause, and how to recover our selves out of this wretched and
damnable condition.

Sect. VIII.
But it will be demanded how this comes ^ be so? and what was the cause?

To which I answer; God at first, entered into Convenant with our first parents
as public persons; both in behalf of themselves, and all that should proceed
out of their loin^; and so, that whatsoever gifts, privileges and endowments
they had bestowed upon them, should be continued to them and theirs only upon
condition of their loyalty, and personal obedience (of which the tree of life
was a pledge:) and they should have and enjoy them, or lose and be deprived of
them, as well for their off-sp^i^g, as for themselves, as they should keep, or
transgress his royal Law.

But see how unworthily they demeaned themselves, toward this their boun^^ul
Maker and Benefactor! For whereas God placed them in Paradise, and gave them
free liberty to eat of the fruit of every tree in the Garden; save only of the
tree of knowledge of good and c^i^, prehibiting them that alone, even upon pain
of eternal death to them and theirs; they most pe^fidi^usly contemned, and
brake this Law; which (as sundry circumstances that do aggravate it show) was a
most execrable and damnable sin. As observe the several circustances set down
by Moses, to amplify the foulness of their Fall: as,

First, that they despised, and made light of the promise of God; whereby they
were commanded to hope for everlasting life, so long as they continued their
loialty and obedience.

2. There was in it an unsufferable pride and ambition, in that he could not
content himself with being Lord of the whole Universe: but he must be equal
unto God; and every way like his Maker.

3. What greater unbelife could there be? when he gave more credit to the
Serpent, in saying, he should not die; then to God, who immediately before
tells them, that if he did sin in eating the forbidden fruit, he should die.

4. In this sin was not only unkindnesse not to be paralleled: but wilful
murder of himself, and all his posterity, whom he knew were to stand, or fall
with him.

5. Herein was soul apostacy from God to the Devil: to whom ( charging God
with lying, envy, malice, etc.) he revolted, and adhered, rather then stick to
his Maker.

And to these might be added many the like circumstances, which grievously
aggravate the sin of our first Parents, and make it so deadly in effect. For
hereby it is, we not only lost our blessed communion with God; that the Image
of God after which they were created, was forthwith abolished, and blotted out:
but that many grievous miseries and punishments, came in the room of it: so
that in the place of wisdom, power, holiness, truth, righteousness, and the
like ornaments, wherewith we had been clothed: there has succeeded these and
the like:

1. This their sin has filled our whole man with corruption.

2. It has made us become vassals unto sin and Satan.

3. It has disabled us from understanding the will, and observing the
Commandments of the Lord.

4. It caused us to lose our right unto, and sovereignty over the creatures.

5. It makes our persons and actions unacceptable to God.

6. It has cast us out of Gods favor, and made us liable, and subject to all
the plagues and miseries of this life; and to endless, eaflesse, and reme^
dilesse torments in the life to come.

Sect. IX.
And the reason is, Our First Parents being the root of all mankind; and
instead of all their posterrity before they had issue: And the covenant being
made with them as public persons; not for themselves only, but for their
Posterity; who were to stand, or fall with them: they being left to the
freedom of their own wills, in transgressing the commandment of God by eatting
the forbidden fruit, through the temtation of Satan: have made us, and all
mankind descending from them by ordinary generation, as guilty of their sin,
as any heir is liable to his Fathers debt. Their act being ours; as the act of
a Knight, or Burgess in the Parliament House, is the act of the whole County, in
whose name, and room they sit, and whom they represent: by which means our
Nature is so corrupted, that we are utterly indisposed and made opposite, unto
all that is spiritually good, and wholly inclined to all evil, and that
continually: and have also lost our communion with God, incurred his
displeasure and curse; so as we are justly liable to all punishments, both in
this life, and in the life to come.

Now for the fuller confirming and amplifying of what has been said, touching
O^iginal sin; take only these ensuing Scrirptures, and Aphorisms, without any
needless connection; that I may be so much the briefer.

Sect. X.
Amongst many others, the most pregnant Scriptures for the confirming of this
point, I hold to be these:

The Fathers have eaten sour grapes: and the childrens teeth are set an edge,
Jer. 31. 20. was a true proverb, though by them abused. By one man sin entered
into the world, and death by sin: and so death passed upon all men, in whom all
have sinned, Romans 5. 12. to 21. Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean?
not one, Job 14. 4. Sec Chap. 13. 14, 15, 16. We are all at an unclean thing,
and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6. By the works of the
Law, there shall no flesh be justified in his sight, Romans 3. 20. There is no
difference, for all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God, Romans 3.
21, 22, 23. And God saw that the wickedness of man was grea(...) in the earth;
and that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only evil
continually. And it repented the Lord, that he had made man, Genesis 6. 5, 6.
Both Jews and Gentiles are all under sin: As it is written, there(...) is none
righteous, no not one. There is none that understands, there is none that
seekerh after God; They are all gone out of the way, they are altogethe(...)
become unprofitable, there is none that does good, no not one. Their throat
(...) an open sepulcher. the poison of Asps is under their lips, there is no
fear of Go(...) before their eyes, Romans 3. 9. to 20. Out of the heart proceed
evil thought(...) mur^bers, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness,
blasphemies, Mat. 15. 19. see Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Whence come wars, and
fightings among you? com(...) they not hence? even of your lusts that war in
your members, James 4. 1. Un(...) them that are unbelieving is nothing pure:
but even their mind, and conscien(...) is defiled, Tit. 1. 15. I see another
Law in my members, warring against th(...) Law of my mind; and bringing me
into captivity to the Law of sin which is my members, O wretched man that I am,
who shall deliver me from the body of this death, etc? Romans 7. 14. to 25. where
the Apostle speaks all this, and a great deal more of himself; see Ephesians. 2. 2,
3. Gal. 3. 10.

Yet how many that g^ieve for their other sins, who are never troubled for
their Original corruption: which should above all be bewailed, even as the
mother and nurse of all the rest; and thought worthy not of our sighs alone,
but of our tears. For this is the great wheel of the Clock, that sets all the
other wheels a moving, while it seems to move slowest. And never did any truly
and orderly repent, that began not here: esteeming it the most foul and hateful
of all, as David, Psalm 51. 5. And Paul, crying out of it as the most secret,
deceitful, and powerful evil, Romans 7. 23, 24. And indeed if we but clearly saw
the foulness, and deceitfulness of it; we would not suffer our eyes to sleep,
nor our cye-lids to slumber, until a happy charge had wrought these hearts of
ours (which by nature are no better then so many styes of unclean Devils) to
become habitations for the God of Jacob.

Sect. XI.
We are the cursed seed of rebellious parents; neither need we any more to
condemn u^, then what we brought into the world with us. In Adam the root of
all, we all so sinned; that if we had no inherent sin of our own, this imputed
sin of his, were enough to damn us.

Our first Parents were the root, we are the branches: if the root be bitter,
the branches cannot be better. They were the fountain, we the springs: if the
sountains be filthy, so must the spangs. Whence it is, that holy David cries
out: Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me,
Psalm 51. 5.

Tantillus puer, tantus peccator, says Saint Austin: when a little child, I
was a great sinner. As in the little and tender bud, is infolded the leaf, the
blossom, and the fruit; so even in the heart of a young child, there is a
bundle and pack of folly laid up, as Solomon affirms, Pov. 22. 15. And as Moses
speaks, The thoughts of man's heart are evil: even from his childhood, Genesis 6.
5. and 8. 21.

We brought a world of sin into the world with us; and were condemned. so soon
as conceived: we were adjudged to eternal death, before we lived a temporal
life. As admit thou had never offended, in the least thought, word, or deed
all thy life: yea, admit thou could now keep all the Commandments, actually
and spiritually; yet all this were nothing, it could not keep thee out of Hell:
since that Original sin which we drew from the loins of our first Parents, is
enough to damn us.

Sin and corruption are the riches that we bequeath to our children; rebellion
the inheritance that we have purchased for them, death the wages that we have
procured them. God made us after his own Image; but by sin we have turned the
image of God into the image of Satan: Yea, like Satan we can do nothing else
but sin, and make others sin too, who would not so sin but for us.

As a surnace continually sparkles, as the raging Seafoams and easts up mire
and diet, and as a filthy dunghill, does continnally reak forth, and evaporate
^^^ous ^do^^: so do our hearts naturally stream forth unsavery eructations,
unholy lusts and motions, even continually.

As, O the infinitely intricate windings and turnings of the dark labyrinths of
man's heart! who finds not in himself, an indisposition of mind to all good;
and an inclination to all evil? O the strange monsters, the ugly, odious,
hidious fiends; the swarms, litters, legions of noisome lusts that are couched
in the stinking sties of every one of our decetful hearts! insomuch that if all
our thoughts did but break forth into action, we should not com far short of
the Devils themselves.

Sect. XII.
And as the healthiest body is subject to the mortallest disease; so there is
no sin so odious, unto which of our selves we are not sufficiently inclinable.
For Original sin, in which we are all born and bred; contains in it self the
seeds of all sins; that fearful sin against the Holy Ghost it self not excepted.

Such venomous natures we have; that never was there any villainy committed by
any forlorn miscreant; whereunto we have not a disposition in our selves.
Insomuch that we ought to be humbled, even for those very sins from which we
are in a manner exempt: For that Coins envy, Ishmaels scofing, Rabsh^ka's
railing, Shimei's cursing, Senacheribs balsphemy, Doegs murder, Pharaohs
cruelty, Sodoms lust, Judas his treason, Julians apostacy, etc. are not our
sins, and as much predominant in us, as they were in each of them; it is only
God's free grace and goodness. For all of them should have been thine and my
sins, if God had left us to our selves. Lord faith Saint Austin, thou lust
forgiven me those sins which I have done, and those sins which only by thy
grace I have not done: they were done in our inclination to them, and even that
inclination needs God's mercy. If we escape temptation, it is his mercy; if we
stand in temptation, it is his mercy; if our wills consent not, it is his
mercy; if we consent, and the act be hindered, it is his mercy; if we fall,
and rise again by repentance, all is his mercy.

We cry out of Cain, Judas, Julian, the Sodomites: alas they are but glasses to
see our own faces in: For as in water, face arswereth to face; so does the
heart of man to man. Says Solomon Prove. 27. 19. even hating of God, is by the
Holy Ghost charged upon all men. Romans 1. 30. John. 15. 23. 24. 25. We are all
cut out of the same piece, and as there is the same nature of all Lions, so of
all men

There is no part, power, function or faculty, either of our souls or bodies,
which is not become a ready instrument to dishonor God: our heart is a root of
all corruption, a seed plot of all sin; our eyes are eyes of vanity, our ears
are ears of folly, our mouths mouths of deceit, our hands hands of iniquity;
and every part does dishonor God; which yet would be glorified of him. The
understanding which was given us to learn virtue, is apt now to apprehend
nothing but sin; the will which was given us to affect righteousness, is apt
now to love nothing but wickedness; the memory which was given us to remember
good things, is apt now to keep nothing but evil things etc. For sin like a
spreading leaprosie, is so grown over us, that from the crown of our heads, to
the sole of our feet; there is nothing whole therein, but wounds, and
swellings, and sores full of corruption. To be short, we are as Trailors,
condemned to suffer eternal torments in Hellfire being only repricved for a
time.

Sect. XIII.
And so much of Original sin, which is the pravity, naughtiness, and
corruption of our Nature. Psalm. 51. 5. Now of actual sin, which is the
transgression of Gods law, 1 John. 3. 4. when evil thoughts are consented
unto, and performed in outward deeds. James. 1. 15. Touching which we are to
know, and take notice; that

The Law of God is spiritual, and therefore requires, not only outward
obedience in word and deed; but also inward in mind and heart, and that
chiefly: neither does it forbid only the committing of outward sins in word
and deed; but also all the secret corruptions of the mind, and heart. Romans 7.
13, 14, 15. Matthew. 5. 21, 22, 27, 28. 1 John. 3. 15.

Again where any duty is commanded, there the means which tend thereto are
enjoined: and where any vice is forbidden, there the occasions, provocations,
and alurments tending thereto; are also forbidden. Again,

It is not enough to do that which is good for substance; except we do it well
also, in regard of circumstances: as namely, that it flows from a pious and
good heart, sanctified by the holy Ghost; and be done in faith, obedience to
the word, humility, saving knowledge, and sincere love to God, zeal of his
glory, and a desire to edify and win others: of which I might give you many
examples; as of the Jews fasting Isa. 58. 3, to 8. of those reprobates
preaching in Christ's name, and casting out devils Matthew. 7-21, 22, 23. of
Cains sacrificiing. 1 John 3. 12. He offered, and God abhorred; because he
cared not for the manner, to do it well; God cared not for his offering, though
the act was good. Simon Magus believed, Herod listened, Felix feared, Saul
obeyed, Jezabell fasted, the Pha^^sees prayed* but because they did not believe
so, hear so, fear so, obey so, fast so, and pray so as God required, and as is
before related, they were never the more regarded for what they did. For love
is the fountain of obedience, and all external obedience to God without inward
love, is hyppocrisie: whereas Christ commends to his disciples, the care of
keeping his commandments aright, as the utmost testimony of their love unto
him, John. 15. 10.

Sect. XIV.
Which being so, how often and how many ways do we all offend? For if we but
narrowly look into our hearts and lives: we shall easily perceive, that there
is not one of those righteous precepts, set down Exodus 20. which we have not
broken, ten thousand times, and ten thousand ways. Yea O God (may the best of
us say) there is no vein in me, that is not full of the blood of thy Son; whom
I have crucified and crucified again, by multiplying many, and often repeating
the same sin^; there is no artery in me, that has not the spirit of error,
the spirit of pride, of passion, of lust, the spirit of giddiness in it; no
bone in me, that is not hardened with the custom of sin, nourished and
supplied with the marrow of sin, no sinews, no ligaments, which do not tie and
chain sin and sin together. Yea, If we but watch over our own hearts narrowly
one day: we shall find an army of unclean thoughts and desires there,
perpetually fighting against our souls. Whereby we are continually tempted,
drawn away, and enticed through our own concupiscence. As how many temptations
come in by those Cink-ports the senses? how many more by Satan's injections?
presenting to the affections things absent from the senses? but most of all by
lust it self, (a thing not created, yet as quick as thought) tumblieg over a
thousand desires in one hour: For the devil, and our flesh meet together
every day, and hour; to engender new sins, which is the reason, our sins are
counted among those things which are infinite: as the hairs of our head, the
sands of the Sea, the stars of Heaven.

We are swift to all evil, but to all good immovable; when we do evil, we do
it cheerfully, and quickly, and easily; but if we do any good, we do it
faintly, and rawly, and slackly. We have used all our wisdom, to commit the
foolishness of sin; our whole conversation has been to serve Satan, and
fulfill the lusts of the flesh. We even suck in iniquity like water, and draw
on sin as it were with cart-ropes: Isai. 5. 18. It has been the course of our
whole life, to leave that which God commands, and to do that which he forbids.
The Word and Spirit may work in us some flashes of desire, and purposes of
better obedience: but we are constant in nothing, but perpetual offending;
only therein we cease not: for when we are waking, our flesh tempts us to
wickedness; if we are sleeping, it sollicits us to filthiness.

What ever God commands, we do the contrary: We profane his days, contemn
his Ordinances, resist his Word, grieve his Spirit, misuse his messengers, hate
our reprovers, slander and persecute his people, seduce our friends, give ill
example to our neighborurs, open the mouths of God's, and our enemi^s, to
blaspheme that glorious Name after which we are called, and the truth we
profess. Yea, we have done more against God in one week, then we have done for
him ever since we were born: and whereas the least of Gods mercies, is greater
then all the courtesies of men: we are not so thankful to him for them all, as
we are to a friend for some one good turn.

Sect. XV.
Neither are we sufficient of our selves to think, much less to speak, least
of all to do ought that is good, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Joh. 15. 4, 5. There is so much
wearisomnesse, pride, passion, lust, envy, ignorance, awkwardnesse, hypocrisy,
infidelity, vain thoughts, unprofitablenesse, and the like; cleaving to our
best actions to defile them: that even our praying, and fasting, and repenting;
our hearing, believing, and giving; our holiest communication our most
brotherly admonition, etc. are in themselves as filthy rags, Isa. 64. 6. were
they not accepted in Christ, covered with his righteousness, and washed white
in his most precious blood.

Our very righteousness is as a menstruous cloth, Isa. 64. 6. What then is our
sinfulness? As bring we our lives to the rule; Look how many sins are
cherished, so many false gods there are chosen. Look how many creatures thou
inordinately love, fear, trustest, rejoicest in; so many new gods have
thou coined: and will thou not th^n plead guilty, when the first and second
Commandment arraigneth thee?

Thou can not away with swearing; but do thou reprove others for their
swearing? Did thou never hear Sermons unpreparedly, irreverently, etc? Does
thy heart upon a Sabbath rest from wordly thoughts? much more thy tongue from
worldly speeches? There is murder of the heart, hatred: Have not thou
murdered thy Neighbors soul, by thy negligence, persuasion, evil example,
etc. Thou have not stolen, but have thou not coveted? Have thou been liberal to
those that are owners of a part of thy goods? have thou not robbed thy brother
of his good name? which is above silver and gold. Have thou not robbed God of
his worship? of his Sabbaths? of his Tithes, etc. Lying, flattering,
detracting, listening to tales; yea not defending thy brothers good name, is to
bear false witness.

Have thou kept the Tenth Commandment? which condemns the very first motions
of sins, springing out of our hearts, though presently rejected; and a thousand
the like: and yet for every drop of wickedness that is in the life, there is a
sea in the heart that feeds it.

Sect. XVI.
True, if thou look on thy sins in Satan's false glass, that will make them
seem light, and contemptible; but behold them in the clear and perfect glass
of Gods Law, and they will appear abominable. Which makes our Savior call
hatred, murder; a wanton eye, adultery, etc. Yea, consider thy sins rightly,
and they will appear as the Judasses that betrayed, the Soldiers that
apprehended, bound, smote and wounded thy Savior, as the gall and vinegar in
his mouth, spittle on his sace, thorns on his head, nails in his hands, spear
in his side, etc.

This is the way to know thy self sinful: and as thus to know thy self, is the
best Divinity, as Demonax said of Philosophy: so thus to aggravate thy sins in
thine own sight, is the only way to have them extenuated in the sight of God.
Whence the more holy a child of God is, the more sensible he is of his own
unholinesse; thinking none so vilde as himself: as it fared with holy Job, Job
40. 4. and 42. 6. and with Isaiah, chap. 6. 5. and 64. 6. and with Saint Paul,
1 Timothy 1. 15. Romans 7. 14, to 25. and with holy David, who almost in every Psalm
so much bewails his sins, original and actual; of omission and commission.

Carnal men are only troubled for those sins that appear to the world: but
those in whom Christ i^ formed a new, think they cannot be humbled enough for
their evil thoughts, vain and unprofitable words, for the evil which cleavs
even to their best actions; for sins of omission, as the want of faith, and
love, and repentance, want of the true fear of God, the neglect of preparation,
and profitable hearing, of praying and reading in their families, of
instructing their children and servants, of sanctifying the Sabbath, and seeing
that all under them do the same; their unfruitfulnesse under the means of
grace, their not growing in grace and true wisdom, their not fearing a lie, an
oath, and a hundred the like. And thus do all experimental Christians, all that
have spiritual eyes. The want whereof I take to be the cause of all desperate
wickedness: as what else but invincible ignorance is the cause, why
wickedness so abounds in every corner of the Land. Sin indeed at first was the
cause of ignorance: but now ignorance is the cause of sin. Swearing, and lying,
and killing, and stealing, and whoring abound: (says the Prophet) because
there is no knowledge of God in the land, Hosea 4. 1, 2. It is a people that do
(...) their hearts, says God; Why? Because they have not known my ways, (...)
10. Ye^ are dec^ived (says our Savior) because ye know not the Scriptures,
neither the power of God, Matthew. 22. 29. When Christ wept over Jerusalem, what
was the cause? Even their blindness. If thou had known (says he) at the
least in this thy day; those things which now are hid from thine eyes Luke 19.
42. Because men know not the wages of evil, therefore they do it: and because
they would securely do it, therefore they refuse to know it. O that men knew,
how good it is to obey; to disobey, how evil! for this would soon disp^rse and
dispell all the black clouds of their reigning sins in a moment. If they were
wise (says Saint Bernard) they would foresee the torments of Hell, and
prevent them: but they that wander in bypath, declare themselves ignorant of
the right-way of salvation, Romans 3. 17. I grant. many that are wicked have a
show of wisdom: but let them seem to know never so much; yet it is through
ignorance that they do so ill.

Sect. XVII.
And so having given you, a short survey of our wretchedness, by reason of
O^i^inal, sin and act^all transgressions; by which we must confess to have
deserved double damnation I come now to declare the means, which God of his
infinite goodness has found out, both for the satisfying of his justice, and
also freeing us from the guilt, and punishment of either. And that with as much
brevity, as may stand with p^^spicuity.

First in general we must undoubtedly know, that the sole perfection of a
Christian, is the imputation of Christ's righteousness; and the not-imputation
of his own unrighteouness, as appears by the whole current of Scripture, of
which a few.

Even the Son of man, came to give his life a ransom for many. Mark. 10. 45. As
in Adam all dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive. 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. As by
one man's disobedience, many were made sinners: so by the obedience of one,
shall many be made righteous, etc. Romans 5. 18, 19. As by the offense of one,
the fault came on all men to condemnation: so by the justifying of one, the
benefit abounded toward all men to the justification of life. Romans 5. 18. Unto
Jesus Christ that loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood.
Revel. 1. 5. The blood of Jesus Christ his Son, cleanses us from all sins 1
John. 1. 7. he is the reconciliation for our sins etc. 1 John. 2. 1, 2. He has
made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin: that we might be made the
righteousness of God in him: 2 Cor. 5. 21. He was delivered to death for our
sins, and is risen again for our justification. Romans 4. 25. Who his own self,
^^re our sins in his own body on the tree: by whose stripes we were healed. 1
Pet. 2. 24. He was wounded for our transgressions, he was broken for our
iniquityes, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his stripes we
were healed Isa. 53. 5. Neither i^ there salvation in any other; for among men,
there is given none other name under Heaven, whereby we must be saved. Acts. 4.
12. The wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 6 23. I am the resurection and the life, be that
believes in me, although he were dead, yet shall he live. John. 11. 25. You
has he quickened, that were dead in trespasses and sins. Ephe. 2. 1. God so
loved the world: that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. For God sent not his Son
into the world, to condemn the world: but that the world through him might be
saved. John. 3. 16. to 20.

God commends his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ
died for us: much more then being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved
from wrath through him. For if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God,
by the death of his Son: much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his
life, Romans 5. 6, to 11. read to the end of the Chapter. See more Joh. 1. 29.
Acts 13. 39. Romans 6. 4, to 23. and 8. 2, 3. and 10. 3, 4. 1 Cor. 15. 56. Colos.
1. 14. Gal. 3. 22. Heb. 9. 28. 1 Pet. 1. 18, 19, 20. 1 John 3. 8.

Sect. XVIII.
As Christ was a sinner, only by the imputation of our sins: so we are just,
only by the imputation of his righteousness. Our good works (were they never
so many and rare) cannot justify us, or deserve any thing at Gods hands: it is
only in Christ that they are accepted, and only for Christ that they are
rewarded. Yea the opinion of thine own righteousness, makes thy condition far
worse then the wickedest man's alive: For Christ that came to save all weary and
heavy laden sinners; (be they never so wicked) neither came to save, or once to
call thee that have no sin, but art righteous enough without him. As hear his
own words to the proud Pharisees, who had the same thoughts of themselves as
thou have. They that be whole need not a Physician, but they the^^ are sick. I
am not come to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance. The ^^st sheep of
the house of Israel, Mat. 9. 13. and 10. 6. and 15. 24. and 18. 11. Nor can any
soul be so dangerously sick: as thou, who art least sensible of thy being sick.

Briefly, until with Saint Paul, thou renouncest thine own righteousness,
see thy self the greatest of sinners, art able to discern sin in every thing
thou can think, speak, or do; and that thy very righteousness is no better
then a menstruous cloth, Isa. 64. 6. thou can have no part in Christ. And
until Christ shall become thine by Regeneration, and a lively faith: Thou art
bound to keep the whole Law, actually and spiritually with thy whole man, thy
whole life; or else suffer eternal death and destruction of body and soul in
Hell for thy not keeping it. So that thou have yet to answer (and I pray mind
it seriously) for all the sins, that ever thou have committed; who art not able
to answer for one of the least of them. For the wages of sin (any sin, be it
never so small) is eternal death, Romans 6. 23. Gal. 2. 16, 19, 20, 21.

Neither let Satan, nor thy own deceitful heart delude thee; in thinking that
thou have faith, when thine own words declare the contrary. Nor would I ask any
more evidence against thee in this, then thine own mouth: in saying, that thou
never doubtest in all thy life: for this makes it plain, that thou never had
faith, nor ever knew what faith means. For he who never doubted, never
believed: and Satan has none so sure, as those whom he never yet assaulted.

Sect. XIX.
But this being a main fundamental point, which every man is bound to know: I
will more particularly and fully explain it as thus:

Man being in a most miserable, and undone condition; by reason of Original
and actual sin, and of the curse due to both; being liable to all miseries in
this life, and adjudged, to suffer eternal torments in hellfire after death:
having no possibility to escape, the fierce wrath of Almighty God: who had
already pronounced sentence upon him. When neither Heaven Earth nor Hell, could
have yielded any satisfactory thing besides Christ; that could have satisfied
Gods justice, and merited Heaven for us: then, O then! God of his infinite
wisdom and goodness, did not only find out a way to satisfy his justice, and
the Law: but even gave us his own Son out of his bosom; and his Son gave
himself to dye, even the most shameful, painful, and cursed death of the
Cross to redeem us: that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but
have everlasting life. John. 3. 16. A mercy bestowed, and a way found out; that
may astonish all the Sons of men on earth, and Angels in Heaven. Wherefore
wonder at this, you that wonder at nothing! that the eternal God would die, to
redeem our worse then lost souls; that we might not dye eternally! O the
deepness of Gods love! O the unmeasurable measure of his bounty! O Son of God,
who can sufficiently extol thy love, or commend thy pity or extol thy praise!
It was a wonder that thou made us for thy self; more that thou made thy
self man for us; but most of all that thou should unmake thy self, that
thou should dye to save us.

Which salvation stands, in two things. First in freeing and delivering us from
Hell; secondly, in the possession of Heaven, and eternal life. Christ by his
death, merits the first for us: and by his obedience, fulfilling the law,
merits the second. The parts of our justification are likewise two: the
remission of our sins, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness; whereby we
have freedom from all evil here, and the perfection of all good and happiness
in Heaven. Insomuch, that all those Millions of mercies that we have received,
from, before, and since, we were born, either for soul or body; (even to the
least bit of bread we eat) or shall enjoy to eternity: Christ of his free grace
has purchased for us, with the price of his own precious blood. For which see
Psalm. 68. 19. and 145. 15, 16. and 75. 6, 7.

Hear this all you that care to be saved! God will pardon all your sins, he
will give you an eternal crown of glory in heaven, if you unfainedly repent,
and wholly rely upon Christ for your salvation, by a lively faith; and that
because he is just: for although the Lord cannot in justice let sin go
unpunished; (for the wages of sin is eternal death, Romans 6. 23. death in the
person, if not in the surety.) Yet Christ has sufficiently satisfied for all
the sins of the faithful, and paid their debt even to the utmost farthing; as
is evident by Isa. 53. 4. 5. a Cor. 5. 21. Heb. 9. 26. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Romans 3.
25, 26. 1. Joh. 1. 7, 9. and sundry other places. As, are we bound to perform
perfect obedience to the Law? Christ performed it for us. Were we for
disobedience subject to the sentence of condemnation, the curse of the Law, and
death of body and soul? He was condemned for us, and bore the curse of the Law;
he died in our stead an ignominious death. Did we deserve the anger of God; he
endured his Fathers wrathful displeasure, that so he might reconcile us to
hi(...) Father and set us at liberty. He that deserved no sorrow, felt much;
that we who deserved much, might feel none. And by his wounds we are healed,
Isa. 53. 5. Adam eat the Apple, Christ paid the price. I^ a word whatsoever
w(...) owed, Christ discharged; whatsoever we deserved, he suffered, if not in
the sell(...) same punishments (for he being God, could not suffer the eternal
torment(...) of Hell,) yet in proportion, the dignity of his Person, (he being
God and man, giving value unto his temporary punishments; and making them of
more value and worth, then if all the world should have suffered the eternal
torments of Hell. For it is more for one that is eternal to dye: then for
others to dye eternally. Therefore was the Son of God made, the Son of man:
that the Sons of men, might be made the Sons of God: and therefore was he both
God and man: lest being in every respect God, he had been too great to suffer
for man, or being in every respect man; he had been to weak to satisfy God.
And so much for explication of the Third Principle, mentioned in the beginning.

Sect. XX
But now coms the hardest part of my work to be performed. For admit the
Natural man be convinced of the truth of these three fundamental principles
never so clearly: yet he will draw such a conclusion from the premises; that
he will be never the better, for what bath been told him, yea he will decoct
all, (even the mercy, and goodness of God) into poison. For what will such a one
suggest to himself? (the Devil helping forward) Let it be granted will he say,
that I were every way wretched and miserable; a great sinner, both originally
and actually; and likewise liable to all the plagues of this life, and of that
to come: yet I thank God, I am well enough, so long as Christ has p^y'd my
ransom; and freed me from all by a new Covenant; the tenu^e whereof is, Believe
and live: whereas at first it was, do this and live: to which I answer;

In Covenants and indentures between party and party: there are always
articles, and conditions to be performed on the one side, as well as promises to
be fulfilled on the other, as says Pareus. Now as God has covenanted and
bound himself by his word and Seal; to remit thee thy sins, adopt thee his
child by regeneration; and give thee the kingdom of Heaven, and everlasting
life by and for his Son's sake; so Christ has for, and on thy behalf
undertaken; yea thou thy self did for thy part, bind thy self by covenant,
promise and vow in thy baptism, that thou would forsake the Devil and all
his works, constantly believ Gods holy Word, and obediently keep his
Commandments; the better thereby to express thy thankfulness toward him, for
so great a benefit. 1 Pet. 3. 21. Psa. 116. 12, 13, 14 And we know that in
Covenants and Indentures: if the Conditions be not kept, the Obligation is not
in force. Whereby millions ( Magus like) after the water of Baptism, (which is
a seal, of the Covenant of Grace) go to the fire of Hell. Yea except we repent
and believe the Gospel; (threats, and precepts; as well as promises) that holy
sacrament, together with the offer of grace: instead of Sealing to us our
salvation; will be an obligation under our own hand and seal against us; and so
prove a seal of our greater condemnation. Therefore the mayn question is,
Whether thou art a Believer? For although Christ in the Gospel, has made many
large, and precious promises: there are none so general: which are not
limited, with the condition of faith, and the fruit thereof unfeigned
repentance; and each of them are so tied and entayled, that none can lay claim
to them, but true believers, which repent and turn from all their sins, to
serve him in holiness, without which no man shall see the Lord Heb. 12. 14.
Isa. 39. 20. As for instance, Our Savior has made public proclamation. Mark.
16. 16. That whosoever shall believe, and be baptized, shall be saved: but mark
what withal is added; he that will not believe, shall be damned. Again, So God
loved the world, that be gave his only begotten Son; that whosoever believes
in him should not perish, but have everlasting life, Joh. 3. 15, 16. And that
none may deceive themselves, he adds; He that believes on him is not
condemned; but he that believes not, is condemned already: because he has not
believed in the name of the only begotten Son of God. And this is the
condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved darkness rather
then light, Joh. 3. 19, 20. And again, As many as received him, to them he gave
power to become the sons of God; even to them that believe on his name, Joh. 1.
12.

Again, Hec^ 5. 9. He is said to be the author of eternal salvation, unto all
that obey him: not unto them which continue in their rebellious wickedness,
and never submit themselves to be ruled by the scepter of his Word. Christ's
blood ( says Z^^c^ie) was shed as well for ablution, as for absolution: as
well to cleanse from the s^il and filth of sin, as to clear and assoil from the
guilt of sin, Rom, 6. 5, 6. God bath chosen us in Christ, before the foundation
of the world: that we should be holy, and without blame before him in love,
Ephesians. 1. 4. They the efore that never come to be holy, were never chosen. He
is said to have given himself for us: that he might re^eem us from all
iniquity, and purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good
works: Titus 2. 14. Luke 1. 74, 75. Yea the Lord binds it with an ^ath, that
whomsoever he redeemeth out of the hands of their spiritual enemies, they shall
worship him in holiness and righteousness all the days of their life, Luke
1. 73, 74, 75. 1 Pet. 2. 24. and Titus 2. The grace of God which brings
salvation, teaches us; that we should deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, an^
that we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present world, verse.
12.

By all which it is plain; that as Christ's blood is a Charter of pardon; so
withal it is a covenant of direction: and he that refuses to live, as that
covenant prescribes; may perish as a malefactor that is hanged with his pardon
about his neck.

Sect. XXI.
But alas, say what can be said! carnal men (who love their sins, better then
their souls) will answer all, yea consute whatever can be alleged, with God is
merciful; Or in case that will not serve, yet they have another shift, or
rather the enemy of mankind, will furnish them with an ^vasion, telling them
that they have a strong faith, good hearts, and mean well: they repent of their
sins, have as good wishes and desires as can be, are elected, hope to go to
heaven as well ^s the best, etc. But to every of ^hese, I answer.

First, true faith purifieth the heart, and works by love, consumes our ^o
^^ptions, and sanctifies the whole man throughout, so that our faith to God,
is seen in our faithfulness to men; our invisible belief, by our visi^le life.

(...) holiness are as inseparable, as life and motion, the Sun and light,
(...), ice, and coldness, the sp^ing and greenness, the rose and sweetnes^,
(...) and ^ardness, cristall and cleerness, pitch and foulness, honey and
sweetness. Again, faith believes the threats of the Word; together with the
promises: Now thou who pretendest belief in the promises, show my thy belief in
the threatenings. For did thou believe the truth of those menaces, which God
has denounced against unclean, coveteous, am^itious, unjust, envious,
malicious persons, and such like sinne^^: how du^st thou then so wallow in
these sins, that if God instead of Hell, had promised Heaven as a reward unto
them; thou could not do more then thou do. Why should thou deceive thy
self with an opinion of faith? when indeed thou believe not so much as the
Devil does; for he believes [namely the threatenings of the Word] and ^rem^les
for horror, Jam. 2. but thou go on in sin, even mocking at the menaces; and
in the infidelity of thy heart, give them the ^ve, saying; no such thing
shall befall thee. But Invadunt urbem, somno vino^u^ sepultam; when they shall
say peace and safety, then comes on them sudden destruction, 1 These. 5. 3.

Though these persecutors of Christ, and murderers of the Lord of life, were
the Devils children; as they were plainly told by truth it self, John 8. 44.
yet they most confidently believed, and stiffly maintained, that God was their
father, ver. 41. And to will the wo^st of men in these days, such as do nothing
but sin, and make others sin, such as glory in, and maintain their sins.

Again, as faith is wrought by Gods Spirit: so where it is wrought, it brings
forth the fruits, of the Spirit, mentioned, Gal. 5. 22. 23. whereas
presumption, as it is of the flesh; so it b^ings forth the fruits of the flesh,
ver. 19. 20. 21.

But it is very easy to believ, thinks the sensualist; yes, but why? Satan
troubles not such, for then he who begot this presumptious faith in him,
should be divided against himself. Nay Satan confirm^ him in this his deceit.
Besides this is a sure rule, that that persuasion only, which follows sound
humiliation, is faith: that which goes before i^ is presumption. And as Ambrose
speaks, no man can repent of sin, but he that believes the pardon of sin: nor
none can believe his sins are pardoned, except he has repented. Besides how
easy a matter soever thou think it is to believe: he that goes about it,
shall find it as hard a work to believ the Gospel, as to keep the Law; and
only God must enable to both, and yet so far as we come short of either, so
far forth we have just cause to be humbled; if we consider how God at first
made us, and how woefully we have unmade our selves. But

Sect. 22.
Secondly, as for their good hearts and meanings, they may think what they
will; but every wise ^an knows; that the outward actions declare the inward
intentions. A good conversion is proved by a good conversation.

The^e is no heart made of flesh, which at some time or other ^elents not; even
(...) and marble, will in some weather stand or drops. Men may flatter God with
their mouths, and wit^ t^ei^ tongues dissemble with him; when their hearts are
not upright with him, Psalm. 78, 3^. 37. and indeed they whose words and dee^^s
are faulty and evil; and yet plead the goodness of their hearts toward God:
are like malefactors, who being convinced of these, or the like naughtiness, by
plain evidence to their faces, do appeal to the testimony of such persons for
their purgation, as they know cannot be found. And in case the hearts of such
men could be seen of others, as their works and words are, their hearts would
appear worst of all, as they do to God, who sees them. Nor is any evil in the
mouth or hand, which was not in the heart first of all, as the stream in the
fountain. And let a vici^us man boast never so much of his good heart; I will
as soon believ him that says he has the Philosophers stone^ and yet lives
like a beggar: which two hang together like a sick man's dream.

We have good hearts, and mean well; alas poor ignorant souls! for every drop
of wickedness that appears in the life, there is an ocean in the heart. The
heart of man is deceitful above all things: and while he thinks there is no
deceit in it, even in that he is most of all deceived. S^nners are like that
peremptory Sexton, that said, howsoever the day goes, I am sure the clock goes
rig^t. So that the Spanish Proverb does every way please me: defienda medios
demio, God defend me from my self.

Carnal men, are apt to boast of the goodness of their hearts: but a man's
heart is as arch a traitor, as any he shall meet withal (...) trust it too
much, and know it too little, is it fared with Leah, Genesis 30 18. and Hazaell 2
Kings 8. 12. 13. and Peter, Mat. 26. 33 Luke 22. 32. Mark 14. 29. And those
Jews, Act. 2. 36. (...) all this they will acknowledge in the end; yea, prove
by experience, that Heaven is full of good works; Hell of good wishes; and that
the fetters which sin makes, it must wear.

Sect. XXIII.
Thirdly, touching their repentance, my answer is True repentance for sin, is a
turning from every sin, to the contrary good. In all true repentance is a
change, both in the judgment from error to truth, and in the will from evil to
good, and in the affections from loving evil, and hating good; to love good
and hate evil; in the whole man from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God. Without which change, no repentance, no being saved: The two
main and essential parts of repentance are contrition or humiliation, and
conversion or reformation. It is not true repentance, except humiliation and
reformation go both together: for either of these single make but a half, or
halting repentance. An unreformed sorrow, is but deformed: and a sorrow less
reformation, is but a very sorry one. Humitation without reformation, is a
foundation without a building: and reformation without humiliation, is a
building without a foundation. Judas was grieved for murdering Christ, yet no
change followed: he fell to murdering of himself. It is not possible a man
should truly grieve, and be displeased for his sins; and yet continue in them
without (...) change.

Sect. XXIV.
Fourthly, as for their assurance of salvation, it is upon a good ground as
a(...) the rest: for they s^mber, and suppose themselves good Christians: ^^e
faith is but a dream, their hope but a dream, their charity but a dream, their
obedience but a dream, their whole religion but a dream; and so their assurance
of salvation is but a dream, they have regeneration in conceit, ^epentance and
righteousness in conceit, they serve God well in conceit, do the works of
justice and piety in conceit, and they shall go to heaven only in conceit, or
in a dream; and never awake until they feel themselves in the flames of hell
Every drunken beast, and blasphemer thinks to go to heaven: though none shall
come there, nor once see God without holiness: which they abhor. One minds
nothing but his cups, another nothing but his coin, a third only his Curtiz^n:
yet all these point to meet in heaven, but this is not the way thi^her. The
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes and the pride of life, 1 John 2. 16. is
a broad way, but not to heaven. Micha when he had a Levite in his house,
thought that God loved him, Judge. 17. 13. It is usual with formalists, when
they have the Sacrament in their belly, to think that all is well, as the Jews
thought, we may ^ut away our wives, we may swear, we may hate our enemies,
we may kill the Prophets, subject the Word of God to our traditi^ns, and
follow our own ways. Why, Abraham is our father, John 8. 39. But by their
leave, Christ calls them bastards, and finds out another father for them, ver.
44. Ye are of your father the Devil, and the lusts of your father ye will do.
Profane Libertine^, such as account not themselves well, but when they are
doing ill: yea, the most covetous oppressors, who may say as Pope (...) did, I
can have no place in heaven, because I have so often sold it upon earth; every
man of them hopes (I confess with more confidence, then judgment) to have
benifit by the Gospel; when they will not be tied to the least tittle of the
Law. But if Christ be not our King to govern us* he will neither be our
Prophet to fore-warn nor our Priest to expiate. Except we so sake our sins, God
will never forgive them, yea he has sw^rn by an oath, that whomsoever he
redeemeth out of the hands of their spi^ituall enemies; shall serve him in
holiness, and righteousness all the days of their lives. Neither can it confist
with his justice, to pardon such as continue in an evil c^u^se of life.

If Christ has freed us from the damnation of sin, he has also freed us from
the dominion of sin. If with his blood he has quenched the fire of hell for
us; he has also quenched the fire of lust in us. Christ's justifying blood, is
given us by his sanctifying Spirit. He being consecrated, was made the author
of eternal salvation, unto all t^em (and them only) that ob^y him, Heb. 5. 9.
Of whomsoever a man i^ overcome, even unto the same he is in bondage, 2 Pet. 2.
19 Have ye then no government of your passions, no conscience of your actions,
no care of your lives: false hypocrites, ye do but abuse, and profane that
name, which ye unjustly arrogate.

Sect. XXV.
But yet more to convince you, you go to heaven, when in sundry partlcula^s,
you fall sho^t of many wicked reprobates recorded in Scripture; as do bu^ deal
impartially with thy self, and tell me thou civil Justiciary whether thou
ever had the heart upon hearing the th^eatnings of the Word, to ^ele^t and
humble thy self with Ahah? to confess thy sins, and ^esire the people of God to
pray for thee with Pharaoh? to be affected with joy in hearing the Word, and
practice many things, with Herod? to ^ee zealous against sin, with Jehu?
willingly to part with a good part of ^hy goods, with Anarias? ^o forsake the
world and all thy hopes in it; to fol^ow poor Christ, as Demus and others? to
venture thy life with Alexander ^he Copper-smith, in cleaving to the truth? yea
it is said of Judas himself that he repented, there is contrition; he says I
have sinned, there is confession, and he restored the money again, there is
satisfaction; which is (...) the Papists repentance: and yet he is Judas the
son of perdition still. Now tell me? do thou not com short of these, many
such as these be wicked reprobates, and yet will thou pleas thy self in a falls
conceit, of thine own happiness, who come further behind them, then they do
behind true christians? If some that have journied in the wilderness to
Kad^sh-barnea, shall yet never enter into Gods rest; shall those that never
left Egypt? Is ^he stony ground reprobate? and can the highway ground be
good. There are three sorts of ground mentioned, Mark. 4. 4. 5. 6. 7. and the
very worst of them receives the seed, yet all damned; whither then shall the
^empest of Gods wrath drive them, that would never yet give the Gospel ^
religious ear.

But vicious men, think God is all mercy (as ^oggie air uses to represent
every object far bigger then it is.) when the Word tells us, that he is a
consuming fire, and a ^ealous God, Deuteronomy. 4. 24. Heb. 12. 29 and when we shall
find in Deuteronomy. 28. thrice as many curses as blessings. Do thou expect to have
him merciful to thee, that art unmerci^ull, cruel, and bloody to ^im, to his,
and thine own soul? none that have eyes in their heads and open, can be so
sort^^^. But Sin is like the juic^ of Poppie, called Opium; which if the
quantity exceed, b^ingeth the patient into a deep sleep, that he never awaketh.
Sinners dream they are awake, but ind^ed they are ^ast asleep; yea, with Sardi
they are dead, while they think they are ^live.

And indeed this misp^ision or mistake, this very opinion of being in ^afe good
enough; keeps a man out of all possibility of being bettered: ^or what we
presume to have attained, we seek not after. Yea this con^^ited righteousness,
is the only cause of all unrighteousness; and many a man had been good, if he
had not at present so thought himself. Until Paul was humbled to the very
ground; trembling and astonished, he never asked Jesus, what will thou have me
to do. And the like of those Con^e^ts that were p^ickt in their hearts at
Peter's searching Sermon, upon their being convinced, that they were the
murderers of the Lord of life, Acts 2. verse. 36, 37, 38.

Sect. XXVI.
In the last place touching their Election, this is an infallible truth;
Whomsoever God has appointed to salvation, to them he has appointed ^he means
also, which is holiness. I^deed a man may be so bold of his Pre^estination, as
to forget his conversation; so he may dream himself in Heaven, and waken from
that dream in Hell. God's purpose touching the end, include the means. Though
God had promised Paul that his company should not be drowned; yet he told the
Mar^iners, that unless they kept in the ship, they should be drowned, Act. 2^.
22, 23. 31. ^s if their safety should not be without means: Rebek^^ had God's
Oracle for Jacobs life, yet she sent him away out of Esau's reach. It was
impossible for Herod to hurt the child Jesus, yet he must fly into Egypt.

And so I have shown in the last place, what are the conditions of the new
Covenant, and to whom the promises belong; which is all that I undertook. Now
if men will yet go on, and perish in their impenitencie; their blood be on
their own heads, and not on mine, I have discharged my duty.

Nevertheless, least the single evidence that I bring from the Word of Truth,
should not prove sufficient to gain your credence to what ha^h been spoken; And
because examples give a quicker impression then arguments, I have one thing
more to crave of thee, which is of as great concernment, as all that I have
hitherto spoken; namely, that thou will also hear the confession of two parties
(in the ensuing, or second part of this Discourse) that were lately in thy very
condition; though now by the infinite goodness of God they have their eyes
opened, and their hea^^s changed, to see and know, both what it is to be in the
state of nature, and what to be brought into the glorious liberty of the sons
God; that so by a threefold coard, you may be drawn to accept of salvation
upon God's own terms; whereas otherwise, you can no way escape his eternal
wrath.

The ensuing, or second part, which I would request you to read and mind, is; A
happy conference, between a Formalist converted, and a loose Libertine;
entitled, As Experimental Index of the Heart.

And so much of the first Part, the second follows.

FINIS
Sold only by James Crump, in Little Bartholomews Well-yard; and by Henry
Cripps, in Pope's Head Alley. 1658.


