A Hopeful way to Cure that horrid Sin of SWEARING.
Or an help to save SWEARERS, if willing to be saved: Being an Offer or Message
from HIM, whom they so Daringly and Audaciously provoke.
Also a Curb against Cursing.
MEMB. 1.
1.. Messenger. NOt to admonish our brother is to hate him, as the Holy Ghost
witnesses, Levit. 19. 17. But to scorn our brother should admonish us, is more
to hate our selves. That little which Cresus learned of Solon, saved his life.
And had Pilate taken that fair warning, his wife gave him: it might have saved
his soul; which once lost, cannot be redeemed with ten thousand worlds: no not
with the enduring of ten thousand thousand years torments in Hell. When a Dog
flies in his masters face that keeps him; we conclude he is mad; are they then
rational men, that (being never so little crossed) will fly in their Makers
face, and tear their Saviors name in pieces, with oaths and execrations?
which is worse then Frenzy. Yea, this is to send challenges into Heaven, and
make love to destruction! And certainly it is Gods unspeakable mercy, that
every such oath and blasphemy, proves not a Benoni, the death of the mother,
Genesis 35. 18.

. 2. Think me not too bold, or over harsh: for I speak to you both for and from
my Maker and Redeemer. Yea, be persuaded to hearken a while unto me, as you
would have God another day, hearken unto you. Are you Christians, as you call
your selves? if you be, you have at least heard what God and Christ has done
for us. How when we were in a sad condition; when by sin we had forfeited our
selves and all we had, and wilfully plunged our souls and bodies into eternal
torments: When neither heaven, earth, nor hell could have yielded any
satisfactory thing besides Christ, that could have satisfied Gods justice, and
merited heaven for us; then, O then! The eternal God would dye, viz. so far as
was possible or necessary, that we might not dye eternally, John 3. 16. A mercy
bestowed, and a way found out, that may astonish all the sons of men on earth,
and Angels in heaven. And all this even against our wills, when we were his
enemies, mortally hating him, and to our utmost fighting against him, and
taking part with his only enemies ( Sin and Satan) as now you do, not having
the least thought, or desire of reconcilement: but a perverse and obstinate
will, to resist all means tending thereunto.

3. O my brethren! bethink your selves; It is his maintenance we take, and live
on. The air we breath, the earth we tread on, the fire that warms us, the water
that cools and cleanses us, the clothes that cover us, the food that does
nourish us, the delights that cheer us, the beasts that serve us, the Angels
that attend us, even all are his. That we are not at this present in hell,
there to fry in flames, never to be freed. That we have the free offer of grace
here, and everlasting glory in heaven hereafter, we are only beholding to him.
And shall we deny this Lord that has bought us? shall we most spightfully and
maliciously fight on Satan's side against him with all our might, and that
against knowledge and conscience? I wish you would a little think of it.

4.. For favors bestowed, and deliverances from danger, bind to gratitude: or
else the more bonds of duty, the more plagues for neglect. The contribution of
blessings, requires retribution of thanks; or will bring distribution of
judgments. And certainly, if a friend had given us but a thousand part of what
God has, we should heartily love him all our lives, and think no thanks
sufficient. And in reason, Has God done so much for us, and shall we deny him
any thing he requires of us? though it were our lives, yea our souls; much
more our sins; most of all this sottish and damnable sin, in which there is
neither profit, nor pleasure, nor credit, nor any thing else to provoke, or
entice us unto it, as in other sins; for all you can expect by it is the
suspicion of common Liars, by being common Swearers: Or that you shall vex
others and they shall hate you. Whereas if we could give Christ our Bodies, and
Souls, they should be saved by it, but he were never the better for them. Yea
swearing and cursing are sins from which of all other sins we have the most
power to abstain. For were you forced to pay three shillings four pence for
every oath and curse you utter, as the Law enjoins: or if you were sure to have
your tongue cut out, which is too light a punishment for this sin, damnation
being the due penalty thereof, as the Apostle sets it down James 5. 12. you
both could and would leave it, which alone makes it altogether inexcusable. And
this know, that the easier the thing commanded is, the greater guilt in the
breach of it: and the lighter the injunction, the heavier the transgression, as
Austin speaks, and Adams eating the forbidden fruit, sufficiently proves. So
that it is evident you love this sin, merely because it is a great sin, and
blaspheme out of mere malice to, and contempt of God, which is most fearful,
and (as a man would think) should make it unpardonable, I am sure the Psalmist
has a terrible word for all such, if they would take notice of it, Let them be
confounded that transgress without a cause, Psalm. 25. 3.

And no marvel that this fearful imprecation should fall from the P^ophets
mouth; for that man is bottomlesly ill, who loves vice merely because it is a
vice, and because God most strictly forbids it. He is a desperate, prodigious,
damnable wretch, who (rather then not die) will anger God on set purpose.
Wherefore look to it, and think of it, you cursing, and cursed Swearers; You
swear away your salvation, curse away your blessing. Howling and Cursing shall
be your chief ease in Hell, to whom blasphemy was an especial recreation on
Earth.

5.. Argue with all the world, and they will conclude, there is no vice like
ingratitude. And mere ingratitude returns nothing for good, but you return
evil; yea, the greatest and most malicious evil, for the greatest and most
admired love. It was horrible ingratitude for the Jews to scourge and crucify
Christ, who did them good every way: for he healed their diseases, fed their
bodies, enlightened their minds, of God became Man; and lived miserably among
them many years, that he might save their souls: (though in killing him, they
did their utmost to sink the only ship that could save them) but you are more
ungrateful to God and Christ then they were, or can be expressed by the best
Orator alive. For which read more, in a Treatise entitled, Gods goodness,
and Englands unthankfulness, from Chapter 4. to Chapter 7.

6.. O that you would but consider, that the Lord Jehovah, who is ^ God, great,
and terrible, of most glorious majesty, and infinite purity; hears and beholds
you in all places, and in every thing you think, speak, or do: who is a just
Judge, and will not let this cursed sin go unpunished: then would you keep a
narrower watch over your thoughts, then any other can do over your actions;
yea, you would as soon stab a dagger to your hearts, as let such oaths and
execrations drop from your mouths: whereas now you swear and curse, as if he
that made the ear could not hear, or as if he were neither to be feared nor
cared for, who for sin cast the Angels out of Heaven, Adam out of Paradise,
drowned the old world, rained down fire and brimstone upon Sodom, commanded
the earth to open her mouth, and swallow down quick Corah, and his company; he
who smote Egypt with so many plagues, overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red
Sea, destroyed great and mighty Kings, giving their land for an inheritance to
his people: and can as easily with a word of his mouth strike you dead while
you are blaspheming him, and cast you body and soul into Hell, for your odious
unthankfulness: yea, it is a mercy beyond expression, that he has spared you
so long. Consider of it I beseech you, lest you swear away your part in that
blood which must save you, if ever you be saved; yea, take heed lest you be
plagued with a witness, and that both here and hereafter: for God (who cannot
lie) has threatened that his curse shall never depart from the house of the
Swearer, as it is Zach. 5. 1. to 5. And I doubt not but you are already cursed,
though you know it not; That either he has cursed you in your body by sending
some foul disease, or in your estate by suddenly consuming it, or in your name
by blemishing and blasting it, or in your seed by not prospering it, or in your
mind by darkning it, or in your heart by hardening it, or in your conscience by
terrifying it, or will in your soul by everlastingly damning it, if you repent
not. Wherefore take heed what you do before it prove too late.

7.. Or if you regard not your self, or your own souls good, yet for the
Nations good leave your swearing: for the Lord (as now we find to our smart)
has a great controversy with the Inhabitants of the Land, because of
swearing, Hos 4. 1, 2. Yea, because of oaths the whole land (even the three
Na^ions) now mourns, as you may see Ier. 23. 10. Neither object that ye are
so accustomed to swearing that you cannot leave it, for this de^ence is worse
then the offense; as take an instance, Shall a Thief or Murderer at the Bar
allege for his defense, that it has been his use and custom of a long time to
rob and kill, and therefore he must continue it, or if he do, will not the
Judge so much the rather send him to the Gallows?

Wherefore I beseech you by the mercies of God (who has removed so many evils,
and conferred so many good things upon you, that they are beyond thought or
imagination) to leave it: especially after this warning, which in case you do
not, will be a sore witness, and rise up in judgment against you another day.

MEMB. 2.
Swearer. Did I swear or curse?

1. Messenger. Very often, as all here present can witness, and Satan also,
who stands by to take notice, reckon up, and set on your score every Oath you
utter, keeping them upon Record against the great day of Assizes, at which time
every Oath will prove as a daggers point stabbing your soul to the heart, or as
so many weights pressing you down to Hell, Rev. 20. 13. and 22 12. As also the
searcher of hearts, who himself will one day be a swift witness against
Swearers, Mal. 3. 5. For of all other sinners the Lord will not h^ld him
guil^lesse that takes his Name in vain, as the third Commandment tells you,
Exodus 20. 7.

2.. But woe is me, it fares with common Swearers as with persons desperately
dis^ased, whose excrements and filth comes from them at unawares; for as by
much labor the hand is so hardened that it has no sense of labor, so their
much swearing causes such a brawny skin of senslessenesse to overspread the
heart, memory, and conscience, that the swearer swears unwittingly: and
having sworn, has no remembrance of his Oath, much less repentance for his
Sin.

Swearer. Alas though I did swear, yet I thought no harm.

3. Messenger. O fool! What Prince hearing himself abused to his face, by the
reproachful words of his base and impotent Subject, would admit of such an
excuse? that whatsoever he spoke with his mouth, yet he thought no ill in his
heart? And shall God take this for a good answer, having told us before hand,
Deuteronomy. 38. 58, 59. That if we do not fear and dread his (...) and ^earful Name,
the Lord our God, he will make our plagues wonderful and of long continuance,
and the plagues of our posterity. Besides, how frequently do thou pollute
and profane Gods Name, and thy Saviors? The Jews grievously sinned in
crucifying the Lord of life but once, and that of ignorance. but the times are
innumerable that thou do it, every day in the year, every hour in the day,
although thy conscience, and the holy Spirit of grace has checked thee for it a
thousand and a thousand times. Do thou expect to have Christ thy Redeemer
and Advocate; when thy conscience (...) thee that thou have seldom remembered
him but to blaspheme him? and more often named him in thy Oaths and Curses,
then in thy prayers.

Swearer. Surely, If I did swear, it was but Faith and Troth, by our Lady, the
Mass, the Rood, the Light, this Bread, by the Cross of the silver, or the
like: which is no great matter I hope, so long as I swore not by God, nor by my
Savior.

4.. Messenger. That is your gross ignorance of the Scriptures, for God
expressly forbids it, and that upon pain of damnation, Iam. 5. 12. First, our
Savior Christ in his own person forbids it, Mat. 5 34, 35, 36, 37. I say unto
you, Swear^ not at all, neither by heaven, for it is Gods Throne; nor by the
earth, for it is his footstool; nor by Jerusalem, for it is the City of the
great King; neither shall thou swear by thine head, because thou can not make
one hair white or black; but let your communication be Yea, Yea, Nay, Nay: for
whatsoever is more then these comes of evil. And then by his Apostle, Above
all things my brethren, swear not, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any
other oath, but let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay, Nay: lest you fall into
condemnation, James 5 12. where mark the Emphasis in the first words, Above all
things swear no^^ and the great danger of it in the last word, condemnation.

5. If the matter be light and vain, we must not swear at all; if so weighty,
that we may lawfully swear as before a Magistrate, being called to it, then we
must only use the glorious Name of our God in a holy and religious manner, as
you may see, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Esaias. 45. 23. and 65. 16. Josh. 23. 7. Ie^. 5. 7.
Exodus 23. 13. And the reasons of it are weighty, if we look into them; for in
swearing by any creature whatsoever, we do invocate that creature, and ascribe
to it divine worship; a lawful oath being a kind of Invocation, and a part of
Gods worship; Yea, whatsoever we swear by, that we invocate, both as our
witness, surety, and judge, Heb. 6. 16. and by consequence, deifie it, by
ascribing and communicating unto it Gods incommunicable Attributes, as his
Omnipresence, and Omniscience, of being every where present, and knowing the
secret thoughts and intentions of the heart: and likewise an Omnipotency, as
being Almighty in patronising, protecting, defending, and rewarding us for
speaking the truth, or punishing us if we speak falsely: all which are so
peculiar to God, as that they can no way be communicated or ascribed to
another. So that in swearing by any of those things, thou committest an high
degree of gross Idolatry, thou spoilest and robbest God of his Glory, (the
most impious kind of theft) and in a manner di^hronest him, and placest an Idol
in his room.

6.. And as to swear by the creature makes the sin far more heinous, so the
more mean and vile the thing is which you swear by (be it by my fay, by cock
and pie, hares foot, by this che^se, and such like childish oaths, which are so
much in use with the ignorant and superstitious swarm) the greater is your sin
in swearing such an Oath: because you ascribe that unto these basest of
creatures, which is only proper to God, namely, to know your heart, and to be a
discerner of secret things; why else should you call that (...) as a witness
unto your conscience, that you speak the truth, and (...) not, which only
belongs to God? And therefore the Lord calls it (...) of him; as mark well
what he says, Ier. 5. 7. How shall I spare thee for this? thy children have
forsaken me and sworn by them that are no Gods. And do you make it a small
matter to forsake God, and make a God of the creature? Will you believe the
^rophet Amos, if you will, he says (speaking of them that swore by the sin of
Samaria) that they shall fall and never rise again, Amos 8. 14. a terrible
place to vain swearers.

Neither are we to join any other with God in our oaths, for in so doing we
make base Idols, and filthy creatures Corrivals in honor, and Competitiors in
the Throne of Justice with the Lord, who is Creator of Heaven and Earth, and
the supreme Judge and sole Monarch of all the world.

Or, in case we do, our doom shall be remediless, for the Lord threatens by
the Prophet Zephany, that he will cut off them that swear by the Lord and by
Malcham: which Malcham was their King, or as some think, their Idol, Zeph. 1.
4, 5.

But admit the sin were small, as you would have it to be, yet the
circumstances make it most heinous; for even the least sin in its own nature is
not only mortal, but rests unpardonable: so long as it is willingly committed,
and excused or defended.

Swearer. But all do swear, except some few singular ones, and they also will
lie, which is as bad.

7.. Messeng. You must not measure all others by your own bushel: for although
ill Dispositions cause ill Suspicions; even as the eye that is bloudshood sees
all things red, or as they that have the Iaundies see all things yellow; yet
know that there be thousands who can say truly through Gods mercy, that they
had rather choose to have their souls p^sse from their bodies, then a wilful
premeditated lie, or a wicked oath, from their mouths; wherefore when you want
experience, think the best, as charity bids you, and leave what you know not
to the searcher of hearts.

8. As for the number of Swearers, it cannot be denied, but the sin is a most
universal, and this is it which has incensed Gods wrath and almost brought an
universal destruction upon our whole Nation; but is not this excuse [ That
others do so] a most reasonlesse plea, and only becoming a fool? when our
Savior Christ has plainly told us, that the greatest number go the broad way
to destruct on, and but a few the narrow way which leads unto life, Mat. 7.
13, 14. And S. John, that the whole world lies in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19.
And that the number of those whom Satan shall (...), is as the sand of the se^,
Rev. 20. 8. and 13 16. Isa. 10 22. Romans 9. ^7. And tell me, Were it a good
plea, to commit a Felony, and say that others do so? Or Will thou leap into
Hell and cast away thy soul, because others do so? A sorry comfort it will be
to have a numerous multitude accompany us into that lake of fire that never
shall be quenched.

Besides it is Gods express charge, Ex^d. 23. 2. Thou shall not follow a
multitude to do evil, and S* Paul's everlasting rule, Romans 12. 2. F^shion not
your selves like unto this world.

Swearer. But I may lawfully swear, so I affirm (...).

^.. (...) If you be lawfully called to it, as before a M^gistr^te, or when
some urgent matter constrains for the confirming of a necessary truth (which
can by no other lawful means be cleared) and for the ending of all contentions
and controversies, and clearing our own or our neighbors good name, person, or
estate, and to put an end to all strife, aiming at Gods glory, and o^r own or
our neighbors good: which is the only use and end of an oath; in which case a
man is rather a patient then a voluntary agent: You may swear, otherwise not.
Neither must we swear at all in our ordinary communication, if we will obey
Gods Word, as you may see, Mat. 5. 34, 35, 36, 37. Ia^. 5. 12.

Swearer. Except I s^ear, men will not believe me.

10.. Messenger. Thou had as good say, I have so often made shipwreck of my
credit by accustomary lying, that I can gain no belief unto my words without an
oath; for it argues a guilty conscience of the want of credit, and that our
word alone is worth no respect, when it will not be taken without a pawn or
surety. Neither will any but base Bankrupts pawn so precious a Jewel as their
Faith, or offer better security for every small trifle. Besides he that often
swears, not seldom for swears. And so I have informed you from Gods Word,
what the danger is of vain and wicked swearing.

MEMB. 3.
1.. But as if Swearing alone would not press thee deep enough into hell, thou
addest cursing to it, a sin of an higher nature; which none use frequently, but
such as like Goliath and Shimei, are desperately wicked, it being their peculiar
brand in Scripture; as how does the Holy Ghost stigmatize such an one? His
mouth is full of cursing, Psalm. 10. 7. and Romans 3. 14. or, he loves cursing,
Psalm. 109. 17. and indeed, whom can you observe to love this sin, or to have
their mouths full of cursing? but Ruffians and sons of Belial, such as have
shaken out of their hearts the fear of God, the shame of men, the love of
heaven, the dread of hell, not once caring what is thought or spoken of them
here, or what becomes of them hereafter; yea observe them well, and you will
find, that they are mockers of all that march not under the pay of the Devil.

2.. And whence do these Monsters of the earth, these hellish mis^reants these
bodily and visible Devils learn this their damnable cursing and swearing? Are
not their tongues fired and edged from Hell? as Saint James has it, Jam. 3 6.
yea, it is the very language of the damned, as you may see Rev. 16. 1, 21. Only
they learn it here before they come thither, and are such proficients therein,
that the Devil counts them his best scholars, and sets them in his highest
form, Psalm. 1. 1. And well they deserve it, with whom the language of hell is
so familiar, that blasphemy is become their mother tongue. Besides, it is the
very depth of sin, roaring and drinking is the horse-way to Hell; whoring and
cheating the foot-way; but Swearing and Cursing follows ^orah, Dathan and
Abiram. And certainly, if the infernal Tophet, be not for these men, it can
challenge no guests. But see how witless, graceless, and shameless even the
best are that use to curse; for I pass over such as call for a curse on
themselves, saying, God damn me, Confound me, The Devil take me, and the like;
which would make a ^^tionall man tremble to name; because I were as good knock
at a deaf man's door, or a dead man's grave, as speak to them.

3.. Thou art crossed by some one, perhaps thy wife, child, or servant, or else
thy horse, the weather, the dice, bowls, or some other of the creatures
displease thee; and thou fallest a cursing and blaspheming them, wishing the
plague of God, or Gods vengeance to light on them, or some such hellish speech
falls from thy foul mouth. And so upon every foolish trifle, or every time thou
art angry, God must be at thy beck, and come down from heaven in all have and
become thy Officer to revenge thy quarrel, and serve thy malicious humor. (O
monstrous impiety! O shameless impudency! to be abhorred of all that hear it)
not once taking notice what he commands in his Word, as, Bless them that
persecute you, bless, I say, and curse not, Romans 12. 14. And again, Bless
them that curse you, and pray for them which hurt you, Luke 6. 28. which is the
practice of all true Christians 1. Co^. 4. 12.

4.. But this is not one half of thine offense, For whom do thou curse? Alas
the Creatures that displease thee are but Instruments, thy sin is the cause,
and God the author, 2 Samuel 16. 11. Psalm. 39 9, 10. Genesis 45. 8, Io^ 1. 21. from
w^om thou have deserved it, and ten thousand times a greater cross: bu^ in
stead of looking up from the stone, to the hand which threw it; (...) from the
effect to the cause, as Gods people do; thou like a mastiff dog, set upon
the stone or weapon that hurts thee. But in this case, Who are you angry
withal? Does your horse, the di^e, the rain, or any other c^eature displease
you? Alas, they are but servants, and if their Master bid smi^e, they must not
forbear; they may say truly what ^abshekeh usurped, Isa. 36. ^0. Are we come
without the Lord? and all that hear thee may say, as the Prophet did to
Sena^h^rib, 2 King. 19. 22. Whom have thou blasphemed? and against whom have
thou exalted thy self? even against the Holy One of Is^ael.

5.. Besides, why do thou curse thine enemy? (if he be so) but because thou
can not be suffered to kill him. For in heart, and Gods account, thou ar^ a
murderer, in wishing him the pox, plague, or that he were (...) or damned. Nor
will it be any rare thing at the day of judgment, for cursers to be indicted of
murder. For like Shimei and Goliath to David; thou would kill him if thou
durst; thou do kill him so far as thou can. I would be loath to trust his
hands that b^ns me with his tongue. Had David been at the mercy of either
Shimei or Goliath, and not too strong for them, he had then breathed his last.

Nor is it commonly any sin committed, or just offense given thee; that thou
cursest. Who could have less deserved those curses and stones from ^^imei,
then David? Yea, did not that head deserve to be tonguelesse, that body to be
headless, that so undeservedly cursed such an Innocent? as after it fell out.
For the curses and stones which Shimei threw at David, rebounded upon Shimei,
and split his heart; yea, and at last knocked our his brains; and the like of
Go^ iahs curses; which is also thy very case. For

6.. What will be the issue? the caus^esse curse shall not come where the
Curser meant it, Prove. 26. 2. yea, though thou cursest, yet God will bless,
Psalm. 109. 28. hut thy curses shall be sure to rebound back into thine own
breast, Psalm. 7. 14, 15, 16. Prove. 14. 30. Cursing mouths are like ill made
Pieces^ which while men discharge at others, recoil in splim^rs on their own
faces, Their words and wishes be but whirlwinds, which being breathen forth,
return again to the same place. As hear how the Holy Ghost delivers it, Psalm.
109. As he loved cursing, so shall it come unto him; and as he loved not
blessing, so shall it be far from him. As he clothed himself with cursing like
a garment so shall it come unto his bowels like water, and like oil into his
bones; let it be unto him as a garment to cover him, and for a girdle wherewith
he shall always be girded, v. 17, 18, 19. Hear this all ye, whose tong^es run
so fast on the Devils errand, you loved cursing, you shall have it, both upon
you, about you, and in you, and that everlastingly; if you persevere and go on;
for Christ himself at the last day, even he which came to save the world, shall
say unto all such, Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for
the Devil and his Angels, Mat. 25. 41. Where they shall do nothing but curse
for evermore; for they no farther apprehending the goodness, mercy, and
bounty of God, then by the sense of their own torments (the effects of his
justice) shall hate him, and hating him they shall curse him, Rev. 16. 11. They
suffer, and they blaspheme; there is in them a furious malice against him,
being cursed of him, they re-curse him; they curse him for making them, curse
him for condemning them, curse him because being adjudged to death, they can
never find death; they curse his punishments, because they are so unsufferable;
curse his mercies, because they may never taste them; curse the blood of Christ
shed on the Cross, because it has satisfied for millions and done their
unbeleeving souls no good; curse the Angels and Saints in heaven, because they
see them in joy and themselves in torment; Cursings shall be their sins, and
their chief ease, Blasphemies their prayers, Lacrym^ their notes, Lamentation
all their harmony; these shall be their evening songs, their morning songs,
their mo^rning songs for ever and ever. And indeed, who shall go to Hell, if
Cursers should be left out? Wherefore let all those learn to bless, that look
to be heirs of the blessing.

7.. But to be in Hell, and there continue everlastingly in a bed of
quenchlesse ^lames, is not all. For this is the portion, even of Negative and
vicelesse Christians; if they be not virtuous. Of such as do not swear exexcept
they ^ear an oath. That abound in good duties, if they do them not out of
faith, and because God commands them; that he may be glorified, and others
edified thereby. Whereas thou do supercrogate of Satan, in damning many
souls besides thine own. Thou have had a double portion of sin, to other men
here; and therefore must have a double p^rtion of torment to them hereafter.
The number and measure of thy torments, shall be according to the multitude and
magnitude of thine offenses, Rev. 20. 12, 13. and 22. 12. Luke 12. 47. Mat. 10.
15. Romans 2. 5, 6. And those offenses if I could stand to aggravate them by
their several circumstances, would appear to be out of measure great and
num^rous. I Will mention but one of ten.

With thy swearing and cursing, thou do not only wound thine own soul worse
then the Baalites wounded their own bodies: for thou (wilfully murtherest thine
own soul, and that without any inducement, as has been proved.) But thou art
so pernicious, that this is the least part of thy mischief; for thou drawest
vengeance upon thousands, by thy infectious and damnable example; as how can it
be otherwise? Thou do not only infect thy companions, but almost all that
hear, or come near thee. Yea, little children in the streets, have learnt of
thee to rap out oaths, and belch out curses and scoffs almost as frequently as
thy self; and through thy accustomary swearing learned to speak English and
Oaths together; and so to blaspheme God almost so soon as he has made them.
And not only so, but thy example infects others; and they spread it abroad to
more, like a malicious man sick of the plague, that runs into the throng to
disperse his infection, whose mischief out-weighs all penalty. It is like the
setting a man's own house on fire, it burns many of his neighbour^ houses, and
he shall answer for all the spoil. So that the infection of sin is much worse
then the act.

8. Nor will thou cease to sin when thou shall cease to live; but thy
wickedness will continue longer then thy life. For as if we sow good works,
succession shall reap them, and we shall be happy in making them so: so on the
contrary, wicked men leave their evil practise^ to posterity, and though dead,
are still tempting unto sin, and still they sin in that temptation, they sin so
long as they cause sin. This was Ieroboams case, in making Isra^l to sin: for
let him be dead, yet so long as any worshipped his Calves, Jeroboam sinned.
Neither was his sin soon forgotten; Nadab his son, and Baasha his successor;
Zimri, and Omri, and Ahab, and Ahaziah, and Iehoram; all these walked in the
ways of Jeroboam which made Israel to sin; and not they alone, but millions of
the people with them. So that it is easy for a man's sin to live when himself
is dead; and to lead that exemplary way to Hell, which by the number of his
followers, shall continually aggravate his torments. As, O what infinite
torments does Mahomet endure! when every Turk that perishes by his juggling,
does daily add to the pile of his unspeakable horrors. And so each sinner,
according to his proportion, and the number of souls which miscarry through the
contagion of his evil example. And look to it, for the blood of so many souls
as thou have seduced will be required at thy hands, and thou must give an
account for the sins, perhaps, of a thousand. Thou do not more increase
other men's wickedness on Earth, then their wickedness shall increase thy
damnation in Hell, Luke 16.

9.. It were easy to go on in aggravating thy sin and wretchedness; and
making it out of measure great, and the souls that miscarry through the
contagion of thy evil example numerous. For is not the Gospel and the name of
God blasphemed among the very Turks, Jews, and Infidels; and an evil scandal
raised upon the whole Church; through thy superlative wickedness, and other
thy fellows? Yea, does not this keep them off from embracing the Christian
Religion, and cause them to p^ot^st against their own conve^s^on? Which makes
me wonder that (...) and all such wicked and profane wretches, are not (like
dirt in the house of God) thrown out into the s^^eet by excommunication: Or as
^xcrements and bad humors in man's body, which is never at ease till it be
thereof disburthened; as Austin well notes. That they are not marked with a
black coal of infamy, and their company avoided, as by the Apostles order they
ought, Romans 16. 17. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 14. Ephesians. 5. 5, 7. 1 Cor. 5. 5, 11. 1 Timothy 1.
20. That they are not to us as Lepers were among the Jews; or as men full of
plague sores are amongst us. We well know the good husband man weeds his field
of hurtful plants, that they may not spoil the good corn. And when fire has
taken an house, we use to pull it down, lest it should fire also the neighbors
houses. Yea, the good Surgeon cuts off a rotten member betimes, that the
sound may not be endangered. Nor will the Church of England ever flourish or be
happy in her Reformation, until such a course is taken.

MEMB. 4.
Swearer. Sir, I unfainedly bless God, for what I have heard from you; for
formerly, I had not the least thought that swearing by faith, troth, or any
other creature, was so grievous a sin, as you have made it appear from the
Word. And I hope it shall be a sufficient warning to me for time to come.

1.. Messenger. If so, you have cause to bless God indeed. For all of you have
heard the self-same Word; but one goes away bettered, others exasperated and
enraged, wherein Will only makes the difference. And who makes the difference
of Wills, but God that made them? He that creates the new heart, leaves a ^^one
in one bosom, puts flesh into another.

2.. Of hearers there are usually four sorts, Mat. 13. 19, to 24. as first, an
honest and good heart, will not return from hearing the word unbettered. Yea,
he will so note what is spoken to his own sin, that it shall increase his
knowledge and lessen his vices. As who by looking in a Glass shall spy spots
in his face, and will not forthwith wipe them out? A wise man will not have one
sin twice repeated unto him. And these may be resembled to wax, which yields
^ooner to the s^al, then steel to the stamp. But

3.. Secondly, others are like Tullies strange soil, much rain leaves them
still as dry as dust. Or the Wolf in the emblem, which though she sucked the
Goat, kept notwithstanding her wolvish nature still. For speak what can be
spoken to them, it presently passes away like the sound of a Bell that is rung.
Let testimonies and examples never so much concern them, they prove no other
then as so many characters writ in the water, which leave no impression behind
them. Who may be resembled to an Hour-glasse or Con^uit, that which in one hour
runs in, the same in another hour runs out again. Or the Smiths Iron, put
it into the fire, it is much sof^ned: again put it into the water, it is harder
then before. Yea, let them never so much smart for their sins: they will return
to them again until they perish. Resembling some silly fly, which being beat
from the candle an hundred times, and often singed therein, yet will return to it
again until she be consumed, Prove. 23. 35. All those Beasts which went into
the Arc (...)

4.. Thirdly another sort will very orderly hear the Word, and delight in it;
so long as the Minister shall rove in generalities, preach little or nothing to
the purpose; But if once he touch them to the quick, drive an application home
to their consciences touching some one sin of theirs, as John Baptist served
Herod; then they will turn their backs upon him, and hear him no farther, as
those Jews served our Savior, Ioh. 6. 66. The Athenians Paul, Acts 17. 16, to
34. and Ahab Micaiah, 1 King. 22. 8.

5.. Sore eyes you know are much grieved to look upon the Sun, Bankrupts cannot
abide the fight of their counting books, nor do deformed saces love to look
themselves in a true Glass. For which read John 3. 19, 20, 21.

But let such men know, that to fly from the light, and reject the means, puts
them out of all hope. That sin is past cure, which turn^ from, and refuses the
cure, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. Prove. 29. 1. As what is light to them that will shut their
eyes against it? or reason to them that will stop their Ears from hearing it?
If those murderers of the Lord of life, Act. 2. 23. had refused to hear Peter's
searching Sermon, in all probability they had never been pricked in their
hearts, never been saved, ver. 37, 38. And take this for a rule, if ever you
see a drowning man refuse help, conclude him a wilful murderer.

6.. Fourthly and lastly, (for I pass by those blocks that go to Church as
dogs do only for company, and can hear a powerful Minister for twenty or
thirty years together, and mind no more what they hear then the seats they sit
on, or the stones they tread on.) There are a generation of Hearers who when a
Minister does plainly reprove them for their sins, and declare the judgments of
God due unto the same, to the end they may repent and believe, that so they may
be saved; will carp and fret, and spurn against the very Word of God for being
so sharp and searching; and thereupon persecu^e the Messenger, as the Princes
and false Prophets did Jeremiah, Herodi^s John Baptist, and the Pharisees
Christ.

7.. And this God takes as done to himself; What says Paul? 1 Cor. 7. 10. I
have not spoken, but the Lord: and therefore as the Lord said unto Saul, Acts
9. 4. that he persecuted him, (though in heaven;) so they which resist any
truth delivered out of the Word, do resist God himself, and not his Messenger,
as evidently appears by these Scriptures, Psalm. 44. 22. and 74. 4. 10. 18. 22.
23. and 83. 2, 5, 6. and 89. 50, 51. and 139. 20. Prove. 19. 3. Romans 1. 30. and.
9. 20. Mat. 10. 22. and 25. 45. 1 Samuel 17. 45. Isai 37. 4 22, 23, 28. Acts 5.
39. and 9. 4, 5. Joh. 9. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 8. Joh. 15. 20, to 26. Numb. 16. 11. 1 Samuel 8. 7. Mark. 9. 42. Psalm. 79. 12. 2 King. 2. 24. O that the Gospels enemies
would but seriously consider these Scriptures, and be warned by them. For
certainly it is neither wise, good, nor safe, either resisting or angring him,
that can anger every vein of their hearts. Yea, God has Messengers of wrath
for them that despise the Messenger of his love.

8.. But hear why they so mortally hate the naked truth. Because it is the Word
by which they are condemned: they loath as much to hear it, as a prisoner does
ab^or to hear his (...) the just Judg^. And indeed if many (as we know by
experience) love not to hear the worst of their temporal causes, and cases;
nor yet of their bodily distempers, with which their lives or estates be
endangered. How much more will wicked men decline from seeing their heinous
abominations, and themselves guilty of Hell, and eternal damnation? though
thereof there be an absolute necessity, if ever they be saved.

9.. Guilty sinners love application as dearly as a dog does a cudgel. And no
marvail, for what Leaper will take pleasure in the searching of his sores? Nor
were Satan his Crafts-master, if he did permit them: For if they could clearly
see the loathsomeness of their impieties, it were not possible not to abhor
them, not to abhor themselves for them; but their blindness makes them love
their own filthiness, as Ethiopians do their own swarthinesse. Besides, they
love not to have their consciences awakened, but would sleep quietly in their
sins. And he that desires to sleep, will have the curtains drawn, the light
shut out, and no noise made. Whence as good meats, are unwelcome to sick
persons: so is good counsel to obstinate and resolved sinners. Tell them of
their swearing, drinking, whoring, c^eating; they will fiet, and chafe, and
fume, and swell, and storm, and be ready to burst again to hear it. But let
envy sweat, swell, and burst; truth must be spoken. And indeed why should not
Gods servants take as free liberty in reproving, as the Devils servants take
liberty in offending? Shall not the one be as loud for God, as the other are
for Baal and Beelzebub?

10.. Yea, admonish them never so mildly, they will say we take too much upon
us: as Corah and his accomplices twitted Moses, Numb. 16. 3. not knowing how
strictly God commands and requires it, Lev. 19. 17. 2 Timothy 2. 25. Ezekiel. 3. 18,
to 22. 2 Pet. 2. 7, 8. Whence as the Chief Priests answered Iud^s, What is that
to us? so they will blaspheme God, tear Christ in pieces, and more then betray,
even shed his innocent blood, digging into his side with oaths, and say, when
told of it, What is that to us? when they might as well say, What is Christ to
us? what is heaven to us? or what is salvation to us? for to us the one cannot
be without the other: we shall never inherit part of his glory in heaven, if we
do not take his glories part upon earth. And with God it is much about one,
whether we be doers of evil, or no hinderers. For if we must not see our
neighbors ox, nor his sheep go astray, or fall into a pit, but we must
reduce him, and help him out of it, Deuteronomy. 22. 1. we are much more bound to help
our neighbor himself from droping into the bottomless pit of Hell. And what
know we but we may win ^ur brother, and so save his soul, Mat. 18. 15.

11.. They will hiss like Serpents, if we trouble their nests never so little.
And its a sure sign the horse is galled that stirs too much when he is touched.
But what are these men like, and how are they like to speed in the end? they
are like the Thracian flint that burns with water, and is quenched with oil:
their souls are the worse for Gods endeavor to better them. His holy precepts
and prohibitions; do either harden them, as the Sun hardens clay, and cold
water hot iron; or else they enrage them, as a furious mastiff Dog is the
madder for his c^ain.

12.. But to be exasperated with good counsel, and in stead of penitency to
break into choler; when fury sparkles in those eyes which should gush out with
water; it is an evident sign of one that shall perish, Prove. 29. 1. Read the
words and tremble, a man that hardneth his neck being often reproved shall
suddenly be destroyed, and that without remedy: see more Prove. 1. 24, 25, 26,
to 33. Whence it is the Prophet tells Amaziah, I know that God has determined
to destroy thee, because thou have done this, and have not obeyed my counsel,
2 Chronicles. 25. 16, 20. and that the Holy Ghost speaking of Elyes sons, says that
they would not hearken unto, nor obey the voice of their father, because the
Lord was determined to destroy them; 1 Samuel 2. 25. Yea, it is an observation of
Livie, that when the destruction of a person or Nation is destined: then the
wholesome warnings both of God and Man, are set at naught. And in reason that
sin is past all cure which strives against the cure. Herbs that are worse for
watering, Trees that are less fruitful for dunging and pruning, are to be
rooted out, or hewn down. Even salvation it self will not save those that spill
the potion, and fling away the plaster. When God would have cured Babylon, and
she would not be cured, then she is given up to destruction without further
warning.

13.. Ignorant Wo^ldlings (who will believe nothing which comes not within the
compass of their five senses) think that because God strikes not, be minds
not, Psalm. 50. 21. Because sentence against an evil work is not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the children of men, is fully set in them to
do evil, as Solomon speaks, Eccles. 8. 11. They are like the Israelites, 1 Samuel 12. 15, to 20. they will not believe without a miracle; and it will be a
miracle if ever they be saved. For should they see miracle upon miracle; should
God forthwith strike one dead with a thunderbolt, and rain down fire and
brimstone upon another, and cause the Earth to swallow down a third quick while
they are blaspheming him: they would be as far from believing as they were
before; as the examples of the old world, the Sodomi^es, Pharaoh, Balaam, Ahab,
Belshazzar, Malchus, and those great Clerks, the Scribes and Pharisees,
together with thousands of the Jews, sufficiently manifest.

Yea, it is easier for a man possessed with many Devils to be dispossessed; to
raise one from the dead; or to turn a stone into flesh (in which God should
meet with no opposition) then persuade an habituated Swearer to believe these
ensuing precepts, predict^ons, testimonies of the Gospel, or any other saving
truth, Mat. 5. 20. and 12. 36. and 25 30, to 46. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 7, 8, 9. and 2.
12. Heb 12. 14 29. Rev. 20. 12. to the end, Deuteronomy. 29. 19, 20. Prove. 1. 24. to
33.

14.. Well may they believe what the World, the Flesh, and the Devil suggests
unto them: As Satan (that he may make smooth their way to perdition) will
persuade the most impudent and insolent sinners, Drunk^rds, Ad^lterers,
Blasphemers, Sabbath Breakers, Bloodthirsty Murderers, Persecuters of the
Godly, and contemners of Religion, that they may take liberty to continue their
sensual lusts, by a testimony of Scripture, and apply Christ's passion as a
warrant for their licentiousness; his death as a license to sin, his cross as
a Letters patent to do m^schi^f. And hereupon, as if a Malefactor should head
his drum of Rebellion with his pardon: they live as if the Gospel were quite
contrary to the rule of the Law; or as if God were neither to be ^eared nor
cared for. Hence they exercise their saucie wits in profane scoffs at
Religion, and disgrace that blood, whereof hereafter they would give a thousand
worlds for one drop: hence they tear heaven with their blasphemies, and bandie
the dreadful name of God, in their impure and pollu^ed mouths, by their bloody
oaths and execrations: hence they are so witless, grac^lesse, and shameless;
as to swear and curse even as dogs bark. Yea, they have so sworn away all
grace, that they count it a grace to swear; and are so far from believing what
God threatens in his Word against sin, and what is affirmed of his justice, and
severity in punishing all wilful, and impenitent sinners with eternal
destruction of body and soul: that they presume ^o have part in that merit,
which in every part they have so abused; to be purged by that blood, which now
they take all occasions to disgrace; to be saved by the same wounds and blood,
which they swear by, and so often swear away; to have Christ an Advocate for
them in the next life, when they are Advocates against Christ in this: that
heaven will meet them at their last hour, when all their life long, they have
galloped in the beaten rode toward hell. And that though they live like swine
all their life long, yet one cry for mercy at the last gasp, shall transform
them into Saints. And this is the strong faith, they are so apt to boast of,
viz. presumption, not confidence: Or rather, Hope f^ighted out of its wits. For
not withstanding all this, in believing the Scriptures, they fall short of the
Devils themselves. For the Devils do really believe that God is no less true
and just then he is merc^full; as his Word declares him to be: and thereupon
they tremble as S. James has it, James 2. 19. whereas these men believe not a
word that G^d speaks, so as to be bettered by it.

15.. And no marvail, for their wont has been to believe Satan rather then
God; as did our first parents, Genesis 3. Therefore now after they have rejected
all means of grace, when they are so crusted in their villainy, that custom is
become a second or new nature: God (that he may punish their hardness and
excess in sin, with further obduration,) not only delivers them up to Satan,
the God of this world; who so blindes their minds, and deludes their
understandings that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ shall not shine
unto them, 2. Cor. 4. 3, 4. Ephesians. 2. 2. 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. But he gives them up,
even to a r^probate judgment, to the hardness of their hearts, and to walk in
their own connsels, Psalm. 81. 11. 12. Romans 1. 21, to 32. And bette^ be given
up to Satan, as the incestuous Corinthian was, then thus to be given up. For he
was thereby converted and saved, as God used the matter: making the Scorpion a
medicine against the sting of the Scorpion: the Horselee^h a means to abate the
vicious and superfluous blood; so ordering Satan's craft and malice, to ends
which himself intended not.

Whereas these are given over; as a desperate Patient is given over by his
Physician when there is no hope of his recovery. As thus, Because they will not
receive the truth in love, that they might be saved: for this cause God gives
them up to strong delusions, that they should believe lies; that all they might
be damned who believe not the truth, but take pleasure in unrighteousness:
they are the very words of the holy Ghost, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 10, 11, 12. If any would
see more touching the woeful condition of a deluded worldling; and how Satan
guls wicked men with a world of misprisions, that he may the better cheat them
of their souls; Let them read The Drunkards Character, and the Cure of
Misprision; for in this I study all possible brevity, being loath either to
surfeit or cloy the Swearer; who is commonly short breathed in well-doing; and
lest adding more should hinder him from hearing this: for Satan and his corrupt
heart will not condescend, he shall hold out to hear his beloved sin so* spoken
against.

MEMB. 5.
1.. Only I will insert a few notions, aphorisms, or conclusions, touching the
former point of Gods forbearing to punish the most flagitious sinners when they
so horribly provoke him: together with some pregnant examples of some that he
has executed Martial Law upon, even in this life.

Cornelius Gallus (not to mention many, nor any that every Author sets down)
dyed in the very act of his filthiness, as Plutarch well notes. Nitingall,
Parson of Crondall in Kent, was struck dead in the Pulpit, as he was belching
out his spleen against religion and zealous professors of the Gospel. It was
the usual imprecation of Henry Earl of Schuartzbourg, Let me be drowned in a
Iakes, if it be not so; and such was his end. You may remember one Lieutenant
of the Tower was hanged; it had wont to be his usual imprecation, as he
confessed at his death. Earl Godwin wi^hing at the Kings Table that the bread
he eat might choke him if he were guilty of Alphr^ds death, whom he had before
slain: was presently choked, and fell down dead: Yea his lands also sunk into
the Sea, and are called Godwins sands: where thousands since have made
shipwreck. It was usual with John Peter mentioned in the book of Martyrs to
say; if it be not true, I pray God I may rot ere I dye: and God saying Amen to
it, he rotted away indeed. A Serving-man in Lincolnshire for every trifle used
to swear, Gods precious blood, and would not be warned by his friends to leave
it: insomuch that hearing the bell tole in the very anguish of death, he
started up in his bed and swear, by the former oath that bell toled for him:
whereupon immediately the blood most fearfully issued, as it were, in streams
from all parts of his body not one place left free and so dyed. Popiel King of
Poland had ever this wish in his mouth; If it be not true, I would the Rats
might eat me; and so it came to pass: for he was so assailed by them at a
banquet, that neither his guards, nor fire, nor water could de^end him from
them; as Munster mentions. The Jews said, Let his blood be upon us and upon our
children; and what followed? sixteen hundred years are now past, since they
wished themselves thus wretched; and have they not ever since, been the hate,
and scorn of the world? Did they not (many of them) live to see their C^ty
buried in ashes, and drowned in blood: to see themselves no Nation? Was there
ever any people under heaven, that was made so fa^ous a spectacle of misery and
desolation? they have had what they c^iled for to the ^ull* and it is just that
they who l^ng for a curse, should (...): yet how many among us, do familiarly
curse their wives, children, etc. Nor is it seldom that God pays them in
their own coin: men profane Gods name, and he makes their names to stink.
When the pestilence rages in our streets; blasphemy and execration must
confess that they have their due wages. Blasphemers live swearing, and dye
raving; it is but their wages.

2.. He punishes some in the Suburbs of hell, that they might never come into
the City it self. The evil he now suffers uncorrected, he refers to be
condemned. Sin knows the doom, it must smart here, or hereafter. Outward
plagues are but favor in comparison of spiritual judgments; and spiritual
judgments but light, to eternal torments. God does not punish all flagitious
sinners here; that he may allow some space to repent; and that none may doubt
his promise of a General Judgment: nor does he forbear all here, lest the
world should deny his providence, and question his justice.

MEMB. 6.
1.. But what do I urge reason to men of a reprobate judgment? to admonish
them, is to no more purpose, then if one should speak to life-lesse stones, or
sense-lesse plants, or wit-lesse beasts; for they will never fear any thing
till they be in Hell fire; wherefore God leaves them to be confuted with fire
and brimstone, since nothing else will do it. If there be any here that believe
a Resurrection (as I hope better things of some of you) all such I would
beseech, by the mercies of God before mentioned; that they would not be so
desperately wicked, as to mock their admonisher, scoff at the means to be
saved, and make themselves merry, with their own damnations; but that they
would entertain this message as if it were an Epistle sent from God himself,
to invite and call them to repentance. Yea, consider seriously what I have
said, and do not, Oh do not mock at Gods Word, nor sport away your souls into
those pains which are easelesse, endless, and remediless. Shall we give an
account at the day of judgment for every idle word we speak, Mat. 12. 36. and
never give a reckoning for our wicked swearing and cursing? we shall be judged
by our words, v 37.

Are you willing to be saved? if you are, Break off your sins by repentance.
Dan. 4. 27. Cease to do evil, learn to do well, Isai. 1. 16. 17. Seriously
grieve and bewail for the millions of times that you have blasphemed God and
pierced your Savior, and never more commit the like impiety. Yea, do not only
leave your swearing, but fear an Oath and make conscience of it, resolve not to
take the glorious name of God in vain, nor place any other c^eature in his
room: though the Devil should say unto you, as once he did to Christ, All
this will I give thee. For it is not enough that we abstain from evil,
unless we hate it also, and do the contrary good; Sanctify the Lord God in
your heart, 1 Pet 3. 15. Make a covenant with your mouth, as Job did with his
eyes, and set a watch before the door of your lips, that you thus offend not
with your tongue, Psalm. 1413.

2.. Which if you do rightly, the like care to avoid all other sins will
necessarily follow: because he that fears to commit one sin out of conscience,
and because God forbids it, will upon the same ground, fear all that his law
forbids, and as heartily, and unfainedly desire that he may never (...) (...)

The Printer to the Reader.
IT being observed that many meeting with some of this Authors Collections, do
earnestly enquire after the rest: I think it not amiss, to satisfy their
desire, and save them further labor, by setting down the severals; which are
these, The Cause and Cure of Ignorance, Error, Enmity, etc. The Cure of
Misprision; or Mistake. The Victory of Patience. The Drunkards character, with
an addition. The Character or Touchstone of a true Believer The Character of a
formal Hypocrite, or Civil Justiciarie. Characters of the kinds of
Preaching. Complete Armor against evil Society. Cordial Counsel. Gods
goodness and Englands unthankfulness, the second Edition, that is divided
into chapters and sections. The first part of the Pastors Advocate. An Abstract
of the Drunkards Character.
already printed. The second part of the Pastors Advocate. The Arraignment and
conviction of covetous, cunning, and cruel Governors, Politicians, Officers,
Judges, Lawyers, etc. with the lovely and lively characters of Justice,
Thankfulness, Contentation, Frugality, Liberality, etc. The Laymans Library,
or the poor man's Paradise.
to be printed.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes. 1652.


