Apples of Gold From the Tree of Life: with Pictures of Silver precious and
pleasant. Or such other Pearls, as are added to the Third impression, of The
Victory of Patience. Printed for their satisfaction that have the Second
impression already; and for a taste to others.
By R. Young Florilegus.
[Place them next after the Epistle.]

ALphonsus King of Aragon being demanded, what company he liked best? replied,
Books, for these ( says he) without fear, or flattery, or any reward, will
tell me faithfully all that I desire to know.

Pithy sentences, and choice Apothegmes; are not only as pictures for
Ornament; but also brief and happy conclusions: extracts of experience, that
both leave a deeper impression in the heart, and take faster hold on the head,
and memory. They are to the mind, as music to the ear, which (next to sleep)
is the best recreation. Quaint and elegant phrases, on a good subject: are
baits to make an ill man virtuous.

This little Incheiridion, is a feast of them: wherein wholsomenesse strives
with pleasantness, and variety with both. By perusal whereof, a man may not
only become more eloquent, but more wise and good. Yea, let him con'n them
well, and (with Gods blessing) he may in this short journey, make more true
gain, then does the Spanish Fleet from the West Indies. For in so doing, he
shall greatly increase his knowledge, and lessen his vices. In one hour he may
read it, and for ever after be the better for it

Antisthenes being asked what fruit he had reaped of all his study? made
answer, I have learned by it, both to live, and walk with my self.

Ambros was wont to say, I am never less alone; then when I am all alone: for
then I can enjoy the presence of my God, without interruption.

Dubartas (and before him Scipio) would not spare to tell his friends; I have
never better company, then when I have no company: for then can I freely
entertain my own thoughts, and converse with all the learned, which have been
in former ages.

When Cato Vtican, in vacation times, and at his best leisure, went to recreate
himself in the country, he used to carry with him the best Philosophers, and
choicest Books. Algerius an Italian Martyr said, He had rather be in prison
with Cato, then with Caesar in the Senate house.

Cicero was, and I am of his mind; and though I be no Hermit, to sit away my
days in a dull Cell, yet will I choose rather to have no companion then a bad
one. My reason is, the soul that lives among thorns, [vicious men] shall
hardly thrive in grace. They are such Backbyasses to a godly life, that they
will do what they can, to hinder our goodness to heaven, and the goodness of
heaven to us; they will wither all our good parts and qualities which are in
us; like an evil North Wind, they blow upon the buds of our graces, and nip
them.

There be some that care not to know; and there be some, that care for nothing
else but to know; many strive after knowledge, but why? they would be wiser,
not holier by it: it is their own honor they seek, not the honor of Christ.
Men of Herod's mind, whom you shall see turning over the Bible, searching the
Scriptures, examining the Prophets, but to what end and purpose? to know good,
but to do evil.

Now he that is unwilling to obey, God thinks unworthy to know. Whence many
striving to expel ignorance, fall into error; as an Empirick to cure one
disease; causes a worse.

True, a wicked man may be taken for a wise man (as a Bristo Stone, may be
taken for a Diamond) but were he so in deed, he would fore-fee the torments of
Hell, and prevent them, as Bernard speaks. Yea, to speak really, he is worse
then a fool, for, says Saint Augustine, If the Holy Ghost terms him a fool,
that only laid up his own goods, Luke 12. 18. 20. find out a name for him,
that takes away other men's.

Men of the World think that to be wisdom, which is not; like Eve, who thought
it wisdom to eat the forbidden fruit; or Absalom, who thought it wisdom to
lie with his Fathers Concubines, in the sight of all the people; or the false
Steward, who thought it wisdom to deceive his Master: As what says Pharaoh to
his deep counselors? Come, let us do wisely, when indeed he went about that
which destroyed him, and his country. The Scribes, Pharisees, and Elders took
counsel against Christ, as though they would most wisely prevent their own
salvation. Ioseph's Brethren to prevent his having dominion over them, as his
dreams imported, thought they had taken a very wise course, in selling him to
the Ishmalitish Merchants, which was indeed the only means to effect it. And
the same is to be observed in all other cases: that the greatest Politician, is
the greatest fool. He is most wise, that is most holy: for goodness, in the
Scripture, is termed wisdom; and vice, folly; sinners and fools, Seunonomies,
Prove. 1. 7.

He is the best scholar that learns of Christ obedience, humility, etc. He is
the best Arithmetician, that can add grace to grace. He is the best learned,
that knows how to be saved; yea, all the Arts in the world are artlesse Arts to
this.

Wherefore O God make me but soul wise, and I shall never envy their
knowledge, that pirty my simplicity: yea, let me be weak in policy, to I may be
wise to salvation.

The first lesson of a Christian, (and so the first step to wisdom) is
humility, Mat. 11. 29. Prove. 1. 7. He will teach the humble his way, Psalm. 25.
9. and he that has not learned the first lesson, is not fit to take out a new,
1 cor. 3. 18. Yea, says St Cyprian, It is as much lost labor, to preach unto
a man the things of God, before he be humbled with the sight of his wants, as
to offer light to a blind man, to speak to a deaf man, or to labor to make a
brute beast wise.

Cyprian brings in the Devil triumphing over Christ, in this manner; As for my
followers, I never dyed for them, (laid down my life, etc.) as Christ has done
for his; I never promised them so great reward as Christ has done to his; and
yet I have more followers than he, and they do more for me than his do for him.
O that men would duly consider how true this is, and amend before the
Drawbridge be taken up; but this is the misery, and a just plague upon our so
much for mality and profaneness, under our so much means of Grace: There be
very few men that make not the whole Bible, and all the Sermons they hear, yea,
the checks of their own Consciences, and the motions of God Spirit, utterly
in-effectuall for want of wit, and grace to apply the same to themselves.

The natural man is just like a Child, that ( beholding his natural face in a
Glass) thinks he sees another Child's face, and not his own.

We do not more love our selves above others; then we see others better then
our selves. But this is to be affectedly blind: wherefore as one says that
poverty is justly contemptible that is purchased with following of vice: so I
in this case, that poverty of wit, and grace, is justly contemptible, which is
purchased by a wilful rebellion against God, and the great means of knowledge
and grace which we enjoy.

Those Souls have seeled Eyes, that see not sin in their best actions.

It is an easy matter to believe, thinks the worldling, but he that goes about
it shall find it as hard a work to believe the Gospel, as to keep the Law? and
only God must enable to both. And yet, so far as we come short of either, so
far we have just cause to be humbled, if we consider (...) God made us, and how
we have unmade our selves.

The Papists, when they could not rule Luther, railed on him, and called him
Apostate. Who answered, I am so indeed; for I am fallen off (I bless God) from
the Devil and the Pope.

Where had you your Ordination? where was your Religion before Luther? (said a
Priest to one of our Ministers:) In the Bible, quoth he, where yours never was.

Master Greenham resusing subscription to the Rishop of Ely; objecting that
Luther thought such ceremonies might be retained in the Church, answered; I
reverence more the revealed Wisdom of God; in teaching Mr. Luther so many
necessary things to salvation; then I search his secret judgments, in keeping
back from his knowledge other things of less importance.

None but a Deity could have found out a way how man, that had justly made
himself most unhappy, should with a full satisfaction to exactest Justice, be
made again most happy; God (says Bernard) so loved his Son, that he gave him
all the world for his possession, Psalm. 2. 8. but he so loved the world, that
he gave Son and all for its Redemption.

King Alphonsus, did not so much wonder at his Courtiers ingratitude to him, as
at his own unthankfulness to God.

What ever carnal reason may suggest, we shall find no better way to prevent
the ruin of the Camp, raging of the plague, drowning of the Ship; then the
stoning of sacrilegious Achan, flaying of adulterous Zimry and Cosby, and
casting Jonas over board. Obedience is the best sacrifice.

Mustle-borough Field, was won by the English, the self same day and hour,
when those Balaams blocks (idolatrous Images) were burnt at London, by order of
Parliament, Acts and Monuments, Fol. 669.

Prayer and supplication, like Saul's sword, and Ionathans bow never return
empty.

No forces are so strong as the spiritual, which made the Queen Mother of
Scotland confess, that she more feared the prayers and fasting of Mr. Knox,
and his assistance, then an Army of twenty thousand men.

Leoline Prince of Wales, when he was moved by some about him, to make War upon
our Henry the third replied; yea, did I not much more fear his Alms, then his
Armies.

Fredrick the Elector of Saxony, intending to War against the Archbishop of
Magdenburgh, sent a Spy to search out his preparations, and to hearken out his
designs: But understanding that he did nothing more, then commit his Cause to
God, and give himself to fasting and prayer: Let him fight, says he, that
has a mind to it; I am not so mad, as to fight against him, that trusts to
have God his Defender and Deliverer.

All heavenly hearts are charitable; And to be a means to bring others to
heaven, is the inseparable desire of every one that belongs to it; good men
wish all good, and happy like themselves.

Love to the body, is but the body of love; the soul of love, is the love of
the soul.

One drunkard may profess to another, that he loves him as well as himself; and
therein speaks truth, for, says Augustine most elegantly, to such an one, thou
love thy self, so as thou wlit destroy thy self; and thou will destroy him
whom thou love as thy self; yea, better then themselves; for you shall have
one Ruffian salute another, with, God save you Sir, but after some strange
attestations, swear away himself with, God damn me Sir: now how can any wise
man think him a friend, that is his own enemy? he that is evil to himself, to
whom will he be good?

But see the depth of such a man's love, and whether it be not to damn thy body
and soul everlastingly. S. Ambrose tells us of one, who solicited a godly woman
to incontinency, saying, he infinitely loved her: she answers, if you love me
so well as you seem, put one of your fingers into the flame, till your flesh be
burnt off: he replies, that was no part of love in her to require it: yes, said
she, if yours be love, to cause both my body and soul to burn in hell fire
for ever; which by consequence will follow, if I yield to your request, and
take your counsel. The tender mercies of the wicked are cruel, Pro. 12. 10.

A drinking friendship, is but a drunken friendship: and believe it, thou will
find those friends firmest, that thy virtues purchase thee: these will love
thee, when thy wealth is gone: whereas those that be won without desert, will
also be lost without a cause: you need but be an Arbitrator between two such
friends to make them both your enemies.

Things that differ in their end, will surely part in their way: now thy end is
to gain him, his end to make a gain of thee. And have you deserved never so
well from him, the denial of one favor, nay, an health, shall drown the
memory of many fore-performed ones: which is all one, as if for the abortion of
one child, a man should kill all the former issue: whereas the good man's thanks
for old favors, lives even in the blows of injutie: or can you not feed these
vermin as you have done, away they go, like a Sun Dial, you shall be no
longer regarded, then you are shined on by prosperity Yea, Rats run not faster
away from an house on fire, not lice from a dead body; then they from poverty:
and if ever it be your misery, to stand in need of them, look for no other
requital, then Job had of his carnal friends: whom he compares to a
deceitful Brook, which in winter is hard frozen with cold, in summer dried up
with heat, between winter and summer passing away, always deceitful, never of
use.

Yea, a man may say of such friends, as a learned Antiquary said of Rumney
Marsh: bad in winter, hurtful in summer, never good. And thou have sped well,
if such friends prove not dangerously hurtful, as well as helpless. Have we
not known some of them resemble the Snake; which when a kind Husbandman had
taken out of the cold, and cherished in his bosom, and she had recovered her
lively heat, and was grown lusty: singled out him, ungratefully to try her
first sting upon. Or a Promotor, that in Lent eats flesh at your Table, and yet
is the first that accuses you to the Magistrate. If Ziba be waxed great under
Mephihosheth, he will give him a list for all he has. A promoted Beggar has
not seldom renounced his advancer.

And what else can be looked for from them? They cannot make conscience of
civil duties, who make none of divine. If a Man have cast off his God, he will
easily cast off his friend. They that have broken their faith with him, will
keep no faith with us. When Religion is once gone, humanity will not stay long
after. Nothing rivits hearts so close, as Religion: it unites them together as
glue does boards together: it makes a knot, even between such as never saw one
another face, that Alexander can not cut: yea, Tyrants will sooner want
invention for torments, then they with tortures be made treacherous. How many
have chosen rather to embrace the flames, then to reveal their companions, and
brethren in Christ? There is no friendship like the friendship of faith. There
is Amor, among Beasts; Dilectio, among Men; Charitas, among Christians, that is
their peculiar, Nature, makes husband and wife but one flesh; grace makes them
even one spirit: and it is a question, whether natural Parents are to be
beloved above spiritual: we know that Christ preferred his spiritual kindred*
to that of the flesh: and major est connexio cordium, quam sanguinum, says
Beza.

Aristippus, and AEschenes, two famous Philosophers, being fallen at variance,
Aristippus came to AEschenes, and says, Shall we be friends again? Yes, with
all my heart, says AEschenes: Remember then says Aristippus, that though I be
your elder, yet I sought for peace: True, says AEschenes, and for this I will
ever acknowledge you the more worthy man; for I began the strife, and you the
peace.

Demosthenes, being reproached by one; answers, I will not strive with thee in
this kind of fight, in which he that is overcome, is the better man. Whom we
may do well to imitate, and only labor (when aspersed) as the ecclipsed Moon,
to keep on our motion, till we wade out of the shadow, and receive our former
splendor: In which take Master calvin for a pattern; who said, Though Luther
call me a Devil, yet I will honor him as a dear servant of God.

Mild words, and gentle behavior, may be resembled to milk, that quenches
wildfire; or Oil, that quenches Lime, which by water is kindled.

Gregory Nazianzen, (I pray mind it seriously) told his friends, that Julian
would prove a notorious wicked man, he took such delight in disputing against
that which was good.

When Erasinus was asked by the Elector of Saxony, why the Pope and his Clergy
could so ill abide Luther? he answered, For two no small offenses, viz. He had
meddled with the Popes triple Crown, and with the Monks fat paunches.

There was never any to whom some Belialists took not exceptions: it is not
possible to please or displease all, seeing some are as deeply in love with
vice, as others are with virtue; and the applause of ignorant and evil men
has ever been vilipended by the wise and virtuous. Phocion had not suspected
his speech, had not the common people applauded it. Antisthenes mistrusted some
ill in himself, for the vulgar commendations.

Socrates ever suspected that, which past with the most, and general
commendations. And reason good, for most men's souls are drowned in their
senses; or so bleered with custom, that they cannot distinguish, nor discern
the true visage of things: but are deluded with misprisions* and false
surmises, even against goodness it self; and carried away with weak opinions,
raised from vulgar mistakes, and shadows of things. And indeed, no vice could
ever be loved but for the seeming good, which it makes show of.

Worldly hearts can see nothing in actions of zeal, but folly and madness;
until we be born again, we are like Nicodemus, who knew not what it was to be
borne again, John 3. until we become zealous our selves, we are like Festus,
who thought zeal madness, Act. 26. until we be humble our selves, we are like
Michael, who mocked David for his humility, and thought him a fool, for
dancing before the Arc, 2 Samuel 6. 16. 20. And how should they other then
miscarry; who have a Pirate (the flesh) for their guide. As who observes not,
that some will condemn, what they as little understand, as they do themselves:
and that others, the better a thing is, the worse they will like it. As nothing
is more bitter then honey, to him that has the Iaundies. But Contumelies and
contempt, that are cast upon us for goodness should be born cheerfully,
because they are confirmations of our conformity to Christ, and add weight to
our Crowns. Therefore the Apostles rejoiced, that they were graced so, as to
be disgraced for Christ, Act. 5. 41.

The worlds smiles, may be resembled to the fruit that undid us all, which was
fair to the sight, smooth in handling, sweet in taste; but deadly in effect,
and operation.

I would not, says Luther, have the glory and fame of Erasmus; My greatest
fear is, the praises of men. Yea, I rejoice says he, that Satan so rages and
blasphemes: It is likely I do him and his Kingdom the more mischief. Whence
Jerome told Austin, It was an evident sign of glory to him, that all Heretics
did hate and traduce him.

To be praised of evil men (said Bion) is to be praised for evil doing: so
the better they speak of a man, the worse, and the worse, the better; as being
like the Blackamores, who (judging of beauty by contraries) paint the Angels
black, and the Devils white. Or the Jews, who preferred Barabas, before Jesus.

Yet there are not a few, who fear the worlds opinion, more then Gods
displeasure; which is to run into the fire, to avoid the smoke; who more
dread the mockes and flouts of men on earth, then they do the grinning mocks of
the Devils in Hell; which makes them cease to be good Christians, that they
may be thought good companions: wherein they put down AEsop's foolish fishes,
that leap out of the warm water, into the burning fire for ease: or Timocrates,
who, as Thucidides relates, killed himself for fear, least he should be
drowned. Or Narcissus, who to embrace his shadow, drowned himself: But for a
man to be scoft out of his goodness, by those which are lewd, is all one, as if
a man that sees should blindfold himself, or put out his eyes, because some
blind wretches revile and scoff at him for seeing; or as if one that is sound
of limms, should limpe or maime himself to please the cripple, and avoid his
taunts. A wise man will not be scoft out of his money, nor a just man be
flouted out of his says: the taunts of Ishmael shall never make an Isaac out
of love with his inheritance.

Dion writes of Severus, that he was careful of what he should do, but
careless of what he should hear.

Libanius could say, If Basile commend me, I care not what all other say of me:
If Demetrius have a good report of the truth, and such an one as St. John, to
bear record for him, he need not care though Diotrephes prattle as fast against
them both with malicious words.

Latimer would rejoice when any objected indiscretion against him in his
Sermons, saying, He knew by that, that they could not object against the matter
it self.

As I think not my self either longer or shorter, at morning, or at noon,
because my shadow is so (says Politian) no more am I lifted up, nor cast down,
with men's flatteries or slanders.

Charles the fifth, coming to Paris, and being entertained with a Speech, that
tended much to his praise; answered, That the Orator rather taught him what he
ought to be, then told him what he was.

Good men will neither back-bite others, nor give ear to back-biters of
others; Whence Austin wrote over his Table thus: To speak ill of the absent
forbear,
Or else sit not at Table here.


Surgius, and Bacchus, two great Courtiers, and blessed Martyrs, being accused
for Christians, and commanded to offer unto the Idols, refused to go into the
Temple, saying: We O Emperor, are bound to you only in an earthly warfare,
you have no command over our souls; God only is Lord of them.

Paulinus Nolanus, when his City was taken by the Barbarians, prayed thus to
God: Lord, let me not be troubled at the loss of my Gold, Silver, Honor, etc.
for thou art all, and much more then all these unto me.

When some bad stop Luthers mouth with gold and preferment; one of his
adversaries answered, It is in vain, he cares neither for wealth nor honor;
Yea, when great gifts were offered him to a better end, he refused them,
saying, That God should not put him off with these things; nor would he be
satisfied with any thing that was here below.

Thou have made us, O Lord, for thy self (says Austin) and our hearts are
unquiet till they come unto thee.

As what I have, says Bernard, if offered to thee, pleases not thee without
my self; so, O Lord, thy good things we have from thee, though they refresh
us, yet they satisfy us not without thy self.

In Spain they lived happily, until fire made some Mountains vomit Cold; but
what miserable discords have followed ever since.

They offered to make Luther a Cardinal if he would be quiet; No, says he, I
will not betray the truth by my silence if ye would make me Pope.

When they offered Basile money* and prelerments to tempt him, he answered, Can
you give me money that can last for ever, and glory that may eternally flourish?

Again, when Valence the Emperor sent to offer him large preferments, and to
tell him what a great man he might be, he answered, Offer these things to
Children, not to Christians. Nor would any solicit them to do ill did they
rightly know them, for what Cicero speaks of Cato, viz. O gentle Cato, how
happy art thou to have been such an one, that never man durst yet presume to
solicit in any dishonest cause, or contrary to duty, may be applied to every
Believer rightly so styled.

The magnanimous Christian, will lose his life rather then the peace of a good
conscience: like John Baptist, he will hold his integrity, though he lose his
Head for it. And reason good, for let a man but keep a good correspondence with
God, and his own conscience: and then he may answer all frighting Alarms, as he
did when the Tyrant threatened him: I will take away thy House, yet thou can
not take away my Peace: I will break up thy School, yet shall I keep whole my
peace: I will confiscate all thy Goods, yet there is no praemunire against my
peace: I will banish thee thy Country, yet I shall carry my peace with me.

A Priest might enter into a leaperous house without danger, because he had a
calling from God so to do; and we may follow God dry-shod, through the Red Sea.

I more fear what is within me, says Luther, then what comes from without: The
storms and wind without do never move the earth, only vapors within cause
Earthquakes, James 4. 1. It is not the tossing of the Ship, but the distemper
of the stomach, that causes sickness; the choler within and not the waves
without: Whence Vespasian (having conquered Jerusalem) refused to have the
Crown set upon his head; saying, I indeed am the Rod in Gods hand, but it is
their sins only that has subdued them.

Jerome writes of a brave woman, that being upon the Rack, bad her persecutors
do their worst, she was resolved rather to die then lie.

The Prince of Conde, being taken Prisoner by Charles the ninth of France; and
put to his choice, whether he would go to Mass, or be put to death, or suffer
perpetual imprisonment? answered, The former I will never do by Gods grace; as
for the two latter, let the King do with me what he pleases; for God, I assure
my self, will turn all to the best.

The Heavens shall as soon fall (said William Flower to the Bishop that
persuaded him to save his life by retracting) as I will forsake the opinion and
faith I am in, God assisting me.

John Noyes took up a Faggot at the fire, and kissed it, saying, Blessed be the
time, that ever I was born, to come to this preferment.

Never did Neckarchief become me so well as this Chain, said Alice Driver when
they fastened her to the stake to be burnt.

Master Bradford put off his Cap, and thanked God when the Keepers wife brought
him word he was to be burned on the morrow; and Master Tailor fetched a friske
when he was come near the place where he was to suffer.

Henry and John, two Augustine Monks, being the first that were burnt in
Germany; And Master Rodgers, the first that was burnt in Queen Mary's dai^s,
did all sing in the flames,

Vincentius, as Luther reports, made a sport of his torments, and gloried when
they made him go upon hot burning coals, as if they had been Roses.

Be of good cheer, said one Martyr to her husband that was to suffer with her,
for though we have but an ill diner, we shall sup with Christ.

And what said Iustine Martyr to his murderers, in behalf of himself, and
his fellow Martyrs; you may kill us, but you can never hurt us? And Francisco
Soyit to his adversaries, you deprive me of this life, and promote me to a
better, which is, as if you should rob me of counters, and furnish me with
gold. The sooner I die, quoth another, the sooneer I shall be happy.

When Pyrrhus tempted Fabricius; the first day with an Elephant, so huge and
monstrous a beast* as before he had not seen; the next day with money, and
promises of honor: he answered, I fear not thy force, and I am too wise for
thy fraud. He will never fear to be killed, who by killing is sure to be
Crowned. A Christians resolution, is like that of Gonsalvo: who protested to
his soldiers, showing them Naples, that he had rather die one foot forwards,
then to have his life secured for long by one foot of retrait.

When Modestus, the Emperors Lieutenant, threatened to kill Bazill, he
answered, If that be all, I fear nor, yea, your Master cannot more pleasure me,
then in sending me unto my Heavenly Father, to whom I now live, and to whom I
desire to hasten. And another time being threatened with bonds, banishment,
confiscation, cruel torture, death, etc. He bad him fright babies with such
bug-bears; his life might be taken away, but not his comfort; his head, but not
his Crown. Yea, quoth he, had I a thousand lives, I would lay them all down
for my Saviors sake, who has done abundantly more for me

John Ardely professed to Bonner, when he told him of burning, and how ill he
could endure it, That if he had as many lives, as he had hairs on his head, he
would lose them all in the fire, before he would lose his Christ.

Gordius the Martyr, said, It is to my loss, if ye bate me any thing of my
sufferings.

Origin was so earnest to suffer with his father, when he was but sixteen years
of age, that if his mother had not kept his clothes from him, he would have ran
to the place where he suffered, to profess himself a Christian, and to have
suffered with him; which was a common thing with the Martyrs, making all have,
least they should miss of that noble entertainment.

Austin observed, That though there were many thousands put to death for
professing Christ; yet they were never the fewer for being slain; and the like
is affirmed by Luther.

The more we are cut down by the Sword of persecution, the more still we are,
says Turtullian of the Christians in his time: Yea, the sufferings of one,
begat many to the love of the truth. We read that Cicilia, a poor Virgin, by
her gracious behavior in her Martyrdom, was the means of converting four
hundred to Christ. Whence Master John Lindsay, a friend to Bishop Bettoune,
upon the burning of Master Patrick Hamilton, said to him, My Lord, if you burn
any more, let them be burnt in hollow Cellars; for the smoke of Master Hamilton
has infected as many as it blew upon* Master Knox in his History of Scotland.

Bilneyes Confession converted Latimer.

Instine Martyr, beholding the piety of Christians in life, and their constancy
in suffering such great things so cheerfully at their death; gathered, that it
was the true Religion which they professed; saying, Surely these men have more in
them then the men of the world; they have other principles, and thereupon came
to embrace the truth.

Adrianus, seeing the Martyrs suffer such grievous things; asked why they would
endure such misery, when they might (by retracting) free themselves? To which
one of them alleges that Text, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc. 1 Cor.
2. 9. The naming whereof, and seeing them suffer so cheerfully, did so convert
him, that afterward he became a Martyr too.

The more the Pharisees of old, and their Successors the Prelates of late,
opposed the truth, the more it prevailed.

The Reformation in Germany was much furthered by the Papists opposition; yea,
when two Kings (amongst many others) wrote against Luther, viz. Henry the
eighth of England, and Ludovicus of Hungary; this Kingly Title being entered
into the controversy (making men more curious to examine the matter) stirred
up a general inclination toward Luthers opinion.

Faninus, an Italian Martyr, being asked why he was so merry at his death since
Christ himself was so sorrowful; answered, That Christ sustained in his soul
all the sorrows and conflicts of hell and death due to us; but by his
sufferings, and the assistance of his Spirit, we are delivered from the guilt
of sin, which is the sting of all troubles, and from sorrow, and fear both of
death and hell. Yea, even in the very act of suffering, God gives courage with
the one hand, and holds out a crown with the other, 2 Cor. 1. 5. and 12. 10.

Many will do something for God, that will suffer little or nothing for him.
The King of Navarre told Beza, He would launch no farther into the Sea, then he
might be sure to return safe to the Haven; though he showed some countenance to
Religion, yet he would be sure to save himself.

Constantius the Emperor, called together all his Officers and Servants,
pretending to keep and promote only such as would sacrifice to the Idols, and
they that refused should be banished; so they dividing themselves, he kept and
promoted only the Christians, who had slighted both his commands and threats;
telling the rest, they were Traitors to God, and therefore could not be loyal
to him.

Before these days came (said Mr. Bradsord Mattyr) how many thought
themselves, and so were taken to be good and faithful Christians, true
Believers, Gods dear Children; but now we see whose they are; for to whom we
obey, his servants we are, etc. Romans 6. 16.

In the Palatinate scarce one Professor of twenty stood out, but fell to Popery
as fast as leaves in Autumn. They were the Rich among the Christians, that
soonest shrunk from Christ in the persecution under D^cius.

Pamachius an Heathen, could say to the Pope, Make me a Bishop, and i will be a
Christian.

Aygolandus (the better to make his peace with Charles the Great) would become
a Christian, and be Baptized; but when he came to the Court, where he saw at a
Table in a room thirty poor people, in mean habites, and at ordinary fare,
which the Emperor told him were the Servants of God, he replied, That if God
kept his servants so poorly, he would be none of his servant. It were good we
would examine our selves, whether we have taken up goodness upon love to it,
or upon some sinister ends.

David thought it not so happy, to be a King in his own house, as a
doorkeeper in Gods house. Solomon did prefer the Title of Eclesiastes; [that
is a soul reconciled to the Church] before the Title, of the King of Jerusalem.
Theodosius the Emp^rour, preferred the Title of Membrum Ecclesiae, before that
of Caput Imperii: professing he had rather be a Saint and no King, then a King
and no Saint. And Godly Constantine, rejoiced more in being the servant of
Christ, then in being Emperor of the whole world.

Ignatius said, He had rather be a Martyr, then a Monarch: Nor did he ever like
himself, till he was thus tried; for when he heard his bones crash between the
wild Beasts teeth, he said, Now I begin to be a Christian.

Queen Ann Bolane, the Mother of Queen Elizabeth; when she was to be beheaded
in the Tower, thus remembered her thanks to the King. Of a private Gentlewoman,
said she, he made me a Marquess, of a Marquess, a Queen, and now having left
no higher degree of earthly honor for me, he has made me a Martyr.

Persecutors, says Bernard, are but our Fathers Goldsmiths, working to add
Pearls to the Crowns of the Saints.

Even the greater sinners may punish the less, and prosper for a time, Ezekiel.
7. I will bring the most wicked of the Heathen, and they shall possess their
houses, verse. 24.

As in letting blood by Leeches, the Physician seeks the health of the
Patient; the Leech to be satisfied with his blood only: So when God works our
good by evil instruments, each further one and the same thing; but God intends
our preservation, they our destruction; He wills that as our chastisement,
which he hates as their wickedness.

It is no argument that Christ is not in the Ship, because tempests and storms
arise.

It is only Heaven that is above all winds, storms, and tempests; nor has
God cast man out of Paradise, for him to think to find out another Paradise in
this world.

As Themistocles once said of his Son; this boy can do more then any man in all
Greece: for, the Athenians command the Grecians, and I command the Athenians,
and my Wife commands me, and my Son commands my wife: So the Churches
adversaries in some places, may boast what their Father the Devil can do; for
he commands the Pope, and the Pope commands the Jesuits, and the Jesuits
command such a King, or Emperor, Revel. 17. 12. 13. and that Emperor, or
King, commands his Officers of State; and they command the common people. And
yet to speak rightly, even all these can do just nothing of themselves, For he
that sits in the Heavens laughing them to scorn, commands all.

Denton the Smith of Welby in Cambridge-shire, that could not burn for Christ,
was afterward burned in his own house. And Judge Hales being drawn for fear of
death to do things against the Law and his Conscience, did not long after drown
himself.

He diminishes from his own contentment, that seeks to add to it by
unlawfulness.

Pope Adrian when he was to dye, brake forth into this expression; O my Soul,
whether art thou going? thou shall never be merry again. When I first entered
into Orders (said Pope Quintus) I had some good hope of my Salvation, when I
became a Cardinal, I doubted of it; but since I came to be Pope, I do even
despair of it.

Surely said Cardinal Woolsie, if I had been as careful to serve God, as I
was to please men, I had never been at this pass.

Gasper Olivianus a German Divine says, I never learned how great God was, nor
what the evil of sin was to purpose, until this sickness taught me.

The Cross opens men's eyes, as the tasting of Honey did Ionathans.

As Alloes kills Worms in the Stomach, or as Frost and Cold destroys
Vermin; so do bitter afflictions crawling lusts in the heart.

Aristippus says to Diogines, If you would be content to please Dionisius, you
need not feed upon green Herbs; who replied, And if you would be content to
feed upon green Herbs, you need not please Dionisius, you need not flatter,
comply, be base, etc.

Austin before his conversion, could not tell how to be without those delights
he then found so much contentment in, but after, when his nature was changed,
when he had another Spirit put into him, then he says; O how sweet is it to be
without those former sweet delights.

Galiacius, that Italian Marquess, that left all for Christ, had no ill
bargain of it; whereas he that forsakes Christ, to save his life and estate,
makes as good a match as Judas did, who sold his Salvation; or the Pharisees,
who bought their damnation for thirty pieces of Silver; or Pope Sextus the
fifth, who sold his Soul to the Devil, to enjoy the glory and pleasure of the
Popedom for seven years. But our neglect is most in that wherein our care
should be greatest.

The first thing that Caius did after he came to the Empire was, to prefer
Agrippa, who had been imprisoned for wishing him Emperor.

Valentinian being put out of his Office, by Julian the Apostate for his
Religion, had after Julian was slain the Empire cast upon him.

Riches, Honors, Pleasures, etc. are so transitory, that the same man the same
day has been both Crowned and beheaded: Zerxes crowned his Steeresman in the
morning, and then took off his head in the afternoon. And the like did
Andronicus the Greek Emperor, by his Admiral.

Rofensis had a Cardinals Hat sent him, but his head was cut off before it
came to him.

Babylon, that bore her self bold upon her high Towers, thick walls, and
twenty years provision laid in for a Siege, was surprised by Cyrus.

Pope Alexander the sixth, and Valentinian his Son, prepared a Feast for diverse
Cardinals and Senators, purposing to poison them: but by the providence of God
they escaped, and themselves alone were poisoned.

The Air is never more quiet then before an Earthquake, and usually when the
wind lies, the great rain falls.

Bernard reports of Pope Eugenius, that meeting with a poor, but honest Bishop,
he secretly gave him certain Jewels, wherewith he might present him, as the
custom was for such to do; so, if God did not first furnish us with his graces
and blessings, we should have nothing wherewith to honor him, or do good to
others. Of thine own I give thee, said Justinian the Emperor, borrowing it
from the Psalmist.

If we have any thing that is good, God is the giver of it. If we do any thing
well, he is the Author of it. God is Alpha, the fountain from which all grace
springs: and Omega, the sea to which all glory runs. All blessings come from
him, like so many lines from the center to the circumference: therefore we must
return all praises to him, like so many lines from the circumference to the
center, Romans 11. 36. 1 Cor. 10. 31. His wisdom he communicates, and his
justice he distributes; and his holiness he imparrts, and his mercy he
bestows, etc. 1 Cor. 1. 30, 31. but his glory he will not give to another,
Isai. 42. 8.

NOw this matter being ended, and yet so much rooms left, it will be no wrong
to the Reader, nor expense to me, if I fill up the sheet with these four
Allegories, viz.

The Analogy between man and a building, a City, a Commonwealth: the whole
World.

1. Man's body is like a House, his soul is the Master, his greater bones are
the beams or main Timber, his Ribs are Lathes, dawbed over with flesh, and
playstered with skin, his mouth is the Door, his throat the Entry, his heart
the great Chamber, and his head the Chapel, both full of curious Art, and
wherein Conscience as Chaplain is ever resident.

His Middriffe is a large Partition 'twixt the great Chamber and the spacious
Hall: his belly is the Kitchen, his stomach the Pot, where the meat is
sometimes but half sod for want of heat: his Teeth are the Kitchen knives, his
Spleen is a Vessel which nature provids, to receive the scum tht rises from
the Pot: his Lungs are the Bellows that respier in every Office, quickening
every Fire; his Nose is the Chimney, whereby is vented such fumes as the
Bellows send up; his Bowels, or Conduits of excrement are the Sink to draine
away all noisome filth, and keep the Kitchen clean; his Brain is the Studdie,
his Eyes like Crystal Windows are clear and bright to let in all Objects,
and let out the sight; his Senses are the Servants, having every one a several
Office, etc. Or

2. Man is like a City; his skin is the Walls, his Eyes and Ears the Factors
and Merchants, his hands the Tradesmen, his legs the Portors, his mouth the
Gate, his teeth the Portcullis, his appetite the Cator, his stomach the Larther
or Kitchen, digestion the Cook, expulsion the Scavenger, his soul the Church,
conscience the Preacher, reason and experience are the Common-Counsel, memory
is Mr. Recorder, understanding the Governor, his Senses are the Officers,
fortitude the Soldiers, words the shot, his brain is the Statehouse, and his
heart the Citadel or Castle: Or

3. Man may be likened to a Kingdom or Commonwealth; his Head resembles the
Prince, his heart the Privy-Counsel, in which understanding fits as President:
his Eyes are the Watchmen and Intelligencers, his Ears the Judges, commutative
justice the Law, custom and experience the Iurymen or Freeholders, the joints
resemble Concord and good Order, the Sinews Money, his Arms and Hands the
Soldiers and Tradesmen, his Feet the Merchants, his Tongue the Pleaders,
Conscience the Preachers, the affections are inferior Officers, the Senses
Servants, the Belly like Idle persons Truth is or should be the Treasurer,
Reason and Religion Lord Chancellor, memory Master of the Rowls, etc. Or

4. Man the Microcosme or little World, is much like the great World or
Universe: his flesh resembles the Earth, his bones the hard Rocks and Stones,
his spirits the Mineralls, his hair the Grass, his breath is like the Air,
natural heat the Fire, blood the Water, his Liver the Sea, his veins the
Rivers, his face the Firmament, his eyes those two great lights of Sun and
Moon, his sinews the Treasure and Wealth, his five Senses the Sinck-ports, his
soul the Monarch, his heart the Queen or Empress, his head the Court or Senate
house, his brains the Counsel or Senate, his reason the President, his will the
Law, etc. Or if you will thus, Magistrates are the Arms of the World,
Counselors the Brains, Lawyers the Tongues, the Rich the Stomachs, the Poor
the Backs, Merchants the Feet, Officers the Hands, and Divines the Hearts, etc.
His youth resembles the Spring, his Manhood Summer, his middle age Autumn, his
old age Winter; and the like between the four humors in man's body, and the
four quarters of the year.

The little World Man, is so the Compendium and abridgement of all creatures,
that whatsoever is imprinted with Capital Letters in that large volum as in
folio, is sweetly and harmoniously contracted in Decimo Sexto, in the brief
text of man, who includs all: Planets have being, not life; Plants have life,
not sense, Beasts have sense, not reason, Angels have being, life reason, not
sense, Man has all, and contains in him more generallity then the Angels, viz.
being with Planets, Life with Plants; sense with Beasts, reason with Angels:
But the Believer has over and above, Gods spirit and faith. Nor does the
rational so much excel the sensual, as the spiritual man excels the rational,
Mat. 4. 16. and 15. 14. Epes. 4. 18, 19. and 5. 8. 1. Pet. 2. 9.

And so according to my ability, I have provided for my Reader, something of
every thing, because no one thing will please all. It may serve eitheir as a
Banquet of sweet Meats, or as a public feast for all comers: to which I have
added an aftercourse of Kickshawes for quesie stomachs, that care for no better
meat. Let each man please himself, (that will be pleased) and it shall not a
little content me, that I can give so good entertainment to so many ( Luke 9.
14. to 18.) at so cheap a rate in these hard times.

Imprimatur,

Tho. Gataker.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by I. Bell, for James Crump in little Bartholomewes Well-yard,
1654.

POSTSCRIPT to the READER.
THe Apostle that prefixed his name to thirteen of his Epistles, held it meet to
leave the same out, of that to the Hebrews: And the same did I in publishing
those two Tracts, A small Map of the many Protestants and few Christians in
England; and, Preparation to Conversion. Sundry reasons induced me to think,
that it would be best so to do; but as when a Pirate said to his fellows, Woe
to us if we be known; an honest man in the same Ship replied, And woe to me if
I be not known: so fares it in this case. For contrary to what was expected,
concealing my name, proves no small hinderance to the sale of them. Wherefore,
though I should count it a privilege to be unknown to the envious, (since to
be more obscure, were to be more secure) and so to the incorrigible, (because I
am become their enemy for telling them the truth) being now requested by the
vendors of those Books; I both own them ^s mine, and withal assure the Reader,
that he shall not find them inferior to the former, but rather (as touching
the subject) more for his benefit; which is the principal aim of

Your affectionate Monitor, R. Young.
The PRINTER to the READER.
IT being observed, that many meeting with some of this Authors Collections, do
earnestly enquire after the rest; and that others (and not a few) think they
have all of them, when they have not a third part, (though they have many in
number of his small pieces) I think it not amiss to satisfy the one, inform
the other, and save both any further labor, by setting down the severalls: And
the rather, for that the said Author intends now to take his work off the Loom,
or turn his Pinace into the Harbor, by putting an end to this employment, as
having said something (if not sufficient) in one or other of his Discourses, to
each soul seduced or afflicted: their several names are, A sovereign Antidote
against all Grief. A short and sure way to grace and salvation. A small Map of
the many Protestants, and few Christians in England. A serious and pathetical
Description of Heaven and Hell. A hopeful way to cure that horrid sin of
Swearing. An experimental Index of the heart. Apples of Gold from the Tree of
Life. Armor of proof against the Worlds envy, scoffs, and reproaches.
Charactors of the kinds of preaching. Complete Armor against evil Society;
First and Second part. Cordial Counsel. Gods goodness, and Englands
unthankefulness. Preparation to Conversion. The Drunkards Character; with an
addition. The Arraignment of Covetousness and Ambition, First and Second Part.
The benefit of affliction. The Victory of Patience. The whole Duty of a
Christian. The Natural Man anatomized The Cure of Misprision, or Mistake. The
Cause and Cure of Ignorance, Error, Enmity, etc. The Pastors Advocate. The
Poors Advocate, First and Second Part. The odious, despicable, and dreadful
condition of a Drunkard The Blemish of Government. The Shame of Religion. The
Disgrace of Mankind; with offer of help to drowning men. The Impartial Monitor,
about following the fashions. The Impartial and Compassionate Monitor about
hearing of Sermons. The Seduced Soul Reduced. The Trial of true Wisdom; with
how to become wise indeed. The Prevention of Poverty, and Cure of Melancholy.
The second part of the Pastors Advocate; or the proof of a good Preacher Six
remaining parts of the Poors Advocate. An infallible way to become happy here,
and hereafter.


The first thirty are already published, of the three last some few (as being
larger Discourses) will ere long be printed.

Such as are printed in a small letter, are sold only by James Crump in Little
Barthol^mews Wel-yard, and Henry Crippes in Pope's Head Alley.


