Physic Refined: OR, A LITTLE STREAM OF Medicinal Marrow, Flowing from the
BONES of NATURE.

WHEREIN Several Signs, particular Rules, and distinct Symptoms; whereby the
most ordinary Diseases may be distinctly known, and truly judged, are
perspicuously Delineated:

AND The most proper Way, safe Method, and simpathetical Cure, whereby Nature
may be helped, the Sick eased, and Languishing Patients relieved (without the
Use of Poisonous Purging Potions, and Venomous Medicaments) is succinctly
Demonstrated: By

John Yarwood, Professor of Physic.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Passinger, at the Three Bibles on London Bridge, 1683.

TO Mrs. Mary Allsop, DAUGHTER OF Anthony Allsop, of Allsop-i th'-Dale, Esquire;
SInce that Ancient House, the Place of Your Nativity, has been a Magazine of
Medicine; out of which the Poor of Your Country have been Armed gratis against
those Darts of Sickness, which fight against Nature; I have assumed the
Boldness of this Dedication; not doubting, but a Person so rarely qualified (as
I know You to be) will (in real Generosity) not only cast a Benevolent Aspect
on these my Public Endeavors; but (according to the wonted Goodness of Your
Heroic Spirit) heartily Accept and Countenance so small a Present, as this
little Tractate, which I have (boldly enough) presumed to shadow under the Wing
of Your Favor: not as if I thought, One so acquainted with Books, would be
advantaged by reading this Compendium, (for I have seen You peruse large
Volums, and known You deduce Judgment from the best Authors) but that you may
courageously go on as You have begun, and (like your good Mother) continue
helping them, that cannot help themselves. And that all other Noble minded
Ladies and Gentlewomen may follow Your Example, is the sincere Wish of

Your Obliged Servant, John Yarwood.
From Shepshead in Leicestershire, October. 9th. 1682.
PHYSIC REFINED, etc.
SECT. I. Scurvey.
THere are wandering Pains running up and down the Body; Spots appear in the
Fleshy Parts; and (if the Disease be confirmed) the Gums are affected with
Bleeding and Soreness. This Disease of it self is more Troublesome, than
Dangerous; but (if it be not cured) it many times brings Dropsies,
Consumptions, and other Distempers arising from Obstructions of the Spleen; and
is often the Usherer in of such Acute Diseases, as terminate in the Grave.

The Cure.
The most Excellent Medicines in this case, are Tincture of Tartar, Tincture of
Antimony, and Tincture of Corals: Twenty Drops at a time, taken at Night, going
to Bed (of any of them) in Spirit of Scurvey-Grass, or (which is better) Spirit
of Tartar. Use it forty Days together. I have often cured it with Antimonium
Diaphoriticum, taken as the former, in Beer or Broth, twenty Grains at once,
every Night for forty Days together; using in the mean time, a Diet Drink, made
with Horseradish, Celandine, and Mustard Seed. Crocus Martis Apperitivis in
this case is very proper; but Oleum Martis is better, and may be taken eight
Grains at a time. A Spirit distilled from Antimony one part, and Salt-Peetre
three parts, taken to the quantity of five Drops at a time, is highly Famous in
this Distemper.

SECT. II. Dropsy.
THis Disease is a Watery Habit of the Body: It Is called by three Names,
according as it affects this, that, or the other Part.

The First is called Ascitis; (that is) When much Water is between the
Peritoneum, and the Bowels.

The Second is called Timpanites; (i. e.) When it is of a Windy Cause, known by
the Hardness of the Place, (where that of Water is more soft) and all other
Parts of the Body wax lean.

The Third is called Anasarca, or Leucaphlegma; (that is) When all the Flesh of
the whole Body appears moist and swelled. It Is generally concluded to be a
Defect of the Liver. There is great Thirst, shortness of Breath, an ill Color,
and great Heaviness.

If in the Beginning of the Disease, there be a Flux of the Belly, with
Concoction, or the Urine Made be more than what is Drunk, there is hope of
Recovery.

The Cure.
Let all the Patient's Drink be sharpened with Spirit of Salt, or Oil of
Sulphur. They that fancy Purging Medicines, use Syrrup of Buckthorn, an Ounce
at a time in the Morning: But Syrrup of Pellitory of the Wall is better, taken
a Spoonful at once, two or three times a day. The Root of Hog-Fennel, powdered,
and taken a Dram at a time, is excellent. I use Ens Veneris, twenty Grains at
once, every Night going to Bed.

SECT. III. Small Pox.
THere is first a Pain in the Head and Back; the Body is feverish, hot, and
the Face is red and swelled; they are sleepy, have Red Urine, and Pricking all
over the Body. The Third or Fourth Day small Pustles arise, and break out in
the Skin.

If they soon come forth, and Ripen easily, appear white, round, and the
Breathing free, there is great Hopes of Recovery: But Bleeding at Nose, great
Third, difficulty of Breathing, Looseness, Bloody Flux, black or livid Urine, a
great Fever, the Pustles appearing Green, Black, or Blueish, or go in again,
or black or blue Spots appearing; all these are dangerous signs.

The Cure.
First provoke Sweat with Bezoar Mineral; six Grains for a Child, and sixteen
Grains for one of full Age. Take it at Night going to Bed. Or Antimonium
Diaphoriticum may be given after the same manner, and the same Dose. Take them
in Sack. Tincture of Saffron, in this case, is excellent; taken a Spoonful or
two at a time, three or four times a day, in good Wine. Ten drops of Tincture
of Corals, or six Grains of Tincture of Tartar, given at Night in Sack, is very
good. Take a little Red Fennel and Saffron, and boil in Posset Drink, and give
the Patient to drink often, before they come out. I make up a Medicine thus:
Take Spirit of Wine, or Aquae Mirabolis, two Ounces, Syrrup of
Clove-Gilly-Flowers one Ounce, Confectio Alkermes one Dram; mix, and give a
Spoonful at a time, four or five times a day.

SECT. IV. Cachexia.
It Is caused through Obstructions, and Hardness of the Liver and Spleen; which
brings the whole Body into an ill State and Disposition.

This Disease commonly follows some long Sickness, as a Dysenteria and
Lienteria. The Flesh waxes loose and soft, the Patient is weak, has bad
Digestion, loatheth Meat, desires Drink. The Body is whitish, and he goes
weakly. It Is mostly incident to Old Men and Children.

If it continue long, it brings the Patient into a Dropsy.

The Cure.
All Medicines, that potently open Obstructions, are proper in this Case. Take
Pulvis Cachecticus, half a Dram at a time, every Morning, and stir after it;
taking every Night ten Grains of Sweating Antimony. Pilulae Anodynae (which is
most commonly known by the name of Matthew's, but more properly Starkey's Pill)
in this Case is excellent, being taken to the quantity of twenty Grains at
Night, going Bed, two or three Hours after a light Supper. Crocus Martis
Apperitivus, in this Case, is proper; but Oleum Martis is better, taken eight
Grains at a time. I distill a Spirit from Antimony one Pound, and Nitre three
Pounds; whereof I give five or six Drops in white Wine or Ale: It must be drawn
in an open Retort, and cast in by two Drams at a time, and the Retort stopped
quickly.

SECT. V. Worms.
THere are three sorts of Worms; as first, Round ones, about six or eight
Inches in length. Such as are troubled with these, feel a gnawing in the
Stomach and Bowels: They start in their Sleep, have a small dryish Cough, and
the Body wastes.

The second sort are broad Long-Worms, which do continually gnaw the Stomach.
There is great Appetite, slenderness and weakness of the Body, and certain
small things, much resembling Cucumber-Seeds, avoided with the Excrements.

The third sort are thin, short, and small Worms; mostly in the Fundament, and
in the Right Gut. They are known by these two signs; they cause the Fundament
to itch, and provoke to Stool, which gives the Patient ease

Worms voyded in the declining of a Disease, (without taking Worm-killing
Medicines) is good: But if they leave the Body in the beginning of a Disease,
it is a sign of Death.

The Cure.
Take thin slices of fat Cheese, set them in a Pewter-dish before the Fire, and
melt out the Oil; put an Ounce of it to half a Pint of sweet Wort; warm, and
drink it in the Morning, fasting two Hours after it. Take Earthworms, slit
them, scowr them in Salt, dry them with a gentle Heat, and give the Powder
inwardly. Take Salt of Wormwood, drop on Spirit of Salt till it cease broyling;
dry it, and give twenty Grains at Night.

SECT. VI. Gout.
It Is a Disease of the Joints, where there is tormenting Pains. It has got five
Names, according to those five Places of the Body it uses to torment. In the
Shoulder, it is called Omagra; in the Hand, Chiragra; in the Hip, Sciatica; in
the Knee, Gonogra; in the Foot, Podagra. If it be knotted in the Joints, or the
Patient very old, Physicians count it uncurable. If the Pain run from one Joint
to another, it is then called a Rheumatism, or the Running-Gout. If this be with
an Asthma, the Cure is difficult.

The Cure.
Take twenty Grains of sweating Antimony at Night, and twenty Drops of Tincture
of Antimony in the Morning, or the like quantity of Spirit of Tartar. Take
seven Grains of Salt of Lead, or twenty Grains of Ens Veneris at Night, or
Bezoar Minerale. Sixteen Grains taken as the former, sweats excellently,
anointing the Place with the Oil of Man's Blood, or with a Lie made of the Salt
of Cow Dung, dissolved in the Air, and the Part bathed therewith. Take
Pigeon's-Dung, Vinegar, and Mustard Seed, of each a like quantity; beat it into
the form of an Ointment, and apply it (on Linen) to the Place grieved: Then
lay on Emplastrum Arthriticum, till the Pain cease; then apply Emplastrum de
Minio, spread on Linen, and let it lie on a Month; and renew it six times.

SECT. VII. Headache.
IF then Pain be extended to the Root of the Eyes, the Pain is within the
Skull; otherwise it is without the Skull. It commonly lasts long, and invades
the Patient with pain on light Occasions; as Blows, Heat of the Sun, violent
Exercise, and the like; with extreme sharp Fits. In some it continues all
times; in others it goes and comes by fits. If the Pain be inward, and extent
to the Roots of the Eyes, the Films that cover the Brain are inflamed: But if
the Pain be outward, the Films that cover the Skull are grieved. It Is for the
most part curable; but if it be of long continuance, it is difficult, and is in
danger of Returning.

The Cure.
Take Oil of Vitriol an Ounce, Spirit of Wine (or good Brandy) a quart; mix
them, cork it well, and set it two or three days in a warm Place; and take half
an Ounce at a time, in Wine or Ale, two or three times a day. Flowers of
Antimony (not Vomitive) taken ten Grains at a time, are excellent. Give it
every other Night; and five Grains of Laudanum, dissolved in Sack (or made into
a Pill) may be taken the other Night. I use Ens Veneris, twenty Grains taken at
Night in unsalted Broth; or the like quantity of Matthew's (or rather
Starkey's) Pilulae Anodynae. Boil Verjuice, and put them hot into a
narrow-mouthed Bottle, and receive the Fume at the Ear, anointing the Temples
of the Head with Vnguentum Populeon, or rather with this Ointment. Take
Ground Ivy, stamp it, and boil it well in White Wind; strain out the Herbs, and
add Sallet-Oyl, and boil it to the Consumption of the Moisture; and anoint the
Head and Temples therewith; warm it well.

SECT. VIII. Megrim and Vertigo.
THe Megrim is a Pain in one half of the Head; wherein if the Films that cover
the Skull be inflamed, the Pain is so vehement, that the Patient cannot suffer
the Skin to be touched with the Hand; being more violent, than dangerous; for
it is commonly quickly cured.

The Vertigo is a Swimming of the Head. It Is said to be caused by a windy
Exhalation. There is Giddiness; things seem to turn round; sometimes the
Patient falls down. There is many times dimness of Sight, hardness of Hearing,
a decay of Taste and Smell; the Head is heavy, and acheth; some feel a gnawing
in the Stomach, and have a disposition to Vomit. This distemper commonly turns
to some other Disease. If the things which the Sick sees, seem Purple-colour'd,
it is the Forerunner of the Epilepsia. If they seem red, or bloody, there is
danger of Madness. Sometimes it degenerates into an Apoplexia.

The Cure.
For the Megrim, take ten Grains of Confectio Anodyna, or twenty Grains of
Pilulae Anodynae; or else five Grains of Laudanum at Night, and two Drams of
Essence of Rosemary in the Morning. Mix twenty Grains of Euphorbium finely
powdered, with an Ounce of Oyl-Olive; and drop one Drop into the Ear warm, on
the pained side. Also take Euphorbium, boil it a little in Vinegar, and apply
it to the contrary side; or apply a warm Cataplasm of Goat's -- Dung and
Vinegar.

For the Vertigo, anoint the Nostrils with Oil of Nutmegs, Marjoram, or
Rosemary: Give inwardly Essence of Rosemary in Wine, or Peacocks-Dung dried and
powdered, a Dram at a time; or a few Grains of Native-Cinabar in Oil of
Caraways.

SECT. IX. Frenzy and Madness.
THe Frenzy is a kind of madness, or fury joined with a Fever; affirmed by
some to be an Inflammation of the Brain, or the films, hurting the internal
senses; there is little sleep, they speak without sense, rise up, leap, and cry
furiously, pulling as though it were straws, or the like from the Bed-clothes,
they breath lightly, and the Pulses are small; some laugh, others are raging,
angry, and hardly ruled.

This disease is commonly mortal, and if the Urine be white and clear, it is a
dangerous sign.

Madness has a great affinity with the Frenzy, the signs are evident, they
are both hard to cure, they differ in this; the Frenzy is accompanied with a
Fever, Madness is without; the Frenzy is dangerous, Madness is tedious, not
perilous.

The Cure.
For to help the Frenzy, give 10 grains of salt of Pearl in Poppy water, for
one dose, or 5 grains or Laudanum given at twice, 6 hours betwixt, dissolve it
in Sack. Potable Silver taken 6 grains at a time in this case is excellent.
Tincture of Antimony or the flowers corrected, are powerful. Black Helibore is
a famous specific, make it into powder and boil it twelve hours in water to
the thickness of a Syrup, add its weight of Sugar, and give half a dram at a
time.

Madness is cured with the same medicines ( Laudanum excepted) give now and
then a dram of the blood of an Ass, taken out of the veins behind the ears, and
sweat after it, oil of Rosemary is good; I use salt of Lead, and Ens Veneris
with good success, 8 grains of the first, and 20 of the latter.

Sect. X. Lethargy and Deep or dead sleep.
THe Lethargy is a drowsy distemper conjoined with a Fever, the patient
breaths weakly, sleeps profoundly, the Pulse is great, and strikes seldom;
though the party be often spoken to, he (through sluggishness) scarcely
answers to the question, only opens his eyes, and shuts them again,
sometimes raves, and is very forgetful. If he be old, Gross, Fat, and the
disease of long continuance, 'twill hardly be cured.

The deep or dead sleep is a disorder of the Brain, wherein the Patient sleeps
with his eyes continually shut, and he will say nothing, though he be stirred
and pricked with needles, it is difference from a Lethargy is only in degrees,
and this is without a Fever; the cure is difficult.

The Cure.
The principal cure of these diseases is potable silver, taken 5 grains at
night, and as much in the morning. The Chimical oil of Rosemary is excellent,
and may be given from 10 to 15 drops at a time in a little Sack, and the
Temples and head (being shaved) may be anointed with it, or oil of Caster, then
lay a Plaster of Stickticum Paracelsi on the head, taking now and then in the
day time 20 or 30 drops of Elixir Proprietatis, and sweating with 15 drops of
spirit of Hartshorn, or 10 grains of Bezoar Mineral is good.

Sect. XI. Apoplexia and Catalepsis.
THe Apolexia is a depriving the whole body of sense and motion; they have pain
in the head, sleep deeply, gnaw the Teeth, feel not when hurt, open not the
eyes, Answer no questions, make little Urine, its sediment is like meal, and
its color like Rust or Canker, they snore, and breath little. It Is said to be
caused through obstruction of those passages whereby the spirits are carried
from the Heart to the Brain. If this distemper be a strong one it is uncurable,
and how weak soever, not easily helped: it is the worst when it seizes young
people in the summer. And if Medicines prove effectual against the Apoplexia,
yet commonly it leaves a Palsy either in the whole or part of the body.

Catalepsis is a kind of Congelation, sudden detention or benuming both in Body
and Mind, the Patient lies as though he was dead, moves not the eyes. Sense and
Motion are lost, the pulse is weak, and he remains in the same figure of body
in which he was taken, whether he lie, stand* or sit, with his eyes shut or
open, the disease (if cured) degenerates many times into an Apoplexia, or
Lethargy.

The Cure.
In both these distempers, the Essence of Rosemary is excellent, a quarter of
an ounce at a time or 10 drops of the Chemical oil taken in 2 or 3 spoonfuls of
wine, or 15 drops of the spirit of the brains and blood of a sheep, taken
often. Aurum Potabilie 6 grains at once, transcends all other medicines; bath
the head with tincture of Papper, and anoint it with Balsamum Polychrestum.
Elixir Proprietatis 15 grains in wine, is proper in these cases.

Sect. XII. Epilepsia.
THe Falling Sickness is a Convulsion of the body, hurting the mind and senses
at some certain times, for when the fit comes, the patient is plucked together,
falls down, trembles, cries out, and (if the disease be violent) foams at
mouth. Van Helmont says it is caused by an infensitive, befooling and mad
poison, afflicting for a space, being installed in the Midriff. It commonly
happens to children, but if it happen to persons of full age, it is seldom cured.

The Cure.
Provoke sneezing with Helebore, and administer Elixir Proprietatis, or Elixir
Vitae, a dram at a time, the Antepileptick spirit of Vitriol, 8 grains at once
in some cordial spirit, is excellent, take 12 grains of Pulvis Antepilepticus
twice in a week. Take the Livers of forty Frogs, dry them with a gentle heat,
and give them in fine powder at five times, morning and evening. The powder of
native Cinabar is much commended mixed with the oil of Carraways. Oil of Amber,
ten grains at once may be often administered; dry the brains of a Weesle, make
the same into fine powder, and drink it in vinegar. The volatile Salt, and
spirit of venal blood is famous in this case, 5 grains of the Salt, or ten
drops of the spirit for one dose; Take every morning 2 drams of the Opeate of
Moniagnana, commended by Riverius. Give a new born child 2 drams of oil of
sweet Almonds, mixed with sugar before it suck, or take any thing for preventing
this distemper.

Sect. XIII. Palsy and Trembling.
THe Palsy is a distemper in which the whole body, or some particular part or
member does lose its sense or motion, or both, according as all, or some of the
Nerves are obstructed. If the back bone be principally affected with the
obstruction, the lower parts are afflicted, but from the affection of the
brain, the face and upper parts are offended, this disease is more frequently
seizing in the winter than in summer, and happens oftener to old people than
young ones, If it be not occasioned from the cutting of a sinew, it may be
cured.

Trembling commonly goes before a Palsy, and is caused through weakness of the
sinew, either by reason of old Age, or excessive drinking.

The Cure.
Tincture of Tarter, 10 drops, or spirit of Tartar, 20 drops at a time are
proper in the case; take 12 grains of Pulvis Antepilepticus once in two days,
and provoke sweat by 10 grains of Bezoar Mineral taken at night, or six grains
of potable silver; bathe the place grieved with an essence of Green Tobacco
leaves, made with Malmsey wine, rub and chafe it well in and use it often.

Then anoint with Balsamum Hystericum, or V^guentum Martiatum. A cataplasm of
the greater Walnut-root is much commended, and often bathing the part with Milk
and Oil.

Trembling is helped by the use of Elixir Proprietatis, a dram taken at once,
morning and night, and by all the former medicines mentioned against the Palsy.

Sect. XIV. Melancholia.
THey that languish under this distemper, have strange imaginations conceiting
themselves to be like what they resemble not; and that they are what they are
not. It Is known by fearfulness, sadness, hatred, and such doleful passions of
the Mind, some conceiting themselves to be beast of this kind, others of that.
Some are fearful of what will not hurt them, others would hurt or kill
themselves, (cause no body else will) some weep, others laugh. Some foretell
strange things to come, others cannot tell what was done yesterday. It Is a
deplorable disease, very uncomfortable state, long and tedious, and in Aged
people, seldom cured.

The Cure.
The best thing is Potable silver, taken 6 grains at night, and a dram of
Elixir Proprietatis, Elixir Vitae, Essentia Magna, Essence of Saffron, Syrupus
Alkermes or Spiritus Analepticus in the morning. The Chemical oils of
Cinanion, Cloves, or Rosemary, given to the quantity of 8 drops at once in wine
or warm broth, is excellent. So are flowers of Antimony (corrected) 6 grains,
at night taken in London Treacle, Take Black Hellebore, salt of Tartar, and as
much white wine as will work them into stiff past, put it in a glass, stop the
Air from it, and after it is two months old, give 5 or 6 grains at a time in a
pill and increase the dose. Twenty grains of Matthews Pill is excellent.

Sect. XV. Nightmare and Cramp.
BY the Nightmare, I mean that oppressive weight and nocturnal suffocation
which the Greek Physicians call Ephialtes, and the Latins Incubus. It commonly
seizes the Patient 'twixt sleep and wake, he thinks he feels something very
heavy upon him; he strives hard, yet cannot move, or stir himself, only groans
but cannot speak; it is caused by eating full and late suppers, of such meats as
are hard of digestion, excessive drinking or such like intemperance, and if it
continue long many times turns to the falling sickness, madness, or an
Apoplexia.

The Cramp or Convulsion is a shrinking or contraction o^ the Nerves, either of
the whole body, or of some particular part* That of the whole body proceeds
either from the marrow of the back, when the Muscle that move the head and back
are drawn together, or from defect of the brain, when the face is plucked also
with the body. That of a part is a particular obstruction of its original. If
it be taken in time i^ may be cured, else not.

The Cure.
Both these distempers are cured with the same Medicines have prescribed to be
used in the Epilepsia, at the 12 Section. In the Cramp, you may Anoint the
part shrunk with oil of Amber, mixed with oil of Roses, and apply over it
Emplastrum Histericum.

Sect. XVI. Pearl and Cataract.
THat which is vulgarly known by the name of a Pearl, is sometimes called Pin
and Web, being a white spot, contracted by the Cornea, and comprehending a
small space of the Pupilla.

the Cataract, or suffusion, is a distemper wherein the watery Humor of the
Eye becomes too thick. In the beginning of the disease, the patient thinks he
sees small things before his eyes, as Gnats, hairs, and the like; it commonly
affects but one Eye at once, when the disease is confirmed, the sight totally
perishes; there appears dark matter in the Pupilla, or white spots about it;
there are red veins about the Circle, and a thick skin over the whole Eye. The
Green colored Cataract, and that wherein the Pupil of the Eye is dilated, so
far that no circle may be seen within the Tunicles, the Eye seeming all black
or all white, are both uncurable: but if the patient be young and can see as
through a mist he may be helped.

The Cure.
For a Pearl put into the Eye a whole seed of Oculus Christi, and wash it with
this water, Honey two ounces, juice of Celandine three ounces, white Vitriol a
dram (dissolved in a ounces of water) and drop it into the eye. For the
Cataract wash the eye 5 times a day in the infusion of Crocus Metallorum in
white wine, giving ten drops of Oil of Rosemary every morning, in warm wine or
broth.

Sect. 17. Blindness and Inflammation of the Eyes.
BLindness is sometimes Total, and yet the Eye to look upon ails nothing. If
the disease proceed through obstruction of the Optic nerves, (as commonly it
does) through super-abounding Humidity, and the sight totally extinct, it is
accounted incurable: but if it be occasioned through the gathering of humors
in the forepart of the head, (as some affirm it may) compressing the Nerves,
there is some small hopes of recovery.

Inflammation of the Eyes, Is that which is commonly called Blood-shot, caused
through defluctions, occasioned by heat; blows, great grief, and the like, and
it is easily helped.

The Cure.
In Blindness, it is convenient to sharpen the Patients drink with Oil of
Vitriol, or Oil of Sulphur, and take Oil of Rosemary ten drops at a time,
morning and night, in four spoonfulls of warm wine.

Take Tutia and Aloes, of each three drams, white Sugar 2 drams, Rose Water and
white wine, of each 6 ounces mixed, and in a glass well stopped, digest in the
sun, or in some other such heat, for a mon^th, shake it every day, then let it
settle, pure off the clear, and wash the Eyes with it, both morning, noon and
Night, both for this distemper, and for a Cataract. Inflammation, or bloodshot,
is cured by salt of Lead dissolved in fair water, or Rose Water, or white
Vitriol one ounce dissolved in three pints of water, and the Eyes washed with
it, or with whites of Eggs beaten to water, or wash with the water squeezed out
of rotten Apples.

Sect. 18. Deafness.
IF this distemper proceed from a Fever, it is remedied by curing the Fever,
if it be some times better and sometimes worse, or proceed from a distemper of
the Brain, it may be helped. But if the Tympany be broken, the disease from the
birth, or absolute, and of long continuance, there is no hope of recovering.

The Cure.
Take the Gall of a Partridge, mix it with so much Oil of Amber, and drop in
three or four drops at a time, and do it three times a day; for want of that
use the fat of an Eele, a Mole or Hedghog, as the former. The juice of Radishes
is much commended, so is the juice of an Onion soaked in Brandy, and roasted,
but I think oil of Carawayes, two drops at once is better. Some use the water
that drops out of a green Ash stick (laid with one end into the fire) boiled a
little with the said fat of an Ele, and dropped into the Ear warm, but above
all, take snakes or Adders, being fat, (which is in July) cast away the heads,
tails, bowels, and skins, put the other in a glass, pour spirit of wine three
inches above them, stop it well, and digest in a warm place, till the substance
be turned to an oil, keep it for use, and put two or three drops at a time
into the deaf Ear.

Sect. 19. Bleeding at Nose.
IT IS caused by stripes, blows, falls, heat, vehement exercise, or else
through an abundance of thin blood, with pain and inflammation of the head, and
if it be not soon stanched is dangerous.

The Cure.
Put a Tent into the bleeding Nostril dipped in the white of an Egg, and covered
over with Bole Armoniack. Give the Patient inwardly Syrup of Vinegar, and apply
Sticticum Paracelsi to the Crown.

Burn blew wooling cloth to Ashes, and snuff them up the Nose, and cast cold
water in the face.

Tie up a spider in a linen Cloth, bruise it a little, and hold it near the
Nose, but touch it not.

Dry the Patients blood to powder, and snuff it up the nose, and take Inwardly
six grains of Salt of Lead.

Take Vinegar and Plantain water, of each two pound, mix it, dip folded Linnens
and apply them to the soles of the feet, palms of the hands, and against the
Liver; drinking Vinegar, and holding some of it in the mouth, or take twenty
drops of Tincture of Corals in wine or ale.

Bind the Head very hard with Incle, and let the knot be in the neck, and lay a
sponge dipped in Vinegar to the Nose. Wet a Linen cloth in Vinegar and wrap it
about the Members of him that bleedeth.

Take Century, Green Rue, and red Fennel, of each a like quantity, stamp them,
strain the juice into Ale; and so drink it. Wet a Cloth of Linen in sharp
Vinegar, burn the cloth, and blow the Ashes into the bleeding nostrils.

Sect. 20. Toothache.
THe common opinion of Physicians is, that this distemper is caused either
simply through heat, or cold, or else complicately through defluction of Rheum,
etc. But old Hippocrates said that hot, cold, moist or dry was not diseases,
but that which is sharp, bitter, sour and harsh; And Helmont affirms, that
the Tooth does not Ache from Rheum falling on it, but by either the Goome being
uncovered, it is made too sensible, or else matter of the last nourishment
being badly digested, does putrify about the root of the Tooth, hence comes
pain, It is most common to rotten and hollow Teeth, and these are seldom cured
without they be taken out.

The Cure.
Take 20 Ivy leaves, a little long pepper, boil them well in old Wine, with a
handful of Salt, and hold the liquor in the Mouth on the Aching side.

Take Primrose roots, Infuse them ten days in Brandy, and snuff a little up
the Nose.

Take Opium and Saffron, of each two grains, ty it up in a bit of silk (or thin
rag) and hold it between the Teeth. If the Tooth be hollow, put a piece of a
Crowfoot root into the hole, or dip lint in Spirit of Sal Armoniack, and apply
it thereunto.

Drop three or four drops of juice of Rue into the Ear on the Aching side, and
lie an hour after on the other side.

Take white Pepper in powder one dram, Oil of Origanum ten Grains, mix and keep
it in a box, and snuff a little up the Nose on the aching side.

Sect. 21. Quinsey.
IN a true Quinsey there is difficulty of swallowing, and breathing, Redness of
the neck and face, a Tumor and swelling in the Throat, and sometimes a Fever,
and is commonly very dangerous.

The Cure.
Most Physicians in this case draw blood. The juice of Orpin taken two or three
spoonfuls at a time is excellent, so is the juice of Housleek, or Crabfish: the
juices may be mixed with the distilled water of the Herbs, and if a few drops of
the Spirit of Sal Armoniack be added it will be the better, and let the tongue
be rubbed with the said juice of Crab-fish or Housleek, let the Patients drink
be Sal Prunella dissolved in water, or take Spirit of Nitre two drams, Spirit
of Wine, and Spirit of Salt of each half a dram, put them to a pint of water,
and drink it at three times, and to sweeten the blood (which in this case
offends by reason of the sharpness of the Liquor Latex) the Tincture of Corals
is a famous Medicament, taken ten drops at once in Wine or Ale. The Ashes of
burnt Crabs, or Swallows, taken inwardly are much commended, and the Ashes of
an Owl (feathers and all) well calcined, blown into the throat, is an excellent
thing to break the Imposthume.

Sect. 22. Pleurisy.
THis disease is an Inflammation of the Pleura, or skin, girding the Ribs,
caused through abundance of Venal blood sent thither, chiefly offending in
quality, for the Archeus being exasperated, an exorbitant Pestilent Impression
is made in the Latex, taunting it with a superabounding sharpness; the which
lighting into the flesh, between the Ribs, causes a Pleuretical pain, and
sometimes the fibers of the Pleura are rent asunder from the Ribs, and while it
does but never so little slacken it self, the neighboring Blood runs to it, in
the place of the wrinkles, made by contracting of the Fracture, and this by
repeated turns, is the cause of a great Aposthume, according to the frequency
and sharpness of the contractures. It Is known by a Fever, difficulty of
breathing, hard Pulse like a saw, a Cough, pricking pain, and sometimes a
Tumor. If the Fever be violent, spittle bloody, very white, green or black, or
the Patient very old, or Astmatical, it is dangerous.

The Cure.
In this disease most draw blood, and affirm the necessity of that way, but
this has only the power of privation, leaves the root of the disease, from
whence commonly springs up a Relaps. A dram of Goats blood taken at once (first
dried and powdr'd is the best remedy I know, take it in Poppy water, at night
going to bed, (every night repeating it) in want of this give Spirit of wine
and Spirit of Sal Nitre, of each twenty Grains in Poppy water as the former.
Tincture of Corals and Tincture of Tartar twenty drops at once of either,
sweetens the blood notably. When the Imposthume is broke, give Syrup of
Succory, and Spirit of Ground Ivy mixed with its own Salt.

Sect. 23. Cough and Asthma.
THis disorder called a Cough, is commonly caused through cold taken, or
through some sharp matter contained in the Breast and Lungs, which causes a
cough without spitting. If it happen to Aged people, having a great obstruction
of the Lungs, and cease suddenly, it is very dangerous (...)

The Asthma is of two sorts, viz. the moist, and the dry; the moist Asthma
produces a Cough, to expectorate the offending matter, yet differs from Cough,
in that it has a mattery Imposthume, or secret phlegm obstructing in the bowel,
whereby it brings forth excrementitious matter, and corrupts its proper
nourishment.

The dry Asthma commonly comes from the Gass of Metals and Minerals, to
diggers Melters, and Chemists, vitiating the Channels of the windpipe, whereby
nourishment degenerates into Excrements.

There is swelling in the Lungs, and stoppage in the Throat: In Children it
turns into a Catarrh, in men, it generally ends in a Chachexia, Plurisie, or
Dropsy.

The Cure.
For a Cough, cut the phlegm with Syrup of Vinegar; then use Syrup of Succory,
taking at night Elixir Proprietatis, Tincture of Sugar, or extract of
Elecampane, and hold in the mouth Trochisci Bechici. All these medicines are
good in the moist Asthma, as also juice of Radish Roots, with Tincture of
Sugar. The dry Asthma is cured with Epilepticals, as Section the 12th.

Sect. 24. Inflammation of the Lungs, and Ulcer of the Breast.
AN Inflammation of the Lungs is accompanied with a sharp Fever, caused by
some preceding diseases for the most part, known by great heat, difficult
breathing, and stretching out of the breast, with a redness there, the breath
is hot, the eyes swell, a dry Cough, Appetite is lost, the Tongue is dry* the
Patient is desirous of cold Air, and cold water. If this disease follow a
Pleurisy, it is very dangerous.

An Ulcer of the breast is generally from an inflammation of the Lungs, being
suppurated, and the Rupture of the Impostume, whereby the matter falls into the
cavity of the Breast; while the suppuration is perfecting, the Fever
increases, but being broken, the Patient spits Matter, is faint, with
heaviness in the bottom of the Breast, a Cough and great pain: If the matter
spit up be green, livid, froathy, or brought up with difficulty, and the belly
loose, it is very dangerous, If the matter be not spit up in a Months time, it
turns to a Consumption.

The Cure.
An Inflammation of the Lungs is cured wih the same Medicines mentioned for a
Pleurisy at Section the 22th.

For an Ulcer in the breast, Take 10 grains of Antimonium Diaphoreticum at once
four times a day, Anoint the stomach with Ointment of Tobacco, and then lay on
a pultis of Figs and Raisons (stoned) mixed with oil of Amber, and Juniper
berries, sharpning the Patient drink with oil of Sulphur, or Vitriol.

Sect. 25. Consumption
THis distemper is a wasting of the whole Body the Patient breathes
difficultly, the Eyes are hollow, the Nostrils sharp, is Thirsty, and has a
Cough sometimes, and the hair falls off, spits either froath, blood, or matter,
from an Ulcer in the Lungs. If the matter spit up stink; If the body be very
loose or an acute disease conjoined, it is very dangerous, But if the Ulcer be
but new begun, there is hope of Recovery.

The Cure.
Balsom of Sulphur is excellent, take it 3 or 4 grains at a time, Morning,
Noon, and Night, and let the Patients drink be sharpened with oil or Sulphur 20
or 30 drops to a pint. The oils of Rosemary, Cinnamon, and Carawayes, help
much, taken ten drops at a time in brothe Lukewarm, there is a Syrup made of
Corals, or Tincture of the same used with good success, so is Syrup of Turnips,
and extract of Elecampane, a spoonful at once in any convenient Vehicle.
Trochischi Bechisi taken 5 grains at once 3 times a day has proved effectual;
so has a Syrrup made of the juice of Cabbage 1 ounce a day. Take Choice Myrrh
4 ounces, Saffron half an ounce. Nutmegs two ounces, Aromaticum Rosatum, two
ounces, Olibanum, one ounce, Honey three pound, make it into an Electuary, and
take as much as a Hazzle nut 3 times a day.

Sect. 26. Spitting of Blood.
IT may be caused by excessive crying, leaping, blows, or falls: or inwardly
through Plenitude, or sharpness of the Liquor Latex, corroding the vessels.
It Is commonly ill, more especially when it is from the Lungs; and many times
foretells a Consumption, if it be not critical, etc.

The Cure.
All those Medicines mentioned in the last Section, for the cure of a
Consumption, are proper to be used here, to which these following may be added.
If the disorder be caused through sharpness of the Latex, Goats blood gently
dried and pouderd, and given a dram at a time is excellent, Henbane-seed
powdered and mixed with Electuarium ad Tabidos, and given morning, noon, and
night, is commended. The Electuary is thus prepared. Take Nutmegs and Cinnamon,
of each 3 ounces, Ginger, three drams, M^gistry of Pearl, two ounces, clarified
Honey, twelve ounces, beat the species severally, then mix them together with
the Honey; given half a dram at a time, morning and evening, Trochisci Beehici,
taken 5 or 6 grains at once is profitable; It Is thus made Take juice of
Liquoris, one pound, white Sugar 2 pound, Opium one ounce, with the mucilage of
Gum Tragocanth, make it into Roles or Troches, and dry them. But above all is
Roche Allome; dissolve it in water, and distill off the water to a dry bottom,
and give 20 drops at a time in any drink.

Sect. 27. Pain of the Stomach.
THere is sometimes accompanying this disease a pain in the Head, which shows
the distemper to arise from Wind, and continuing unremoved, a Timpany follows:
If there be a perpetual gnawing felt in the stomach, -- then it is caused by
Worms, and so less dangerous; if there be a looseness, vomiting or the patient
thereunto inclined, it shows a sharpness in the stomach, and if it be
accompanied with a Fever, or the extreme parts be cold, it is very dangerous.

The Cure.
If the distemper be occasioned by Wind, things Carminative are most proper.
Take the distilled oils of Cummingseeds, half an ounce of Fennel, Annis and
Caraway, of each one dram, of Dill and Camomil of each half a dram, mix and
take 3 or 4 grains in luke warm broth. If worms cause the disorder take the
cure from the 5 Section. If it be caused by some preternatural sharpness in the
stomach; some anoint outwardly with the ointment of Tobacco, and use Laudanum 3
or 4 grains, given at night in a pill, but 8 or 9 drops of oil of Cinnamon in
lukewarm broth is much safer, spirit of Camomil in Mint-water, is famous in the
case, so is Essence of Elder, Angelica and Rosemary.

Sect. 28. Swounding, and Beating of the Heart.
SWounding in some is caused through extraordinary fear, Immoderate grief, etc.
and in this case it is the least dangerous: in others its without manifest
cause, and these commonly dye suddenly, but in a Fever it is dangerous and
pernicious. Immoderate and unnatural beating and trembling of the heart, may be
known by feeling, and is sometimes caused through shame, joy, fear or Anger: In
others it is continual, and in these cases the least to be feared. But if it be
caused from a Tumor in the Perecardium or Arteries of the Lungs (as some
Physicians say it may) it is incurable, and coming upon an acute disease, very
dangerous.

The Cure.
Of both these distempers are performed with Cordials, among which Aurum
Potabile, and Species Alexipharmaca, taken 5 or 6 grains at a time of either,
is excellent, so is Elixir Proprietatis, and Elixir Vitae, 20 grains, taken in
Wine or Syrup of Clove-gilly slowers. Oil of Citrons and juice of Alkermes mixed
with Spirit of Wine, is highly commended; so is the Essence or spirit of Bawnt,
Borage, and Buglose. Magistery of Pearls, and Corals. There are a sort of Flies
which Children call Lady Cows with Golden colored wings, being gently dried
and powdered, are given inwardly with good success.

Sect. 29. Depraved and Lost Appetite.
A Depraved Appetite is that which fondly covets, longs for, and desires to eat
hurtful things, not fit for food, as Oatmeal, unripe fruits, Chalk, Coals,
Ashes, etc. it commonly happens to Women with Child, and Maids troubled with
the Gren sickness; this may be of long continuance, but (of it self in Maids)
it is not dangerous, yet if it be not cured, great obstructions, Cachexia's,
Dropsies, and pain of the stomach follows.

Want of Appetite is cause by obstruction of the mouths of the Meseraicks, or
through too much fullness and over glutting of the stomach, or else weakness,
want of natural heat, etc. and if it happen in the declination of a disease, it
signifies a relapse, if it be caused through want of natural heat it is most
dangerous, and worse to be liked in children than in men.

The Cure.
To women with child, the blood of a Vine is commended. Maids may remove the
cause which is best performed by Elixir Proprietatis, Essence of Garlic,
Savin, or Penroyal; Tincture or spirit of Tartar, taken 4 or 5 times at Night
going to bed, 8 drops at once.

In a depraved appetite, give 9 drops of oil of Cloves, or oil of Cinnamon in
warmish broth, sharpen the Patients drink with the oil of Vitriol, or oil of
Sulphur, and in both cases strengthen the stomach as at Sect. 30.

Sect. 30. Vomiting.
THis disorder is generally caused through weakness or foulness of the stomach;
weakness may arise from Antecedent causes, as too much emptiness, want of
natural rest, superlative Anger, boundless Passion, and the like. If the matter
vomited up be green, black, livid, or stinking, it is for the most part
dangerous, but being of none of these colors, but coming after a Flux of the
belly, it is good or on a Critical day, it is accounted by the Galenists a
plausible sign of Recovery, provided the matter vomited up be such as they call
Phlegm and Choler.

The Cure.
Most Physicians in this case (when it is caused through the foulness of the
stomach) give a gentle vomit. The stomach must be strengthened with Syrup of
Corals and Pearls, and Spirit of Mint, take a spoonful at a time morning noon,
and night. Crude juice of Quinces is wonderful powerful, and Syrup of Vinegar
is none of the worst Medicines. Let all the Patients drink be sharpened wirh oil
of Sulphur; give 15 Grains of Elixir Proprietatis in Sack, at night going to
bed, or the like quantity of Elixir Vitae, applying to the stomach a Cataplasm
of Bread and Vinegar, or a plaster of London Treacle. There may be a Magestery
made of Oyster-shells and given to the quantity of 20 grains at a time, with
good success.

Sect. 31. Iliac Passion.
THis is a distemper of the small Guts, commonly occasion through obstruction
of the Bowels, with a coldness, and putrefaction of food: it is known by most
vehement and horrible pain, the stomach abounds with too much moisture, there
is a great rumbling in the Bowels, Wind and belching without ease; the dung is
stopped, and if the disease increase, the Patient voyds all the excrements
upward, and then it is mostly accounted deadly, and being accompanied with the
Stranguria it is the worse.

The Cure.
It Is performed by those Medicines prescribed for removing the Colic at the 32
Section, a dram of Cream of Tartar dissolved in a mess of unsalted broth, has
been found effectual; so has oil of Almonds and Malmsey wine. I use to sharpen
the Patients drink with oil of Vitriol, to a pleasant acidity, which has
proved effectual when all hope from common means has been past, and clisters
was vomited upward.

Sect. 32. Cholick.
IT IS a pain in the Gut Colon, sometimes caused by Wind, and then there is a
stretching forth and swelling of the belly; if it be occasioned through
Inflammation of the said Gut; there is an inward burning hear, stoppage of
Urine, the body is bound; sometimes there is vomiting, thirst, and a Fever. If
the distemper be behement, the belly bound, with watchings, vomiting, Hiccough,
coldness of the extreme parts, and cold sweats, all these are desperate
symptoms; but if the disease be gentle, and the body soluble, there is little
danger.

The Cure
Take Salt of Wormwood, and drop on it spirit of Salt, till it cease broyling,
dry it and give 8 or 9 grains at a time in broth, Infuse Hawthorn flowers in
Rhenish wine, distill off the spirit, and take a spoonful at once.

Take Lemmon, Orange, and Citron peels, of each two ounces, spirit of wine one
pint, infuse them together 20 days, pour off the Tincture, and give a spoonful
at once in wine, with a few drops of oil of Cinnamon. Take spirit of Salt and
spirit of wine, of each a like quantity, mix them in a Glass, and administer 40
drops at once in a draught of wine or Ale. Take 6 or 7 grains of salt of Lead
in white wine, or ten grains of Ens Veneris taken in broth, at night going to
bed, and the like quantity at morning and noon two hours before and after meat
has been found very effectual. If the disease be caused by wind, give Oil of
Anniseeds, Fennel, or Carawayes in warm broth, proper spirit or distilled water.

Sect. 33. Flux of Blood and Matter.
A Bloody Flux is an Exulceration of the Bowels, known by vehement pain and
bloody Excrements, when the disorder is in the Great Bowels, the dung is as at
other times, comes forth with wind, froathiness and Blood aloft, but if the
small Guts be exulcerated, there is pain about the Navel, the Excrements are of
various colors, (if black and stinking the case is desperate) commonly they
are of a Lead color, and there is a gnawing felt: If there be pain in the
Liver and Midriff, Vomiting and Hiccough, Loathing of meat, a Fever, thirst,
or pieces of flesh voided, the ease is dangerous. A Flux of Matter generally
follows a Flux of blood; the Patient continually goes to stool, the Excrements
are crude and pale, and the taste is lost; if the disease last long, it may
turn to a Dropsy: when it follows other diseases, it is for the most part
deadly.

There is also an ordinary flux of the belly, which in a dropsy shows
recovery, but if it happen to a woman with child or the Excrements be Green,
Blew, Black or Yellow, it is of evil signification.

The Cure.
Let the Patient drink Cows Milk plentifully, Potable Gold, and tincture of
Corals are excellent, so is the juice or pulp of Quinces, or a dram of crude
Alum dissolved in water, and so drank, but Roach Alum dissolved in water, and
it distilled off in Ashes is highly famous, so are Bramble Berries gathered
unripe, dried and powdered, and given in Red wine, the juice of sloes or Poppy
water. Tincture of Emeralds is excellent, 5 grains at a time. See the following
Sect.

Sect. 34. Tenasmus.
THis distemper is a continual desire in the Patient to go to stooll, without
voiding any thing, except bloody or filthy matter like snevil, some say it is
generally caused by cold, or that it may be by means of a Flux of Blood or
matter: if it continue long, there is danger of an Ulcer; and if it happen to a
woman with child, there is great danger of Abortion.

The Cure.
This distemper is helped with those Medicines mentioned in the foregoing
Section of Fluxes, to which these may be added, being a like proper in all four
cases. Take new butter (unsalted) melt it in a Basin set in hot water, pour off
the clear from the feces, and then boil it for half an hour, and therewith mix
verjuice, juice of sloes or Rose Vinegar, and use the same as sauce to the
Yolks of Eggs boiled hard; dry the blood of a Hare to powder, and take it
inwardly. Take a large Apple, fill up the middle part (where the core lay) with
a piece of an Honey comb (the Honey being squeezed out) Roast it in embers, and
so eat it wax and all. Take the outward bark of black thorn, dry it and powder
it, and drink it in red wine. Take white stones with red veins, boil them in
new milk till half the milk is wasted, and drink plentifully thereof, or new
milk wherein steel has been often quenched, works the same effect. Take yellow
wax, and ducks grease, make an ointment for the fundament.

Sect. 35. Hemorroids.
THis Distemper is also called the Piles, it is the flowing of-blood to the
Fundament by the veins, which in some sent forth much, in others they send out
little or no blood, and these latter have commonly vehement pain in going to
stool. And at other times also: if the Flux of blood be very immoderate, it is
dangerous, and brings great weakness, Dropsies and an ill state of body to the
Patient, but if the flux of blood be moderate Critical or otherwise for the
benefit of nature, it is -- healthful

The Cure.
If the Piles be swelled or the pain vehement, apply to the place Crocus
Metallorum, take inwardly the binding Crocus of the binding Crocus of Iron 30
grains at a time, if the flux of blood be great. There is an herb called
Pile-wert, being made into an ointment has been found succesful, but if it be
made up with the ashes of burnt cork and Capons grease it is the better, or mix
salt of Lead with fresh butter, and therewith ancint the place. Take Conscrve
of Roses, and therewith mix a little fine Bole, and take a knifpoint full at a
time; but above all is the fume of Frankincense, put it on some live coals in
a deep pot, and let the patient sit over it.

Sect. 36. Obstruction of the Liver.
IN this Distemper the Urine is watery, thin and white, the Excrements of the
belly are moist and Chylous (of the same Color as the Urine is of) the Patient
is commonly lean of body, yet very pursie and dull, the face is pale, and after
eating there is a pressure in the right Hypocondria, with ill digestion: If it
continue long, it is not to be cured.

The Cure.
The best and most absolute Medicine in this case is the spirit or Tincture of
Tartar taken to the quantity of 8 or 9 drops at a time in Wine or Ale. Tincture
of Corals may be taken as the former; many in this case use the filings of Iron
crude, whereof they give twenty or thirty grains at a time thrice a day, but
the oil of Iron is better; its thus prepared. Take filings of steel, dissolve
them in spirit of salt, put the dissolution into a Glass retort; place it in a
sand Furnance, and distill off the spirit, which come off sweet in taste,
whereof you may give 8 or 9 drops at a time, the common way of curing this
disorder is by giving every morning a dram and half of Pulvis Cachecticus, and
stiring well after it, The Yellow Jaundice are cured by all these Medicines
which are proper for the cure of the Green Sickness, and therefore I shall say
no more of that disease; see Section the 37.

Sect. 37. Yellow-Jaundice.
IT IS known by yellowness of the skin, most discoverable in the Cheeks and
whites of the Eyes: the tongue is bitter, and some have a hiccough and
vomiting, the Urine is Reddish, or Yellow, in so much that it will dye a piece
of Linen Cloth of the same Color. If this disease come to the Patient in the
beginning of a Fever it is dangerous; if it comes upon an Inflammation of the
Liver, it foretells an Impostume, if upon a Scirrhus, it ends in a Dropsy.

The Cure.
All the medicines mentioned in the 36 Sect. for to open obstructions of the
Liver, are also proper for the cure of the Yellow Jaundice. Drop oil of
Vitriol, on Salt of Tartar, till it cease making a noise, then dry it, and give
twenty grains at a time in broth, or any other convenient liquor. Take the Gall
of a Raven, dry it to powder, and drink thereof in Ale a week together. Take a
great Apple, pick out the core, fill it up with Butter, Turmerick and Saffron,
Roast it, and give it the Patient to Eat, do so four or five mornings together.
Elixir Proprietatis is excellent, half a spoonful at a time, boil in the Pat
ents broth Ground Ivy, and the Roots, wires, and Leaves of Strawberries.

Sect. 38. Obstruction of the Spleen.
IT IS known by heaviness, pain, beating and swelling on the left side under the
Ribs, there is loathing of meat; blackness of the Tongue, Thirst, a Fever,
lying on the right side is very painful, and on the left is not easy. If it
continue long, it degenerates into the Scurvy, and a Schirrus; afflicts the
Patient with Melancholy and pain in the side.

The Cure.
Give every morning a dram of Pulvis Cachecticus, and ten drops of spirit of
Hearts Horn at night. The Tincture of Tar-drawn with its own spirit, or the
spirit alone, are famous in this case, whereof 6 drops may be taken at a time
in Sack. Drop oil of Vitriol on Salt of Tartar, till it cease making a noise,
then dry it and give Twenty grains at a time in broth, Tincture of Corals is
much commended, take 8 or 9 drops at a time in fragrant Wine. Take the roots of
Polipody, stamp them to an Impalpable pap, boil them in common water six hours,
strain out the feces, clarify the decoction and make it into a Syrrup, whereof
take a spoonful at a time, two or three times a day, Anoint outwardly with the
oil of Rue, and apply a Plaster made up with the juice of Hemlock.

Sect. 39. Stone in the Reins and Bladder.
IT IS known by pains about the Loins, there is some times sand and redish
gravel voyded in the Urine, which is often bloody, thin and in small quantity;
the thigh on that side where the stone is most commonly, is pained, and as it
were benumbed.

Stone in the bladder is known by vehement pain there after making water, and
the bigger the stone is, the greater is the pain, the Urine sometimes stops
suddenly; the Patient Pisseth with most ease lying on the Back; and there is
many times white Gravel sent out with the Urine.

The Cure.
Both these distempers are helped by such Medicines as strongly provoke Urine,
amongst which there are a sort of wood Lice called Sows, are famous, being
washed in white wine, and the juice squeesed into a draught of white wine, and
so drank; you may begin with the juice of three at a time, and so increase
every day one till you come to 20, and then decrease the number. You may pierce
a Birch-tree in the month of March, and it will send forth abundance of
Liquor, which being drank with Gromwell seeds, is highly Famous in this case;
so is the water distilled from an herb called Arsmart, used as the former, or
three spoonful of the juice drank in a glass of white Wine works the same
effect, there is a fruit grows on white Thorn called Haws, the stones where of
(being gathered full ripe) powdered and mixed with Gromwell seeds gives great
ease to the Patient, being drank in white wine. See the 41 Section.

Sect. 40. Diabetes.
IT is commonly called unmeasurable Pissing, for the Retentive faculty is so
weak, that whatsoever is drank by the Patient is sent forth again by urine as
it was taken, there is an unquenchable Thirst, heat in the Bowels, Leanness,
and if it be not suddenly cured it is deadly, bringing the Patient into a
Consumption.

The Cure.
Tincture of Emeralds in a his case is excellent, so is the salt and Tincture
of Corals, to the quantity of ten grains (of any of them) at once taken in
Malaga Wine.

Take hearts horn, burn it till it is white, powder it, boil the same in common
water, and let the Patient drink thereof, or take 4 or 5 handfuls of the inner
bark of the young and tender branches of the Hazel-tree, (branches of one years
growth) boil them well in common water (or rather in small beer) and let the
Patient take thereof for his common drink; or in its stead, if steell be often
heated and extinguished in water, and that water drank, it is said to be helpful
in this case. But binding Crocus of Iron is very powerful in this Distemper,
and muy be taken 20 grains at a time. Dissolve salt of Lead in water, and
therewith bathe the back, and let a drying diet be used.

Sect. 41. Stoppage and Difficulty of Urine.
SToppage of Urine may be caused by a stone, clotted blood, hardness, swelling
or hurt of the Nerves, relating to the bladder, it is very dangerous if it
continue long, and the Patient is troubled with a Hiccough, and his breath
stinks of urine.

Difficulty of urine is with Heat and Inflammation of the part, causing hot
Urine, but is less dangerous than the former, but it the Patient be old, if it
continue long and so ulcerate the neck of the Bladder it is not easily helped.

The Cure.
The most potent medicines to cure these diseases are those set down in the 39
Section, where I treated of the stone, to which these following simples may be
joined, being proper in both cases, viz. Camomil, Centaury, Burdock (Roots and
seeds) Asparagus, Brooklime, Winter Cherries, Garlic, all sorts of Parsley,
rest-Harrow, Betony, Caraway seeds, Cummin seeds, Anniseeds, Fenugreek seeds,
wild Carrot seeds, Juniper Berries, Bay Berries, 8t. John's Wort, Guaiacum,
Fennel, Broom, Endive, Ragwort, Lavender, Cloves, Feaverfew, Smallage,
Pellitory of the Wall, Rue, Garden-Cresses, Cicely, Nutmegs, Cocle, Peniroyal,
Radish, Saxifrage, Wild-Time, Time, Lavender, Tamerisk, Vervain, Tansie and
Nettles.

Sect. 42. Fever.
THe cause (according to Van Helmont) is an Alcalie abounding, and there is a
Poisonous excrement in the Midriffs; the most gentle fevers continue but one
2, 3, or 4 days, wherein the Pulse is equal, and Urine not much differing from
its natural color, and these are not dangerous; if it continue longer, it is
called a Putrid Fever, wherein the Urine has no sediment, but is thick and
red, the Pulse is unequal, and there is great heat; if there be a looseness and
vomiting there is hope of recovery. There is also a continual Fever, which is
sometimes accompanied with a Pleurisy, Quinsie, Vleer, or Inflammation of the
Lungs, and this is very dangerous. There is moreover a Burning Fever, wherein
the Tongue is dry, rough and blackish, there is a burning heat, thirst, gnawing
in the stomach, Pale and thin Excrements and great watchings, and this is very
dangerous, but if the Urine be red; with signs of Concoction, there is hope.

The Cure.
The best and safest way to cure a Fever, is by such universal Medicines as
simpathize with nature, and fortify the heart; as Potable Gold 5 grains at
once in Sack, or take spirit of Wine 2 ounces, Syrup of Clove-gilliflowers 1
ounce, Confectio Alkermes, 1 dram; mix and give a spoonful at once in good
Wine.

Sect. 43. Ague.
THere are three sorts of Agues, (properly called Fevers) the first is named
an Intermitting Quotidian; afflicting the Patient every day, the cold fit comes
colder and colder by degrees, yet is not very excessive on the one hand, nor
the hot fit much vehement on the other, but the disease commonly lasts long,
and many times degenerates into a Dropsy, Cachexia or Lethargy.

The second is called an Intermitting Tertian, it comes every other day with
pricking and vehement cold, the pulse is equal, and anon a violent heat
increases, with much thirst, and sometimes vomiting.

The third is called an Intermitting Quartane, and comes with two days
intermission between the fits: in the beginning the pulse is slow, the fit
comes with vehement cold, and afterward comes a hot burning fit, the Urine is
white, thin and watery, this sort of Ague commeeth long, sometimes turns to a
Diopsie, and to old people is often mortal.

The Cure.
Take ten drops of spirit of Sal Ammoniac (in Centaury-water) at right going to
bed, 3 or 4 times a weak, keep very warm, and expect sweat. Crude Alum twenty
grains at once in warm Ale is excellent, Take Bay Salt and fresh English Hops
of each two handfuls, and 4 ounces of Blew ourrans; beat them all well
together, spread it on Linen, and apply it to both the wrists.

Sect. 44. Hectick-fever.
IN this disease there is an unnatural heat kindled, as well in the fleshy and
sollid parts, as in the spirits; yet so without pain, that the Patient cannot
tell that he has a Fever, there is a slack and hard pulse, dry cough, Eyes
hollow, shedding of Hair, Nose sharp, the face is Leady, Urine thine, crude
white, or pale and at last oily; the stomach is drawn in almost to the Ribbs
and the whole body consumes.

This distemper is for the most part mortal, when it turns to a Marasmos, and
that is when all (or most of) the foresaid symptoms jointly appear, but if it
be taken in time, and good means used, they may prove effectual.

The Cure.
This disease is cured like a Consumption at the 25 Section. Let the Patient
feed much upon Raisons of the Sun, and Almonds, and let him drink Milk with a
few drops of oil of Cinnamon, But Asses Milk with salt of Pearl is said to
transcend. Anoint the back bone with oil of Bay Berries mixed with oil of
Almonds. Take Nutmegs and Cynamon of each 3 ounces, Ginger 3 drams, Magistry of
Pearl 2 ounces, Honey prepared 12 ounces, make it into an Electuary, and take
thereof 4 times a day, the quantity of an Hazlenut at once. Spiritus
Analepticus, taken half an ounce at once is excellent. The Essence of Borrage
and Bugloss is highly commended in the case* so is the Magistry of Corals 10
grains at a time.

Sect. 45. Spotted-feaver, and Plague.
A Spotted Fever is a continual malignant burning-Feaver, the Patient is
tormented with pain in the head, faintings, excessive Heat, Thirst, and
watchings; having (after a few days) spots coming out, sometimes all over the
body, and sometimes only on one part, being small and of a reddish, purplish,
livid, Leaden, or sometimes blackish color; the distemper commonly ends in
seven days time; if the spots turn livid or black, and the Urine look as it
did in health, it is exceeding dangerous.

The Plague is a continual Malignant burning Fever, wherein the Patient is hot
within and cold without; there is excessive pain in the head; with heaviness,
weariness, Lumpishness, carelessness, sleepiness and Sadness of the mind, loss
of Appetite, vomiting, thirst, bitterness, and dryness of the mouth; Urine
thick and stinking. The Pulse small and deep; there is Bubo's behind the Ears,
under the Arm-holes, or in the grom; or else Carbuncles or Blew, Reddish, or
Lived spots, the Disease is dangerous, but it is most deadly when no Buboe's
come forth, or when they come forth and go in again, or if they the spots
appear of a Livid or black Color, it is commonly mortal. The Cure.

These distempers are helped by such Medicines as cheer the spirits and comfort
the heart, as the Tincture of Life. Which is thus made. Take spirit of Wine one
quart, Cochineal ( or English Saffron) one ounce, put them in a large glass
well corked, set it in warm place for 20 days, pour off the tincture, and give
a quarter of an ounce at once in the Patients drink. Spirit of Hartshorn 20
drops at once is excellent, but the most transcending medicament is 5 grains of
Potable Gold.

The Conclusion.
THis Compendium (adventured upon the Public Stage for the Worlds Speculation)
I gathered into so small a Volume, for my own Use (as Occasion serves) in my
Practice: But conceiving it might be serviceable for such Ingenious
well-disposed Persons, as are willing to help their poor Languishing and Sick
Neighbors, (that want Silver-cords to draw the Advice of Money-sucking
Physicians, to supply their Necessities) I have adventured to run the hazard of
being sharl'd at by all Callumnious Tongues; of whom I may say, as was said of
old, (...). Nor do I so much as hope to escape being bitten by the Heels by
those Gnathonical Currs, who prefer Self-Interest before a Public Good, (like
him who said, (...)) Howbeit, I have Herculean Hopes, that this little Piece of
Medicinal Marrow will meet with some Ingenious Interpreters of my harmless
Meaning; who would do good to all, to the utmost of my Ability.

An Advertisement.
POor People languishing under Bodily Distempers, may have free Advice and
Medicines for not^ing, from the Author of this Book; who may be met with most
(if not all) Market-days, at the sign of the Crown in Loughborough.

FINIS.

