The Impartial Monitor.

About following the FASHIONS OR The sweet fruit of Sharp Reprehension, in a
rare example, of one that (by Another's Pen) cured his Wife of her Costlinesse.

Imprimatur, EDMUND CALAMIE.

Books (well chosen) are The best Recreation, best Company, best Cheer, best
Cheap.


Printed by J. Bell, and are to be sold by James Crump, in Little Bartholomews
Well-yard, 1656.

The Impartial Monitor, or the Sweet Fruit of Sharp Reprehension.
Much Respected: Did not the Word of God command me, Lev. 19. 17. Heb. 3. 13.
Conscience and duty bind me, a zeal of God's glory, and a desire of your
eternal good, constrain me: Discretion dictates unto me, that it is better
having a friend without trouble, then a foe with it.

Not that you shall have cause to find fault with it, or with me for it: for I
fight not against you, but against your sins; not with you, but with your
enemies for you: You have no such foes as your faults, and these are they that
I seek to subdue and batter down before you; as well knowing, that unless they
die, you cannot live.

Other friends refuse to tell you of your faults, who will be very ready to
tell others of them; whereas I speak of your faults to your face, of your
virtues behind your back: and he that loves not such a friend, hates himself.
He (says Solomon) that refuses instruction, is brutish, Prove. 12. 1. and
destroieth his own soul, Chap. 15 32.

When wisdom stretches out her hand, and men refuse: then wisdom will laugh at
their destruction, Prove. 1. 24. etc. That soul is past cure, which turns
from, and refuses the cure, Deuteronomy. 17. 12. Prove. 29. 1. Psalm. 81. 11, 12. Small
hope of that Patient, that is deaf to the counsel of his Physician.

But I hope better things of you; for admit it prove as welcome to you at
present, as water into a Ship, yet when you shall consider, that I have so
learnt to distinguish between persons and vices, offenders and offenses; as to
have no peace with the one, while I have true peace with the other: that I do
not so hate, as to be a foe to goodness; nor so love, as to foster iniquity;
That he who is a friend to our faults, is no friend to our selves: the case
will be altered; since that to be vices friend, is to be virtues enemy.

True; sore eyes cannot abide the light of the Sun: And so long as you love
your sins better then your soul, you will scorn my counsel. But if ever your
eyes be opened as Saul's were, Acts 9. 18. you will say as once David to Abigal,
1 Samuel 25. 32. 33. Blessed be the Lord, and blessed be thy advice, and blessed
be thou who have kept me from doing thus, and thus. He that rebukes a man,
shall find more favor at the length, then he which flattereth with his
tongue, Prove. 28. 23. Reprove a scorner, and he will hate thee: but rebuke a
wiseman, and he will love thee, Prove. 9. 8. Give instruction to a wiseman, and
he will be yet wiser: teach a just man, and he will increase in learning, Ver.
9. And (which makes much for my encouragement) Nathan wrought more upon David,
by one private particular admonition, then all the Lectures of the Law could do
for three quarters of a year together. And it were happy for millions, were
they so plainly dealt withal.

Wherefore be not in the least offended, but love and thank me for my plain
dealing, Prove. 28. 23. Yea, if I make you smart, give me the more thanks, love
me the better for it. Sharp reprehension is the healing of the soul; and love
to the soul, is the very soul of love. And not to chide a friend least we
offend him; is as to let him drown, rather then catch him by the hair. He is
shrewdly wronged, that being stung by a Be, (when asleep) is delivered from a
Serpent, which otherwise had stung him to death. The Physician and Surgeon you
know, heal us not without pain, and yet we reward them. And possible it is, I
may prove another Photian unto you; who when a friend of his would have cast
himself away, suffered him not; saying, I was made thy friend to this purpose.
So then, abide me no friend to your faults, or, no friend to your self: And let
this serve for an Apology, as also for a Protection.

Dear Cousin! my love to, and hopes of you formerly were not greater, then is
now my fear: for that scarce a day passes, but I hear that of your pride; which
both moves me to passion and compassion. Possible it is, that though you make
your self the subject of every opinion, wise and weak, and no less of their
discourse; though you are a wonder amongst fools for your bravery, among
wisemen for your folly: yet you may neither hear of it, nor in the least
perceive it; high time therefore you be told thereof. If with those Gentiles,
Romans 10. 20. you receive more good by it then you desire, admire the Providence
and free grace of God.

Is it a wrong to lay, that you bid defiance to all other Ministers wives? The
best Lord Bishops Wife in the Land might not wear a French hood, by Act of
Parliament; you do far more, and seem to scorn (not to own) the Function, though
too honorable for you.

To speak of particulars; as naked breasts and shoulders, (when in warm weather
that was a fashion, though a whorish one) beauty-spots, cut-locks, long trains
like a Countess, light colored gowns and Waste-coats, gold-lace, with other
curious and costly laces and attires, fit for none but Ladies: exactness in all
new fashions, deifying your Child, your little regard of hearing the Word, (in
which you should be an example) and the like, were needless; being better
known to your self, and more observed by others then me. Though I may more then
guess, how you and your wicked Counselor, more study for fashions, then
Lawyers do for delays: yea, your Husband (were he at all consulted with) would
find it as hard a task to cloth you, as Mercury had to cloth the Moon: And
it is a sure conclusion, where so great care is had to deck the body, there is
as great carelessness, and as little regard to adorn the soul with virtue, as
Cato speaks. Yea, let conscience say, Whether you be not more careful to
preserve your clothes from dust and spots, then your soul from guilt? Do not
you know also, that you honor your Child more then GOD? as that man of God
told Eli touching his sons, 1 Samuel 2. 29. a good way to be rid of him.

Pambo spying a certain woman flaunting it in very sumptuous apparel, fell a
weeping; and being asked why he wept so much answered, For two causes; one, the
destruction of this woman; another, because I (quoth he) who prosess my self a
Christian, do not so much study to please God by innocence of life, as this
woman does to please the Devil and men with her vanities. I cannot, nor need I
stand to apply it.

But see the sottishness of pride and vain glory, for pride and folly are
vices that ever go together. Wicked men glory in that which is indeed their
Shame. Our clothes are but as a plaster upon a sore. Wickedness brought
nakedness, and apparel hides it, Genesis 3. 10, 11. whereof being proud, is as if
a Thief should be proud of his halter. Our clothes are but to cover shame and
nakedness; but as signs of God's displeasure, by reason of Original sin; and
to be proud of them, is as if a Prisoner should be proud of his Bolts. Our
clothes are like a Westminster Hall paper, to show what we have committed which
occasioned it, nor had we else needed them. It is as if a Rogue should have his
pardon, upon condition that he will ever after wear a rope about his neck: and
therefore as one burned in the forehead for some villainy, ought so often as he
looks in a glass, and perceives the scar thereof, to think upon and detest
his wickedness, so ought we.

Again, in glorying in gorgious attire, you make that a matter of pride, that
indeed makes you ridiculous: You think your self brave, but no body else
thinks you so. Nothing procures love and credit, both with God and man, like
humility; nothing hatred and scorn, like pride. Would you have God your friend,
or your enemy? you may: for he resists the proud, and gives grace to the
humble, James 4 6. 1 Pet. 5. 5. No vice gets a man so many enemies as this
vice: not the humble alone, but one proud man hates another: your self loves
humility in all but your self; as if you did wish well to all souls but your
own.

It is a just plague upon Sensualists, they seek for things out of their proper
orbs: They seek for reputation in revenge, but alas! that is to be found in
patience. It is the glory of a man to pass by an offense, Prove. 19. 11. They
seek content in riches, which is, as if one should seek for fresh water in the
midst of the Sea. They seek for honor in pride, whereas honor is to be found
in humility, Prove. 29. 23. It is to be observed, that the more ignorant any
one is, the more conceited he is: Great pride, argues great ignorance; little
humility, but little knowledge of our own hearts. According to our humility, is
our knowledge of our selves: and according to the knowledge of our selves, is
our humility. When Paul saw the filthy puddle of concupiscence that was in
him, he was thoroughly taken down indeed: And until we become humble, we can
never become wise. Time, reading and learning may swell our brains, but still
our hearts will remain empty. He will teach the Humble his way, Prove. 11. 2.
The first step to wisdom, is humility, Isa. 28. 9.

Nor is pride more a sign of ignorance, then it is of emptiness: The lighter
balance, or end of the beam, will press upward, and ever be highest: that ear
of corn, or bough which is fullest, or most laden with fruit, hangs lowest to
the ground always: It is froth only that swims on the top.

It is the nature of man to be proud, when man by nature has nothing to be
proud of. As take away from men's minds vain opinions, flattering hopes, falls
valuations, imaginations, and the like; you will leave the minds of most men
and women but poor shrunken things, full of melancholy, indisposition, and
unpleasing to themselves. And as for Beauty, even the fairest presence, (which
puffs up so many) is but a dunghill coveredover with white and purple.

Or admit it be grace and virtue that one is proud of; such an ones graces and
virtues will be sure to lessen, as his pride increases; and in the end wither
away and leave him, as leaves do a tree in Autumn. Neither will any good thing
stay or reside, where pride is, and remains: be it peace, plenty, credit, or
the like.

First, not peace or comfort: Such as have their thoughts high, and their
fortunes low, live always a pensive life. And the only reason why we want our
desires, is, because our desires want reason. Ye ask and receive not, because
ye ask amiss; that ye may consume it upon your lusts, Jam. 4. 3.

2. Nor credit: Infamy ever ensues arrogance. If we thought meanlyer of our
selves others would think better of us. Fair Absalom had ambitiously provided a
stately Monument for his Corpse, a Pyramid, or Pillar in the King's Dale: but he
was tumbled with infamy into a ditch, and covered like carrion under an heap of
stones. The Babel projectors built their Tower to get them a name, but it
turned to their shame and confusion too. Even the best and greatest works,
undertaken for ostentation, do commonly miss of their end, and turn to the
Authors shame. Before honor goes humility, Prove. 15. 33. but when pride
comes, then comes shame, Prove. 11. 2.

3. Nor will plenty and prosperity stay, where pride remains. While Saul was
little in his own eyes, God made him head over the twelve Tribes, and gave him
abundance: but when he left his humility, his Kingdom left him and his house.
When Hezekiah was puffed up with the wealth and the precious things that God gave
him, the Prophet tells him, that all those things, and all that his Fathers had
laid up in store for him, should be carried away to Babylon, 2 Kings 20. 12. to
19. When Nebuchadnezar built for the glory of his Majesty, and began to boast
himself, he was suddenly deprived of his Kingdom, and sent to graze with the
beasts: but when he was humbled to the very ground; he had his Kingdom, and all
else restored unto him, Dan. 4. 29. to 37.

Many the like examples I might give you, of such as have been undone by their
pride; but daily experience has acquainted you with not a few, that by hoysing
up the sail of their ships too high, have made shipwreck. A little sail to a
great Vessel rids no way, though the wind be never so fair: A large sail to a
little Bark, drowns it. The pride of man shall bring him low: but the humble in
spirit shall enjoy glory, Prove. 29. 23. Blessed are the meek, for they shall
inherit the earth, Mat. 5. 5. W^^ so exalts himself, shall be brought low:
but whosoever humbles himself, shall be exalted, Mat. 23. 12. Luke 14. 11. No
sin has pulled down so many as this, that promised to set them up.

And I would wish you to look to it, (least God withdraw more, as he has
already some of the fuel of your pride, and quench the fire of your Kitchen)
for confident I am, out of the experience I have of the Lord's dealing; that if
you belong to him, he will make you bow, or break: you shall be humbled, and
that to purpose; and that in it wherein you offend. Mark me what I say, Are you
proud of beauty? You shall have no beauty to be proud of. Because the daughters
of Zion are proud, and walk with stretched out necks, and with wandering eyes,
making a minsing as they go, and make a tinkling with their feet: therefore
shall the Lord make the heads of the daughters of Zion ball'd, and the Lord
shall discover their secret parts. In that day shall the Lord take away the
ornaments of the slippers, and the cauls, and the round tiers, the sweet balls,
and the bracelets, and the bonnets, the tires of the head, and the slops, and
the head-bands, and the tablets, and the earrings, the rings and the mufflers,
the costly apparel and the vails; and the wimples, and the crisping-pins, and
the glasses, and the fine linen, and the hoods, and the lawns. And instead of
sweet savours, there shall be a stink, and instead of a girdle, a rent; and
instead of dressing of the hair, baldness: and instead of a stomacher, a
girding of sackcloth; and burning instead of beauty, Isa. 3. 16. to 25. Miriams
Leprosy is one instance of this: her foul tongue was not only punished with a
foul face; but her pride was cured with deformity.

Or is it plenty that makes you flaunt it? You shall want necessaries. Or is it
making an Idol of your little one, it shall be taken from you; and so of health.

There cannot be a worse sign of ensuing evil, then pride, as we see in Peter.
If Paul but begin to exalt himself, some messenger of Satan shall be sent to
pull him down again, 2 Cor. 12. 7 ^^ide goes before destruction, and an high
mind before the fall, ^^^. 16. 18. And the reason is, All that are proud in
heart, are an abomination to the Lord: and though hand join in hand, such shall
not go unpunished, Prove. 16. 5. He that has a proud look, and high heart, I
cannot suffer, says the Lord, Psalm. 101. 5. Job. 40. 11. 12. Mal. 4. 1. of
which you have had some experience.

The Lord has spoken to you, once, twice, thrice; and that in an easy and
familiar Scripture phrase: he has brought you, and your babe, into physics
fetters; he has abated of your beauty: he has cut short your means, (the fuel
of your pride) yea he has gone further with you; for whereas your honor has
been more cared for then your God, and all was well while you were well
esteemed. Is not your good name at the stake? and your credit woefully blasted,
by excelling all of your rank and calling, and all bounds of discretion; and by
your scorning to be thought a Ministers wife; in which Religion also suffers.
Has not self-conceitednesse broken your credit? For as there is no plaster
like this, to pull down proud flesh; so God has accordingly decreed, that
while we think well of our selves, others shall never think well of us.

Thus has the Lord dealt with you, whose preventing mercy it is, to speak
before he strikes, to lighten before he thunders, to warn before he wounds, to
use the rod, before he takes up the sword: yet you neither hear, nor take
notice of his displeasure. Your eyes are not opened, your heart is not humbled,
but your pride remains: being somewhat like Nero still, who took it for a
disparagement, forsooth, to be seen two days in one suit. Though you wear a
pretty part of your husbands estate upon your back; and the like about your
neck.

What is wisdom departed from you? or would you have Jezabels fare? be dashed
in pieces. Would you be let go on like Absalom? whose chief pride lay in his
hair, and that became his halter. Look to it, for God will first or last make
you know your self, if you belong to him; and at the next bout, cast you down
to the very ground: and if that will not serve, one foot shall slip into hell,
that it may be a means through his blessing, to further and forward you in the
way to heaven; as it fared with the incestuous Corinthian 1 Cor. 5. 5. 2 Cor.
2. 6, 7, 8. which if you would prevent, take warning in time: for, God will be
sure to have his will of those that are wedded to their own wills: yea he
delights in it, as you may see in Pharaohs example.

O Cousin! my fear is, that this your pride will spin you a thread of many
troubles, before you learn that lesson of the Psalmist, Before I was afflicted,
I went astray: but now do I keep thy commandments, Psalm. 119. 67. And indeed
we call for greater strokes, by not feeling the lesser.

If we be warned of any thing but sin, one warning will serve: but we are so
incorporated, and inured to sin, that a thousand sermons will not serve. Custom
has made sin stronger in many, then the Word of God: Whereupon God takes
another course, and says, I will go and return to my place, till they
acknowledge their fault, and seek me: for in their affliction they will seek me
diligently, Hos. 5. 15. Though indeed never to think on God until we stand in
need of him, argues a base, and not an ingenuous spirit.

I confess it is well if it prove so well; for this is more then God ows us:
and his method to millions is this; The seed was sown this year, the Lord calls
for fruit, and none will come; the next year, and the next after, and none
comes: at last the curse goes forth, Never fruit grow upon thee more: as it
fared with the Fig Tree: Cut it down, and cast it into the fire, Luke 13. 6. to
10.

Now whether of these two ways the Lord will deal with you; only himself
knows. But one of the two I am sure he will, and the last is most likely. For
the greatest number enter the broad-gate; and they are few in comparison (one
of a City, and two of a Tribe, Isa. 10. 22.) that shall be saved. True, there
is scarce a man on earth, but he thinks to go to heaven; though no man thinks
that the whole world shall go to heaven, for then were hell made to no purpose.
Yea, whereas the Jews thought, that if but two men in the world were saved, the
one should be a Scribe, the other a Pharisee: Christ says, neither of both
should come there, Luke 13. 28.

But admit your case be only doubtful, and not desperate: you have not two
souls, that you may hazard one: nor will any wiseman venture his soul on such
an uncertainty. I know you have favorable thoughts of your self, and much to
say in your own behalf, (though that much is nothing). In excusing our faults
we are all too eloquent; though to a wise and godly man, (whose folly is wiser
then the wisdom of the world:) what you have to allege, would appear but
pitious shifts, weaker then walls of paper. As what says wise Solomon? All the
ways of a man are clean in his own eyes; but the Lord pondereth the spirits.

And men may more then guess, by reflection from the Word; because the outward
actions declare the inward intentions. A good Conversion is proved by a good
Conversation. If any one be ingrafted into Christ, by a lively faith; he becoms
a new creature, and shows it by the fruit of a good life, Joh. 15. 1. to 9. he
is divorced from the world, and the flesh, with their fruits, and fashions, 1
Cor. 6. 9, 10, 11. Gal. 5. 19, 20, 21. Prove. 16. 2. 1 Pet. 4. 3. 1 John 2.
Ephesians. 4. 18, 19, 20. And whosoever does not bring forth such fruit, it is
certain that he is not yet ingrafted into Jesus Christ. Regeneration, or
New Birth, is a creation of new qualities in the soul, as being by nature only
evil disposed. In all true Repentance is a change, both in the Judgment, from
error to truth; and in the Will, from evil to good; and in the Affections,
from loving evil, and hating good, to love good, and hate evil. In the whole
man, from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan unto God; without
which change, no repentance. Grace changes nature of a bramble to become a
vine, of a thorn a fig tree, of a wild, a natural Olive, of a Lion a Lamb, of
a Dog under board, to a son sitting at table, of a Saul a Paul. And of this you
may assure your self, that if Christ be not your King to govern, he will
neither be your Prophet to forwarn, nor your Priest to expiate.

It has always been your unhappiness, to have a tempter to attend you, who,
if you take not heed, will become your utter destruction: and it is none of her
least wickedness, to bring you into dislike of your choice, by mentioning what
matches you might have had; for were it not a true lie, yet it is, at best, the
Devils heart in her lips. However he had ill hap, being an able Minister, a
godly Christian, a loving husband to meet with one that proves neither a good
huswife, nor a good Christian. And as for your means, a very Barber, or
Tailour, or Chandler expects more with a wife: so that your matching with him
was more a preferment, then a stooping Yea, according to the skill I have, he
had better have given your means (I mean first and last) for a wife, that had
been a good and frugal huswife, then to have married such a costly one, that
spends all, but neither gets nor saves any thing. One that keeps as many maids
and Chare-women, as might serve three of your estate; and those maids must be
such lofty ones, that the meanest must not go of an errand, or bring home a
little meat; yea, one of them has more command over you, then your husband. O
sorry wife! may your husband say. Yea, who can choose but say? that you deny
the Faith, and are worse then an Infidel; if instead of laying up for your
children, you leave them in debt by your over lashing. It is the Apostles
conclusion, 1 Timothy 5. 8. House and riches are the inheritance of the fathers:
but a prudent wife comes of the Lord, Prove. 19. 14. and is his peculiar gift,
Prove. 18. 22.

When the Lord God saw, that it was not good that man should be alone, (Adam
without Eve, being but half himself) he said, I will make him an help meet for
him, Genesis 2. 18. If you were a meet wife, a gift given of God; nothing would
please you, that does not please him. His good would become the business of
your actions and aims. You would imitate that virtuous and industrious wife in
the Proverbs: you would be like Sarah, or Rebeccah, or Ruth, or Hannah, or
Abigail, or Elizabeth, or Mary, or Martha, or Dorcas, etc. At least you would
study frugality, and not scorn, as you do, to set your fingers to some works of
huswifery.

But you are a Gentlewoman born and bred? Answer, Were not your Ancestors known
to us, you might tell us so. But admit it, Tamar was a Kings daughter, yet it
is written for her honor, that she took flower, and did knead it, make cakes
in his sight, and did bake the cakes, and took a pan, and powered them out
before him, and brought them into the chamber to Amnon her brother, 2 Samuel 13.
Even the children of Kings, in those homelier times, did not scorn thus to
employ them^lves. Nor is there any state of man upon earth, that can ^rivilege
a folded hand.

Or is it your beauty, that makes you too good for such im^loiment? if so,
miserable man that meets with a fair face. He is a simple man that chooses an
Apple by the skin: Yea, ^e that weds for state or face, buies a horse to lose
the race. How^ver, it had been a thousand times happier for him, had he in
choosing a wife taken the Apostles direction, Tim. 1. 2, 9, 10. and 3. 11.
Titus 2. 4, 5. 1 Pet. 3. 1. to 7. Nor was it indeed ^awful for him, being a
Minister, to have accepted of you. As let me refer it to your self, If all
women (I mean Christian women) ought to attire themselves in modest apparel,
with shamefastness and sobriety; not with broidered hair, or gold, or gaudy
attire, or pearls, or costly apparel; but as becomes women that profess the
fear of God, with good works: If they ought to be discreet, chaste, keeping at
home, good and obedient to their own husbands; that the Word of God be not evil
spoken of, that even they which obey not the word, may without the Word be won
by the conversation of the wives, while they behold their pure conversation,
which is with fear: as it is Titus 2. 4, 5. 1 Pet. 3. 1, 2, to 7. 1 Timothy 2. 9,
10. and 3. 11. What ought a Ministers wife to be, that the Ministry, nor the
Gospel, nor the Word of God. might be evil spoken of, Tit. 2. 5. For, for many
othermens wives to do wickedly, or undecently, is not so much, as for one
Ministers, Isa. 1. 21. If a Professors, a Ministers, an Independent Ministers
wife becoms scandalous, how great is her scandal? how unnatural? Ministers and
theirs, (like a Beacon upon an hill) have all eyes upon them* The least mote
that flies in the Sun, or between our eyes and the light, seems a greater
substance then it is, and the more eminent the person, the more notorious the
corruption. And as in respect of others the offense is greater, so in respect
of your self, your sin and punishment shall be greater; as you may see in Elyes
sons. Cesars wound that his son Brutus gave him, went nearer to his heart, then
all the stabs of his foes.

Which being so, banish I beseech you, this base, this divelis^ pride out of
your heart, least it banish you out of heaven. All other sins the Devil made,
only Pride made the Devil. Had it not been for Pride, the Angels that are now
in hell, should be in heaven; and we who are now in this barren wilderness
should have been in Paradise. Nor can God and pride dwell in the same heart,
that could not dwell in the same heaven. The Lord is high, says the Psalmist,
yet he beholds the lowly but the proud he knows a far off, Psalm. 138. 6.
Yea, that high and lofty one, that inhabiteth eternity, says, I dwell in the
high and holy place, and with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit,
Isa. 57. 15. Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of
grace, which is heaven on earth; and theirs is the kingdom of glory, which is
heaven in heaven.

Yea, strive to excel others in humility, that you may excel others in glory:
and be not like Chancers wife of Bath, who would be content to eat brown bread
in heaven, for a lutle toleration of her will here on earth. Abstain not from
evil only, but from the appearance, 2 These. 5. 22. If you belong to Christ's
family, wear not the worlds livery. If you be a Christian, strive to imitate
Christ. Fashion not your self like unto this world. Be not like a piece of Iron
between two equal Loadstones. The prosperity of fools destroieth them, Prove. 1.
32. Be not you a foolish, but a wise Virgin, Mat 25. 1, to 14, Commit your
ways unto the Lord, and your thoughts shall be directed, Prove. 16. 3. So shall
you be no longer led by your wicked Counselor. A looking-glass will make a
fool proud, but an hour-glasse will make a wise man humble.

True, Women (as they say) for a little goodness look for great praise; and
for much evil, no chastisement. But if God by his Spirit shall work this upon
your conscience, you will have cause to bless his Name, that ever you met with
such a monitor; neither will you resemble the rustic Sailor: who when he is in
danger of shipwreck, will promise to change his life, and to embrace virtue in
the extreme: but when the storm is over-past, he returns to his former vomit,
and becoms worse then he was before; making no conscience, nor account of his
vows and protestations; yea he re^s them as dreams, and toies. Perseverance is
the crown of ^es, and heaven shall be the crown of perseverance. And (...) I
can assure you, do but now forsake your sins for Christ, (...) you shall
hereafter (if brought unto it) be able to en^e martyrdom for him.

To conclude with a word of advice, if you ever intend a ^nge, totally divorce
your self from that Jezabel, who has ^wn you to this, and never change word
with her more. For ^re is no disputing with Satan, nor his Agents; as you may
(...) by his success in Paradise. Genesis 2. 2, to 7. Nor will God ^ep us from the
sin, if we keep not our selves from the occasion. therefore so soon as David
determined to keep Gods comman^ents, these are his words, Depart from me all
ye workers (...) iniquity, Psalm. 119. 115. And indeed all depends upon the
ob^ving, or not observing this.

Your Affectionate Kinsman R. YOUNG.
And so much of the pride and vanity of Women. It were good deed (and I could
find in mine heart) to tell men al^ of mealing their heads and shoulders; of
wearing fardin^ales about their legs, etc. For these likewise deserve the ^od:
since all that are discreet do but hate and scorn them for it. But they are
wiser in their own conceit, then seven men that can render a reason; and more
hope of a fool then of such, Prove. 26. 12, 16.



FINIS.
Other Pieces made by the same AUTHOR, and whi^ are to be sold by James Crump,
in Little Bartholomews Well-yard, are
A Sovereign Antidote against all Grief. A Description of Heaven and Hell. A
hopeful way to cure that horrid sin of Swearing. Apples of Gold from the tree
of life. Armor of proof against the Worlds Envy, Scoffs, and Reproaches.
Characters of the kinds of preaching. Complete Armor against Evil Society,
first and second part. Cordial Counsel. God's goodness, and Englands
unthankfulness. Sin stigmatized, with an addition. The Arraignment of
Covetousness, and Ambition, first and second part. The benefit of Affliction.
The victory of Patience. The whole duty of a Christian. The Natural Man
anatomized. The cure of Mis-prision, or Mistake. The Cause and Cure of
Ignorance, Error, Enmity, etc. The Pastors Advocate. The Poor's Advocate, first
and second Part. The odious, despicable, and dreadful condition of a Drunkard.
The Blemish of Government, Shame of Religion, Disgrace of Mankind: with Offer
of Help to Drowning-men. The prevention of Poverty, and cure of Melancholy.


FINIS.

