THE SEDUCED SOUL reduced, and rescued from the Subtilty, and Slavery of Satan,
that bloody devouring Dragon, and vowed Enemy of all Mankind. Together with
Provision that none may be disappointed of their end, by mistaking their way:
would men but now hearken unto Christ, as they would have Christ another day,
hearken unto them.
By R. Junius, in reference to Levit. 19. 17. Isa. 58. 1. Prove. 1. 20. to the
end, and 14. 12. Acts 11. 14. 1 Timothy 4. 16. James 1. 21. Jude 23.
CYprian brings in Satan, triumphing over Christ in this manner; As for my
followers, says he, I never laid down my life to redeem them, as Christ has
done for his; I never promised them so great reward, as Christ has done to
his: and yet I have more followers then Christ, and they do far more for me,
then his do for him. And indeed, To whom we yield our selves as servants to
obey, his servants we are to whom we obey; whether of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness, Rom* 6. 16. And in case we do the Devils works,
we are the Devils servants, as our Savior affirms, John 8. 34, 44. Again, it
is the abstract of Religion, to imitate him whom we worship. Neither are we
worthy to be called Christians, except we imitate Christ, and square our lives
according to the rules he has given us, Luke 14. 26. 2 Pet. 2. 19. 2 Cor. 5.
17. 2 Timothy 2. 19. Who then shall compare men's lives with Christ's life, or those
rules set down in his Gospel, but must be forced with Lynacre to confess; That
either the Gospel is none of Christ's, or very few amongst us are Christians.
Observe it I pray, for it falls heavy on many thousands, that think they are
Christians beyond all exceptions.

2 But to bring this point more close, and home to men's consciences. We read,
That the greatest number go the broad way to destruction, and but a few the
narrow way that leads unto life, Matthew. 7. 13, 14. That the whole world lies
in wickedness, 1 John 5. 19. That the number of those whom Satan shall
deceive, is as the sand of the sea, Rev. 20. 8. That many are called, and but
few chosen, Matthew. 20. 16. and 22. 14. That though the number of the children
of Israel are as the sand of the sea; yet only a remnant of them shall be
saved, Romans 9. 27. Sad predictions! How then does it concern every man of us,
to be-think our selves, whether we be of that small number, and to mistrust the
worst, as all wise, and sound-hearted Christians use to do, Matthew. 26. 21, 22.
And indeed, they are Texts of Scripture, that would make the most in these
days to tremble; Yea, they could not (without Gods great mercy) but be
swallowed up of their own confusion, were they not spiritually blind and deaf,
and dead. For experience shows, that amongst those that call themselves
Christians, scarce one of an hundred, whose knowledge, belief, and life, is
answerable either to the Gospel, their Christian profession, or the millions of
mercies they have received.

Yea, notwithstanding the Holy Ghost tells us in the word; and we hear the same
daily; That every man shall be judged according to his works, be they good or
evil, Rev. 20. 13. and 22. 12. That we shall give an account at the day of
judgment for every idle word we speak, Matthew. 12. 36. That there needs no
other cause of our last and heaviest doom, then Ye have not given, ye have not
visited, etc. Matthew. 25. 41. to 46. That the righteteous shall scarcely be
saved, 1 Pet. 4. 18. That many shall seek to enter in at the straight gate, and
shall not be able, Luke 13. 24. That no unrighteous person shall inherit the
kingdom of God; but shall have their part and portion in that lake, which
burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death, 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
Gal. 5. 21. Revel. 21. 8. That except our righteousness exceeds the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, (who were no mean men for outward
and formal performances) we shall in no case enter into the kingdom of heaven,
Math. 5. 20. And that without holiness, no man shall see the Lord, Heb. 12.
14. (which Scriptures if they be true, what manner of persons ought we to be?
in all holy conversation and godliness, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Pet. 3. 11.)
Yet most men live, as if the Gospel were quite contrary to the rule of the Law:
As if God were neither to be feared, nor car^d for: As if they were neither
beholding to him, nor afraid of him, both out of his debt and danger; Yea, as
if there were no God to judge, nor Hell to punish, nor Heaven to reward, I
cannot think of it without astonishment.

But to all these, let me add one thunderbolt more out of Gods Artillery,
which you shall find, Deuteronomy. 29. where he expressly tells us, that he will not be
merciful (I pray mark it) unto such as flatter themselves in an evil way, but
that his wrath and jealousy shall smoke against them, and every curse that is
writ in his Book shall light upon them, etc. verse. 19, 20. And that if we will
not regard, nor hearken unto him when he calls upon us for repentance: He will
not hear nor regard us, when in our distress and anguish we shall call upon
him for mercy; but even laugh at our destruction, and mock when our fear
comes, Prove. 1. 24. to 33. Neither is salvation more promised to the godly, in
any part of the Bible, Old Testament, or New, then eternal death and
destruction is threatened to the wicked. For though to all repentant sinners he
is a most merciful God; yet to all wilful and impenitent sinners, he is a
consuming fire, and a jealous God, Heb. 12. 29. Deuteronomy. 4. 24. These are dreadful
threats, from the mouth of an Almighty, and terrible God, who is Truth it self,
and cannot lie. Nevertheless, men's obdurate and adamantine hearts, brawned and
hardened with the custom of sin, will tremble and relent no more at the
hearing of them, then the seats they sit on, or the stones they tread on.
Their supine stupidity is no more capable of excitation then the Sea Rocks are
of motion, or the billows of compassion. They are like the Catadupans,
inhabitants of the Cataracts, who hear not the roarings of Nilus. As Drums and
Trumpets (we know) and that loud rupture of the air with Ordnance, is but like
soft music to the ears of some fleshed soldiers, hardened with often
success. And the reason is, they will rather hearken to their own deceitful
hearts, and believe Satan, that would gull them of their souls, and plunge
them into eternal torments, then they will hearken to, or believe the God of
Truth. And the reason of this reason is, when men reject all g^od means, and
refuse to serve the true God, he in justice gives them over to the false to be
taught, and governed by him; for which you have an express place, 2 These. 2.
10, 11, 12. And likewise an example thereof in Ahab, 1 King. 22. 20. to 23.
Yea, how could I here enlarge? as would you know, why many men in this, and
other ages before us, have been such superlavive monsters in wickedness, as
striving after perfection of evil, counting it the greatest honor to commit
the greatest sins, and being sorry, as it were, that they could not commit a
sin beyond president, and be like their father the Devil, Such as
blasphemous and impudent Pharaoh, who being bloodied with his unresisted
tyranny, could belch out defiance in the face of heaven, saying, who is God? Or
Nicanor, who being persuaded from cruelty upon the Sabbath Day, in that God had
appointed it holy; answered, if God be mighty in Heaven, I am also mighty on
Earth: Though the same tongue that spoke it, was cut into little pieces and
flung to the Fowls: and the same hand that smote, was cut off, and hung before
the Temple. Or as Pope Hildebrand, who asked the Sacrament of Christ's body
before all the Cardinals, how he should destroy Henry the Emperor; and having
no answer, flung it into the fire, saying, Co^ld the Idol gods of the Heathens
tell them what should succeed in their enterprises, and can not thou tell me?
how others could wholly spend and employ their time, and strength, and means?
how they should take such pains, and be at such cost, to commit robberies,
rapes, cruel murders, treasons? blow up whole States? depopulate whole Towns,
Cities, Countries? Seduce millions of souls, as Mahomet and the Pope have
done? make open War against the Church of God, as Herod, Antiochus, and others
have done? persecute the known truth, as Julian the Apostate did? Invent all
new vices they could, and destroy the memory of all ancient virtues, as
Heliogabalus did? make it their trade to swear and forswear, if any will hire
them, as our Post^ knights do? Not unlike those Turkish Priests, called Seitie,
and Cagi, who for a double Ducket will make a thousand false oaths before the
Magistrate, and take it to be no sin, but a work deserving praise, by lies,
swearing, and for-swearing, to damnifie Christians what they can. Or would you
know why our Land (notwithstanding we excel all Nations under heaven, for
means of light and grace) has such monsters? as upon an hours warning will
lend Jezabel an oath, to rob poor Naboth of his li^e and vineyard? Such
Vultures, irreligious Harpies, that have consciences like a Barn-door, that
seldom awake but to do mischief. Some men and women, that will be Bawds to
their own Wives and Daughters? (But, o that the Sun should shine upon her, that
will sell for gain unto Hell that body which she brought forth, with so much
pains and danger to this earth. Certainly, there was never woman more deserved
to be called the Devils Dam then she.) Why, there are some that dare the day
to witness their ungodliness, and do their villainies to be seen of men? That
Zim^i like, dare bring Whores to their Tents openly. Yea, like Absalom, dare
spread a Tent on the top of the house, and go in to their Concubines in the
sight of all men. I have my self heard a cauterized Gallant boast of his lying
with women of all conditions, save witches, and protest that should be his next
attempt. Yea, how often shall you hear old men glory of their fore-past
whoredoms, boast of their homicides, cheats, and the like? Yea, if it be
possible, make themselves worse then ever they were: and rather then want
matter of ostentation, they will boast of the foulest vices; For their
excrements, they account ornaments, and make a scarf of their halter.

Again, others there are, who like them of Gibeah, Judge. 19. and the Sodomites,
Genesis 19. are not content with the common way of sinning; but are mad with a
prodigious lust; Being forth the men, that we may know them, verse. 5. Let any
reasonable man judge, whether they could be thus desperately wicked, if the
just and true God had not for their rebellious and damnable wickedness, in
rejecting him, given them up to be ruled by the false; namely, the god of this
world, and all wicked men in it. Even as a just Judge having passed sentence
upon some heinous Malefactor, gives him up to the Jailer, or Executioner, as
you may see by sundry places, 2 Timothy 2. 26. Ephesians. 2. 2. John 13. 2. Acts 5. 3.
1 Chronicles. 21. 1. Genesis 3 1. to 6. Rev. 2. 10. Gen 3. 15. John 8. 44. and 12. 31.
and 14. 30. 2 Cor. 4. 4. Ephesians. 2. 2. But to enlarge yet more, how many amongst
us have their consciences so feared up with the custom of sin, that they had
rather be confounded, then reformed: That will grudge to be stayed in their way
to Hell? (whereby they become wilful murderers of their own souls.) Yea, they
will fly upon those that shall oppose their perdition, and more then spurn at
Christ's Messengers, that are sent to save them, (which is to strike at him,
whose message they bring:) And others so reprobate, that their utmost endeavor
is, to damn others souls with their own. These are your seducing drunkards,
devisers and broachers of damnable errors; Projectors of unknown villainies,
exemplary leaders into wickedness; who Jeroboam, or Mahomet-like, cease not to
sin, and tempt, and damn, though they cease to live: For though they die,
they leave their sin behind them, and that propagates, who resemble a
malicious man sick of the plague, who runs into the throng to disperse his
infection; whose sin seems to outweigh all penalty.

Others there are, that through a presumptuous confidence, think they may run
upon score with Satan, and sin boldly and freely, because Christ is able to pay
all; so making Christ a bolster, or Patron of sin. Yea, they will also boast,
what a strong faith they have; when yet they fall short of the very Devils in
believing: For they believe the threats that are written in the Word, and
tremble for fear, Jam. 2. 19.

Again, others you have, so civilly righteous, that they see no need they have
of a Savior: and the less sensible they are, the more sick they are; for as
nothing is more easily broken, then those things that are most hard: so
notorious offenders are nothing so hard to be convinced and converted, as the
civilly righteous, that seems to live un-reproveably.

Lastly, to pass by those many millions of souls, who are so invincibly
ignorant, that remaining so, it is impossible they should be saved; for they do
not know wherein they have broken this or that Commandment in particular; what
wicked hearts they have by nature, nor what need they have of a Savior. Nor to
say any thing of that, which cost the lives of so many thousand Israelites, I
mean murmuring, and unthankfulness, which is the sin of almost who not; and
such a sin as few, even of the better sort of Christians have the wit to
consider. To pass by these (I say) how many through prejudice, so blind their
own eyes, that they will decoct everything the godly do or say into poison:
Yea, they will not only pick strawes, to put out their own eyes withal; but
they even protest against their own conversion, as esteeming, and accounting
all Religion, and Devotion mere foolishness. Yea, they will scoff at the
means to be saved, and make themselves merry with their own damnation: So that
good counsel to them, is but offering Aqua-vitae to the dead. A man would
admire and wonder how men's souls should be so drowned in their senses; how any
one that is endowed with a reasonable soul, should be of so reprobate a mind,
as most men are; did not the frequency of sin take away the sense of sin. As o
how the soul, that takes a delight in lewdness, is gained upon by custom* do
not all cauterized sinners, drunkards, blasphemers, defrauders, and the like?
Yea, and civil men too, account it a crime to be holy? or to have a tender
conscience? or to be so careful to serve their Redeemer? as themselves are
industrious to serve the Devil, and satisfy their own hearts lusts. Yea, and
custom has so bleared them, that they cannot distinguish nor discern the true
visage of things. Yea, the most of men amongst us so delude themselves with
mistakes, and false surmises, against Religion, and the religious, that piety
and goodness is so despised; looseness and profaneness so set by, and
defended, by some ignorantly, by others maliciously: and this also by reason of
long custom runs so deep and strong, that we can never look to have it
mended, until Christ comes in the clouds. What this may bring upon us, only
the Lord knows, and knows to prevent: But sure I am, it has already been so
long neglected, and so little opposed and laid to heart; that it has almost
overgrown both corn and good herbs. Insomuch that the wickedness of the
greater part, has brought such a scandal upon the better part: That our
Religion is even abhorred of the Heathen. And how can it other, then cut the
hearts of those that have felt the love of Christ? to hear him so wounded at
home with oaths and blasphemies, abroad with reproaches; who is the life of
their lives, and the soul of their souls. Speak we must, endeavor what we
can. Cry aloud, says God, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet, and
show my people their transgressions, and the house of Jacob their sins, Isa.
58. 1.

But alas, little comes of it; For let all the Ministers unanimously say what
can be said, blind sensuallists will confute all that can be alleged; with
God is merciful. And Christ died for all. Only believe and thou shall be
saved; no matter how they live: a reprobate, yet common error: as thinking
with Eunomius, that faith without works will serve: Insomuch that every drunken
beast, and blasphemer, thinks to speed as well, and go to Heaven, as soon as
the best.

One minds nothing but his cups, another nothing but his coin, a third only
his Curtizan; yet all these promise to meet in Heaven. The Jews thought we may
put away our wives, we may swear, we may hate our enemies, we may kill the
Prophets, subject the Word of God to our traditions, and follow our own ways.
Why? Abraham is our father, John 8. 39. But by their leave, Christ calls them
bastards, and finds out another father for them, ver. 44. Ye are of your
father the Devil, and the lusts of you^ father ye will do. Profane
Libertines, such as account not themselves well, but when they are doing ill.
Yea, the most covetous oppressors, who may say as Pope Leo did, I can have no
place in Heaven, because I have so often sold it upon Earth. Every man of them
hopes to have bene^i^ by the Gospel, when they will not be tied to the least
little of the Law. But if Christ be not our King to govern us, he will neither
be our Prophet to fore warn, nor our Priest to exp^ate. Except we forsake our
sins, God will never forgive them. Yea, he has sworn by an oath, that
whomsoever he redeemeth out of the hands of their spiritual enemies, shall
serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of their lives. Neither
can it consist with his Justice, to pardon such as continue in an evil course
of life. Nevertheless, there is scarce a wicked man upon Earth, but he thinks
to go to Heaven.

But what is the reason? consider that, and you will cease to wonder. For what
the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 3. is appliable unto all natural men. Their minds
were blinded; For until this day remains the same veil upon their hearts,
un-taken aw^y in the reading of the Old Testament, which vail, when they shall
turn to the Lord, shall be taken away in Christ, verse. 14, 15, 16. Here you see
they have a vail or curtain drawn over their hearts, which keeps them from the
knowledge of Gods Word: But that is not all; They have so hardened their hearts
with a customary sinning, even from their infancy, that a man were as good
speak to a stone, as admonish them, Jer. 6. 10. and 5. 3. Zach. 7. 12. Jude
12. Ez^k. 11. 19.

Thirdly, the Gospel is hid unto them, because the god of this world has
blinded their minds, lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should
shine unto them, as the same Apostle speaks, ^ Cor. 4. 3, 4. Finally, they have
Phraoh's curse upon them, a hard heart, and a seared conscience: so that they
are no way capable of yielding to, or hearing God speak by his Ambassadors, say
they what they will. Whence it is, that St. Cyprian uses these words: It is as
much lost labor (says he) to preach unto men the things of God, before they
are humbled with the sight of their wants, as to offer light to a blind man,
to speak to a deaf man, or to labor to make a brute beast wise. See Revel. 3.
17. In the mean time thoughts of Eternity never trouble them; They are at peace
with Satan, the world, and their own consciences; have made agreement with
Hell, and with Death; they satisfy their lusts to the full: So like men
sleeping in a Boat, they are carried down the stream of this world, until they
arrive at their Graves-end [Death] without once waking to be-think themselves,
whether they are going [to Heaven or Hell.] They slumber, and suppose
themselves good Christians; their says is but a dream, their hope but a dream,
and so of their obedience and whole Religion, all is but a dream. They have
repentance in conceit, they serve God well in conceit; and they shall, if they
look not to it, go to Heaven only in conceit, or in a dream, and never awake,
until they feel themselves in the burning lake. For he that makes a bridge of
his own shadow, how can he choose but fall into the water.

In which case, what heart would it not make to bleed, that has any Christian
blood in his veins, to see what multitudes there are that go blindfold to
destruction, and no man offer to stop or check them; before they arrive there,
from whence there is no redemption. I remember St. Bernard uses these words;
Had we stood by, says he, when Adam was between the persuasion of his wife,
and the precept of his God, when the one said, Adam eat, and the other said,
Adam eat not; for if thou do, Thou shall die the death, and all thy
posterity. Had it been an ill office to have cried out, and said, o Adam, take
heed what thou do! Or would he have had cause to complain of being prevented?
I trow not, Yea, I think it had been a seasonable piece of high friendship, and
none can deny it.

I remember also what a Merchant once did; he comes to his friend upon the
Exchange, and falls to boxing him, with these words; I have often enough told
you of your whoring, but you will never leave it. Know you not, that it will
p^ove your ruin in the end? (...) h^ld to be a little cracked in brain, and
perhaps you will think (...) often times, from the rarest and quickest
agitations of (...) the most distempered and out-ragious frenzies, there
want^^g (...) a pegs turn to pass from the one to the other: So in mad men's
(...) see how fitly folly suiteth, and meets with the strongest operation
(...). Yea, who knows not, how un-perceivable the neighborhood is between
folly, and the liveliest elevations of some men's wits. And indeed, when I
consider, how our carnal friends will curse us (when they come in hell) that we
did not our utmost endeavor to stop them. I could afford to lay hands upon a
Drunkard, a Blasphemer, or a Murderer to stay (...), from the evil he is
going to commit. Yea, to kneel down upon my knees, and beg of him, that he
would not so desperately damn his own soul. And indeed could, a man save his
friends soul by so doing (as possibly he might, Jude 23. Jam. 5. 26. 1 Timothy 4.
16.) he needed not much to care, though the world reputed him a mad man, or
spent their verdicts on him. O my brethren think of it, before it be too late!
and seriously consider what one soul is worth, and what you would take to be
in that condition with them, as you were once. (For I speak to enlightened
souls) Yea, how should not the very thought of it, make all that are got out of
Satan's clutches, to plot, study, and contrive all they can, to draw others of
their brethren after them?

We read, that Andrew was no sooner converted, and (...) Christ's Disciple, but
instantly he drew others after him to the same faith, John 1. 41. and the like
of Philip, verse. 45. And of the woman of Samaria, John 4. 28. to 41. And of
Peter, Luke 22. 32. Acts 2. 41. and 3 Chap. and 4. 4. And so of all the
Apostles. Yea, Moses so thirsted after the salvation of Israel; that rather
then he would be saved without them, he desired the Lord to blot him out of the
book of life, Exodus 32. 32. And Paul to this purpose says, I could wish my
self to be separated from Christ, for my brethren, that are my kinsmen
according to the flesh: meaning the Jews, Romans 9. 3. And indeed, all heavenly
hearts are charitable. Neither are we of the Communion of Saints, if we desire
not the blessedness of others; it being an inseparable adjunct, or relative to
grace; for none but a Cain will say, Am I my brothers keeper? Yea, where the
heart is thankful, and inflamed with the love of God, and our neighbor; this
will be the principal aim: As by ^y si^s, and bad example, I have drawn others
from God; so now I will (...) I can, draw others with my self to God. Saul
converted, will build up as fast, as ever he plucked down; and preach as
zealously as ever ^e persecuted, and we are no what thankful for our own
salvation* if we do not look with charity and pity upon the gross
mis-opinions, and mis-prisions of others, and at least do something for the
saving of those poor, ignorant, and impotent wretches, that are neither able
nor willing to help themselves. Neither needs there (as one would think) any
spurring or prompting of the thankful or charitable to this duty.

And what though we cannot do what we would? yet we must labor to do what we
can to win others; not to deserve by it, but to express our thanks. Besides,
it were very dishonorable to Christ not to do so: did you ever know, that
wicked men, Thieves, Drunkards, Adulterers, Persecutors, false prophets, or the
like, would be damned alone? no, they mis-lead all they can, as desiring to
have com-panions. Yea, the Tharisees would take great pains, compass sea and
land, to make others twofold more the children of hell then themselves, as our
Savior expressly witnesses, Matthew. 23. 15. which may cast a brush upon our
cheeks, who are nothing so industrious to win souls to God. Therefore what a
worldling would do, to get himself an hundred pounds, that a Christian should
do to win a soul to Christ: Or he is unthankful to his Redeemer, that has
done, and suffered so much for him. But I have known a very small matter, (with
Gods blessing upon the means) as the lending of a Book to an acquaintance, or
towling him to hear an efficacious Sermon, prove the saving of his soul. And
that has been a greater cause of rejoicing to both parties; then others have,
when their corn and their wine increases, Psalm 4. 7. Weak means shall serve
the turn, where God inten^s success. Even a word seasonably spoken ( God
blessing it) like a Rudder, sometimes steers a man quite into another Course.
Antiocl^us by hearing from a poor man, all the faults which he and his
Favorites had committed, carried himself most virtuously ever after. Antoninus
amended his future life and manners, by only hearing what the people spoke of
him. The very crowing of a Cock occasioned Peter's repentance. Augustine, that
famous Doctor, was converted, by only reading that Text, Romans 13. 13. Let us
walk honestly, as in the daytime, etc. Learned Junius, with reading the first
Chapter of Saint John's Gospel, was won to the faith of Christ. And Melancthon
much after the same manner. I have read of two famous Strumpets, that were
suddenly converted, by this only Argument, That God sees all things, even in
the dark, when the doors are shut, and the curtains drawn.

Bilneys Confession, converted Latimer: yea, Ad^i^nus was not only converted,
but became a Martyr too, by only hearing a Martyr at the Stake alleadg that
Text, Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, etc. 1 Cor. 2 9. Yea, even those Jews
that crucified the Son of God, were converted by hearing those few words of
Peter, Acts 2. And it pleased God, when I, my self, was in as hopeless a
condition, as any; That a poor man's persuading me to leave reading of Poetry,
and fall upon the Bible, was a means of changing my heart, before I had read
out Genesis, being but twenty years of age. Whom I more bless God for, then
for my Parents, from whom I received life. And this (because I know no better
way, to express my thankfulness to him, who has freed me from frying in
Hell-flames, for ever and ever; then by endeavoring to win others from Satan's
Standard to Christ's) makes me do the like to others. And that is by giving and
lending well-chosen Books, fit and proper for the parties condition, whether he
be merely civil, or vicious; a Scoffer, Swearer, excessive Drinker, Miser,
Oppressor, Prodigal, or the like. And have sometimes found the same so
succesful, that it has put me upon a more general, and public piece of
service, that may extend it self to thousands, if men have but half that
affection to spiritual, and eternal riches, namely, wisdom, grace, and
glory; as they have to temporary, and transitory. I know well, that a great
many will spend more time and money in an Alehouse in one day, then in Gods
service, or upon their souls, in many months. Yea, (as if the best part: were
least to be cared for.) How many thousands will bestow more upon their very
Hair, or upon a needless, Indian wanton weed, in one month, then upon God,
and their souls in a whole year. A sign how they love him, who laid down his
life to redeem them! And how wise, and thankful they are, though these also
dream they are good Christians, true Protestants; and perhaps are so accounted
by the most. As he that has but one eye, may be King amongst the blind, and
the commonnesse of offenders, may even benumbe the sense of offending. And I
take this their little regard of God, their own souls, and honesty withal,
not only to be the cause of men's prospering no better, but likewise of their
sadness, complaining, melancholy, and discontent, (as one of these two
(poverty, or melancholy,) is commonly the lot of every impenitent person.) For
how should they have merry hearts, that have not good consciences.

But all are not alike, ^linde, sensual, ungrateful: For though some by loss
of conscience, are become Atheists; and by loss of reason, Beasts; and though
they that have no reason, will hear none, (whereof you have a lively instance
or president, at the conclusion of this discourse, purposely set there to be
sunn'd and scorned) yet others there are, will be more ingenuous, I mean, they
have not been too long sick to be recovered; to whom a word or two by way of
advice.

Such therefore as had not rather live in the Darkness of Egypt, then in the
light of Goshen: Such as would not (with those foolish virgins, Matthew. 25.)
lose their inheritance, to save charge of the conveyance. And (with that Rich
fool, Luke 12.) be disappointed of their end, by mistaking their way, let them
at least, lay out the third part of a shilling upon these three new Books.

An Experimental Index of the Heart. A short and sure way to Grace and
Salvation. The Trial of true Wisdom.


As treating upon the most needful subjects, and being purposely projected and
contrived for their eternal welfare, that are altogether mindlesse of their
own: And possible it is, that many thereby may receive more good, then at
present they have the wit to wish for, or desire: it being sage, seasonable,
and wholesome Instruction, to prevent Destruction.

And that no man may imagine it a matter of benefit: the Projector (contrary to
other Projectors) will not only lose thereby; but in case any shall repent
their bargain, the Venders of them ( Henry Cripps in Pope's Head Alley, and
James Crump in Little Bartholmews Well-yard) shall return them their money when
they please.

A Charge drawn up against Drunkards, in a clearer print, that themselves also
may read it.
THe Drunkard is a strange Chymaera, more prodigious then any Monster; Being in
Visage a Man, but a Brotheus: in Heart, a Swine: in Head, a Cephalus: in
tongue, an Aspe: in Belly, a Lump: in Appetite, a Leech: in Sloth, an Ignavus:
a Ierff, for excessive devouring; a Goat, for Lust; a Syrene, for Flattery; a
Hyaena, for Subtilty; a Panther, for Curelty. In envying, a Basiliske: in
Antipathy to all good, a Lexus: in hindering others from good, a Remora; in
Life, a Salamander; in Conscience, a Ostrich; in Spirit, a Devil; 1 In
surpassing others in sin. 2 in tempting others to sin. 3 In drawing others to
Perdition. Even the most despicable piece of all humanity, and not worthy to be
reckoned among the Creatures which God made.

These being small picces, are sold only by James Crump, in Little
Bartholmews, wel-yard; And by Henry Cripps, in Pope's Head Alley.

FINIS.

