^rnal Reason, or the Wisdom of the Flesh: How foolish, deceitful, dangerous,
reprobate and divilish; together with Rectified Reason, or the Wisdom of the
Spirit, how divine, transcendent, safe, profitable and delightful: As also, how
man was at first Created; how he is now Corrupted, and how he may be again
Restored: Being Three Fundamental Principles of Christian Religion; which few
do indeed know, and yet he who knows them not, cannot be saved.

By Junius ^lorilegus.

Licenced and Entered according to Order.

London, Printed by I. R. for the Author, living at Stratford. 1669.

THE PREFACE.
THough the generality of the Jews were rather hardened than bettered, by all
our Saviors Preaching and Miracles: Though many with us by over much fasting,
have lost their stomachs, and others been too long sick of sin to be recovered:
Though many, with the Spider, will de^oct what here is into poison:
^^withstanding, many by loss of Conscience, are become Atheists; ^^rs by loss
of Reason, Beasts; that not a few are so blockefied by ^^e custom of sin and
wicked company, that they despise all means of be^^ing better; will mock their
Admonisher, and hate all that walk not after ^^^ir rule; yea, they will make it
a heinous crime and sh^ne, if others are as ^^^^strious to save souls, as they
are to damn them.

Nevertheless, such as are not yet infected by lewd ones, that sc^rn not ^earn,
nor hate the light; such as would not fear their frumps, and be ^o wise for
their fraud, are entreated to accept of this Book, thus given, ^^me in
thankfulness for the great good he once received by means of a lit^^^ good
counsel, as thinking he can never be thankful enough for such an ^^mparable
mercy: And probably, that medicine which has proved so ^esful for the curing
of one Patient, if it be communicated to thousands, (...) work the same effect
upon not a few; yea, if a word or two seasonably spo^^^ steered him quite into
another course, why may not a more serious and pre^^^itated Advertisement ( God
blessing the same) prove the saving of thy (...).

And little do thou know, how thy heart upon hearing it may be changed, ^^des
thine intention: Whether with those Gentiles, Romans 10.20. th^^ ^^est not
receive more good thereby than thou desire: Or whether Chrut ^^come unto thee
uncalled, as he did to Zacheus, Luke 19.5.

Neither think it strange, that it should be thus brought unto thee unexpected
as that Cake and Cruse of water was to Elijah, 1 Kings 19.6. It suffice^ that
all heavenly hearts are charitable: Nor is he of the Communion of Saints, that
desires not the blessedness of others; or any whit thankful for his own
salvation, that looks not with charity and pity upon the gross misopinions and
mispristons of his bre^hren.

Besides, it were very dishonorable to Christ, when we are got out of Satan's
clutches, not to do our best to draw others after us; as did Andrew, Joh^ 1.41.
and Philip, Verse. 45. and the woman of Samaria, Joh. 4.28. ^^ 41. and Peter,
Luke 22.32. Acts 2.41, and 4.4. Did you ever know, the wicked men, Thieves,
Drunkards, Adulterers, False Prophets, (...) the like, would be damned alone?
No, they mislead all they can, as desiring ^^ have companions. Yea, the
Pharisees would take great pains, compa^^ Sea and Land, to make others twofold
more the children of He^^ than themselves, as our Savior expressly witnesses,
Mat. 23.1^^ And what a shame were i^, that they should labor more for that
which will b^ inhance their damnation, than we for that which will add to the
weight of our eternal glory and salvation. And so much by way ^^ Preface.

The Wisdom of the Flesh, how Foolish, deceitful, dangerous, etc.
A Proud and Critical Gallant (whose manner it was to usurp a^^ the discourse
at Table) observing one to be more silent tha^ the rest, demands of him in a
jeering way, What he thought to b^ the strangest and foolishest thing in the
world? who answered to the Askers shame, There is not to be found in the whole
Universe, an^ thing so strange and foolish, as an Impenitent sinner, or an
unbelieve^ of whose number I fear your Worship is one; for you, I presum^ hope
to go to Heaven, and be saved by Christ; but should you b^ asked a reason of
that hope, you can no more tell it, than the wind can tell which last blew off
my hat: And then he so prove^ what he had asserted, that this Narcissus, or
Menicrates, became ^meek by hearing the same, as before he had been lofty: for
where as before he thought himself as wise as Solomon, he now found an^ confessed
himself no better than a Beast in his knowledge of any thin^ that concerned the
good of his soul; as Jeremiah affirms of eve^ natural man, Ier 10.14. And
thereupon resolves with Saul, aft^^ he had heard that Voice from Heaven, Acts
9. to forsake the bro^ way, and to become as faithful a friend to Religion, as
he ha^ formerly been a bitter enemy.

And well might it work this happy effect in him, as you w^ confess when you
have heard the whole related; yea, if it wo^ not the like change in you who
shall read or hear the same, pr^bably no other ordinary means will. But before
I come to t^^ you that, hear (as by way of preparative) how some would not ^^
prevailed withal to believe, although an Angel should be sent unto them from
the dead (as Abraham told Dives, Luke 16.31.) And yet with what small and weak
means some others have been converted; as were Iustine the Philosopher, Cyprian
the Necromancer, S. Austin, Fulgentius, Francisco, Iunius, Melancthon,
Adrianus, Latimer, and many others.

We read of two famous Strumpets, that were suddenly converted with this only
Argument; that God sees all things, even in the dark, when the doors are shut,
and the curtains drawn; yea a thought only has sometimes served the turn. Nor
needs there any more to a clarified understanding, than the bare thought of
Gods Omnipresence, Omnisciency, or Omnipotency; as being present every where,
knowing every thought and intent of the heart, and being Almighty to punish or
reward evil and good.

Whence, Melancthon having found the Word most easily to prevail with him (as
wax sooner yields to the seal, than steel to the ^^mp) doubted not but his
preaching should do wonders upon others: But having tried, he found and
confessed, that old Adam was too strong for young Melancthon.

Nor is the conversion of a sinner, Regeneration, or the New birth, so easy a
matter as men may imagine: Yea, the conversion of a sinner is held by the
Learned a greater Miracle than was the Creation of the World; and their Reason
is weighty: For, in making such an one ^New Creature, say they, must be a
number of Miracles. A blind ^^n restored to his sight, a deaf man to hearing, a
man possessed with many Devils, dispossessed; yea, one dead in sin, and buried in
the Grave of long custom; with a Gravestone laid upon him, raised from the
dead; and in every one a stone turned into flesh. In all which, God meets with
nothing but opposition, which in the Creation he met not with.

The case is this, though the weakest means shall serve the turn, where God
intends success; yet when he withholds his contemned grace, Paul himself shall
not be able to move a soul. Besides, as all bodies are not equally apt to be
wrought upon, by the same medicine; so are not all souls by the same means of
grace. One remains obstinate and refractory, whiles others are pliable.

The same report, wherewith the spirit of Rahab melts, hardens the King of
Jericho, Josh. 2. Sergius Paulus was converted, Elymas obdu^ated, at the same
Sermon, Acts 13. that one hard saying of our Savior, John 6. like a file,
sharpened eleven of his Apostles; while it so blunted the rest of his Disciples,
that many of them murmured, and from that time went back, and walked no more
with him, Verse 66, etc. Plants and stones lie under the same beams of the Sun,
and are wet with the same moisture of the clouds, yet the plants spring and
grow, when there is no alteration of the stones. An Ethiopian enters black into
the Bath, and comes black out again.

The Holy Ghost witnesses, that though the generality of the Jews were rather
hardened than bettered, by all our Saviors preachin^ and miracles; yet Peter
converted three thousand at one Sermon, and five thousand at another. Jonas his
short Sermon of but seven word^ Yet forty days and Ninevy shall be destroyed,
Jonah 3. proved the conversion of sixscore thousand Ninevites: Whereas the
graves opening, the o^^ arising, the Temple renting, the light of the Sun
failing, the Centurian confessing etc would do no good upon the Scribes and
Pharisees: Yea^ let the Sodo^ites be stricken blind, for contesting with Lot
and hi^ two Angels yet they will not cease seeking his door to break it open,
persist they will, until they feel fire and br^^stone about their ears, G^^^ 19
Only God will give success to whom, when, and as he pleaseth^ Gods house, as
the streets of Jericho, may be thronged, and yet bu^ one Za^heus gained to the
faith; Whereas Hillary found not seventeen Believers, and left not so many
Unbelievers in the whole City.

Indeed, if God but speaks the word, no means can be too weak^ as when he
created the World, he but said, Let there be light, and there wa^ light And
when he said to our first Parents, Bring forth fruit, the^ did so, Genesis 1. and
2. So if he but says, Let this or that soul be enlightened to see his miserable
and wretched condition, by reason o^ his original and actual defilement, and
the punishment due to both^ Let him have power and will to repent and believe
savingly, it is n^^ sooner said, than it is accomplished: Otherwise he remains
blin^ to all dangers^ deaf to all good instructions. And so I come to acquain^
you, how this silent Guest proved his assertion, in showing, ho^ invincib^y
ignorant every Natural man is, in things that are supernatural or that make for
the good of his precious and immorta^ soul, and all saving knowledge; and how
foolish, deceitful, dangerous^ reprobate and devilish, carnal reason, or the
wisdom of the flesh is, thoug^ it be sufficiently discovered, 2 Cor 3.14, 15,
16, 17, 18. Revel. 3.17^ 1 Timothy 6.4, 5. But take it in his own words.

Is there any thing, says he, more stupid, sottish or ridiculous, than for men
to think themselves as wise as the best, whe^^ it may truly be said of every
natural man, touching true wisdom^ as the Lord speaks of the Ostrich, Job. 39.
namely, that he is deprive^ of wisdom, neither has h^a^y understanding
imparted unto him Verse. 17^ Are not they stupefied sots ^ who with the Church
of Laodicea, Rev. 3^ think themselves rich, and to want nothing, when yet they
are wretched, an^ miserable, and poor, and blind, and na^ed of all sp^ritual
endowments, ver, 17^ ^ Tim. 6 4. Are not they ca^eles^, mindless and regardless
fools that are the greatest strangers to themselves, quick sighted to other^
faults, blind to their o^n? Are not they drunken sots, frantic fool^ or savage
beasts? who believe Satan, that promises prosperity t^ sin, yea^ lif^ and
salvation (as the P^pe promised the Pon der Traytors^ and not believe God, who
threatens Hell and damnation, in case me^ repent not, and forsake their sins?
When Satan is known to be ^he Father of all lies, cheating and cruelty, and God
to be truth itself, that cannot lie: Or those who will receive what ever is
offered them? be it bribe, or any other sinful bait, not once think^ng this is
forbidden fruit, and thou shall dye the death? Who think, the ^owed enemy of
their souls and all mankind, can offer them a ^^^is without a hook? Who stand
more in awe of the Temporal Magi^^^te, that can only kill the body; than they
do of their Maker who can with one word of his mouth, cast both body and soul
into hell: And indeed, if visible powers were not more feared than the
invisible God; and the haulter, more than Hell ( Natural men being like beasts,
that more fear the flash of powder than the bullet) the World would be overrun
with outrage, Again, Are not they brainless beasts, brutish Sensualists, yea,
frantic fools, fitter for Bedlam, than to be admitted into Christian Society,
or the Communion of Saints? who ^esemble Judas, that preferred Thirty pieces of
silver, before him that was Lord of the whole world, and ransom of all mankind?
In that they stand more upon their silver, or sides smarting, than upon the
loss of their precious and immortal souls; prefer time, yea, a moment of time,
before Eternity; their bodies, before their souls; yea, their outward estates
yea a little base pelf, or some paultry pleasure, before either soul or body;
and who will tremble more at the thought of a Bailiff, or a Prison, than of
Satan or Hell, and everlasting per^ition. Again, Are not they senseless and
odious Savages, worse than Turks, that sell Christians; or Canibals, that eat
men; (for these are not cruel to themselves) who can find in their hearts to
damn their own souls, and go to Hell, that they may raise their houses, and
leave their Heirs a great estate. Whereof take a sad instance of a rich
Oppressor, not far from the place where I once lived, who having scraped up a
great estate for his only son; when he came to dye, he calls his son to him,
and said, Son, do you indeed love me? the Son answered, That nature, besides
his paternal indulgence, obliged him to that. Then said the Father, Express it
by this, hold thy finger in the candle as long as I am saying the Lords prayer:
The Sun attempted the same, but could not endure it. Upon that the Father brake
forth into these doleful expressions, Thou ^^nst not suffer the burning of thy
finger for me, but to get this wealth, I have more than hazarded my soul for
thee, and must burn both body and soul in Hell fire for thy sake: Thy pains
would have been but for a moment, but mine will be everlasting and unquenchable
fire. And yet it is hard to determine, whether the Voluptuous Prodigal, or the
Covetous Cormora^t is the greater fool. He that with a wanton eye, a liquorish
tongue, and a gamesome hand, indiscreetly ravels out his Ancestors fair
possessions, it may be an hundred pounds per annum, in three years, and then
leads the rest of his days in prison, there to repent at leisure, having for
his attendants, so^row, grief, derision, beggary and contempt in the first
place, and aft^^ that his portion with Dives in the burning Lake. Or he who
(...) get an hundred pounds per annum, and only possess, not use the sam^
after he has got it, ^perhaps three years, is content to be weepin^ and
wailing, and gnashing of teeth in the Prison of Hell for evermore. F^ without
question these two are both fools alike, yea, none fitter t^ be begged for
fools. Again, are not they stupendiously blockefied, wh^ all their life long do
what God forbids, and yet confidently hope t^ escape what he threatens? who
expect that Heaven will meet the^ at their last hour, when all their life long
they have galloped i^ the beaten road toward Hell: to have Christ their
Redeemer and A^vocate, when their consciences tell them, that they seldom
remember him, but to blaspheme him, and more often name him in the^^ Oaths and
Curses, than in their Prayers, who will say they love G^^ and Christ, and yet
hate all that any way resemble him: Are Fli^ unto God, Wax to Satan; have their
ears always open to the Tempter, she to their Maker and Redeemer; yea, when
they take up Arms again^ Christ, and are mockers of all that serve him in
sincerity and truth? A^^ what more common than for a Christian in name, ^o
scoff at a Crhistia^ indeed, and to traduce those whom they cannot seduce. Yea,
they will hazard the damning of their own souls, rather than not fling a dagger
at t^^ apple of Gods eye, Zach. 2.8. Deuteronomy. 32.10. Again are not they
Atheist^cal fools? who read Luke 13.24. That many shall seek to enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, and yet shall not be able, because they did not striv^ to
enter in at the strait gate; yet they doubt not of their entering though they do
not so much as seek: And 1 Pet. 4.18. That the righteous shall scarcely be
saved, yet every Scoffer, Drunken Beast and Blasphmer, is confident that he
shall be saved: And 1 John 5.19. That the whole world lies in wickedness? And
Rev. 20.8. That the number of tho^^ whom Satan shall deceive, are as the sand
of the Sea, Revel. 13.15, 16 17^ Isa. 10.22. Romans 9.27. yet the most wicked of
them, think themselves none of the number, nor any way concerned in the matter:
And Mat. 12.36. That we must give an account at the day of judgment, for every
idle word we speak; yet they look to give no accoun^ for their drinking,
swaring, scoffing, whoring, cheating, seducing, Sabbath breaking, and many the
like enormities. Are not these senseless and shallow pated fools? and what are
they better, I beseech you who count them all Roundheads and Phanaticks, that
have more Religion than an Hea^^en; or knowledge of heavenly things, than ^
Child in the womb has of the things of this life; or conscience than an
Atheist: or care of his soul, than a Beast; and are mocker^ of all that march
not under the pay of the Devil. Or they who no^ only spend their whole time
and Patrimonies in riot, and upon Dic^ Drab^, Drunkennes^; but think every one
exorbitant, that walks not aft^^ (...) rule: That will not only eat the
forbidden fruit, as the price of death ^nal, but account them fools that do
otherwise; who think Religion a dis^^^agement, and their sins a glory: for they
glory in their sins, and ^^e ashamed to appear good. Are not they hair brained,
^antick, outrageous, desperate, and Diabolical fools, who being never so little
displeased with others, will fly in their Makers face, and tare ^^eir Saviors
name in pieces with Oaths and Execrations; as being ^orse than any mad Dog,
that flies in his Masters face that keeps ^i^. Who (as if Satan alone could
expel Satan) use to mitigate the ^^ngs of conscience, by going to the Tavern or
Alehouse, to drink care and sorrow away: Or perhaps to the Brothel-house, so
adding sin to ^^^n; leaving Gods remedies, to seek remedy of the Devil? For
surely ^hey which strive to cure their present misery, with present mirth, have
not their misery taken away, but changed, and of Temporal made Eter^^l, Luke
16.25. Yea, I Will appeal to themselves, Whether this be ^^y other toward the
stilling of their Consciences, than as a saddle ^f gold to a galled horse, or a
draught of poison to quench a man's thirst.

Then are not they fools in folio, who will put so weighty a bu^^ness, as their
Salvation or Damnation upon a hazard; as counting it (...) indifferent thing,
whether at the last and great day of Judgment, they shall be bid, Depart ye
cursed into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: Or hear it
said, Come ye blessed of my Fa^^er, and inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, etc.
Mat. 25.34. to 46. Then that are they, that like so many blind men, run
headlong to hell, and yet think themselves in the way to Heaven? Who will boast
of a strong faith, and yet fall short of the very Devils in believing; for they
believe the threats of Gods Word, and a general judgment Day, and thereupon
tremble, James 2.19.

Who think they do God good service, in persecuting of his servants, Joh. 16.1.
whereof take a remarkable instance, which is no less common than it is wicked
and witless: We read Judges 15. that God in great love sent Sampson to deliver
the men of Judah, from the slavish ^hraldom of their enemies; but they in
requital, bind him (in whom all their hope of deliverance lay) and deliver him
up to those enemies that kept them under, to the end they might slay him, and
still make slaves of them. Again, after this, God sent unto their Successors
the Jews, his only Son, to the end he might heal their diseases, feed their
bodies, inlighten their minds, and save their souls: And they in requital of
all, hate, revile, scourge and crucify him; though in killing him they did
their utmost, to split or sink the only ship that could save them. Now what
think you of these blockish Jews, were they more wicked or witless, or
ungrateful? I know you will say they were all: If so, why are you such lots and
shallow brains? For it is but your case laid down in the person of another; as
the disguised Prophet dealt with Ahab, 1 Kings 20. Or as Christ dealt with the
Priests, Scribes and Elders, Luke 20. As thus, God out of his infinit^ love,
has sent his Ministers to be your deliverers from the grievou^ slavery and
thraldom you are in, under Sin, Satan and Hell; bu^ you are scorners of your
Teachers and Instructors, and more of their godly instruction, what else makes
you pick so many holes in their coats, find so many faults with them, raise so
many objections if not lies against them? that nothing they either do or
delive^ can please you. Why are you so spightful in spitting out you^ spleen
against them? why do you slight their persons, and detai^ from them their dues?
Or if you do for your peace and credit^ sake part with some poor matter, you
think any thing too much for your Minister: And what you part with is drawn
from you, as (...) much blood from the heart: And then also, you will basely
asperse him^ yea, many there be, that will pretend Conscience (forsooth) that
they may rob their Minister, and allege, he had not their voice or consent
when chosen, or they hear him not, or they like not hi^ preaching, that he has
taken degrees, is ordained, he is a Black coat, or rather, he is a
conscientious Pastor, or a Shepherd of Christ sending, and not an intruder:
Then how basely will you calumniat^ him, that but takes his dues, especially of
a poor body; Min^sters, more than all the world besides, must take a tester for
a shilling: An^ not he alone shall suffer; But all these Churchmen (say you)
ar^ so covetous, that they never think they have enough. Again, you^ enmity to
the Ministry appears plainly in this, you envy not the pr^digious wealth of
Merchants, of Lawyers, of any? But if you hear of Minister that has a
twentieth part of their means, your hearts and spleens ri^^ at it.

And yet what can you allege for your selves, or against you^ Pastors? Are
they any other to you than those Messengers were to Lo^^ that came to fetch him
out of Sodom that he might not feel the fire and bri^stone which followed, Genesis
19. Or than the Angel was to Peter, the opened the iron gates, loosed his
hands, brought him out of prison, and delivered him from the thraldom of his
enemies, Acts 12. They beg and dig, the dig and beg, as that good Vine-dresser
did, whose mattock kept off the masters, Ax, Luke 13.8, 9. They bring you the
glad tidings of Salvation, would furnish and endow you with the spiritual,
invaluable and lasting riches of Grace and Glory: They beat their brains, the^
spend their spirits, pour out their prayers, plot and contrive all they can to
sa^^ your precious souls (were you willing to be saved:) They are content to
waste themselves (like a Candle) that they may give light unto, a^ bring others
to Heaven, 1 Cor. 9.19. 2 Cor. 12.15. And do you instead of honoring,
respecting and rewarding them, hate, traduce and p^^secute them. I would wish
you to look to it; for if I have a^ skill in Scripture, there is not a sin in
the Nation, that so hinders (...) blessings, or pulls down the curses and
judgments of God upon us, as do^ is sin; and yet it is not more provoking,
than it is a common (...): But it is a true observation, Sacrilege is the
greatest Theft, (...) of it men make the least Conscience. And sure I am, our
love (...) Christ is best known by our respect to, and usage of his Mes^^^gers:
nevertheless, I foresee from former experience, that God (...) work a Miracle
to persuade you, not to carry an aching tooth against godly and conscientious
Minister: For the Ministers are to the ^^^nts seed, as Sheep-keepers were to
the Egyptians, a very abomi^tion to them, Genesis 46.34. yea I am able to Divine
(though I ^no Antivorta) that not a few will fling away this Book, and ^^d
great fault with the Author (though no Minister) so soon they meet with this so
necessary and considerable a truth. And ^^deed, nothing more usual, than for
men to pick straws to put out (...) own eyes withal. But go we on. Are not
those men brainless ^^asts and fools, who will say, they defy the Devil and
all his works, ^^d yet at the same time are slaves to the Devil, and do his
will in every ^^ing? As what says the Apostle? They art kept by the Devil in a
snare, ^^d taken captive of him at his will: he rules and works his pleasure
in (...), as being their God and Father, and Prince and Master, 2. Tim. 2.26,
John 8.44. and 14.30. 2 Cor. 4.4. So I have given you his whole answer.

Now tell me, you that have read or heard these ridiculous and ^^ainless
absurdities, what you think of these men, that take themselves for rational
Creatures, and are so taken to be by all their fellow Sensualists (who are
every one guilty more or less of ^^e same absurdities; for it is the case of
almost who not) are ^^y not all pitifully deprived of their reason and
understanding, ^uching Eternity and the good of their souls? Could they ever
^^us think, speak or do, if they were not either mischievous ^ools, or frenzy
men? Yea, if these pernicious fools were not ^^ockified into a reprobate
judgment, could they thus think and ^^solve, if so confess, that Natural and
unregenerate men, wilful and ^penitent sinners, are the most foolish,
shallow-brained and degenerate creatures alive. Nor can you, or the cunningest
pate in the Nation pro^uce the like Prodigy; as will more manifestly appear,
when I ^^ve given you the Natural man's Character; as I find it portrayed ^^
the Scripture, Gods Dictionary. But first let me add weight to that is past,
that these fools may, if it be possible, be brought out of love with their
present condition.

God has promised to bestow all blessings upon those that serve and obey
(...), both Temporal (so far as would make for their good) Spiritual and
eternal: That they shall fare well in their bodies, names, estates, ^^^cious
souls and postcritics: And that they shall want nothing that is ^ood for them,
Prove. 28.27. as both the Old and New Testament fully ^^clares; se^ Deuteronomy. 28.
Psalm 84.11. and 37.3. to 7. and 34.9, 10. Mat. 6.33. Godliness has the
promises, not only of this life, but of the life to co^^ 1 Timothy 4.8. the
quintescence whereof consists, in freedom from ^ evil, ^and fruition of all
good, which is the purchase of Christ for his followe^ Again, on the contrary,
he has threatened, that the unbeliever and disobedient, shall be cursed in
every thing he has or does, or that befalls him. Curs^ in this life, and cursed
in the life to come: for which read Deuteronomy. 28. God h^^ set before us life and
death, Heaven and Hell, as a reward of good and evi^ and lest us, as it were to
our choice, whether we will be complea^ly and everlastingly happy or miserable.
Yet most men will choo^^ rather to be cursed and miserable here, and go to Hell
hereafter, the^^ to fry everlastingly in a Furnace of fire and brimstone, to
enj^^ their lusts, than by forsaking their sins, to serve Christ, as he has
commanded them in his Gospel, to inherit a Celestial and Eternal Kingdom, and
weight of superabundant Glory in Heaven; where are such joy as eye has not
seen, nor ear heard, nor can ever enter into the heart of man conceive, 1 Cor.
2.9. Why else do ninety nine parts of all the me^ in the Nation, as we may
conjecture, all their life long walk in (...) broad way, which leads to
destruction; and resuse the narrow wa^ which leads unto life, Mat. 7.13, 14.
1 John 5.19. Revel. 20.8.

Yea, which makes their case much more miserable and deplor^ble; and (as one
would think) should make their sin unpardonable: So far are they from obeying
Christ's Precepts in the Gosp^^ themselves, that they will hate, scoff at, and
persecute others that do, an^ that for their so doing.

Again, We are all born into the world guilty of High Treason, against t^ great
King of Heaven and earth, and withal condemned to suffer eternal to^ments in
Hell fire, being only reprieved for a time, to see if we will sue o^ our
pardon in Christ, Romans 5.12. to 21. And God by his Ambassadors ^^ the Ministry,
daily offers every of us a pardon, the remission of o^^ sins by the blood of
his Son, and the Kingdom of Heaven freely, upon the condition of Faith and
Repentance (which is such a spectacle (...) unspeakable mercy, as might ravish
our Souls with admiration God, says S. Bernard, so loved his Son, that he gave
him all the wor^^ for his possession, Psalm. 2.8. but he so loved the world,
that he gave Son a^^ all for its Redemption.

But alas, most men will not, yea very few amongst us will be redeemed by him,
or accept of a pardon from him, They will choose r^ther to serve Satan, that
bloody devouring Dragon, and vowed enemy of all mankind.

Mark it, I beseech you! for I have to do with unreasonable m^ as the Apostle
styles all that have not faith, 2 Thessalonians 3.2. God has give his only Son, and
his Son his own precious blood, to purchase us life an^ salvation, and every
day makes us gracious offers thereof, b^^ men will not accept of salvation.

Yea, they are so remote from yielding or submitting, that li^^ blind beasts,
or mad men, they run upon Gods judgments, as Balaam (...) upon the swords
point in the Angels hand; and yet are so far from be^^g afraid, that they
applaud their own wisdom, for giving such li^erty to their lusts, thinking that
no men in the world, enjoy the (...) freedom; when indeed their bondage is much
worse, than the ^ruel and tyrannical bondage and slavery of Egypt.

Here is Blockishness with a witness! only the multitude of their ^^mpanions,
in this their foolish frenzy, is the strongest testimo^^ they have to prove
themselves in their right minds: And to ^^monish them, is to no more purpose,
than if one should speak to ^^^ess stones, or senseless plants, or witless
beasts; for they will never fear ^^y thing, till they be in Hell fire.
Wherefore God leaves them to ^^confuted with fire and brimstone, since nothing
else will do it.

Now these things considered, what can any indifferent man ^^^nk? As that the
road to Hell (a place so woeful and dolorous) ^ould be so exc^^edinglw thronged,
and the way to Heaven (a place (...) blessed and glorious) should be almost
wholly neglected, Mat. 13.14. 1 John 5.19. Rev 20.8. That Christ should lay
down his life (...) ransom and redeem men from infinite, intolerable and
inter^^nable torments; and to purchase for them such pleasures, as ne^^^ entered
into the heart of man to conceive; and yet Satan (that bloody ^^vouring Dragon,
and vowed enemy of all mankind) should have ^^ore Servants and Volunteers than
Christ; and they do far more ^^r him, than Christ's Servants do for their Lord,
Rev. 3.4. and 13.16. ^om. 10.16, That Men supposed rational, should resolve to
destroy ^^emselves; that they should love damnation, that they should (...)
their own souls, as well as holiness, and the holy God; and ^^sor sin and
vanity, such a wretched emptiness: This is the great^^^ folly and frenzy
imaginable; this above all deserves bitter la^^ntation! Yea, what Sea of blood
is enough to bemoan this fool^, wicked and desperate madness? And yet this is
most men's ^epth of brain: And thus it fares with all willful and impenitent
^^^ners, who as we may probably conjecture, are ninety nine ^^rts of all the
men in this Nation, if the word of God may be ^^ought worthy to determine it;
for which see Luke 12.32 Mat. 7.^14. and 20.16. and 22.14. 1 John 5.19. Romans
9.17. and 10.16. Revel. ^^.16. and 20. 8. Isa. 53.1. The consideration whereof,
would ^^ze any one that is in his right wits: Yea, how is it possible, ^^t the
reasonable soul of man (let him be professedly barba^^us) should be capable of
such a Monster? Yet search the Scriptures, ^^consider the reasons which follow,
and you will no less wonder, ^^w it should be otherwise. The reasons are many,
I Will give you the ^^incipal.

First, Man sinned away his light, when he sinned against his light. We (...)
lost the prerogative of our first creation, by Adams eating the forbidden
fruit, and were thereby deprived of all other spiritual an^ divine privileges,
and endowments, wherewith we were before invested, Genesis 3. Romans 5.12. to 21.
Indeed it was Satan's brag to our fi^^ Parents, if you will eat the forbidden
fruit, ye shall be as Gods, to know go^^ and evil, Genesis 3. But therein he
proved himself, the Father of (...) Cheats and Liars; for instead of Gods, they
became Beasts, yea D^vils; and instead of knowing what was good, and what evil,
they an^ we (who were in their loins, and were to stand or fall with them not
only lost our true knowledge of good and evil, but we a^ become so reprobate
in our judgments, that we mostly think go^^ to be evil, and evil to be good;
as you have in part heard, and as I sha^^ in the ensuing pages further acquaint
you.

We read Genesis the first, that God made us after his own Image, wit^
perfection of all true wisdom, holiness and righteousness, writin^ his Law in
our hearts, and giving us ability to obey and fulfill the same in every point;
so that man was created very good, did fully clearly and perfectly know the
whole will and works of his Maker, was able out of the integrity of his soul,
and fitness of a^ the powers, fully, willingly and cheerfully to love, observe
an^ obey his Maker in every tittle and circumstance he required, an^ to love
his neighbor as himself. Insomuch, that neither the mind di^ conceive, nor the
heart desire, nor the body put in execution an^ thing but that which was
acceptable and well pleasing to God as those Scriptures do plainly show, Genesis
1.26, 27, 30. Eccles. 7.29* Romans 2.18, 15.

But by giving credit to Satan, and by eating the forbidden fruit, the^ and we
with them, not only lost our blessed communion wit^ our Maker, had the Image
of God forthwith abolished and blotted out but in the place of wisdom, power,
holiness, truth, righteousness, and the like ornaments wherewith we had been
clothed, there has succeeded these and the like: 1. This sin has so
corrupted our whol^ nature, that we are utterly indisposed and made opposite to
(...) that is spiritually good, and wholly inclined unto all evil, an^ that
continually. 2. It has made us very Vassals to sin and Satan. 3. It has
disabled us from understanding the will, and observing the Commandments of the
Lord. 4. It has made our person^ and actions unacceptable to God. 5. It has
cast us out of God^ favor, and made us liable, and subject to all the plagues
and miseries of this life, and to endless, easless and remediless torment^ in
the life to come: For proof whereof, read Genesis 6.5, 6. Romans 3.9. to 20. Mat.
15.19. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. James 4.1. Tit. 1.1^. Romans 7.14. to 25.

This was the fruit of their unsufferable pride and ambition, in that they
could not content themselves with being Lords of the whole Universe, but they
must be equal with God, and every way like their Maker: Of their horrible
unbelief, when they gave more credit to Satan than to God. of their unparalleled
and unexpressible ingratitude, in that they thought Paradise, and all that was
therein too little, except they had also that one thing which God reserved, and
from which they were prohibited, namely, the forbidden fruit; of their wilful
murder of themselves, and all their posterity, whom they knew should stand or
fall with them; of their ^^^ful Apostasy from God to the Devil, and sundry the
like. Bad work, ^^d wages.

And as man lost his light, when he sinned against his light, so his blindness
remains: Insomuch, that unto this day, when Moses is read, there is a vail or
curtain drawn over every natural man's heart, which is never removed or taken
away, until he turns to the Lord by repentance: Nevertheless, when he shall
turn to the Lord, the vail shall be taken away in Christ, 2 Cor. 3.14, 15, 16.
And so much of the first Reason; for ^ study all possible brevity, lest the
pages should grow (like fish) into a multitude.

Secondly, Another reason is, These men are Unregenerate, and so want the eye
of Faith, which only can see and discern spiritual objects; and also the
Spirit, who is the giver of all true wisdom: Faith most clearly sees and
beholds, those things which are hid from the eye of Reason, John 12.46.
Unregenerate men, who want the eye of Faith, are like blind Sampson without his
Guide. We must have minds lifted above nature, to see and love things above
nature; heavenly wisdom, to see and discern heavenly truths, or else that truth
which is saving, will be to us a mystery, Mark 4.11. if it seem not
foolishness, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8, 14. To them that are (...), the Gospel is hid, 2
Cor. 4 3, 4. Whereas the Believer discerns all things, even the deep things of
God, 1 Cor. 2.10, 12, 15, 16. Reason discerns natural objects; Faith, spiritual
and supernatural. We may see far with our bodily eye, Sense; ^arther with the
minds eye, Reason; but farther with the souls eye, Faith, than with both: And
the Believer, ^ath the addition and advantage of Gods Spirit, and faith above
all other ^^n, John 8.12. So that as mere sense, is incapable of the rules of
Reason; so Reason is no less incapable of the things that are Divine and
Supernatural, Ier. 10.14. 1 Cor. 2.14, 15, 16. Ephesians. 5.8. And as to speak, is
only proper to men; so to know the secrets of the Kingdom of Heaven, is only
proper to Believers.

Now of Natural and speculative knowledge, the wicked have as large a share as
the godly; but of Spiritual, experimental and living knowledge, which is
supernatural, and descends from above, James 3.17. and keeps a man from
every evil way, Prove. 2.12. The wicked have no part with the godly. Whence all
men in their natural condition, are said to be blind and in darkness, Mat.
4.16. and 15.19. Ephesians. 4.18, 19. and 5.8. Whereas Believers are called
Children of the light, and of the day, 1 Thessalonians. 5.5, 1 Pet. 2.9. But that you
may see what a mighty and vast difference there is, between Natural men and the
Regenerate in their knowledge, hear what the Word speaks of each severally; for
I will lay down their several Characters, in the very expressions of the Holy
Ghost.

First, Natural men in Scripture, are said to have uncircumcised hearts, Jer.
9.26. Romans 2.29. Gross hearts, Mat. 13.15. Brawny hearts, Isa. 6.10. Fat
hearts, Acts 28.27. Hearts without feeling, Ephesians. 4.18.19. Foolish hearts,
Romans 1.21. Blind and dark hearts, Romans 1.21. Beasts hearts, Dan. 4.16. Jer.
51.17. Dead hearts, 1 Samuel 25.17. No hearts, Hosea 7.11. Evil and wicked
hearts, Genesis 6.5. Unclean hearts, Ezekiel. 14.3. Impure hearts, James 4.8.

Hearts Slow to believe, Luke 24.25. That cannot repent, Rom 2.5.

Feigned hearts, Jer. 3.10. False hearts, Jer. 5.23. Deceitful hearts, Jer.
17.9. divided hearts, Hosea 10.2. Double hearts, 1 Chronicles. 12.33. Psalm. 12.2. A
heart and a heart, Jer. 32. Proud hearts, Deuteronomy. 17. Froward hearts, Prove.
11.20. Stubborn hearts, Hosea 13.6. Obstinate hearts, Jer. 52. Hard hearts,
Exodus 9.12. Stony hearts, Exek. 11.19. Reprobate hearts, Romans 1.28. 2 Timothy 3.8.
and Satani alhearts, Acts 5.3. and 26.18. whereof not a few by the custom of
sin, harden their own hearts, Heb. 3.8. yea, make them as hard as an Adamant,
Zach. 7.12. Lest they should hear the Law, and be converted by the Gospel, Isa.
6.10. Whereupon God in judgment hardens them, Exodus 7.3, 22. and 10.20. and
14.8. So making them more hard and brawny, Isa. 6, 10. John 12.40. And so much
of their hearts. Then

Secondly, The same word does further acquaint us, that Natural and
unregenerate men, are stark blind to spiritual things, especially to what might
make for the good of their souls: Whence they are said by the Holy Ghost, to be
blind, and in darkness, Psalm. 69.23. John 12.40. Mat. 4.16. and 15.14. Ephesians.
4.18.19. and 5.8. 1 Pet. 2.9. Whereby is meant, the darkness of their
understandings: To be Foolish, Isa. 56.10. Romans 1.21, 22. John 3.19. Ignorant,
Ier. 4.2^. Revel. 3.17. Drunken and asleep, not knowing what they do, Luke
23.34. Mad, Luke 15.17. 2 Pet. 2.16. No better than Beasts in their knowledge
of spiritual things, Ier. 51.57. Psalm. 49.11. As the Horse and Mule, which
perceive nothing, Psalm. 32.9. Acts 28.26. Yea they are every where in the Word,
likened to the very worst of Beasts and Serpents; as namely, Lions, 2 Timothy
4.17. Dragons, Revel. 12, 7. and 16.23. Wolves, Mat. 7.15. Tigers, Bears, Wild
Bores, Unicorns, Leopards, Dogs, Phil. 3.2. Swine, Foxes, Serpents, Vipers,
Adders, Aspes, Cockatri^es, Phil. 3. Mat. 23.33. Dan. 7.4, 5. 6.8. Psalm. ^0.13.
Zeph 3.3. Cant. 2.15. And many the like. And as if all this were too little,
many of them blind their own eyes with their wickedness, Psalm. 2.1. to 6. and
their prejudice, 1 Cor. 2.8. yea, mink with their eyes, that they may not see
the truth, Mat. 13.15. Acts 28.27. Whence God in judgment gives them the
Spirit of slumber, Eyes that they should not see, and ears that they should not
hear, Romans 11.2. yea, shuts up their eyes, Isaiah 6.9, 10. And blinds their
minds, John 1^.40, and delivers them up to walk in their own counsels, Jer.
9.14. And to strong delusions, that they should believe lies, and to a
reprobate mind, Romans 1.28. Isaiah 6.9, 10. Mat. 13.15. And lastly, God in
justice delivers them up to Satan, the Prince of darkness, so to be further
blinded, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ shall not shine unto
them, Psalm 69.23. Ephesians. 2.2.2 Cor. 4.3, 4. 2 Thessalonians. 9, 10. By all which you
may see, what a pitiful Chimera the Natural man is, especially touching his
knowledge in spiritual things, and for the good of his soul.

But hear also, what the same Word speaks of the Regenerate: I will give you
their Character also, in the very words of the Holy Ghost, I pray mind them.
It is said, that God circumciseth the hearts of his children, that believe in
him; and of stony hearts, makes them fleshy and soft, Ezekiel. 11.19. Romans 2.29.
yea, he takes away the stony hearts out of their bodies, and gives them new
hearts, Ezekiel. 36 26, even putting a new spirit into them, Ezekiel 11.19.

Besides, he so farther softens them, that they become like melting wax. Psalm
22.14. Then opens them to hear and receive his Word. Acts 16.14. 1 Samuel 10.26.
yea, he washes them from wickedness, Ier. 4.14. Cleansath them, Psalm 73.13.
Purifies them by faith, Acts 15.9. and sheds his love ^^r^ad in their hearts by
the Holy Ghost, Romans 5.5. And having thus prepared them, he writes his Law in
their hearts, Ier. 31.33. Heb. 8.10. and 10.16. and puts in them such a filial
fear of his name, that they shall never i^part from him, Ier. 32.40.

Whence they are said by the Holy Ghost, to be pricked in their hearts, Acts
2.37. to set and apply their hearts to understand his Precepts, Prove. 2.2. Dan.
10.11, 12. and to seek him with their whole hearts, Psalm 1.2. To have
per^eiving hearts, Deuteronomy. 29 4. To lay up his word in their hearts, Psalm
119.11. yea, to have it written in them, Psalm 37.31. and to keep his
Commandments (...) their hearts, Proverbs 3.1. and 4.21. to have contrite
hearts, Psalm 14.18. Repenting hearts, Romans 2.5. Faithful and believing hearts,
Romans ^0.9. Willing hearts, Exodus 35.5. Meek, lowly and humble hearts, Mat. ^3.
to 6. and ^1.25. to have steadfast, Isaiah 38.3. stable, Heb. 13.9. rise, Prove.
18.15. and understanding hearts, 1 Kings 3.12. to have sin^hearts, Ephesians. 6.5.
sincere hearts, Genesis 20.5. true hearts, Heb. 10.22. ^^est and good hearts, Luke
8.15. pure hearts, 1 Pet. 1.22. Matthew. 5.8. clean hearts, Psalm 51.10. and
perfect hearts, 1 Kings 8.61. Psalm 101.2. Isaiah 38.3. And what can be further
said in praise of men! But ^ake another instance.

Secondly, As the Regenerate and Unregenerate differ in their ^^arts, so no
less in their sight and knowledge of spiritual things; whence God is said to
open the eyes of Believers, Isaiah 42.7. Acts 26.18. To see the wonders of his
Law, Psalm 119.18. yea, he gives them the spirit of Wisdom and Revelation, to
teach them all needful truths? Ephesians. 1.17. 1 Cor. 2.10. whence they are said
to have their eyes in their heads, and open, Eccles. 2.14. to have seeing and
enlightened eyes, Ephesians. 1.18. and called children of the light, and of the day,
1 Thessalonians. 5.5. counted a sober, wise, knowing and understanding people, Deuteronomy.
4.6. and that increase in knowledge daily, Prove. 4.18. and many the like
expressions mentioned in the Word, which I purposely omit.

Which being so, were the same but truly believed, rightly applied, and
seriously considered (as O that men would but believe, the Word of God to be
Gods Word) who would not long for, and strive after such a condition. What rare
and incomparable Privileges are these, that the Regenerate man enjoys, over
what the Natural man does? Can there be a greater difference between beasts and
men, or between the living and the dead, than there is between the one and the
other? No. Only the Sensualist perceive^ it not, therefore he desires not to
become so wise, so happy. And if ever they do, it must be the gift of God
alone: In the mean time, if it be so, that so long as we remain in our Natural
condition, we have eyes, and see not; ears, and hear not; hearts, and
understand not spiritual things; as Christ himself plainly affirms, Mat. 13.15.
and his Apostle, Acts 28.27. and before them both, the Prophet Isaiah, Chap.
6.9, 10. and that we are only bent to follow the ways of our own hearts,
Isaiah 57.17. which are deceitful above all things, Ier. 17.9. And that these
men have so lost the Prerogative of their Creation, that they are become Beasts
in condition, if by nature they are blind, deaf, drunk, mad, yea, stark dead in
sin and in soul. How is it possible they should know, bolieve and live, a^
Christ in his Gospel requires; which is so Divine, Spiritual and Supernatural;
so holy, just and good, Rom 7.12.

Again, If men by Nature are become Beasts and Serpents, as the Word, Gods
Dictionary (who can give most congruous names to Natures) every where styles
them; how can any wise man wonder, tha^ these men should refuse a pardon, when
offered them? That they should prefer Satan's service before Christ's; choose
Hell, and refuse Heaven, etc. Yea^ how should it be otherwise, when their
judgments are becom^ so reprobate, that touching spiritual things, they
altogether o^ mostly, judge by the rule of contraries; esteeming good evil, and
evi^ good; put darkness for light, and light for darkness; bitter for sweet,
an^ sweet for bitter: They justify the wicked, and condemn the just, as the
Prophet affirms, Isaiah, Chap. 5.20, 23. And so much of the secon^ Reason. But
to these we may add,

3. Every man is born stark dead in sins and trespasses: You has he quickne^
says the Apostle to his converted Ephesians, that were dead in sins and
tre^passes, Ephesians. 2.1. By one man sin entered into the World, and death by si^
and so death passed upon all men, in whom all have sinned, Romans 5.12. to 2^ O
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death, Romans
17.14. to 2^. As in Adam all dye, 1 Cor. 15.21, 22. Briefly, we are not only
dead in sin, but so burified in the grave of long custom, that we cannot so
much as stir the least joint, no not so much as feel (...) own deadness, nor
desire life, but resist all means tending thereunto; except God be pleased to
raise and restore our souls from the death of sin, and grave of long custom, to
the life of Grace. Now you know, that a dead cond^tion, is an insensible
condition: The dead are not frighted with fire and brimstone; the dead hear
not, though God be on Mount Eball, thnudring curses upon curses; the dead feel
not, though that which is ^^^vier than Mountains of Lead be lying on their
backs. Nor can it be expected, that dead persons should be able to choose the
good, and refuse the evil: Those that are dead, tell them of everlasting
burnings, they fear it ^t: Offer them everlasting joys, they value them not.

Again, This may serve to inform you, why they are never troubled for their
sins, be they as wicked as Heliogabalus was, who ^^vented all new vices he
could, and destroyed the memory of all ancient vir^^^s. How many men live, as
if the Gospel were quite contrary ^o the rule of the Law? As if God were
neither to be feared nor ^ared for; as if they were neither beholding to him,
nor stood ^^aw of him, both out of his debt and danger; yea, as if there were
no God to judge, nor Hell to punish, nor Heaven to reward: That (...) even make
a trade of sin, and live as if they had no souls to ^^ve: Such as have shaken
out of their hearts the fear of God, the (...) of the world, the love of
Heaven, and the dread of Hell; not once ^uring what is thought or ^poken of
them here, nor what becomes ^f them hereafter: yet nevertheless, be their sins
never so many and innumerable for multitude; never so great and heinous, for
^^ality, and magnitude, not one of these sins ever trouble them: ^^a, they can
find wherewith to boast of; As that they are no dissemblers, yea, they hate the
hypocrisy of Professors, they do not ^^stifie themselves, and despise others,
like the Puritans, they are ^ot factious, singular, censorious, etc. they pay
every man his ^wn, and do no man wrong, they love an honest man with their
^earts, etc. and as touching their Faith in Christ, they never doubt^d in all
their lives (a plain confession, that they ^re strangers to ^aith; for he who
never doubted, never believed) nor were they ever ^^oubled in mind, as many
scrupulous fools are (an evident proof, that Satan the strong man keeps
possession, whereby all is quiet and in peace; ^esides (which strikes the nail
up to the head) they are no Changlings, ^^ey are the same they were ever; a
plain confession that they are ^et (...) Devils children.

(...) But this is not all; for admit these blind Sensualists are so
no^^riously vicious, that Satan cannot cover their sins, or totally ^^ind them;
rath^r than own their own wicked^ess, they will plead the goodness of their
hearts, desires, meanings: As whatsoever their words and actions be, they thank
God, they have as good hearts and mean as well as the best: As commonly they
think best of themselves, that have least cause: Nor can the best Preacher
alive, ever bring them off of that cursed principle of nature, laid down Revel.
3. They are rich, and wise, and good enough, and want nothing; when indeed they
are wretched, and miserable, and poor, and b^ind. and naked of all spiritual
endowments, Verse 17.1 Tim. 6.4, only they want eyes to see the same. And no
wonder; for Satan who is the God of this World, and the Princ^ of Darkness,
Ephesians. 2 2. so rules in the darkness of their understandings, and so blinds the
minds of his servants, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ cannot
shine unto them. Whence their deceitful hearts serve them as Jae^ did Sisera,
who promised him protection and safety, but paid him with shame and ruin,
Judges 4.18. to 22. It is very observable, how there are none more jocond,
confident and secure, than the worst of sinners, they can strut it under an
unsupportable Mass of Oaths, Blaspemies, Thesis, Murders, Adulteries,
Drunkenness, and other the like sins, yea, can easily swallow these Spiders with
Mithridates, and digest them too (...) when one that is regenerate, shrinks
under the burden of wandering thoughts, and want of proficiency. But why is it?
they are dead in sin^ Ephesians. 2.1. Revel. 3.1. Now lay a Mountain upon a dead
man, he feels no^ once the weight.

To a Christian that has the life of grace, the least sin lies heavy upon the
conscience; but to him that is dead, let his sins be as heavy as a Mountain of
Lead, he feels in them no weight at all. The more grace, the more spiritual
life; and the more spiritual life, the more antipathy to the contrary: whence
none are so sensible of corruption^ as those that have the most living souls.

But had they eyes they would see, that those streams of defilement that are in
their lives, do but show what a fountain of wickedness there is in their
hearts: Even as a little ware men lay on their stales, does show the great
abundance they have in their shops and Warehouses. Poor souls! they brag of
good hearts, when the heart of mam, by nature, is like Hell it self, whose fire
of lust is unquenchable For all those monstrous impieties which the lives of
men are tainted with, are not to be compared with the venom that lurks in the
heart of every man by nature. But alas! how few see in themselves a general
defect of all righteousness and holiness, wherein at first they were created?
How few are convinced of an antipathy in themselves to all that is good, and
that the^ are haters of Go^ by nature? That they are dead in trespasses and
sins, and that the Devil works in them his pleasure, and that he possesses the
hear^ of every ^nregenerate man. Ephesians. 2.2. yea, touching these o^ any other
saving truths, there is no convincing them.

Neither is this that you have heard all, or the worst; for they not only
think themselves thus wise and good, but they think as basely of those that are
better. As it is worth the^ ^observing, how basely these Sensualists think of
the Religious, and their ways^ O what a poor slave do they hold the man of a
tender Conscience: They dare deny any fact, and wager lies with that
Grandfather of lies and Liars; we dare not tell an untruth, though it were to
save our lives: They dare drink themselves into beasts; we dare not, lest we
should never be recovered again unto men: They dare sin God in the face, and
presume upon his patience; we fear him as a consuming fire, etc. But you must
know, that until we are born again, we are like Nicodemus, who knew not what it
was to be born again, John 3.4. Until we become zealous our selves, we are like
Festus, who thought zeal madness, Acts 26.24. Until we be humble our selves, we
are like Michael, who mocked David for his humility, and thought him a fool for
dancing before the Ark, 2 Samuel 6.16. For, to carnal-minded men, all Religion
seems foolishness, 1 Cor. 1.18. It faring between the Sensual and Spiritual, as
it does between Youth and Age: For as Young men think Old men to be f^ols, but
Old men know the Young to be fools; so Worldlings think the Religious fools,
but the Religious know them to be fools, because they have had the experience
of both conditions; as the old have been young, but the other are utterly
unacquainted with what they see and know.

And let so much of this Book suffice, to be given to all that pass along
Stratford (admit they be Mockers at the means that others are saved by; even
such as will neither read good Books themselves, nor permit others; but in pure
spite to Religion and goodness, tare them in pieces, so soon as stuck up,
little considering who sets them on work, and makes them guilty of
soul-murther) only take a few lines as a rarity, out of what is to follow of
this subject.

Above all other things, study 1. To know thy self in Adam. 2. To know God in
Christ: for this is the perfection of all knowledge, and all other knowledge
without this, is but ignorance, John 17.3. And for the attaining that, peruse a
precious Book, entitled, A Gospel Glass for English Professors. Alas! many who
bare the names of good Christians and Wise men, deserve not the name of men;
for when you begin to value your souls, and to lay out your thoughts and
endeavors about Eternity, and how to be saved, you begin to be men, but ^t
before.

Now so many as prize these twelve leaves, will need no intrea^y to find out,
what follows in the ensuing discourse. In the mean time, seriously mind (for
most men do but trifle in their hearing and reading) what I have here added of
another subject, ^oless considerable.

The Sin of almost who not: A Horrid Sin, and yet little laid to heart, seldom
by any Repented of.
IF Satan to gratiate and gain himself credit, could with one lie so lesson
Gods Honor, Goodness and Fidelity to our First Parents, as to make him an
Impostor, and thereby frustrate and make fruitless, all that he had done and
preached to them immediately before, Genesis 3.4, 5. how easy is it for his
Instruments, wicked men, with one slander, to raise their low merit on the
ruins of another reputation, and to deprive him of his good name, which a
virtuous life for many years has deservedly gained him. A man's honest fame,
being like the Merchants wealth, which is got in many years, and lost in an
hour.

Nor is a slander or calumny, other than the Devils mind in thy mouth, his
heart in thy lips; for he speaks in and by thee, as then he did by the Serpent,
when ever thou backbitest or slanderest, Mat. 16.2^. John 8.44. Or as
Chrysostom has it, a lie or slander is but the Devils Arrow, shot by man's
Bow: He lends thee his lies and malice, and borrows thy tongue to utter
them; because the Devil wants a tongue.

The Accuser of the Brethren makes choice of wicked men to traduce those whom
he cannot seduce as he desires; as we may plainly see in our Saviors example;
who notwithstanding h^^ fulfilled all righteousness, and did all things well,
for in his mouth was found no guile, nor fault in his manners, nor error in his
Doctrine, which of you (said he) can rebuke me of sin? yet the world traduced
him for a Samaritan, a Blasphemer, a Sorcerer, a Wine-bibber, an^ Enemy to
Caesar, and what not?

There was never any so innocent or virtuous, to whom such Belialists took not
exceptions; because they are as deeply in love with vice^ as others are with
virtue Yea, whom all men commend, you have some Thersites will take occasion to
blast. As for their deserts, they will sk^p them over, as some nimble
Commentators will skip over hard places; but their failings, infirmities and
miscarriages they will set out with discants, no less tedious than maliciou^
and odious.

Nor can thou more manifest thy self to be of Satan's highest ^^m,, than by
calumniating. Gregory Nazianzen used to tell his ^riends, that Julian the
Apostate would prove a notorious wick^d man, he took such delight in disputing
against the good and ^oodness.

Tale-bearers know no better way of commending themselves, ^han by disparaging
others: But it proves the contrary, for he ^ut resembles the silly Fly, which
findgeth her own wings, and ^orments her self in the flaming light that she
labors to extin^uish and put out: He but discredits himself, to discredit
others; ^^Tamar defiled herself, to be revenged on her Father in Law ^^dah.

But O the mischief thou do! for thy slander passing through ^any mouths (as
one Dog sets many Dogs on barking) does multiply and increase like a snow-ball,
or like a stone cast into a pond, which ^akes but one circle, but that one
begets an hundred; and in ^se the slander spreads it self, the first Relator
may have to an^^er for the sins of a thousand: Neither are some more prone
(...) raise slanders, than others are to believe and spread them; as (...) see
by our Saviors example, Matthew. 28.12. to 16.

Again, As these spitting Adders will smite their stings very deep, do their
wounds are commonly incurable. A slander once raised, ^ill scarce ever dye;
witness that lie raised upon our Savior, Mat. ^8.12. to 1^. It is like
Wildefire, that cannot be quenched; for (...) the least, it leaves such a scar
of suspicion upon the parties ^ame and credit, that even death it self, which
cures all other ^ings, will not be able to cure.

Again thirdly, Take away a man's good name, and all virtuous ^ctions will seem
but counterfeit hypocrisy and slender rea^ons, even conjectures and
probabilities, strike as great a stroke, and work as forcibly with the common
people, as deep demon^^rations. Wherefore no wonder that it is said, Deuteronomy.
27.24. ^ursed be he that smites his neighbor secretly; and Psalm 101.5. Him
^at privily slandereth his neighbor, will I destroy. And yet how great is ^he
number of those that backbite and slander their neighbors! ^^is the sin of
almost who not. It was said of Golden mouthed Chrysostom, that he never spoke
ill of any man; find out such another, and ^ll put his name in the Chronicle
with letters of Gold. O that so many ^^ves and fishes, as did feed five
thousand in the wilderness, would ^ut stop their mouths, who amongst us do
make it their fore and ^^er Grace at the Table, to disgrace some Innocent;
Perhaps their Masters whom they live by, or their own faithful Minister, or
some emi^nt Christian, and then the sin is triple; for he that delpiseth,
tra^uceth, or any way wrongs one of Christ's Ambassadors of the Mi^istry, or
active Christian, strikes at the Image of God in him, by whose Spirit he both
speaks and acts; and God takes it as if i^ were done to himself: For proof of
both, see Matthew. 25.45. Is^ 37.22, 23. Psalm ^4.22, Acts 9.4, 5. 1 Thessalonians. 4.8.
John 15.25, 24, ^^ Numb. 16.11. 1 Samuel 8.7. Mark 9.42. 2 Kings 2.24. Wherefore
loo^ to it in time, and consider withal, that the Backbiter is bound i^
Conscience, Reason and Religion, to restore the good name o^ his neighbor,
which he has by detraction taken away; an^ that is exceeding hard, if not
impossible: And yet how many ha^ thou injured by tale-bearing, backbiting and
slandering! An^ must not God work a miracle, to persuade thee to make
restitution^ As first, to go to the parties wronged, and there confess the
wrong and crave their pardon: then to go from house to house to vindicate and
clear the party, where ever thou have wickedly staine^ and aspersed his good
name, which even makes me cry out, Lord who shall be saved! Or, many are
called, and but a few chosen.

(...) And yet the willing ear detracts as much, if not worse, than the
slanderers tongue; this being the Tempter, the other the tempted. The Receiver
we know is as bad as the Thief, for he makes it as much his own sin, as if he
had been the first Relator; and were ther^ no Receivers in this case, there
would be no Thieves: For ever^ the least check or frown of a standerby, will
silence the barking tongue, Prove. 25.23. O that men would spit at this Asp or
Sl^^ worm, so soon as it but begins to hiss. O for an Antedote that would cure
this poison of Aspe^, it were worth a million of mone^ says,

R. Junius.

YOu are desired to read these 22 pages in your Families, to lend them t^ your
Neighbors, and to send your Friends ^o fetch them; at least that you will
fasten them to some wall. The which done, your Consciences will more than
requite you: for which read Acts 11.14. James 5.20. Da^^ 12.3.


