AN Experimental INDEX Of The HEART: In which (as in a Looking-glass) both
Profane and Civil men may see enough, to make them in love with Religion. Being
a most happy and providential Conference between two Friends: (after the ones
heart was changed;) the which may both provoke and encourage all sorts of
Sinners to read the same, that (in the least) love themselves. Drawn up and
published for the good of all.

By R. YOUNG of Roxwell in Essex, Florilegus.

Add this as a Second Part to those Three Fundamental Principles of Christian
Religion; Entitled, A short and sure way to Grace and Salvation.

Sect. XXVII.
A Loose Libertine, meeting with his Friend that had lately been a Formal
Christian; he greets him as follows:

SIR! me thinks I have observed in you a strange alteration, since our last
meeting at Middleburrough: nor only in your behavior, company, and converse;
but even in your countenance: What is the matter, if I may be so bold?


Convert. Truly Sir, you are not at all mistaken, nor am I unwilling to
acquaint you with the cause; if you can affoard to hear it.

Soon after my return into England, I was carried by a friend to hear a Sermon:
where the Minister so represented the very thoughts, secrets, and
deceitfulness of my heart unto my conscience; that I could not but say of him,
as the Woman of Samaria once spoke of our Savior: He has told me all things
that ever I did. Which made me conclude with that Unbeliever, 1 Cor. 14. 24,
25. That God was in him of a truth: nor could he ever have so done, if he were
not of God. As the Young Man in the Gospel reasoned with the Pharisees,
touching Jesus when he had opened his eyes, that had been blind from his
birth, Joh. 9. 32, 33. Whereupon I could have no peace nor rest, until I had
further comm^^ed with him about my estate; for I found my self in a lost
condition touching Eternity: It faring with me as it did with those Jews, Acts
2. when Peter by his searching Sermon, had convinced them that Christ, whom
they had by wicked hands crucified and slain, was the only Son of God, and
Lord of glory, ver. 36. 37. And having had the happiness to enjoy the benefit
of his ^^ge advice as I stood in need thereof; (God having given him the tongue
of the learn^d, to administer a word in season to them that are wea^y, Is^. 50.
4.) I bless God, his word and Spirit has wrought in me such a change and
strange alteration, that it has opened mine eyes that were (...) before,
inclined my will to obedience, which before was rebelli^us, softened my heart,
sanctified and quite changed my ^ffections: so that I now love that good which
before I hated, and hate that evil which before I loved; and (...) deli^^ted
with those holy exercises, which heretofore did most displease me; and am
displeased wi^h those vain pl^as^^es and filt^^e sins which in times p^st did
most delight me. Which is such a mercy, that no tougue ^s able to express!
For till that hour I went on in the broad way, and worlds road to destruction,
without any mist ust; whereas now God has been pleased to take me into his
Kingdom of grace here, and w^l never leave me, until he has brought me to
his Kingdom of glory hereafter.


Loose Libertine. What you speak makes me wonder: for I ever he^d you the
compleatest man of my acquaintance; just in all your dealings, temperate and
civil in your depo^tment; yea, I have never seen you exceed in the least, nor
heard you swear an Oath, ^xc^pt faith and troth, and that very rarely. Besides,
you have been a good Protestant, and gone to Church all your days.


Convert. What you speak, none that know me can contradict; nor could they ever
accuse me of any scandalous crime, or unjust act* Yea, I had the same thoughts
of my self; and should any one have told me formerly, that I was such a great
sinner, such a Devil incarnate as I was! I should have replied as Hazael did to
the Prophet, (telling him of the abominable wickedness he would e're long
commit) What am I a D^, etc. 2 Kings 8. 12, 13. And no wonder, for as every man
in his natural condition, is stark blind to spiritual objects, 1 Cor. 2. 14. so
the heart of man is deceitful above all things: even so deceitful, that none
but God alone can know it, as the Prophet shows, Jer. 17. 10. But because this
is a truth that transcends your belief, and because it may be of singular use
to you also, to know the same: I will give you a short character of my former
condition; the which done, I doubt not but you will assent unto what I have
^itherto said, or shall further relate.


Sect. XXVIII.
First touching my knowledge, (I mean saving knowledge, without which the soul
cannot be good, as wise Solomon witnesses, Prove. 19. 2.) it was such, (though
I thought my self wiser then to make scruple of, or perplex my self about
matters of Religion, as do the religious: even as the King of Tyrus thought
himself wiser then Daniel, Ezekiel. 28. 3.) that spiritual things were mostly
represented to my understanding false, and clean contrary to what they are
indeed. Like corporal things in a Looking-glass, wherein those that are on the
right hand seem to be on the left, and those that are on the left hand seem to
be on the right. As it fared with Saint Paul, while he was in his natural
condition, Acts 26. 9. which made me think and call evil, good; and good, evil;
bitter, sweet; and sweet, bitter; to justify the wicked, and condemn the just,
as the Prophet complains, Isa. 5. 20, 23.

As for instance, I most sottishly thought, that I both loved, and served God
as I ought; yea, I should have taken it in four scorn, if any one had
questioned the same: when indeed I was a Traitor to God, and took up arms
against all that worshipped him in Spirit and in truth. I was so far from
loving and serving him, that I hated those that did it; and that for their so
doing, I could also hear him blasphemed, reproached, and dishonored, without
being once stirred or moved at it. I loved him dearly, but I could never
affoard to speak a word for him; and likewise his Children entirely, but
instead of justifying them, or speaking in their defense when I heard them
scoft, scorned and abused by wicked and ungodly men; all my delight was to jeer
at, flight and slander them where ever I came. I more feared the Magistrate,
then I feared God; and more regarded the blasts of men's breath, then the fire
of God's wrath. I chose rather to disobey God, then to displease great ones;
and feared more the worlds scorns, then his anger.

And the like of Christ that died for me; a strong argument that I loved
Christ, when I hated all that resembled him in holiness. Yea, I so hated
holiness, that I most bitterly hated men for being holy: insomuch that my blood
would rise at the sight of a good man, as some stomachs will rise at the fight
of sweetmeats. I was a Christian in name, but I could scoff at a Christian
indeed; I could honor the dead Saints in a formal profession, while I worried
the living Saints in a cruel persecution. I condemned all for Roundheads, that
had more Religion then a Heathen; or knowledge of heavenly things, then a child
in the womb has of the things of this life; or conscience, then an Atheist; or
care of his soul, then a Beast. I had always the basest thoughts of the best
men: making ill constructions of whatsoever they did or spoke: as the Scribes
and Pharisees dealt by our Savior.

Sect. XXIX.
As, O what a poor slave did I hold the man of a tender conscience to be! yea,
how did I applaud my self for being zeallesse, and fearlesse; together with my
great discretion, and moderation: when I saw this man vexed for his zeal, that
other hated for his knowledge, a third persecuted for the profession of his
Faith, etc. For (being like Cain, Ishmael, Eliab, Michol, Pharaoh, and Festus,
I thought their Religion Puritanisme, their conscience of sin, hypocrisy;
their profession, ^issimul^tion their prudence, policy; their faith and
confidence, presumption; their zeal of God's glory, to be p^ide and ma^ice;
their obedience to God's laws, rebellion to P^iaces; their execution of ju^ice,
cruelty, etc. If they were any thing devou^ or forward to admonish others, that
so they might pluck them out of the fi^e; I conceived them to be besides
themselves: as our Savior was though^ to be by his Kinsfolk, and Saint Paul by
Festus, Mark 3* 1. John 10. 20. Acts 26. 24. 1 Cor. 1. 18. My religion was to
oppose the power of religion; and my knowledge of the truth, to know how to
argue against the truth. I never affected Christ's Ambassadors, that preached
the glad tidings of salvation, but had a spleen against them; yea, I hated a
Minister, for being a Minister; especially, if a god^y and zeal^us one, that
sp^ke home to my conscience, and told me of my sins; much more if he would not
admit me to to the Lord's ^able without trial and examination: yea, then like
Ahab to Eliah, I became his enemy, and hated him ever after; would impeach his
credit, and detain from him his dues. And are not all these strong evidences,
tha^ I loved and served God, and my Redeemer as I ought? But to make it more
manifest, what a rare Christian I was.

I thought my self a Believer; yea, I could boast of a strong faith, when yet I
fell short of the very Devils in believing: for they believe the threats and
judgments contained in the Word, and tremble thereat, James 2. 19. Whe^eas I
thought them but Scar-crows to f^ight the simple withal: yea, I held Hell it
self but a fancy, not worth the fearing.

Because I was not notoriously wicked, but had a form of godliness, was civil,
etc. I was able to delude my own soul* and put off all reproofs and
threatenings; by comparing my self with those, that I presumed were worse then
my self: as, Drunkards, Adulterers, Blasphemers, oppressors, shedders of blood,
and the like; counting none wicked but such. Yea, looking upon these, I admired
my own holiness; and thought my moral honesty, would be sufficient to save me.
Nor did I know wherein I had offended.

And whereas the Law is spir^tual, and binds the heart from affecting, no less
then the hand from acting: I was so blind and ignorant that I thought the
commandment was not broken, if the outward gross sin be forborne. Whence these
were my thoughts, I never brake the first commandment, of having many gods:
for I was no Papist, nor Idolater: nor the second, for I worshipped God aright:
nor the third, for I had been no common swea^er, only a few pet^y oaths: not
the fourth, for I had every Sabbath gone duly to Church: not the fifth, for I
ever honored my parents, and have been a loyal subject: not the sixth, seventh,
eighth, ninth, or tenth, for I never commi^ted murder, or adultery, never
stole ou^h^, never bare falls witness; nor could I call to mind, that I had at
any time coveted my Neighbors wise servant, estate, etc. And nothing more
common with me, then to brag of a good heart and meaning, of the strength of my
faith and hope, of my just and upright dealing, etc. And because I abstained
from notorious sins, I thought my self an excellent Christian; if God was not
beholding to me for not wounding his name with oaths, for not drinking and
playing out his Sabbaths, for not railing on his Ministers, for not oppressing
and persecuting his poor members, etc.

Sect. XXX.
And yet had it been so, as I imagined; admit I had never offended in the least
all my life; either in thought, word, or deed: yet this were but one ha^f of
what I ow to God; this were but to observe the negative part of his law, st^ll
the affirmative part thereof I had been so far from performing; that I had not
so much as th^ught of it. And to be just in the sight of God, and graciously
accepted of him; these two things are required: the satisf^ctory part to escape
Hell, and the meritorious part to get Heaven. And the true method of grace is,
Cease to do evil, Learn to do well. Isa. 1^ 1^, 17. The Fig Tree was cursed,
not for bearing evil fruit; but because it bare no good. The evil Servant was
not bound hand and foot, and cast into prison, for wasting his Masters goods;
but for not gaining with them* And those Reprobates at the last day, shall be
bid depart into eve^lasting fire; not for wronging or rob^ing of any, but for
not giving, for not comforting Christ's poor members. M^th. 25. So that my case
was most desperate! For though, with that Pharisee Luke. 18. 11. I was apt to
thank God, and brag; that I was just, and paid every man his due: yet I never
thought of being holy, and of paying God his dues; as his due of believing, or
Repenting, of new obedience, his due of praying, hearing, conferring,
meditating on his word and works, sanctifying his Sabbaths, and instructing my
Children and Servants; teaching them to fear the Lord. His due of Love, Fear,
Thankfulness, Zeal for his Glory, charity and mercy to Christ's poor members,
and the like.

I should have served God in spirit, and according to Christ's Gospel: as all
that are wise hea^ted do live, and believe, and hear, and invocate, and hope,
and fear, and love, and worship God in such manner, as his word prescribes. I
should have been effectually called, and become a new Creature by regeneration;
being begotten and born a new, by the immortal seed of the Word. I should have
found an apparent change wrought, in my judgment, affections, and actions; to
what they were formerly. The Old man should have changed with the New man,
worldly wisdom with Heavenly wisdom, carnal love for spiritual love,
servile fear for Christian and filial fear, id^e thoughts for holy thoughts,
vai^ words for holy and wholesome words fl^shly works for works of
righteousness: even hating what I formerly loved, and loving what I formerly
hated.

But alas! I have heard the Gospel day after day, and year after year: which
is the strong arm of the Lo^d, and the mighty power of God to salvation. That
is quick, and powerful, and sharper then any two-edged-sword; and yet stood it
out and resisted, instead of submitting to Christ's call; even refusing the free
offer of grace and salvation. I have heard the word faithfully, and powerfully
preached for forty years: yet remained in my natural condition unregenerate:
without which new birth there is no being saved, as our Savior affirms. John.
3. 5. I had not trodden one step in the way to conversion: for the first part of
conversion, is to love them that love God: 1 John 3. 10, 11, 14. I should daily
have grown in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ:
but I was so far from growing in grace, that I had not one (...) of grace or
holiness; without which (...) man shall see the Lord. Heb. ^2. 14. I was all
for observing the second Table, without respect to the first: or all for
outward conformity, not at all for spiritual and inward holiness of the heart.

Sect. XXXI.
Either what I did was not morally good for the matter, or not well done for
the manner; nor to any right ends: as out of duty and thankfulness to God, and
my Redeemer; and out of love to my fellow members. Without which the most
glorious performances, and rarest virtues; are bu^ shining sins, or beautiful
abominations. Gods glory was not my principal end, nor to be saved my greatest
care.

I was a good, civil, moral, honest hypocrite, or infidel: but none of these
graces, grew in the Garden of my heart. I did not shine out as a light, by a
holy conversation to glorify God, and win others. Now only to refrain evil,
except a man hates it also, and does the contrary good, is to be evil still:
because honesty without piety, is but a body without a soul:

All my Religion was either superstition, or formallity, or hypocrisy. I had a
form of Godliness, but denied the power thereof: I often drew near unto God
with my mouth, and honored him with my lips: but my heart was far from him.
Isay. 29. 13. Mark. 7. 2. to 14. Matthew. 15. 7 to 10. All which considered viz.
the means which God had afforded me, and the little use I had made thereof;
left me in a far worse condition, then the very heathen that never heard of
Christ. So that it was Gods unspeakable mercy, that I am not at this present
frying in Hell flames, never to be freed.

God has sent unto us all his Servanes the Prophets, rising up early, and they
have been instant in preaching the Gospel, both in season, and out of season:
but my carnal heart has ever been flint unto God, wax to Satan: you shall dye
if you continue in the practice of sin, I heard: but you shall not dye, as
says the devil, I believed.

Sect. XXXII.
Besides all this, suppose I had none of these to answer for; neither sins of
Commission, nor sins of Omission: yet Original sin were enough to damn me, no
need of any more; and yet my actual transgressions have been such, and so
many, and my ingratitude therein so great; that it might have sunk me down with
shame, and left me hopeless of ever obataining pardon for them. As see but
some small part of my monstrous, and divelish ingratitude to so good a God, so
loving and merciful a Savior and Redeemer; that has done, and suffered so
much for me, even more then can either be expressed or conceived, by any heart
were it as deep as the Sea!

Touching what God and Christ has done for me, in the first place he gave me
my self, and all the Creatures to serve for my use; yea he created me after his
own Image, in righteousness, and holiness, and in perfect knowledge of the
truth, with a power to stand, and for ever to continue in a most blessed, and
happy condition. But this was nothing in comparison; for when I was in a sad
condition, when I had forfeited all this and my self; when by sin I had turned
that Image of God into the Image of Satan, and wilfully plunged my soul and
body into eternal torments: when I was become his enemy, mortally hating him,
and to my utmost fighting against him, and taking part with his only enemies
sin and Satan; not having the least thought or desire of reconcilement, but a
perverse and obstinate will, to resist all means tending thereunto: he did
redeem me, not only without asking, but even against my will; so making of me
his cursed enemy, a Servant, of a Servant a Son, of a Son an Heir, and Co^-h^ir
with Christ. Gal. 4. 7. But how have I requited this so great, so superlative a
mercy? All my recompense of Gods l^ve unto me, has been to do that which he
hates, and to hate those whom he loves.

Christ the fountain of all good is my Lord, by a manifold right, and I his
servant by all manner of obligations. First, he is my Lord by the right of
Creation, as being his wo^kmanship made by him. Secondly, by the right of
Redemption, being his purchase bought by him. Thirdly, of preservation, being
kept, upheld, and maintained by him. Fourthly, his by Vocation, even of his
family; having admitted me a member of his visible Church. Fifthly, his also
(had it not been my own fault) by sanctification, whereby to posses^ me.
Lastly, he would have me of his Count by glorification, that he might crown me;
so that I was every way his. God had raised me from a beggar to a great estate:
but how did I require him? I would not if possible, suffer a godly and
conscientious Minister to be chosen, or to abide where I had to do; but to
bring in one that would flatter sin, and flout holiness; discoura^e the godly,
and encourage the wicked, I used both my own, and all my friends utmost
ability. Much more might be mentioned, bu^ I fear to be tedious.

Now argue with all the world, and they will conclude, that there is no vice
like ingratitude! But I have been more ingraceful to God, then can be expressed
by the best Orator alive. It was horrible ingratitude in the Jews to scou^ge
and crucify Christ, who did them good every way; for he healed their diseases,
fed their bodies, enlightened their minds, of God became man, and lived
miserably amongst them many years, that he might save their souls: but they
fell short of my ingratitude to God, in that most of them were not in the least
convinced, that he was the M^ssias sent from God, and promised from the
beginning. But I have not only denied this Lord that bought me, but I hated
him; yea, most spi^efully and maliciously fought on Satan's, and sins side
against him; and persecuted his children, and the truth with all my might: and
all this against knowledge, and conscience, after some measure of illumination,
which cannot be affirmed of the Jews. Yet miserable wretch that I was, if I
could have given him my body and soul, they should have been saved by it, but
he were never the better for them.

Sect. XXXIII.
Lastly, to tell you that which is more strange! Notwithstanding all this that
has been mentioned, and much more: Yet I thought my self a good Christian
forsooth; yea, with that young man in the Gospel, I thought I had kept all the
commandments. Nor was I a whit troubled for sin, either original, or act^al:
but my conscience was at quiet, and I was at peace, neither did any sin trouble
me. Yea, I would appl^ud my self with that Phari^^e, Luke 18. 9, to 15. and
say, I was not like other men: not once doubting of my salvation. I ever
refused to do what my Makes commanded, and yet confidently hoped to escape what
he threatened. No^ did I doubt of having Christ my Redeemer and Advocate in the
next lif^, when I had been a bitter enemy to him and his m^mbers in this life.
H^re was bl^ndnesse with a witness; as it is not to be believed how blind and
blockish men are, that have only the flesh for their guide; espe^^ally if ^hey
have hardened their hearts, and sea^ed their consciences with a customary
sinning. As I could give you for instance, a large catalogue of rare examples,
how sin has besotted men: and what stark fools carnal men are in spiritual
things; he they never so wise for mundane knowledge. But least i^ should be
taken for a digression or excursion, you shall have a list of them by
themselves; the which I will add as an Appendix to this Discourse, or Dialogue.
In the mean time I have given you a brief of my manifold provocations, and
great ingratitude to my Maker and Redeemer (for otherwise I might be endless
in the prosecution thereof). It remains that I should in like manner lay open
my original defilement; which is the fountain whence all the former (whether
sins of commission, or sins of omission) do flow. But touching it be pleased to
peruse that small Tract, entitled, A short and sure way to Grace and Salvation:
Or, Three Fundamental Principles of Christian Religion, by R. Y. from page 4,
to page 10.

Sect. XXXIV.
Loose Libertine. If this has been your case, no wonder it has startled you;
for to deal plainly with you, as you have done with me; what I have heard from
you, makes me also tremble. For if such honest moral men, that live so
unreprovably as you had done, go not to heaven; what will become of me? that
have been openly profane, and notoriously wicked all my time? Yea, it contented
me no^ to do wickedly my self, and so damn my own soul: but I have been the
occasion of drawing hundreds to Hell with me; by seducing some, and giving ill
example to others, (the infection of sin, being much worse then the act). As
how many have I drawn to be Drunkard^? and swearers, and who emongers, and
profane persons? insomuch, that the blood of so many souls as I have drawn
away, will be required at my hands. Yea, my life ha^h been so debauched and
licentious, that I have brought a scandal upon the Gospel, and made it odious
to the very Turks and Infidels, Romans 2. 24.


Convert. Alas! what I did that was morally good, or what evil I refrained,
was more for self end^, or more for fear of men's Laws, then for love of
Christ's Gospel. True, I went under the notion of an honest man, and a good
Christian: I was baptized into the faith, and made a member of Christ's visible
Church: but I was so far from endeavoring to perform, what I then promised;
that in effect I even renounced both Christ, and my Baptism, in persecuting
him, and all that sincerely professed his name; thinking I did God good service
therein, Joh. 16. 2. Gal. 1. 13, 14. Phil. 3. 6. Nor was it for want of
ignorance, that you thought so of me: for by nature (be we never so mild and
gentle) we are all the seed of the Serpent, Genesis 3* 15 and children of the
Devil, Joh. 8. 44. Yea, ^he very best moral man is but a tame Devil, as
Athanasius well notes. But it is a true proverb, the blind eat many a fly;
and all colors are alike to him that is in the dark.


Loose Libertine. So much the worse is my condition: for my conscience tells
me, there is not a word you have spoken of your self, but I can justly apply
the same unto my own soul, and a great deal more. For whereas you have been a
moral honest man; so that none except your self, could tax you for breaking
either God's Law, or man's: I have been so wicked and profane, that I could
most presumptu^usly, and of set purpose, take a pride in my wickedness, commit
it with greediness, speak for it, de^end it, joy in it, boast of it, tempt and
enforce to it; yea, mock them that disliked it. As if I would send challenges
into Heaven, and make love to destruction; and yet did applaud my self, and
prefer my own condition before other men's: saying, I was no di^^embler; yea, I
hated the hypocrisy of Professors: I do not justify my self, and despise
others, like the Puritanes: I am not factious, schismatical, singular,
censorious, etc. I am not rebellious, no^ contentious, like the Brownists, and
Anabaptists. I am a good fellow, and love an honest man with my heart, etc. and
as touching a good conscience, I was never troubled in mind, as many
scrupulous fools are. I have a good heart, and mean as well as the precisest.
But now I see the Devil and my own deceitful heart deluded me so; that my whole
life hitherto, has been but a dream, and that like a blind man, I was running
headlong to Hell, when yet I thought my self in the way to heaven. Just as if a
beggar should dream, that hewe^e a King, or as if a traitor should dream of his
being crowned, when indeed he was to be beheaded; the case of Laodicea, Rev. 3.
17. the young man in the Gospel, Luke 18. 20, 21. and that Pharisee, spoken of
Luke 18. 11. 12.


Sect. XXXV.
Convert. It was not your case alone, but so it fares with the worst of
sinners: Only it much rejoices me, that it has pleased God to open your eyes,
to see all this in your self. For flesh and blood has not revealed it unto
you. Yea we are naturally so blind, and deaf, and dead in sin and in soul:
that we can no more discern our spiritual filthiness, nor feel sin to be a
burden, then a blind Ethiopian can see his own blackness, or then a dead-man
can feel the weight of a burden, when it is laid upon him. Acts. 28. 27. Isay.
6. 9, 10.

And this common experience shows; for if you observe it, who more* socond,
confident and secure, then the worst of sinners; they can strut it under an
unsupportable Mass ^f oaths, blasphemies, thefts, murders, adulteries,
drunkness and other the like sins; yea can easily swallow these spiders with
Mithridates, and digest them too: when one that is regenerate, shrinkes under
the burden of wandering thoughts, and want of proficiency. But why is it? they
are dead in sin. Ephesians. 2. 1. Revel. 3. 1. Now lay a mountain upon a dead-man,
he feels not once the weight.

To a Christian that has the life of grace, the least sin lies heavy upon the
conscience: but to him that is dead, let his sins, be as heavy as a mountain of
l^^d; he feels in them no weight at all.

Again, they are insensible of their fin and danger, because ignorant for for
what the eye sees not, the hear truth not. Security makes wordlings merry,
and therefore are they secure, because they are ignorant. A dunce we know,
seldom makes doubts: yea a fool says Solomon, boasts and is confident.
Prove. 14. 16. neither do blind-men ever blush. And the truth is, were it not
for pride and ignorance, a world of men would be ashamed to have their faces
seen abroad: For take away from men's minds vain opinions, flattering hopes,
false valuations, imaginatious and the like; you will leav the minds of most
men and women, but poor sh^unken things; full of melancholy, indisposition,
and unpleasing to themselves. Ignorance is a vail or curtain to hide away their
sins: whereupon they are never troubled in conscience, nor macerated with cares
about eternity; but think that all will be wel^.

The div^l and the flesh, prophesy prosperity to sin, yea life and salvation,
as the Pope promised the powder-traitors: but death and damnation (which Gods
spirit threa^e^s) will prove the crop they will reap. For God is true, the
devil and all flesh are liars.

When we become regenerate, and forsake sin; then the devil strongly, and
strangely assaults us: as he did Christ, when he was newly baptized; and Pharoh
the Children of Israel, when they would forsake Egypt; and Herod the Children,
when Christ was come to deliver his people. Whence, commonly it coms to pass,
that those think best of themselves, that have least cause; yea the true
Christian, is as fearful to entertain a good opinion of himself; as the false
is unwilling, to he driven from it. They that have store of grace, mourn for
the want of it: and they that indeed want it, chant their abundance. None so
apt to doubt their adoption, as they that may be assured of it: nor none more
usually fear, then they that have the greatest cause to hope. We feel
corruption not by corruption, but by grace: and therefore the more we feel our
inward corruptions; the more grace we have.

Contraries, the nearer they are to one another, the sharper is the conflict
betwixt them: now of all enemies, the spirit and the flesh are nearest one to
another, being both in the soul of a regenerate man; and in all faculties of
the soul, and in every action that springs from those faculties. The more
grace, the more spiritual life; and the more spiritual life, the more
antipathy to the contrary: whence none are so sensible of corruption, as those
that have the most living souls.


Sect. XXXVI.
Now for remedy of the contrary, there cannot be a better lesson for carnal
men to learn then this. All the promises of God are conditional, to take place
if we repent: as all the threatenings of God are conditional, to take place if
we repent not. But wicked men, as they believ without repenting; their faith
being mere presumption: so they repent without believing, their repentance
being indeed desperation: and this observe, we are cast down in the
disappointing of our hopes; in the same measure, as we were too much listed up,
in expectation of good from them. Whence these perremptory presumers if ever
they repent, it is commonly as Francis Spira, an Advocate of Padua did: and
never did any man plead so well for himself, as he did against himself.

One star is much bigger then the Earth; yet it seems many degrees less. It is
the nature of fear, to make dangers greater, helps less then they are. Christ
has promised peace and rest unto their souls that labor, and are heavy laden;
and to those that walk according to rule. Matthew. 11. 29. Gal. 6. 16. even peace
celestial in the state of grace, and peace eternal in the state of glory.
Such therefore as never were distressed in conscience, or live loosly; never
had true peace. Peace is the Daughter of righteousness. Romans 5. 1. Being
justified by faith, we have peace with God. But he who makes a bridge of his
own shadow, will be sure to fall into the water.

Those blocks, that never in their life were moved with Gods threatenings, never
in any straight of conscience, never groaned under the burden of Gods anger:
they have not so much as entered into the porch of this house; or lift a foot
over the threshold, of this School of repentance. Oh! that we could but so
much fear the eternal pains, as we do the temporary; and be but so careful
to save our souls from torment, as our bodies. In the mean time, the case of
these men is so much the worse; by how much there fear is the less. It faring
with the soul, as with the body: Those diseases, which do take away all sense
of pain; are of all others most desperate. As the dead palsy, the falling
sickness, the sleepy lethargy, etc. And the patient is most dangerously sick,
when he has no feeling thereof. In like manner, whilst they suppose themselves
to be free from judgment; they are already smitten with the heaviest of Gods
judgments; a heart that cannot repent. Romans 2. 5.

In a lethargy, it is needful the patient should be cast into a burning
Fever; because the senses are benumbed, and this will waken them, and dry up
the besotting humors. So in our dead securety, before our conversion; God is
fain to let the Law, Sin, Conscience and Satan loose upon us; and to kindle the
very fire of Hell in our souls: that so we might be rowsed out of our security:
but thousands of these blocks, both live and depart with as great hopes, as men
go to a lottery: even dreaming of Heaven, until they awakein Hell. For they
too often die, without any remors of conscience like blocks; or as an Ox dies
in a ditch. Yea thousands that live like Laban, dye like Nabal, (which is but
the same word inverted.) whilst others the dear Children of God, dye in
distress of conscience. For it is not every good man's hap, to dye like
Antonius Pius; whose death was after the fassion, and semblance of a kindly,
and pleasant sleep. However Saint Austins rule, will be sure to hold. He cannot
dye ill, that has lived well: and for the most part, He that lives
conscionably, dies comfortably, and departs rich. And so you see, how it
fares with the wickedest and worst of men. Wherefore if you are truly sensible
of your wretchedness: it is a good sign, that you are in some forwardness to be
recovered; and really to become so good, as formerly you but dreamed, or
imagined your self to be. And indeed the very first step to grace, is to feel
the want of grace; and the next way to receive mercy, is to see your self
miserable. Therefore our constant, and most diligent search should be, to find
out the naughtiness of our own hearts; and to get strenght from God, against
our prevailing corruptions.

Sect. XXXVII.
Loose Libertine. But is there any hope for one so wicked as I? who have turned
the grace of God into wantonness; applying Christ's passion as a warrant for my
licenciousness, not as a remedy; and taking his death as a license to sin, his
^ross as a Letters pattent to do mischief. As if a man should head his d^um of
rebellion, with his pardon. For I have most spi^efu^ly, and maliciously, taken
up arms against my Maker, and fought against my Redeemer all my days.


Convert. Do but unfainedly repent you of your sins, and forsake your former
evil ways, and lay held upon Christ by a true^ and lively ^aith: my soul for
yours, God i^ very ^eady to forgive them, be they never so many, and
innumerable for multitude; never so ha^nous, for quality and mag^itude. Yea, I
can show you your pardon from the great King of Heaven for all that is past. the
which you may read at large Isai. 55, 7. Ezekiel. 18. 21. to 29. and 33. 11. Jo l.
2. 12, 13, 14. Yea read 1 Cor. 6. 10, 11. together with the story of Man^sses,
Mary M^gdelen, the Thief, and the prodigal Son: and you shall see presidents
thereof. Yea the very murderers of the Son of God, upon their serious and
unfeigned repentance, and steadfast believing in him; received pardon and
salvation. And indeed dispai^, is a sin which never kn^w Jesus. True, every sin
deserves damnation: but no sin shall condemn, but the ^^ing and conti^uing in
it. True Repentance, is ever blessed with forgiveness. And know this, that Gods
mercy is greater then thy sin, what ever it be: you cannot be so infi^ite in
sinning, as he is infinite in pardoning, if you repent: yea sins upon
repentance are so remitted; as if they had never been committed. I will put
away thy transgressions as a cloud, and thy sins as a m^^t. Isay. 44. 22. And
what by corruption has been done, by repentance is undone. As the former
examples witness. Come and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your
sins be as scarlet; they shall be as white as snow. Isai 1. 18. Yea whiter then
snow: For the Prophet David, laying open his blood guil^in^ss, and his
Original impurity, uses these words: Pu^geme with Hysop, and I shall be
clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter then snow, Psalm. 51. 7. And in reason,
did Christ come to call sinners to repentance? and shall he not show mercy to
the penitent? O who would not cast his burden upon him? that desires to give
ease. As I live says the Lord, I would not the death of a sinner, Ezekiel. 18.
32. and 33. 11.

Only, apply not this s^lve, before the ulcer be searcbed to the bottom: Lay
not hold upon mercy, until you be thoroughly humbled. The only way to become
good; is first to believe that you are evil: and by accusing our selves, we
prevent Satan: By judging our selves, we prevent God.

Are we as sick of sorrow, as we are of sin; then may we hopefully go to the
Physician of our souls, who came into the world only to cure the sick, and to
give light to them only, who sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death. God
does not power the oil of grace, but into a broken, and contrite heart.

Would thou get out of the miserable estate of nature, into the blessed
estate if grace? and of Satan's bondslave become the child of God, and a
member of Christ? Would thou truly k^ow thine own heart? and he very
sensible how evil and wicked it is? that so thou may have a more humble
conceit of thy self? lay to heart these three particulars: 1. The corruption of
our nature, by reason of Original Sin. 2 Our manifold breach of God's righteous
Law, by actual sin. 3. The guilt and punishment due to us for them both. This
being done, thou will see and find, thy necessity of a Redeemer. And it is
thirst only that makes us relish our drink; hunger our meat. The full stomach
of a Pharisee, surcharged with the superfluities of his own merits, will loath
the honeycomb of Christ's righteousness. This was it, which made the young
Prodig^l, to relish even servants fare; though before wanton, when full fed at
home. No more relish feels the Pharisaicall heart, in Christ's blood: then in a
chip: But O how acceptable, is the fountain of living waters; to the chased
heart panting and braying. The blood of Christ to the weary and tired soul; to
the thirsty conscience scorched with the sense of Gods wrath: he that presents
him with it, how welcome is he? even as a special choice man, one of a
thousand. And the deeper the sense of misery is, the sweeter the sense of mercy
is.


Sect. XXXVIII.
Then if you would be satisfied for time to come, whether your Repentance, and
conversion be true and sound? these particulars will infallibly inform you. If
you shall persevere, (when this trouble for sin is over) in doing that which
now you purpose, it is an infallible sign, your repentance is found, otherwise
not. If thou do call to mind, the Vow which thou made in baptism and do
thy endeavor to perform that, which then thou did promise If thou do
square thy life, according to the rule of Gods word; and not after the
rudements of the world. If thou art willing to forsake all sin, without
reserving one: (for otherwise that one sin may prove the bane of all thy
graces: even as Gidion had Seventy sons, and but one Bastard: and yet that
bastard, destroyed all the rest that were Legitimate. Judge. 9. 5.) Sin is like
the Ivy in the wall; cut off bow, branch, body, stump; yet some strings or
other will sprout out again: Till the root be plucked up, or the wall be pulled
down and ruined; it will never utterly die.

Regeneration, or new birth, is a creation of new qualities in the soul; as
being by nature only evil disposed. God's children are known by this mark,
they walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit Romans 8. 1. If Christ have
called you to his service, your life will appear more spiritual, and excellent
then others.

As for your fails, it is a sign that sin has not gained your consent, but
committed a rape upon your soul; when you cry out to God. If the ravished
Virgin under the Law cried out, she was pronounced guiltless. A sheep may fall
into the mire, but a swine delights to wallow in the mire. Great difference
between a woman that is forced, though she cries out and strives: and an
alluring Adulteress.

Again, the thoughts of the godly are godly, of the wicked, worldly; and by
these, good and evil men are best, and truliest differenced one from another.
Would we know our own hearts, and whether they be changed by a new birth:
examine we our thoughts, words, actions, passions; especially, our thoughts
will inform us; for these cannot be subject to hypocrisy, as words and deeds
are.

Sect. XXXIX.
Then by way of caution know; that a child may as soon create it self, as a man
in he state of Nature regenerate himself. We cannot act in the least, unless
God bestows upon us daily privative grace, to defend us from evil; and daily
positive grace, inabling us to do good. And those that are of Christ's teaching,
know both from the word, and by experience, that of themselves they are not
only weak, but even dead to what is good; moving no more then they are moved:
that their best works are faulty, all their sins deadly, all their natures
corrupted originally. You has he quickened, that were dead in trespass^s and
sins Ephesians. 2. 1. Yea, we are altogether so dead in sin, that we cannot stir
the least joint, no not so much as feel our own deadness, nor desire life,
except God be pleased to raise and restore our souls; from the death of sin,
and grave of long custom, to the life of grace. Apt we are to all evil, but
reprobate and indisposed to all grace and goodness; yea, to all the means
thereof.

My powers are all corrupt; corrupt my will:
Marble to good, but wax to what is ill.
Insomuch, that we are not sufficient of our selves to think, much less to
speak, least of all to do that which is good, 2 Cor. 3. 5. Joh. 15. 4, 5. If we
have power to choose or refuse the object; to do these well we have no power.
We have ability, we have will enough to undo our selves, scope enough
hell-ward; but neither motion, nor will to do good: that must be put into us by
him that gives both power and will, and power to will.

Finally, each sanctified heart feels this, but no words are able sufficiently
to express, what impotent wretches we are, when we are not sustained. So that
we have no merit, but the mercy of God to save us: nothing but the blood of
Christ, and his mediation to cleanse and redeem us: nothing but his obedience
to enrich us. As for our good works, we are altogether beholding to God for
them, not God to us; nor we to our selves: because they are only his works in
us.

Whatsoever thou art, thou owe to him that made thee: what ever thou have,
thou owe to him that Redeemed thee. Therefore if we do any thing amiss, let
us accuse our selves: if any thing well, let us give all the praise to God. And
indeed, this is the test of a true or false Religion: that which teaches us to
exalt God most, and most to depresse our selves is the true: that which does
most prank up our selves, and detract from God; is the false. As Bonaventure
well notes.

Sect. XL.
Now to wind up with a word of exhortation; if thou be convinced, and
resolvest upon a new course; let thy resolution be peremptory, and constant:
and take heed you harden not again; as Pharaoh, the Philistines, the young man
in the Gospel, Pilate and Judas did: resemble not the iron, which is no longer
soft, then it is in the fire; for that good (says Gregory) will do us no good,
which is not made good by persevarance: If with these premonitions, the Spirit
has vouchsa^ed to stir up in thine heart any good motions, and holy purposes
to obey God, in letting thy sins go; quench not, grieve not the Spirit, 1 These.
5. 19. Return not with the Dog to thy vomit; least thy latter end prove
sevenfold worse then thy beginning, Matthew. 12. 43, 45. O it is a fearful thing
to receive the grace of God in vain! and a desperate thing, being warned of a
rock, wilfully to cast our selves upon it. Neither let Satan persuade you to
defer your repentance; no, not an hour; least your resolution proves as a false
conception, which never comes to bearing. Besides, death may be sudden: even
the least of a thousand things can kill you, and give you no leisure to be sick.

Thirdly if thou will be safe from evil works, avoid the occasions; have no
fellowship with the workers of iniquity: neither fear their scoff; for this be
sure of, if your person and ways please God, the world will be displeased with
both: If God be your friend, men will be your enemies: if they exercise their
malice, it is where he shows mercy. But take heed of losing God's favor to
keep theirs.

B^da tells of a great man, that was admonished by his friends in his sickness
to repent: who answered, He would not yet; for that if he should recover, his
friends and companions would laugh at him: but growing sicker and sicker, they
again pressed him: but then his answer was, that it was now too late; for I am
judged and condemned already.

A man cannot be a Nathanael, in whose heart there is no guile; but the world
cou^ts him a fool. But Christ says, Verily except ye be converted, and become
as little children; ye shall not en^er into the Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 18. 3.

Again, Satan and your deceitful heart will suggest unto you: that a Religious
life, is a dumpish and mellancholly life: but holy David will tell you, that
light is sown to the righteous; and joy to the upright. Psalm. 97. 11. Isa. 65.
14. And experience tells, that earthly and bodily joys; are but the body or
rather the dregs of that joy, which Gods people feel and are ravished with* As
O the calm, and quietness of a good conscience the assurance of the pardon of
sin, and joy of the Holy Ghost, the honesty of a virtuous and holy life how
sweet they are. Yea even Plato an Heathen could say: that if wisdom and virtue
could but represent it self to the eyes; it would set the heart on fire with
the love of it. And the like of a sinners sadness, as hear what Seneca says;
if there were no God to punish him, no Devil to torment him, no Hell to burn
him, no man to see him: yet would he not sin, for the ugliness and filthiness
of sin, and the guilt and sadness of his conscience. But experience is the best
informer: wherefore take the council of holy David, Psalm. 34. 8. O taste and
seek that the Lord is good: blessed is the man, that trusts in him. To which
accords that of holy Bernard, Good art thou O Lord to the soul that seeks
thee; what art thou then, to the soul that finds thee. As I may apeal to any
man's conscience, that has been softened with the unction of grace; and truly
tasted of the powers of the world to come; to him that has the love of God
shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Ghost: whether his whole life be not a
perpetual halelujak, in comparison of his natural condition. Whence they are
able to ^^eight all such objections; as he did: you tell (...) that scrupling of
small matters, is but slumbling at straws; that they be but trifles: When I know
your tongue can tell nothing but truth, I will believ you. Fifthly, beg of God
that he will give you a new heart, and when the heart is changed; all the
members will follow after it; as the rest of the creatures after the Sun, when
it arises. But without a work upon the heart, wrought by the Spirit of God; it
will follow its own inclination to that which it affects; whatsoever the
judgment shall say to the contrary: That must be first reformed, which was
first deformed. It is idle, and to no purpose to purge the channel, when the
fountain is corrupt. Whence the Apostle orderly bids us, first be renewed in
the spirit of our minds; and then let him that stole, steal no more, Ephe. 4.
23. 24. Yea it is God's own counsel, to the men of Jerusalem, Jer. 4. wash
thine heart from wickedness: that thou may be saved ver. 14. It is most
ridiculous to apply remedies to the outward parts, when the distemper lies in
the stomach. To what purpose is it to crop off the the top of weeds, or lop off
the bows of the tree, when the root and stalk remain in the earth: as cut off
the sprig of a tree, it grows still; a bow, an arm, still it grows, lop off the
top, yea saw it in the amidst, yet it will grow again; stock it up by the
roots, then (and not till then) it will grow no more; whence it is that God
says, give me thine heart, Prove. 23. 26. Great Cities once expunged, the
dorpes and villages will soon come in of themselves: the heart is the treasury
and storehouse of wickedness Mat. 12. 34. such as the heart is, such are the
actions of the body which proceed from it, Mat. 12. 35. Therefore as Christ
says, make clean within, and all will be clean, otherwise not, Mat. 23. 26.
Therefore David's prayer is, Create in me a new heart O Lord, and renew a right
Spirit within me, Psalm. 51. 10. do thou the like, importune him for grace; that
you may firmly resolve, speedily begin, and continually persevere; in doing and
suffering his holy will: desire him to inform and reform you so, that you may
neither misbeliev nor mislive; to change and purify your nature, subdue your
reason, rectify your judgment, reform and strengthen your will, renew your
affections, and beat down in you, whatsoever stands in opposition to the
Scepter of Jesus Christ.

Sixthly and lastly; if you receive any power against your former corruptions;
forget not to be thankful, yea study all possible thankfullness, for that you
and I, are not at this present frying in hell flames, never to be freed; that
we have the offer of grace here, and glory hereafter; it is his unspeakable
goodness. And there is nothing more pleasing to God, nor profitable to us; both
for the procuring of the good we want, or continuing the good we have; then
thankfulness. Nee will sow there, and there only plenty of his blessings;
where he is sure to reap plenty of thanks and service: but who will sow those
barren sands, where they are sure not only to be without all hope of a good
harvest; but are sure to loose, both their seed and labor. Consider what has
been said, and the Lord give you understanding in all things. And so much for
the Second part. An Appendix follows: wherein you have instances of all sorts;
how sin besots men.

Sold only by James Crump, in Little Bartholomews Well-yard; and by Henry
^^ipps, in Pope's Head Alley, 1658.


