A SECOND COVRANTE OF NEWS FROM THE East India in two Letters. THE ONE WRITTEN
BY Master Patricke Copland then Preacher to the English in the East India, to
Master Adrian Iacobson Hulsebus Preacher to the Dutch. THE OTHER WRITTEN BY
Master Thomas Knowles Factor there, etc. By both which letters you may
understand of some other occurrents betwixt the English and Dutch in those
parts.

Printed the 18. of February, 1622. Stilo Nouo.

REVERENDO IN CHRISTO FRAtri D. Domino Adrian Iacobson Hulsebus apud Iackatra
nenses Batavos Praedicatori, Salutem and pacem ab authore vtriusque. Loving
brother:
I have received your letters, and according to your desire, have returned
these few lines in answer thereunto. If I have not so fully satisfied the
particulars of your letters, as I wished and purposed, I pray you impute it not
to any want of will, but unto my disaquaintance with your Dutch tongue and
hand: I should peradventure have given you better satisfaction then now I do,
If you had written to me in the Latin tongue. But to leave excuses and come to
the matter, the thing you touch in your Letter is but too too true, to wit,
that the hatred and dissension among Christians (if it continue, as God defend
it should) is, and will be the cause of much innocent bloud-shedding amongst
friends, and of estranging the hearts of Heathens, from the worship of the true
God. And therefore that enimitie amongst friends may cease, and that such as
are as yet without, may be allured to submit themselves to the scepter of
Jesus Christ: it stands us upon (who are Preachers of the Gospel of peace)
to be instruments of peace, which for my own part how willing I am to do, is
not unknown to such as know my self, and among whom I do daily converse. I
have always both in public and private, by Letters to our Worshipful company
in England, and by lively voice to our Commanders here in the Indies, declared
how good a thing it is for us that are Christians, professing one Faith, one
Christ, one Baptism, to live in peace, and to dwell together in unity. And of
this my earnest desire to be a peacemaker, Master Brancraft your Master of the
Black-Lyon, who remained after his taking some weeks aboard of the Royal
James, can give evident testimony and witness. And now that you have written
to this end, I will stir up my self, and set a fresh upon the work of
reconciliation. It is pelf indeed and pride, that is the Makebate breeding
strife and discord: for, had not the riches of the Moloccos and the robbing of
the Chinaes and others by you, under the English colors, fathering thereby
your theft upon us, cast you into a deep and deadly Lethargy, you would not
as you have done, have abused your best friends abroad, that have shed so much
of their dearest blood in defense of you and your country at home; but now you
are freed from the Spaniard at home, you fall out with your friends abroad. Is
this the recompense of our love and blood showed unto you, and shed for you, to
keep you from the supposed thraldom of Spain? Did David thus reward his
three Worthies, who adventured their lives to satisfy his longing, and to
quench his thirst? Did he not say, Lord be it far from me that I should do
this: is not this the blood of the men that went in ieopardy of their lives? 2 Samuel 23. 17. Do you thus requite us, as Lot did Abraham, Who when as he with
the 318. that were borne and brought up in his house, did recover Lot and his
goods and women out of the hands of the Conquerors, cared not for him but to
serve his own turn, and being delivered did in a manner scorn Abraham's
company. Well, though Abraham being the elder and worthier might have stood
upon his right, yet yielded of his interest, that he and Lot might live as
brothers, and the rather because both of them at this time soiourned among the
Cananites and Pheresites, who were ready to take notice of their discord, and
so to curse their God, and holy religion. Yet what gained Lot by separating
company, but a shower of fire and brimstone, which rained upon Sodom wherein
he lived, and would have consumed both him and his, if God had not been
merciful unto him at Abraham's request?

It is not long of the English that we expose our selves to the mockery of
Infidels: our Company love peace, and trade peaceably: they have put up for
peace sake more wrongs at your hands, then they mean to do again. You write
and publish to the world that the Sea is free, and yet by your encroaching upon
it, are not you both the Mothers and Nurses of discord? One of our Commanders,
wrote (as I think, or at least sent word by one of special note amongst your
selves) to Coen your Commander concerning a parley before the shooting down of
our Turret at Iackatra: but the first and last news we heard of him, was it
not the beating down of our house there, and the defaming of our Nation, with
Penoran at Bantam and others here?

And think you that this is the way to make peace?

The present Captain of your Fort at Iackatra promised to the Right Worshipful
Sir Thomas Dale our chief Commander, upon the faith of a Christian, that M.
Peter Wadden (now your prisoner) should have free ingresse and egresse in and
out of your house to parley between us, to return to our Ships: and yet is
either promise or oath kept? has he not, and does he not continue your
prisoner to this hour? You remember Iehu his answer to Iehoram, What peace
whiles the whoredoms of thy Mother Iezabel, and her witchcrafts are yet in
great number? 2 King. 9. 23. No sound league of friendship or reconciliation
can be made, or being made can continue, till the wrongs which men have done
one to another, be reproved, and removed; and satisfaction given by word and
deed, where it may possibly be performed; else it will be like a wound or sore,
that being cured outwardly to the eye, does bleed and fester inwardly; many
hollow reconciliations are daily made amongst men, which afterward break out
to the hurt of both parties, and scandal of others: As a wound that is ill
cured, by an unskillful or an unconscionable Surgeon. As for mine own part,
I would to God that if it were possible, I might with all my best skill and
cunning be the Chyrurgion to cure this wound, that our reconciliation, when
ever it shall be made, may not be hollow, but holy and firm: yea I wish from
my heart, that my very blood might be the milk to put out this wild fire
which now is kindled, and (if it be not quenched in time) is like to devour,
not only the ships and goods (as it has done some al ready, and is like to
do ^ precious lives, of many of both nations and of ^ (it is like) will but se
the time that ever the English and Dutch knew the Indies. All (...) one side,
there must be a yielding of both (...), if ever there be a sound peace (...)
sides (...) who shall begin ^^^^^eer, what avalleth anger without strength to
bear it out? What is fierceness of spirit without wisdom of heart? but even
as fools bo^^ against himself. And to such a one may not the saying of
Archidamus to his son, being too foole-hardie, be as fitly applied as a glove
to a man's hand (...) son put to more strength, or take away some of this
courage? You cannot be ignorant that when Herod intended to make war against
the Tyrians and Sidonians, how they came all with one accord, and persuaded
Blastus the Kings Chamberlain that they might live in peace, or else they
should all of them be starued, Act. 12. 20. Take heed you come not to this
when it is too late. Are you so well able to live of your selves in Holland,
that you have no need of your neighbor country England? Are you so high above
the waters, that the sluices of heaven cannot drown you? Or are the Seas so low
beneath your Netherlands, that you fear no deluge? Shebna the Treasurer, was
he not as surely seated as your Grave is in Holland? or the greatest amongst
you here in the Indies, even Coen himself? and yet was he not tossed up and
down as a foote-ball in a strange country? and were not the Chariots of his
glory the shame of his Lords house? Esaias 22. 18. But I have run my self a
little beyond that I intended, and now to recover my breath, by these lines I
promise, and by word and deed will, God willing, with sail and care labor to
bring to pass, that we may live as friends and neighbors both here and at
home. Thus I have returned you an answer to that you desire, and look that
both of us should do our best endeavor for the good of our present Fleets, and
of such as hereafter may live to bless us. From our Royal James riding near
to Bantam Rode, this 20. of April 1619.

Your loving brother Patricke Copland.

From aboard the Be in the Rode of Iacquatry on the Coast of Iava, the 25 of
Febr. 1620.
AVgust the second 1619. our ship and goods were taken by the Flemmings in the
Strait of Sinday near Bantam, and set a shore at Iaquatry. September the 8.
1619, the Flemmings dispersed us into their ships, and on the coast of Sumatra
the first of October 1619. they took four other English ships, viz. the
Dragon, the Bear, the Expedition, and the Rose. And on the second of October
they turned us all a shore at Tekoo amongst the Indians, where our Merchants
had no trade, but for eight days. We were then 370. and odd men, all or the
most part undone. About 15. men were killed in fight. They left us the little
Rose to shift for our selves.

October the 23. 1619. there came into the Rode out of England three other
ships, the Paltegraue, the Elizabeth, and the Merchants Hope. From Tekoo we
sailed to and fro, and at length came to anchor at an Island called Amyncan,
where we had fresh water and some fish, but is no place of trade, nor is there
any man that knows of any thing that grows upon it. The people are thought
to be man-eaters. After this we returned back for Tekoo, and near the same
January 29. 1619. we met with General Prynne in the Royal James, and his
whole fleet of ships in number nine. All the fleet being then twelve goodly
ships, were resolved to sail for Bantam: and in sight of two Flemmish ships
(which we purposed to take) Captain Adams in the ship called the Bull,
together with one of the Flemmish ships came up with news of peace. We then
sailed for Iaquatry, where by the way met us 17. sail of goodly Flemmish
ships, with whom (had not the peace then come) we must have fought it out. But
peace being then concluded between the Flemmings and us, our English Factorie
was again settled at Iaquatry; and the ships divided some for one place, some
for another.

April 26. 1620. the Royal James, and a ship of some 800. Tonnes, called the
Unicorn, set sail for Iapan, the distance near about 1400. leagues. June the
second 1620. the Unicorn was cast away on the coast of China, near a certain
Island called the Macoio Island. In the ship were two English women; both which,
and all the men were saved: for they ran the ship near the shore. Most part
of all their goods they lost. As we sailed for Iapan, at a place called
Puttany, we heard of Captain Iordayne, who being there with two ships, called
the Hound, and the Samson, there came into the Rode and fought with them three
Flemish ships: Captain Iordayne was slain in that fight, and the Flemmings
took both their ships. December 17. 1620. the great James being well trimmed
at a place called Farando in Iapan, came away from thence: and January the 14.
1620. we arrived safely at Iaquatry, where she is now laden for England.

The ships that since my coming from England, have been taken and lost, are
the Sun, cast away near Bantam; the Star, taken near Bantam; the Dragon,
the Bear, the Expedition, and the Rose, taken at Tekoo; the Hound and the
Samson taken at Puttany; the Unicorn cast away on the coast of China; two or
three other ships taken and lost at the Mollucas.

Men of good command, dead, are, Captain Parker of Plymmouth, Sir Thomas Dale,
Captain Iordayne killed at Puttany, Captain Bunnier killed at Tekoo while we
were at Iapan. The Flemmings yielded up again the Star to the English, and
she is gone to the Mollucas.

Thomas Knowles.


