SIDROPHEL VAPVLANS: OR, THE Quack-Astrologer Tossed in a BLANKET.

By the AUTHOR of Medicaster Medicatus.

In an Epistle to W -- m S -- n.

With a Postscript, Reflecting briefly on his late Scurrilous Libel against the
Royal College of Physicians, Entitled, A Rebuke to the Authors of a Blue Book.
By the same Hand.

Astrologi! Genus hominum potentibus infidum, sperantibus fallax,

Tacit. Hist. lib. 1. By these Fables Astrologers Live, Cheat, and Get Money.
Indeed no Generation of Men are more Pernicious to a Commonwealth, C. Agrippa.

There are more Empirical Impostors, more Idiots, Illiterate Cheats, pretending
to Astrology in this your Royal City, than of any other sort, not only
Seducing, but Ruining many of your Majesty's poor Subjects. Dr. Ramsey 's Ded.
of his Tract. de Ven. 1661.

LONDON, Printed and Sold by John Nutt, near Stationers' Hall, 1699.

To the Honorable and Learned COLLEGE of PHYSICIANS, and Worshipful SOCIETY of
SURGEONS, London.
Learned and Wortly Gentlemen,
HEalth is not only the Felicity, and Interest of every individual Man in a
Body Politic; but of the whole Community; because Diseases and Hurts (by
disabling Private Persons from Public Service) do weaken and infeeble the
Commonwealth.

It Is therefore a great wonder, that in this Age of Regulation and Amendment,
nothing is done to rectify the notorious Abuses, and secure us from the
Mischief done by those Men; who (without Skill or Authority) under pretense of
restoring and conserving, do destroy Men's Lives and Estates; and more
especially at such a time when the Nation is in need of both, for its Defense
and Preservation.

Reformation is a Name we are very fond of, and a Work we seem to be always
doing: But when will it be done? We have lately gained a new Law to secure
Apothecaries from being Scavengers; Is there not more need of one to keep
Shooemakers from turning Doctors and Moon-Prophets? What else means the
bleating of those Sheep in our Ears? If the Body Politic consist of many
Natural ones, the Conservation of the one, is the Maintenance of the other; and
that is beyond a Cobler's Last.

Why then should Impudent, Ignorant Quacks and Empiricks ( Smiths, Weavers, 3
Hen. 8. c. 11.
Cobblers, Draymen, Women) etc. boldly and accustomably take upon them great
Cures, and Things of great Difficulty? In the which, thy partly use Sorcery and
Witchcraft, partly apply such Medicines unto the Disease, as be very noyous and
nothing meet therefore; to the high Displeasure of God, great Infamy to the
Faculty, and the grievous Hurt, Damage and Destruction of many of the King's
Liege People; most especially of them that cannot discern the uncunning from
the cunning.

And yet notwithstanding this Public Declaration by a Statute Law of this
Nation, these Impostors, as if they were Paramount to all Law, Superior to the
Supreme; or Tyrants cum Privilegio, do with Impunity Defraud Men, not only of
Health and Wealth, but Limb and Life too: And this, not only in the Country,
but in our Metropolis, in the Face of the Government, and of You, whose
Province it is (if any Bodies) to Suppress such Pernicious and Destructive
Vermin.

Gentlemen, It plainly appears by Several Statute. Laws of the Kingdom, and the
Royal Grants of Kings and Queens of England, that you do not want sufficient
Authority for this Good Work; and I am sure you cannot want Skill and Learning
enough to Alarm the Nation against them, to Baffle and Expose them to the World
in their true Colors, that People may see in what Hands they trust their Lives.

It Is your Duty and your Interest so to do. It Is a Noble Work to remove those
Nuisances; though the Subject of your Censure be vile as the Person is, whom I
have now in hand, yet the Undertaking is Generous, and worthy of You. Hercules
thought it a besitting Labor to cleanse Augeas's Stables. Justice is not
disparaged by Sentencing the vilest Malefactor to the Gallows. The Good
achieved to the Public by any Act, hallows it. And thus may present
Undertaking becomes worthy of your Patronage, and Imitation; and I presume to
crave both.

For, beside the Common Injury Empiricks do to Mankind in general, they have a
particular spite against you, which they spare not to discover on all
occasions. Culpeper in one Breath Sentenced a whole College of your most
Learned Predecessors, and King James their Patron, to the Devil. And this his
Zany not only commends, but imitates him; affronting you to the Queen, in a
Dedication of that Book wherein he abuses me to the Reader, and in many other
Rude Libels. I am therefore obliged to him, for giving me such good Company,
and shall be quit with him anon.

He has indeed a peculiar Merit in him which ought to be regarded: he is an
Astrologer, as well as an Empirick; and that is a Composition, which Poisons
both Body and Soul; cheats Men not only of their Money and Health, but of their
Loyalty too; whereby he becomes obnoxious to the Government more ways than one;
and ought to be Chastised by them with a Whip in the House of Correction, as
well as by us in the Press.

These Astrological Quacks do not only Reproach, Libel and Rail at you, but
Usurp your Office, contrary to Law; taking upon them to Reform the Settled
Rules, Methods, and Medicaments, and give Encouragement to all sorts of
Empiricks, and Quack-salvers. So that the Faculty is in danger of being
overthrown, and the Nation subjected to all those inconveniences, which the
want of Able Physicians, and the multiplying Cheating Mountebanks, can
introduce.

I know what I am to expect from these Men for giving them this Disturbance;
it is like stirring a Nest of Wasps; and accordingly I expect all the
Mountebanks and Astrologers in the Nation will fall on me: for they, like
Swine, if you take one by the Ears, the whole Herd will squeal, and gruntle at
him who does it. He that tosseth a Whelp in a Blanket, must expect much noise,
and a filthy stink. And of this I am the more assured, because the fear of it
only, has made this Hocus extract the Quintescence, or Powers of Billingsgate,
and Bedlam, and throw it in my Face.

But these Foresights do not discourage, nor damp me at all. If I serve Truth
and the Public, I gain my Point, let the Quacks and Astrological Impostors
Rail on, and fling Dirt as fast as they can. If I but continue in the Favor
and Reputation I am Honored with by you, none of it will stick upon

Your most Humble Servant, James Young.

TO THE READER.
YOU cannot but think me induced by some very extraordinary Motive, to so mean
an Employment, as that of Censuring an Author so Futile; and a Book so
Contemptible, as an Astrologer, and his Almanac. But no meanness of Person or
Book, ought to exempt him or them from Chastisement, when faulty. And that he
whom I have taken to task, is highly such, will appear in the following Examen;
where, beside the Mischief this sort of Men do the Nation in general, you will
see the wrong this Mopus has done me in particular, and that is Provocation
enough to Chastise him.

Some Years ago, he told the Mobb (few else read or regard his Gallymawfry)
that I stole my Notions of Ol. Tereb. from Crato, an Author who has nothing in
him which could color so unjust and false a Reflection. And although he knew
it to be so, yet refused either to confess it, or give satisfaction for the
wrong he had done me: But fearing I would resent it, and expose him, he in his
next Libel falls a Railing at me, in a sort most Rude and Senseless, without
one Reason to support his ill Language; and repeats the same again in another
Years Hodge-Podge, where he has the Forehead to Publish the same Falsehood of
Crato and Me, which he had done so many Years before. These repeated
Provocations conquered all the Reasons which restrained my Pen from taking
Satisfaction, and let it loose upon him, with all its Resentments of the Man,
and the Trade he Practices.

Beside those particular Injuries this Lunatic has done me, you will be far
from thinking it an Idle or Impertinent Work, to Correct and Expose the whole
Herd of those noxious Creatures; if you consider, that though they be Things
hated by the Wise, and despised by the Learned, they are not seldom cherished
and employed by those who Plot and Design to disturb the Common Respose; and by
such have been made use of in all Ages, to seduce the Vulgar into Faction, and
prejudice their Minds against Established Government. Instances of it are
innumerable in the Story of all Times and Nations. And for it We are told by
Tacitus, Pliny, Agrippa, and many others, they were often banished Rome and
Italy by the Decrees of several Senates, and Laws of diverse Emperors; and that
Justinian the famous Legislator, made it a Crime Capital. To the Commonwealth
and Public Peace (says C. Agrippa, who was a great Lawyer, Statesman and
Astrologer) they have been pernicious in all Ages. For beside their Frauds and
Cozening Practices on the Common People, they are Authors of much Mischief to a
State, drawing Credulous People to their Ruin, causing Wars and Sedition. No
Sort or Generation of Men being more pernicious to a Commonwealth, than those
who undertake to Prognosticate by the Stars, and scatter their Prophecies about.

It Is no new thing to have Faction and Rebellion promoted in this Nation by
such Men; 33 Hen. 8.8.14.5 Eliz. 15.23 Eliz. 2.
and for that Reason-many Laws were made against them by our Wise Ancestors.

W. Lilly and N. Culpeper are the last dead Instances of it: And there are a
couple of the same Stamp left alive to carry on the same Design, by the same
Method. Plin. l. 13. c. 1. P. Commines, l. 4. c. 126.
Our Nation was long since famous among Foreigners for being deluded by
Prophecies and addicted to Magic. And I would fain take off the Scandal, by
exposing those who continue to maintain that Trade among us.

He whom I have singled out for that purpose, seems to be the fattest of the
Herd; and to have many additional Aggravations above ordinary Astrologers.
There Is a peculiar danger in him to the Government, manifest every Year, by his
fond inculcating a lewd Prophecy, like that which the Arch-Impostor W. Lilly
long since published against Monarchy, Predicting its final Downfall, together
with the Mitre and Coronet; and the establishing of Democracy in England. This
is the plain meaning, and most manifest design of it, manger the sham
Interpretation he has lately put upon it, See Baker's Chron. p. 310 5 Eliz.
15.12 Car. 2.30.
for that is plainly forced and contrived, after I had threatened him with two
Statutes, one against Publishing Prophecies, foretelling a Change of
Government; another enjoining the Observation of January the 30th, of which
till then he took no notice, although he forgot not to Calendar his own
Nativity; as his Brother P -- does the Whipping of T. O. And both the Martyrdom
of K. Charles, or else shun and affront it.

These things do more Mischief among the Vulgar, than Milton, Cook, Goodwin,
Ludlow, or all the odious Vindicators of Rebellion, Patricide, and Democracy,
this last Age has been plagued with. Almanacks are Oracles to the Vulgar, and
when larded, or rather baited to hook in Customers with fine Receipts, to cure
even incurable Diseases, become very Public, and regarded mostly by such as
are least able to penetrate into the Delusion, or discern the Snare. Thus Lilly
and Culpeper poisoned the People formerly; Mon. or no Mon. Catast. Magn.
and thus their Successors carry on the same Design now. The labored
Discourses of the Grand Boutefeus scarce reach the Hand, seldom the
Understanding of the Populace; and are consequently unable to do that Mischief,
by Seducing and Disaffecting them, as such obvious Hieroglyphics, and
Prophetic Emblems of the Determination of Monarchy, Episcopacy, and Nobility,
and setting up Democracy in these Kingdoms.

For those Reasons I have taken upon me to Lash and Expose those Men, and the
Art by which they poison the Minds of People, and Conjure them out of their
Duty and Allegiance. And if those Incorrigible Figure-Casters persist in the
Trade of Publishing such Pestilent Almanacks; I hope all good Subjects will be
fortified against the Infection, Design, and Factious tendency of them.

My Moon-Prophet so exactly resembles Sidrophel in Hudibrass, that I chose to
treat him under that Character. How it fits, such as know him may judge by the
following Description of his Prototype.

He deals in Destinies dark Counsels, Part 2. Cant. 3.

And Sage Opinions of the Moon Sells;
To whom all People far and near,
On deep importances repair;
When Brass, or Pewter hap to stray,
Or Linen slinks out of the way;
When Cattle feel Indisposition,
And need the help of a Physician;
When Murren reigns in Hogs or Sheep,
And Chicken languish of the Pip;
To him with Questions, and with Urine,
They for discovery flock, or curing.
He had been versed in Astrology,
And was Old Dog at Physiology:
But though in Circle of the Arts,
He did advance his Natural Parts,
Like Dog in Wheel, did still retreat,
And fall to Juggle, Cant, and Cheat;
Or as those Fowl that live in Water,
Are never wet, he did but smatter:
Whatever he labored to appear,
His Understanding still was clear;
Yet none a deeper Knowledge boasted,
Since Friar Bacon, or Old Grosted.
He with the Moon was more familiar
Than ever was Almanac Well-willer;
Her Secrets understood so clear,
That some believed he had been there;
Knew when She was in fittest Mood
For cutting Corns, or letting Blood;
When for anointing Scabs or Itches,
Or to the Bum applying Leeches;
Fright Agues into Dogs, and scare
With Rhymes the Toothache and Catarrh;
Cure Warts and Corns with application
Of Medicines to the Imagination.
He knew the Medicine Paracelsus
Could make a Man with, as he tells us;
He knew whatever's to be known,
But much more than he knew would own.
Did not our great Reformers use
This Sidrophel to foreboad News?
And has he not always foretold
Whatever the close Committee would?
Made Mars and Saturn for the Cause,
The Moon for Fundamental Laws, etc.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. line 38. for He read But, p. 7. Marg. for L. H. r. lib. 4. p. 8. l.
17. r. many degrees better, p. 9. l. 19. r. discoverer, p. 12. Marg. r. 1652.
p. 19. l. 33. for professor r. possessor, p. 20. l. 2. r. 20. p. 29. l. 21.22.
for Impostor r. Prophet, p. 41. Marg. r. Tom. 2. p. 46. Marg. r. de Peste. Some
Literal Mistakes are left to the Readers Candor.

To W -- S -- n.
THERE is, Egregious Sir, a Quack Astrologer in your House, who some Years
since Published a Scandalous Reflection on me, without either Reason, or
Provocation, so to do; which a Friend of mine imparting to me, (for I used not
to mispend Time, or Money, in such empty Stuff, with which his Pen has
surfeited the World.) I expostulated the Matter with him, by Letter; and
demanded his Authority, or Reason for the Reproach; or an Acknowledgment of the
Fault, or Mistake, if it were such; but instead of giving me any manner of
Satisfaction, He, in the next Public Effort of his fertile Pen, falls a
railing, and chattering, like an obnoxious Criminal; and attempted, by dint of
Scolding, to Huff me out of those Resentments, which he had great reason to
fear, would be severe upon him.

-- Nihil est audacius illis
Reprehensis; iram, atque animos, a crimine sumunt.
Indeed, at first, I was so little displeased to see my self treated in a
manner, so much to his own Shame, and Opprobrium, more than mine; that I
slighted the Bawling Brainsick, till I found him at me again: And for want of
new Matter, giving the People twice Sodden Cabbage: the same fulsom Stuff in a
second Almanac, which he had done in that, wherein he first put that Falsehood
on Crato and me.

The Repetition of this groundless Affront, (after I had charged him with the
Falsehood thereof, and he had tacitly allowed it himself) made me steal a few
Hours from other Avocations, to do my self right, and stop the Carreer of his
Scurrilous Pen. But since he denied to take notice of my Private Challenge, I
could not readily think of a better way to gain that Point, that by this
Public Address, and Appeal to you, who are so much alike and so near of kin to
him.

But before we engage in so rough and unpleasant a way, as a close and serious
Discourse of this Matter will carry us to, It may not be amiss to sweeten our
Humors by some divertive Entertainment, in the beginning of our Course; and
because some of his Quack Postures afforded me such Pleasure, that I felt
little of the pinching part of his Bum-fodder; I will make you merry with a
Specimen of his Worship's Wit, both in Verse and Prose.

I begin with the former, not only because the Pamphlet abounds therewith, but
for the excellency of it; being the very quintessence of Helicon, and Heart
Blood and Guts of the Muses. Homer, Pindar, Virgil, or Cowley were mere Fools
to Sidrophel, or Watchum, his Journeyman Poetaster; not one of them ever made
such bold strokes, or can show such Flowers, as I can, out of his doggrel and
fastidious Rhyme.

Renowned Prince! Prevail and Prosper still:
And make like God's Decrees your Royal Will!
There Is a Bird for the King, against whose Father's Tyranny and Arbitrary
Actions, he had just before bent his doughty Song: and now He comes to admonish
his Majesty to the same Practice. Where is the Liberty and Property of
Subjects, so much talked of? If they be governed by a Prince, whose Will, like
the Decrees of Heaven, is Absolute and Irresistible? For so the Assembly in
their Confession and Catechisms define Predestination, or God's Decrees to be,
viz. destining, or determining from all Eternity, such to Heaven, such to Hell,
( L. Du Moulin allows scarce One in a Million to the former) without foresight,
or respect had, to Good, or Evil in them; but merely to show his Power, and for
his Glory. To imitate this, must be very Arbitrary, and Tyrannical! And like
the Grand Louis his declared Reasons for making his last War on the
Netherlands, and spilling the Blood of so many Thousands, not for their Fault,
but his Glory. Thus in a roaring Song against Arbitrary Power, which had
tumbled King James out of his Throne, He recommends to King William a Walk on
the same dangerous Precipice.

-- You by your lightning Steel,
Give to the stupid Foe a sense to feel.
This is a whole Nosegay for his Majesty, made up of as much Nonsense, as ever
was in so little Meeter. He had reason to scorn assistance from the Muses in
his first Poetical Sally in January; he has a Furnassus in his own Breast.

-- Excludit sanos Helicone Poetas
Democritus. --
He has a peculiar sort of Poetry; a Specimen of which may be thus Paraphrased
in Prose. Your Sword made the living dead, i. e. the Stupid feel, cujus
Contrarium --

The Gallick fury vanished like a Ghost,
And trembling stood before your Mighty Host.
I know not whether he intended this for Prophecy, or History; I am sure it is
neither Sense, nor Truth. The French have not shown themselves such Cowards of
late, as to lose their Courage at the sight of an Enemy. But the Jest is, their
fury vanished, and yet stood trembling: There is a sort of a Contradiction in
that; vanishing, and standing; fury, and trembling, are different things. --
This was in June. It seems the hot Weather made the Monsieurs cold, and the
cool Weather heated them; for in September, he tells us they became brisk;

Threatened Revenge, and boldly swore.
They valiant are when that no Foe is near;
But always sneak, when Enemies appear.
This was verified at the Siege of Namur; where our new Observator affirms,
That, the Confederates, in seeing the Town lost before their Faces, won more
Glory, 1692.
than the sneaking French, who took it in despite, and in sight of such
Puissance as the Confederate Army, Headed by so great an Hero, and Renowned
Prince.

But his choicest Flowers are at the end of this Gallymawfry, where he
ingeniously mingles Poetry and Prophecy, and both of so true a stamp, as if
Apollo had made him an Oracle, as well as a Poet. For my part, I don't know
which to admire most, the Prediction, or the Rhyme.

Deceit's the Line which some great Men do tread,
Death reigns among the Living, not the Dead.
Both these are for Rhyme, neither of them for Sense, and may be thus
Travestee'd.

There dwells no sense within the Poet's head,
For Death cannot reign, where't has not conquered;
No more than Life can do it among the Dead.
With this scrap of my Muse, we will pass by his Poetry, and taste a bit of his
Prose; of which he gives us a most delightful Morsel, in the third Paragraph of
that Nonsense, his Genethliacal Considerations; the whole of it is a sort of
Cant and Banter, which no Man can reconcile to Sense, Reason, Letters, or
Truth: or make Intelligible to the most apprehensive Mortal; much less the
Vulgar, whom he designed to captivate and amuse by them. Pray take it.

This Proposition (quoth he) is to be considered, and by Experience to be
observed, whether it be true, or false; and if true! how near it comes to
truth: or wherein, or in what parts it may vary from it. This senseless Stuff
may be thus Paraphrased. Is W. S -- n in Bedlam, or not? If he be there, pray
tell me how near he is to it, or how far from it? Risum teneatis --

With a whole Gorge full of the like Stuff, he crams his Reader, in his
Physical Advertisement for August.

Crato says, That Oil of Cloves being presently put into a Wound, causes Pain
to cease immediately, without Inflammation; and brings sordid Ulcers to a
Cicatrice, and cleanses them; and stops Blood so admirably, that nothing does
it more, or better. If Oil of Cloves which is so hot, does this so absolutely,
and so safely? (Mark him, good Sir!) much more safely may it be supposed to be
done with Oil of Turpentine, or any other Chemical Oil: which is cheap, and
wants some degrees of the heat of Oil of Cloves. And possibly from this it
might be that Turpentine Young might receive his Notion of stopping Bleeding
with Oil of Turpentine. Crato, it seems was the Author; though he is pleased to
attribute the whole Invention to himself; which a Man of Candor would have
abhorred to have done. Yet it is said, the French, and others used it in the
same case before him.

Before I expose the Falsehood of this senseless Reflection, I must inform you
that Seventeen Years since, I was prevailed on by such as I could not refuse,
to Publish some Notions concerning the Virtues of Oil of Turpentine:
Particularly, its wonderful Power to restrain the Bleeding of Wounds.

This Discovery met with various Fortunes, some disparaged it as a fallible and
uncertain Remedy; others contemned it as an Old one; but many Ingenious Men
honored me with thankful Letters, together with Observations, confirming what
I had writ concerning it; and which is Invaluable, the Famous, Honorable Mr.
Boil, not only said to Dr. R. H. and my self, such kind things of it, as I am
too Modest to repeat; but He was likewise pleased to honor it with Public
Approbation, in his Book of Specifiques. p 160


I found more Envy, or Carelessness, than Truth, in such as charged it with
uncertainty, and failure; and from any of the few, who pretended they knew it
before me, I could never wrest any proof; and I do here profess, That in all my
Reading, Conversation, and Travels, (which are not the least) I never met it
directly, or indirectly in any Circumstance; nor had other Direction to it,
than what I frankly owned, and avowed in my Preface to that Discourse.

I am not the only Man, whose Labors have met such diversity of Fate. The
Great Harvey's Discovery of the Circulation, was at first decried as a false
Novelty by some; other invidious Men said, the Glory of the Invention was due
to Caesalpinus; some, to Hippocrates; and one more Retrospective than the rest,
espied it in the Writings of Solomon.

How unjustly Sidrophel has charged me with stealing away the Honor due to
Crato, I will now evince; and leave you to wonder, as much as I do, at the
Impudence and Folly of the Reproacher.

Crato says, etc. This is like those Preachers, who quote St. Austin, and
never read a Father. I have perused all Crato's Works, without being able to
discover such a Passage: nor could I reasonably hope to find it there, knowing
him to be a Man wiser than to write such Stuff. And surely, if Sidrophel had
known where to find it, I had not been to seek it, and yet I must do him the
right to confess, that he wanted not an Author for what he said; but it is such
a Third-hand one; as he will be ashamed of, if he has any Modesty in him? The
Author I mean, is the Anonymous Translator of Bonetus his Index, who says,
Page 660. Oil of Cloves makes Wounds, that if it be put in presently, their
Pain immediately cease without Inflammation: And it brings sordid Ulcers to a
Cicatrice; and cleanses them. It stops Bleeding nothing more. -- And for this
he quotes Crato in the Margin, without naming Book, Chapter or Page.

There is nothing of this originally in Bonetus; but added with many other
things by the Translator, taken, as he declares in his Preface, out of J. G.
Waltherus his Sylva Medica. Walther Sylva Med. p. 1601.
To him I had recourse, and in page 1601. of that labored Work, I found these
words, Joh. Crato l. sing. Obs. Med. in Ep. Ep. 97. Ol. Caryoph. praestat vuln.
ut illorum dolor. si mox indatur, statim sedet and absque inflamm. ad cicatr.
perducat sordida Vlc. mund. flux. and vir. sistet adeo ut nih. supr. -- I have
put them down to a Letter, pointed, and abbreviated exactly as it is in the
Book; that you may see the Insincerity and Wickedness of my Antagonist, how
little ground he had for quoting Crato, or affirming that Oil of Cloves stops
Bleeding, and at so wonderful a rate; so absolutely, that nothing does it more
or better; when Crato, Waltherus, or whoever were the Author of these words,
mean nothing of it. They speak of the flux of Humors to sordid Ulcers, not one
word of the Haemorrhages from Wounds.

Moreover, I am well assured, Crato has no such Epistles extant as those
Waltherus referrs to; because in three several Editions of that Work, which I
have examined, they are not to be found: nor is there any mention made of them
by Vander Linden, or in G. Merklin's Account of the Labors of that Author, nor
is there reason to think so good a Physician, so well Skilled in Natural
Philosophy, and the Materia Medica, as Crato was, could fall into so gross an
Error, as to think that the Chemical Oil of an Aromatic Vegetative, hot in the
third degree, as Cloves are; could cause such sudden, prodigious Cessation of
Pain, in recent Wounds, and not inflame them.

I know many famous Authors account it very balsamic, viz. Beguinus, Weicker,
Renodeus, Gluckstrad, Barthius, Ernestus, Hoffman, Woodal, etc. Some of them
equal it with natural Balm, and there are three or four Writers of good
Reputation among us, who speak highly of its healing Virtue, and of its faculty
to restrain the Haemorrhages of Wounds too, which Sidrophel, had he known them,
might have alleged more to his purpose and credit, than this Third-hand
Quotation, as from Crato.

J. Ernestus much admires it, De ol. Chym. p. m. 410.
Exterius omnia recentia vulnera, punctim vel caesim inflicta, sanat,
humiditates nervorum in iis and haemorrhagias compescit.

J. J. Weickerus, writes thus of it -- Omnes virtutes habet balsami.
Extrinsecus vulnera recentia sanat, Antidot. l. 2 p. m. 655.
vulnerum sanguinem fluentem and aquam sistit.

J. Barthius directs a way of distilling an Oil from Cloves, In Tyroc. Beguini.
l. 2. c. 6.
to drops of which being mingled with 4 grains of Sacchar. Saturni, ulcera, and
vulnera mirabiliter consolidat.

And A. Libavius says, Prax. Chym. 136.
Balsamus est praestantissimus, vulnera omnia fundentia, sanguinem and serum,
quod supprimit.

The truth of all which, I readily credit; declaring at the same time, that I
derived not my Notion from Crato, or either of them; nor obtained it any other
way, than what I declared in my Preface: Nor can Oil of Cloves pretend to those
many adventitious Benefits, which accrue to Wounds, by the use of Oleum
Terebinthinae; much less will it allay Pain in recent ones, and not heat them.
To affirm that, is so senseless, Dispens. l. 1. Cap. 3. Sect. 7. p. 145.
and void of all reason, that Sidrophel himself, methinks, should not have been
guilty of it, after you had told him so learnedly, That Cloves yield much Oil,
because they have much of Sulphur and Salt in them, and that by reason of the
Salt, the Oil is sharp, caustic, and biting. Very much so, says M. Thybaut,
from whom you stole the whole.

If Cloves be hot in the third degree, as is by all hands allowed, Theat. Bot.
I. H. p 429. Hist. Plant. Tom. 2. l. 26. cap. 2.
the Chemical Oil must be more so; as J. Bauhinus, and our excellent Mr. Ray do
alike observe. -- E caryophyllis qu^que distillatur oleum. -- Est preculdubio
calidius multo. And consequently must accend, and inflame newly divided Flesh;
unless we are such Children to believe, that a very hot oily Sulphur will cool:
and a very hot, Corrosive sharp Salt ease Pain in tender Wounds. That would
make us as ridiculous Naturalists as the old Woman, who said, Pepper was hot in
Operation, but cold in Working. And such a one is Sidrophel, if he believe such
Paradoxes; as he will find to his Pain, if ever he be so silly when he has
occasion to experiment it on himself.

It brings sordid Ulcers to a Cicatrice, and cleanses them.

Here he puts the Cart before the Horse; for by the Rules of Surgery, sordid
Ulcers must be cleansed before they be cicatriced. But I perceive he is a
Stranger to those things: else he would neither have written so preposterously,
nor believed (though he had had an Author for it) so erroneously as he has
done by asserting, ^^at an anodyne Medicine is detergent. We know that all
Mundifiers, especially such as are po^ent enough to cleanse sordid Ulcers, are
sharp, and frettin^; and consequently painful: Such are precipitate, Mercury,
V^tri^l, Verdigrease, etc. and without doubt the Oil now in dispute, will
appear sensibly so, when applied to Ulcers, much more to Wound^ that are not
senseless.

It stops Bleeding, so admirably, that nothing ^^th i^ more, or better,

Here he transcends his Authors, for they do not make its Operation such an
admirable thing. But I know ^e stretched it, to make it tally with Oil of
Turpentine: but that will not do! though to carry on the Metaphor, he commits a
most horrid blunder in these words,

If Oil of Cloves, which is so hot, does this so absolutely? And so safely?
Much more safely may it be supposed to be done with Oil of Turpentine, etc.
which wants some degrees of the heat of Oil of Cloves.

Here he seems sensible of the heat of Clove Oil. It Is strange therefore, that
Crato, or any Man, should persuade him, that its Anodyne to recent Wounds, and
will not heat them. But who can be surprised at the Inconsistencies and
Incongruities of a Man, who has so little regard to Sense, Truth, Coherence,
or good Manners? And commits such blunders in one breath, as he has done in
this single Period. Oil of Cloves stops Bleeding so wonderfully, that nothing
does it more, or better; it does it absolutely, safely, etc. and yet after all
that superlative Character, he supposes it may be done a degree better by Oil
of Turpentine; for that will stop Blood more safely, than what does it
absolutely, and safely. Oil of Cloves is not to be exceeded, but Oil of
Turpentine is most excellent. If this be not Teague all over, I know not what
is? What, Dear Joye! Does Oil of Turpentine exceed an absolute, safe,
incomparable Remedy? Will it stop Blood better than what does it best of all?
Can it excel that, which is not to be excelled? This is pure Mountebank
Rhetoric, common with Sidrophel, who has recommended to the World above an
hundred Remedies, every one of which is the best.

And possibly from this it might be, that Turpentine Young, might receive his
Notion of stopping Bleeding with Oil of Turpentine. Crato it seems was the
Author, though he is pleased to attribute the whole Invention to himself: which
a Man of Candor would have abhorred to have done.

In this senseless, and irrational Rallery, I shall pass over his Nick-naming
me, and his most Illiterate way of expressing himself, as no strange thing from
one over Head and Ears in the Bogs of Blunder, and Nonsense; and proceed to
show you the Iniquity, and ill Consequence of his way of Inference, or
concluding a Posse ad Esse, for that is his Logic; and by the same Rule I will
undertake to prove Sidrophel to be the Son of a Whore: for it is possible: Ergo
He is so. By this way of arguing, he accuses me of being Plagiary from Crato:
But how Absurdly and Illogically is too apparent; for by it, any thing may be
made good: Conclusions may be made not only repugnant to Logic, and the Rules
of Persuasion, but to Truth it self; and all things that can exist, are
actually now in being, if his Rule be good.

Beside, the inartificial Deduction, the Inference is very untrue: It was
impossible I could steal that from Crato, which was never in him. If it were,
why does he not show it me, when demanded? Though if he could produce it in
him, it would not prove that I stole it thence; because I never knew or heard
it was there, till Waltherus, the Englisher of Bonetus, and Sidrophel have
falsely told me so, long since my Book was Published.

But if I had been led by Crato to those Thoughts I had of Ol. Tereb. Sidrophel
confesses mine exceeds his in diverse particulars; and consequently, all that
advantage is owing to me; and Crato no more the Author of my Notions than the
Inventor of Prospective Glasses was the Author of Tellescopes; The Pilot at
Helvia, the Discover of America: Or he that enquired of Dr. Harvey what became
of all the Blood yelpt from the left Ventricle of the Heart into the great
Artery, was the Discoverer of Circulation.

Ita res accendunt lumina rebus. Lucret lib. 1.
Hints may lead to Discoveries, but do not make them; one thing gives light to
another; and the Glory of those Achievments attempted from those lesser
Intimations, remain to Galileo, Columbus, and Harvey, while the Names of those
first Luminaries, are sunk and lost.

Furthermore! If any such thing was in Crato? Why must I steal it from him,
rather than Ernestus, Wickerus, or Libavius? How comes he to be the Author of
the Invention, more than they, who had said it before him: And from whom, if
ever he said any such thing, he probably took it? There is an Edition of
Ernestus Printed, when Crato was but 23 Years old, and R. Moreau says that
Wicker flourished in Basil 1562. which was 23 Years before Crato died, about
which time also Libavius was Professor of History, and Poetry, as Merklin tell
us.

But after all; It Is manifest, that I was so far from arrogating the Invention,
or assuming more than belonged to me, that in my Preface to that Book, I not
only inveighed warmly against such, as Plume themselves with others Feathers;
but renounced any Claim to that particular Invention; and not only so, but told
my Reader how the first Discoverer found it, and named the Person who handed it
from him to me. This is so plain, and clear in the four first Pages of that
Preface, that I am astonished at the Forehead of this most notorious and most
infamous Plagiary! Surely no Man without Opium, could accuse me publicly for
arrogating the whole Invention, when the World knows not an Author less guilty
of such Piracy than my self, or more than my Accuser, who concludes as he
began, with Falsehood and Slander.

It Is said the French, and others used it in the same Case before him.

If he has any Author for this Report, it is just such another as he had for
Crato: Such as he is ashamed to own; for I am sure, the French mention it not
in any of their Writings, nor ever used it in their Practice, till they had it
from me: Nor have any other ever pretended to it, that I know. There are many
Men apt to arrogate more to themselves than belongs to them, witness Sidrophel;
but where is he, who will suffer another to carry away his Laurels? I will
therefore presume (after so many Years enjoyment of the Honor which I won, by
Publishing, and Improving this Discovery) to claim it by Prescription, as my
due; in despite of this invidious Gainsayer, who, fearing his fathering it on
Crato would not deprive me, attempts by a second Lie to give it the French. I
have demanded his ground for this Suggestion also, but his guilt still keeps
him silent: so that I conclude this also to be a Chimera of his own Brain, as
all the rest of his Affirmations are.

Now, if there be nothing in Crato, which could beget in me, such an Opinion of
Ol. Tereb. as I Published; or if there were, and I ignorant of it, and
consequently not led by it; if I not only exclaimed against Plagiaries in
general, but disclaimed any Title to that Exploration in particular, All which
are most certain; What an injury has he done me, thus to Libel and Expose my
Name, and Reputation, without any manner of Cause to justify it, or Foundation
to support it.

But alas! All this is nothing compared with what the next Sally of his Pen
bestows on me. Here his Choler is only moved, there his Gall overflows with so
much rancour, and bitterness, as if one of Billingsgate, broke loose from
Bedlam, had raked Holbourn-Ditch, or the filthiest Shore of the Town, for Dirt
to cast upon me. He resolved, if false Reflections, and groundless Calumnies
would not blacken me, to try what Smutty scolding would do. Transported he was
with fear of being Chastized for his Fault, and cunningly thought to prevent me
by throwing Dust in my Eyes, and crying Murder! like a Thief pursued by the
Constable.

This he attempts in a rude, and savage Epistle, to the Reader of Seplasium,
(Forica, or Sterquilinum had been a fitter Name for it;) but how much it
blackens himself more than me, every Man of sober Sense shall judge.

I must own, that he honored me with very good Company, by railing in the same
Libel against the College of Physicians, and Men of the greatest Reputation in
Physic, for imposing on the Public, by not providing such Physicians, and
Remedies for Service of the Army, as he could have done; whereby great numbers
in the Irish Expedition might have been saved. As much as to say, Why had not
your Majesty made Sidrophel Physician, and Apothecary-General to your Forces?
He by his Skill, and Fidelity, would have saved the lives of many thousands of
your poor Subjects, who died for want of both, in the hands of such ignorant
Knaves, as the Murdering College appointed for that Service.

It was my turn next, and accordingly Sect. 11. of his Preface to the same
Libel, he falls on me; but after another manner. He does not lay spilling the
Blood of Men to my charge, but the Credit of Quacks, and Mountebanks. I had not
been guilty of the death of thousands (thank my Stars) as the College were: but
my fault was, That I had reflected on the Ignorance of such Fools, and Knaves
as would be thought Physicians too, and so engross to themselves only, what the
Proverb divides among all Mankind; and for that he falls heavily on me after
this manner.

It may be (quoth he) such an ignorant Fellow as the Nasty Author of an
Impertinent Pamphlet called Medicaster, may bedaub me, as he has done honest
Culpeper, who has been at rest these Forty Years.

All Men are Ignorant, Socrates.
though not all alike so. He was no small Philosopher, who after long Study,
confessed that he was come to know that he knew nothing. If the Book which so
Scared, and Provoked Sidrophel, or what else I have written, will not convince
him that I am not the most Ignorant Man in Nature, I hope this will: and if
that fail, I dare Appeal to the most competent Judges in the Nation, the
College of Physicians, and Society of Surgeons, who are the great Tribunals of
our Faculty, and to whom, I have Dedicated my self and This.

But to call that Book a worthless Scribble, and its Author an Impertinent, was
much out of the way: Nothing being more valuable, more proper, or more noble
than to rescue Men from Errors, and Mistakes; and to scourge such out of
Apollo's or Aesculapius's Temple, as attempt to put Falsities on Mankind, that
are of such danger to their lives, and the useful Art of Healing. This, This
was the whole drift of that Book, and so effectually done, that I knew none it
displeased; except the Quacks, who, alarmed by the design, I seemed to have, of
exposing the whole Herd of Scribbling Medicasters, cried out Fire! Murder!
etc. before they were hurt. Indeed I pointed at Sidrophel, and his Father
Culpeper; at Thompson, Harvey, and others of that Tribe; but that was all the
harm I did these honest Men; and perhaps, if he had not given me this
Provocation, I had said no more of them. In the List I hinted of that sort of
Cattle, he could pick out but three to vindicate, by which he allows my Censure
of the rest: And I Will prove that these select Friends of his, are not the best
in the Pack: Or as bad as the worst of them, whom he left to themselves.

Culpeper was an Impudent Quack Astrologer, and a Rebel. He Libelled the
learned King James, and that most Pious Prince, and Martyr, his Son, and damned
them both to Hell, together with the whole College who Compiled the London
Dispensatory. Among whom were our Immortal Harvey, Glisson, Jordan, Mayern,
etc. Men of more Worth and Learning, than all the Quack Astrologers in Europe.
These famous Worthies are by Sidrophel's Honest Culpeper, treated as if they
were (like them) Scounderils, Dispensatory, Ed. 1652. on Man. Christi.
and pernicious Vermin. In one Page he calls them Lubbers, Blasphemous,
Unskillful, Dishonest, Impudent in Sin, Sodomites, Idolaters, Ranters, Men that
Worshipped Old Jemmy for God, and his Son for Christ: But their Tutelar Gods
(quoth he) being apud inferos, gives me some hope they will follow them
quickly, and so all the Tyrants go together. Thus inhumanly, and in a fashion
as far from Honesty, and Christianity, as it was from Charity, or good Manners,
does this Wretch (celebrated by Sidrophel) treat the Sacred and Pious Memories
of the most Learned and best of Men, and most uncharitably and wickedly
Sentence their Souls to no less than Eternal Flames, a piece of Impudence never
to be paralleled but by Sidrophel himself.

But you shall have another Evidence of Culpeper's Honesty, given to the World
by W. Prynne, who was one of the most active Instruments to promote the
Rebellion against King Charles the Martyr, and a violent Enemy to the
Protestant Episcopal Fathers, not sparing the Pious, and Learned Bishop Usher.
He tells us, That those two Jesuitical Prognosticators, Lilly, True and perfect
Narrative. etc. p. 60.
and Culpeper, were so confident, A. D. 1652. of the total Subversion of the
Law, and Gospel Ministry, That in their Scurrilous Prognostications, they
Predicted the Downfall of both. And in January 1654. They Foretold that the Law
should be pulled down to the ground, the great Charter, and all our Liberties
destroyed, as not suiting with English Men in these Blessed Times. That the
Crab-Tree of the Law should be pulled up by the Roots, and grow no more: There
being no reason we should now be governed by them.

A. D. 1652. Sidrophel's Honest Culpeper Published a Libel called, Catastrophe
Magnatum containing Treason enough to hang all the Empiricks, and Astrologers
in the three Kingdoms, Railing at the Crown, Mitre, and Long Robe; inveighing
against the Law, and Lawful Government of England; predicting the utter
Subversion of it, both in Church and State; Praising, and Extolling the
Villainies of those Execrable Traitors, and Barbarous Regicides, who stand
proscribed in our Statutes, and in our Laws declared to be Sons of Belial, 12
Car. 2.30.
Men hardened in Impiety; neither true Subjects, nor true Christians. And so
much for the honesty of Sidrophel's admired Culpeper. As to his other two
Brethren whom he defends, and applauds, you shall have their Character too by
and bye, as they come in my way.

My Name he thinks not worthy to live in his Work; and I thank him for it. I
had rather have it in an House of Office, than his Confectioners Shop. Had he
used it any other way than he does, he had injured me; it being better to be
reviled with the College, than praised among such infamous Fellows as Culpeper,
Thomson, etc. And more Reputation to be ill spoken of, than commended by such a
Scandalous Plagiary; whose good word can be no Credit to any Man on whom he
bestows it.

I am alive (quoth angry Sidrophel) to castigate his Insolence, at least to
trample upon his Contumelies; which I shall do by slighting his Ignorance and
Malice, and not resenting the Injury.

Here Is another touch at Irish! And such a Teague-land Blunder-buss as the
former. -- What, Dear Joy! Castigate his Insolence, and trample upon his
Contumelies, without resenting the Injury? What! Slight his Contumelies, and
yet all the while scold like any Fish-woman at Bilingsgate at the Author of
them? These things don't consist; unless he wisely thinks a Man may be in a
Rage without Anger: Beat an Enemy without taking any notice of him: Revile, and
Quarrel in pure Love: Or, to use his own Words, Castigate Insolence, and
trample on Contumelies, by slighting them.

He has no luck at all at Satyr; Therefore, good Sir, if you cannot persuade
him to leave off Translating, This I desire may be observed by such as mistake
his Rant for good Satyr, especially a little Glysterpipe Fellow, who lives
within a mile of the Gallows, and is to die within a Ropes length on it.
(i. e. Cobling) Physic Books, and Scribbling Almanacks, (his two chief
Talents) yet beg him to desist from Satyr; for he can make none but on himself.
He has here attempted to be Satirical on me, but you see he is like one who
spits into the Sky; it rebounds on his own Face. They say a little Wit, and a
great deal of ill Nature make a good Satyrist. He has enough of the latter;
but he wants even that Modicum of the former, to complete him. He is but an
Infant Satyr, he has Nails, but no Teeth. He can scratch but cannot bite. In
short he is a Scold, not a Satyr. A Zoilus, or a Momus, not a Juvenal, or a
Persius.

I, but besides himself, and his dear Father Culpeper, the Silly Wretch, and
Impertinent Fool that wrote Medicaster Medicatus, has assaulted the Reputation
of the Learned Dr. Thomson, and Worthy Ingenious Dr. G. Harvey: Both which had
more Learning in their Little Fingers, than that Conceited Impertinent has in
his whole nasty Body, and that provokes him to piss upon the Puppy.

Pray take notice, Sir, how he scorns to resent the Injury my Book did his
Party. Observe with what Civility, Calmness, and Polisht Manners, he acts the
Philosopher, or the Christian, under all the Affronts I put upon him and his
Friends. See how Meekly he turns the other Cheek, and gives me his Cloak also.
Poor Saint! I pity him, that he so soon discovers himself to be quite contrary
to his Pretensions, and after all his Meekness, Patience, and Passive Valor,
rails, and throws about him like a Thrasher, or Kettle-Drummer.

Ay, but his two Darling Friends were affronted by me, and that transported
him; nothing else would have moved his Ire, and stirred up his Wrath against
me. I confess I do not wonder at his fond Concern for his two learned Friends,
because I know them cast in one Mold, They are Birds of a Feather.

Thomson I shall say the less of, because he is dead: And because while living,
he was sufficiently proved to be no Doctor, but an Illiterate Dunce; by one of
the most Learned Physicians of the Age. And indeed he was obviously so to all
Understanding Readers of his Pamphlets: Stubbs against Thompson. etc.
For excepting a few hard words, the Cant and Jargon of Helmont, and an Arcanum
or two, that he boasts of, more famous for the Death, than Cure of his
Patients, there is nothing at all in them: His Notions are untintelligible: His
Opinions, as far as they can be understood, very Erroneous: his Language
Bombast, Affected, and very Silly: And his Assertions Heterodox, and Wrong.
Take a few Specimens. The time is at hand (quoth he) that a Phlebotomist will
be looked upon no better than a Bronchotomist or Cutthroat. Preface.
Blood is the immediate Instrument of the Soul, in which it shines, Thompson's
true way of preserving the Blood, p. 2. p. 4.
displaying its Radiant Beams every way; that Sensation, Motion, Nutrition, and
all other Functions may be performed.

The Blood of Man is graduated to the highest Perfection, fitting to be a
Receptacle of so Divine a Guest, the Immortal Soul, which as long as it is here
incarcerated, lying couched in the Sensitive, being bound to act by Corporeal
Organs, suffers many Obscurations, Defections, and Eclipses, through variety of
Meteors arising in the Horizon of this Microcosm, from the Blood degenerate and
depraved.

Blood is an Universal Substance divisible only by some external, p. 6.
accidental means, as the Air or Fire, which causes a various Texture and
different Position of its Atoms, etc. -- Both of these do strangely larvate and
disguise this puniteous Balsom, etc.

Did they rightly understand how Blood like Mercury might be Polymorphised, p.
6.
etc. these Dogmatists would never be so forward to pierce poor Man's Skin,
rashly let out, and throw away the substantial support of Life, etc.

The efficient Cause or Agent of Blood is the innate Archeus or Vital Spirit,
p. 9.
which chiefly makes this formal transmutation of whatever is nourishable. This
works by his principal Instrument, the Ferments in the Duumvirate, and in the
rest of the Digestions. For this Primum Mobile, moving sine Motore alieno, sets
all the other Wheels in Motion, till being exantlated, and its Vital Power
exhausted, all the inferior Orbs forthwith subsist, are at a stand and fail.
This Autokineton is the Seat or Subject of the Sensitive Soul, where it is
emicant and translucent in the same manner as the Beams of the Sun received in
by the Air in a serene, clear Sky, are effulgent and bright; but in a cloudy
dusky Heaven are offuscated and opacous.

If timely prevention be not made, either by potent strength of Body, p. 12.
or a prevalent Art, the Man decays in his Faculties, the Archeus becomes
aculeated, extimulated, and becomes exorbitant, framing variety of Exotic,
Morbifick Idaeas, causing a Syndrom of Heteroclite Symptoms.

The next notable Cause that makes great alteration for the worse in this Vital
Juice, p. 14.
are the extravagant Perturbations, Storms and Tempests that arise in this
Microcosin, raised through misapprehensions, misapplications, and
misinterpretations of things obvious to our Sense, contrived by a luxated or
dislocated imagination.

This feral Brat of Hell, Melancholy, does disturb the Economy of the Soul's
residence, p. 15.
and is the Original of a black fuliginous Archeus, etc.

Anger intoxicates, pourtraying the perfect Idea of Madness, which sometimes is
so graduated, that no Poison in this part of the World seems to be more active,
for a few Atoms of this venomous Gore penetrating the cutaneous Membrane, has
infected the whole ruddy Mass, introducing most truculent Symptoms.

If we be not Master of our unruly Passions, it is impossible there should be
an Eutomie, an Eucrasie, and Eumetry in this Solar Juice.

Diseases are first embryonated and characterized in the Vital Spirit, p.27.
residing in the Hypocondries, Stomach, and Spleen, etc.

An inveterate pain of the Head takes its first beginning from the enormon of
the Duumvirate, where the seminal Rudiments and Idea of this Disease were
abumbrated or shadowed forth by the sensitive Soul, excited to Passion upon the
apprehension of something disagreeing and injurious to Vitality. Afterward the
same is perfectly delineated in the Archeus of the Brain in which the Scene
laid below is now brought to light above. Now is to be seen a Syndrom of many
Symptoms, which plainly show the Nature of the Disease suitable to the part
afflicted. Here the Latex and Vital Juice apostalize by degrees from their
purity, the Ferments, etc.

As the Soul inhabits the Archeus, p. 28.
so this is permanent in the Blood, and all three take up for their
Metropolitan or chief place of Residence, the Stomach and Spleen, in which the
Soul by means of the Duumvirate, acts freely.

An Epispastick of Cantharides being laid on, p. 39.
where there is Vitality, the Skin in a short space is separated from the Flesh
by an acrimonious Ichor, which the Archeus fabricated, being put into a
fretting condition upon the apprehension of this virulent I laister.

Nothing is more congenerous, symbolizing with the Animal Gas of Life, than
highly exalted Spirit of Wine, being forthwith embraced, p. 44.
united, and identified one with another, by reason of their Affinity and
Congruity.

Physicians do not truly understand the energy of Zymosis, what a powerful
alterity is made by it, and how the sulphurous Particles of the Vegetables
becomes Vrinous like the Spirit of the Animal, whereby it is enabled to
profligate the Morbifick Matter through all the Emunctories, Sluices, and secret
Passages of the Body; This is the direct way of curing Fevers fundamentally,
though they conclude the Fate of such must needs be sad, when such Presumptuous
Phaeton- like Pyrotechnists, drive the Mettlesom Horses of the Sun of this
Microcosm so furiously.

And yet with all this Ignorance, he had such a stock of Confidence, as to
encounter that Prodigy of Learning abovenamed: But his Heart was too big for
his Head. It was such an Impar congressus, that I pitied to see the poor
forward Creature so overmatcht, and baffled; so publicly exposed, and charged
with Ignorance in the Writings of Hippocrates, or Galen, and all the very
Rudiments of Physic, without one word to say in his own behalf, which did not
confirm the Imputation his Antagonist publicly laid on him.

As to his surviving Friend G. H. -- y, He, like himself, has been many Years
a busy Scribbler of Heterodox Opinions and Principles in Philosophy and
Physic; prostituting the Noble Art of Healing, and Libelling the most Famous
Practicers, and Eminent Professors of it, in this Age and Nation; viz. Such as
Sir Th. Brown, Dr. Charlton, Cox, Willis, Lower, Short; not sparing the most
Learned College of Physicians, London. Men, whose Books he was not worthy to
carry after them: If you would see the Philosophy and Learning that was in the
Head of him (I meddle not with that in his little Finger, because Sidrophel
writtily says, there is too much for me) read his Archiologia Philosophica
nova: If his Manners, Civility, and good Breeding, you need not go so far, as
he did for it, it is abundantly expressed in his Casus Med. Chir. and his
Conclaves: If his Skill, you may have a lumping Penniworth in the rest of his
Fastidious Scribbles; and if in all of them put together, you do not see the
true shapes of a Scholar, a Gentleman, and a Physician drawn by his own hand,
(Painters seldom hit their own Faces, nor Astrologers their Fates) behold him
done to the Life by another in a Dialogue between Philiater and Momus, printed
in 12o Anno 1687.

De mortuis nil nisi bonum, is a Rule, quoth he, our little Prosligate is
unacquainted with: And why? Because I said Culpeper was one of the Scribbling
Medicasters of the Age. Was he not so? Did he deserve to be well spoken of when
dead, who had done so much mischief when alive; and was so uncharitable to the
Souls of his deceased Sovereigns, as to place them in Hell? Besides reproaching
Their Names, and blackening Their Reputations without Truth, or Humanity, after
they were laid in their Sepulchers? It seems, he was not acquainted with this
Rule, nor Sidrophel with the other part of it, Nil nisi verum de vivis.

I have been told that a Scholar once complaining to the Butler, that his Drink
was dead, had the same Reprimand from the cunning Ale-tap, which I had from
Sidrophel: Nil nisi bonum de mortuis. Now either the Wag was in the right, or I
not in the wrong: Take your choice.

But to be more close and serious with him in this matter, I must tell him, his
Rule is not general; it is in many cases a fault to follow it, and our Duty to
say evil of such dead, as were notorious for committing it when alive. For this
we have many Examples in Scripture, the Writings of the Fathers, the Anathema's
and Censures of the Church against Heretics, and Heterodox Men. In our
Statutes, instances of it often occur against Traitors, Rebels, and pernicious
Men, such as Cromwell, Bradshaw, and Ireton, who stand branded with very evil
Characters, after they had been long dead, and their Heads on Westminster Hall,
as you may see 12. Car. 2.30.

Had he minded Ludlow, and other late Libellers of King Charles the Martyr, of
this Adage, it had been pertinent. For they, contrary to all the Rules of
Christianity, Humanity, good Manners, and Truth it self, have reproacht the
Reputation of that most Pious Protestant Prince, who stands celebrated in many
of our Statute Laws, and is Yearly by our Parliaments, and biggest part of the
Nation, recognized, and solemnly declared to be a Righteous, Pious, Innocent
Prince, and Martyr; whom yet their venomous Pens call, Tyrant, Pharaoh, Nimrod,
Nero, etc.

But I cannot forbear wondering with what Face Sidrophel could affirm, in the
midst of all this horrid Billingsgate, and such a storm of Fury and Scolding,
That it was unchristian, and unmanlike, to sling Dirt upon any one. Does he not
by an ore tenus confess himself inhumane, and unchristian? Or does he think
that to call a Man in the Face of the whole World, Ignorant, Malicious, Nasty,
Impertinent, Scurrilous, Insolent, Senseless, Fool, Dog, Wretch, Whiffling Cur,
Snarling Puppy, Profligate, Delinquent, etc. and to crowd all this stuff into
one Page of an Octavo Book, was not flinging Dirt on a Man, but giving him
Sugar Plumbs? One of them must be his Belief, and I don't much care which it is.

To cast Dirt upon the Dead, is an Incivility not to be forgiven, quoth he; and
he is the first that ever made exposing Quacks to be the sin against the Holy
Ghost. If what he says be true, every Grave-maker is daily guilty of it in a
literal, and every Controvertist, and Opposer of Heresy, in a Moral Sense. And
nothing is more common in the scribbles of those Chymiasters, and Star Doctors
themselves, than to rail at all the Physicians, except a few Maggoty
Helmontians, and Astrological Quacks, that have been in the World these Sixteen
hundred Years; as Men who have acted by mischievous Rules, and killed their
Patients by ill Methods, and Medicaments. Cap. 3.
His Friend Thomson in particular speaks it in plain English. And his Father
Culpeper in Latin.

But did I abuse the dead by placing Culpeper ( Thompson was then alive) among
the empty Scribblers in Physic? No, all the Learned Physicians in England are
of my Mind, and can think no otherwise of so Ignorant, so Rude, so Pragmatical
a Traitor, as he was.

Sidrophel concludes this huffing Paragraph, with pronouncing me Senseless, and
Nothing.

As to the first, I do not, as he and some other vaunting Empiricks do, pretend
to more Sense than comes to my dividend; nor will I own him so much in the
right, as to think that I am wholly destitute of any at all: That Scandal is
notorious to all that know me, or have seen what I have written: And even by
this Reproof, it will appear, that I am Professor of Sense enough, to show that
he has less than he pretends to: and that all he has, amounts to little more
than none at all. And as to the Subject of our Contest, I have referred the
Matter to a Tribunal, at whose Bar he dares not Appear, nor Appeal.

Nor am I so little, as to justify his accounting me Nothing. I have the
Honor to be in the Friendship, Esteem, and Correspondence of the most Eminent
of the College, and Surgeons Hall; and had a Freedom in the Latter conferred on
me Gratis, without Examination, or any way of Purchase. I have been Physician,
and Surgeon to a public Hospital near 21 Years; and much longer served my
King, and Country, in all the Military Offices my Profession could Capacitate
me. I have served in the Navy, in the Army, in a great Garrison, and Dock-Yard.
And besides all this, I preside in the Civil Government of one of the biggest
Corporations in England. And if notwithstanding all this, I am Nothing,
Sidrophel is much less than nothing: That is, an Almanac maker, and one who
Scribbles for Bread, or to a worse purpose.

What that is, will appear in the Remarks I am next to make: Which will as
fully detect his Knavery to the Public, as the former does his Folly to me. He
out-doth the Proverb, and is both Fool, Knave, and Physician too. And that you
may be sure to see him all over, and know him in which of those shapes soever
he appears, I will take off his Fools Coat, and put on him that of W. Lilly;
which fits him so exactly, that it is hard to know the one from the other. Their
Resemblance in Art, and the use they make of it, is the same: Their Contempt,
and Affront of King Charles the Martyr, is alike: One affirms him justly
Executed; the other thought the Anniversary enjoined by Law for that Excerable
Murder, not worth a place in his Calendar; nor his Name fit to stand in the
noble List of Saints and Martyrs; ^^ne 7.
while yet he obtrudes ill Company on that Glorious Army, and thrusts among
them such odious, and despicable Celebrations, as that of a Quack's Nativity.

But their greatest similitude lies in a Hieroglyphical Prophecy against the
Throne and Church of England, published many Years since by the one, and now
inculcated to the World by the other. It Is true that since he heard how his
contempt of the Royal Martyr in his former Almanacks, and those Prophetic
Emblems, were two faulty things I took notice of, He has labored to put a
sham Interpretation upon the one, and amend the other, by noting on the 30th of
January K. Chapter I. Dec. that is, beheaded, or Executed, as Lilly, and the rest
of that Tribe used to word it, which is next to saying nothing, or worse.

His Democratical Hieroglyphick pretends to contain the future State of England
for an Hundred Years, beginning 1650. half of which being past, and gone, his
future Tense is become Preterimperfect; and he fatum post fata canebat,
foretells things already come to pass, which every Fool can do. But Folly apart!
Let us examine the Knavery of this Emblematical Withcraft; and I think the
expired part, will make a Key to that which is yet unfulfilled. Mark then!

It begins with an Executioner, and his Sword bloody; others cutting down Royal
Oak Trees, and a Crown over (not on) a Man's Head, another lying dead, as in
State; and upon him a Scepter, Sword, and three Crowns; then comes a Crowned
Draggon with a Scepter in his right Claw -- It Is easy to unriddle the meaning
of all this, being in plain Hieroglyphical English, the Murder of King
Charles, and Cromwell the Dragon assuming the Government -- What follows
resembles the Transactions, and Accidents of those Times. But the Sting is in
the Tail, and does not yet appear; although a Man with half an Eye may see the
meaning of it, Mauger the Varnish he would gloss it, and delude us withal.

The Catastrophe, or part to come of this Tragical Business, is a Magnificent
Palace, before whose Gates lie several dead Dogs, Wolves, and other Beasts of
Prey, with their Heads separated from their Bodies. These I take to be
Courtiers turned out of White Hall, and Murdered at its Gate, as King Charles
was. Then appears an Assembly of Men sitting in an House like a State-House;
three of them in long Robes; over the Head of one written PAX; of another LEX;
and of the third GREX; not a word of REX. Then appear Men undermining the
Foundations of many Famous Churches; some of which fall, others are falling:
Then appears a Man pulling a Surplice over a Bishop's Ears. There Is Episcopacy,
and the Church gone at a dash. Then you see a great Imperial Crown broken into
pieces, and with it many other little Crowns and Coronets; there is Monarchy,
and Nobility mumbled. Then the Swords are beaten into Plow-Shears, and the
Spears into Pruning Hooks, and all ends with Victory, and Triumph over
Monarchy, Episcopacy, and Nobility: And then Hey Boys up go we!

For to what purpose else can it be, that this is so Yearly published, and
repeated, but to Influence Peoples Minds in this Nation (so long famous for
being deluded by Prophecies) with an Opinion that the Crown, Mitre, and
Coronet, are by Heaven destined to Destruction; and consequently must be
submitted to, if not promoted? That the People of this Nation have been often
drawn into Rebellion by such bantering Devices, and Dreams of Astrologers, is
abundantly reported by our Historians; out of whom anon you shall have numerous
Instances. It was to these Deluders, that Wales owed that Lamentable Ruin it
suffered in the days of Hen. IV. and to them we are not a little indebted for
the Miseries this Kingdom has suffered within few Years before the Date, or
Commencement of this Prophetic Emblem, by which Sidrophel seems to be carrying
on the Tragedy his Predecessors began. The fall of Churches, the divesting of
Bishops, and breaking in pieces the Imperial Crown of England (for there is the
Scene), too plainly tell us what he would be at. And to make the unfulfilled
part the more credible, he cunningly orders it so, that the first is already
verified, and come to pass. This Device, or Banter he borrowed from, or wrote
in imitation of that Arch-Impostor and false Fortune Tellers, W. Lilly, who at
the end of a Pestilent Pamphlet, which he calls, Monarchy or no Monarchy in
England, written 1651. gives such Prognosticating Pictures as those published
by Sidrophel. There Is the Mob Assassinating Gown-Men, some Bishops, and
Episcopal Clergy tumbling down Pulpits and all. Others of them lying prostrate
on the ground; there are three Crowus and a Coronet turned upside down; there
are his Twins and Dragons, flaming Towns, Fleets, Graves, dead Corpse, lean
Cattle, Streams of Blood, a red Sea of green Blood, and all the Scarecrow,
Bugbear Emblems of future Vengeance on the Church, Throne, and Nobility; which
he had Predicted in that lying Book, after the thing had come to pass.

I call it a lying Book, on many accounts: One of which is very notorious, and
remarkable, for though it were written to Predict the final Extirpation of
Monarchy, from the Murder of King Charles the Martyr; P. 62.
there is a Prophecy in it, that within Fifty Years of that time, a King Henry
of this Nation, should Conquer France, and that he should be twice Crowned.
This Merlinus Liberatus takes notice of in his Almanac 1692. as a Prophecy to
be performed by K. William. Be that true, I am sure the Prophet was false. For
how could there be no more Kings in England? and yet a King of this Nation,
within Fifty Years after the fatal Period of Monarchy among us, atchieve so
mighty a thing? But his Pen was like his Name, nothing but Lies; and so is
Sidrophel's too. Their Hieroglyphics are alike, their Designs seem to have the
like Tendency, Date, Commencement, and Catastrophe. And the Authors alike, a
couple of Canting Deluders, and false Prophets; who I hope and pray may be
alike mistaken, and confounded, and our Government in Church, and State, abide
for ever. Amen.

Although an Astrologer, or an Almanack-maker be a thing odious enough to the
wise part of the Nation, by the Falsities and Delusions they yearly put upon
them; yet forasmuch as all Men are not enough sensible thereof, and many that
are so, do yet encourage the Cheat to wicked purposes, I will undertake to
undeceive the one, and expose the other, by a brief Censure of Astrology, and
setting it in such a Light, as any Man with half an Eye may see through it, and
discern the Vanity, and Falseness thereof, and the Wickedness of those who
Practice, and Profess it; particularly Sidrophel, whom I will here expose as an
Astrologer, and hereafter as a Quack, in a second part of Medicaster Medicatus.

In doing which, I shall not meddle with all the trifling, and sottish Fancies,
which the Brains of Astrologers (fertile in Fiction) have conceived of the
Stars, and those Spacious Nothings, the 12 Houses, or Castles in the Air; being
things, which ought rather to be laughed at, as the Whimsies of Men, who have
given their Imaginations liberty to commit the greatest Extravagancies in
Bedlam; or the Crotchets of such Crafty Pates, as laugh at all those who do not
laugh at them: But offer against it these weighty unanswerable Objections.

1. If Astrology were true, there is yet no true Astrologer, because they have
no certain Foundation at all: The Ephemerides, and Astronomical Tables by which
they Calculate, being by their own Confession false, and consequently there
Schemes no better than Poor Robins. Morinus, Agrippa, P. Cavino, Gassendus,
Astrol. Gal.
Cherubin, Hevelius, Ricciolus, and many other learned Astronomers do affirm
this. And besides, the better sort of Astrologers themselves, such as Morinus
the Frenchman, who pretends to have made all new Rules of Astrology, because
the former were all of them false, and foolish; the most Illiterate of those
Impostors say the same thing. Partridge charge all the Tables before his own,
with falsehood; and you, sweet Sir, sensible that all extant are uncertain, and
erroneous, promise to publish New and Correct ones. Rob. Godson writes
Altrologia Reformata A.D. 1696.


2. In the Nature, Property, and Influence of the Stars, Division of the
Zodiac, Twelve Houses, and first Elements of their Art, they do not agree. So
that all their Judgments are as false, and uncertain, as their Calculations;
much more so, if there be no Zodiac in the Heaven, nor an Heaven for such a
Zodiac; but that all their noise of Trigons, Merc. Vol. 1. n. 6.
Triplicities, etc. be as the Athenians call them, a fardle of Gibberish
Nullities, invented on purpose to abuse the credulity of Children, and Fools.
Their dividing the Heaven into 12 parts, Dr. More's Mist. of Iniquity p.
349.355. also his Answ. to Butler, 105. Gassend. c. 8. p. 722. Vol. 1.
is without Reason, or Mathematics: Their qualification of the Stars, without
Philosophy: and both mere imagination, as vain as Vanity it self, says the
greatest Mathematician of this Age.

3. The new, and approved System of Copernicus, the Myriads of Stars unknown to
former Ages, quite confound all the old Astrology.

4. Their Mutual Railing at one another Ignorance, Error, and Knavery; even to
the height of Billingsgate, like Gadbury and Partridge, yearly, if we must
believe them all, proves them all such. Augur ridet Augurem.

Gassendus tells us, That their Art contains no one Fundamental, Op. Refor.
Praef.
which is not oppugned by some one or more of its Professors. And Partridge
himself speaks out pat to the point, He that would laugh at Astrology (quoth
he) need not read Heminga, etc. but our own Authors; our Rules are so
deficient, that they are not to be relied on, they thwart one another; our
Aphorisms are false, and involve us into a Labyrinth, which makes us Ridiculous.

5. Their different Opinions, in Prognosticating and Predicting counter to one
another, according to the Times, or the Interest they are of, shows their
Ignorance, or Knavery, and the Vanity of their Art. The Instances of their
contradictory Presagings, are very numerous. The most famous of late are to be
found in Wharton, and Lilly, Gadbury, and Partridge.

6. Nor are they more divided among themselves than they are from Truth. The
falseness of their Prognostications in former Ages, are remarkt by Cicero,
Pliny, St. Augustine, and others: Those since, by the noble Picus, Heminga,
Angelis, Gassendus, and many more. For it is not only those little mean Fellows,
who nowadays make Almanacks, that prove the truth of this Reflection every
Year: But such Masters as Albumazer, Cardan, Gaurichius, Nostradamus, and
Lilly; they have convinced the World, that the Art is not able to help them to
the Knowledge of any Accident before hand. They have not so much foresight of
Weather as a Shepherd, or a Sinner that carries an Almanac in his Bones; or
an old Woman with Corns on her Toes. Perhaps they will tell you (as they do every
Year) at such a time as this; That great Preparations for War, and
Consultations will be made next Winter; That Fleets, and Armies will be abroad
next Summer, and some Battle fought, or a Town taken or besieged: That about
next December, (as Merlinus Liberatus lately foretold) There will be business
at the Old Baily, and that several aged People will die, in and about London.
At such a ridiculons rate, who may not turn Prognosticator?

Fatidicus non est qui manifesta canit. I have read all Lilly's Almanacks from
40 to 60, in the Holy time of that great Rebellion, to which he was accessory;
and find him always the whole breadth of Heaven wide from Truth. Scarce one of
his Predictions verified, but a Thousand contrariwise. It Is hard that a Man
shooting at Rovers so many Years together, should never hit the right Mark. In
one of his Almanacks Dedicated to the Long Parliament, a very few Months before
the Army (those Legions of their own raising) tore them in pieces to the very
Rump, He told them their Duration would be long, in Settlement and Peace, and
that they should do much good to the Kingdom, and accord with the King; Who was
then closely confined by the Votes of Non-Addresses to Carisbrook-Castle. And
but four Months before the Execrable Murder of that Pious Prince, He wrote,
That the King should be restored to his former Dignity: That the Parliament,
full of Honorable, and Loyal Intentions, would end all things in a general
Agreement, and Reconciliation. But no sooner was that Black Tragedy acted, and
the Sword assumed the Crown, but he changed his Tune. Then we were to have no
more Kings in England, and Charles the Second should die before he was 38 Years
old: That the Ottoman should ruin the Emperor, and Venetians, about the Year
70. With abundance more of such Lying Stuff were his Almanacks filled, till the
Restoration, of which he foretold not one syllable.

John Gadbury, deceived by Lilly, or some such lying Spirit as led him,
foretold also in an Almanac near 75. that about 80. the Turks would make a
mighty inrode to Germany; That Vienna should be taken by them, and they push
their Victory home to the Belgic Shore. When contrariwise, about that time,
the Germans and Venetians made such Monstrous, and incredible Impressions on
the Turks, as recovered all the Morea, Hungary, and a great part of Greece.

In former Ages, when Astrology was more used, and better understood, they were
guilty of the same Mistakes, and Falsities. Caesar, Pompey, and Crassus, whose
Fates were Violent, Immature, and Tragical, were promised by those Diviners,
that they should die aged, at their own Houses, in Peace and Honor.

J. Picus Mirandula says he examined many of their Calculations, and found
scarce one in twenty prove true. Praefac. Molin.
Joseph Scaliger tells us that Albumazer predicted that Christianity would last
but 1460 Years. Ab. Judaeus foretold the coming of the Messiah should be A. D.
1464. Arnoldus, That Antichrist would appear 1345. and that A. D. 1174. the
Arabian, Jewish, and Christian Astrologers all agreed, that the utmost
Desolation of the World by Tempest, would happen A. D. 1186. How false these
Predictions were, time has shown the World.

Sextus ab Heminga collected thirty Eminent Nativities, Calculated by the best
Rules of this lying Art, and they proved all false by Experience, sad Events
happening to those on whom the Heavens by the Rules of Astrology smiled; and
happiness to such as they frowned upon.

Cardan and Gaurichius both Calculated the Nativity of Hen. 2. who was slain in
his fortieth Year, Causin Holy Court, p. 360.
by a Splinter of Mongomery's Lance; though one of them said, He should live
to an happy old age: and the other, that if he survived the great Climaterick
Year, he should live gloriously to 70.

Both did the like with Luther, and were both alike mistaken.

Cardan, who (as Gassendus says) was a Man of the best Wit, Brains, and
Learning of any Astrologer, spent an hundred hours on the Birth of our Edward
6th; and after all that Industry, was scandalously mistaken in his Fate;
Gassend. p 748. lib. 1 de quad. c. 2. Sect. 13.
for He died in his 16th Year, who by the Astrologer's Calculation, should not
be sick till his 25th, and after that die of a Flux, and a Fever. Si vis
divinare, contrarium ei ad unguem dicito, quod Astrologi aut pollicentur, aut
minitantur, was the saying of Martianus, not only commended, but verified by
Cardan: Who after all his Skill, confessed that scarce one of their Predictions
in forty proved true: Lib. de Judic. cap. 6. D^. More Mist. p. 356.
So that the best of them cannot forbear owning themselves no Wizards; they all
seem Infatuated, and more under the Power of Witchcraft than above it.

J. R. Camerarius, was as much out in his Judgment upon the Nativity of Henry
4th; and Gassendus relates how much Nostradamus was mistaken in his Genethliacs
on the Scheme of Suffredus his Nativity. For to him all things happened quite
contrary to the Lying Predictions of that famous Astrologer.

Now if such Masters in the Art, had not Skill enough to avoid such gross
Mistakes, What can be expected from such half witted Astrologers as Merlinus
Liberatus, and Sidrophel who every Year expose themselves to this Censure? And
as for Friend John, the humble Servant of Urania, all the many Calculations in
his Collect. Genet. are accused of Falsehood by his Brother Partridge. Opus
Reformatum.

7. Their not foreseeing the most remarkable Events, sufficiently shows the
Vanity of their Art, and their own Ignorance. This is manifest in the great
Accidents of the last Thirty Years; the Reslauration of King Charles II. the
Plague and Fire of London; the treble War 1666. Oats 's Plot; the great Snow
1681. and the Frost 1683. the Death of King Charles, and the Fate of his
Brother; the Stupendous Revolution 1688. the Death of Pope Innocent XI. the
Dukes of Newburgh, and Lorrain, who were the grand Pillars of the Confederacy,
and died in one Year; the great, and Mavelous turn of Affairs in Austria,
Hungaria, and the Morea; the many terrible Earthquakes in Jamaica, Sicilia,
Naples, Flanders, and London, and the Death of Queen Mary, were things our
Astrologers foreknew no more, than Lilly could Divine who shit at his Door.
Think you that Sidrophel, so cunning a Conjurer as he would be thought, if he
had foreseen the time of that great Ladies Death, would have placed Laurels on
her Brow, and told her of their being always green, but the Year before they
withered?

Against this Reflection, I know but one Instance they have to object: and that
is the Hints Mene-Tekel gave of King James's Death, a little before the
Abdication.

Suppose, but not granting that to be true too, it does not follow, because
once in an Age, among a thousand false Prophecies, one is fulfilled, that they
are true Prophets; more than that the Devil is not a Liar, because he once
spoke truth. The veracity of them both is the same, in despite of a single
Instance each have to the contrary. One Swallow does not make a Summer. When
Astrologers, like the Father of Lies, commonly fail, and err in their
Predictions, it is to be supposed that Chance, or some other Intelligence, not
the Stars, put them so rarely into the right. Children, and Fools speak truth,
says the Proverb: And the Scriptures tell us, that the Devil himself, by the
Miraculous Power of Christ, had such a force put upon his Nature, as to do it
once, when he acknowledged our Savior to be the Son of God. Astrologers may
therefore be allowed to resemble them in this, as they do in all things else;
though like common Liars, they are not to be believed, till their Truth becomes
apparent by experience, and that (God wot) will be but seldom. If it be a good
Argument to prove the Truth of Astrology, that some Predictions have been
verified, by the same sort of Logic it is to be proved false, because their
Divinations are oftener so than otherwise; as is confessed by Cardan, and
proved by Picus, Heminga, Gassendus, Chambers, and many others.

Mene-Tekel not only got the Author a great Name, but patcht up the decayed
Credit of Astrology among the Populace, because they could not see the Spirit
by which he Divined. But wiser Men knew he Predicted by Intelligence with the
Contrivers, not the Planets. The Stars that presignified it to him, dwelt on
Earth, not in the Twelve Houses of Heaven. And they perhaps did not err, who
looked on the whole thing as a Political Device to dispose the Minds of People
to that great Change: We all know that he failed in the Death of King James,
the Employment of his Gallows, and many other particulars: And he that knew the
great, and universal discontent in the Nation, at the Management of Affairs
under that unfortunate Prince, and how many were engaged to dethrone him, might
without Astrology foresee as much as he. I know a Great Man who (although no
Conjurer) told me as much, and as soon, as Mene-Tekel did, of that business.

The Laplanders may easily foretell a Storm they are about to raise, and he that
is the Instrument of Mischief, is best able to Predict the consequence of his
Design: Like those Skilful Poysoners Naturalists Theophr. Hist Plant. l. 9 c.
6. Boil Not. Phil. p. 264. Medela Medie p. 103. Ramsey of Poison p. 10.
and Travelers tell us of, who contrive the fatal Dose so, that the Victim
shall not die in many Years after taking it, and then not miss an hour. Such a
Pandora may easily turn Astrologer, as well as Poysoner; and foretell the time
of the Patient's Exit, more certainly than any Genethliac by the Nativity.

We are told that the Indians have, and Caesar Borgia had this pernicious
Skill: and it is suspected that there were in England some, who, without
Astrology, knew, many days before King Charles was sick, when he should die. By
the same way Dr. Bates, Cromwell's Physician, became a truer Prophet than
Thomas Goodwin his Chaplain; the Dose the one gave being too hard for the
Prayers the other made for that Usurper. Though they were alike confident, the
one of his Death, the other of his Recovery; yet the former went on the surest
grounds, as appeared in the Event.

Thuanus, Scaliger, and Gassendus say that Cardan lost his Life to save his
Credit; for having Predicted the time of his own Death, he starved himself to
verify it; Magastrom. p. 173. Dr. More Mist. p. 358.
or else being sure of his Art, He took that to be his fatal day, and by those
apprehensions made it so. And I do not want a learned Author to back my belief,
that great men have untimely died by some Artifice of the Astrologers, for the
same reason.

Domitian having Decreed to banish all the Astrologers, they conspired his
Death; and one of them, Ascletarion, Sueton. lib. 12. Sect. 15.
told him when it should be. The time appointed happening while Apollonius
Tyanaeus was Disputing in the Schools at Ephesus, he suddenly stopped, and cried
out, well done Stephanus! Kill the Tyrant! And then told the Audience that the
Emperor was wounded. This contributed highly to the Fame of that Impostor,
although it proved him such no more than the Duke of Braganza, or one of the
Priests who contrived and managed the Revolt of Portugal, if they had foretold
it.

A Son of Nostradamus told the Men of Friuli, that he was sent by his Father to
premonish them of the ruin of their City by Fire such a Night: They believing
the Oracle, and watching narrowly to prevent the Conflagration, found him, and
his Accomplices, scattering Fireballs in diverse parts of the Town.

Pope Hildebrand was one who Studied, and Practiced this Art: and yet had so
little Skill, or Confidence in it, that he hired several Ruffians to Murder
the Emperor Hen. 4. at the time he Predicted his Death. Acts and Mon. Vol. 1.
p. 199. Vol. 2. p. 170.
This we are told by Cardinal Beno, of his own Religion. Beside Fox and others
of ours, Ollerius Barcinonensis, foretold the Assassination of Hen. 4. of
France by Ravaillac, from a secret Intimation of the Design, known to some
Grandees of Spain, and others of the Court of Rome who were no Astrologers. The
Author of the Turkish Spy tells us, that Fr. Corvinus the famous Italian
Astrologer, the Night before that Murder, said on the top of his House in
Florence, That to morrow the greatest King in Europe would be killed: But says,
the Intelligence he had was from Earth, not Heaven, or the Stars. And Merlinus
Liberatus will not allow his Friend John to have any other foresight of the
Prince of Wales his Birth, than by the Transactors of that Mysterious Affair,
that is by the same way and means himself knew what he Published in his
Mene-Tekel: For without the help of Satan, or the Stars, any one may Predict
Events, if they are in the Contrivance, or have Intelligence with those that
are so.

8. Their Ignorance of their own Affairs, Misfortunes, and Fates before they
happen, proves them unable to foretell that of other Men. Astrologers, says
Agrippa, while they gaze on the Stars for direction, etc. fall into Ditches,
Wells, and Gaols, and like Thales, become the Sport, and Derision of silly
Women, and Slaves. Astra tibi Aethereo pandunt sese omnia Vati,
Omnibus and quae sunt fata futura monent.
Omnibus ast Vxor quod se tua publicat, id te
Astra (licet videant omnia) nulla monent.
was an Epigram made by Sir Tho. More; R. Castro Med. Polit. l. 2. c. 2.
and I fancy our witty Hudibras was as sharp upon Sidrophel, and Wachum in
English, as the other was in Latin.

Quoth Hudibras, the Stars determine,
You are my Prisoners, base Vermin.
Could they not tell you that as well,
As what I came to know, foretell?
By this what Cheats you are we find:
Who in your own Concerns are blind.
The Learned Mr. Purchase tells us that the Death of Hagag a Sarazen King,
Pilgrim, p. 226.
was foretold by an Astrologer, who did not foresee his own; for as soon as he
made his Prognostic of the King, his own Head was struck off.

Sir John Chardin in the History of his Persian Voyage, Page 40. 131. 132.
Appen. 25.
tells us, That Astrologers are in very great esteem among that People: And
that they always crown their Kings in the minute they direct. And if after that
the King be unhappy, he is crowned again on a new chosen time, Causin Holy
Court.
as Solomon the Third was so crowned while he was in that Country. But the
Astrologers often mistake, and are as often put to Death.

King Hen. 7. understanding, that an Astrologer had foretold the punctual time
of his Death, sent for him, and enquired where he, the Conjurer, should keep
his next Christmas? He answered, that he knew not. Then quoth the King I do
without Astrology tell you, it shall be in Gaol. And thither he sent, and kept
him long enough to see by Experience, that the King was a truer Prognosticator
than himself.

J. Galeazus, Duke of Milan, treated another Impudent Astrologer with more
severity; for having Predicted that he should long survive that Prince, he
Ordered the Wretch to be immediately hanged. Such another Story is in the
Anthologia of Diophantes the great Astrologer, Gassend.
done in Verse.

Gaurichius did not foresee by the Stars, that he was to suffer on the Rack;
nor Cardan that his Son was to be hanged for Poisoning his Wife.

I was personally acquainted with Dr. W. Ramsey, who publicly boasted of Skill
enough in Astrology to foreknow a Man's Fate; particularly whether he were born
to die rich, Chr. Astrology cap. 6. Sect. 6
be fortunate in Marriage, etc. and depended so much on it, as to assure
himself of great Wealth, and happy Nuptials; who yet died poor, in a Gaol,
after he had Married such a Wife as provoked him to write that Satyr against
Matrimony, called Conjugium Conjurgium.

That Beelzebub of Astrologers, W. Lilly, was wholly Ignorant of the
Restoration, when he wrote those Traiterous Libels, which forfeited his Neck
to the Gallows.

Friend John was so certain that Popery would prevail, Opus Reform. p. 85.
and eradicate the Northern Heresy, and so Ignorant of the late Revolution,
that he not only persuaded a Gentleman to turn Papist for these Reasons, but
embarkt himself in that Interest; and thereby drew such a Storm on his Head, as
he would have avoided, if his Art had given him the least Prospect of the right
way, or had not led him into the wrong.

Would Sidrophel, think you, have undergone the hazard, and trouble of a Voyage
to America, to repair a broken Fortune, if the Stars had let him see, that he
should have returned no wiser, nor richer than he went out? Pray ask that Lying
Astrologer, (who so often writes as if Conscience, and Religion, not Debt and
Beggary drove him thither) whether it was not he that raised so many Devils, as
during his abode there, and since, have possessed the choicest Saints in
New England? To conclude, All that pack of Fools, and Knaves, who pretend by
Judicial Astrology, to foresee good and bad fortune, to hit opportunities, and
nick lucky minutes, for making things happy, confute themselves; being, for the
most part, hated, scandalous, little, needy fellows; the very abjects of that
fortune, whose favors they pretend to foresee, and manage.

9. Astrology cannot be true, because Men born at one time, and in one
Horoscope, and Constellation, meet diverse, often contrary Fates: Kings and
Slaves, Lords and Beggars have been born in one minute; Twins begotten at one
Coition, and yet of different See many singular Instances of the different
Fates and Dispositions of many famous Twins, in Mr. Chambers, p. 53. etc. Dr.
More 's Mist. Iniq. p. 357. Heyden, p. 252.
Sexes, Humors and Fortunes. Of Seed thrown into the Ground in one moment,
some have taken root, some been eaten by Birds and Worms, and some proved
fruitless. A Man born at once, by the Rules of Astrology, should die all
together: But contrariwise, some Men survive their Ears, Noses, Hands, Feet,
Legs, and Arms, many Years. Nor is it so in Genethliacs only, but in Judicial,
and Horary Astrology also. Ships commencing Voyages in one minute, and Men's
Journeys in one moment, have had different success. If two Men, or more, about
to fight a Duel, or run a Race, come in one moment to enquire of the Astrologer
their success; by the Rules of that Art, both must win, or lose; conquer, or be
conquered; because they both put the Question together. So if two, or three Men
ride, or run a Race, and in one moment start forth, if Astrology were true,
they must both win, or both lose; which cannot be.

10. The death of Multitudes of Men, in one minute, some in one moment, in one
place, by one cause, cannot happen by the Rules of Astrology: Because the Stars
never concur to such an Identical Fate in so many thousand Nativities, Sir W.
Raleigh p. 153.
as theirs who fell in the Battle between Semiramis, and Stourobates, where
Four Millions were slain on one side, besides the many Thousands which fell on
the other. The Army of Xerxes, when they passed the Hellespont, consisted of
Seventeen Hundred Thousand Men, Idem l. 3. cap. 6.
the greater part of which fell in the Battles of Platea, and Mycale.

In the Scripture we read of 320000 slain at one time, Joshua cap. 11. Chron.
2.16.
on one side; and 500000 at another; beside the many who perished on the side
of the Vanquishers: 180000 Assyrians died by the hand of an Angel, at one time,
in the days of Hezekiah. Are these things accountable by the Rules of
Genethliacal Astrology? If the small distance that might be between their
Fates, be an Evasion, What think you of vaster numbers, who have perished
together in a moment, by one accident? The Hundreds blown up with Opdam; the
Thousands swallowed by the Earth with Corah, etc. in the Wilderness; and of
late in Jamaica, Sicilia, etc. or the Inundations of Deucalion, Holland, etc.
or the Flood of Noah? Can their Fates be found Predicted by so long a
Conspiracy of the Stars, as must be in the many days, in which those Multitudes
of Nations were born? Can the different Births of so many Myriads of Men, have
in the compass of an Hundred Years, such conspiring Horoscopes, as shall
determine them all to one sort of Death, and puncto of dying? Can the Heaven
for so many millions of minutes, as these Multitudes were Born in, have so
constant and agreeable an Aspect, Dr. More 's Mist. p. 357.
as there must be, if Astrology be true, to determine the Fate of such infinite
Numbers, to the same Numerical time, and Identical manner of Death? I call them
infinite Numbers, believing, with Sir Tho. Brown, Pseud. Ep. l. 6. c 6.
that the World was then as full of People as now.

11. If the Stars Influence, or Celestial Constellations beget such Accidents
as occur on Earth; How comes it, that when the like Horoscopes recurr, as were
at the Genesis of Alexander, Caesar, or Judas, Men most famous for Piety, Art,
Valor, Poetry, etc. or infamous for Wickedness, have not been again produced?

12. If Human Actions be directed by the Stars, Whence is it that National
Customs of Food, Clothes, Religion, Marriages, Diseases, Languages, Laws,
Tempers, Colors, Constitutions, etc. come to be peculiar, and constant to each
Kingdom, when the Influence of Heaven on them, is so various? The Heavens
change, but the People do not. The People of the greatest part of the Earth are
black, the Wind blows constantly one way for Eleven Months of the Year; and the
Weather, during that time, Serene, without Rain, or Storms: And in that Month
varieth, with Tempests, and great Showers, or Floods from the Sky. This cannot
be from the Stars.

13. The Astronomancers talk much of the untimely death of Picus, and other
Writers against their Art, as if it were a Revenge the Stars took on such as
derogated from their Dominion: But have they not as much Power to Prevent, as
to Revenge such Injuries done their Sovereignties? If all our Actions, or those
only of Importance be directed by the Stars; Is it not absurd to suppose they
should inspire so many great Fathers, Philosophers, Divines, and the most
Learned Men the World has owned, with Disposition, or Ability to write against
them; and single out one or two of them to punish; and suffer so many others,
who have as much, or more, affronted their Deities, to escape, and prosper?

14. The Exclamations made by Men Great, Learned, and Good, some of which have
studied your Art to the bottom, gives great reason to think it Fallacious, and
Wicked. St. Augustine, Calvin, Perkins, Briggs, Heminga, Dr. Humes, Angelis, and
other Divines: Picus Mirandula, J. Scaliger, C. Agrippa, Mr. Freke, and many
Philosophers, who were Famous Astrologers, call it Fallacious, Fabulous,
Ridiculous, and Vain; and its Professors Cheats, Impious, Factious, and
Dangerous in a Commonwealth; Beside, Multitudes of the most Famous Men of all
Learned Professions, who have decryed it as a Delusion, and exposed the Vanity,
Falsity, and Wickedness of such as pretend to Prognosticate by it.

Among the Fathers not one of them was for it, but Origin. Tertullian said that
it was invented by the Devil, and he banished Heaven for it. St. Ambrose calls
it wicked, and vain. St. Basil, St. Jerome, and Epiphanius call it foolish
Madness, invented by Satan. So does St. Cyprian, St. Chrysostom, Eusebius,
Lactantius, St. Gregory; and almost all the Fathers wrote against it. Aquinas
calls it a Devilish Art. Luther, Junius, Melancton, P. Martyr, Gualterus,
Willit, Causin, B. Charlton, M. Chambers, Mr. Purchase, Bishop Tailor,
Stillingfleet, Dr. More, Mr. Giree, Rowland, Gattaker, Gale, Crow, have all
exploded it, as contrary to Truth, Religion, and the Commonwealth.

15. Being invented by the Devil, and practiced by his Disciples, in opposition
to Religion, and Godliness, it disposes the Minds of Men to Idolatry, and
Atheism; attributing to the Creature, the Power of the Creator; or believing
them really Gods, as the Heathens did. It takes off our dependence on God;
renders Prayer useless; destroys Free Will; makes us of free Agents, passive
Patients.

Tertullian says more than once, that it came from Heaven, but was brought
from thence by the Fallen Angels; and we all know what the greatest Assertors
of it in former Ages were: Pharaoh, Nebuchadnezzar, Nero, Julian, Manasses,
Maximinus the Tyrant, Jannes, and Jambres, Elymas the Sorcerer, Albumazer,
Caracalla, Menander, Saturninus, Hildebrand, Carpocrates, Priscillianus,
Porphyry, etc. who were all of them Disciples of Hell, and Lovers of Astrology.
It must needs be so; Vaninus, the great Advocate for Astrology, died a
professed Atheist. Vide Parker, Tent. de deo Disp. 1. Sect. 26.
for the Devil is the Guardian Angel of their Art; and I Will tell you how they
came by him. In the Pontificate of some such Holy Father as Gregory 7. a Lover
of this Black Art, one of the Tribe craved of his Holiness a Protector or
Patron Saint for Astrologers, like as other Arts had. The Good Pontiff willing
to oblige a Faculty he loved well, gave him the Choice of all in St. Peter's.
The humble Servant of Urania, depending upon the Direction of good Stars to a
good Angel, went to the Choice hoodwinkt; and groping among the Images, the
first he laid hand on, was that of the Devil in Combat with St. Michael. Had he
chosen with open Eyes he could not have met a sitter Protector for so
Diabolical an Art.

It Is asserted by Mr. Calvin, that it leads Christians to Idolatry, On Isaiah
47. and Jerem. 10.
by attributing Divine Power to Planets, making them not only the occasion of
Good, and Evil in general, but extenuates, and subjects the Power of Religion,
Miracles, Efficacy of Prayer, all Piety, and the state of future Life, to
depend on the Stars.

Venus, they say, gives the Felicities of this Life, and Jupiter, of that to
come: for when he reigns, the Native shall be eternally happy. When Saturn is
placed in Leo, Lex Judaica est a Saturno; Christiana a Jove and Mercurio;
Mahometica a Sole and Mart, and Idololatria, a Luna and Mart. Card.
the Body shall live long, and the Soul for ever. He that prays to God when
the Moon with the Head of the Dragon is joined to Jupiter, shall obtain
whatever he asks. He that is placed under Mars in the ninth House, etc. shall
be able to cast out Devils. A Prophet must be born, if in Gemini, etc. In
short, The Gift of Prophecy, Power of Religion, Secrets of Conscience, Command
over Devils, Virtue of Miracles, Efficacy of Prayer, Future State, etc. are all
made by these Men to depend on the Stars; Vouchsafed by them, and to be known
from them. The Flood, Moses's Law, Christ's Birth and Death are said to be the
Effects of their Influences, by those Blasphemous Astrologers, says that Great
Protestant Father. These, and such horrible Opinions do they hold, who pretend
to Christianity: But how unworthy of that Name, let all sober Men of that
Religion judge.

Some of them have been so daringly Blasphemous, as to write, That Christ was
famous for so many Miracles, Dr. More's Mist. Godlyness, p. 337.
because He was born while Saturn and Gemini, etc. That He Disputed with the
Doctors so Young, because Jupiter, etc. His many Travels, often Weeping, never
Laughing, the prevalency of his Gospel, are all attributed to the Position of
the Planets at his Birth, Dr. More. against J. B. p 158 Notes c. 34. p. 148.
Mist Godlyness p. 338. Page 49.
by such pretended Christian Astrologers, as Maternus, Cardan, R. Bacon, A.
Villa Nova, Vaninus, Card. Alliacensis, Priscillianus, and many others. But Mr.
Gregory and Dr. More show, that they cannot agree in what Sign he was born:
It Is true, that an extraordinary Star led the Magi to the place where he lay;
and our Star-gazers don't spare to tell us of it; and endeavor to persuade us,
that those Wise Men were Astrologers: But that is confuted over, and over, by
Mr. Gregory, who has published a Scheme of that Great Nativity.

But besides those Powers which they so Blasphemously attribute to the Stars,
over the Actions, and Passion of Christ himself, they ruin the true Notion of
God's Providence, wholly destroy Free Will, in the most minute things; and
leave us not so much liberty of Choice, as the most rigid Predestinators have
done; but six us under such a fatal Necessity, as the Hobbists and Atheists do.

Sir Chr. Heyden, the Great Advocate of Astrology, affirms, That the Efficacy
of the Stars cannot be frustrate without a Miracle: Row and against W. R. p.
136.
Where is then the Providence of God, and Free Will? To what end is Prayer, and
second means, if there be such an absolute Destiny, and irresistible Influence?
We are not free Agents, but, like Bartholomew Puppits, act and speak as
Jupiter, or Mars please to constrain us: De Civit. De^ lib. 5.
Or (as the Astrologer spoken of by St. Augustine) It Is not we that Lusted, but
Venus: Not we that Slew, but Mars: Not we that Stole, but Mercury: Not God that
helped, but Jupiter: And so Freeborn Man is made a Star-born Slave.

In excuse of these Consequences, the Astrologers, when put to it, are
sometimes so senseless, J. B. against Dr. More, p. 93. More's Reply, p. 122,
123.
as to confound Fortune, which is Chance; and Fate, which is determined, and
inevitable. And to help their Cause from those pressing Difficulties, which
incumber it, with worse: For to avoid the foresaid Imputations, they deny the
Stars Necessitate, and allow them only to Dispose. They Incline, but do not
Force: Therefore Wise Men rule the Stars. Sapiens dominabitur Astris.
But what is Astrology, if that be true? How can he Predict that, which every
Wise Man may defeat, and none but Fools are sure to verify? Can he tell what
will come to pass, if every Wise Man has Power to frustrate the Prediction?

Beside all this mischief Astrology does to Religion and Christianity, it is an
Art not only near of Kin to Witchcraft, August. Civit. Dei lib. 5. c. 7. Dr.
More ubi sup. p 358. Vind. against Chambers cap. 19.
and Magic, but leads Men into it, as diverse, who have escaped the Snare,
acknowledge. Sir Chapter Heyden (their Zealous Advocate) confesses that Necromancy
is often palliated under the pretense of Astrology. And Mr. Butler the
Astrologer, in the Preface to his Hagiastrologia, page 24. confesses, That
without the Heavenly and Supernatural Wisdom, Astrological Skill would become
rank Poison to the Astrologer, as being such a thing as would lead him to the
Devil, sooner than to God; and draw him into Sorcery, and other evil Arts,
whereby they would be entangled with Diabolical Familiarities ere they are
aware, even as are Witches and Conjurers. See more the like in the Book it
self, p. 35. and 38.

When Men become greedy of knowing things before hand, they bind themselves
Apprentices to the Devil's Black Art: For he, who is never wanting to gratify
wicked desires, helps them to foresee by a worse Art than Astrology, though
that be bad enough, what they desire to know. Thus Julian, Hildebrand, and many
more, proceeded from Astrology to Necromancy, and such abominable Diabolical
Practices, as would make a Man tremble to read. After the death of the
Apostate, there were found in Antioch sundry Heads, and Carcasses of Men,
Women, and Children, barbarously slain for Divination, and Sacrificed to the
informing Demon. In one Temple he acted such execrable things, as he strove to
conceal, forbiding any one to open it beside himself: But after his death, they
found among many other cruel Effects of his hellish Curiosity, a Woman hanging
by the Hair of her Head, her Hands cut off, her Belly ripped up, etc. to
vaticinate his Persian Victory. This not only shows the danger of those
unreasonable Desires, which put Men on use of Astrology; but the defect of it:
For if the Stars could foretell Men things to come, they would not go to the
Devil for more Skill.

Now this Art being of so Devilish an Original, so hurtful to Religion,
Providence, Dependence on God, and all Christian Duties; leading Men to
Atheism, Idolatry, Blasphemy, Witchcraft, Magic, Murder, and cruel Butchery;
Picus Mir. p. 434. Against Dr Humes. cap. 31.
how great is the Impudence of those Men, who publicly call it an Art useful
to Religion? As R. Bacon, Cardinal Alliacensis, and others have done. A Divine
Study, as Ramsey calls it; the only Way, and Path that leads to God, as others
say; an Art near of Kin to Divinity, as Preface to Sir G. W. Works, and in his
Excellency of Astrology, p. 15. J. Butler against Dr. More.
J. Gadbury has the confidence more than once to affirm; and a most Sacred and
Divine Study, as one who calls himself a Minister of the Gospel says; when
nothing is more destructive thereof, and different from it, less like it, less
a Friend, or of less Affinity to it than that? To false Prophets, and lying
Spirits, the Relation and Resemblance of those Deluders cannot be denied; we
saw them but the other day in these miserable Nations: James Naylor, O.
Sedgewick, Mary Carry, Hannab Tapnel, and other Enthusiastic, Hysterical
Millennaries, who Prophesied, as Lilly and Culpeper Prognosticated; as Goodwin,
Bond, and H. Peter's Preached, or Scribled; and all as far from Truth, as the
Infernal Author of the Black Art is from an Angel of Light.

16. They have the boldness to affirm, that their Art is of such absolute
necessity in curing Diseases, that not a Plant can be gathered; a Medicine
compounded, or administered; an Operation made, or a Judgment given without it.
But this pretense is also vain, like all the rest, being an old Maggot, bred in
some ancient Physicians Brains, and would have long since died, if it had not
been nourished by a few Modern Lunaticks -- A Purge, say they, is not to be
given while the Moon is in Aries, or Taurus, because they being Signs of such
Creatures as chew the Cudd, the Patient will therefore Nauseate, and Vomit it
up again. Such sottish, and ridiculous Reasons do they give for the use of
Astrology in the Art of Healing.

But all the most Famous, and Learned Physicians of later Ages, from sounder
Principles of Philosophy, understand better; and either explode this vain Art,
and reject it, or take no notice of it in their approved Writings, nor in their
Practice.

Vanit. cap. 30, 31.
Cornelius Agrippa was a Physician, and had been an Astrologer: He tells us,
it is so far from being useful in Physic, that it renders useless all the
endeavors of the Physician, and excuses the mischievous doings of Quacks, and
Empiricks, which probably is the chief Reason why it is so much in esteem among
them. It depriveth an able Doctor of the Credit due to his successful Skill, by
attributing the fate of the Sick, etc. to Celestial Influences. In short, he
calls it a ridiculous, and groundless figment: And its Professors Cheats,
Knaves, Fools, Rebels, Doctors of Falsehood, Lying, etc.

G. Fallosius, Erastus, Lemnius, Gesner, Ficinius, Valleriolus, Fuchsius,
Monardus, Fr. Valesius, R. a Castro. Helmont, Diemerbroek, Dr. Brown, Witty,
Sydenham, True, have written against it Some of them say, That neither Men nor
Devils can foretell any thing by the Stars. All of them decry its use in
Physic. And Sidrophel himself (pardon me for naming him among such Worthies)
in the Preface to his Translation of Dolaeus's System, not only leaves it out
from among the needful Qualifications of a Physician, but has lately put a
French Author of the Pox into English, Page 123. Probl. 8.
who explodes, and ridicules it as much as any Man.

In Practice, the most Eminent for Skill, business and success, slight and
disregard it. And they who have observed its Rules, have been convinced by
Experience that it signifies nothing. We find no notice of it in the Methods
of Sennertus, Riverius, Willis, Sydenham, or the most Celebrated Practicers now
alive. And were there nothing to show it a Nullity in the Art of Curing; the
Infamy, Poverty, unsuccessful attempts of such as pretend to act by it, is
demonstration enough.

17. Astrology, and Prognosticating by the Stars, is condemned in Scripture,
and forbidden by the Mouth of God. See Deuteron. XVIII. 10, 14, 15. etc. Isaiah
XLIV. 25. XLVII. 13, 14. Jeremiah X. 2. Acts XIX. 19. Add to them Psalm CXXXIV.
Isaiah XLI. 23. Ecclesiastes VIII. 7. X. 14. 1. Corinthians. II. 11. and consider
the II. IV. and V. Chapters of Daniel, how the King of Babylon relying on these
cheating Astrologers, had been deluded by them, and upbraids their Ignorance
and Frauds.

Sir Chr. Heyden, Ramsey, and others endeavor to elude the force of these
Scriptures; but beside current Commentators, Dr. Holmes, Mr. Rowland, Mr.
Gattaker, and many particular Divines, have proved them fully to the purpose.

18. Besides the Holy Oracles of God, the Venerable Writings of the Fathers,
and the Learned Arguments of Physicians against Astrology; the most Eminent
Politicians, Statesmen, Historians, Lawyers, and Philosophers have writ of it
with great Contempt and Detestation: Tacitus in his Annals and History, often
speaks of the Mischiefs they did; and for which they were several times
banished Italy, and Rome. They are, says he, a sort of Men false to
Government, and all that trust them. Seneca derides them, Plutarch censures
them, Cicero wrote largely against them. Also Pliny in many places relates the
Treachery of their Practices, and falsity of their Art. Not. Hist. lib. 7. c.
49. lib. 18. c. 23. lib 30. c. 1, 2.
Picus Lord of Mirandula, a Man of high Birth, and great Learning, whom
Scaliger called the Monster of his Age; and Naudaeus the Phoenix of all great
Wits, wrote 200 Years since 12 such Invincible Books against Astrology, as not
only purchased him the Name of Flagellum Astrologorum, but so muzled them all,
that not one has appeared able to Answer him.

He proves Astrology to be an Art invented by the Devil, abolisheth all
Religion, Philosophy, Physic, Law, etc. of great mischief to Mankind, destroys
the use of Faith, lessens the Reverence of Miracles, destroys Divine
Providence, Patronizeth Sin, excuses Vice as coming from Heaven, defiles and
subverts all good Arts; translating the causes of things from Reason, to
Fables; abrogating all Rules of Human Providence, etc.

Page 183.
Sir Tho. More makes his Eutopians despise and laugh at them. R. a Castro tells
us he was the Author of that Lampoon against them, Astratibi AEthereo pandunt,
etc. C. Agrippa treats them with great Scorn and Derision, and exposes their
Art as a Delusion, and great Cheat. My Lord Bacon, Chancellor of England, not
inferior to the best of these for Learning, says, That Astrology has no
grounds, Inslaur. Mag. lib. 3. c. 4. page 3. and Essay. 35.; Essay l. 1. c. 4.
nor soundness, and such as Practice it, no Honesty, or Sense. Their Persons
are despicable (says he) but their Practices dangerous. They are Impostors,
who have done great Mischief; and therefore so many Laws have been made to
suppress them. M. Montaigne, that Noble French Author, tells us, The Art ought
to be abhorred by all good Christians, having done much Mischief, though in it
self as insignificant as a Dream.

The Learned K. James says, Daemonolog. l. 1. c. 5. Verit. Relig. l. 4.
Judicial Astrology is learnt in the Devil's School. An Art not lawful to
Practice or be trusted in by Christians, having no ground of Natural Reason.

Both the Scaligers (Prodigies of Learning) writ against it. The Father against
Cardan, and the Son calls it a Practice without Foundation, contrary to
Religion, and Philosophy, etc. Praef. Molin. Argenis l. 2.
So says the Famous J. Barclay.

H. Grotius (whose greatest Enemies Mr. Baxter, and Dr. Owen) allowed to be
Wise above the pitch of Human Nature, and incomparable in all Human Learning,
derides Astrology as an Art without agreeing Rules, having nothing in it
certain, but uncertainty.

Ludovicus Vives on St. August. Civit. Dei, our Learned Savil in his Notes on
Tacitus, and others call it, an Art that teaches Knaves to cheat Honest Men.
And J. Milton in his Figure-Caster Ridicules it with much Wit, and Confutes it
with no less Reason. Astrology, says he, is an Art that teaches Astrologers
to Lie as often as they speak. Our Ingenious, Learned Feliham wonders
Astrologers can for bear laughing when they meet, Reso^ve 96.
to think how they gull the People with such a Fallacy, and Delusion as is
impossible to be true. And Mr. Freke the Astrologer, calls it Madness, Folly,
Delusion, an Irrational, groundless Imposture, impossible to be true. Essay p.
^3. etc.
And by Experience found to be the Devil's Lure, to draw Men into Neoromancy.
What shall I say more! The Noble Picus in his two first Books against them,
has shown at large how much the Learned Writers to his time decryed and wrote
against this Wicked, Senseless Art. And I have proved that the most Eminent
Authors since, of all sorts, have done the same, and hissed it off the Stage;
to whom may be added Des Carts, Rohault, and all the new French Philosophers,
beside our Learned Athenians. I might teaze them with Lucian Juvenal, Quevedo,
Hudebrass, Poor Robin, Mr. Wilson's Witty Play called the Cheats, and others,
who with sharp Wit and keen Satyr, expose them in their true Shapes and
Colors. (^ee Sir Roger L'Strange's Fables, and the Turkish Spy.) But I must
hasten the Matter off my Hands, and will shut up my Evidence against them with
one of their own Advocates, Ramsey, who was, like Sidrophel, a busy Scribler,
an Empty Physician, and an Ignorant Star-Cazer. This Man tells the King, That
the Common Practicers of Astrology deceived his People of their Money, Lives,
and Loyalty, and that London abounded with such Idiots, Cheats, and Illiterate
Impostors, as himself was, and Sidrophel continues to be.

There is much more to be said against this vain Art, to prove it false and
built on nothing: As the want of knowing the exact Longitude of the Place,
which is both necessary and imposis;ible: So is the moment of the Genesis,
Question, or Action to be judged of, and consequently leave their Erections to
mere Chance; and then it is 10000 to one, as Dr. More says, but that it prove
false. Gassendus affirms, That if there be any thing to be judged by Astrology,
the Artist must know the precise moment of the Sun's being in a Cardinal Sign;
Tom. 1. p. 728.
Yet sure I am, says he, that there are no Tables, or Ephemerides extant that
can teach the Time by six hours. Those of Tycho come nearest Truth, and yet are
wide from it.

My last Argument against Astrologers, and their pretended Art is, That in all
Ages, and most Governments, they have been pernicious to the Commonwealth, and
Enemies to the Public Peace. And for that Reason so many Laws have been made
against them, not only abroad, as Historians tell us, but in our own Nation,
Hen. 8.14 33.5 Eliz. 15.23. Eliz. 2.3.4. Edw. 6.15.
as may be seen in the Statute Book, Beside their Frauds, and Cozening
Practices (says Aggrippa, Montaigne, and Bacon) on the Common People, they are
Authors of much mischief to the State, drawing Credulous People to their ruin,
and causing among Nations most cruel Wars and Sedition: No sort of Men being
more pernicious to a Commonwealth, than those who undertake to Prognosticate by
the Stars, or any other way of Divination, and scatter their Prophecies about.

I urge this last of all, because it is so pat to the great Objection I have
against Sidrophel. For he seems to verify this Censure, and to be designing by
his false Art, to subvert the present Frame of our English Government in Church
and State, by making the People believe Heaven has decreed it shall be changed
into that of a Neighboring Country.

That such effects have been the consequents of such Fanatic Enthusiastic
Dreams, I will prove by a few, out of many, Instances.

Socrat. lib. 7. Sozom. lib. 8. Niceph. lib. 13.
Isdegerdes the Persian King was so disturbed by the Contrivances of
Astrologers, that he decimated them. Valerius Maximinus being overthrown by
Licinius, contrary to the Predictions of the Star-Diviners, who had betrayed
him with false assurances of Success, He put them all to death. Thus they
deluded Pompey, Caesar, and Crassus.

Thucydides Plutarc^.
Nicias the Athenian, was persuaded by them to keep his Fleet in the Haven; the
same Night the Syracusians surprised them all. Plutarch, Tacitus, Suetonius,
etc. say that Otho was induced to the Murder of Galba by the Astrologers,
Magoma^^^. 346.
who told him he was to succeed him in the Imperial Throne. And by the same way
Stephanus was prompted to Assassinate Domitian. Cambysis was Murdered by two
Astrologers. Plutarch.
Alcibiades, to obtain his Ambitious aim, suborned them to encourage the
Athenians to a fatal War with Sicily. Many Astrologers combined to dethrone
Valens, and set up Theodorus a Pagan, Wieri praestig, c. 10. p. 2^.
by pretending they found his Name prenoted by the Stars; but the Emperor not
only slew those Traiterous Diviners, but, as the Historians say, all those
whose Names began with Theod. that he might be sure to baffle their Prediction.
By such Men, and encouragement from the Stars, it was that Valentinian the
Younger was murdered. Libo Densius, encouraged by Firmius Catus, to make
Insurrection against Tiberius, in confidence of success by Astrological
Prediction, was defeated, and then slew himself; and such was the Foundation of
Catiline's Conspiracy.

The Story of Caracalla is very famous. He, while in Mesopotamia, being Jealous
of a Plot against him, sent to the Roman Astrologers to be informed. They
accused Macrinus, his faithful Prefect, of a Conspiracy, which nothing but his
Death could frustrate. This Answer coming while the Emperor was intent on some
sport, (...) gave it Macrinus to read; and he finding his innocent Life in
danger, by this trick of the Astrologers, secured it by the murder of
Caracalla, of which he had not thought before.

Such Diviners had assured the Wife of Pheroras, that the Line of Herod would
extinguish, Joseph. Antiq. lib. 17. cap. 3.
and her Husband succeed to the Crown. They, to assist their Stars, and work
out their own good Fortune, conspired against the King's Life, and lost all
their own by the stroke of Justice.

Mahomet the III. had a Rebellion raised against him by the Astrologers,
Purchase Pilgr. p. 276.
Predicting that his Son should overcome and succeed him: But all proved false,
and the Son, Astrologers, and Rebels were slain.

The D. of Visco was by the Astrologers assured of his having the Crown of
Portugal after the Death of Don Juan el Grandes: But impatient of gaining it,
he Rebelled against him a first time, and was both Defeated, and Pardoned. Upon
a second Attempt, he fell by the Hand he would have untimely ruined. Essay 11.
lib. 1,
M. Montaigne tells us, that the Marquess of Saluza, the French General in
Piedmont, in the Days of Francis the First, having all imaginable Advantage
against the Enemy, was, notwithstanding so terrified by the Astrologers, who
had Predicted the Success of Charles the Fifth, and the Ruin of France, that he
basely Revolted, to his own perpetual Infamy and Ruin.

We will leave Foreign Instances of the mischief done by Astrologers to
Princes, and Kingdoms; and now take a view of what has been wrought by them in
our own Country, so long famous for giving Credit to such Heathenish false
Prophets, as will appear by the following History.

The Scots have been often thus betrayed into Rebellion, Speed p. 672.
and the Murder of Kings. The Earl of Athol was prompted to Conspire against
James I. by their assuring him, that he should be Crowned in that Kingdom: and
true it was, for the King understanding what instigated him to Rebel, he caused
a Crown of red hot Iron to be put on his Head, by which, and some other
Tortures, he ended his wretched Life.

Fuller's Worthies of Wales, p. 19.
The Welsh have a Saying published by one of them, that beside God, there is no
Diviner; and yet so far pursued their hard Fate, that by the Instigations of
those Astrological Boutefeaus, who had possessed Prince Leolin, that He should
wear the Crown of Brutus; he first refused to attend the Coronation of Edward
I. then Rebelled against him, and Invaded England, but was Vanquished and
Slain, His whole Family extirpated, His Title annexed to the Crown of England,
and the Welsh subjected to its Laws ever since.

Afterward in the Days of Henry IV. Owen Glyn Dower Dwy became inveigled by a
Prophecy of Merlin's, Dr. Powel's Hist. p. 386.
(whose Name Lilly and Partridge affect) that the time was come, wherein the
Britains, by his Assistance, should recover their Ancient Freedom and Liberty;
Rebelled, made War, and were overthrown, and curbed by such Laws, as Dr. Fuller
compares to those of Draco, written in Blood.

In our part of this Isle, we find Peter Pomfret attempted to raise a Commotion
against King John, by buzzing into the Peoples Ears certain Prophecies from the
Stars: And in the Reign of Edward VI. by the same Device, Fox's Acts and
Monuments in ^d. 6.
the People were made believe, That there should no more Kings Reign in
England; That all the Nobility should be destroyed, and the Government fall
into the Hands of four Commoners. A Prophecy much like that of Sidrophel's, but
expressed in plainer English: Upon which they Rebelled in Devonshire, Oxford,
Buckingham, Norfolk, and York, to the great hazard of the unsettled Kingdom and
Protestant Religion, then as young and weak as the Prince, who was Head of both.

In the Reign of his Famous Sister, and Successor, Sir W* Churchill's Div.
Brit. p. 313.
Q. Elizabeth, they played the same Part with her; for the Papists, deluded by
Astrological Predictions of her short Reign, were easily drawn into many
desperate Conspiracies against Her, to the great Peril of that Renowned Life
and Government.

How accessory they were to that grand Rebellion against Charles the Martyr, to
the great Detriment and eternal Scandal of the Protestant Religion, as the
Statue 12 Car. 2.30. most sensibly expresses it, appeared by the Almanacks and
other Firebrand Libels, published and scattered about the Nation, by those two
great Incendiaries, Lilly and Culpeper.

After the Restoration of his Son, they continued to Plot against the
Government upon the same bottom: For if we may believe the Narratives of
Dugdale and Smith, Page 26.
the Astrologers having told the Jesuits that King Charles would outlive his
Brother, they resolved to cross the Stars, and cut him off, that the Duke might
Succeed to effect their long projected Design, of introducing Popery; and hence
sprang that Plot, which caused so much noise and fear to this divided Kingdom.

The History of the late unhappy Duke of Monmouth, shows how much he was
seduced by this wicked Art, and instigated to that Rebellion which ruined him,
and endangered the welfare of us all.

How much the like Design has been agitated since by the like Men, I have
sufficiently shown. Tacit Ann. 12. lib. 2. Dion. in vit. Dom. Vlpian de Offic.
Proc. lib. 7. Sueton, lib. 9. C. Agrip. van. c. 31. Dr. Cave Eccl. Introd. p.
22.
Indeed in all Ages and most Nations they have been so pernicious to the common
Welfare, that as I have proved, they were often driven out of Rome and Italy,
in the times of Tiberius, Vitellius, Constantine, Gratian, Theodosius, etc.
Justinian (as appears in his Code) made it a Crime Capital to Practice it. And
Constantius (another Christian Emperor of great Fame) as soon as He came to the
Throne, made it loss of Life to Consult Astrologers.

By our own Laws it has been Felony to Practice that Hellish Art: And it is
still punishable by Fine, and Imprisonment. See 33 Hen. VIII. c. 8.14. etc. 5
Eliz. 15. And indeed considering the fatal Experience we have had of those vile
Men, and their wicked Practices, the Tools they have been to the Factions,
their notorious Cheats, how they have been forbidden by God himself, and
exploded by Men of all Ages, Nations, and Faculties, it is a wonder they are
permitted to live among us.

To conclude: If Astrologers err in their Fundamentals, and are mistaken in the
first Elements of their Art: If the late discovery in Astronomy have given the
Heavens a new Face, hid to the Inventors of Astrology, and to all before this
Age: If they differ among themselves, have no Accord; but contradict and
Prognosticate contrary to one another, and to Truth: If the Presages of the
most Famous among them, commonly* prove false, and contrary to Event: If they
are ignorant of the most remarkable Occurrences in the World before they
happen; and of their own Fates, till they come to pass: If Men of one Genesis
and Commencement, have various Fortunes, and multitudes of different
Horoscopes, one punctual Period: If the recurrence of Constellations do not
again produce the same Men or Effects: If Customs and Circumstances of whole
Regions, continue unvaried under daily Changes in the Heavens: If multitudes of
Men, learned even in Astrology, exclaim against it, as vain and wicked; and
affront the Stars in spite of their Power; or rather in conformity to their
Influence: If it be an Enemy to Providence and Free Will: If it advance
Principles destructive of Religion, and promoting Idolatry, destroy Philosophy,
and the force of natural Remedies: If Astrologers and their Art be no less
pernicious to the Public Welfare, are the Authors of Heresy, and Rebellion,
and as such have been not only proscribed by the wisest Governments, but
forbidden by Scripture, exploded by Fathers, eminent Divines, Statesmen,
Politicians, Philosophers, and the most learned Wise Men which have been in the
World; and by them all accounted a Cheat, and dangerous Impostors, we have
cause enough to renounce it.

I thought to have ended with this Summary, See Diemerbroek de pect. cap. 8.
but remembering that among the many trifling Arguments urged in behalf of
Astrology, and to prove the Influence of Heavenly, on Sublunary Bodies, they
urge one which they call manifest, and demonstrative, viz. the Power of the
Moon on the Sea, causing the Flux and Reflux thereof by its pressure, Tr. Phys.
page 4.
as M. Rohault expresses it. I will show this infallible Argument to be a
Vulgar Error, and that the Moon has no more force to move the Waters, than the
Waters have to move the Moon, or make it into a green Cheese; but that both are
independent from each other. Their Motions indeed are concurrent in some few
places of the World: But without relation, as Cause to Effect; or any
Influence, See Mr. Philips's Letter to Dr. Wallis, P^il. Tr. 34.
or Operation at all one on the other.

1. This seems manifest by all Tide Tables published Yearly by those
Almanack-Makers themselves: For they tell you, That different degrees of Tides
happen in places of this Nation, and parts adjacent at the same time: Now if
the Moon move the Water, let them tell us how a Full Moon makes high Water at
one place, and half Tide at another, not far distant. If the Moon move the
Water, surely it would make the Tides alike, or near so, at all places,
especially neighboring ones, when it is in the same Age and Station: But the
contrary is told us by themselves: And there are others assure us, that in some
places of the World, the highest Tides are at the Quadratures of the Moon, when
it is lowest with us.

2. If the Moon cause the ebbing and flowing, how comes the Sea to keep so
regular and exact to the Laws of its Motion, when the Moon is in the other
Hemisphere, as when in this? To think that the Moon, which they say is cold,
can operate through so remote, opaque, and bulky a Body as the Earth, Dr. More
ubi supra, p. 339. 340, 345, 349, 353, etc.
when we are sensible that so piercing, and hot a Planet, as the Sun, cannot do
it, seems the Opinion of a Lunatic, or an Astrologer, rather than a
Philosopher, or Man of Sense.

3. If the Moon, etc. How is it that the Spring-Tides happen, as at Plymouth,
two days after the New Moon, and as many after the Full? The Refraction of the
Sun's Rays, which is supposed, cannot be the Cause; nor is it consistent with
any other of the many Hypothesis by which the Phenomenon have been formerly
solved.

4. If the Moon be the Cause, etc. How comes it, that there are not Tides (at
least regular ones) all the World over? For since the Cause is universal, one
would expect the Effect should be so too. But that failing gives us cause to
suspect we are mistaken in imputing it to the Moon.

In the Mediterranean, and those Parts of America of our own Latitude, where
the Moon increases, and wanes, rises, shines, and sets exactly as with us,
there is no regular motion of the Sea. What little ebbing and flowing there is,
is most manifestly occasioned by Winds, and Land-floods. So in Denmark and the
Soundt, there are no Tides, Molsworth's Account. p. 14.
but a small Current of the Waters made by the Winds blowing in or out, as we
are told by an observing Man, lately Resident at Copenhagen. At the Capeverd
Islands, W. India Seas, and many other Places of the World, where Cynthia is as
powerful as here, P. 148. E^. ult.
she has no such Operation, or Influence at all: Nor is there any discernible
change in the Sea, Wind, or Weather. The Caspian Sea, which is an hundred and
twenty German Leagues long, and ninety broad, is salt as the Ocean, and has
multitudes of Rivers falling into it, but neither Ebbs nor Flows, as the
Holstein Ambassadors observed in their Travels, p. 148.

5. If the Moon, etc. Whence is it that in so many Places of the World, the
Current of the Sea runs always one way, and that so swiftly, as is scarce
credible? From the Gulf of Florida, to the Latitude of forty degrees, it runs
North-East many hundred of Leagues. In the Streights of Gibralter, it runs
always so strongly Eastward, as to force a Ship in against a fierce Levant-wind.
In the Fr^tum Magellanicum, its force is such, that no wind is strong enough to
carry a Ship against it.

6. If the Moon, Heylin. Cos. lib. 2. p. 615.
etc. How is it that some very fierce ones are so irregular, variable, and
uncertain? Like that of Euripus, which it is said so puzzled Aristotle to
comprehend, that He threw himself into it. Journal into Greece, p. 458.
Si quidem ego non capio te, tu capias me.

Sir George Wheeler tells us, that its prodigious ebbing and flowing, has been
justly admired in all Ages for one of the greatest Wonders in the World. He,
Father Jaques, Paul Babin, and Ignatius Bradi, Phil. Tr. 71.
who visited this wonderful Gulf, s^y, that it commonly flows 7, or 9 times in
a day; some(...) changes its course 14 times in 24 hours. The (...) in an hour
and half change its Motion 3 times. (...) of a Month it moves so regularly, as
to be red(...) But in the other part of the Month, it is not (...), and changes
Motions from 7 to 14 times a day, (...) all that motion, rises not above a
Foot, ebbs toward the shore, and flows when its Motion seems ebbing toward the
Sea.

These are the strange, and surprising Appearances in this miraculous Gulf of
Negropont, Pseudod. Ep. lib. 7. c. 14.
which Sir Tho. Bro^^, to save Aristotle's Credit, endeavors to diminish: But
my Authors who examined things on the Spot, relate with great surprise the
amazing Phenomenon they saw there. And if there were nothing prodigious in it,
it is notwithstanding sufficient to my purpose, to prove that some Motions of
the Sea are Anomalous, and therefore not governed by such a regular Cause, or
Guide, as the Moon is; she is constant to her Motions, the Sea is not, but in
the compass of one Year, is in one, or other of its different Circumstances, at
every hour of the Moon's Age. Be she full, or new, increasing or waning, the
Sea of Euripus observes her not; but be full, or low, on this, or the contrary
Motion, when the Moon is in every, or any of her Figures.

7. If the Moon, etc. how is it, that in contrary Positions the same Effect is
produced, as in Plymouth, a N. N. E. and W. S. W. Moon, make High Water, and
Springtide alike, when at each time scarce above the Horizon?

8. If the Moon be the Cause of the Seas Flux and Reflux, by its Pressure,
Reflection, or Refraction; How is it possible that the Motion of the Sea shall
run counter to that of the Moon? As it is on the Coast of Devon, and Cornwall;
the strongest Flood runs opposite to, and against the Face of the Moon.

How absurd is it to affirm, that a bright and dark Moon shall have the same
Effect? That a Body fourteen times less than the Earth, and at such a great
distance from it, shall press the Ocean to such an ascent, and while it is in
the like Situation, force it to retire; and this Influence to be in some Places
only of the same Latitude, no more liable to it, than those where it begets no
such Effect? That it shall move the Sea in this Hemisphere, when it is in the
other? That the motion of the Sea in some places shall be ever one way, in
others irregular, in others constant to Rules of Flux and Reflux, and in some
have no motion at all, in some move contrary to the motion of the Moon, and in
others to all the degrees of Ebbing and Flowing at all times of the Moon's Age?
These things plainly show that Planet has no Operation on that Element; and
gives us reason to think that in those few parts of the World, where their
Motions conform to each other, it is from Concomitancy, Concurrence, or, as
Isaac Vossius believes, De Mot. Man. cap. 16, 18.
from an accidental Synchronism, without Physical dependence; or according to
some other of those ways, by which Learned Moderns have supposed it to be done.

Galileo, and after him Gassendus, De Aestu Mar.
ascribe it to the great Acceleration and Retardation of the Earths Motion,
compounded of the Annual and Diurnal, etc.

Dr. More says, notes on Psychathanasia p. 391. Dial. Phys. p. 406.
The Flux and Reflux of the Sea depends on the Motion of the Earth, and
attempts to demonstrate it by diverse Schemes of his own, Galileo's, and des
Chartes.

The Learned H. Fabri endeavors to solve it by the Pressure of the Atmosphere,
and that the Tides vary according to the inequality, or the different Circles
of the Air's Pressure, and the several Tracts of those Pressures, in respect of
their Situation and Extent.

Our Famous Dr. Wallis says, Phil. Tr. 16.34.64. etc.
That the whole difference of Tides, viz. Diurnal, Menstrual, and Annual, and
all the Motions of the Sea which concur with the Moon, depend on one Common
Cause, viz. the Common Center of the Earth and Moon's gravity. This he
endeavors to explain and prove, and answers all the Objections, and
difficulties in, and against it. But as our Athenians say, If that were true,
the many great Ponds of Water in England being thinner than the Sea, would have
Tides in them.

R. Des Carts ascribes it to the greater Pressure made upon the Air by the
Moon, Princip. Phil. Part 4. Mist. p. 346. Phys. Mechan. Exp. p. 65.
and the intercurrent Ethereal Substances at certain times of the day, and
Lunary Month, more than at others: But although Dr. More calls it a plain
Solution of the Matter, Mr. Boil and Sir Chr. Wren suppose, if that were true,
it would have the same effect on the Quicksilver in a long Tube.

So that the Cause of this Motion seems as hidden, as that of the Heart, known
only to him who made it. And the Athenians Opinion of it is the truest; Mere.
Vol. 1.3. Vol. 8. c. 14.20 Vol. 9 c 8.
That the Sea moves not by the Moon, but the necessary Law of the Creation, or
the first established Order of Nature, no more to be accounted for, than the
Motion of the Sun, etc.

And after all, if their Hypothesis were true, and the Moon did move the
Waters, it would not help them to prove the Influence of the Stars on other
Earthly Bodies, so many times farther from us, more than the Light given by a
Candle in my Chamber, would prove that it did Illuminate the whole Hemisphere.

The only sensible Operation any Heavenly Body has on us, is light and heat,
and both from the Sun; and yet we see how gloomy and frigid the Air is, when he
is removed but so far as beyond the Equator, and how the Life of Vegetables,
and some Animals seem then wholly dampt and extinguished. How much more would
it be so, if he were so remote as Saturn, and Jupiter? Now if because the Sun
and Moon Operate senlibly on us, you will infer, that those remote and
undiscernible Planets and Stars have Influence, of which we are not sensible;
it is arguing from certainty, in behalf of uncertainty, which is no good Logic.

Another Instance which Astrologers give to prove the influence of Stars on
Sublunary Bodies, Gassend. c. 4.
is the Dog Star, which they say is known to cause great heat; but I say it is
no such matter. It Is true, that the time of his appearance happening in the
fervor of the Summer Solstice, in the Days of Aristotle (when it was first
observed) gave occasion to the Mistake. But as now it appears a Month later
than it did then, without any change in the Season; so when Ten Thousand Years
hence (if the World last so long) it will rise Five Months later, and by the
Anticipation of the Equinoxes, his Kennel be as low as Capricorn; it will make
no more alteration in it, but become then to us on this side the Equator, what
it is now to them so far on the other, viz. a Significator of Cold.

Add to this, That if the Canicular Star caused the Heat of the Dog Days, why
do we not feel it in February, and in the Night, the Star being then above our
Horizon?

All this, and much more which I might urge, proves that the supposed heat of
it comes from the Sun, who having accended the Air in his way to our Tropic,
in his return meeting this Star, the Old Astronomers falsely attributed that
fervor to the Dog Star, which is wholly owing to the Sun, and would be, if no
such Star appeared.

For a third Argument in behalf of Astrology, we are asked a Question sit only
for the Mouth of those Men. What are the Stars made for, if not for Influence?
By which they suggest that they are made for nothing else. But I will Answer
them with another Question; Is any Man now so Ignorant of the Celestial
System, as not to know that those Millions of Stars visible to us, beside the
many Millions more beyond our Ken, are Suns, Moons, Earths, habitable, and
without doubt inhabited Orbs, of vaster Magnitude than this Earth? Or will any
but an Astrologer believe, or suppose those Myriads of vast Bodies were created
to be the cause of Men's Vices, Miseries, and Ruin; to force, or incline them to
all their detestible Villainies; to be the Instruments of fatal necessity, and
force poor Mortals to those Actions, they would not otherwise be guilty of? Are
Astrologers themselves ignorant, that they give Light and Direction in the
Night, and in Navigation tell the Mariner his Latitude, when the Sun is
obscured on the Meridian? Are they not reasonable grounds to admire the Power
of the Great Creator, and the Beauty of Heaven? Is not the wonderful Regularity
of their amazing Motions a great Conviction of Atheism, and a proof of the
Deity?

John Gadbury, Almanac 1692.
that Stale Bafled Advocate for Astrology, has lately offered several other
Ridiculous Things in defense of it, which the Athenian Philosophers have
sufficiently Confuted and Exposed, to which I referr Sidrophel, and without
Astrology can foretell him, that so Ignorant and Unlearned as I am, I have said
more against his Art, than he is able to Answer.

CVLPEPER REDIVIVVS: Or, a Second Part of SIDROPHEL VAPULANS: Briefly
containing some short Reflections on a late Scandalous Libel against the Royal
College of Physicians, London; Entitled, A Rebuke, etc. Written by William
Salmon.
Ecce iterum Crispinus.

Juven.
TO prevent Amusement, Sir, and help you to understand rightly (if it be
possible) some Passages in the foregoing Epistle, it is needful to tell you,
That it was written four Years since, and has lain so long in Lavender, by
Advice of some Friends, who thought Sidrophel so Contemptible a Blockhead, as
not to be worth the Notice even of the meanest Artist; That his Railing was no
more to be regarded than the barking of a Dog; That to oppose him would give
him Reputation, and be apt to make People think him Considerable, who is indeed
a Contemptible Adversary; That to meddle with him, would foul a Man's Fingers,
raise Dust in his Eyes, and Noise in his Ears; That Reason and Argument were
lost on such an Incorrigible, and Conceited Opiniator; and would be so far from
Silencing, or Amending, that it would Animate and Provoke him to greater
Clamor and more noisy Scolding.

These Diss^^sives have hitherto restrained me from taking the Satisfaction
which has been so long my due, and giving him the Chastisement he has so long
deserved: But when I saw in his last Scandalous Libel against the College, the
unbridled Impudence with which he Affronts those Worthies, and in what a
Senseless, Rude manner he Reproacheth so many Great and Learned Men, and that
upon no other occasion, but a most Pious and Charitable Design to relieve the
Poor, when neglected and refused by others, who were Requested and Encouraged
by the College of Physicians and City, to engage in that Charitable
Undertaking, I laid aside all diverting Considerations, to pursue that of a
just Resentment against so Shameless, and Scurrilous a Reviler: And accordingly
resolved that his Ignorance and ill Manners should no longer be a Sanctuary to
him, but that I would Expose and Punish him by the Pen, who has so much
offended with it.

How Culpable and deserving Chastisement he is, his own Pen confessed, while he
was Railing in the midst of his Dung-Boat against the College and the Author of
Medicaster Medicatus, and bespattering us with his nasty Cargo; even then under
that stinking Dispensation, Rage and Malice so blinded and transported him,
Seplasium Pref Sect 11.
that he forgot what he was doing, and declared, That to fling Dirt on any Man,
was inhumane and unchristian; and yet no Man has been more busy in that filthy
Practice than he; and even against such, to whom more Respect and Deference was
due, than to an hundred such as I am.

In his last Libel against the College and its Worthy Members (which has thus
provoked me) he does in most opprobrious Language (with great Impudence, and
little Sense) Revile their Persons, Disparage their Skill, Undervalue their
Learning derogate, from that Power and Authority which diverse Acts of
Parliament and Royal Charters have given them; Reproaches and Censures their
late Generous Project, to serve the Poor with Advice and Medicines without
Profit; arrogate a Power, and pretend an Ability to Reform Physic, Surgery,
Pharmacy, Chemistry and Anatomy, etc. and to make his new House an Academy, and
himself an Oracle, Greater, and Wiser than Apollo. Wherefore, Not to Expose and
Chastise such an Insolent and Vain glorious Assumer, were a fault equal to his
own: I have therefore taken in Hand the Rod which has so long lain in Pickle
for him, and put it in ure, that this Noisy Spark may better know himself, and
the World see how Empty a Creature he is, who thus would Affront and Impose
upon his Foolish and Ignorant Admirers.

I suppose that Honorable and Learned Body, to which this ignorant Empirick is
such an Enemy, will not be wanting to Vindicate themselves, and Punish him
according to his Deserts: Power and Ability I am sure they want not; and I
doubt not, but they will exercise both on so provoking an occasion, and not
suffer their Reputations and Interest to be so overborn, and trampled on by
such a Swinish Adversary, but stop the Career of his Brutish Pen, by such means
as Law and Learning have put into their Hands, in assurance of which, my
Remarks on his Libel shall be the shorter.

There is lately Published by a free thinking Republican a Book, wherein, one
whole Chapter is employed to prove, Theol. and Polit. Disc. cap. ult.
That Men under such a Free Government as ours, ought to have the liberty of
thinking as they please, and writing what they think. Sidrophel seems by his
Practice, to be of his Opinion, for he sets no bounds to his Thoughts, nor
limits to his Pen; but, like a true Libertine Libeller, lets both fly at all
Games, mounting his filly Railery at the most Eminent for Art and Learning in
the Three Kingdoms, if not in the whole World.

What it is that exasperates him to this Barbarous Outrage against them,
besides the common Antipathy and natural Enmity of Ignorance to Art, and
Empiricism to an Academick Education, I am to seek; unless his Soul be that of
Culpeper Transmigrated. I find he Wheedles and Cajoles the Apothecaries, but
that is like the Algerines putting out Christian Colors to Delude and
Captivate. His Compassion is feigned, and his Alarm false. He endeavors to
make them believe the College design to ruin the greatest part of the
Apothecaries in London, while he above any Man (except his Learned Friend G.
H.) has made it his business to destroy all that are in England. What the
College did was in their Favor, to ease them of unprofitable Patients, and too
many poor, miserable and distressed Complainants, and gave good Reason for it.
But his endeavors have been constant to deprive them of the Rich as well as
Poor Customers, by teaching their Art to all, who can read English; directing
and encouraging the People to make their own Medicines, Publishing Swarms of
Receipts in Almanacks and Popular Pamphlets, magnifying Nostrums, Arcanums;
recommending Medicines, and crying up to Sale Remedies of his own silly
Invention, Composition, and Preparation, which is the utmost any Man can do, to
ruin their Trade. So that Maugre all his Soothing and Clawing, he is so far
from being their Friend and Advocate (as he pretends) that he really is the
most notorious, and most mischievous Enemy they have in the World, next to
Health.

How much then like a Crocodile is he, to lament the Chimerical ruin of so
many Families, to whom his own devouring Practice is destructive? And what a
Sycophant is he, thus to upbraid the College, and accuse them of a Wickedness
he so notoriously commits, and has so long Practiced? If his Design be to
engross that Pious Work of ruining so necessary a Trade, he had cause to be
angry with them for meddling in his Business, and taking Work out of his Hands;
but then he ought in good Manners to have told them so.

To the Surgeons, he likewise pays great Compliments, and makes high Court. The
Master of the Hall he Dubs Honorable, and makes them all better Men than the
Doctors; gives their art the Preference both for Worth and Antiquity; and
accounts a Surgeon so necessary to complete a Physician, that he pronounces all
such as are not excellent in that Art, to be ignorant of the other.

If this be the Only and True Character of a Physician, pray what is Sidrophel,
who is neither Surgeon nor Apothecary, much less a Physician, but a Railing
Fool, who is notoriously ignorant how much the Company of Surgeons have been
obliged to the College of Physicians for their Improvement, even in their own
Art; nor yet the Advantages which all the Members of the College of Physicians
do happily enjoy for their Improvement in Surgery: For it cannot be denied, but
that the most considerable Anatomical Improvements made in our Profession, are
chiefly owing to the Learned Members of the College; such as Dr. Harvey, Tern,
Scarburgh, Croon, etc. And so sensible the College has been hereof, that they
passed a Statute forbidding any of their Members to read any Public Lectures,
even in Surgeons-Ha^, unless the Master and Wardens did first ask the
President's leave; giving this Reason in their Statute, Quippe aequum and
ratio^i consentaneum arbitramur, ut qui per Collegam aliquem pr^s^iunt, ii
Collegio ipsi aliquod grati animi Officium praestant.

And I may be bold to say, That the College have so great. Advantages both as
to Anatomical and Chirurgical Improvements, that no Society in Europe has the
like; there being no less than Three different Lectures founded in that
Honorable Body: One a Fellows Lecture, whereby every Fellow, at his Admission,
is obliged publicly to Dissect a Human Body at such time as the President
shall appoint. A Second is a Lecture Founded by the Learned Dr. Coniston, Anno
1635. which is to be read Yearly by one of the Four Youngest Doctors of the
College, upon two, three, or more such Diseases ^as the Censors of the College
shall Appoint or Direct. A Third (and the most considerable of all, both for
Antiquity and Usefulness) is a Chirurgical Lecture founded in the 24th of Q.
Eliz. by the Right Honorable John Lord Lumley and Dr. Caldwall, to restore
Surgery to her Perfection, by procuring an Excellent Reader, who shall read
openly in the House of the College of the Physicians in London, in good Order,
all the whole Course of the Art and Science of Surgery, which has been most
Learnedly performed, not only as to the Anatomical, but Chirurgical Part of our
Art, by those Great and Learned Men, Dr. Foster, Dun, Harvey, Scarburgh, etc.
so that Sidrophel has little Reason to charge them with Ignorance in our
Profession.

And yet after all this Deference and Ceremony to the Surgeons, he does them
also all the Mischief he can, and strives to Ruin them by the same Method he
does the Apothecaries; Teaching, as well as he is able, every Body to cure
themselves; but the Cursed Cow has short Horns: His Design of Prostituting and
Exposing our Art to the Vulgar, does us little harm; partly because he is
unable to teach it, but chiefly because it is not to be Learnt by Words or
Writing. Experience is our Master: And to that he is a Stranger, and so we
become secure and safe from the Damage his Pen does the Doctors, Apothe^^^^^,
and Chy^ists.

To the Physicians, especially those of the College, he behaves himself with
the same Rudeness, and abominable Scurrility, Culpeper did before him. Some
Passages I have Collected and Exposed, which is Refutation enough; mere showing
such a Monster, being sufficient to render him odious. I know none of his Dirt
can stick upon Men so much above the reach of such a Virulent, Malicious
Rayler; although he labors hard with all imaginable Affronts, to provoke and
abuse them.

Seplasium. Ars Chirurg. Rebuke.
Some times he charges them with Falsehood, Murder, and the Death of Thousands;
and makes the late Queen a Victim of their Ignorance and Male-Practice.
Sometimes he prefers the Apothecaries, as Men more useful, and having more
Skill in Physic, and Advantages of learning it than they: And affirms, No Man
can be a good Doctor, till he has served Fifteen Years with an Apothecary; as
if cleaning Shops, Shoes, Streets, Skillets, and Glyster-Bags, running of
Errands, beating Diapente, and ringing Quevedo's Passing Bell, were of more use
in Learning the Art of Physic, than Studying Books, Hearing Lectures, Visiting
Hospitals, and Conversing with Learned and Skilful. Men in the Universities.

If so, I would ask this Pretender to the Skill and Title of a Doctor, with
what Apothecary he served his two Apprenticeships? If with any one of that
Trade, he can pretend to no other Character by Law than his Master had. If with
none, then by his own Confession he has not been duly Educated in Physic, and
is unfit for the Practice of it.

The Billingsgate Language, the Bedlam Sense of his Libel, is obvious to every
Man of Manners and Understanding; the Vainglorious Part of it, is no less
palpable in the many occasions he takes to magnify himself and vilify others:
Boasting of Great Practice, Great Success, Great Skill, Great Charity, a Great
House, and a Great Library; and all but a Great Nothing.

As to the Law Part, his Ignorance and Error are no less manifest, Dr. Chapter
Gooda's Vind^e. cap 1. And his R. Coliege Founded by Law.
as a Learned Member of the College has long since demonstrated, and he will
speedily find to his Cost, all his Objections against their Authority, and the
Acts Establishing it, are by that Worthy Person fully Anticipated and Confuted.

If any Man of Puncto be so over n^ce to think I Treat this Rude Adversary two
severely, or uncivilly, and not like a Man of Breeding; I beg the Favor of him
to consider the Provocation which he has given, not to me only, but likewise
to the Royal College and other his Superiors, whom he Ridicules, and Banters,
Affronts and Reviles without any Regard to their Degree and Character. How much
like an abandoned Clown he Bespatters them in diverse of his Libels, and in one
little Pamphlet, he does over and over call them Liars, Quacks, Empiricks,
Knaves, Villains, Fools, Thieves, Robbers Scounderels, Pitiful Mean Fellows,
Sneaking, Envious, Malicious' Ignorant, Iroud, Fresumptous, no Doctors -- and
then let him tell me, whether he Deserves better usage than I give him; or
ought to be treated with Civility, who has so Abdicated it, and like a Beast
of Prey, forfeited all Right to Law.

To conclude this loathsome Employment: I have read a great many Libels with
which the Liberty of late Times has Poisoned the Nation, but in none found
such a mixture of Brutish Ignorance, Saucy Rudeness, and a want of Sense, or
Truth as in this; many False and Dangerous Things have been set off with a good
Grace, and Clothed in an Eloquent Civil Style, with an Air or Semblance of
Reason, etc. But in this we meet nothing like it. No Manners, Sense, Wit,
Learning, Truth or Reason; but downright Ribaldry, Slander, Falsehood, Folly,
and Rudeness, as I will shortly make evident, if not prevented by some more
Concerned, and better able to Vindicate the Learned College, and Expose this
Odious, Clamorous Witling, than

J.Y.
December 2. School.
FINIS.

