May the 4th.

Captain YARNER'S RELATION OF THE Battle fought at Kilrush upon the 15th.
day of April, by my Lord of ORMOND, who with 2500 Foot and 500 Horse,
overthrew the Lord Mountgarret's Army, consisting of 8000 Foot and 400 Horse,
all well armed, and the choice of eight Counties.

Together with a Relation of the proceedings of our Army, from the second to
the later end of April, 1642.

battle scene

LONDON, Printed for F. Coules, and G. Badger, 1642.

Captain Yarner his Relation of the Battle fought at Kill-rush on the 15
April, 1642.
THe 14 day of April my Lord of Ormund having intelligence that the Lord
Mountgarret, was come down from Kilkenny, with the choice forces of that County
and 8 Counties more, sent out the Commander of his own troop Sir Patrick Wems
and with him Captain Armestrong to view their numbers and manner of lodging,
who being discovered from their Army, they entertained with an Ambuscado of 10
Musketters: who swamme the river or made hard shift to get over, and the better
to toll them unto danger sent over some 10 Horsemen, but their Ambush was
discovered, and Captain Armestrong dismounting 6 Dragoneers, drove them to
make as hard shift to return with the loss of their arms, the horse being
charged with a small party of ours took the same course for their fasety; ours
escaped not shot free, for 2 or 3 of my L. of Ormunds troop were hurt, and Sir
Patrick Wems horse shot under him, to be better satisfied my L. of Ormound,
with Sir Tho.' Lucas, and a troop of Gentlemen volluntiers, most of them
Officers, and some other troops, went himself to see the countenance of the
Rebels; some shot they made at him, but he returned with this resolution, not
to alter or make any stay of his fore resolved march, nor to go one foot out of
the way for them: The next morning we had order to march: I visiting my L. of
Ormund to receive his Commands, he did me the honor to ask my opinion, and
withal told me his, viz. Not to avoid them, nor to seek them upon their
advantage, and that he had finished his designs in despite of them, and if
they had the confidence to stop his passadge he would make his way through them.

Notwithstanding the neerenesse of his insulting enemy, his Lordship took care
for the safety of the Town of Athy, left behind him there, as I take it, 3
Companies, with necessaryes for a town of defense, and so after prayers, which
every morning was performed, began to march; which he had disposed to best
advantage he could, how ever our train and baggage was a great hinderance to
our march, and a great weakening to us, making so great an interposition
betwixt our Van and Rear; Cornet Pollard was sent with 30 Horse, as Van
Currier to see the passages free from Ambushes, to second him was sent a party
of firelocks, I think about 100 or 200, the Rebels appeared with their numerous
Army, adorned with many Colors, on the other side of the bog by a Castle called
Killika, some 3 miles distant from us, but marching very swiftly toward us,
without any trouble of carriages and sometimes we could perceive them to trot,
all this while we kept on a steady march with as much order as the
inconveniency of our carriages would ^iv^ u^ leave, and my L. of Ormond was
resolved not to spare a bit of it, bu^ a^ (...) dear rate, notwithstanding the
L. Mountgarret had made liberal promises of it and us to his Soldiers,
assuring them that we were running away and would not strike one blow,
commanding them not to spare one of us, and to that purpose had sent to guard
all p^ssages, by which we might escape, that one might not live to ca^ry news
to Dublin, but ^^od disposed other ways.

About 2 or 3 of the clock in the afternoon (as I take it) our way led us near
them and to a pass, which they hastened to take, which had been a great
prejudice to us, to prevent which, Sir Tho. Lucas with 6 troops hasted to gain
it, which he did and faced their Van, and so brought them to a stand: My L. of
Ormond seeing he could (...) pass without manifold danger to his Carriages and
Reare-gard, drew the Van into a battalia, sending his Carriages away behind him
under the guard of the Van Curriers, and hasted up the Rear, which being placed
in a handsome form of Battle, which he did all himself and fitted his
Battalias to the ground on which he stood.

Sir Tho. Lucas seeing my Lord in a posture to fight, left his station and
returned to my Lord and presently drew his Horse to flank the left wing of the
Foot, and gave me charge of the Reserve, himself preparing for the charge with
Cap. Armestrong and Sir Patrick Weames; I had for the Reserve the L.
Lieftenants Troop, Sir Geor. Wentworths commanded by Cap. Harmon and Sir Char.
Coots commanded by Lieftenant Daniel Havilide. The left wing was flanked with 3
troops commanded by Sir Richard Greenefield, viz. the Lord Liles commanded by
Captain Treswell his own, and Captain Stouts: in the mean time our Cannon made
16 shot at the Rebels, but feared more than hurt them: our forlorn hope being
100 Musketters commanded by Cap. R^chford began to give fire upon their
batalia, being seconded with 100 Firelocks commanded by Cap. Samford; the whole
Army Horse an^ Foot advancing toward the Rebels, Sir Tho. Lucas with his 3
troops 6 fe^te before them, espying a breach in the ditch, where 4 horses might
charge a breast, began to trot toward their strongest and t^^ckest body, where
stood about fourscore Horse of theirs, who first began to run, their body
presently began to stagger, which he perceaving, began to set spurs and rusht
into the middle of them with his three troops, the other three being so greedy
of execution, could not be restrained, notwithstanding all my endeavors and
premonitions: Sir Rich. Greenfield with his 3 trops charged their left wing and
there routed them likewise; so that they had only their Van consisting of about
1500 and one troop, who seems to advance a little, but were presently sought
with by my L. of Ormonds troop of Volluntiers wherein Collo. Barry and Collo.
Farrar, and many more Officers of quality served. Col. Craford advancing with
his Divisions put them to a hasty, but not so disorderly a retreit, as the
rest; the execution lasted 2 miles, I conjecture we could not kill so few as
500. Many more Arms were lost, that little baggage which they had with their
little quantity of Ammunition come to our Custody, the bog behind them and our
former labors which had worn us much was their protection: what men of
quality were slain I certainly know not but many there were; it growing now
late and having 5 or 6 miles to our quarters where we intended that night to
lodge, my L. commanded prayers and thanksgiving to God for the victory to be
performed on the place, and so in the best order we could marched toward old
Connell, where that night we lodged.

In this business I could not find one man taxed for any thing in the
execution of his duty; from the highest to the lowest there was a great
alacrity and cheerefulnes in their countenance, the Officers commanding, the
Soldiers with a gallant silence obaying and kept their orders and distance,
with much more care and exactness, than usually in their common exercise: the
enemy had a trebble number, the advantage of place, sun and wind, which no art
could prevent them of; but God gave us the advantage of courage and conduct,
and had not our Horse been too furious in the execution, the slaughter had
been the greater. Sir Char. Coote would not be out, but as if he had been but
30 years old, charged in amongst them and with his own hand did brave
execution, and although at first he had lost his Cap, yet would his
earnestness not permit him to stay to take it up, but bare headed scoured
about the field, crying, Kill, kill, and with his hand gave the example, whilst
my L. of Ormond secured the Cannon, and victory, with some divisions of foot,
and beat their Van into a speedy Retraite, etc.

Soli Deo gloria.
A short Relation of the proceedings of our Army in their march through the
Queens County, to the relief of sundry Towns and Castles besieged by the
Rebels.
THe 2. of April, my Lord of Ormond took the field with 3000. foot, and 500.
Horse, marching from Dublin in the Evening with five pieces of ordinance, and
200. wagons with Ammunition, and victuals for the use of our Army, and the
relief of our Forts besieged, and that night they lodged at Racoole, 6. miles
from Dublin, from whence Captain Yarner was sent with two Troops of Horse to
destroy the Country on the left hand, under the Mountains, in the County of
Wicklo, with command to meet the Army the next night at the Nace, which he did;
having burnt 10. or 12. Villages, and slain about 10. men armed, Sir George
Wentworths Troop passing by the Castle of Tipper, within a mile of the Nace,
had their Trumpeter slain from the Castle, in revenge whereof, Sir Charles
Coote drew up 200 Firelockes and a Troop of Horse to it, and blew up the
Castle, putting all to the sword.

That night the Army lodged at the Nace, and the next day marched to old
Connell, and the day following, came to Athy, where they found the Town burnt
by our own people the day before, who had all betaken themselves to the Castle,
not being able to defend the Town any longer, but by the approach of our Army,
their wants turned to great plenty; Captain Yarner having brought into the Town
500. head of Cattle, which he had driven out of the Country, besides what was
brought in by others: during this march about 8. score horse were sent by my
Lord of Ormond to rownd the Country by Cullen Bridge, with provisions to
releeve Sir George Greanes his Castle, and the Castle of Carlo, which was close
beset by 1300. Rebels, but upon the approach of our horse they fled, and in the
Town of Carlo were slain and hanged about 100 men, and having relieved the
said Castles, our horse returned to our Army, which were marched from Athy to
Mary-burrow, alias, The fort of lease, where our body of foot remained, and
about 400. horse were sent under the command of Sir Charles Coote to relieve
Burrowes, the ^irre and other forts there-about, in which service he stayed
abroad three days, and having relieved the said Towns, after several
skirmishes, and as many slaughters of the Rebels, who lay like swarms of Bees
in the woods, bogs and other places of advantage, through which our Horse
passed, and in their return relieved Sir Robert Piggots Castle, and the Town
of Balle-Ma-Kill. which he found in great distress, and out of these several
places he brought with him men, women and children, such as were not
serviceable, to the number of 60. families, which at his return he planted at
the Nace, 12. miles from Dublin.

Thus having performed what they intended, he returned to our Army at
Mary-burrow, both horse and man being quite spent with extraordinary marching,
thorough the bogs and woods, having in 48. hours together taken but three
hours rest, and in all this service lost not one man, only about 30. or 40.
horse were lost in the bogs, Captain Yarner being shot in the head, and
Captain Armestrong shot in the belly, but had no hurt, only crushed them a
little, our horse being returned to Mary-burrough, my Lord of Ormond having
left a good Garrison there, returned to Athy, and having left a strong Garrison
there, and overthrown my Lord Mountgarret, with the flower of the Rebels, he
returned to old Connell, and so to the Nace, where Sir Charles Coote with his
Regiment and 300. Horse, being left in Garrison, the Lord of Ormond, with the
rest of our Army returning to Dublin, where we joyfully received him upon the
17. of April, being Sunday, having in that space being but 15. days, marched
above 50 miles outright into the Country, and relieved all our distressed
Forts and Towns thereabouts, in despite of all the powwer of the Rebels, Sir
Charles Coote being left in the Nace aforesaid, did there plant the 60 families
of poor people, which he brought with him out of the Queens County: and
having by his daily sallyes. from thence into the Country round about him,
brought in great store of Cattle, Corn, and provision, he gave to the said
families 300. milch Cowes, upon condition that they should sell milk to his
Soldiers, at a half penny a quart, and Butter and Cheese pro Rato; he gave
them also great store of Corn at the rate of 10 shillings the Winchester bound
barrel, after which rate they are to provide Bread for his Soldiers; if all
our commanders would take this example, we should have no want in our Army, nor
be thus burdened as we are with the maintenance of many thousands of poor
stripped people, gathered hither out of all parts of the Country, most of them
people of quality: Sir Charles Coote has also banished all the Irish women and
children out of the Nace, not to be seen in the Town or thereabouts, upon pain
of death, their men being all fled before.

Out of the 800. Horse received out of England this last week, with my Lord
Lile 400. are sent for Drogheda, and the Town of Dundalke, 200. to my Lord
Moore, who in Sir Henry Tichburnes absence is Governor of Drogheda, and 200. to
Sir Henry himself at Dundalke, together with 300 foot, from whence we hope
shortly to hear of some good service effected by them, Sir Henry having burnt
up all the Country round about him, for 5, or six miles, and having understood
that Sir Phelom o Neale had raised a new Army of 3000, men and lay at the
Newry, but 8 miles from him, he issued out of Dundalke, with 800. men and went
6 miles to go and visit him, where Sir Phelom o Neal appeared on the one side
of him, with 1500 men, and Collonell Master Bryan on the other side him, with
1000. more; both which Armies he with his 800. men dared to battle, but they
refusing him, he returned to Dundalke, burning all before him. There are now
some store of Scots landed in the North at Knock-fergus, with a Regiment of
English and store of Arms and Ammunition, so that we hope shortly to have the
passages clear betwixt us and them, and that Sir Henry Tichburne will join
with their Army which by this time we suppose is drawing toward him; but we
have here strange reports of the behavior of the Scots, which we hope are
false: if they should prove true, we should soon be weary of them: here is
also a tumor of a Ship of 300. Tonne, lately arrived at Wexford, with
Ammunition from Hamberough, which if true is very bad news, and will cost much
blood in this Kingdom, if our Seas be no better guarded, also some Ships with
Ammunition are said to be gotten into Galloway, and we have also sent some Ships
thither to relieve the Fort which we fear may be in some distress: if they
have gotten any store of Ordinance and Ammunition into the City, the greatest
power of the Rebels lies in the West, about Cork, Kingsaile, and Bandon
Bridge, but God sending some timely succor thither, we hope speedily to remove
them from thence. The second of April, the Countess of Ormond, with all her
Children, and about 100 poor stripped English arrived at Dublin, she being
prisoner to my Lord Mountgarret 5. months before, and was now brought to Dublin
by Captain Bartlet, in the Kings Pinace from Waterford; the Fort of Duncannon,
at the mouth of that Harbor being secure: our Army is shortly going forth
again farther Westward to relieve diverse parts there distressed, and in the
County of Wicklo, the Lord be their protection, etc.

FINIS.

