A TRVE AND IMPARTIAL Relation of the BATTLE BETWIXT, HIS MAJESTY'S ARMY,
and that of the REBELS near Newbery in Berk-shire, Sept. 20, 1643.

WITH The several Actions of the KINGS Army since His Majesty's removing it
from before Gloucester.

Sent in a Letter from the Army to a Noble Lord.

Printed at Oxford by L. Lichfield. 1643.

My Lord,
I Have omitted all the last Week to give your Lordship an account of the
condition of His Majesty's affairs here; every day ((...) these three last)
having produced little in (...), but much in expectation. But now that the long
looked for Crisis of a Battle is over, I have thought it fit to inform your
(...), not only of the (...) and (...) of that but also of the steps and (...)
to it being doubly obliged so to do, in (...) to His (...) sevice, as well as
in what I owe to your (...) which I find in as much danger of suffering by some
of our own parties, (...) the conduct of His Majesty's designs with rashness
and imprudence, as in the Rebels (...) the truth of the (...) of (...). (...)
by then usual arts of (...), by which they have (...) appeared able to make
better (...) of defeates, then we of Victory.

Your Lordship may be pleased (...) understand that the Earl of (...) having
descended with his Army into the Vale of Gloucester, before the King could well
draw His from the Siege up to the hills to fight with him, it was not thought
fit to follow him into the enclosed Country, where the King should loose the
(...) advantage he had above him in strength of horse, but rather to make
choice of such a place to in camp his Army as might be aptest for these three
ends: to accommodate his Quarters; to strengthen him in provisions; and equally
to intercept his flight in a fair Country; whether he should take it by the
way of Worcester toward Warwick or by the way of Cyrencester toward Reading,
and to these purposes, the Town of Winchcombe and Sudely Castle were made
choice of as the most appropriate. But after two days lodging there, (the
Queens Regiment having in their coming to that quarter defeated one of the
Earls best Regiments of Horse of Dutchmen, commanded by one Blaire) upon
intelligence that the Earl was advanced as far as Teuxbury and Vpton bridge,
(whereby it was made probable unto us, that he intended (...) way) the king
(...) his Army of (...), from whence having (...) up a (...) of theirs) we were
quickly hurried by the news that Essex had faced about, and had in the night,
with great silence secrecy, and strange diligence, almost gained Cirencester,
and surprised two new raised Regiments of ours there, before we could get any
certain notice of his (...): having left (as it seems) most of his great
Ordnance and baggage behind him, and amusing us with a show of Forces still in
Teuxbury and Vpton, which were (as I conceive) those now remaining in Garrison
at Gloucester. Upon certainty of his remove on the Thursday, our whole Army on
the Saturday morning marched after him, our Horse with such diligence, that on
the Sunday night they quartered within six miles of him, he at Suningdon, we
about Farringdon. Upon the (...) morning Colonel (...), with a party of a
Thousand commanded men, was sent to follow them in the Rear from their
quarters, whilst Prince (...) with the body of the Cavalry drew over the
directest way to meet him, and it was our good luck to (...) his Army just:
(...) our party had overtaken it upon the open Down, two miles on the
Northwest side of Aubourne, the Rebels discrying us drew up in (...), leaving
only a body of some two (...) Horse upon a hill somewhat distant from the
gross of their Army, which we found means so to steal upon with Vrries
party, as to charge and rout them, and taking two Coronets, and killing Forty
or Fifty men, without any loss on our part; we beat them into their Foot and
Cannon, upon which occasion we discovered such evident symptoms of fear and
distraction in their whole Army, as that the Prince was well (...) tempted from
his temper, and was once resolved to have charged (with 3000. horse alone)
their whole Army consisting of (...). horse and 5000. foot at least, and store
of Cannon. But news arriving at the (...) that our Foot was, beyond
expectation, advanced within 6. or 7. miles of us, it imposed upon his
Highness prudence this caution, not to adventure upon half our strength that
rest, which the next day he might be sure to fight for with double power: upon
which consideration he made a stand, resolving that night only to attend them
and hinder their march. We had not stood long when we discovered that the enemy
prepared for a retreat, and by degrees drew away their baggage first, then
their soot leaving their horse at a good distance from them.

The Prince his (...) hereupon was to have charged them: when (...) their
Forces should have bin drawn off the Field into those Lanes, whereinto their
baggage was already advanced, but their motions being so very slow, and the
night drawing on, upon second thoughts his (...) judged it the best course to
try, if (by a small party he could engage their horse, which was then grown to
be at a good distance from their Foot: this partee he committed to the care of
Vrrey, with two Regiments only near at hand to second him, keeping the body
of his horse at such a distance, as might encourage the Enemy to venture on
that severed part, which they did with a little too much encouragement. For (to
say the truth) the Regiments that should have seconded Vrrey, not doing their
parts so well as they ought, forced his partee to make somewhat a disorderly
retreat, and the Prince to send hasty succors to them, which the Queens
Regiment (commanded by my Lord Iermyn) was ordered to do, which his Lordship
performed with much Gallantry, being received very steadily, by a strong body
of the Enemies Horse, and with a Composedness in the Officer that commanded
them very remarkably. For his Lordship advancing before his Regiment, with the
Marquess de la Vieuville on the one hand, and the Lord Digby on the other (the
Enemies Volley of Carabines given them smartly at less than 10 yards) being
past, the Commander somewhat forwarder than the rest, was plainly seen to
prye into their countenances, and removing his leavell from one to another to
discharge his Pistol as it were by Election at the Lord Digbyes head, but
without any more hurt, (saving only the burning of his face) than he himself
received by my Lord Iermyn's sword, who (upon the Lord Digbyes Pistol missing
fire) ran him with it in to the back, but he was as much beholding to his Arms
there, as the L. Digby to his headpeece. Immediately upon this shocke, the
Queens Regiment was so charged in the Rear by a fresh body of theirs, that the
greatest part of it, shifting for themselves, the Lord Iermyn, accompanied with
the French Marquess, and the Officers only of his Regiment, thought it as
safe a way as well as the most honorable, to venture forwards through their
whole Army, rather than to charge back through those that had environed him,
and so with admirable success (the unhappy loss of that gallant Marquess
excepted) he brought 4 Colors and all his Officers off safe, having made their
way round, through the gross of the enemies Foot. The L. Digby being stonn'd,
(...) for the present blinded with his shot, was fortunately rescued out of a
Regiment of the Enemies by a brave Charge, which Prince Rupert in person made
upon them with his own Troop, wherein his Highness horse was shot in the head
under him, but yet by Gods blessing brought him off; and so the Enemies horse
being beaten up quite to their Foot, and Cannon, the night coming upon us,
gave a period to that action. That night we quarterd in the field some 2. miles
distant from the Enemy, who by the next morning was stolen away as far as
Hungerford; whereupon, the Prince conjecturrng rightly the course they would
(...), drew his horse the directest way toward Newbury, assigning the Foot
also their Randevouz there that night, where, luckily they met in the Evening,
at the same instant that the Earl of Essex his Army appeared within a mile of
the Town, with little thought (as I conceive) of finding his intended quarter
so prepossest: upon sight of our Army they retreated into certain hedges and
Fastnesses, a mile and half distant from Newbury westward. The Rebels thus
happily overtaken in their flight, consultation was held of the way to prevent
their farther evading us, and it was resolved on for the best, to draw all the
Kings Army that night into a large field on the other side of Newbury,
adjoining to those closes where the Enemy had made this haul, (...) the end we
that might be in readiness to press upon the first motion of theirs. The night
was past in much (...), but with opinion on our part, that they were marched
away. The next morning being Wednesday the 20. of Sept. by break of day, (in
stead of the flight which upon all their former proceedings, we had reason to
expect) we discovered them settled in the most advantageous way imaginable of
receiving us, whether invited to it by the extraordinary advantages of the
place, or engaged to it by the despair of escaping us by a Retreat, I know
not, but there we found them, their Foot, their Horse, and their Cannon planted
with much skill, not only for mole sting us, and preserving themselves, but
even for temptation to us to assail them upon those disadvantages. For having
lodged their Baggage and Principal Reserve both of Horse and Foot, upon a Hill
side under a Wood near Hampsted, fenced by hedges and dithes inaccessable, but
by such and such passes, and having (...) another principal part of their
strength betwixt that and a place called Enbourne, in strong hedges, and
houses, with apt (...) on both sides, for bravadoes sake, or to invite us, they
had drawn out into Battalia into a little Heath on the South Side of (...)
three bodies of Foot, both lined and flanked with strong (...) of Horse, (...)
favor of (...), so as that upon all occasions they might (...) power out
thither from their Holds what new strength they pleased, or, if beaten, might
have a safe Retreat, into the adjoining (...), which nature and they had both
so well secured, they being so (...) placed for fight, and so (...) for
sub^^^tence, we having Newbury at our backs to sustain us, and so many more
(...) then they to cut off provision. It may well accur to (...) Lordship to
question why (since it does to so many more to (...) that) we did not
endeavor to combat them: so by their necessityes as to oblige them for want of
sustenance to retreat over some (...) equal (...), rather than to assail them
upon such dangerous odds of Situation. The answer to this objection by way of
excuse, that we were in some sort to lead on, and engaged by the tempting
prospect of that little Battalia I mentioned upon the (...); and by way of
justification I am to tell (...), that there was within the Enemies Dominion a
round hill not suspected nor (...) by us the night before, from whence a
battery would command all he plain before Newbury, where the Kings Army stood,
(...) that unless we (...) our selves of that hill, there was no holding of
that (...), but the King must have retreated with his Army thence, the dishonor
of which, I believe you will easily consent ought to outweigh the hazard of
attempting them, and (to say the truth') even without their having that (...),
the Kings person was exposed all day to much more hazard of the Cannon than was
fitting, the Re^e^e's im^loying it very freely where ever by any signs they
could discover his (...). This hill and that heath I mentioned, were the 2
eminent scenes (...) that days action, from 7 a c'ock in the (...) till 7 at
night, except only one attempt made by them from their grand Reserve upon a
pass on our right hand near the River (...) by the Kings Life-guards, in
which they were repulsed. The issue of the Battle on the heath (first begun
and quickly ended) was a (...) routing of their horse, the possessing of 5
pieces of Cannnon there, though able to bring off but one of them, the forcing
the Foot to retreat into their strength, though unbroken, for (give their due)
they showed themselves like good men, and lastly the gaining and holding the
place.

This action was done (...) by our horse, for (to say truth) our foot having
found a hillocke in the Heath that sheltered them from the (...), would not
(...) a foot from (...). The General and Prince Ruherts personal presence and
conduct, (...) much to the good success, as also the Lieut. general Willmots.
Chief Officers of horse, that bore a principal part in the action it self,
were my Lord of Carnarvon, Colonel Gerard, Sir Charles (...), the Earl of
Northampton, the Lord Chandois and Daniel (...). To name them all that did
eminently there, were to give you a Catalogue of all our gentlemen of quality
there present: for there is scarcely any that did not behave himself
remarkably. Persons of note killed there, were the Earl of Carnarvan, the Earl
of Su^derla^d, Col. Morgan, (...). Col. Fielding, and some (...) Volunteers,
whose names I cannot collect, (...) the (...), Sir George (...) eldest Son, a
(...) and an ingenious young man; Persons of note (...); of prime Officers, the
Lord (...), Sir Charles (...), Col^nell Charles Gerard, and (...) Ivers. Of
lower Officers abundauce, but none that I hear eit^er of them or these
dangerously. Of Volunteers, the (...) of (...), and Mr. John Russel, Mr. Edward
Sackvild, Mr. Henry (...), George Porter, with many more.

The action of the hill was carried with as much bravery both by our Horse and
Foot as on the Heath by the Horse alone, the Foot Commanded by Sir Nicolas
Byron, the Horse by Sir (...) (...), who after six hours (the (...) dispute
that has been seen) gained it from my Lord of Essex his own guards that had
possessed it, enjoyed it (...) many (...), and in the end (the Enemy (...) up his
rest to regaine it, after as hot a fight as at their taking it) repulsed him,
and kept it still.

Officers of note hurt there, were Colonel (...), George (...), and Ned
Villiers, and the Lord Viscount Flakland (volunteering it with too much
bravery) unfortunately killed I may have omitted many persons as eminent in
their actions that day, as some of these I have named, (...) it being so end
less a task to nominate all, I have only (...) such as I conceive to be of
your Lordships acquaintance.

Your Lordship does not expect that I should tell you of noble men killed on
the other side, nor much of (...), but of such things as they call Officers,
their Prisoners assure us concurringly that the most and principal of them are
slain, The night coming upon us soon after the Enemies final repulse from
that hill, the King drew all his Army up to the top of the heath, keeping
possession both of that, and of the hill till toward night, at which time,
(...) Horse and Foot, being extremely tired, and (...) probably informed that
the (...) had retreated with their carriges, and a principal part of their
Army, it was thought sit to draw his Horse into (...) on the other side of the
River, and His foot into the Town, principally to refresh them, and to enable
them for the next (...) pursuit, but in part (for I will (...) nothing from
your Lordship) to make a Bridge to a flying Enemy, least in deed too great a
despair of (...) might have made them (...) a second fight in that
disadvantagions place, where having not (to tell you the truth) Powder enough
left for half such another day, having spent four score (...) in it,
threescore more then had served the turneat Edge hill, nor could we be assured
that the supply from Oxford of 100. Barrelles more could come to us till the
next day at noone.

Thus my Lord have I given your Lordship as true an account as I can, of Gods
blessing upon the justice of His Majesty's (...) that day, which (considering
the disadvantage we fought upon) may well be counted in it (...) a happy
success, but in the affects it has since had in our pursuit of my Lord of
Essex, our defeating in that pursuit, his two best remaining (...) of Horse,
our dissipating in so great a measure his Army, and (...) ding the Rebels back
with so much terror, to their nest ( London) may well be reputed a great
victory; and yet I am confident that our having gained (...) Field, Colors,
Cannon, store of Prisoners, from them, beaten them from all places, that we
under took, (...) them from all that they attempted, our having execution on
them in their flight, and all this with the loss of half their numbers, all
the (...) ensigns of a battle gained; will not have kindled lighter (...)
with us in joy and thanksgiving, then with the remaining Rebels in hopes yet
farther to abuse the people, by passing still upon them deliverancies for
Victories.

From Newbery this 22. of Sept, 1643. Your Lordships most humble Servant.

