A Brief Discourse, Concerning The Power of the PEERS, and Commons of
PARLIAMENT, in point of Judicature.

Written by a Learned Antiquerie, at the Request of a Peer, of this REALM.

Printed in the year, That Sea-Coale was exceeding dear. 1640.

A BRIEF DISCOVRSE Concerning the power of the Peers and Commons of
Parliament in point of Judicature.
SIR, to give you as short an account of your desires as I can, I must crave
leave to lay you as a ground, the frame or first model of this state.

When after the period of the Saxon time, Harold had lifted himself into the
Royal Seat; the Great men to whom but lately he was no more then equal either
in fortune or power, disdaining this Act, of arrogance, called in William then
Duke of Normandy, a Prince more active then any in these Western parts, and
renowned for many victories he had fortunately achieved against the Franch
King, then the most potent Monarch in Europe.

This Duke led along with him to this work of glory, many of the younger sons
of the best families of Normandy, Picardy, and Flanders, who as undertakers,
accompanied the undertaking of this fortunate man.

The Usurper slain, and the Crown by war gained, to secure certain to his
posterity, what he had so suddenly gotten, he shared out his purchasse
retaining in each County a portion to support the dignity Sovereign, which was
styled (...) (...); now the ancient Demeanes and assiguing to others his
adventurers such portions as suited to their quality and expense, retaining to
himself dependancy of their personal service, except such Lands as in free
Alms were the portion of the Church, these were stifed Barons Regis, the
Kings immediate Freeholders, for the word Baro imported then no more.

As the King to these, so these to their followers, subdivided part of their
shares into Knights sees, and their Tennants were called Barons Comites, or
the like; for we find, as in the Kings Writ in their Writs Baronilus suis and
Francois and Anglois, the sovereign gifts, for the most part excending to
whole Counties or Hundreds, an Earl being Lord of the one, and a Baron of the
inferior donations to Lords of Towne-ships or Manors.

As thus the Land, so was all course of Judicature divided even from the
meanest to the highst, portion each several had his Court of Law, preserving
still the Manor of our Ancestors the Saxons, who jura per pag^s reddebant; and
these are still termed Court-Barons, or the Freeholders Court, twelve usually
in number, who with the Them or chief Lord were Judges.

The hundred was next, where the Hundrus or Aldermanus Lord of the Hundred,
with the chief Lord of each Towne-ship within their limits judged; Gods people
observed this form in the public Centureonis and decam Iudieabant plebem omni
tempore.

The County or Generale placitum was the next, this was so to supply the
defect, or remedy the corruption of the inferior, Vbi Curiae Dominorum
probantur desecisse, pertinet ad vice-comitem Provinciarum; the Judges here
were Comites, Vice-comites and Barons Comitatus qui liberas in (...) terr^^
^a^eant.

The last and supreme, and proper to our question, was generale placitum apud
London universalis Synodus in Charters of the Conqueror, Capitalis curia by
Glanvile, Magnum and Commune consilium coram Rege and magnatibus suis.

In the Rolls of Henry the 3. It is not stative, but summoned by Proclamation,
Edicitur generale placitum apud London, says the Book of Abingdon, whether
Epium Duces Principes, Satrap^ Rectores, and Causidi^i ex omni part
confluxerunt ad istam curiam, says Glanvile: Causes were referred, Propter
aliquam dubitationem que Emergit in comitatu, tum Comitatus nescit dijudicare.
Thus did Ethelweld Bishop of Winchester tranferre his suit against Leostine
from the County ad generale placitum, in the time of King Etheldred. Queen
Edgine against God^, from the County appealed to King Etheldred at London.
Congregatis Principibus and sapientibus Anglia, a suit between the Bishops of
Winchester and Durham in the time of Saint Edward. Coram Episcopis and
principibus Regni in presentia Regis ventilate and finita. In the tenth year
of the Conqueror, Episcopi Comites and Barons Regni potestate adversis
provinciis ad universalem Synodum pro causis audiendis Convocati, says the
Book of Westminster. And this continued all along in the succeeding Kings
reign, until toward the end of Henry the third.

AS this great Court or Counsel consisting of the King and Barons, ruled the
great affairs of State and controlled all inferior Courts, so were there
certain officers, whose transcendent power seemed to be set to bound in the
execution of Princes wills, as the Steward, Constable, and Marshall fixed upon
Families in fee for many ages: They as Tribunes of the people, or ex plori
among the Athenians, grown by unmanly courage, fearful to Monarchy, fell at
the feet and mercy of the King, when the daring Earl of Leicester, was slain
at Evesham.

This chance and the dear experience Henry the 3. himself had made at the
Parliament at Oxford, in the 40. year of his reign, and the memory of the
many straights his Father was driven unto, especially at Rumny-mead near
Stains, brought this King wisely to begin what his successor fortunately
finished, in lessening the strength and power of his great Lords; and this was
wrought by searching into the Regality they had usurped over their peculiar
Sovereigns, whereby they were (as the Book of Saint Albans terms them.)
(...).

And by the (...) that hand of power which they carried in the Parliaments by
commanding the service of many Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses to that great
Counsel.

Now began the frequent sending of Writs to the Commons, their assent not only
used in money, charge, and making Laws, for before all ordinances passed by
the King and Peers, but their consent in judgments of all natures, whether
civil or criminal: In proof whereof, I will produce some few succeeding
Presidents out of Record.

When Adam^^ that proud Prelate of Winchester, the Kings (...)
half brother had grieved the State by his daring power, he was exiled by
joint sentence of the King, the Lords and Commons, and this appears
expressly by the Letters sent to Pope Alexander the fourth, expostulating a
revocation of him from banishment, because he was a Churchman, and so not
subject to any censure, in this the answer is, Si Dominus Rex and Regni majores
hoc vellent, meaning his revocation, Communitas tamen ipsius ingressum in
Angli^m jam nullat^^us sustineret. The Peers subsigne this answer, with their
names and Petrus de Mountsord vice totius Communitatis, as speaker or proctor
of the Commons.

For by that style Sir John (...), Prolocutor, affirms (...)
under his Arms the deed of Intaile of the Crown by King Henry the 4. in the
8. year of his reign for all the Commons.

The banishment of the two Spencers, in the 15. of Edward the second, Prelate
C^mites and Barons et les autres Peers de la (...) and Commun^s de Roialme,
give consent and sentence to the revocation and ^eversement of the former
sentence the Lords and Commons accords and so it is expressed in the Roll.

In the first of Edward the 3. when Elixabeth the Widow (...)
of Sir John de Burgo, complained in Parliament, that Hugh Spencer the younger,
Robert Bold^^k and William Cliffe his instruments had by duresse forced her to
make a Writing to the King, whereby she was despoyled of all her inheritance
sentence is given for her in these words, (...) (...) avis est al (...) Counts
and Barons and autres grand^s and a tout C^mmin^^^^ de la terre, que le dit
escrip^ est fait contre (...) and (...) per agard de^ Parliam^dam sue elloques
al livre a la di^ (...).

In An. 4. Edward 3. it appears by a Letter to the Pope, that to the sentence
given against the Earl of Kent, the (...)
Commons were parties, as well as the Lords and Peers, for the King directed
their proceedings in these words, Comitibus, Magnatibus, Baronibus, and aliis
de Communitate, dicti Regni ad Parliamentum, illud congregatis injunximus ut
super ^is discernerent and judicarent, quod rati^ni et justitiae, conventret,
habere prae (...), solum Deum qui cum concordi unanimi sententia tanquam r^rum
crimmis (...) majestatis m^rti adjudicarent ejus sententia, etc.

When in the 50. years of Edward 3. the Lords had pronounced Parl. Ann. 5. E. 3.
the sentence against Richard Lions, otherwise then the C^mmons agreed they
appealed to the King, and had (...) and the sentence ^^tred to their desires.

When in the first year of Richard the second, William Par. Ann. 1. Richa. 2.
11. 3. 8. and 3, 5.
West^n, and John ^ennings, were arraigned in Parliament, for surrendering
certain ^ores of the Kings, the Commons were parties to the sentence against
them given, as appears by a Memorandum annexed to that Record. In the first
of Henry the 4. although the Commo^s refer by protestation, the pronouncing
of the sentence of deposition against King Richard the second unto the Lords,
yet are they equally interessed in it, as it appears by the Record, for there
are made Proctors or Commissioners for the whole Parliament, one B. one Abbot
one (...) Baron, and 2. Knights, and G^^y and Erpingham for the Commons, and to
in^er that because the Lords pronounces the sentence, the point of judgment
should be only theirs, were as absurd as to conclude, that no authority was
best in any other Commissioner of Oyer and Terminer. then in the person of that
man solely that speaks the sentence.

In 2. Henry 5. the Petition of the Commons imports no Rot. Parl. An. 2. H. 6.
^sse, then a right they had to act and assent to all things in Parliament, and
so it is answered by the King; and had not the adjournall Roll of the higher
house been left to the sole (...) of the Clarke of the upper House, who (...)
out of the neglect to observe due form, or out of purpose to obscure the
Commons right and to flatter the power of those he immediately served, there
would have been frequent examples of all times to clear this doubt, and to
preserve a just interest to the Commonwealth, and how conveniently it suites
with Monarchy to maintain this form, lest others of that well framed body
knit under one head, should swell too great and monstrous. It may be easily
thought for; Monarchy again may sooner groan under the weight of Aristocracie
as it once did, then under Democracie which it never yet either felt or feared.

FINIS.

