YOU are to take notice, That no Letters ought to be received by you, directed
unto any Parts beyond the Seas, unless the full Port for the same unto London
be paid; and also, the Port that must be paid from the Inland Post Office, unto
the Foreign Post Office, according to the Rates underwritten: Otherwise, the
Letters are commonly refused by the Foreign-Office, and lost, to the great
abuse of the People, and also of the Office: therefore you must receive for
Letters sent for the Foreign Post Office, besides the Port for London, the
Rates following, viz. For Letters, single, double, treble, quadruple, by
number, and so proportionably, for parcels of Goods by weight.
s. d. To Morlaix, St. Maloes, Caen, New Haven, upon which is to be written,
Port paid to Roan, by the hand of the Writer, and the Money. single 0 6 double
1 0 treble 1 6 ounce weight 1 6 To Bourdeaux, Rochel, Nants, Orleans, Byon,
Tours, and other places beyond Paris. Port paid to Paris single 0 9 double 1 6
treble 2 3 ounce weight 2 0 To Geneva, Marsellia, and all parts of Turkey,
Smirna, Constantinople, Aleppo. Port paid to Lions. single 1 0 double 2 0 of an
ounce 2 9 ounce weight 3 9 Letters to Rome, Venice, Geneva, Leghorn, Naples,
Messina, Millan, Mantova, by way of Mantova. Port paid to Mantua. single 0 9
double 1 6 treble 2 3 ounce weight 2 8 To Heidleburgh, Mentz, Franckfort. Port
paid to Cullen. single 1 0 double 2 0 treble 3 0 ounce weight 4 0 To Cullen.
Port paid to Antwerp. single 0 8 double 1 4 treble 2 0 ounce weight 2 0 To
Hamborough. Port paid to Antwerp. single 0 8 double 1 4 treble 2 0 ounce weight
2 0 To Noremberg, Gottenburgh, Koningsburgh, Dantzick, Lubeck, Lipswick,
Bremen, Stockholm. Port paid to Hamborough. single 1 0 double 2 0 treble 3 0
ounce weight 4 0 Letters by the way of Lions, to Rome, Leghorn, Genoua, and
other places of Italy. Port paid to Lions single 1 0 double 2 0 of an ounce 2 9
ounce weight 3 9 Letters for Bilboa, Madrid, Malaga, Cadiz, and other places of
Spain. Port paid to Byon. single 1 3 double 2 6 ounce weight 6 0

You may take in all other Foreign Letters unto any of the places beyond the
Seas hereafter named, without taking any Port for the same, save only the full
Port to London, which must always be paid before you receive them, and then the
Letters will go safe from the Inland-Office to the Foreign, and be sent
carefully, as they shall be directed, viz.

France.
Callis Diepe Bulloigne Abeville Amiens St. Omers Montreile Paris Roane
Flanders.
Dunkirk Ostend Lisle Ypre Courtray Ghent Bruxels Bridges Antwerpe.
Holland.
Sluis Flushing Middlebourg Amsterdam Rotterdam Delph Hague Leyden. Harlem
Utricht Parmerant Horn Encusen Maydenlick Alkemore Edam Mynekedam Schedam
Brover-haven Massensburg Gourcome Tergowe Grovenburgh. Dort Berkenupzon Bredagh
Wesell Mastricht Nimigen Treveere Zirickzee.

