HAving with as much delight as diligence, read over this excellent Discourse,
entitled, The Primitive practice for preserving Truth; and finding it richly
furnished with variety of learned and select Story, eminently useful for
common information against persecution merely for Conscience sake; I conceive
it very worthy of the Press.

John Bachiler

THE PRIMITIVE PRACTICE FOR PRESERVING TRUTH.

OR AN HISTORICAL NARRATION, Showing what course the PRIMITIVE Church
anciently, and the best Reformed Churches since have taken to suppress Heresy
and Schism.

AND Occasionally also by way of Opposition discovering the Papal and
Prelaticall courses to destroy and root out the same truth; and the judgments
of GOD which have ensued upon persecuting Princes and Prelates.

By Sir Simonds D' Ewes.

The second Impression, more exact then the former.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Pope's Head Alley.

TO THE READER.
JUDICIOUS READER,
THIS ensuing Discourse being penned by me about eight years since, not only
for recreation amidst my severer studies, but as a Preparative also, by which I
desired to fit my self, either for a voluntary exitement, or a necessary
suffering; I intended it only for a private use: For I then residing in the
County of Suffolk, which had newly groaned under the Prelaticall tyranny of
Bishop Wren, as did all other parts of his Diocese; did know that the Press
was then only open to matters of a contrary subject. But now upon the perusal
thereof, conceiving that it might be of some use, in respect of the many
distractions amongst us at this present, when a blessed Reformation is so near
the birth, and yet the Church seems to want strength to bring it forth, I was
content to yield to the publishing thereof. I did at first, purposely omit the
citations of those many and select Authorities, out of which this ensuing
Discourse was drawn, lest the margin thereby should have swollen to a greater
proportion then the Discourse it self, some whole Sections or Paragraphs being
almost entirely extracted out of the Records of this Kingdom: And I have
through the whole Tractat chiefly laid down the matter of fact out of Story,
not only extant in print, but yet remaining also in M. S. and have lest the
debate of the dogmaticall part of it, to those, whose calling and leisure is
more proper for it. My many present employments, both public and private, did
scarce permit me to supervise it, and to amend it in some few places, which
puts me almost out of all hope ever to transmit to posterity any one of those
several great and more necessary Works I had in part collected and prepared
(for the good and benefit of this Church and Kingdom) in the time of my
leisure and freedom.

S. D.

THE PRIMITIVE PRACTICE For preserving TRUTH.
SECTION I.
IT is the undoubted Mark or Brand of the Church Antichristian and Malignant,
to persecute; of the Church Christian Orthodox and truly Catholic, to be
persecuted: For the Truth, if it have but equal countenance and safety, will
not only prosper and flourish amongst the professors thereof, but will also in
due time, sometimes by a sudden power, profligate and trample upon Heresy, as
it did upon Pelagianisme, among the ancient Protestant Britains in Wales, about
the year of our Lord, 466. and sometimes by insensible degrees waste and wear
out falsehood, as it did the contagion of the Arrians amongst the Eastern
Christians; but Falsehood, Heresy, men's Inventions, burdensome Superstitions
intermixed with Gods Worship, and Idolatry, or any divine Creature-adoration,
consisting in men's bowing to, or toward Images, Crosses, Altars,
Communion-tables, Relics, or the like, can never be generally and publicly
established, without sharp and cruel persecution be exercised and practiced
upon the goods, estates, liberties and lives of the godly. The Pope and the
Turk have both upheld and propagated their abominations by the sword, although
no indifferent and impartial judgment can deny, but that the Romish
Antichrist, in this one particular, exceeds the Ottomanish Muphti, in that he
makes it a part of the Tridentine Faith, and so a Tenet of his Religion, to
persecute, destroy and root out all the Evangelical party, under the false and
personated names of Heretics: Whereas the Turk acknowledges this Truth, that
the Conscience neither can, nor ought to be compelled; and therefore they
permit the free exercise, not only of the Protestant Religion in all their
dominions, but of the Popish also, in many places of the same, whom yet they
justly abhor, as the Jews do also (led by the morality of the second
Commandment) for setting up Images in the places of their public Assemblies,
and committing Idolatry by adoring them.

SECT. II.
A Protestant Church, if it desire to intermix any superstitious Ceremonies or
Idolatrous actions, with the power and purity of the Gospel, must likewise be
enforced to borrow some part of the other Characters also from the Church
Malignant, by enforcing the observation of such additions with the persecution
of Gods children in their estates, goods, and liberties, equalling in many
respects the shedding of their bloods; and reckoned up together by the Author
of the Epistle to the Hebrews, for so many kinds or species of martyrdom.
There are in all parts of the world, amongst the very Christians themselves,
the greater number ignorant, profane and vicious, who neither regard to know
the truth, nor desire to suffer for it, but will always run with the
multitude, and be carried with the stream: They will of Protestants become
Papists to morrow, rather then lose either goods, life or liberty; of Papists
the next day Anabaptists with Sebastian Castellio, and James Arminius; of
Anabaptists the third day (if by that means they may escape danger, and rise to
preserment) become Turks or Abisens: For, doubtless, in running from truth to
falsehood, as in turning from the medium to an extreme, there is no essential,
but only a graduall difference. As Constantine filled the Empire with
Christians, so Julian with Atheists and Persecutors. The greater number with
holy King Edward in England, even Harding and Boner, among others for company,
embraced the Protestant truth; and as soon as he died, all again generally
licked up the old vomit under Queen Mary, whose bloody fires were scarce
quenched by her death, and the royal Scepter thoroughly grasped by her blessed
sister, but all again, for the most part, (as if Religion had been but a
fashion, which commonly deriveth its frenzy into the country by the Court)
changed with the new Prince, and especially the Churchmen, among whom, through
the whole Realm, not twenty in a thousand did stick to their infallible Head,
the Romish Antichrist.

SECT. III.
WHen learned and pious Luther lay on his deathbed, he Lutherus paulo ante
mortem, age^ cum Phil^ppo Melancthone, fatetur, in negotio Coenae^n mium esse
factum, etc. Dr Rainoldus prelectione 4a. in lib. Apocryphos, p. 53. Col. 1. Et
Orat. Isaac Bootii Vesalii de controversiis Sacramentariis Edit. Basilere Ao.
Dm. 1601. ad Calcem Polani Analys. in Ho^^seam, p. 405.
acknowledged his errors, which coming but newly out of darkness, had been
embraced by him amongst his many truths, and obtruded from him upon the Church
of God, especially those two monsters of Consubstantiation and Ubiquity; yet
(taking counsel rather of men then of Gods Word) for fear, lest if he
retracted them, the people would suspect the rest, and so fall back again by an
absolute recidivation to Popery, he counted it more safe to declare his
judgment in private, and to leave the rooting out of those weeds by insensible
degrees to his Disciples. To effect which, the French and Helvetian churches
did readily afterward afford the Germans diverse public conferences: But
Doctor Andreas, John Brentius, and other Pseudo-Lutherans, having sucked in the
poison of the Anabaptists (the Devils Master-engine in this latter age, with
the Jesuits, to restore Pelagianisme to the World) and having added those old
blasphemies that concern the advancement of man's free will above Gods grace, to
Luthers new Mass, as the Papists then, and still in a bitter scoff or
sarcasme call it, grew into so extreme an hatred against the maintainers of
Gods truth, both within and without Germany, as they became more bitter in
their invectives against them, then against the Papists themselves, and did
even then by their false and preposterous courses, threaten a ruin to
themselves, and the whole Evangelical party, which they have since most
miserably effected and brought to pass in a great part of the Christian world;
which drew the King of great Britain, in the year 1611. to remonstrate to the
united States of the lower Germany upon the death of James Arminius the
Anabaptist, or Pseudo-Lutheran, whom he calls the Enemy of God, and their
electing of Vorstius into his chair, whom he calls a blasphemer; that if they
did not in time prevent the growing of that pestilentiall Sect, it would in the
issue prove the utter ruin of their flourishing Commonwealth.

SECT. IV.
THe Electorall House of Saxonic, upon the devesting of that brave and pious
Prince John Frederick the true heir by Charles the fifth, and the investing of
the younger House, to usurp that honor, has ever since proved a greater
friend to the Popish party, then to the purer Churches of Christendom, of the
French and Helvetick confession. Miurice that usurped that Duchy and
Electorate upon the incaptivating of the said Duke John Frederick his Cousin,
first ruined the Princes of the Smalcaldick union, to which himself had
subscribed, and then casting an ambitious eye upon the Empire it self, broke
his faith with the Emperor that had raised him; and having patched up that
defection by the means of Eerdinand of Austria, King of Bohemia, afterward
settled in the Imperial Throne, he lastly perished by a violent death in a
pitched battle, sought against his fellow-Protestants, and left his brother
Augustus to succeed him. This new Electorall family aided the Leaguers in
France, against that victorious Prince, Henry the Great: They ruined and took
prisoner their Cousin, the Duke of Saxon Weymar, (the principal branch of
their House) in the Castle of Goth, in the time of Maximilian the Emperor, they
put in their far-fetcht pretentions to the Duchy of Cleeve and Juliers in our
days, and joined their Arms with the Archduke Leopold, against the Marquess
of Brandenburg, and the Duke of Newburg, the indubitate heirs thereof, whose
right also was asserted by the whole Protestant party besides of Christendom.
These were the fruits of their miserable errors in doctrine brought in and
established by James Andreas Osiander, and their fellow Pseudo-Lutherans,
retaining still their Images and Altars in the places of their public
worship, although they confess them to minister matter of offense to many of
the better learned, and matter of superstition to most of the ignorant
multitude. Nay, hence in the year 1580. did the Pseudo-Lutherans proceed to
enforce the Ministers of Saxony to subscribe, amongst other Articles, to that
monstrous error of the Ubiquity of Christ's body, exploded with just derision by
Bellarmine, and all learned Papists: And from enforced subscription (which is
ever for the most part the forerunner of persecution) they fell in the year
1591. upon the death of Duke Christian, the best of all the Electors of the
aforesaid Augustus line and race, to shed the innocent blood of that brave
Gentleman and faithful servant of the State, Paulus Krelius, Chancellor of
that Duchy, for no other delict, but because he was a known friend to the
purest doctrine, and a stout Protector of those whom they styled Calvinists.
After which followed the suspension and imprisonment of Urbanus Pierius,
Professor of Wittenberg, and of diverse other learned and godly Ministers; yea,
within a year or two after, such was the furious virulencie of the Inhabitants
of the Town of Leipsich, led by the Scholars of the Universitie there, (who
have since, in these later Germane wars, fully tasted of the divine
indignation) as they fell upon the houses and movables of such as embraced the
Helvetick Confession, despoiled them of their goods, and committed diverse other
outrages upon them. But most fatal have been the effects of this last Duke of
Saxonie's hovering neutrality in matter of Religion, when at first he refused
to be comprised in the Protestant union, entered into by the Germane Princes in
the year 1617. for their necessary safety, when secondly he sided the year
following, with the Emperor Matthias, against the Protestant Bohemians. And
thirdly, when in the year 1620. he joined his Armies with those of the
Emperor Ferdinand the second, (that but a few years before lay hid in
obscurity, in his slender Patrimony at Gratz.) and so proved one of the chief
causes of the utter subversion (for ought we yet see) of the Religion and
Liberties of Germany. For had not Frederick the fifth, Prince Elector Palatine,
rather aimed at the upholding of true Religion in Bohemia, then at any
ambitious ends of his own, he had never hazarded the peace, plenty, and quiet
he enjoyed at Heidelberg, to have accepted that controversall crown at Prague,
and to have entered that Kingdom in a hostile manner, which for above the space
of twelve months before had been filled with war and misery.

SECT. V.
I Do not find that any higher or greater punishment was inflicted upon
Heretics themselves in the Primitive times, though they remained obstinate
after all other means used for convincing them of their errors, then exile or
banishment. St. Austin writing to Proculianus the Donatist, acknowledges such
as err from the truth, must be drawn home by mild instruction, and not by
cruel enforcement. And when Bishop Itacius, in the year 383. being a man of a
turbulent spirit, and fierce nature, had caused Priscillian the Heretic, and
diverse of his followers to be put to death; he was first condemned for that
bloody act by Thcognistus: And St. Ambrose afterward meeting with some Bishops
at Triers, that had partaken with Itacius in that cruel execution, would not
so much as entertain any communion with them. Theodosius the Emperor, in the
Synod of Constantinople, in stead of blood and irons, caused a public dispute
to be afforded the Arrians themselves, although they had been before condemned
by the Council of Nice: The like merciful provision did Charles the Great,
and Jews the Good in France, ordain for such as were counted Sectaries in
their times. Neither did those three hundred and eighteen Fathers in the first
Nicene Council, those six hundred and thirty in that of Chalcedon, or those
hundred and fifty in that of Constantinople use any other weapons against the
same Arrians, Nestorians, and Macedonians, then the Word of God; nor stirred
they up, or permitted the Christian Magistrate in their days to punish them by
death. Paulus Aquiliensis, and Cedrenus, do also both of them report, that
when the Emperor Justinus used clemency toward the very Arrian Heretics,
Theodoricus the King of Italy being infected with the same poison, did
notwithstanding, led by that example, suffer the Orthodox Christians to have
the free exercise of their Religion in all his Dominions. We shall need no
further examples to prove this truth, when it is confessed by one of the most
learned and best Romanists of our age, that there is no approved example in all
the Monuments of Antiquity, of any execution done upon the Sectaries of those
times; but that the Church of God did always abhor the shedding of blood in
matters that merely concern Religion, Jac. Aug. Thuanus Prooem. in Histor. p. 5.

SECT. VI.
IT is likewise contrary to the practice of the best Princes, and the wisest
States of this latter age of the world, to make matter of heresy it self a
capital crime. Francis the first of that name, King of France, having decreed
a persecution against the poor Protestants of Merindoll, and Cabrieres, and
being informed by William Bellay, Lord Langay, Governor of the Province, that
they were harmless men, very laborious in their callings, just in their
dealings, loyal to their Prince, charitable to the poor, and very frequent in
their prayers to God, and their innocence being likewise cleared in a great
measure by Cardinal Sadolet himself, he caused them to be freed from further
persecution, till being falsely informed by one Minerius, a turbulent fellow,
that there were fifteen thousand of them up in arms in rebellion, he rashly
gave them over to the fury of their enemies, yet not as Heetiques, which he
always accounted them, but as Traitors, as he was then misinformed of them.
In Germany, Ferdinand the first, taught by the error of Charles the fifth his
elder Brother, found no such means to make his Government happy, and his
Empire flourishing, as to decree the liberty of Religion. Which course the good
Emperor Maximilian his Son following, dyed as happy as he lived victorious.
The Venetian State endure no Inquisitors in matters of Religion, nor if any of
their Subjects be accused of Heresy, do they suffer it to be questioned
before any of the Clergy alone, who are thirsty after blood, but before them
jointly together, with their Civil Judges. The first Monarch in England that
made matter of Religion, a capital crime, by a public Act or Statute, was the
usurper Henry the fourth, who having by the persuasion and assistance of Thomas
Arundell, that traitor, Archbishop of Canterbury, and his fellow-Prelates,
deposed and murdered his lawful Sovereign, Richard the second, to curry
favor with those bloody Canniballs, was forced to yield to the murdering of
Gods Saints: since whose time the blood of the Martyrs in England, have proved
the seed of the Church, although by the short reign of that Kingdoms
unfortunate Mary, their number comes far short of those in France, and the
seventeene Provinces; in which two Dominions, within the space of little more
then five years, the curious searcher may find by diligent inquisition, that
Gods truth was sealed under Charles the ninth of France, and Philip the second
of Spain, with the blood of near upon two hundred thousand Martyrs, amongst
whom were slaughtered diverse great and eminent personages of both sexes: a
cruelty that very Mahumetans do abhor; as it appeared by that which the
Ambassadors sent from Abas-Meriza the Persian Sultan, to the Emperor Rodolph,
in the year 1604. did allege to justify the merciful Government of that
Empire, to wit, that all Christians had free liberty of Conscience in all their
Sovereigns Dominions, and therefore they exhorted his Imperial Majesty to
join in a firm league with him against their common enemy the Turk.

SECT. VII.
AS it is against the practice of the Primitive Church, the course held by the
Christian Emperors, and the observation of the wisest Princes and States of
the latter age, though otherwise Pontifician, to make matter of heresy a
capital crime, to enforce the Conscience, and to put to death, for the cause
of Religion merely, so it is against the Rules of charity and reason.

First, It is against the Rules of charity, if we had no other light to guide
us, but the most wise answer of Englands last matchless Edward, being then but
a child, when he was pressed to yield his assent to the burning of an
Heretic; What (said he) shall I send him to hell? By which he truly
intimated, that whereas in all other offenses, the Malefactors are punished
with death, because it may be hoped they have repented the sin; but to
destroy an Heretic before conviction, is to be the Devils Catour, and to send
him in provision even to Hell it self. For the very pertinacious holding of an
Heresy is agreed on by all sides to be a damnable sin, and then the cutting
them off in that sin, is to be the immediate Instrument of their perdition.
This does that virulent Romanist or monster of men, Nicholas Harpsfeild, in his
Wiclevian History openly boast of, Cap. 16. p. 717. That those (blessed
Champions of Christ whom he calls) Heretics, did in the fires that consumed
their bodies, taste the first fruits of the eternal fire they endured
afterward. On the other side, if they suffer not but for fear of death, hope
of preferment, or other base ends, turn from one Religion to another,
especially from the truth to error and Idolatry, without instruction, or
reasonable conviction, they only dissemble outwardly; as the Moors of Gran
ido did under that bloody Philip the second of Spain, who being enforced to be
present at the Mass in the morning, practiced their own Mahumetanisme in the
evening; or else their conscience being shipwracked by their Apostasy before
conviction, with Francis Spira they are swallowed up of despair, or with Peter
Espinae, Archbishop of Lions, of the Henetick faction in Henry the fourths time
of France, with lust and Epicurisme, who practiced that emasculating sin with
his own sister. The Jews in England from Willian the firsts time, till the
eighteenth year of Edward the first, were the only Usurers of the Realm, and
brought in large contributions and tallages to the Kings under whom they lived,
and enjoyed here the freedom of their consciences: At their deaths their whole
Estates escheated to the King, which their next heirs commonly redeemed for
one full third part of three: But to encourage them to turn Christians, it was
appointed in the Assize, by which they were governed under their own proper and
peculiar Justices, that if any Jew dyed, whose heir became a Christian, he
should inherit all the estate, of his Ancestors, without any further sine or
composition with the Prince. The Master of the Rolls-house in London, and other
places in other Cities of the Kingdom were appointed for the entertainment of
those Christian converts, and were thence called Domus Conversorum: All which
may clearly be gathered out of those Records of the Exchequer, commonly called,
The great Pipe Rolls, and the Communi^ Rolls: By which allurements some of
the Jews out of malice to their fellows, or having committed some penal
offense to escape the punishment practiced amongst themselves, or else for lucre
sake, (the sin of avarice being connaturall to most of them) were baptized and
became Christians outwardly, without any due instruction in the Christian faith
beforehand, and being convinced also that the Papists adoring or bowing to,
and toward Images, Altars, Relics, and the like trumpery, was absolute
Idolatry against the second Commandment, they proved, as commonly the Jews
and Christians at this day do, when they turn Turks, the wretchedest varlets in
the whole Kingdom. What were the poor Indians wont to say, when to avoid the
Spaniards extreme and inhumane cruelties, they were drawn to their Masses, but
that since they became Christians, they had learned to swear and drink? It was
an excellent and just sentence which one of the Grand Seignienrs pronounced
against diverse hundreds of Christians, that falling down-before him, made
declaration, that they had deserted their Sacra, and given up their names to
Mahomet, he inquired of them why they did so; and they confessing plainly, that
they did it to be freed from those many taxes, contributions and oppressions
which they before groaned under; he rejected their enforced conversion for
outward ends, and commanded their taxes and levies to be continued. This
Heroic action of the Turkish Monarch, was not much short of that policy of
one of the ancient Christian Emperors, who having his Army mixed of Christians
and Pagans, and desiring to discover who of the first were little better then
those of the latter, made, like another Jehu: a public Declaration for the
restoring of Paganism, upon which, diverse of the Christian Commanders showing
themselves forward to desert the truth, and to follow the stream and time, he
presently reproved and cashiered them; alleging, that all such were unworthy
to serve any Prince that had proved unfaithful to that divine Majesty, by
which Princes rule.

SECT. VIII.
AS it is against the Dictamen of Christian Charity, to make matter of Religion
a capital crime, or to enforce the conscience, without a full and clear
conviction, from the profession of one Religion to another, or to any new
burdensome Ceremonies, to be superadded in the public worship of God,
although the Religion it self remain the same it was before in the general; so
it is against the rules of Reason it self. This was confessed by Henry 3. of
France, one of the most impotent Princes that ever swayed that Scepter, and
most inveterate enemy that ever the Protestants had, having been instructed to
hate, betray, and persecute them, by Katherine de Medices his bloody mother,
even from his very Cradle; yet when James Clement a Jesuited Monk had sheathed
a knife in his bowels, and that he saw himself near the minute in which he
was to give an account of all his cruelties to the supreme Judge of Heaven and
earth, he made an effectual speech to the chief Commanders of his Army, being
most of them Romanists: To acknowledge and obey the King of Navar ( then a
Protestant) as their lawful Sovereign, and the lineall heir of the French
Crown, and to know this undoubted truth for the future; That Religion which is
distilled into the souls of men by God himself, cannot he enforced by man. The
same truth likewise, and almost in these very words, did the Lord Brederode,
and the other Protestants of the lower Germany allege for their just excuse in
their united Apology, published in the year 1566. and further added; That if
the Papists did conceive their Religion to be the truth, they should in sieed
of blood, fines, imprisonments and exilings, follow the seasonable advice of
wise Gamaliel, and try a while, whether the Protestants separation from them
were of God or not; for otherwise, if by force and tyranny they did compel
them to profess and practice those actions in Gods worship which they
accounted abominable, and did also restrain them from performing those holy
duties toward God, wherein they were convinced the truth of his service
consisted, their consciences must needs be shipwracked and undone, and so in
stead of making them new Converts, they should leave them Atheists and
Libertines. This very objection also (in the year 1572) did Katherine de
Medices of Florence, then Queen mother of France, (though she little practiced
the truth of the Consequence) make in the Treaty of marriage of Francis de
Valois her youngest son, with Queen Elizabeth of England. The great rub
pretended on both sides, (though the match was never really intended by either
Queen) was matter of Religion; in which that glorious Virgin Monarch, having
given her Ambassador express instructions, not to yield so far as that the
Duke of Alenzon should be permitted the celebration of his Mass in private.
What Mr. Walsingham, says the Queenmother upon his next audience, Will your
Mistress have my Son turn Atheist, and profess no Religion at all? For with
your Church he cannot join, till he be further instructed; and you will not
suffer him to continue those Sacra by which he has hitherto served God, what
shall he turn Heathen till you have converted him? Though this unfortunate
Lady did by this her wise answer discover the true madness of all persecutors,
yet did she not forbear to bath her cruel hands for many years after, in the
blood of Gods Saints, and caused many, as St. Paul witnesses of himself,
before his conversion, to blaspheme, by their ejuration of the known truth, and
their subscriptions to the Popish trumperies; of which, some that persisted in
Papistry, turned prodigious sinners and libertines; and others with the King of
Navar, and Prince of Conde, as soon as they got loose, returned to the known
truth. The heroic answer of that brave Prince, John Frederick Elector, and
Duke of Saxony, is worthy to be engraven in leters of gold on pillars of
brass, who being taken prisoner by the Emperor, Charles the fifth, in the year
1547. and threatened with present death, except he would renounce and yield up
his Electorate and Duchy to his false and treacherous Cousin Maurice, and
become a Romanist, yielded readily to all the former conditions, but absolutely
refused the latter: And when in the year following, that wicked interim was
yielded unto by all the Princes of Germany; some being driven by fear, and
others drawn on by flattery, which was, That Popery should be restored in all
places, till a general Council were called, and further order taken for the
liberty of Religion; This godly Prince, though Ces^rs captive, could never be
drawn to subscribe to it; and when those two subtle Perenots, Nicholas
Cardinal Granvellan the Father, and Anthony the Bishop of Arras his son, had
used many arguments to persuade him, What (says he) would you draw me to? I
am convinced the Religion I now live in to be the truth, and should I outwardly
make profession of any other, I should but dissemble with God and the Emperor,
and so draw near to that unpardonable sin against the Holy Ghost: with which
answer, Charles the fifth himself was so pleased, as he more respected and
honored the Duke ever after. What this pious Prince foresaw and avoided, too
many by lamentable experience have found true, and repented, who having abjured
the truth for fear, and felt but a while the horror of an afflicted and wounded
conscience, have hasted to those Popish Officers, as diverse in England did in
Queen Mary's time, where their abjurations and recantations remained, and
having gotten sight of them, have rent them into many pieces, and joyfully
embraced, not only their Irons, but the stake it self, as a far more easy
suffering then what they before felt and endured. Had Charles the 9th of France
but followed the good counsel was openly given him in the Parliament at St.
Germans the first year of his reign, That the differences of Religion neither
ought, nor ever could be composed by blood and cruelty, but by Gods Word and
seasonable conferences, he had never made his reign and memory so infamous to
posterity as now it is, nor drawn the divine vengeance upon himself, by
shedding so much innocent blood as afterward he did. For as diverse were
butchered by him in that barbarous massacre at Paris, in the year 1572. so
Henry de Clermont (commonly surnamed Bourbon) Prince of Conde, was some days
after the general slaughter of the Protestants, committed there, appointed by
him to die, but his pardon being obtained by Elizabeth (a name, it seems, only
proper to gracious and excellent soveraignesses) his Queen, one of the
daughters of the good Emperor Maximilian, (although Conde knew it not) he
comes to him, and tells him, of three things he must elect one: either to hear
Mass, to die, or to suffer perpetual imprisonment; the young Prince no whit
abashed, makes him this sudden and brave answer: God forbid, Sir, that I should
choose the first, but of the two latter, I am ready to submit to that which
your Highness shall appoint. There is as rare a story of the Lady Jane Gray,
eldest daughter of Henry Gray, Duke of Suffolk, not much inferior in birth and
extraction to Conde himself, by her mothers side, who was grandchilde and
co-heire to Edward the 4th, King of England, related by a Gentleman, and a
Courtier, as it seems (for I find not his name) under Queen Mary, in the year
1553. who dined at Mr. Partriges house within the Tower with her, whilst she
remained a prisoner there, which narration well deserving to be transmitted to
posterity, does here ensue out of a Manuscript History of a great part of that
Queens time, the very Autograph it self being in my Library, written by the
said Gentleman with his own hand, some few words being added, which were at
first casually omitted by his haste, or inadvertency in penning of it, and some
other words changed and written according to the manner of speech now used: On
Tuesday, the 29th of August, I dined at Partriges house with my Lady Jane, etc.
After that we fell in discourse of matters of Religion, and she asked what he
was that preached at Paul's on Sunday before, and so it was told her to be
one:::::::: I pray you (quoth she) had they Mass in London? Yea forsooth
(quoth I) in some places: It may be so (quoth she) it is not so strange as the
sudden conversion of the late John Dudley Duke of Northumberland.
Duke, for who would have thought, said she, he would have so done? It was
answered her, Perchance he thereby hoped to have had his pardon. Pardon!
(quoth she) Woe worth him, he has brought me and our stock in most miserable
calamity and misery by his exceeding ambition; but for the answering that he
hoped for life by his turning, though other men be of that opinion, I utterly
am not: for what man is there living, I pray you, although he had been
innocent, that would hope for life in that case, being in the field against the
Queen in person as General, and after his taking so hated and evil spoken of
by the Commons, and at his coming into prison so wondered at, as the like was
never heard by any man's time; who can judge that he should hope for pardon,
whose life was odious to all men? But what will ye more? like as his life was
wicked and full of dissimulation, so was his end thereafter: I pray God I, nor
no friend of mine die so; should I, who am young, and in the flower of my
years forsake my faith for the love of life? Nay, God forbid; much more he
should not, whose fatal course, although he had lived his just number of
years, could not have long continued: But life was sweet, it appeared so he
might have lived, you will say, he did not care how; indeed the reason is
good: for he that would have lived in chains to have his life, belike would
leave no means unattempted: but God be merciful to us, for he says, Whosoever
denies him before men, he will not know him in his Fathers Kingdom. How
justly may the masculine constancy of this excellent Lady, whose many virtues
the pens of her very enemies have acknowledged, rise up in judgment against
all such poor spirits, who for fear of death, or other outward motives, shall
deny God and his truth, and so crown the Trophies of the Antichristian or
mongrill adversaries by their lamentable apostasy. For what she here spoke
Christianly, she within a few months after performed constantly, her life
being taken from her on the 12th day of February, 1553. having lived first to
see Mr. Harding her fathers Chaplain revolted to Antichrist, to whom she wrote
an effectual Letter of admonition and reproof, published by Mr. Fox in his
Acts and monuments, p. 1291. not unworthy the perusal of the ablest Christians
and greatest Doctors.

SECT. IX.
AS it is against the dictamen of reason, to make matter of Religion a capital
crime, so it is against the rules of policy it self, in respect that heresy
and falsehood, which would in time die of themselves, are thereby increased and
propagated, and so the end for which force and violence are used, is no ways
obtained thereby. This was verified in the death of Prisciliian the heretic
of old, by which his followers were mightily increased, and having before but
reverenced him as a holy man, did afterward adore him as a Martyr. The present
age verifies it in the death of Michael Servetus the Spaniard, and other
Anabaptists, though most necessarily cut off by the sword of the Magistrate,
for their blasphemous opinions and lawless Tenets, tending to the utter
subversion of all Civil government. The Anabaptists in their Dialogues,
published in the English tongue in Queen Mary's days, though they craftily
withdrew many of their Anarchicall Tenets (agreeing almost verbatim with the
works since penned by James Arminius, and the latter Anabaptists) do extol
that Servetus as a Prophet of the Lord; and their numbers are at this day so
increased, as they constitute or make a considerable party in diverse parts of
Christendom. But those cursed enemies of the truth, that think by persecuting
it, to abolish it, as they fight against God himself in so doing, so have they
heretofore, and shall still in despite of all their devilish policy for the
time to come increase and propagate the same. This, if all other Instances
wanted, would sufficiently appear in that famous example of an English
Schoolmaster, a most zealous Papist in the days of King Edward the sixth, who
afterward in the beginning of Queen Mary's government, frequenting the fires
of some of the Martyrs, was so convinced with hearing what they spoke, and
seeing how cheerfully they suffered, as he himself relinquishing the former
ignorance and idolatry he had so long embraced, at last witnessed the truth
with his own blood. Not he only, but many thousands also besides, were
doubtless enabled by the clear shining of those fires, to discern the
foulness of those mysteries of darkness, under which they had been so long
held captive. And after her short Reign (infamoused by so much bloodshed) was
expired, it facilitated the way for her royal sister Elizabeth to restore the
truth at an easy rate. When the Executioner came behind John Hus, to kindle
the pile that encompassed him: Come hither my friend, (said he) and kindle it
here before, for had I feared what thou bring, I had not appeared at this
Stake to day. His death brought so incredible progress to the true Church in
Bohemia, as did also that of Jerome of Prague his Contemporanie, that their
bloody persecutors had just cause within a few years after their decease, to
acknowledge their own error in having hastened their ends. As fruitful a
seed-time to the Church in France, proved the death of Annas Burgus, a Senator
of Paris, in the year 1559. under Francis the second. A man he was so virtuous
and innocent in his life, as some of the very enemies of the Truth labored his
delivery when he was in prison, and so resolute and cheerful in his death, as
it encouraged thousands in that Kingdom, in the constant profession of the
Reformed Religion. What better success had all the bloody executions of
Ferdinand de Toledo, that merciless Duke of Alva, and of his new erected
Bishops in the lower Germany, but that the Gospel at the last got the victory
over hell, and all the powers of darkness? Neither indeed could those cruel
Inquisitors have expected other issue, had they but truly considered what
Religion had been; and that Princes and States may command the bodies, but not
the souls and consciences of men; Which having been once persuaded by
Instruction and Information to embrace and believe any opinions, though
heretical, and therefore much more the Truth it self, can never be driven
from them, but by the same means of a further and more clear Instruction. The
godly have ever looked upon chains, prisons, racks, and fires, as the trial
and reward of their faith, more fearing to do evil, then to suffer evil,
well knowing that they shall neither suffer more, nor their cruel enemies be
able to inflict more, then God shall turn to his own endless glory, and their
everlasting good. Did the Heathen Poet desire to be sent back to the Mines (a
life more tedious then that of the Gallyes) rather then he would commend a few
bad Verses, contrary to his judgment? Could Epicurus, that impure Philosopher,
say of a wise man, that if he were scorched in Phalaris Bull, he would not be
moved with it, but only cry out, Dulce est, and ad me non attinet? Or the
young Stoic in Gellius, to maintain the Apathie of his Sect, neither groan
nor frown in the midst of a burning fever? And shall we think that Gods
Saints who have their reason heightened and irradiated by grace, and their
souls immoveably founded upon a lively and living faith, will fear to lose
their estates, liberties, and lives for the Truths sake? No doubtless, but as
the Gold is tried by the Furnace, and cleared from the dross, so in time of
persecution they shall be discerned from all hypocrites, Atheists, Libertines,
and Time-servers whatsoever.

SECT. X.
BUt oh that Princes and Great ones would shake off those fleshflyes and
Sycophants, who tell them the contrary, and know the Truth to be that nothing
can more infamouze their reigns and memories to Posterity, nothing bring more
inevitable ruin to their Persons, nothing finally prove so deadly a
Consumption amongst their posterity, as to enforce the Consciences of their
Subjects, by fines, imprisonments, subscriptions, recantations, depauperations,
and death. Charles the fifth having obtained the Imperial Chair, by the money
and means of Henry the eighth of England, was the most potent Emperor that
ever Germany had, as long as he maintained the peace of Religion, but having
yielded to the Popes instigations, and prospered a while in his intended
extirpation of the Truth, he found at last by experience what his brave and
valiant General Castaldus had foretold him; That these violent proceedings
would in the end prove fatal to himself; For having first fled away at
midnight in a cold and rainy season from Onspruch, for fear of the Protestant
Army, he was afterward (in stead of settling his son Philip in his own
Chair, which he had fully intended) feign to surrender up the Empire to
Ferdinand his Brother, who for diverse months before had entered into a secret
league with the Protestant Princes of Germany, and so having lived a few years
after in a despised and disconsolate solitude, heat last ended his life very
ingloriously. His son Philip the second, the most inveterate enemy of the
Gospel that ever lived, did not only set up Shambles and Butcheries for Gods
Saints in most of his own large Dominions by his Inquisitors, but continually
aided the Rebels in France, England, and Ireland, against their lawful
Sovereigns, and plotted to invade all other Protestant Dominions in
Christendom, that so at last by one general carnage of them all, he and his
holy Father the Pope, might have shared the Christian world by a double
Monarchy of the Church and Empire between them. But did this bloody Prince
prosper in these his ambitious and cruel designs? Certainly, nothing less;
for what got he by his invading France by land, England and Ireland by Sea, and
by his large Pensions conferred on the traitors and secret enemies of either
State; but that in the issue having wasted about thirty millions of money upon
those fruitless designs, and not gained a foot of ground in either of those
Realms, he lost a great part of the Seventeen Provinces, with whom having
broken the Oath solemnly sworn to them upon his Inauguration, they by
assistance of England, and France, freed themselves from his unjust oppression
and tyranny? Neither did the divine Justice let him so escape, but raised a
fire in his own house, so as the Jest of Augustus touching Herod, might well
be verified in him, That it had been better to have been his swine then his
son. For whereas he had issue by Mary his first wife, the daughter of John
the third of that name, King of Portugal, one only son called Charles, a
Prince of admirable towardliness; he during the life of Englands unhappy Mary,
his second wife, treated a marriage for his said son with Elizabeth the
eldest daughter of Henry the second of France; During the treaty Mary his wife
dying, he marries the Princess Elizabeth himself, intended for his son:
they both often in private after never forgetting their old affection, lament
their unhappy loss each of other: the son also distasts his Fathers
cruelties, and the butcheries of his Inquisitors. This enraged his jealous
Father, who having in the year 1568. first imprisoned him, within a few days
after poisoned him in a dish of broth. His Mother in Law followed him within a
few months after, sent out of the world by the same kind hand and means, (say
the French Writers) the violence of the poison causing her to miscarry also by
an abortion. And then was Philip the Father put to seek out a fourth wife, and
having married Anne the daughter of Mary, his own natural sister, he had issue
by her, Ferdinand and James, both cut off by death in their Infancy, and Philip
who being the only issue of this incestuous Match, lived to inherit his
Fathers Dominions, though not the full measure of his cruelties, having been
perhaps forewarned by his sad and loathsome end, to pursue a more mild and
peaceable Government. Rodolph the second of that name, Emperor of Germany, not
following the steps of the wise Maximilian his Father, but of the foresaid
Philip his Brother in Law, sought by all secret and hostile means to enervate
and destroy Religion in the Empire. What got he by it, but to have the curse of
the Scripture to fall upon him; That the Elder Brother should serve the
younger? for Matthias the Archduke of Austria, raising an Army in the year
1608. and joining his Forces with those of the oppressed Protestants in
Bohemia, hemmed up his brother Rodolph in Prague, got the Kingdom of Hungary
from him in possession, the Empire in reversion, and left him only the robes
and complements of Majesty; which notorious affront he did not long over-live,
nor ever had the means or power to revenge.

SECT. XI.
IF we pass out of Spain and Germany, from the House of Austria into France,
to consider the sad successes of the Princes of the Valesian line, upon their
hatred and persecution of Religion, we shall see so many instances of Gods
just indignation against them, as they may not only leave to all posterity a
just ground of admiration, but save us the labor also of searching any further
back into the elder Histories of Gods judgments powered out on the persecuting
Emperors in the Primitive times. Henry the second of France, was meanly
married to Katherine de Medices, the Niece of Pope Clement the seventh, during
the life of Francis the Dolphine, his elder brother, afterward poisoned. That
prudent Prince, Francis the first, his Father deceasing, he succeeded him in
his Throne and Purple, and swayed the French Scepter diverse years, with much
tranquillity and happiness, till loathing the coiture of his Queen, unfit
indeed for a Princes bed, he grew highly enamoured on Pictavia of Valence, a
woman of exquisite beauty and good extraction: with whom he long after lived
in continual advowtrie, and was by her enticed to the persecution and
slaughter of the Protestants, in the year 1553. that so by the confiscation of
their lands and goods, she might enrich her self and her kindred. This
persecution set a period to all his former victories, and was followed the next
year with the loss of the City of Senis in Italy to the Spaniard, the death
of that gallant old General Leo Strozzi, by a base hand, and the overthrow of
the French Army by James de Medices. In the year 1556. the violence of
persecution was again renewed against the Professors of the Truth, and the very
next year following, as before, God again gave up the French Army to the
slaughter of the Spaniards, and the Dutch, at the fiege and battle of St.
Quintins, in which there were about 3000. slain upon the place, and many of
them signal men, and the Town soon after taken in by assault, Annas Duke of
Memorancie himself, the Constable of France, Gasper de Colignie, Earl of
Caestilion, Admiral of France, the Marshall of St Andrew, the Duke of
Longevile, and a number of other great Peers were taken prisoners. In sum,
the loss and slaughter was so great and fatal to the French, as it well-neer
equalled that victory obtained by the Duke of Bourbon, at the battle of Pavia
in Italy, against Francis the first his Father; yet Henry the second still
shuts his eyes against the cause of all these losses, and having his heart
already cauterized by lust, he not only caused the godly to be committed to the
flames, but would needs view their torments himself, as a pleasing spectacle,
and had conspired and combined with Philip the second of Spain, his new Son
in Law, for the utter ruin and final subversion of Geneva: Nay, but a few
hours before his death, in the year 1559. Lodowick Faber, and Annas Burgus,
two Senators of Paris, because they had spoken a little freely for the
innocence and piety of the Protestants in the open Senate, were imprisoned upon
his express command in the Bastile in the same City by Gabriel Earl of
Mongomery, one of the Captains of his Guard; and the persecution against all
others of the same profession grew hot and furious, when the King upon the 29th
of June the same year, running at Tilt with that very Earl of Mongomery, and
near the very Baslile, where the Senators remained prisoners, was struck with a
splinter of Mongomeries spear through his eye into his brain, and never had
the happiness to speak any one word after, though he survived the wound a few
days, or to acknowledge his former lust and cruelty. Had the Papists but such
an instance of Gods immediate providence in vindicating their cause, we should
soon hear of one true miracle amidst so many false and adulterate. But if we
further look to Gods hand that followed this Prince in his posterity, it will
yet seem the greater Miracle; for of five sons he had, all except one, died
without lawful issue to survive them, and three of them by violent deaths, and
in his posterity ended the Valesian line, the Crown devolving thereupon to the
royal branch of Clermont, commonly called Bourbon, whom his sons had most
bitterly hated and persected. Of all his five daughters, three died issuless,
and the eldest that had issue was cut off by poison. Nay, his very Bastard son,
Henry of Engolisme, a great actor amongst others in the massacre of Paris,
perished also by the stab of Philip Altovit a Florentine, his old enemy, in the
year, 1586. during the reign of Henry the third his brother.

SECT. XII.
FOr Charles the ninth (third son of Henry the second aforesaid) that succeeded
Francis the second his brother, in the Kingdom of France, in the year 1560.
had he continued his reign with as much mercy and wisdom as he began it, or
followed the grave and seasonable advice of Michael Hospitalius his Chancellor
in his latter years, as well as he did in his former, he had in all likelihood
lived as virtuously as he died miserably. He had scarce reigned two years in
peace and plenty, when Katherine de Medices his mother, desiring to vest and
settle the Regencie in her self, by raising combustions in the Realm, began to
persuade her son to revive and renew those persecutions against the Protestants
which his father had begun; she reconciled her self to Francis Lorainer, Duke
of Guise, whom but a little before she had justly feared and hated, being a
secret enemy to Jews de Clermont, Prince of Conde: He and the Marshall of St
Andrew having gained Annas de Memorancy, Constable of France to their party,
conspired all together for the utter ruin of the truth. The Protestants in the
mean, seeing the King in his Infancy, to be held captive, as it were, by this
Triumvirate, take up Arms by the Queenmothers own instigation, to maintain the
Kings Edict of Pacification, published in the year 1561. and commonly called
The Edict of January. The year following, by the instigation of the same
Triumvirate, not only the Queen Mother, but Anthony de Clermont (usually
surnamed Bourbon) King of Navar also, (who yet died a Protestant) was drawn on
to assail the said Protestants by open force, they in the mean time filling the
Queen-mothers ears with these vain flatteries, that she should soon see the
utter ruin of all the Heretics in France; from which time that goodly
kingdom, so rich, peaceable and flourishing, for near upon forty years
together, (some short times of truce and peace being interposed) was filled
with cruelties, ravages, ravishments, bloodshedding, battles, sires,
slaughters, and all other calamitous desolations that accompany intestine and
civil broiles; in the issue of all which, the Protestants being increased in
their strength and numbers, obtained a more firm and advantageous peace then
ever they had before enjoyed: whereas those three Incendiaries of all these
miseries perished within a few years after, by the just judgment of God, in
the very act of their hostile pursuements of his children: The Marshall of
Saint Andrew was slain at the battle of Dreux, Annas de Memorancie under the
very walls of Paris, and Francis Lorainer, Duke of Guise, was pistolled by John
Poltrot, at the siege of Orleance. King Charles seeing that open force could
not destroy the truth, nor root out the Professors thereof, about two years
before the hellish massacre began at Paris, and continued to the perpetual
infamy of France in diverse other Cities in that Realm, held a secret Council
in the Castle of Blois with Katherine de Medices his mother, Alexander and
Hercules (called also Henry and Francis) his two brothers, and Henry Lorainer,
son and heir of the before pistolled Duke Francis, Duke of Guise; by what means
they might best draw the Protestants into their toil to destroy and murder
them. The same Council was held again by King Charles in the house of
Hieronimo de Gondy at St. Clou, and the time and order of the bloody marriage
banquet to be served in at the nuptials of the King of Navar, with the Lady
Margaret his sister, was there agreed upon, and resolved of, almost, in the
same manner as it was afterward put in execution upon the 24. day of August,
being St Bartholomews day, in the year 1572. in which were most inhumanely
slaughtered within the space of few days, of men, women and children, many of
them also being great and honorable personages of either sex, about thirty
thousand: And while the Duke of Guise was busy in prosecuting that merciless
and inhumane execution, it was seriously advised upon, and disputed of, in the
Queenmothers Cabinet-councell, whether it were not necessary that he himself,
and the rest of his family then there, should also be dispatched at the same
time in that tumult: King Charles himself never saw good day after that bloody
massacre, although his Court sycophants had promised him it should prove the
first happy day of his absolute Monarchy; for though he had been long
drenched in lust, (a sin seldom separated from a Persecutor) by his ordinary
advowtrie with a mean wench of Orleance, on whom he begot Charles of
Engolisme, after Earl of Auvergne; and though he had been trained up by his
mother, to see the flaughter of beasts, and ever in the chases loved to both
his hands in the blood of the fallen game, (all which might have served to have
stupefied his conscience, as they did inflame his sierce and cruel nature) yet
so stinging a remorse in his inward man did ever pursue and haunt him after
that merciless slaughter accomplished chiefly by his often swearing and
forswearing himself, (by which the Queen of Navar, and the Admiral Chasrilion
were deceived) as that his eyes rolled often uncertainly in the day with fear
and suspicion; and his sleep was usually interrupted in the night with dismal
dreams and apparitions, like R. 3. of England, after the murder of his two
Nephews in the Tower of London; nay, though he survived not this inhumane
slaughter sull two years, yet had he plotted and decreed the death of the said
Henry Duke of Guise, and the removal of his Queen Mother and her instruments
from the helm of State: But some of his agents that were to have acted these
last feats, playing false with him, (as he had some few days before the said
massacre poisoned that incomparable Princess for learning and piety, Joan
D'Albret Queen of Navar, Grandmother to Jews the thirteenth, now King of
France:) so did his mother or the Duke of Guise, by way of prevention or
anticipation minister to him his fatal physic, of which, after many sharp and
grievous torments, he deceased upon Whitsunday, having not then attained to the
five and twentieth year of his age, in the year 1574. the violence of the
venom leaving in his intrailes (as appeared upon his distection) many blew
spots and swellings.

SECT. XIII.
WE have seen the gain and advantage that King Charles the ninth of France made
by his barbarous persecutions, it is likely that those very flatterers which
assured him those cruelties should make him an absolute Monarch, did help to
absolve him of his Monarchy. He had his punishment first, his mother, his two
brethren, the Cardinal and Duke of Guise, that had not only joined with him in
it, but encouraged him to it, they still survived him, and for ought men saw,
were firmly stablished in much safety and prosperity; though Guise might have
been warned by the death of Claude, Duke of Aumale his brother, slain at the
siege of Rochel, in the year 1573. The first act by which Henry the third (the
new French King, and brother and heir of Charles deceased) discovered his
impotency of spirit, and want of judgment, was his clandestine and sudden
stealing out of Poland, where he had been but a few months before elected and
crowned King: This was the first unfortunate step of his following his mothers
weak Dictates, and rejecting the able advises of his own Council. But her next
instructions which she as fatally gave him, as he weakly pursued, being to
root out the Professors of the truth with fire and sword, involved him and his
kingdom into innumerable miseries. The good Emperor Maximilian the second, in
the Kings passage out of Poland through Germany, and the Venetian State, during
his stay there, gave him both of them more faithful counsel, earnestly
advising him to maintain the former Edicts of Pacification, and not to enforce
the consciences of men in matter of Religion: The same opinion was generally
held by his wisest Counselors, and by all sober and discreet Romanists at
home, who saw plainly, that the Protestants increasing was the only means now
left under heaven, in time at length, to draw the Pope and his Conclave to
yield to some reformation of the Church, which it exceedingly needed. But other
Papists there were of loose and Atheistical lives, as Jews Lorainer,
Cardinal of Guise, Henry Lorainer his elder brother, Duke of Guise, Renate
Villoclare, (a man, says incomparable Monsieur de Thou, fatally preferred to
this Kings attendance by his mother) and diverse others, who persuaded the King
to break the former Edicts of Pacification, and never to sheath his sword, till
he had utterly ruined the Protestants of France, whom some of their
foul-mouthed fellow-brethren, Protestants of this age, have styled French
Puritanes, and would, perhaps, had they lived in his time, have joined their
ghostly advices with those of the Cardinal of Guise for the utter extirpation
of all such as dissented in judgment or practice from themselves in matter of
Ceremony. I have often wondered in the perusal of the story of this King, whose
troublesome reign did necessitate his frequent consultations; that when diverse
advices were propounded, he ever pitched upon the worst and most fatal to
himself: But I found the two main causes of it to be; first, his blind and
inveterate hatred of the truth: and secondly, his weak and degenerate spirit,
by which the House of Guise, the Arch-enemies of the Gospel, became at the last
so potent, and triumphed so notoriously over his impotency, as they forced him
to seek to those very Protestants for support, against whom himself had taken a
most wicked and solemn oath, as the head of a faction amongst his own Subjects,
for their utter subversion. Infinite almost, was the treasure he spent upon his
Minions and pleasures, (his very expenses for maintenance of his dogs only in
that age, amounting unto twenty thousand pounds yearly at least) but most was
exhausted in the prosecution of his civil wars against the Protestants, and
his servile ancillating therein to the ambition of others. Guise and his
faction now grown strong, (and assured of support from Philip the second of
Spain,) after his expelling the King out of Paris, and heaping a world of other
insolent affronts upon him, was drawn by him in the year 1588. to the Assembly
then held at Blois; he came thither with Jews Lorainer, Cardinal of Guise his
brother, and Charles Prince of Jenvile his son, upon the same royal assurance
of safety with which Charles the ninth had (by his advice) deceived the
Protestants before the inhumane massacre in the year 1572. And now let all
Popish and Popishly addicted, Pseudo-Lutherans, who make it a sport to fine,
imprison, suspend, vex, and impoverish their Fellow Christians for the lightest
matter, draw near and stand amazed at Gods secret judgments: For during this
Assembly at Blois, was this Henry, Duke of Guise, slaughtered, against the
public faith given him, not only within the Castle of Blois, but in that very
room in which sixteen years before he had advised the bloody massacre of Paris
to be committed and executed. Two circumstances also that attended his fatal
minute, do add much horror to the punishment it self: The first, that he was
but new risen from the bed of his adulterate lust, the very morning he was
murdered, having not been able to conquer the chastity of a Gentlewoman
attending the Queen Mother before that night; and therefore was so eager upon
reaping the fruits of his long fiege, as he repaired not to the Councel-chamber
till he was often sent for, and scarce ready. The second, in the manner of his
first wound, which was given him in his throat, and caused immediately the
blood so abundantly to stream out of his mouth, as he never had time once to
call on God for mercy or forgiveness, but spent the last minute of his life,
in the revenging himself on his murderers. A little after the Cardinal of
Guise his brother, a great gamester at Cards and Dice, perished likewise in the
same Castle of Blois, by a violent death. Katherine de Medices, the
Queen Mother, who had been the chief cause, for near upon thirty years before
her death, of the shedding so much innocent blood in France, being present at
the same time, in the Castle of Blois, stormed secretly, that so great an
action should be entered into, and gone through without her advice; and (when
she understood that Charles Lorainer, Duke of Maine was escaped, being the
younger brother of the murdered Duke of Guise;) presaged to the King her son,
the sad issue of that rash attempt, which he interpretting (as it seems) to be
rather the expression of her wishes then her fears; and having, by many wosull
experiences, seen the effects of her Italian revengefull spirit, took a course
to pacify her wrath; for not long after, she there ended her unhappy life by
poison, (says Elias Reusner) in the same Castle also, where she held the first
secret and bloody Council for the execution of the foresaid inhumane massacre.
Francis her youngest son, died before her, upon the tenth day of June, 1584. in
the one and thirtieth year of his age, of so violent a poison ministered to him,
doubtless by some of the Hispaniolized Guisards, as it caused his very blood
to gush out of his body in several places; the sight of which purple streams,
might well call upon him to remember with what inhumane triumph he trampled on
the bloody streets of Paris, in the great slaughter committed on Gods Saints
and Martyrs, about twelve years before. There now only remained Henry the
third, the French King alive, of all the first contrivers and principal
executioners of that inhumane massacre, which no age, no time, no action of the
most barbarous nations of the world could ever pattern; neither believe I, can
any ancient or modern History parallel the following punishments of the chief
actors therein in all respects: who not only all of them perished by violent
and bloody ends, but proved also the murderers one of another. Charles
Lorainer Duke of Maine was presently upon the death of his brother, made
General of the holy League; Paris it self, and in a manner, all the Popish
cities beyond the Loire, giving up their names and forces to the Henotick
faction, supported by Pope Sixtus the fifth, from Rome, and Philip the second
from Spain. When the King saw that neither his acting the Monk with the
Flagellators, nor his playing the Persecutor against the Protestants would
secure him from a speedy ruin, by the violent hands of the rebels: He sends to
the victorious King of Naver, his brother in Law, and to the Evangelical Army,
before whose known valor the Popish Forces hastened back from the Loire to the
Seine; Henry the third pursues them, and pitched his royal Pavilion at St
Clou, not far from the gates of Paris. But his old cruelties and persecutions
of the godly, were doubtless the Remora of his new expected victories; and the
divine providence so ordered it, that in the very place where the last
resolution was taken by himself, his Mother, his brethren, and others, for the
speedy execution of the beforementioned belluine Massacre, about seventeen
years before, nay, in the very same house of Hierome de Gondy, and in the very
same room or chamber (says John de Serres) was he murdered by James Clement,
a Jesuited Monk, in the year 1589. and in the thirty and ninth year of his age.
The assassination was furthered by the authority of Pope Sixtus the fifth, by
the seditious preachings of the Jesuits, Priests, and Friars, in Paris, (who
had secretly drawn infinite numbers into open rebellion before, by their
auricular confession) and by the persuasion of the Lady Katharine Mary,
Duchess of Mompensier, sister of the deceased Duke of Guise, whose horrible
transport with malice against the Protestant party, and desire of revenge
against the King himself, did so far excaecate and blind her nobler endowments,
as she prostituted her body to that Jesuited wretch (as impartial de Thou
himself relates) to encourage him the more in the accomplishment of the
murder, and so to stupefie and harden his soul by that fatal sin of lust,
that it might not startle at the commission of any other wickedness
whatsoever. Yet as this King some months before his death altered his former
bloody resolutions against Gods servants, so did the Divine providence at his
death afford him some hours of repentance and sorrow, after the bloody knife
had been sheathed in his belly: In which he acknowledged his error and sin; his
error, in having been so long misled by his ambitious and factious Vassalls;
his sin, in having persecuted his Protestant Subjects, and enforced the
consciences of many to submit to Popery against the known truth by cruelty and
threatening.

SECT. XIV.
IN this fifteenth age also (within the compass of which we shall confine our
discovery of Gods Judgments upon persecuting Princes) the truth began to
spread forth its beams in this other world of Great Britain, in a more
resplendent luster then formerly: not but that I dare undertake to prove by
some select, and perhaps, fearce known monuments of Antiquity, that the Gospel
was planted here in the Primitive time, that the Protestants Religion
flourished here near upon four hundred years, before Austine the Monk, the
first Popish Archbishop of Canterbury, poisoned the purity of Gods worship with
his burdensome Trinkets and Ceremonies. Finally, that it was from the first
plantation preserved amongst the Welsh and Scots, to the days of John
Wickleffe, without any interruption, and was secretly practiced also in England
from Henry the seconds time, at the least, to the begun Reformation of King
Edward the sixth. But this requiring a reasonable Volume of it self to be at
large deduced, I must pass over, as improper for this place. We may begin in
England with Henry the eighth, in whose reign no Papist can deny, but that
diverse Protestants were not only hunted after, fined, imprisoned, compelled to
abjure, and otherwise disciplined; but were likewise consumed in the merciless
flames, as Heretics. And therefore when the Papal side take so much pains to
recount either the ill successes of his own reign; or the dying issulesse of
all his posterity, as the signs and characters of Gods indignation against
him, they do but furnish the Orthodox party with weapons against themselves.
For the truth is, he did only abolish the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome,
not the Pontifician or Papal Church, which to this day, as also in the former
ages in France, has been so hedged up and incircled under certain restrictions
and limits, as it is of small consequence to help the Prelates, and of little
power to hurt the King; So that Cuffetellus the Dominican proved it at large in
an elaborate Work, published in the year 1609. and the Sorbonists determined it
in the year 1611. that the Pope had no power or Jurisdiction in that Kingdom
in matter of Temporalities. Neither did Henry the eighth in England proceed any
further in this particular of abolishing the Popes power, then those his two
coaetaneous Princes, Francis the first, and Charles the fifth, did at sundry
times in their several Dominions, upon less provocations: So the same Charles
the fifth, writing to the Council assembled at Bononie, superscribed his
Letters only, Conventui Bononiae, as did afterward Henry the second of France,
writing to the Tridentine Conspirators, fule it only the Convention of Trent;
who also in the former and better part of his reign fairly cut shorter a
great-part of the Popes Ecclesiastical authority in France. And how little
Philip the second himself of Spain, the sworn enemy of the godly, regarded the
Pope further then he did ancillate to his ambitious ends, appears plainly in
this one particular, that when upon the unfortunate death of Sebastian, King of
Portugal there were diverse competitors for that kingdom, and that Don Antonio
had already assumed the title thereof, he would not admit the Popes
intercession to have the matter composed by Treaty, or refer the cause to his
decision: Nay, that bloody Charles of France, of whose fatal end we have but a
while before discoursed, when Pius the fourth, in the year 1563. had cited
Odetus de Coligny, Cardinal of Chastillion, John de Monluce, Bishop of
Valence, and others of his Subjects, to appear at Rome before his Inquisitors,
he sent him a stout Message by Henry Clutinius his Ambassador then at Rome,
That if he did not speedily withdraw that citation, he would no longer
acknowledge him for Pope. At which bold Declaration, the Pope and his Conclave
being affrighted, the prosecution of that business ceased by the very
withdrawing of the Citation it self, and by the Popes future silence. All which
open affronts, the Popes in this fifteenth age after our bleffed Saviors
incarnation, endured from these Kings; not because they were more dear to
their Subjects then their Predecessors, or the Popes less potent then in
former times, (for their strength in Italy was more increased in that age, then
in ten foregoing) but indeed it was the light of the Gospel that began about
these times to dawn every where, that made way for dispelling those chains of
darkness, with which both Prince and people had in those former ages been
enfettered; So as the Pope fearing, lest all should fall from him, as some
Germane Princes, Republiques, and Cities had already done, was fain to comply
with the French King, to submit to the Emperor, and to Court the King of
England, by the intercession of foraine Princes for a reconcilement. But to
proceed from Henry the eighth of England, the Father to Mary Queen of the same
Realm, his daughter, of whom, and her wisdom, the Pontificians so much boast.
It is certain that she entered her reign with the breach of her public faith;
For whereas the Crown was set on her head by the German and Commons of Suffolk,
although they knew her to be a Papist, (which shows that the godly Protestant
usually nicknamed by those that are profane, lustful, and Popishly affected,
is the best Subject any Sovereign can be happy in) yet she in one of her first
acts of Council, took order for their restraint, long before the Mass and
Latin Service were generally received in London it self, and caused that
Diocese to taste the sharpest Inquisition and persecution that raged during
her reign, which was happily shortened by her husbands contemning her person,
and her enemies conquering her Dominions; neither of which she ever had power
to revenge, or recover; so as though the cause of her death proceeded from no
outward violence, yet was her end as inglorious and miserable, as her reign had
been turbulent and bloody. She might have taken warning by the sudden and
immature death of James the fifth King of Scotland, her cousin Germane, who
raising persecution in Scotland against his loyal and innocent Protestant
Subjects, in the year 1539. burning some, exiling and imprisoning others, and
forcing many to blaspheme, in abjuring the known Truth, by the advice and
procurement of James Beton, Archbishop of St Andrews, and David Beton, Abbot of
Arbroth his brother, never saw good day after: two brave young Princes his sons
were the year following cut off by abortive ends in their cradles. Wars to his
great loss and disadvantage were raised between himself and his Uncle Henry
the eighth King of England, and all things fell out so cross to his haughty
and vast mind, as it hastened his death, which fell out in the year 1542.

SECT. XV.
WEre the Histories of Popish Prelates worthy to be joined to those of Kings
and Princes, we might fill up a large Tract with Gods judgments powered upon
them: For as most of them have been given up to lust and crapulositie, so have
many of them been bitter enemies of the truth, and stingie persecutors. We have
seen the fall of the Cardinal of Guise, and all ages have cause to admire the
exemplary judgments of God powered out upon that bastard-slip, Stephen Gardner,
Bishop of Winchester, in the very instant of his plauditees and caresses for
the vivicombury of reverend Latimer, and learned Ridley. But I shall content my
self to have abstracted, as a taste for the rest, the notorious punishments
inflicted by a higher hand upon two Arch-Prelates, the one of England, the
other of Scotland: Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury, having been the
successful traitor, by the help of his reverend fellow-Bishops, to establish
Henry the 4th in the Throne of R. the second his liege Lord, and Cousin-German,
pressed the new King (whose broken title needed his Prelates supportment) to
use his temporal sword for the destroying the disciples of John Wicklesse,
whose numbers were so increased at that time, as they even filled the kingdom;
the King assents, and having by their merciless instigation shed the blood of
Gods Saints, he reigned neither long nor happily: H. 5. a brave and martial
Prince, his son, succeeding him, the Protestants began to meet more publicly,
and to profess the truth more openly then before; the Archbishop thereupon
renews his former suit to the son he had before pressed with success upon the
father, and prevailed. In particular, he first aimed at the destruction of Sir
John de Old Castle, Knight, commonly called the Lord Cobham, who had most
affronted him. This noble Gentleman was extracted from an ancient Family of
Wales, where he had large possessions, and much alliance, by whose means he
after lay long-hidden there, notwithstanding all the search his bloody enemies
made after him: he had issue by Katherine, daughter of Richard ap Yevan his
first wife, John, who died before himself, and Henry de Old Castle, who
survived him, and to whom King Henry the sixth, in the 7th year of his reign,
restored diverse Manors and Lands which had been entailed upon him; he married
to his last wife, Joan, the sole daughter and heir of Sir John de la Pole,
Knight, whom he had begotten upon the sole daughter and heir of the Lord
Cobham of Kent, which Joan had been first married to Sir Robert de Hemenhale a
Suffolk Knight, and was secondly the wife of Sir Reginald de Braybroke, Knight,
by whom she had only issue that survived her; the said Sir John de Old Castle
her third husband, in her right enjoyed the Castle of Couling in Kent, and many
other large and great possessions; and by the marriage of her also he was
nearly allied to the Duke of Suffolk, the Earl of Devonshire, and many other
great Peers of the Realm at that time, and did doubtless enjoy the style and
title of Baron Cobham, as is infallibly proved by several Writs of Summons
sent unto him, being all entered upon Record in the Close Rolls, by which he was
summoned to assist in the House of Peers in Parliament by that name, in the
time of H. 4. and H. 5. All which I have thought fit to transmit to posterity
touching this noble martyr, being no where to be found in any public story,
not only to show how many supportments he had, besides the favor of King
Henry himself, to have retarded the Clergy from questioning him, but also, how
easily he was destroyed by the bloody Prelates of those endarkened times, when
the Sovereign had but permitted them the use of his power to ancillate to their
cruel resolutions; of which impotent act of the Kings, says Archbishop Parker
himself, Rex virum clarum sibique familiarissimum Episcoporum potestati, and
carnificinae permisit, who yet overlived that excarnificating Arch-Prelate two
years at the least: For the Archbishop having murdered diverse godly martyrs
in H. 4. time, and been a great stickler in State-affaires, when long before he
procured himself to be made Lord Chancellor of England; and lastly, in a Synod
held by himself at Rochester, having forbad the reading of the Scriptures in
English, and limited Preachers under a heavy censure what they should treat
upon in the Pulpit, was soon cut short himself by the immediate hand of God,
after he had condemned that warlike Gentleman, Sir John de Old Castle, Lord
Cobham, before he could see him executed, his tongue being so benumbed and
swollen, that he could neither swallow nor speak, as Thomas Gascon relates in his
Theological Dictionary, for a few days before his death, it being, faith
another, the just judgment of God upon him (and may be a fair warning to all
other wicked Popish Prelates) that as he had muzled up the mouths of Preachers,
and kept the Scriptures from the knowledge of the people being their spiritual
food; so he should neither be able to speak nor to swallow from that very
minute this judgment fell first upon him, but died within a few days after in
great torment and extremity, by a languishing silence and famishment. The last
example is of later days, and concerns the admirable punishment of David
Beton, Archbishop of St. Andrews in Scotland, being also a member of the
purpurated Conclave at Rome, he had continued diverse years an inveterate enemy
of the Gospel in that Kingdom, under James the fifth, and after his death
taking advantage of the infancy and pupillary age of the Princess Mary, the
hereditary Queen of that Realm, he thought it a work worthy of himself to
double-die his Cardinal robes in the blood of the Saints; and therefore, to
make a sull and clear way for that his sanguinary project, he forged a Will of
the deceased King, establishing himself chief Regent there during the young
Ladies incapability to govern; from which, upon the discovery of his false
play, he being removed, and a while committed to safe custody, he was no sooner
delivered, but he presently enterprised to raise a new and fatal war between
England and Scotland, and to root out the professors of the truth, by a violent
and bloody persecution. Amongst others, cited and imprisoned, or exiled in the
year 1545. he seized on George Wischart, a very eloquent and learned Preacher,
who by the Latin Writers of that age, is surnamed Sophocardius, and contrary
to their own Popish Canons, adjudged him to present death himself, (which is
never done, except in the merciless Inquisition of Spain, by those bloody
Wolves themselves, but by delivering the martyrs into the power of the
lay-Magistrate) and in the Court before his Castle of St. Andrews, caused the
same to be executed, the said George being first strangled, and his body
afterward burnt to ashes, the Cardinal in the mean time had a chamber
prepared for him, with Carpets and Cushions on the windows, out of which to be
a triumphant spectator of this godly man's murder, from which he departed not
more delighted then (as he himself thought) secured, beginning to fortify his
said Castle against all assaults: But Gods judgment from eternity awarded
against him for this latter as well as his former cruelties exercised upon his
faithful servants, slept not; for within a few weeks after, the Cardinal
having falsified his promise to the Lord Norman Lesle, son of the Earl of
Rothsey, a devout Romanist, he upon the thirteenth day of May, the same year,
with some fourteen resolute Gentlemen in his company, entered the same Castle of
St. Andrews, where the Cardinal lay; and having first assured himself of the
command within, and the gates without, he executed that bloody Prelate in his
bed, without law or justice, who had but a little before, most unjustly
condemned and murdered the aforesaid George Wischart; and willing to expose
the dead carcass of that purpurated persecutor, as it were, all weltered and
besmeared with blood to the view of the people, who abhorred his cruelties, and
rejoiced at his fall; they casually and contingently laid it along to be seen
of all men upon that very window out of which a little before, leaning at his
ease upon rich Cushions, he had proudly beheld the butchering of that godly
martyr. The Cardinals end, it is likely, had neither been so sudden nor so
shameful, had he followed the wholesome counsel and seasonable advice of John
Viniram a learned Priest and moderate Papist, who by his command preaching
before him and diverse others of the Romish Clergy then assembled together, for
the condemnation of that godly martyr, George Wischart, told them plainly, That
nothing did more increase the number of Heretics, then their own stupid
ignorance and wicked lives; and that there was no other sword to be used for
their extirpation then that of Gods Word, by which they were to be tried and
convinced, because every error which might properly and truly be called an
Heresy, was directly and flatly against the same written Word.

SECT. XVI.
IT may somewhat amaze the reason and judgment of any moderate man, though an
Atheist, why the Pope himself or his Prelates and Clergy should so extremely
hate and violently persecute (even more cruelly then they do Jews or Turks)
the Evangelicall party, and especially those of the French, Scottish and
Helvetick confession, who do commonly join eminency of piety and godliness,
with a most sound and absolute body of doctrine agreeable with that of the
Primitive Church. But if we consider that the Pope himself, all Popish or
popishly affected Prelates, and all the Romish rabble, like the Scribes and
Priests in our Saviors days, aim nothing at all at Gods glory, or the
salvation of men's souls, but only at the maintenance of their wealth, pride
and tyranny, not intending to yield an inch or hairs breadth to any the least
reformation: we cannot but see that their self-love, and wallowing in all
sensuality, is the cause of the hatred of the godly, who both by their lives
and writings condemn and oppose their wickedness and errors: For as the
persecutions of the Arrians against the Orthodox Fathers exceeded the cruelty
of the Heathen Emperors, so has that of the Romish Babylon far surpassed and
out-stript them, both being joined together, they fear not the diminution of
their Votaries by the persuasion of Jews or Turks, but only by the sound
reasonings of the Protestants, whose Religion has already gained from them,
not only Cities, Republickes, and Provinces, but whole Kingdoms also; and
therefore seeing the truth it self is against them, they count it high time to
fall from reasoning to policy, and from institution to cruel persecution, as a
ready means to carry through their bad cause. Incomparable Monsieur de Thou
(who is a glory to the Romish Synagogue it self, and whose History the most
exact and excellent that ever was written by a humane pen, ought always to be
dear to the Christian world) discovers plainly to us this truth, in setting
down the bloody Legacy Pope Paul the third left to his Conclave when he died
in the year 1359. For having called diverse of the Cardinals into his
bedchamber, he exhorted them by all means to maintain and continue the
office of the Inquisition, as the only means left upon earth to establish and
support the Romish Religion: then which Confession there can none be more
clear of the falsehood of their pretended Catholic Church; for if no other way
remain but blood and butcheries for them to establish and repair the lofty
and proud Towers of their Babylon, then have they doubtless no part left in
the Church founded by our Savior and his Apostles; for that was at first
reared up and finished by the preaching of the Gospel, and may certainly be
continued and supported to the worlds end by the same means. It is not for
Christians, but for Pagans and Infidells, who know not the way of instruction,
to propagate their Gentilisme and Idolatry by fire and sword. Besides, that
epidemicall sin of lust, both natural and against nature, being peculiar to
the Popish Prelates, and the rest of their Clergy, is a maine ground of their
stupefied Consciences, and so prepares and fits them for the shedding of
innocent blood, or any other sin whatsoever. Peter Espina^, Archbishop of
Lions in France, was a great persecutor, and a prodigious incestuator with his
own sister; John Archbishop of St. Andrews in Scotland spent the greater part
of the revenues of his Sea, and the seizure of the Protestants estates (whose
mortal enemy he was) upon his harlots and revellings; the Cardinal of
Granvellans veneries were so manifest and numerous, as when in the year 1574.
the Kingdom of Tunis, and the Fort called the Gulet, before accounted
impregnable, were won by the Turk; the Spaniards made a jest of it, and said
openly, that the Cardinals breeches had occasioned that loss; meaning thereby
that Philip the second relying chiefly upon his advice in that and most of the
rest of his important affairs; his lust so took him up, as he had not time to
give seasonable counsel. The reckoning up of all these lustful Priests and
Prelates, who have been persecuters of the truth since the last Reformation
begun by learned Luther, would desile all modest ears to hear, or any
Christian tongue to relate. It may justly be said of them all, what one
delivered of the beforementioned Cardinal Beton; That he wallowed at home in
pollution with his harlots, and raged abroad with the blood and slaughter of
the innocent. Ockam himself in the first part of his Dialogues, lib. 5. cap.
16. confesses that a wicked and an Atheistical life blinds the understanding,
and prepares a way for the entertainment of the vilest heresies: How true is
this of the Romish Prelates, who could not possibly swallow down those
prodigious errors, and several kinds or species of Idolatry, abhorred of the
very Moors and Turks; That taking from the Commandments one; that adding to
the Articles of the Creed twelve; that robbing the people of the Cup; that
depriving God of his honor, by praying to men and women departed; that
trampling of Christ's infinite merits under their profane feet, by their own
merits, and a number of other falsehoods, were not their judgments poisoned by
their horrible lusts, and other crying sins? The Turks themselves boast at this
day, that they first learned their Sodomie from the Italians, and that
disorderly brood in Italy, may as truly vaunt, that they first learned that
abomination from those amongst them in orders. Was there ever, or shall there
ever be, not only amongst the Papists, but amongst the Lutherans and
Pseudo-Lutherans, any Prelate, or other Ecclesiastical person, that did or
shall violently cite, accuse, suspend, fine, imprison, deprive, or murder any
godly Minister, or other pious Christian, who was not, or will not be amongst
other vices, guilty of that brutish sin of lust? And it is possible, though the
backdoor be kept never so secret, yet God shall at last, in his judgment,
reveal it to the world, as he does often punish them with that loathsome and
infamous disease commensurate to that sin, with which that notable persecutor
Doctor Weston in Queen Mary's days in England was so unconcealably smitten, as
he was ordinarily branded by a beastly nickname, not beffiting modesty to
express.

SECT. XVII.
THe fruitful seed-time of several vices, and of lust especially in the
Popish Prelacie and Clergy, brings in a large increase in the Laity also, to
fill up the reaping time, or harvest; and not only their lust and Epicurisme,
but their malice against the truth, and thirsting after the blood of the
professors thereof, like a contagious gangrene, has likewise infected,
especially, since the year 1500. the vicious and profane lay-Papists
themselves. What was Escovedo the great Instrument of the King of Spains
cruelties against the Evangelicall party in the lower Germany, but a lump of
lust, which in the end proved fatal to him? But as the horrible massacre
committed in France, in several places, in the year 1572. is not to be
paralleld, in respect of the treachery and inhumanity of it in any Story of the
most barbarous Nations of the world: so it will not be amiss, seeing the
examples of this kind would else prove endless, to confine our selves, with
taking a summary view of the chief undertakers in that masterpiece of hell,
which was never in any possibility to be equalled since, but with the Romish
Powder Plot in England, had it succeeded. To begin with Paris it self; the
murderers The late inhumane man sacre and bu^chery in Ireland has since
excee^ed it.
there, were for the most part, brutish and lustful soldiers, or profane
varlets of the scumme of the City, their leaders were indeed more noble, but
less virtuous: The Dukes of Guise and Aumale, Albert Gondy, Earl of Rets,
Tavanne, and others of them, having been bred up in lusts, revellings, and
other Aulicall deviations. The place that came nearest to Paris in the
cruelties of their murders, was the City of Lions, where the numbers of the
slain and massacred were so great, as their bodies being cast into the river
Rosne, corrupted and stained the stream, the violence whereof carrying them
down upon heaps to Tornou, and the inhabitants not knowing what they were, but
fearing an invasion by enemies or robbers, assembled themselves in arms
together for their mutual defense. The chief abetters and ringleaders of
which butchery, Monsieur de Thou himself confesses to have been Boidon,
Mornieu, and Clou, three of the most wicked and vilest varlets that a Kingdom
could harbor: which Boidon was after executed at Clermont, in Auvergne; and if
Merniue escaped a shameful end, yet doubtless he deserved it as well as his
fellow-persecutor, having before, as witnesses Serranus, procured the murder
of his own father. At Toulouse also, a few days after, there was a great
slaughter of the godly committed, but by whom? not by the better sort of
Citizens, or sober and morally virtuous men, but one Turry, and a number of
other infamous lewd persons like himself, joined themselves together, for the
effecting of that bloody execution: The like villainy was accomplished at the
great city of Roane in Normandy by one Maronie, a most infamous Ruffian, and a
great many other base varlets, who assembled themselves to him as their
ringleader; but in none of them were these two hellish sins of advoutrie and
blood more adaequately coupled together, then in one Ruygaillard the
masterbutcher at Angiers, who having long continued an Adulterer, was at last
enticed by his harlot, to murder his own wife. Thus we see that it is not the
sober and virtuous, but the lustful and vicious Papist, that inveterately and
irreconciliably hates the godly and sober Protestant; not but that common
experience teaches us how the loose and debauched persons of either Religion,
do as well agree together in their plots and excesses, as if there were no
difference of opinion between them; but that there should be such prodigious
malice in the looser and erroneous Protestant against the more strict and
Orthodox, as to wish their extirpation, rather then the conversion of the
Romanists, nay, to join their arms with those of the vassals of Antichrist,
for the eradication and subversion of them, is such a mystery of the lower
region, as the horrible and vast desolation of Gods true Church in our days,
gives us as much cause to lament it, as the ages to come will have abundant
occasion to admire it. Amongst the Turks, Jews, Indians, Persians, and the
Papists themselves at this day, the most zealous and holiest as they conceive
them in their Religion, are most esteemed and honored, and only in the
greater part of the Protestant Churches, the most knowing and tenacious of the
Evangelicall truth, and the most strict and godly in their lives are hated,
nicknamed, disgraced, and vilified; and grace which should only add a luster
to learning, riches, honors, noble extraction, and all other outward gifts,
either natural or acquisite, that alone obscureth all the rest, and brings the
contempt, not only of great ones, but even of the scum and dregs of the
multitude upon the persons so qualified. Doubtless, this shows that the
Protestant Religion, where the Gospel is maintained in the power and purity of
it, is the very truth it self. And that the Prince of darkness seeing the
greatest zealoters amongst the Turks, Jews, and Papists hasten on in a false
and fatal course, never opposes them, no more then he does the debauched,
loose and Atheistical Protestant, but only stirs up all he may the hatred,
scorn and persecution of all sorts against those pious Christians, who are
convinced of the truth, and by their innocent lives and godly conversations,
maintain and demonstrate, that it undoubtedly is the true Religion which they
profess.

SECT. XVIII.
LVther had scarce planted the Cospel in Germany, in the year 1517 but within
the space of some five years after, Melchior Hofman, Thoms Muncer, Bernard
Rotman, and other Anabaptists, planted there also, as may be strongly
collected, diverse Pelagian blasphemies of free will, recidivation from grace,
and the rest, to which they joined community of goods, and the extirpation of
all Monarchy and Magistracy, saying, Luther and the Pope were two false
Prophets; but of the two, Luther was the worst, because Luther especially
labored to advance Gods grace, and to beat down the heretical tenet of man's
free will. Michael Servetus the Spaniard, and Bernardin Ochinus, as may
probably be gathered, did succeed Muncer and Rotman, as the chief Doctors of
that pestilentiall Sect; but as may easily appear, upon diligent search, did
cunningly conceal their dangerous doctrine, of not allowing temporal Princes
and Magistrates, because they saw it inevitably drew upon them the necessary
opposition of all Kings, and well governed States. Theodore Bibliander, and
Sebastian Castellio the Savoyard, grew famous amongst their fellow Anabaptists
after Servetus death: and the same Castellio translated into Latin the
Dialogues which the said Ochinus had written in the Dutch or German tongue,
which Dialogues are ordinarily at this day imprinted with the rest of
Castellio's Works: And in the last age from the time this Sect took its first
beginning in Holland, till about the year 1611. they knew no other name or
appellation, but of Anabaptists only, which title also, with much alacrity and
confidence, they assumed and appropriated to themselves in their own books they
published: James Arminius, a flashie and shallow Divine of Leyden, (as may
easily be evinced) was so taken and overtaken with the perusal of Castellio's
Dialogues, and the secret conferences of some of the Anabaptists themselves, as
it clean turned his judgment from the truth to falsehood; and therefore to
justify his own apostasy, and to perpetuate the memory of his new Masters
labors, without once doing honor to his name; he re-prints his said
Dialogues, and other Works, almost verbatim, altering only the frame of them,
and patching them out also with some pieces he had borrowed from the Jesuits
polemicall volumes against the Dominicans, the latter opposing, and the first
defending the heretical tenets of Pelagius, the Britain, as learned de Thou
himself freely acknowledges. After the death of Arminius, in the year 1611.
the name of Anabaptists, by which the maintainers and asserters of those errors
had for above fourscore years last past, been known and called by (as in the
Articles of the Church of England, published in the year 1552. Article 8. and
elsewhere) and sometimes also Anabaptists or Servetians, from Michael Servetus,
as by the same de Thou in his story, lib. 34. p. 239. began to be deserted, as
too odious and gross for this learned age, and by the ignorance of the
Orthodox Divines, who saw not the admirable use of story in their polemical
Tractates, they have achieved the senseless and new name of Arminians, when
poor Arminius himself took up his errors upon trust at the third or fourth
hand, stealing that out of Castellio, which he had borrowed from Ochinus, the
scholar of the Spaniard Servetus: And Barnevelt himself in his Apology
confesses, that he had learned those points in Germany many years before he
knew Arminius; nay, as men extracted from base beginnings, and advanced to high
honors, do commonly pretend by an adulterate and a false descent to noble
ancestors: so these impudent fellows are not ashamed to father their forgeries
on judicious Luther himself, as if there were no other difference between them
and the Orthodox Protestants, then was between Luther and Calvin; whereas it
appeared plainly, in the year 1560. by the very confession of the Papists
themselves, that upon a strict inquiry then made, it was found, that the
Protestants dissented from the Romanists in forty points of doctrine. But those
of the Helvetick and Augustane confessions amongst themselves but in two,
whereas if these new coiners do but daily increase their dangerous errors for
the time to come, as they have done for the time past, since Sebastian
Castellio's death, they will dissent as much from learned Luther, as he did
from the Papists themselves. And how little coherence there was between Luther
and those Anabaptists of his time, whom Castellio followed, is apparently
expressed in the very Preface it self prefixed before his Dialogues, and other
his Latin Works, printed in the year 1613. where the Author of the said
Preface (a stout Anabaptist) freely acknowledges, that Martin Luther, John
Calvin, and Martin Barrha, did all defend Gods absolute and eternal Decree,
and the Power of his Grace, following therein St. Augustine; and falsely adds,
That a way is thereby opened to a secure and loose life: which inconvenience,
says the same Prefacer, Erasmus Roterodamus, Theodore Bibliander, and
Sebastian Castellio, foreseeing and desiring to prevent, did oppose the said
doctrine, and maintained free will to be in man, or an ability in and from
himself, without the assistance of Gods grace, to do good. The
Pseudo-Lutherans, or Anabaptists in Germany, that had even overspread the whole
Dominions of the Elector of Saxony, before the Enangelicall Jubilee was there
celebrated in the year 1617. were within two years after, the direct
Instruments of ruining the Gospel it self: For they mistake themselves
ignorantly, or are wilfully blind in the passages of that time, who impute all
the miseries that Germany has now for these eighteen years last past groaned
under, to Frederick the fifth, Prince Elector Palatine, his accepting of the
Bohemian Crown, in the year 1619. in respect that the Protestants of that
Kingdom, after the election of Ferdinand of Gratz, for the King thereof, in
1617. finding that he was wholly swayed by the Jesuits themselves, or his
Jesuited Counselors, and began to infringe the liberty of Religion there
established, they acquainted the Emperor Matthias therewith, during whose life,
the said Ferdinand was not to intermeddle with the affairs of that Realm. But
the Emperor, whether he feared that his said Cousin of Gratz should supplant
him, as he had formerly done his own brother, Rodolphus the second; or whether
out of immoderate love to him, I know not, neglected the Bohemians, just
Petitions and Romonstrances; whereupon, in the year following, there being a
great Assembly of them in the Chancerychamber, within the Castle of Prague, and
some sudden alteration happening, they threw out three of the Emperors
Counselors at the windows, and though none of them were slain or maimed with
the fall, yet the Bohemians themselves took this outrage to be an offense so
unpardonable, as they presently prepared themselves for an offensive and
defensive war, elected thirty Directors to govern the Kingdom, and raised two
Armies to be in readiness, the one under the Earl of Thurne, and the other
under Ernest, Count of Mansfield. The Emperor also, and his Cousin Ferdinand,
made great preparation for war, nominating the Counts of Dampetre and Buequoi
for the Generals, upon which there presently followed diverse hot skirmishes,
between the forces on both sides, the miserable Inhabitants of Bohemia proving
already a lamentable prey to the licencious Soldier. And now let any
indifferent and impartial man judge, what fault or error all this time, did
the said Prince Elector Palatine commit; Nay, on the contrary, the Jesuit
himself confesses in his Austrian Laurel, page 104. that the said Prince
Elector labored by all means to have composed this difference in a Treatable
and amicable way by his letters and Internuncio's, till seeing the Emperors
Armies, notwithstanding all his intercession to have entered and wasted Bohemia,
their aim to be chiefly at the extirpation of Religion; and himself as the
prime Prince of the new Union, to be obliged in honor and conscience to have a
care of the Evangelical cause, he was necessitated to join his Arms to
theirs, not refusing also the Crown, being, for ought he knew, most justly
laid at his feet, after a general and unanimous election: Could he foresee
that any Evangelical Prince should be so Pseudo Lutheranized, as to betray the
whole body of the Protestant Religion, and the fundamental liberties of the
Empire in Germany to the Antichristian adversary? In all humane reason, had the
Elector of Saxony but looked on, and done nothing, much more had he but
assisted the Bohemians, professing the same Gospel with himself, that fair
branch of the third family in Christendom had now flourished in those ancient
regalities their Ancestors enjoyed, and the Church and Empire had been as
glorious and happy as now they are desolate and miserable. But God that decrees
all most justly and wisely for his own glory, and the good of his children,
will, I doubt not, by some means, though yet hidden, replant again the royal
branches of this Imperial Vine, as to the admiration of the whole Christian
world, both enemies and friends, he has hitherto supported the Royal root of
those branches with patience and alacrity.

SECT. XIX.
AS the vicious and Atheistical Popish and popishly affected Prelates and
profane Christians hate and persecute the pious Protestants more then they do
adulterers, swearers, perjurers, or any other notorious delinquents; so the
moderate and virtuous Papists of both Orders, abhor their slaughters, and
desire their peace and freedom. Sir John de Old-Castle, in the time of Henry
the fifth of England, being convented before Thomas Arundel, Archbishop of
Canterbury, and diverse other lustful and bloody Prelates; Whilst I was (says
he) a swearer, a rioter, and every way else vicious, you never reproved me or
questioned me, but since I have embraced this despised doctrine of Wicklesfe,
which has taught me how to conquer my sins, and to lead a godly and an
honest life, now you are enraged against me with malice, and seek my
destruction. The same true observation was made by Annas Burgus, that brave
Senator of Paris in the year 1559. under Henry the second of France; That
there were many adulteries, perjuries, oaths, and other infamous offenses,
daily committed, and already punishable by the Laws, and yet such as were
guilty of all or any of those crimes were countenanced and advanced; but
against the Protestants all cruelty was practiced, who were guilty of no other
offense, but of embracing the truth of the Gospel revealed unto them by the
Spirit and Word of God, and of discovering by the same light, the horrible
vices and errors of the Popish power, that so there might follow an emendation.
To this purpose also tended that Christian advice which a person of noble
extraction David Hamilton gave to his Cousin James, Earl of Arran, then Regent
of Scotland, in the year 1545. when Cardinal Beton would have persuaded and
drawn him to have joined with himself in the persecution and slaughter of the
godly in that Kingdom. I cannot but wonder, says he, that you should give up
the innocent servants of God himself, against whom no crime is objected, but
the preaching of the Gospel, into the hands and power of men most infamous for
lust, cruelty, and all other wickedness, when in the mean time those very
enemies of the truth themselves cannot deny, but that the lives of such as
profess this doctrine they hate, are full of integrity and virtue. And
therefore, although the profane and bloody Prelates could never be drawn to
pity Gods children, much less to love them for their piety and innocence,
being therein more inhumane then diverse of the Heathen Emperors themselves,
who upon information of the virtuous and harmless deportments of the
Christians by their governors of Provinces under them, did cause their
persecutions to be slackned and ceased. Yet have diverse Princes and other
moderate Pontificians in the foregoing age, been moved by the upright and
honest lives of Gods children, to further their liberty of conscience, and to
abhor the cruelties of their fellow-Romanists practiced upon them. Maximilian
the Emperor, son of Ferdinand the second, and Francis the first, the French
King, were hence drawn to permit unto their own Subjects freedom of
conscience: The Earls of Egmont and Horn, (though zealous Papists) labored
with the Duchess of Parma, that the low country Protestants might be free
from fines, imprisonments, and all other persecutions in respect of Religion.
Under Francis the second, the French King, in the year 1560. by the elaborate
and learned speeches of Charles Marillack Archbishop of Vienna, and John de
Mon^^^e Bishop of Valence freely pronounced before the King himself, in
behalf of the French Protestants, all persecution against them was for a time
remitted; the said Bishop amongst other particulars, not fearing to affirm
plainly, That a great increase of the Sectaries did proceed from the ignorance
and evil lives of the Bishops, who having cast away the cares of their flocks,
had for many years studied to inhaunce their fines and rents, and to live
deliciously and loosly; so as sometimes there were seen forty of them at once
together mouldering and wasting themselves in Paris in luxury and idleness:
the care of their Churches being in the mean time delegated over to young and
ignorant fellows; and so the Bishops themselves becoming blind and useless,
the Parish Priest also following the example of their Diocesans, were only
careful to spoil and vex the people for their tithes, and wholly unskilful
and negligent in preaching to them; and that therefore it was no wonder, though
diverse of the Nobility, as well as of the common people, did readily hearken
to new opinions and doctrines. The same counsel, That the conscience ought not
to be forced, nor any to be persecuted for Religion merely, did Michael
Hospitalius Chancellor of France, give unto Charles the ninth, the same year
upon his new succession to the Crown after the decease of the said Francis his
brother; and Paulus Foxius to Henry the third, in the year 1574. very
copiously, and most eloquently, couched in two several Orations, inserted at
large by Monsieur de Thou, in his unparalled History in their due places, who
was himself nineteen years old when that horrible massacre was committed in
Paris, in the year 1572. on Saint Bartholomenes day, which fell out that year
on the Lords Day, and did in his very soul abhor the cruelty and
savagenesse thereof, when in his passage through the streets to Mattins that
morning, he encountered with diverse villains, dragging along the dead body of
Hierome Grolote, late the Governor of Orleance, all weltring with ghastly
wounds in his own blood; at which sight his heart relenting, and mourning
inwardly, not daring to shed tears publicly, he hastened home to the house of
Christopher de Thou his father, at that time the chief President of the Court
of Parliament at Paris, there freely to deplore and execrate that Heathenish
butchery; as did also the said Christopher his father. Vidus Faber Pibracius,
John Merviller, Belieureu, all eminent men, with all the judicious and morally
virtuous Papists in the City, who Christianly hid up, and so preserved many
Protestants secretly in their houses from a wretchlesse massacring; nay, Arman
Guntald the old Marshall Biron (father of Charles Duke of Biron, that was
beheaded in Henry the fourths time) when the Deputies of Rochel repaired unto
him some few weeks after that bloody execution, to treat of a peaceable
accommodation of their affairs with him, he shed many tears in their
presence, upon his execrating the authors of that cruelty, and acknowledged it
the great blessing of God upon him, that he neither knew of it, nor had any
hand in it. At the City of Lions also, where the inhumanity of the murderers
almost equalled that of Paris, Mandelot the Governor there, did his best to
have prevented it, and in his heart, with many other grave and sober Citizens
of the Romish Religion, utterly detested it. And when the slaughtered bodies
were tumbled into the River Rosne, and carried down with the stream to Tornou,
Valence, Vienne, and Burg, contiguous to the same River, the Papists generally
detested the cruelty. And at Arles, where for want of springs and ponds, they
had most use of that river-water; they so much abhorred that butchery, as they
would neither drink thereof, nor yet eat any of the fish taken therein, for
diverse days after; and generally, in all Provence, those of the Romish
Religion drew out the mangled bodies out of the water, and with great humanity
interred them. Monsieur Carragie, a noble Gentleman the Governor of the great
city of Robin in Normandy, did likewise oppose the massacres there to the
utmost of his power, as did also James Benedict Lagabaston the prime Senator of
Bordeaux, who thereby became himself in danger to have been slain by those
seditious varlets, who had been at first stirred up to commit those murders by
the wicked sermons of a lustful Jesuit, named Enimund Auger. Claudus, Earl
of Tend, a descendent of the illustrious House of Savoy, Governor of
Provence, Monsieur de Gordes, Governor of Daulphinie, Monsieur Sauteran,
Governor of Auvergne, and Francis Duke of Memorancie, particularly and
absolutely refused to suffer any massacres to be committed in such places as
were under their several government; so as the Rochellers in their Declaration
set out the same year, do acknowledge and confess, that all such Rom mists,
who had but any humanity left in them, did in their hearts abhor, and with
their mouths detest those hellish outrages and cruelties. And it well appeared,
what base varlets they generally were in most places, who were the executioners
of those villainies, because their Religion consisted chiefly in robbing and
spoiling the Protestants houses, suffering many of them in the mean time beyond
their cruel resolutions to escape safely away. Nay, whereas the furious people
of Paris already enraged with a blind zeal, came to a certain white
Thorne-tree that blossomed the day of the massacre in St. Innocents Churchyard,
in that city, as if God by a miracle had approved their barbarous and
sanguinary action; the more judicious Papists, conceived this to have happened
by pouring of hot water upon the root of that tree, or by some other secret
imposture; or if it were a true miracle, then the Protestants alleged, that it
might much more justly be interpreted to the advantage of the Protestant Church
then of their own: That first the place where the tree grew, being dedicated to
the memory of Innocents, argued the innocence of those who were martyred; and
that as the same tree at that season of the year, being in August, though it
showed life, yet could not have blossomed without a miracle: So the Protestant
Church and Religion in France, which seemed by this blow to be utterly extinct
and ruined, should again revive, blossom forth and flourish, by the miracalous
power of God, in as great splendour and beauty, as over it had done formerly;
which the event and issue notwithstanding all the great Processions and high
Masses of Pope Gregory the thirteenth and his Conclave at Rome, did accordingly
verify.

SECT. XX.
HOw shall these sober minded and moderate Papists rise up in judgment at the
last day against all loose, ignorant and profane Protestants of both orders,
who for the smallest offenses and for the very tenderness of conscience it
self, vex, molest, cite, sue, imprison, fine, suspend, deprive, and utterly
undo their innocent, godly and peaceable fellow Christians? For if it be
neither warranted by the practice of the Primitive Church, nor consonant to
reason, policy, or the property of the true Church, to kill an Heretic by a
long and noisome imprisonment, or to adjudge and put him to a violent death. If
persecution for conscience sake be accounted, and that justyl, a brand of the
Antichristian Church, and that Luther and his followers had even necessary
cause in the year 1517. in that respect only to depart out of the Romish
Babylon, as from a Malignant Synagogue; how is it possible that Protestant
Prelates should persecute any at all with imprisonment and despoiling them of
their goods, though convicted of Schism it self, but much more such sober and
innocent Christians, who by their own confession hold nothing in matter of
doctrine contrary to the truth, live inoffensively and virtuously in respect of
their conversation, and are ready in all humility to submit to any particulars
in matters supposed to be indifferent, which they shall be convinced out of
Gods Word to be so? It is confessed on all hands, that it is a most dangerous
sin to do any thing, yea, a lawful act, against the dictate and persuasion of
Conscience; and shall pious Christians in all other respects, for this alone be
persecuted, and followed with greater violence, then Adulterers, Swearers, or
Fornicators themselves? The authority and glory of a Prince had been as fully
extended in removing those particulars which made the breach, as in retaining
them, it being acknowledged on all hands, that the removal of them is, and was
always as lawful as the retention of them; but if the wisdom of any Church
conceive it self upon great and sound motives rather obliged to retain them,
and to add new burdens rather then to abolish or change the old; yet
doubtless withal some course may be considered of, how those who in all main
and fundamental truths are the true servants of God, the humble and obedient
children of the Church, and of innocent and virtuous lives, might in the mean
time enjoy the Ordinances of God in peace and quiet: For doubtless, if one
Protestant may lawfully vex, cite, fine, suspend, deprive, excommunicate, and
imprison another (which in some cases necessitates a lingering death) for things
accounted by themselves no way essential to Gods worship normans salvation:
then is all we have said against the Romists Synagogue of no validity at all;
nay, there being no Magis and Minus in persecution, it will follow necessarily,
that for the same causes one Protestant may as well put to death another, as
imprison him; and so Samaria shall of necessity justisie her sister Sodom.
That the supreme Magistrate in things lawful ought to be obeyed for Conscience
sake, is a certain truth: But yet it is too apparent that such as are more
violent for these lesser matters, so to ravage and trample on the weaker and
more humble Christians, by pressing obedience to the Magistrate, are commonly
themselves the most outrageously disobedient; for though they seem most eager
to obey him in these formal and outward commands, yet where the commands of
God himself and the Magistrates meet together, forbidding Adultery,
Fornication, swearing, blaspheming, unlawful gaming, starving of souls,
maintaining erroneous doctrines, and diverse other horrible and Atheistical
offenses; here neither God nor Prince, Law nor Gospel, heaven nor hell, can
restrain their lustful practices or scandalous lives. Did Cardinal Sadolet
himself intercede with Francis the first the Grandfather, and the Arcbishop of
Vienne, and Bishop of Valence, with Francis the second, the Grandchilde, two of
the French Kings, for the Protestants of their times, whom yet they accounted
Heretics; and is it possible any Protestant Prelate or Divine, should stir up
any Protestant Prince or State to ruin their Protestant-fellow-Ministers, and
other Christians, because they cannot submit to such particulars, as in
themselves can no way hinder or impeach the unity of faith, nor could break
(if Gods glory were only aimed at) the bond of love? The Apostle Paul having
left the true Church that incomparable Catholic Rule; That the stronger
Christians should bear with the weaker, and that the weaker Christians should
not condemn the stronger.

SECT. XXI.
THere were in all ages, even in the first and purest times, Confessions set
out by the Primitive Christians, to be a Guide and a Rule for all Conditions to
walk by: and when the Nicene Creed was penned by the learned Fathers of that
Council, it was all that was required of any to be publikly confessed, that
had been either accused or suspected of Heresy. The Protestants in all ages,
when they were questioned, (and especially since the year 1500. that the
differences about Religion have even filled Europe with the sharp disputes of
the sword and pen) have not only offered to do whatsoever the ancient Fathers
required as an act sufficient to clear and acquit such as were in their times
suspected of heresy, but further to put their cause to the trial of the
Scriptures, the best and surest Rule; nay, to admit the Decrees of the first
General Councels, and the united Tenets of the Orthodox Fathers for the first
five hundred years. But the Romish Synogogue degenerating, first in manners,
and then in doctrine; first introducing innumerable Trinkets and Ceremonies, to
pester Gods public worship, and afterward several Idolatries, absolutely to
kill and poison it, could not satisfy themselves with pressing upon the
Protestants the confession of those Truths they yet maintained an I held; but
that not a grain of corn might remain in their great heap of chafe, nor one
true Professor be hidden amongst the multitude, they invented four manner of
unchristian and tyrannical courses, whereby to ensnare and illaqueate not only
the most innocent, but even the most prudent and sagacious man alive. First,
they proceeded against any person they suspected, without accuser, witness, or
proof, and fettered his ears with so many Questions to be answered unto upon
oath, and with so many several examinations at several times, that at last,
as John de Monluce, Bishop of Valence, well observed of the Spanish
Inquisition, in the year 1562. that it was Decipula ad vexandos bonos and illa^
queandas conscientias: Though he came into their clutches unjustly suspected,
yet he was sure never to escape their griping talons justly acquitted. A second
invention was to add many new matters to be confessed as matters of faith,
which were before left as matters of liberty and fact, either to hold or not to
hold; and in this particular did that fatal Conventicle of Trent so
blasphemously transcend the bounds of all sobriety, as to add twelve new
Articles of faith to the ancient Creed, to be believed upon pain of damnation;
and to this they commonly adjoined, as a slip or branch of it, adjuration of
all former truths, or at least a Recantation. Miserable experience has taught
the Lutherans and Pseudo-Lutheran, in Germany, the tyranny of the Romanists in
this particular, who having assisted them to ruin those godly Protestants in
the Empire, of the most sound and Orthodox Helvetick or French confessions,
did, as a reward of their treachery, find them more implacable against them,
enforcing upon them a most dangerous and blasphemous abjuration, then against
the others. These two former ways of Inquisition went yet no further then the
tongue, but the next that followed included the hands also, and compelled
subscription to many false blasphemies, and dangerous heresies. Thus the
Lutherans of Saxony desiring to root out all the godly Ministers amongst them
of the purer Confessions, would have them subscribe to those two portentuous
and monstrous errors, of Consubstantiation and Ubiquity. And it was a notable
Machiavilian policy of charles the ninth of France, who having enforced the
consciences of the King of Navar, and Prince of Conde, in the year 1572. by the
cruel murder of diverse in their sight, and by threatening death to themselves,
to cause them to write to Pope Gregory the thirteenth, by their Letters under
their own hands, that both their conversion to Popery, and abjuration of the
truth, had been grateful and voluntary. But the fourth and last invention is a
downright and never failing way, either of discovering the godly, or of
shipwracking their consciences, being one of those sins Divines call Peccata
vastantia Conscientiam, and that is their enforcing them to adore their
several Idols, by bowing to and toward their hee-Saints and shee-Saints,
Altars, Relics, Crucisixes, and their great Moloch of the Mass. This skill
they learnt from the Heathens themselves, who to avoid multiplicitie of
Interrogations, with the first holy and Primitive Christians, who abhorred the
placing of Images in their public Temples and Oratories; they asked them in a
few words, Will you sacrifice to the Image? Charles the ninth of France never
demanded of Henry de Clermont Prince of Conde, whether he would turn Papist;
but, will you go, (said he) to Mass? He knew raw flesh to be harder for a
true Protestant to digest, then all the other parts of Popery. And doubtless,
he that will adore and bow unto or toward an Image, the Sacrament, an Altar, a
Communion Table, or any other creature, where the bowing is not merely Civil,
will never stumble at any other part or point of Popery, but may safely pass
to Rome, or Rhemes. Oh that the Papists could but see their own vanity in
bowing to and adoring the Wafer Cake as God! For they confess it is not
transsubstantiated into Christ's flesh, unless the Priest that consecrate
intend to turn and change it. And what then if the Priest be so ignorant, as
many be, that he know not the words at which his quu or turn is come by his
imagination only to work a miracle? what if his mind be roving about his
necessary affairs, or more unnecessarie and vainer thoughts, usual with them
that read one particular often over, and so inadvertently he forget to join
his intention to the words of Consecration? Doubtless, these cases and diverse
besides, might be instanced; in which the Priest has often and does daily
fail to create his Savior (blasphemy I confess positively to affirm) for
want of mere advertency and premeditation within the rules of the Romish
Synagogue it self. And then what follows, but formal and material Idolatry,
by their own confessions, when they adore it? So as should the Papists
themselves see a Protestant Prelate or Minister bowing to and adoring the
Elements of Bread and Wine in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, before or
after Consecration, he could not but account him a Poishly affected Priest
belonging to his own Church, or an absolute Idolater; For in the 29th Article
of Religion, published by the Church of England, agreeing expressly with the
Helvetick and French Confessions, it is plainly let down; That
Transubstantiation or any change of the substance of Bread and Wine, is
repugnant to the plain words of the Scripture, overthrows the nature of the
Sacrament, and has given occasion to many superstitions; That the body of
Christ is given, taken, and eaten in the Supper of the Lord only after an
heavenly and spiritual manner; And that the mean whereby the body of Christ
is received and eaten in the Supper is faith; And that the Sacrament was not by
Christ's Ordinance reserved, carried about, lifted up, or worshipped; So the
Article of the Church of England. When therefore any Papist shall see his Mass
celebrated by any English Divine, with Elevation and Adoration, or bowing to
and toward it, both gestures being condemned by the doctrine of that Church,
he must either within, and by the rules of his own Church give him up for an
adaquate Idolater, in giving adoration to the substances of Bread and Wine,
which action the Romanists abhor and condemn, or else in charity suppose
howsoever in outward show he seem an heretic, yet in truth he is a good
Catholic; and did intend in and by the words of Consecration to make his
Savior; and so supposing his body to be really there before him, does adore
and bow to it. The Lutherans condemn the Popish Transubstantiation; the
Jesuits deride the Lutherans Consubstantiation and Ubiquitie, and both justly.
But should they hear of any subtle wittall, that has in theso days found out
a third and more sublime invention out of the Bush that the man in the Moon
carries at his back, and can find Christ's body in the Sacrament as really and
naturally as it was in the Virgins womb; but yet will not say, he is bodily
there either Con, Sub, or Trans, they would most justly hiss him out of their
Churches and Schools. Doubtless, the Popish Transubstantiation is of the
three the most rational and profound error, because that being accompanied
with a supposed Miracle, and may be at any time excused by the inadvertent
default of the Priest, admits the loss opposition. And I have often wondered
why some of that active rabble could not as well and as secretly on the sudden
have supposited true flesh instead of the Hostia, as they have by an insensible
legerdemaine sprinkled pure and lively blood from a lancinated singer upon the
Wafer Cake it self. Certainly, there is no truth in Scripture more plainly set
down then that doctrine of the Church of England, and of the more Orthodox
reformed Churches, in which they maintain and teach, that Christ's body is
ascended into heaven, and there remains as visibly and circumscriptively as
it did upon earth before it ascended, that it is only present given and taken
in the Sacrament, after an heavenly and spiritual manner, and that to worship
it, or make it a sacrifice, are blasphemous and dangerous deceits, from all
which it will undoubtedly and necessarily follow, that Christ's body is no more
present at the Sacrament really and carnally after the words of Consecration,
then it was present with the Bread before it was brought into the Church, or
with that which is left after the administration of the Sacrament ended, and is
carried again out of the Church, where also it may as lawfully be adored, as
at any time during the holy administration it self, each adoration being
gross Idolatry. Were the ignorantest men and silliest women able in Queen
Mary's days to assert this truth, even by dispute against those bloody Bishops
and Idolatrous Priests, that would have obtruded Christ's real presence in the
Sacrament, and their blasphemous sacrifice of the Mass upon them, and after to
die for it; and shall we not think thousands will be now ready also in all
humility and patience to lay down their lives for the same Truth? How
dangerous in all ages this idolatrous adoration or bowing to Images, Altars,
the Hostia, Relics, and such other trumpery, has been to the very moderate
Papists themselves, appears by a pretty relation in the History of learned De
Thou; That Francis the second in the year 1559. being persuaded by the
Cardinal of Lorraine, and some others of his faction, that there was no way to
discover and irretiate the Protestants like that of their Images, did cause
them to be erected and set up with Candles burning before them in several
streets and eminent places of Paris, to which there assembled diverse
tankardbearers, scullions, and other such like of the dregs and scumme of the
people, who to the shame of the Priests and all Church Discipline, profanely
chanted and sang before them: And when any passed by, were he Papist or
Protestant, if he did not presently deliver them money toward the maintenance
of those Tapers, and adore the Idol, they fell upon him; and not contented to
make him taste of their fists and handy-blowes, or to throw him into the dirt,
and trample on him, did after all those gross abuses carry him to prison,
there to be further questioned; many sober Papists having have of business,
not seeing the Images, or otherwise not regarding the disorderly carroling of
such a company of Varlets, were by them basely assaulted, beaten, and spoiled,
to the great distaste, and open repining of the best and discreetest Citizens,
though otherways truly caec-obedient and zealous Romanists.

SECT. XXII.
YEt must we not think that Heresy or Heretics ought so to be indulged, as
thereby to be confirmed, and made more pertinacious in their heresies. They
ought to be instructed, reproved, and discountenanced, and if they prove
irrecoverably obstinate, exiled. We see God himself commanded the Jews to put
an Idolater and a blasphemer to death; and though I do not conceive that to be
an Evangelicall precept, but only a judicial law, proper and peculiar to that
people and Church, yet doubtless it may thence by the rule of Analogy be
concluded, that where Idolatry and Heresy are mixed together, as amongst
Papists and Montanists or Altar-adorers, or where blasphemy and heresy meet in
one, as amongst the Arrians, Pelagians, or Anabaptists, the followers of
Sebastian Castellio, and James Arminius, there a more severe course may be
warrantably practiced to stop the dispersing of that poison, then for the
suppressing of any other Heretics, who are not guilty of those two
abominations, but only hold some lesser errors. Incomparable Monsieur de
Thou, says in the Preface before his History, dedicated to Henry the Great of
France, that exile or banishment was the first and greatest punishment that
ever the ancient Church inflicted upon Heretics, (which on all sides is
acknowledged to have been a true Church) as we see in the banishment of the
Manichees, under those two pious Emperors, Theodosius and Valentinian; and in
the exilement of diverse kinds of Heretics under Constantine and Marcianus:
But when men have joined, either open rebellion and treason, or proditorious
positions to their Religion, as the Papists, or have maintained Anarchicall
Theses as a part of their doctrine, condemning Monarchy, Magistracy, and all
civil government, as the Anabaptists: In these cases, although they did
absolutely defend dogmaticall and fundamental errors, yet were their exilement
or a greater punishment justly inflicted on them, because the case is now
altered from matter of conscience to matter of offense and crime. Had the
Protestants been but once guilty of such an unmatched villainy, as the
Powder Plot was, in any part of the world where they are tolerated, they had
doubtless been for ever rooted out from thence; for though some desperate
Romanists only were engaged in the execution, yet in the general,
questionless, all the Recusants of England knew, that a great action was in
hand, against Church and State; and that their Romish Synagogue was to be
erected in Great Britain, upon the ruins of them both: And for the prosperity
of it, as Henry Garnet himself confessed, they all prayed. Nay, when diverse
English Papists, admonished by the guilt of their own conscience, fled upon the
discovery thereof into France, and were kindly received there by the Governor
of Callis, and he comforting them, in respect they had left their country,
estates and friends; No, says one of them to him again, We grieve not at all
for those losses, but that so brave and excellent an action (meaning the
Powder Treason) had no better success. At which answer, the said Governor was
so extremely incensed (as he often after himself related to the same de Thou,
who delivers the Story) that he verily thought to have precipitated the varlet
headlong into the sea. And as for their Romish doctrines, manifestly tending to
treason, conspiracy and rebellion, they were so exactly collected together into
one bo ly by learned Bishop Morton, and published in the year 1605. a little
after the discovery of that treason, as we shall need a great deal of charity
to believe they can be good subjects in and under any Protestant Prince or
State. Neither do the Anabaptists come much short of the Papists in their
dangerous tenets or practices, although they exactly imitate their old master
Pelagius in one particular, which Vossius himself confesses of him, teaching
many of their desperate doctrines, as he did, privately, which yet they
conceal and suppress in their published Tractates, which have given so many
fatal wounds to the true Church of God in this and the last preceding age; for
the proof whereof, we shall need to produce no other witnesses then those two
sincere and impartial Historians, John Sleidane, and the same Monsieur de
Thou, from whom we may learn, that after Melchior Hofman had broached his
wicked Tenets in Germany, about the year 1520. and with his disciples, Thomas
Muncer, Bernard Rotman, and John Leyden had assumed to themselves the name of
Anabaptists, and drawn many of the baser sort after them, whom they persuaded
not to suffer any of Noble blood to remain; and that there could be no other
lawful Magistrate, but one of their Sect: they easily drew them to take arms,
and possessing themselves of the city of Munster in Westphalia, had like to
have proved the utter ruin of it, had it not been delivered by the arms of
some of the Germane Princes, after which followed the execution of diverse of
those rebels. After these men succeeded as chief propagators of their errors,
John Cerdo, hanged at Brussels, Michael Servetus the Spaniard burnt at Geneva,
and Cornelius Apelman executed at Vtrecht in the year 1570. all three of them,
though guilty of diverse gross heresies, yet were condemned and put to death
for blasphemy, and other notorious crimes. John Williams their successor,
finding their treasonable and Anarchicall positions to afford them no safety in
any well governed Monarchy or Republique, got him to Ruremund, in the Duchy
of Guelders, and there having drawn to his party some three hundred varlets
and mean sellowes, he told them no goods could rightly appertain to any man
but of their own Sect, and therefore assured them, whatsoever they could get by
pillaging and robbery, was a lawful gain: by which means many horrible and
grievous thefts and spoils were committed in Guelderland, and in the Duchy
of Cleve adjoining. The said Williams also being taken, was for his many
abominable offenses and villainies burnt at Buslaken in the Duchy of Juliers,
yet died so courageously, like Servetus his fellow Anabaptist, as that their
Sect was exceedingly confirmed and increased thereby; so as had not their other
portentous crimes justly necessitated their capital punishment, it had been
much better for the true Church of God, their lives had been spared: For
whereas before ignorant men had for the most part presidented their Church and
kingdom, (for their chief Prophets commonly governed all the rest after their
own wills) these men's sufferings drew on, as may be easily gathered, Theodore
Bibliander and Sebastian Castellio, to give up their names to the maintenance
of the same blasphemies, who cunningly defended only in their public writing
those points which Pelagius had formerly broached, whom Arminius, Vorstius, and
the other Anabaptists of the nether Germany have since followed; but for those
dangerous and unsafe doctrines of condemning Magistracy, extirpating Nobility,
and permitting robberies, howsoever they may still in private teach and adhere
to them, and would, perhaps, if they could once make the stronger party in any
State, soon enough practice them, yet they have most politickly omitted, not
only the maintenance, but the very mention of them also, in the said published
Works and Tractates. Thus also the Papists themselves, upon occasion, being
pressed with any of their seditious tenets, will deny them; as Peter Cotton the
Jesuit did their allowing of the murder of Kings after Henry the fourth of
France was stabbed by that wicked Jesuited varlet, Ravaillac; and Henry Garnet,
at his execution protested, that he ever abhorred the Gunpowder-plot. The
Pelagians, in the time of the ancient Britains were the undoubted instruments
of the ruin of England, then called Britain, of murdering Constantine the
father and Constans the son, both successive Kings there, and of setting the
Royal Crown upon the head of Vortigern, Duke of Cornwall, a Pelagianized
traitor against his Sovereign, who in lieu thereof to gratify them, soon
filled up, as may be probably collected, the Bishops Seas, to which neither
Baronies nor Sericality were then, nor for five hundred years after annexed,
with heretical and lazy droanes, who had well-neere ruined the true Church of
God in those days. All the world may know what warning King James of England,
that learned Prince, gave to the united States of the Netherlands, by his
published Works upon the death of the Anabaptist Arminius, and succession of
that blasphemous Vorstius in his room and chair at Layden, that if they did
not in time look to the suppression of those blasphemous Heretics, they would
in the end prove the ruin of their Church and State. God of his infinite mercy
grant that they may never be able to bring desolation or subversion to them;
nor to any other Church, Kingdom, or State of Christendom, where the Gospel
and the truth are established, by the increasing of their numbers and powers to
an excessive and formidable proportion.

SECT. XXIII.
WE have seen the greatest and uttermost punishment that the Primitive Church
thought fit to be inflicted on the Heretics of those times was exilement, in
which case they had always a competent time allowed to provide conveniences
before they receded, safe conduct for their departure, and a full power given
them, either to retain their praediall and fixed estates they left, and to
receive by their deputed agents the yearly revenues of them, or else sell them.
And if we do seriously peruse the Histories of later times, we shall find the
cruellest Tygres, and most Wolvish Prelates that ever miscarried the affairs
of any Kingdom or State since the year 1500. never to have grown to that
senseless and belluine height of malice against the godly, as neither to suffer
them to enjoy their liberty and quiet of their consciences at home, nor yet
peaceably and innocently to leave their dear and native country, and to plant
themselves in such parts of the world as they may enjoy their inward peace
without offense or scandal to any. Philip the second of Spain, who was one of
the most prodigious offenders against God, in his time, having vitiated women
of the noblest rank, violated contracts of the deepest nature, murdered his
eldest son, and third wife, unjustly detained the Kingdom of Navarre, broken
his oath with Arragon, Naples, and the Netherlands, and the most resolved and
premeditated persecutor of Christendom, being wholly actuated and precipitated
to it by Nicholas Perenot, Cardinal of Granvellan, and the bloody Inquisitors,
yet in the year, 1575. he set out a public Declaration touching all the
Inhabitants of the Netherlands, that it should be lawful for any that would
not embrace the Rom m Religion, to depart from thence whither soever they
would, and to sell their estates, or else to. retain them, and to receive the
profits of them: And not many years after, he gave liberty also to the very
Mohammedan Moors in Spain, amounting to diverse thousands, to depart freely
thence, into any Province of Africa, there to enjoy freedom from the bloody
Inquisitors, and with his own shipping conveyed many of them safe into France,
through which, by the graclous permission of Henry the Great, they had safe and
free passage. Charles the ninth also, the French King, did by his Agents
earnestly solicit Jews de Clermont, Prince of Conde, and Gaspar de Colignie,
Earl of Cistillion, Admiral of that Kingdom, being the chief Commanders and
Directors of the Protestants affairs, to depart the Kingdom, with the rest of
the Religion; and that they might begin a Plantation in the Island of Florida
in America, he not only gave leave to the first expedition, which was
undertaken by John Ribald, in the year 1562. but also, at the same Admirals
entreaty, did contribute very largely himself to the second navigation, which
was entered upon, not long after the first, by Renate Laudonere, and diverse
other Protestants. But it pleased God, that this fair occasion, not only of
enlarging the French Empire, but also of planting a blessed Church amongst
those Heathen people, was in the very bloome and infancy prevented and brought
to nothing by the precipitation of Luidonere himself, and by those factious
Romanists about the King, who occasioned new civil wars and tumults in the
Realm. After the horrible and inhumane massacre of Paris, in the year 1572.
which was partly resolved upon, because the Protestants would not upon any
terms remove out of France, and so desert and leave their dear and native
country: Charles Duke of Loraine intending to take that occasion, to extirpate
the true Religion out of his own Dominions, which he might have done by their
slaughters, yet gave them liberty to depart whithersoever they would in safety,
and full time to sell and dispose of their goods and estates. Nay Queen Mary of
England, whose bloody persecutions shall make her reign infamous to the worlds
end, yet in her first year expressed so much mercy, as having publicly
declared, that she meant to restore the Romish Religion; she further permitted
to all her subjects that would not profess the same, free liberty to depart
out of her kingdom; by which the lives and ravagings of many hundreds were
saved, and amongst them diverse of the Clergy; for the first sensible
persecution began then in St. John's College in Cambridge, where the Idolatrous
bowing to the Mass and Altar, being wickedly practiced and pressed, diverse
immediately left the same College thereupon. Now if the Popish Prelates of
those times, who accounted the Protestants arch-heretiques, and mortally hated
them, did yet persuade the Kings and Princes they served, and too often
misadvised, to permit the Protestants freedom of departure, with liberty and
time to sell their goods and estates; is it possible that there should live in
and under any Protestant Church, such inveterately hating Prelates, against the
weaker and humbler Christians, who dissent from them, as themselves pretend,
only in matters of form and order, arbitrary to be abolished or retained by the
supreme Magistrate, as neither to suffer them to live quietly at home without
vexation, suites, fines, suspension, deprivation, and imprisonment, which in
many cases occasioneth their immature deaths, nor yet suffer them to depart
quietly, to plant a Church amongst the very Heathens themselves, to the honor
of God, and the enlargement of their Sovereigns Empire and profit? Is it
possible that so many miles distance should not abate and assuage the very
malice of Rome it self against them? Were their departure like that of the
fugitive Romanists a few years since, to join with the public enemies of the
Kingdom, to invade it, and to be more forward to subdue it to a cruel and
barbarous Nation, as they were in eighty eight, then the adversaries
themselves, then might there be some colorable reason to use all extremity and
cruelty against them for their ruin and extirpation; but when their hearts and
souls breath forth nothing but loyalty and innocence, the throne and
kingdom fare the better for their prayers and humiliations, and the worst they
desire, is but the quiet of their own consciences; how is it possible they
should be so prodigiously hated of any, that would but pretend truly to love
the Gospel, and heartily to vote the flourishing of it? Certainly it is
impossible they should be so transported with barbarous rage, as some of the
Popes have been, who rather desired to see the ruin of those innocent
Christians, then of the very Turks and Mahometans, unless they will yield
themselves to be as deeply toxicated with the dregs of that Romish cup as the
Jesuits are, who in the year 1578. began to preach and teach publicly, that
it was a more acceptable work to God, for Christian Princes to root out and
persecute all Sectaries and Schismatikes amongst themselves, then for them to
join their forces against the Turks and Infidels; A doctrine, says Monsieur de
Thou, (one of their own Historians) contrary to all Christian piety and
mansuetude, who with the rest of the sober and moderate Romanists, by their
charitable and advised censures, given of the strictest and most tender
conscienced Christians, (notwithstanding they most abhor any the least
intermixtures and additions in Gods Worship, which have been introduced by the
Papists) shall at the last day rise up in judgment against the invectives of
many seeming Protestants, of both orders, against the same persons,
endeavoring thereby to prepossesse the ears and fascinate the judgments of
the greatest Princes, that so they may obtain license and power under them,
utterly to ruin and destroy their humble and pious Fellow Christians, who are
notwithstanding permitted quietly and safely to enjoy the public liberty of
their conscience in those Kingdoms and States where the Romish Religion it
self flourishes.

SECT. XXIV.
UNder Henry the fourth, the late great and victorious French King, the major
part of the Papists of that kingdom continued in a most obstinate and furious
war against him, during the first four years of his reign, calling into their
succors the Spaniards the sworn enemies of that Crown and State, and yet he
offered them, not only to permit all his Romanized subjects the public
exercise of their Religion, but also to continue it in all places in the same
form and freedom as it had been used at the time of the murder of Henry the
third his predecessor, by a Jesuited assassinate. And further implored his own
Subjects, Not to endeavor to force him to the change of his Religion, which he
knew to be the truth, being a cruelty he desired not to practice upon the
meanest of them. The Protestants will yield up their Religion as false and
wicked, if ever such an example can be produced against them, where they had
liberty of conscience sincerely afforded them, and yet took up arms against
their lawful Sovereign. But those unreasonable French Papists, being true
limbs of the Romish Synagogue, whose faith was then faction, and whose Religion
was then rebellion, would embrace no conditions of peace, no offers of
pacification from their own undoubtedly lawful and warlike King, as long as he
continued in the open profession of that truth, in which he had been educated
under Joan D'Albret, hereditary Queen of Navarre, his royal and godly mother;
who also upon her deathbed had expressly charged him never to recede from it.
This brave Prince seeing nothing but an utter ruin threatened to his kingdom
of France, either by cantonizing it into Provinces, or setting a forainer on
the Throne, (which Charles Lorainer Duke of Maine had out of some ambitious and
self-respects of his own, a while opposed and prevented) in the year 1593.
submitted himself to a public recidivation, which though it brought on an
outward peace to that Realm, yet was the King himself never freed from
continual Treasons and Conspiracies, hatched against him in the dens and nests
of the Jesuits, till at the last he perished under one of them to the
irreparable loss, not only of France, but likewise of all Christendom.
Neither did the Papists cease to vilify his very act of reconciling himself to
their Church, saying, as Monsieur de Thou himself confesses, that either his
conversion was fained, as it had been before in the year 1572. and that a false
Catholic would do more hurt in their Church then a true Heretic, or else
that he loved the Crown of France better then he did the kingdom of Heaven,
that to gain that without any inward convincement, would turn from one Religion
to another.

SECT. XXV.
AFter this martial Prince had deserted the Protestant Religion to the great
astonishment and excessive grief of all the Professors of the Gospel, both at
home and abroad; What did his French Subjects of the Helvetick Confession
instantly rebel against him, and deny him due and lawful obedience, as his
Popish Subjects had done before? Nothing less; but all the disobedience they
showed to him, or expressed toward him, consisted in humble supplications and
Remonstrances, that they might still enjoy the public liberty of their
Consciences; and he as graciously yielded to their just and Christian
Petitions; and all the time he reigned, never forgot their cause or prayers, or
suffered any of his bloody Prelates, or Jesuited Counselors, to molest, vex,
cite, fine, suspend, deprive, or imprison any of them, and much less to
butcher them, or draw blood from them; because he knew every one of those acts
are essentially true and downright persecution, as well as shedding their
bloods; only there is a graduall difference in the Martyrdomes of the
sufferers as well as in the cruelty of the destroyers. As strange was the
example of Henry the eight of England, who led by the advice of some of his
Sycophanticall Popish Prelates, thought to have established the Romish
Religion, without admitting the influence of the Papacy, whose unerring spirit
is to that Synagogue like the soul to the body, or the Sun to the firmament.
But he soon saw his error, and would doubtless, had he lived, have made that
integrall and saving Reformation, which his Royal Son so piously finished;
for he himself and his new Popery, were more abhorred by the Bishop of Rome,
and his Vassalls, as a monstrous and inconsistent Church, then the Princes of
Germany themselves, who had made a rational and entire defection from that
man of son. For the Pope and his Conclave employed Cardinal Poole ( Henry
the Eighths near kinsman) as their Ambassador to Charles the fifth the
Emperor, to exhort and persuade him instantly to invade the King of Englands
Dominion, rather then to make war against the Turk himself. And the reason
why the Pope was so vehement in his prosecution against that King, does
palpably and fully appear from the very words ensuing of the Decree of Pope
Boniface the eighth, in his Extravagants set forth by himself in the eighth
year of his Papacy, about the year 1300. Subesse Romano pontifici (says he)
omni humanae creaturae declaramus, dicimus, definimus, and pronunciamus omnino
esse de necessitate salut is: We declare, define, and pronounce, that it is
necessary for every one that is to be saved, to be subject to the Pope of Rome.
The same doctrine does the Bull of Pope Pius the fifth, bearing date there in
the year 1564. and the Romish Catechism set out a little after, does maintain
and confirm in the tenth, eleventh, and twelfth Sections thereof, in their
exposition of the twentieth Article of their new Creed, (to which Creed their
Prelates and other Ecclesiastics are compelled to swear, that they hold it to
be the true Catholic faith) it being strongly disputed for also by Suarez in
his first book and twelfth Chapter against the Lutherans, by Gregory de
Valentia in his Analysis, lib. 6. cap. 1. and by Bellarmine in his third book
and fifth Chapter of the Church Militant; That though any Prince, Prelate,
Priest, State, or Church, should receive all the other parts of the Romish
faith and Religion, abolishing the doctrine and discipline of the Protestants,
and should only deny the Popes Supremacy and subjection to him, yet they
should still remain damnable and wicked heretics; So as the light of the
Sun is not more clear then that the Pope in this one particular imitates God
himself, hating more a linsey-woolsey mungrell halting Popish Protestant, then
a true and zealous one. Blessed therefore are those Monarchs, Princes, and
States, who preserve the Evangelick truth, without the least intermixtures of
false doctrine and Pontifical additions; for to halt between light and
darkness, and to intermix Idolatrous actions, or Popish errors, with saving
truths, will necessarily draw on the ruin of the godly, and the hatred of the
Papacy, and bring down Gods judgments as causally as an absolute, entire, and
plenary defection and recidivation. And then if the Popes headship be once
admitted, a volume would not suffice, how not only every proud Prelate, but
even every Popish Priest; might trample on the Sovereigns Crown and Dignity,
murder their fellow subjects, and be guilty of a thousand other villainies,
without dreading or regarding the punishment of the Temporal sword.

SECT. XXVI.
MAtthew Paris, the Monk of St Albanes, (a witness without exception) does
truly relate a pithy Story, to show the ancient deplorable and base state and
condition of the English Kings under the Papal tyranny; That Pope Innocent the
4th in the year 1253. in the 37th year of Henry the third, being set in his
Conclave, in the middle of his Cardinals, after mature deliberation and
advisement upon a very small and trifling occasion, brake out into this
vehement Interrogation; Nonne Rex Anglorum (says he) noster est vafsallus, and
ut plus dicam, mancipium, qui possumus eum nutu nostro incarcerare and
ignominiae mancipare? That is, Is not the King of England our vassal, or to
say more, is he not our slave, who have power as often as we please, either to
mue him up in prison, or to expose him to ignominy? Justly therefore did Henry
the eight of England free himself from this Papal Tyranny: and if he had been
possibly sensible of those bodily pangs, or inward remorses and horrors upon
his deathbed, which the Papists mention, yet could not these divine
flagellations be imputed to his defection from Rome, and error, as they
pretend, but to his shedding of so much innocent blood of Gods Saints, by the
instigation of his sanguinary Prelates. For in France after that barbarous and
cruel Massacre in the year 1572. upon the eighth day of November the same
year, there appeared a dreadful Comet, touching which some learned Protestant
immediately published an elaborate and exquisite Poem, presaging that it was
Gods Herald or Messenger to denounce his judgment shortly to ensue upon that
Kingdom, for their newly perpetrated inhumane butcherie. His verses were (...)
dispersed, when there suddenly broke out in Poitou a new (...) and before
unknown disease commonly called the Poit^vin Cholick, which wasted that goodly
Kingdom for above thirty years after It was accompanied with so many extreme
pains and torments, not only in the outward parts of the body, but in the
inwards and vitals also, as it drew on diverse horrid convulsions, and in many
blindness it self before they dyed. The strange original, the hidden nature and
those unparalleld torments it produced, sometimes resembling the very stabs and
gashes made with swords and poygnards, gave all impartial judgments just
ground to conclude it to be the finger of God himself, in punishing the
merciless murders of his dear Saints. And a blessed warning it may be to all
Christian Kingdoms and States, that a seasonable remedy to stop the growing of
the plague, pestilence, and other several diseases and judgments may
questionless be applied, by inhibiting and abolishing the power and malice of
such Popish Prelates as count it their chiefest solace to waste and persecute
the pious and godly Protestants, that so the true Catholic Church might again
flourish, as it did in the Primitive times under learned, religious, sober,
faithful, preaching Pastors and Ministers. Which incomparable blessing, the
Divine Providence vouchsafed to the Scottish, French, and Helvetick Churches
upon their first Reformation.

The Printer to the Reader.
I Am here courteous Reader, instead of troubling thee with an Index of the
Errata, to give thee notice, that so great care has been used, in this second
Impression, as it needs none; neither was it my fault, but my misfortune, that
the first had so many greater errors as well as lesser slips; for I had the
use of a very imperfect Copy, transcribed from the Original by two or three
several hands in some have; by which I was misled almost in every Section.
Those errors, and such as escaped the Press, are now amended to thy hand.

FINIS.

