A Short DISCOURSE Of the TRUTH and REASONABLENESS Of the RELIGION Delivered by
JESUS CHRIST.

Wherein the several Arguments for Christianity are briefly handled; the
Miracles done by our Savior, Apostles and Christians, in confirmation of this
Doctrine, are proved from the Confessions of the Enemies of our Religion, Jews
and Heathens, and from the unquestioned Authorities of the most Eminent Fathers
of the Primitive Church.

Unto which is added

A Disquisition touching the Sibylls and the Sibylline Writings; Wherein the
Objections made by Opsopaeus, Isaac Casaubon, David Blondel, and others, are
examined, and the Authority of those Writings Asserted; which may serve as an
Appendix to the foregoing Discourse.

By another hand.

Joh. 1.45. We have found him of whom Moses in the Law and the Prophets did
write, Jesus of Nazareth the son of Joseph.

Joh. 15.24. If I had not done among them the works which none other man did,
they had not had sin.

Possum quidem dicere necessaria fuisse (Prodigia) prs^usquam crederet mundus.
Quisquis adhuc Prodigia, ut credat, inquirit, magnum est ipse Prodigium, qui
credente mundo non credit.

S. Aug. de Civitate Dei, lib. 22. cap. 8. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for H.
Herringman, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Blew Anchor in the lower Walk
of the New Exchange, 1662.

TO THE READER.
I Was once resolved to have said nothing before this Discourse, because I look
on Prefaces generally as more fashionable then necessary, and more fit to usher
in something that is pleasant, then any thing that is serious: But considering
with my self both the Time and Occasion of my Writing, and finding something to
have fallen from my Pen suitable to both, I then saw I was obliged for thy sake
to do that which I hoped I happily might have awarded.

The Occasion that put me on Writing was a desire to satisfy my self
concerning the truth of the Miracles done by our Savior: Not that I had in the
least any diffidence of them; but because I found Atheism, through the iniquity
of our Times, was grown so impudent, that in most places where I came the only
Wit was to question Principles, and no man was Ingenious but he that talked
most confidently against the Foundations of our Faith. I was amazed when once I
heard the Miracles done by our Savior questioned, and that not only for
Argument sake, but with much zeal and earnestness; because the Evangelists who
relate them were Parties, and therefore upon no Reason ought to be admitted as
Witnesses. This Argument seemed to carry in it great plausibility; and I
perceived several, who wanted not Abilities, very much taken with it, as if all
our Faith was to fall before it, when this proceeded merely from want of
searching to the bottom; for I can believe no man that is Rational, but must in
this particular receive sufficient satisfaction, if he will but take half that
pains to confirm himself in the Truth, which diverse amongst us have done to
shake it.

This was the principal aim of this Discourse; and I hope I have in this
Particular produced the Confessions of Jews and Heathens, the open Enemies of
our Faith, which may persuade any person, since they were not Parties, (their
own Argument) to believe the truth of them. I confess, we do in this Age want
many Records the Primitive Christians Appealed to for the Truth of what they
said.

As the Archives at Rome, which Tertullian produces to the Roman Senate, Apol.
cap. 21.
as a witness of the miraculous Eclipse at our Saviors Crucifixion; The Acts
of Pilate, Apol. 2. p. 66.
which Justin Martyr desires the Emperor Antoninus to search, concerning the
Miracles done by our Savior, etc. But, thanks be to God, we are not yet
destitute, but we have some Authorities remaining, not to be contradicted. And
for my part, I cannot but judge that sufficient, had we no more, The strange
Conquest of the World to the Cross of Christ, effected by such weak and
ignorant persons as the Apostles were; when the Doctrine they taught did not
only deprive the embracers of it, of all the Pomp, and Pleasure, and Glory of
this world, but subjected them to all the miseries and torments the cruelty of
the Devil or man could invent.

To these I have added the Authorities of the most Eminent Fathers of the
Primitive Church, for the most part taken out of either their Apologies to the
Emperors and Senate, for their Faith, or their Answers to the Discourses of
the Heathen Philosophers against it. And for my part I cannot but persuade my
self, that no rational man but will believe, that such Learned men as they were
(for I speak not now of them under any other Notion) durst plead to the Senate
and Emperors, as Arguments to take off their Persecutions, the Miracles they
then did, unless the matter of Fact they urged had been true and not
fictitious: For certainly, had it been otherwise, instead of mittigating, they
had but enraged their Enemies; instead of lessening their punishments, they had
increased them.

Against this of Miracles, I meet but with one Argument our Atheists have
invented, (which they may thank the Church of Rome for, who by their foolish
Legends, and Monkish doteries have beguiled very many into the belief of their
apparent erours, and that is, That they believe the Real Miracles done by
Christ, and Christians for some Ages after our Saviors Passion; were Deceits
and Impostures. And though this be very presumptuous, to suppose all the world
could be cheated so much, contrary to their Interest, because they see some now
beguiled and abused by those whose Interest it is to do so: Yet I think to this
there is an Answer beyond a Reply; for though it be very easy for men to feign
Miracles, when the Patient conspires in the deceit as well as the Agent; yet it
is impossible to deceive, when he that is miraculously recovered, does oppose
both the Doctrins and Persons of them that do it. Here now we produce you
Miracles done upon Heathens themselves, who were so far from conspiring to
deceive the world into the Christian Faith, that they made it their business to
destroy the Professors of it. Here we produce the gods they worshipped,
confessing themselves Devils, trembling at the Name of Jesus, and not daring to
lie to the meanest Christian.

Neither is it at all material to say, as I have heard some do, That the Devils
might confess, to deceive the world after another manner. It Is possible they
might do so, (that being their proper work) but here this diceit is to destroy
himself, his Kingdom, the Dominion he gained over the whole world, to fix into
the hearts of people Principles against himself, and to uphold a generation of
men that resist him, renounce him, and fight against him.

To this let me add, That these Miracles were done without any outward
Applications, without any Spells or Charms, without the least matter to work
on, but only by the Name of Jesus Christ, and that not by some Eminent
Christians, but by any Christian, as Tertullian and Arnobius sufficiently
assures me. Apol. ca. 21. Adv. Genesis l. 1


If it be asked me now, Whether the Power of Miracles still continues in the
Church? I must Answer with St Austin, That he that wants a Miracle to believe,
is now a Prodigy himself, that does not believe when the world believes: But
yet this I find, St Paul was very much grieved at Epaphroditus his sickness,
Phil. 2.
and did not recover him, when he did daily others; and I suppose upon this
ground, because God bestowed this miraculous power to convert to Christianity,
which was not necessary to Epaphroditus, already a Christian; and it is not
improbable but God might still bless his Church with those extraordinary gifts
for the conversion of Infidels, which are not to be expected of us, who are
Christians already.

If now this be true, which certainly no man can question, who will believe any
thing he has not seen? If our Saviors Mission and Doctrine, if the
Christianity the Apostles received from him, and the Universal Church from
them, be confirmed by Miracles, it is not only irrational, but perfect folly, to
question any truth our Blessed Savior has delivered, be it never so much
above the reach of our frail Understandings, and imperfect Reasonings, since
God for the truth of it has annexed his Seal to it: For he that shall do so,
must either believe there is no God, which is contradictory to the very nature
of a Miracle, or which is worse, that God confirms that which is not true.

I have nothing further to inform thee of, but the time of my writing, which
thou may easily perceive, in reading, without my telling it. 'Twas some years
ago, in the midst of those miseries we groaned under; and then it was no wonder
Atheism took so deep root amongst us, when an outward form of Godliness was
made a Cloak for all manner of impieties and villainies.

It was much to be hoped, since God has worked a Wonderful thing, if not a
Miracle, amongst us, since God has restored our King and Church, beyond all
expectation, without the least drop of blood, that this it self should have
rooted out those Positions which our late wicked Times had bred amongst us; but
since it is otherwise, I hope I may be pardoned for giving the World this
trouble. I am too sensible of mine own imperfections to expect much from so
slight a Piece; but having had the happiness by it to satisfy some whilst it
was in MSS, I hope it may more now it is published; and if it does but engage
some Learned Person to write in our English Language of this Subject, I shall
judge my pains well spent, because I am confident nothing will conduce more to
the Glory of God, and good of his Church, which I assure thee was, and ever
shall be the aim of the Author.

Courteous Reader,
THe Printer does desire thee, that before thou read over this little
Discourse, thou would mend these faults, and pardon him for giving thee this
trouble.

Page 5. line 25. read was. p. 13. l. 18. r. to Constantine. p. 14. l. 2. r.
Antoninus. ibid. l. 15. r. Vopiscus. p. 16. l. 6. r. theirs. p. 19 l. 18. r.
destruction. p. 20. l. 2. r. inulti. p. 22. l. 17. dele think. p. 25. l. 9. r.
Pellaeus. p. 25. l. 10. r. appeared. p. 35. l. 18. r. Abranavell. p. 40. l. 26.
r. oppose. ibid. l. 28. in margin, r. arcte. p. 43. l. 28. in margin, r.
virtutum. p. 62. l. 2. r. Omnipotents. p. 76. l. nlt. in margin, r.
denuntiantis. p. 84. l. 16. in margin, r. Homilia secunda. p. 85. l. ult. r.
likely. ibid. l. 10. in margin, r. (...) ibid. l. in margin, r. (...). p. 88.
l. 4. r. Cyrill. p 91. l. 24. in margin, r. Contigere. p. 111. l. 14. in
margin, dele quolibet. p. 122. l. 30. r. other. p. 123. l 10. r. of the
Martyr. p. 137. l. 26. in margin, r. (...). p. 143. l. 11. r. putarentur. p.
151. l. 12. r. Fraym. p. 160. l. 29. r. Erythrea. p. 164. l. penult. r. Pircon.
p. 174 l. 13. burnt r. reviewed. ibid. l 24. r. about 70. p. 184. l. 10. in
margin, r. (...). p. 196. l. 7. r. first. ibid. shall r. have. p. 196. l. 8. r
showed.

The Truth and Reasonableness of the Religion delivered by Jesus Christ.
I Hope no man will judge an Apology for Christianity either impertinent or
unseasonable in this Age, when amongst the greater sort of men the Name only
remains, and the Practice is vanished. These Apostatizing times have bereft us
of many great advantages the Primitive Christians had for the increasing of
their Belief. And it is sad to consider, that the Foundations of our Faith have
been so tottered and shaken, by the most horrid actions of pretended
Christians, that too too many have been apt to believe Religion to be nothing
else but Policy, and a crafty Art to persuade men's Consciences to act that for
God, which otherways their very reason would inform them to be most horrid.
Christianity is not to be blamed upon this account, whose Principles are not
only pure, but peaceable. A Religion never propagated but by sufferings; the
Martyrs flames enlightened the world into a belief of Christ, not their hands.
Our Savior did not only bring peace into the world at his birth, but left it
as the best Legacy he could give his Disciples, when he went to his Father. The
Primitive Fathers through all their Persecutions counted Prayers and Tears the
only Arms lawful for Christians. Tertullian in his most excellent Apology tells
the Romans how desolate their Country would be, if the Christians would but
forsake them, that they would presently be a prey to their Enemies.

Without doubt (says he) you would be amazed at your solitariness, Procul
dubio expavissetis ad solitudinem vestram, ad silentium rerum, and stuporem
quendam quafi mortui Orbis: Quaessissetis quibus imperaretis, plures hosts
quam Cives vobis remanssissent, nunc cum pauciores hosts habetis prae
multitudine Christianorum. Ap. ca* 37.
at the silence of things, at such a stupor as if the World was dead: You would
seek who to command; more Enemies would remain then Citizens; for now you have
fewer Enemies by reason of the multitude of Christians. You see the Christians
were then sensible both of their number and of their power: Yet how boldly does
this excellent Father challenge them to accuse the Christians of any Conspiracy
against their Magistrates, of the least wickedness, as firing their Enemies
Towns, or of any revenge when the greatest lay in their power. Nay he concludes
this with an Absit. God forbid this Divine Sect should be revenged by humane
fire, Sed absit aut igni humano vindicetur divina Secta, aut doleat pati in quo
probatur.
or should grieve to suffer in what it is tried.

This I have begun with as a Preface to my Discourse, that the World might see
it is not Christianity, it is not Religion does countenance such actions; but
that the Devil (who when he pleases can transform himself into an Angel of
light) does endeavor to introduce Atheism, by infatuating his Vassals to
abuse Religion, to use that as a Cloak; and so he hopes when the vizard is off,
and these Hypocrites appear in their colors, the Religion they profess will
vanish with the Professors.

This being premised, I hope I need not justify my self in endeavoring to
maintain so great a Truth, which I think in no time needs more to be studied
then now, when the open Adversaries of Christianity do not only increase in
their number, but in their confidence; and the iniquity of our times permits
men not only to maintain in Discourse, what formerly they durst scarce think,
but also publicly to vent Atheistical Principles in Print, as no Christian ear
can suffer.

Christianity is a Doctrine will no way please our Atheists, who are so far
from denying themselves, that they only count them wise men, whose business is
to please, and enjoy themselves. It Is no wonder these men are loath to believe a
God, when they wish there were none. It Is an excellent saying of Minutius
Felix, which I have often thought on.

I am not ignorant (says he that there are many who out of the
conscientiousness of their deserts, Nec ignoro plerosque ex conscientia
meritorum se post mortem nihil esse magis optare quam credere; Mallent enim
penitus extingui quam ad Judicia reparari.
do rather wish then believe they shall be nothing after their death; for they
had rather be extinguished then be repaired to Judgment.

To these men I shall only say what Arnobius has put in my mouth almost upon
the like occasion. Sed and ipse quae pollicetur non probat. Ita est: Nulla
enim, ut dixi, futurorum potest esse comprobatio. Cum ergo haec sit conditio
futurorum, ut teneri and comprehendi nullius possunt Anticipationis attactu;
Nonne purior ratio est ex duobus incertis, and in ambigua expectatione
pendentibus, id potius credere quod aliquas spes ferat quam omnino quod nullas:
In illo enim periculi nihil est si quod dicitur imminere cassum fiat and
vacuum, in hoc damnum est maximum, id est salutis amissio, si cum tempus
advenerit apperiatur non fuisse mendacium. Arnob. lib. 2. p. 44.
But Christ (say the Heathens) does not prove there shall be that future
existence which he promises. Be it so: For (as I have said) there can be no
proof of future things. When therefore this is the condition of all future
things that they cannot be reached or comprehended with any reach of
Anticipation; Is not that reason best of two uncertainties that depend upon
ambiguous expectation, to believe that rather which carries some hope in it,
then that at all which carries none. For in this there is no danger, if that
which is said to hang over us be empty and vain, but in that there is the
greatest damage, that is the loss of Salvation, if when the time comes that be
found no lie.

I shall principally direct my Discourse against this sort of men, who I cannot
properly call Atheists, because they acknowledge a God, but yet tell us he
regards not these petty inconsiderable actions of men; as the Poet speaks of
Jupiter; That he is not at leisure to be present at these trifling affairs. Non
vacat exiguis rebus adesse Jovi. Ovid.
And truly it would be well for men of these Principles, that their position
was true; for then they might hope that God in another world would not take
account of those actions which he considers not here. Against these men I say I
will direct my Discourse; and the best way (in mine opinion) to convince them
of the truth of Christian Religion, is to press those Arguments against them
which were the first Motives to move the Roman world to believe a Crucified
Savior. For if the Romans were rational, wise, and understanding men, and
neither in parts nor understanding at all inferior to the most intelligent
amongst us, the same reasons that had strength enough in them to convince them,
must have strength enough in them to convince us. Now the first Motive that
moved them to consider the Doctrine of Christianity, were those extraordinary
Miracles that Christ, the Apostles, and Christians did for a very long time
amongst them, which being obvious to sense, the most obstinate Heathen could
not deny; and being above the power of man, the most willful amongst them could
not but acknowledge to be done by the finger of God. This of Miracles is that I
shall most particularly insist upon; but my intentions are, before I come to
prove these Miracles, to treat of those several other Arguments which are used
by Christians to confirm their Faith: And though to a considerate person there
is none of them but carries weight enough in them to assure him both of the
truth and excellency of Christianity: Yet to the most obstinate Rationalist (if
I may so call him) that Argument which carries along with it Omnipotency, that
never goes without Gods Seal attesting it, must force him to believe, what
perhaps he is most loath to do.

The Method I shall follow is this.

Judaea; and the Jews generally about Christ's coming.



Jesus that did come, whom both he and we say was that Prince.

Jesus that did come, did come about the time the Jews expected him, and did
answer all the Prophesies concerning the Messiah.

Jesus, is, where it is not above reason, most reasonable, and upon the
Principles of Reason ought to be admitted; Where it is above the reach of
Reason, and depends upon the Authority of the Lawgiver, is confirmed by
Miracles, which carrying Omnipotency, and Gods Seal perpetually annexed unto
them, need not desire but command admittance.

I shall begin with the first, Thesis 1.
to show that about that time of our blessed Saviors Incarnation, not only the
Jews did expect their Messiah, but the Heathens did dread some King to be born
in Judaea, who should rule the World: And though perhaps both of them looked
for a Temporal Prince, yet it is considerable, that though they were mistaken in
the manner how, yet they were not in the thing, that such a Prince should arise
in Judaea.

For the Jews first.

Had we no other Testimonies then that S. John gives us of the woman of
Samaria, John 4.25.
I know that when the Messiah comes; we might easily suppose 'twas a thing
universally believed and known, or else it would not by such a person have been
so confidently asserted. But in John 3. we may find all men musing whether John
Baptist was not the Christ. John 3.15.
In John 7. we find it taken for granted, John 7.27.
that he was to come, because the Jews tell us, that when he comes, no man
knows whence he is; and more particularly by the Quaere following; When
Christ comes can he do more Miracles? verse 37.
But what need I say more of this when it was not only the expectation of the
Ancient Jews, but is still of the Modern, who (as credible Authors assure us)
do at this day upon any tempestuous weather open their windows in expectation
of him. The Jews in their Liturgy sing at this day this sad verse. Veniat Elias
Propheta, Elias Propheta, Elias Propheta, repent ad nos veniat cum Messiah
filio Davidis. As Hoornbeck teaches us in his 2. lib. cap. 1. page 193. De
convertendis and convincendis Judaeis. In the night of the Feast of the
Propitattion they pray. Rememoretur coram te memoria Messiae fi ii Davidis
servi tui, and memoris populi tui. Ibid.
I know some of them begin now to be so hardened, and are so tired in their
expectation, that as they excuse his not coming at the time we say he should,
because of the sins of the people; so are apt to believe he never will come for
that reason.

It Is an answer they have invented, in my opinion, very fatal to themselves,
and to their conversion very prejudicial: For as they have no ground to say,
that God who promised the Messiah of his free goodness, and without Condition,
should not send him in the fullness of time according to his promise, be the
sins of the people never so great; so it is in its own nature impossible to
overthrow such an answer when the matter of the answer is true, but the reason
false. It Is as impossible for us, I say, to prove, that can be no reason, as it
is for them to prove it is a reason; and so when the Jews give us that reason,
and only instance in some examples of Gods deferring his promises because of
the sins of the people, they only prove, that had not Christ come, that might
have been a reason, which at most amounts but to a probability; So when we
reply to them, we cannot say that can be no reason Christ had not come, because
what may be probable cannot be said to be impossible; but this we say, it is no
reason because Christ is come. And so you may see this willful Nation are come
to this pass, that resolving not to believe Christ come, they will answer Gods
promises, which are as well certain for the time as the thing, with an answer
which is at most but probable; and this probability concurring with their wills
sways more with them then the greatest certainty. I shall say no more of this
here, because when I come to my second Proposition I shall have a fitter
occasion to handle it.

I shall proceed to show you the second part of this Proposition, viz. That the
Gentiles had some expectation of such a Prince to arise. And this will appear,

1. From the authority of the Sybils, who evidently foretold him in all the
Qualifications he came; which if they did, we have sufficient reason to believe
the Gentiles expected him, because it is evident they esteemed them true
Prophetesses. That they believed their authority we need no other to assure us
but the Poet, who commands as great a credit to his word, Credit me vobis
folium recitare Sybillae. Juven.
as if he had been repeating a leaf out of the Sybils. That they were long
before Christ's time the several Authors that name them. Antiq. Romans lib. 1. p.
39.
Diodorus Siculus, Edit. Wecholianae, Anno 1586.
Dionysius Halycarnassaeus, Lib. 7. cap. 33. Divinitas fuit in Sybillis.
Pliny, Cap. 8. p. 24.
Solinus, and Eclog. 4.
Virgil will assure us: Especially if we add to this, that those that mention
the Sybilla Erithraea, the most famous of them, makes her elder then Troy, as
Lib. 1. pa. 44.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, Apollodorus, and others do; those that mention
Cumana, makes her as old as Tarquinius Superbus, or at the least Tarquinius
Priscus; as Lib. 4. p. 259. lin. 21.
Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, lib. 13. ca. 13. de libris.
Plinius, Cap. 8. p. 24.
Solinus, and Ultima Cumaei venit jam carminis aetas. Eclog. 4.
Agellius does, and most remarkably Virgil, who lived in Augustus time, and
expressly tells us, That the last Age of the Cumaean Verse is now come. I might
cite more Authors to this purpose, but I need not; there remains but one thing
to strengthen this Argument, which till of late I think for this last 1000.
years was never questioned by Christians, and not now by any but those that
either deny or question all Antiquity; and that is, that those Verses wherein
our Savior is so clearly prophesied was theirs, and not foisted under their
names by some Christian in the first times of Christianity. This I shall prove
unto you with as much brevity as I can.

But before I come to it, it is necessary for me to premise thus much; That
where a matter of Fact is denied, it is impossible to prove it, but by
Authority, or by Arguments which only amount to a probability; for no higher
demonstration is the matter capable of, and so great a force our Arguments have
for this purpose. The first whereof is,

1. That most of the Ancient Fathers pess these Authorities against the
Heathens in their Apologies. I shall name some of them.

1. Justin Martyr in his first Oration to the Greeks presses them with the
Sibylls: if you will not believe us, be persuaded by your most ancient and very
old Sybyll, (...). And after he adds this, (...). In fine.
whose Books are happened to be saved in the whole world. And some few lines
after he adds: Believe her clearly prophesying concerning the coming of our
Savior Jesus Christ, and concerning all those things which were to be done by
him. This Father mentions them also several times in his Apology, which for
brevities sake I omit. The second Father shall be Origin, and perhaps you may
wonder at that, because he is one of the Authors for the contrary: therefore I
choose him, and that very place. It Is in his 7th Book against Celsus. Then
(says Origin) I know not what he means, (...). lib 7. page 369. Edit. Canta.
that we had rather call the Sibyll the Child of God then Jesus, when he
assevers that we have inserted many and blasphemous things into the Sibylls
books, and shows us nothing; for he shows not what we have inserted; certainly
he would have shown them us if he could have produced more ancient, and more
incorrupted Copies, and such as had not those things which he supposes are
inserted in them. All that I can gather from this place is, that Celsus being
pressed with the Sibylls authorities, and finding no way to answer them,
thought it the surest answer to say, that the Christians had foisted those
verses in them; which methinks is no reason for us to believe a satisfactory
answer; when Origin here in this place, wondering at so confident an assertion
without the least of proof. Had there been the least ground for it, it would
have stood Celsus in good stead to have showed any ancient Copy without those
Interpolations. Certainly he was too great an Artist in reasoning, to let slip
so great an advantage, had it indeed been any; and this I leave to any sober
man's judgment.

The next that follow shall be Tertullian, who in his second Book ad Nationes,
proving our Faith for Antiquity to be above the Heathens, Ante enim Sibylla
quam omnis literatura extitit, illa scilicet very vera Vates, and cujus
vocabula Daemoniorum vatibus induistis. Ad Nationes, l 2. c. 12.
says, That the Sibyll was before this kind of learning was in the world: And
then he tells us what he means by the Sibyll; to wit, that true Prophetess of
Truth, whose words you have put in the mouths of the Devils Prophets.

4. Our fourth Authority shall be Lactantius, who tells us, That the Heathens
being convinced with these Testimonies, His testimoniis quidem revicti solent
eo confugere ut dicant, non illa esse Carmina Sibyllina, sed a nostris facta
atque composita; quod profecto non putabit, qui Ciceronem, Varronemque legerit,
aliosque Veteres qui Erythraeam Sibyllam caeterasque commemorant, ex quorum
libris ista exempla proferimus, qui auotores obier unt antequam Christus
nasceretur. Lact, lib. 4. cap. 15.
say that these are not the Sibylls Verses, but they were made and composed by
us Christians, which truly he could not think, who has read Cicero and Varro,
and other Ancients, who mention the Sibyll Erythraea, and the rest, out of
whose books we produce these Examples, whose Authors have been dead long before
Christ was born. To these already named, I will referr the Reader to St.
Austin, de Civitate Dei, lib. 18. cap. 33. And so Constantine the Emperors
Speech, Chap. 18, 19. ad Sanctorum Coetum, where he will find both the
Emperor and the Bishop asserting the Sibylls Authorities; the repetition
whereof will be too large for so short a Discourse.

2. My second Argument for the Sybills works, which I told you before could
amount but to a probability, is this.

That the books of Hystaspis, and the Sybills, were by Heathen Laws forbidden
to be read; which had they been esteemed as spurious, it had been much a better
way to have made the fraud public, then to have prohibited the reading of
their Books. Now that such a Law was made, Justin Martyr assures us in his
second Apology to Antoninius Pius. These are his words. (...). Ap. 2. p. 64.
Through the energie of these foolish Devils, death is threatened to all the
Readers of the Books of Hystaspes, the Sybils, and the Prophets, that by fear
they might turn away men that are apt to believe the knowledge of good things,
and that they may keep them slaves to themselves.

This we may gather also from the Letter the Emperor Valerianus wrote to the
Senate, as Flavius Vopianus teaches us, wherein he says; I wonder holy
Fathers you doubt so long of opening the Sibylline books, Miror vos patres
sancti tamdiu de aperiendis libris Sybillinis dubitasse, perinde quasi in
Christianorum Ecclesia, and non in Templo omnium Deorum tractaretis. This place
is cited by Baronius, Anna. 1. T. 1. p. 8.
as if you were handling this in a Congregation of Christians, and not in the
Temple of all the Gods.

The Orator Tully also in his book de Divinatione seems to mention this Law,
Injussu Senatus proditum est a Majoribus ne legantur quidem libri. de Divinat.
lib. 2.
when he tells us it was delivered by the Ancients, that these books were not
to be read without the Senates leave.

And something to this purpose has Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, whose words are
these: After the expulsion of Kings, (...). lib. 4. p. 260.
this City taking into their charge the Sibylline Oracles, appointed most
eminent men to be their Keepers, who all their life time have this care, being
exempted from all Offices, Military and Civil, and to these they add others,
without whom it is not lawful for these men to look into these Oracles.

From this place I suppose I may gather the great care the Romans had for their
preservation, which makes it a far more difficult thing to foist any thing in
them, and an easy thing for an Heathen Emperor to see whether the Quotations
the Christians used out of them were spurious or no. And this place seems to
intimate something of what Justin Martyr before told us, when it tells us they
were by Law so strictly kept, that it was dangerous for their very keepers,
without others by Public Authority delegated with them, to read them.
Certainly an Apologist durst write nothing but Truth, when on the truth of
their Apology their life and every thing dear unto them depended. And I confess
I know not why the Roman Emperors should not forbid the reading of the Sybills
Oracles, Ep. 42.
as well as Julian the Apostate did all the Gentile books by a Law, when the
true reason why he did this, was to keep the Christians in ignorance of their
horrid Rites; (although he pretends that they might not blaspheme their gods)
and by that means to hinder their confuting them. I am sure the advantage the
Christians gain by the Sybills would be the greater, because their books would
confirm them in their own Religion, when the Gentiles could make them only
abhor their. If you ask me how these Prophesies came so public, when they
were so strictly kept. The answer is easy; for it appears, that Attilius
privately writ them out, and for that cause was put into a leather bag, and
cast into the Sea; as Dionysius Halicarnassaeus and Valerius Maximus will
inform us, Dionys. lib. 4. Valor. li. c. 13.
if no body else besides him did it. I would not in this place be mistaken, as
if I thought what I have said concerning the Sybills were sufficient to prove,
that those Prophesies we have, that go under their name, were all theirs: For
though I verily believe much of them were really the Sybills Prophesies; yet I
doubt not but many things have been added, and foisted in them many years after
Christ. And it is sufficient for my purpose, that there were Prophesies extant,
whether they were the Sybills, or no, which foretold such a Prince to arise; as
appears both from Cicero and Varro, and many other Authors, some whereof lived
before Christ. But I hope if what I have said be not sufficient, yet the
Ingenious Appendix of my Learned Friend will make it more then probable, that
the Prophesies that go under their names, were for the most part theirs, and
ought to be so admitted. And thus much for the Sybills.

2. Our second Argument, that the Heathens expected such a Prince, shall be
from the Affirmations of several of them.

The first shall be that great Master of Eloquence, Tully, who in his second
book de Divinatione, has this passage well worth our noting. What Authority
(says he) has that madness, Quid vero habet Autoritatis furor ille, quem
divinum vocatis, ut quae sapiens non videat, ea videat Insanus, and is qui
humanos sensus amiserit, divinos assecutus sit? Sybillae versus observamus quos
illa furent fudisse dicitur, quorum Interpres nuper, falsa quadam hominum fama
dicturus in Senatis putabatur eum, quem revera Regem habebamus, appellandum
quoque esse Regem, si salvi esse vellemus. Page 295. Edit. Par.
which we call Divine, that a mad man should see those things which a wise man
cannot, and that he who has lost humane senses should obtain divine? We
observe the Sybills verses which she is said to have uttered when she was mad,
whose Interpreter by some false report of men was supposed to be about to speak
them in the Senate, viz. That he whom in truth we have had a King, should be
called a King, if we would be safe. I much admire at these men that suppose the
Sybills Oracles were foisted by Christians, when we here have Tully not only
mentioning them, but telling us that they foretold a King whom we ought to call
so, if we would be safe. Now how this concurres with the Prophesies we have of
them, I need not tell any man that has read them. And it is more considerable,
that Cicero being a very great enemy to Monarchy, does fancy these Verses were
made to advance that newly begun Empire. If I mistake him not, his words
signify so much. Hoc si est in libris, in quem Hominum, and in quod tempus
est? Callide enim qui illa composuit perfecit, ut quodcunque accidisset,
praedictum videretur hominum, and temporum definitione sublata. Ibid.
If this be in the Sybills Books, unto what man, and unto what time does it
belong? For he that made these Verses acted subtly, that whatsoever might
happen might seem to be foretold, the definition both of the person and time
being taken away. By this we may see how these poor Sybills are tossed; Cicero
fancies that some Heathen that favored Monarchy made them, and Celsus says the
Christians made them. These Affirmations being contradictory, cannot both be
true; the first sufficiently destroys the second; and Tullies mistake arises
from another mistake; had he rightly understood them, he would scarcely have
imagined them the fiction of a Heathen. Here is one thing not to be overlooked,
that this Orator tells us. Ex primis versuum literis aliquid connectitur. Ibid.
That out of the first Letters of every verse something is signified; Which how
well it agrees with the Verses of the Sybill of Erythaea, De Civit. Dei, l. 18.
cap. 23.
Varro, and S. Austin out of him will inform the enquirer. I have been longer
on this Authority then I shall be on the rest, because this advantaged much
what before I have affirmed of the Sybills; and if it does so, I am sure Tully,
though he misapplyed it, as it was the fortune of others to do, had then some
notion of a King to arise.

My second Author shall be Suetonius Tranquillus in his life of the Emperor
Vespasian, who tells us that all the East over there was an ancient and
constant fame, that it was decreed by the Fates, that they that came forth of
Judaea should rule over all. Percrebuerat Orient toto vetus and constans
opinio, esse quoque in fatis, ut Judaea profecti rerum potirentur. Id de
Imperatore Romano, ut de eventu postea patuit, praedictum Judaei ad se
trabentes, rebellarunt. Suet. Vespa.
This prediction (as by the event afterward appeared) was of the Roman
Emperors, the Jews drawing to themselves rebelled. This place is very plain;
and the learned Causabon tells us, That in these words there appears the
footsteps of truth, In quibus verbis apparent vestigia veritatis, and ejus
vaticinii unde illud manavit. (...). Notae in locum.
and of that Prophecy from whence it flows. (...). Out of thee shall arise a
Ruler. Hegesippus in his fifth Book of the distraction of Jerusalem, tells us
something of this Rebellion of the Jews, and that a false Prophet even then was
the cause of the burning of the Jews in the Temple. His words are these. Nam
cum animi multorum inflecterentur ut se fracto agmine Romany traderent,
Pseudopropheta quidam jactare coepit in excessu mentis suae, Templo divina
praesidia non defectura, vocare populum ad se velut quodam Oraculo, adhuc se in
Templo suo manner, illico repulsurum hostium cuneos, and flammarum incendia.
Sic miseri dum infoeliciter falsis circumventionibus credunt, dedecores atque
vi ulti sicut pecora trucidantur. Ca. 44.
For when the mind of most were bent, that their Army being now broken, they
should deliver themselves to the Romans; a certain false Prophet from the
bottom of his mind began to speak boastingly, that refuge from Heaven would not
be wanting to the Temple; and to call the people to him as it were by a certain
Oracle, that they should continue yet in their Temple, and that they should
presently repel the bodies of their Enemies, and the violence of the flames.
So these miserable men whilst they unfortunately believed false circumventions
were killed like beasts disgracefully, and without revenge. And Josephus tells
us this Prophecy more at large. Sed quod cos ad bellum maxim excitaverat
responsum erat ambiguum itidem in sacris libris inventum, quod eo tempore
quidam esset ex eorum finibus orbis terrae habiturus Imperium. Id enim illi
quidem quasi proprium acceperunt, multique sapientes interpretatione decepti
sunt. Hoc autem plane responso Vespasiani designabatur Imperium, qui apud
Judaeam creatus est Imperator. de bello Jud. lib. 7. cap. 12. In fine.
But that which most of all stirred them up to a War was an ambiguous answer
found in their sacred Books, that at that time one out of their borders should
be Emperor of the world. This they indeed received as proper to themselves,
and many wise men were deceived with the Interpretation. But by this answer the
Empire of Vespasian was plainly designed, who in Judaea was created Emperor.
Suetonius in his Octavius has yet another Authority, if it can possibly be
more plain. These are his words. Julius Marathus tells us, Author est Julius
Marathus, ante paucos qui nasceretur menses, prodigium Romae factum public,
quo denunciabatur Regem Populo Romano Naturam parturire: Senatum exterritum
censuisse, ne quis illo anno genitus educaretur. Eos qui gravidas uxores
haberent, quo ad se quisque spem traheret, curasse ne Senatus consultum ad
Aerarium deferetur. Sueton. in Octa. p. 253. Edit. Lug. Bat.
that a few months before Augustus was born there was a Prodigy done at Rome
publicly, in which it was foretold, that Nature should bring forth a King for
the Roman Nation. The Senate being affrighted at this, decreed, that none born
that year should be educated. They who had wives great with Child (as much as
every one could from hence draw hope to themselves) took care lest that Decree
of the Senate should be brought to the Treasury. Because if it was once placed
in the Treasury it was irrevocable. Upon this account both Lentulus and
Cataline hoped to have been this King. Florus lib. 41. Ca. Phi. 2.
He that considers these Authorities well must evidently see Gods providence in
these predictions, making way for the coming of our Savior. What the Heathens
understood by Nature I need not tell you, they having that Notion of it, as we
have of the great God. And that it should be foretold that God should bring
forth a King for the Roman world, savours much of a Divine Prophetic Spirit.

3. Our third and last Author shall be Cornelius Tacitus, that excellent
Historian, who not only agrees with Suetonius in the prediction but explication
also: His words are these. There was a persuasion in very many, Pluribus
persuasio inerat antiquis Sacerdotum literis contineri, eo ipso tempore fore,
ut valesceret Oriens, profectique Judaea rerum potirentur. Quae Ambages
Vespasianum and Titum praedixerunt. Sed vulgus more humanae cupiditatis, sibi
tantam fatorum magnitudinem interpretati, ne adversis quidem ad vera
mutabantur. Hist. lib. 5. p. 965.
that it was contained in the ancient Books of the Priests, that in that very
time it should be that the East should grow powerful, and those that come of
Judaea should command all. Which doubtful Prophecy foretold Vespasian and
Titus. But the vulgar, after the manner of humane desire, did interpretate to
themselves so great a magnitude of the Fates, and through adversity they were
not changed to believe what was true.

This now will sufficiently assure us that not only the Jews, as before I have
showed you, but all the East had such a Tradition of a Ruler to arise; and
although the Jews upon this mistake rebelling were destroyed by Vespasian, and
because of Vespasian's success the Romans attributed this prediction to the
Emperor, and so they were both out in the Exposition, yet were they both right
in the expectation of such a Ruler.

I think think these Authorities amount to a sufficient proof: I should not
have been so long in handling them, had they not much conduced to my designed
discourse.

My second Thesis is, Thesis 2.
That the Jews that now expect the Messiah to come, do acknowledge the time
when he should have come to be past. And this I shall prove with some less
labor then I did the former.

My first Argument for that is, Manasse Ben Israel, telling us from Rabbi
Elianus, Vitia and peccata populi in causa esse, cur adventus Messiae ulterius
longiusque dies iste esset dilatus, adeo ut treeenti anni ultra quatuor mill
annorum elapsi sunt. Man. lib. 3. de Res. Ca. 3. So quoted by Hoornbeck, l. 2.
C. 1.
That the vices and sins of the people was the cause why the day of the coming
of the Messiah was deferred further and longer, insomuch that 300 years are
already passed more then 4000. And Manasse himself having repeated R. Elianus's
opinion, concurs with it, when he tells us, And truly it is most certain, Et
profecto verissimum est, si Israelitae serio factorum egissent proenitentiam,
Messiae adventus non fuisset procrastinatus. Ibid.
if the Israelites would most seriously repent of their deeds, the coming of
the Messiah had not been delayed.

This is the Proposition we have in hand affirmed; for nothing can be said to
be deferred, but the time of whose coming is past.

2. Because in the public Prayers now used amongst them they pray as if they
were in despair of his coming. Now it is not rational to suppose that they
should despair of a deliverance, if the time when they expected deliverance be
not in their own opinion past. I have before repeated some few passages out of
their Liturgies: I shall add these, which Hoornbeck affords us in the very
place I before mentined. Let it please thee, O Lord, that in a short time thy
Sanctuary be built. And again, Et placeat tibi Domine, ut brevi aedificetur
Sanctuarium tuum in diebus nostris. In Seder Tepholoth, p. 2. l. 17. and pa.
109. 119. Et non est Sacerdos summus, qui pro nobis propitiationem faciat:
Quare placeat tibi Domine, Deus Noster, and Deus Patrum nostrorum Deus
misericordiarum, ut convertaris ad nos, nostrique miserearis, and Sanctuarii
tui, in commiserationibus multis, and brevi illud aedifices. Hoorn. ut antea,
p. 193.
There is no Priest that can make propitiation for us. Wherefore let it please
thee, O Lord, our God, and the God of our Fathers, the God of Mercies, that
thou would be turned to us, and have pity on us, and of thy Sanctuary in thy
many compassions, and in a short time would build it.

3. Thirdly, Because about the time of our Saviors coming, and since, they
have been deceived with several Impostures, whom they supposed were the
Messiah; as in the time of the Emperor Adrian, with Aristo Pellaris, as
Eusebius tells us. lib. 2. cap. 8.


In Crete a Pseudo- Moses persuaded the Jews that he would lead them through
the Sea to Canaan as Moses did; which folly this lamentable people believing,
threw themselves with their Prophet from the Rock into the Sea, so that many
perished, and more had, if the Christian Charity had not relieved them; As lib.
7. cap. 37.
Socrates in his Ecclesiastical History, and lib. 14. cap. 40, 41.
Nicephorus tell us.

Under the Emperor Leo Isaurus a Syrian Impostor deceived them, saying he was
the Messiah, as Baronius tells us, Tom. 3. page 20. Ad An. 721. out of
Theophanes.

In the time of Maimonides, as he himself tells us, there was one David el
David, who by Enchantments did persuade many to believe him the Messiah. He was
of that confidence that he did not only affirm it to the Jews, but to the
Persians also, for which he was cast into prison, out of which either by Magic
or bribes he got out; the King pursuing him, he is reported to have passed over
the River Goa upon his Cloak, and in one day to have gone ten days Journey; but
at last by the help of Zaid the King of the Turks, being drunk, he was
beheaded: Or as others say, A sign being asked him, he told them if he was
beheaded he should live again, which he did in craft to avoid a greater
punishment. This Impostor Gentius in his Jewish story mentions. page 169.
And in the Age before us R. Lemlem a false Christ appears, who for his
Enchantments was publicly burnt. R. Maimonides mentions many others; but these
are enough to show us that the Jews ever since our Saviors coming have
expected a Messiah, and so by consequence have acknowledged the time he should
have come to be past.

4. The fourth and last reason shall be this, which I hasten to, because I
would avoid tediousness, because many amongst themselves believe he will never
come; which truly upon the grounds of the first reason (to wit) That he is
deferred from the sins of the people, may as well be an Argument for his not
coming as for his delay. Some Rabbis we have affirming as much, though not in
express words. Rabbi Hillels says, Non dabitur Israeli Messiah, jam enim
compotiti co^ sunt temporibus Heskiae Regis Jehudae. In codic^ Sanhedrin. Cited
by Hoornbeck p. 115.
That the Messiah shall not be given to Israel: For they long ago enjoyed him
in the days of Hezekia King of Judah. Here we have a sufficient testimony of
the Jews despair in their condition. This Rabbi, rather then suppose Christ to
be the Messiah, will fancy him to have come so many ages before, and will
believe this fancy rather then the greatest Reason. That Messiah of his must
certainly be a strange one, that he should never be mentioned or known to any
but R. Hillell. How pitifully do the Jews deride at the obscurity of our
Saviors birth, when his miracles made him renowned all over the world, and his
faith in so short a time subdued it? when alas here we have a Messiah found
out, come, and gone, and known to none but Rabbi Hillel. I know R. Joseph, as
Hoornbeck tells us, asks pardon for this error of Rabbi Hillell, that he
should imagine Christ should come in the days of Hiskia King of Juda, which was
in the time of the first Temple; 9 Zach. 9.
and the Prophet Zachary prophesies of him under the second Temple. This
dispute of the Messiah coming, is a subject they shun discoursing of, and avoid
as much as in them lies to do it. Manasse Ben Israel their great Doctor, in his
Book De Resurrectione, does so stagger about it, as one would wonder that so
sober a person should believe such follies, and reject so much of Reason. He
tells us, It is not only evident in the Books of Moses, Non tantum inquit, ex
libris Mosaicis, verum etiam Propheticis constat Resurrectionem mortuorum
conjunctam and annexam fore adventui Messiae. Solum in controversia
relinquitur, utrum is primus ac unus, an secundus Messiae adventus futurus sit.
Hanc disputationem nunc non aggredior, sed simpliciter dato, tum venturum, and
fore resurrectionem mortuorum. Deinde adjuncto loco Deuteronomy. 33.35. concludit,
itaque eodem fere tempore and die Messiah veniet, and mortui resurgent. l. 3.
Ca. 2.
but in the Prophets, that the Resurrection of the dead shall be joined and
annexed to the coming of the Messiah. This only is left in controversy,
Whether it be the first and one, or the second coming of the Messiah that then
shall be. I will not enter upon this dispute; but this being simply granted,
that he shall then come, and the Resurrection of the dead shall then be. And
then adding the place of Deuteronomy. 33.35. he then concludes, that in the same day
and time the Messiah shall come, and the dead rise. I confess, to me from these
words nothing is clearer but that he is willing to shuffle Christ's first coming
off quite and clean, or at least defer it to his second, upon very trivial
accounts, by which we may easily gather they have so long talked of such a
thing that they are ashamed to deny it, and yet so slight it, as if they
scarcely believed there would be any such thing. Thus I have briefly from the
Jews despair of his coming, and the reasons they urge why he is not come,
proved from themselves a tacit confession, that the time since they supposed
he should have come is past. I proceed to the third, which is,

That there was one Jesus Christ that did come, Thesis 3.
whom both he and we say was this Messiah. Now to prove matter of Fact, as I
told you, our best proofs are Authorities; and that I shall do, not from
Christians, but from the enemies of Christianity, Heathens; and a confession of
an enemy is not to be denied by any that will not deny Principles themselves.

1. Our first Author shall be Cornelius Tacitus, an Historian that no man
judged either fabulous, or to Christianity partial, who speaking of Neroe's
cruelty to the Christians, tells us the Author of them, and part of their story.
His words are these. The Author of this Name (Christian) was Christ, Author
nominis ejus Christus, qui Tiberio imperante per Procuratorem Pontium Pilatum,
supplicio affectus erat. Repressaque in praesens exitiabilis superstitio ru^sus
erumpebat, non modo per Judaeam Originem ejus mali, sed per urbem etiam quo
cuncta undique atrocia aut pudenda confluunt, celebranturque: I gitur primo
correpti qui fatebantur, deinde indicio eorum multitudo ingens, haud perinde in
crimine incendii quam odio humani generis convicti sunt. Tacit. Annal. lib. 15.
page 797. Edit. Paris.
who when Tiberius was Emperor was punished with death by Pontius Pilate, the
then Procurator of Judea. This detestable superstition being depressed for the
present broke out again, not only through Judea the Original of that evil, but
in the very City it self, whither from every part all things that are wicked
and shameful come together and are esteemed. At first they were punished that
confessed themselves Christians, and then by their indictment a great multitude
were convicted, not so much for the fault of the fire, as that they were hated
by all mankind. This is a very considerable place; for we have not only a
testimony to prove there was such an one as Jesus Christ, and that he was put
to death by Pontius Pilate, but we have here the mention of the first
persecution the Christians suffered at Rome under Nero, and that the reason why
they suffered was not that they fired the City, which Nero himself did, but
that being generally hated by mankind, Nero that delighted in wickedness, could
no way so clearly excuse himself as by accusing them, against whom the whole
world was willing to believe any thing that was evil, although they knew them
guilty of none. And it is not to be omitted, that which the most excellent
Apologist speaks of Nero the first. Christian Persecutor, to the Senate of
Rome. Consult (says he) your Commentaries, Consulite Commentarios vestros,
illic reperietis primum Neronem in hunc Sectam cum maxim Romae oriuntem
Caesariano gladio ferocisse. Qui enim scit illum, intelligere potest non nisi
grande aliquid bonum a Nerone damnatum. Tertul. Ap. Cap. 5.
and there you will find that Nero was the first that raged against this Sect
rising at Rome; for whosoever knows him must understand, that nothing but some
grand good could be condemned by Nero. And truly it was no wonder that an enemy
to mankind should be an enemy to the best of men; that he who butchered his own
Parasites upon no account but because they were men, would destroy those whose
actions as well as their nature contradicted his humor. But this by the way.

2. The second Author that assures us there was such a person as Christ, is
Suetonius, who in his fifth Book and twenty fifth Chapter tells us, That
Claudius expelled the Jews out of Rome, Judaeos impulsore Chresto assidue
tumultuantes Romae expulit. In Claud.
because they through the impulse of Chrestus did cause Tumults.

By the Jews are meant the Christians, This place my Lord Armagh in his Annals
understands of one Chrestus that was the Author of a sedition amongst the Jews;
but diverse are of this opinion.
whose beginning being in Judaea, were ordinarily by the Heathens called so;
and here we have Chrestus put for Christus. This change of E for I the Heathens
did in affront to Christ; insomuch that Tertullian wonders why so innocent a
Nameshould be hated. For (says he) an innocent name in innocent men is hated.
Oditur etiam in hominibus innocuis etiam nomen innocuum. Ap. ca. 3. Attamen
Secta oditur in nomine utique sui Auctoris. Quid Novi? Si aliqua disciplina
cognomentum Sectatoribus suis de Magistro inducit. Nonne Philosophi? etc.
But here the Sect is hated for the name of the Author. What news is it, if a
discipline gives name to its followers from their Master? Do not all the
Philosophers so? And he tells them a little before, that he wonders why they
will call them Chrestiani rather then Christiani. Christianus quantum in
inter-pretatione est, de unctione deducitur. Sed and cum perperam Chrestianus
pronunciatur a vobis (nam nec nominis certa est notitia penes vos) de suavitate
and benignitate compositum est. Ibid.
For (says he) Christianus, as to the Interpretation, is deduced from
anointing: But when it is enviously pronounced of you Chrestianus (for you have
no certain knowledge of the name) it is compounded of sweetness and benignity.
All which amount to no more, but that he wonders at their envious ignorance who
would rather call them Chrestiani then Christiani, when either names signify,
that they are so far from disowning, as they most highly esteem and zealously
embrace. Justin Martyr in his second Apology to Antoninus the Emperor mentions
the Heathens hatred at the very name of Christian We are accused (says he)
that we are Christians, (...). Apol. 2. p. 42.
to hate that which is (...), which is good, is that just? And truly it is no
wonder through the Devils instigation the Heathens should have that violent
hatred to the name, which was it self so dreadful to their Idols (as hereafter
I shall prove) and was the only crime, if their greatest honor may be once so
named, they could ever be accused of. I have said this concerning the name of
Chrestianus, because though Suetonius differs in a letter, yet it might appear
to be a voluntary and envious mistake, and so his authority may pass without
control.

3. The third shall be that of Pliny the younger, which does not so directly
mention Christ as the other Authors do, but telling us of the Christians,
affirms the God they served to be Christ. It is in his Letter to the Emperor
Trajan, which he purposely wrote to know what he should do with that sort of
men. And therein he tells the Emperor, That he punished them for their
obstinacy rather then any thing else. He tells him also, That there were some
that denied themselves to be Christians, Pervicaciam certe and inflexibilem
obstinationem debere puniri. lib. 10. Ep. 91. Quorum nibil cogi posse dicuntur
qui sunt revera Christiani.
and that did sacrifice to the Images, and cursed Christ. To do which no true
Christian could be compelled. He adds also, That there were others which
affirmed they had been Christians, but now were not; and says, that all these
worship the Emperors Image, and the Gods. These by the way I must tell you
were the Gnostiques, whose Principles were to deny Christ rather to suffer for
him.

Now from these Haereticks Pliny gives the Emperor an account of the Religion
of the Christians. They affirm, says he, this to be the sum either of their
fault or error, that they were wont upon a determined day, Adfirmabant autem
hanc fuisse summam aut culpae suae aut erroris, quod essent soliti stato die
ante lucem convenire, carmenque Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invicem; seque
Sacramento non in scelus aliquid obstringere, sed ne furta, ne latrocinia, ne
adulteria committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne depositum appellati abnegarent:
Quibus peractis, morem sibi discedendi fuisse rursusque coeundi ad capiendum
cibum promiscuum, tamen and innoxium.
before break of day, to meet together, and to fing turn by turn verses amongst
themselves to Christ as God; and that they bound themselves by an Oath, not to
any wickedness, but that they might not commit Thefts, nor Robberies, nor
Adulteries; that they might not break their promise, nor deny the pledge when
the owner calls for it; which being done, that it was their custom to depart,
and again to meet to eat together promiscuously, but without any hurt. We see
here what a notable description, or rather confession of the excellency of the
Christian Principles we have from the mouth of a Heathen. It Is true, afterward
he calls it Superstitionem pravam and immodicam, an empty and vain
superstition, which is to be wondered at to come from so sober a pen, when the
Principles he before repeated, to a natural man savors so much of sobriety and
reason. Perhaps he durst say no otherwise; but this he concludes with. It is
evidently certain, Certe satis constat prope jam desolata Templa coepisse
celebrari, and sacra solennia diu intermissa, rep^ti, passimque venire victimas
quarum adhuc rarissimus emptor inveniebatur, ex quo facile est opinari quae
turba hominum emendari possit, si fiat poenitentiae locus.
that the Temples now almost desolate, begin to be celebrated, and the sacred
solemnities, which long have been intermitted, are repeated; and that beasts to
be sacrificed do come from abroad (though to buy them as yet there are found
but few chapmen) from which it is an easy conjecture, how great a multitude of
men might be mended if there could be a place for repentance. From these words
we may gather how great a conquest Christianity in so short a time had made,
that their Temples should be desolate, that there should be no buyers of
Sacrifices to their Gods, unless a liberty of return and repentance be allowed
to Christians, who lapsed upon no other account but fear of torment. Fear made
Heathens, and only Reason Christians. The Rack was that that filled their
Temples, not their Religion, not the power of their Idol Gods.

To these Heathen Authorities let me add the Jews, who confess there was one
Jesus that did come. Their Talmudists call him suspensum, that is, hanged;
which they do, supposing it the most opprobrious and cursed title they could
give him, because their Law says, Cursed be every one that hangs upon a
Tree. Benjaminus Judilensis in his Itinerary acknowledges him slain at
Jerusalem; and at this day all the modern Jews allow such an one to have been.
I omit citing their Authorities for proving that which I think no man ever
denied of what Religion soever; but if there be any such, I have said enough to
convince any man in this particular.

The fourth thing I lay down is, That this Jesus that did come, Thesis 4.
did come about that time the Jews expected him, and did answer all the
Prophesies concerning the Messiah. Now to prove this particularly will take up
more time then the brevity I aim at will afford me: And therefore I shall only
touch at some of the most eminent marks that were to go before and follow the
Messiah, which happened about that time, and were verified in our Jesus.

First, For the time; and this will appear by several Prophesies that assign
the time of the Messiah coming.

The first considerable Prophecy that assigns the time of the Messiah coming
is Jacob's predictions, on his deathbed, of the Tribe of Judah, That the
Scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor the Lawgiver from between his feet,
until Shiloh come, and unto him shall this gathering of the people be. If by
Shiloh in this place be meant the Messiah, then either this Prediction must be
false, which to say is blasphemy, or else this Messiah must be come. Now that
by Shiloh is understood the Messiah, we have the confession of the ancient
Jews. Rabbi Johanam asking what was the name of the Messiah, they of the School
of Rabbi Schila answered his Name is Shiloh, according to that which is
written, until Shiloh come. The Cabalists tell us that in (...) Messiah venit
there are the same numerical letters that are in (...) Messiah, See M. Piersons
book of the Creed, Artic. 2. p. 162.
and therefore they so interpret it. And both Onkelos Jonathans Targum, and the
Hierusalems Targum for Shiloh puts Messiah: Hoornbeck in his forementioned
tract, De Con. et Con. Judaeis. li. 2. pa. 128.
reckons the concurrence of diverse Rabbis to this interpretation of Shiloh.
Rabbi Beehai, Rabbi Selomo Jaxtis on this place, Rabbi Moses Gerundensis, Rabbi
Joeb ben Sueb Abrunevel apud Menassem in Com. ad hunc locum. All which
Authorities assure us, That the Jews understood that prophecy of the Messiah,
and that [ until Shiloh come] is no more but until the Messiah come. I am in
this kind of Learning no ways versed, and therefore am forced to take the
Authorities as I find them quoted; but from them all this I must gather, That
the Ancient Jews acknowledge this to be a Prophecy of the Messiah; which, if
so, must evidently assure us he must be come: And that our Jesus did come
before the Jews polity was destroyed, these Jews that tell us he did come, do
assure us withal, That he was accused by the Sanhedrim, and suffered under
Pontius Pilate, when as yet their Government was not dissolved.

2. A second considerable Prophecy of the Messiah was, That he should come
whilst the second Temple stood. This is educed out of two places in the
Prophets. The first is that of Malachi 3. Chap. 1. Behold I will send my
Messenger, and he will prepare my way before me; and the Lord whom ye seek
shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant whom ye
delight in: Behold he shall come, says the Lord of Hosts. The second is that
of the Prophet Haggai, Chap. 2. v. 7. For thus says the Lord of Hosts; Yet
once it is but a little while, and I will shake the Heavens and the Earth, and
the Sea, and the dry Land. v. 8. And I will shake all Nations, and the desire
of all Nations shall come, and I will fill this House with glory, says the
Lord of Hosts. v. 10. The glory of this latter House shall be greater then that
of the former, says the Lord of Hosts: And in this place will I give peace,
says the Lord of Hosts. Now from these Prophesies it is most evident the
Messiah was to come whilst this second Temple stood; For else what does the
Prophet Malachi mean when he tells us, The Lord whom ye seek shall come to his
Temple? Or how can Haggai be understood, That the glory of the latter House
shall be greater then that of the former? unless the greatness of it consisted
in the presence of the Messiah; For alas we know, those that returned from the
Captivity, and saw the former House, were so far from rejoicing to see this
latter, that they wept to see it so far to fall in its magnificence, as Ezra
tells us in his Chap. 3. v. 12. The Jews themselves (to make this clearer) have
observed five signs of the glory of the first Temple, all which were wanting in
the second. The Vrim and Thummim, by which the High Priest was miraculously
taught the Will of God; The Ark of the Covenant from whence God gave his
answers by a clear and audible voice; The fire on the Altar which came down
from Heaven, and consumed the Sacrifices; The Divine presence or Habitation
with them represented by a visible appearance, or given as it were to the King
or High Priest by anointing with Oil of Unction: And lastly, the Spirit of
Prophecy, with which those especially who were called to the Spirit of
Prophecy were endued withal. I need not say what extraordinary Privileges
these are, they will sufficiently teach them us themselves. The building of the
second House was poor, nay, as Haggai tells us, Nothing. Mark his words. Who is
left among you that saw this House in her first glory? O how do you see it now!
Is it not in your eyes in comparison Nothing? Now is it possible any thing can
make this poor despicable second House to overtop in glory that former,
stately, and God-inhabited Temple; unless it be the visible, and bodily
appearing of God himself in it, unless the Messiah, the desire of all Nations,
the Eternal Son, yet Equal God, should exhibit himself personally and adorn
this House. But what need I say so much to confirm this Prophecy, when Manasse
Ben Israel, as Hoornbeck teaches me, confesses; That Rabbi David Kimki, Locum
Haggai ad Templum secundum istud applicant R. David Kimki, R. Hazaria A-adoni,
and magna pars veterum, testante Manasse nostro, libro de termino vitae, page
152. Hoornbeck lib. 2. page 152.
R. Hazaria A-adoni, and a great part of the Ancients apply this place of
Haggai to the second Temple. The Exceptions of some Jews to this place, are so
very frivolous, that I omit them wholly, but you may see them sufficiently
refuted by Hoornbeck in the place before mentioned. I think now it is evinced
that Christ must come, whilst this Temple stood, this Temple is utterly
ruined, therefore he is come; and that before it was ruined our Savior did
come, not only the Jews, who tell us he was crucified by Pontius Pilate, Tacit.
Annal. lib. 15. Histor. Lib. 5. Josep. de bello Judaico, lib. 7. Hegisippus in
Anacaephalaeo 51.
whilst he was Procurator of Judaea, but the Roman Historians which assure us
there was such a person that then did suffer, acknowledge his suffering was
long before the Emperor Vespasian destroyed the Temple; as you may see at
large by the Authorities in the Margent.

3. A third considerable Prophecy is that of the Prophet Daniel, which
expressly points at the time of the Messiah coming, and concurres with our
Jesus; the place is the 9. Cha. v. 24. Seventy weeks are determined upon thy
people, and upon thy holy City to finish the transgression, and to make an end
of sins, and to make reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting
righteousness, and to seal up the Vision and Prophecy, and to anoint the most
Holy. v. 25. Know therefore and understand, that from the going forth of the
Commandment to restore and to build Jerusalem unto the Messiah the Prince,
shall be seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks; the street shall be built
again, and the wall even in troublous times. v. 26. And after threescore and
two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for himself; and the People of the
Prince that shall come shall destroy the City, and the Sanctuary, and the end
thereof shall be with a flood, and unto the end of the War desolations are
determined. v. 27. And he shall confirm the Covenant with many for one week,
and in the midst of the week, he shall cause the Sacrifice, and Oblation to
cease, and for the overspreading of Abominations he shall make it desolate even
until the Consummation, and that determined shall be poured upon the desolate.
This Prophecy I suppose is clearly meant of the Messiah, because here we have
not only his Name, but his Sufferings, and the account of his Sufferings, not
for himself but the People. If now this be a Prophecy of the Messiah, as
hereafter I shall show you the ancient Jews confess, then this Messiah must
both be come, and cut off before the final destruction of Jerusalem, whose
final destruction the very Jews, were they not perfectly blind, must see was
that of Vespasian, since which time they have never had either the City or
Temple. That which is most difficult here is, the direct time of the Messiah
cutting off is told us under the name of so many weeks, Leviticus 25.8.
which being put for years, as we may find it so used in diverse places, and
sometimes for days, as the Prophet himself does in the following Chapter, Dan.
10.2.
does sufficiently teach us, that these weeks are not to be understood
literally weeks nor days, because both those periods passed without the
fulfilling of this Prophecy, but years, which I told you before, the Scripture
understood by weeks; and then we shall find this prophecy very exactly
fulfilled in our Jesus, allowing only some few years which must arise from the
not knowing the certain beginning of this prophecy. I confess Hoornbeck upon
this place pleases me well, who having before told us, that the difference in
the beginning of them, have caused some difference in the end; that some have
ended them in the Messiah's Baptism, others in his passion, others in the
destruction of the City, at last concludes with this. Unless perchance you had
rather, which I suppose not much, Nisi forte velis cui haud multum refragor non
praecise sumendas hebdomadas illas, and ante ad justum illum annorum numerum,
sed potius (...) circum circa numerum LXX. quem Deus in Prophetia hac
retinuerit, non ut ex amussim spectaretur, sed similitudine aliqua ad LXX.
annos Captivitatis. lib. 2. page 169.
that these weeks are not to be taken precisely and strictly to that just
number of years, but rather more largely about the number of LXX years, which
God in this prophecy retained, not that it should be looked to exactly, but
with some similitude to the LXX years of Captivity. I know there are some
endeavoring, and with great likelihood probable to effect it, a demonstration
of this prophecy by the Eclipses; unto these I wish all success imaginable,
though thus much me thinks is sufficient to satisfy any rational man, (that
the time when exactly to begin not being known, yet if we reckon backwards from
the birth of our Savior, and find it come very near; and besides consider that
those events are passed which were to follow the Messiah cutting off) that this
prophecy was exactly fulfilled in him. There remains thus only to show, that
the Ancient Jews understood this place of the Messiah. (I need say nothing that
they expected him then, having said sufficiently of that before.) Hoornbeck to
this purpose tells us, that R b. Saudia a Gaon, R. Nahman Gerundensis, and
diverse others expound this place of the Messiah; but at last he gives Manasse
Ben Isreal's testimony, which being very material I shall at large quote it out
of him. But that I might add this of the Interpretation of this prophecy;
Verum ut addam illud interpretationis hujus Prophetiae, vary illa etiam ab
hujus aevi Hebraeis explicata est: Neque illud mirum cuique videri debet, si in
Prophetia tam obscura varient sententiae. Idcirco sunt qui ita illas
septuaginta septimanas accipiunt, ut dicant post finem illarum venturum
Messiam, qui illos dominos constitutus sit totius mundi. Atque hoc quidem
opinati sunt omnes qui arma tunc temporis adversus Romanos susceperunt: At
licet multis aerumnis and laboribus obnoxii essent, nihilominus tamen semper
spem suam in venturo Messia posuerunt, quippe putarunt eum mediis in aerumnis
conspectum sui praebiturum esse. Quare verba haec, ad consummandum
praevaricationem, ita exposuerunt: Ut post expirationem LXX hebdomadum peccata
remitterentur. De termino vitae, p. 175. Hoorn. p. 169.
for this is variously expounded by the Hebrews of this Age: Neither let this
be a wonder to any if there be difference of opinions in so obscure a
prophecy. There are therefore those who take these 70 weeks so, that they say
after the end of them the Messiah is to come, who would constitute the Jews
Lords of the whole Earth. And this truly all those did imagine that took arms
against the Roman Emperor: And although they were obnoxious to many miseries
and labors, yet notwithstanding they always placed their hope in the Messiah
that was to come, because they thought he would afford the sight of himself
when they were in the midst of their miseries; wherefore these words, to finish
the Transgressions, they expounded; that after the expiration of 70 weeks sins
are pardoned. I think if a Christian had writ these words, he could not more
ingenuously have confessed the truth. We have here an evident Testimony that
the Jews that lived about the time of the destruction of Jerusalem looked for
the Messiah then to come, because they thought Daniels period was ended; and
though (as I have often told you) they expected a temporal Prince, yet they
thought this prophecy did concern the time when he should come. So that to
shut up this Argument, we evidently knowing even by their confession, that our
Jesus did come a little before that time that he was cut off; and that the Jews
thought Daniels period then out, at which period they expected him, may be
sufficiently assured, that our Messiah came about the time the Jews expected
him. So much for the time touching the Prophesies which were fulfilled in him.
The second branch of this position I shall briefly show; the brevity I aim at
not affording me liberty to name all, but the most considerable.

2. For the Prophesies, That they were fulfilled in our Savior.

1. The first Prophecy of note concerning our Savior, was the Prophecy of
his forerunner, Elias was to come. This we have prophesied by Isaiah, and
Malachy, Isa. 40.3: Mal. 4.5. Jo. 1.21.
and we find verified in John Baptist, as our Savior tells us. It Is true, he
denies himself to be Elias, that is, to be the individual Elias the Thesbite,
whom the Jews supposed should be born again, when John came only in the power
of Elias. Now that there was such an one Josephus in his Annals confesses, and
moreover adds, That amongst the Jews there was an opinion that Herod's Army was
by a just judgment of God destroyed, Apud Judaeos autem fuit opinio justa
ultione numinis deletum Herodis exercitum propter Johannem qui Baptists
cognominatus est. Hunc cum Tetrarcha necavit virum optimum, Judaeos excitantem
ad virtutem studia, and imprimis pietatis and justitiae, simulque ad baptismi
lavacrum, etc. Lib. 18. ca. 18. I have not the Greek Edition.
by reason of John who was named the Baptist; for this good man the Tetrarch
slew, who incited the Jews to study Virtue, and most principally Piety and
Justice, and withal to come to be baptized. And so he proceeds, telling John
Baptists Authority, and the fear that Herod had of him, by reason of the great
concourse of people that followed him upon the account of his piety.

2. The second prophecy I look on as most remarkable is that of the Prophet
Esaias, Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign. Isa. 7.11.14.
Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a son, and shall call his name
Immanuel. That this prophecy concerned our Savior, his birth is sufficient to
assure us; but that we may clearly understand it, here are three things to be
considered. First, That the word (...)signifies a Virgin, and not any woman.
Secondly, That the other exceptions of the Jews against this Prophecy are
frivolous. And that our Savior was born of a Virgin.

For the first, briefly the word (...) is but seven times in the Old Testament,
three times with the Affix (...), and always signifies a Virgin. Abraham's
servant uses this word in his prayer, Genesis 24. and certainly he desired a
Virgin for his Master Isaac; besides, in ver. 16 we find the Scripture telling
us Rebecca knew no man, and yet she is called (...). I repeat not the several
places for brevity. The only place which the Jews urge that signifies an
Harlot, is Prove. 30.18, 19. The words are these, There are three things which
are too wonderful for me, yea, four which I know not; (ver. 19.) The way of an
Eagle in the Air; the way of a Serpent upon a Rock; the way of a Ship in the
midst of the Sea; and the way of a Man with a Maid. Now this they will not
allow to be a Maid, but an Harlot, because in the verse following the way of an
adulteress woman is described: Such is the way of an Adulteress woman, she
eats and wipeth her mouth, and says, I have done no wickedness. And this
Manasse Ben Israel and all the Jews object.

In answer to this, it is not a necessary consequence, though the twentieth
verse speaks of an Adulteress woman, therefore the nineteenth must: But on the
other side, the obscureness to be known rather persuades it to be a Virgin than
a Whore, whose Actions are too common to be obscure. I am sure, that the word
most properly signifies a Virgin may be educed of the Etymology, it being
derived from (...) abscondit, la^uit, to hide, denoting to us the custom of the
Jews, and other Eastern Nations, in keeping the Virgin from the sight of men;
and (if we may credit Hoornbeck) there is no more proper word in the Hebrew
Language to signify a Virgin. lib. 3. c. 1. p. 225.
But allowing, in this place, it should signify a Whore, here is but one place
of seven that may probably signify so. As for the place we have now in hand,
it is impossible it should be so interpreted: For the Lord here promises a sign
to the whole house of Israel. Now can it be imagined, that a woman should bear
a son, should be a sign? A sign must have something of wonder in it; and is that
at all wonderful? The Text it self will persuade us to understand it of a
Virgin. But upon what account is this not to be understood of a Virgin? Is it a
miracle above the power of Omnipotency? Is it impossible for God, who made all
things out of nothing, to make a Woman conceive without a Man? The Jews
themselves believe, That God made Adam out of the Earth, Eve out of Adams side;
the Jews themselves tell us, that Aarons Rod blossomed without root; and is
this at all more a wonder then any of these? let any indifferent person judge.
But however our modern Jews interpret it, the Ancients did it by Virgin, as
Justin Martyr answers Tryphou the Jew, Dial. cum Try. Jud. p. 243.
and as their own Nation in the Septuagint Translation renders it (...), which
can signify nothing else; and the holy Rabbi Hakadoth tells us, the Messiah
mother must be a Virgin, and her name Mary, as he gathered out of the
Cabalists. 3 Quest. in Esaias 9.


Secondly, To this first exception the Jews add two or three more, which I
repeat, that I may make the way clear before me.

The first is, How the birth of our Savior by a Virgin, which was to come so
many ages after, could be a sign to Ahaz and the house of Israel for his
delivery. Unto which is answered, first, that not only the exhibiting of a
sign, but the promising of a sign to come hereafter is sufficient. God had
often promised a Messiah; but how he should be born was not yet foretold; Now
the foretelling of that may be a sign. Besides another, and a more apparent
promise of the Messiah coming, though many ages to follow, might evidently
teach them, that God, who would so wonderfully then save his people, would not
suffer them to be ruined by their enemies. Now, of this we have some examples;
I will name but one or two. Samuel gave Saul a sign of his being Anointed King,
that it was from God, because when he was gone from him, at Rachels Sepulcher,
1 Samuel 10.1, 2, 3
he should find men that would tell him his fathers Asses were found. And so
the sign that God gave Eli of the destruction of his Family, was, 1 Samuel 2.34.
that his two Sons, Hophni and Phineas, should both die in a day. The Jews
second exception is, because our Saviors Name was not Emanuel. To this is
answered, It Is not necessary his Name should be Emanuel, since his nature was
so, since he was God with us, as his name signifies. And that names often show
the nature, we have a most remarkable example in the same Prophet, of the
Messiah also; in his ninth chapter, ver. 6. he tells us, His Name shall be
called Wonderful Counselor, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace; which
Title will appear, to every eye, a description of the nature, not of the name
of the Messiah. The last exception is concerning the words following this
Prophecy, which are, Butter and Milk shall be eat, and how they are verified
in our Savior: in which there is no repugnancy, but that he should be educated
as other Children are; and that before the Child should know either good or
evil, the enemies of Judaea shall be destroyed.

3. That our Savior was born of a Virgin. Against the Jews I have this to say;
That we have the same, and as great Authority, nay greater then they have, to
prove the Miracles of Moses or any of the Prophets: For what Authority besides
the Books of Scripture, and the constant attestation of their own Nation in
several Ages, can the Jews produce? And have not we much more? That our Savior
should be born of a Virgin I have showed you was prophesied; That he was born
of a Virgin, we have the four Evangelists to attest it; and in answer to the
constant Tradition of their single Nation for their Miracles, we have the
constant witness of all Christians, not only of one but of every Nation, nay of
the convicted Jews. The first publishers of Christianity were Jews, and they
witnessed this; so that we have part of their Nation divided against
themselves: And that the Christians always believed this, the Articles of their
Creed will inform us. Now if the Jews think it reasonable we should believe the
Miracles of their Prophets, have they not the same, or greater reason to
believe this miraculous Birth of our Savior? But to this let me add;
Secondly, If the Virgin Mary was not a Virgin when she brought forth our
Savior, why was she not punished for an Adulteress? For Joseph we know denied
Jesus to be his Son, the Law commanded an Adulteress to be put to death, the
Jews wanted not malice to have prosecuted her, nor (had she been guilty) will
to have punished her. If in this particular there had been the least of fault
in this blessed Virgin, the Pharisees had had too great an advantage to have
let it slip. Joseph might easily have been the Plaintiff, the Pharisees her
Enemies the Judges, and yet we see her untouched, because immaculate and
without spot. Now is not this a more then probable Argument to convince a man
of this truth. If we consider the fury and malice the Jews prosecuted our
Savior with, the hatred they bore the Apostles, the persecutions they raised
against all Christians, can we rationally suppose this blessed Virgin the
Mother of our Jesus, should pass without their notice, had they not been
assured of the truth of her Virginity, and believed their further enquiries
would have advanced the Christians Faith, and abolished theirs? But in the
third place let me add what Suidas tells me of the great Secret Theodosius the
Jew told Philip a Christian Merchant concerning our Savior; which being too
large here to repeat, I shall contract the sum of it into as few words as I
can. In the time of the Emperor Jnstinian, there was one Theodosius a chief
man amongst the Jews, that was intimate with Philip a Christian Merchant: This
intimacie being great between them, Philip attempted, out of the love he bare
him, to convert him to Christianity; which Theodesius seeing, and perceiving
this attempt proceeded merely out of the affection he bore to him, told him
plainly, that it was vainglory and ambition were the only cause kept him a Jew,
that he was a chief man amongst his people, when amongst Christians he should
be inconsiderable; but yet withal he told him, that out of gratitude to him he
would reveal a Secret of his Nation, which would be very advantageous to the
Christian Religion. In the Temple of Jerusalem (says he) there were 22
Ordinary Priests, out of which number when any died the remainder proceeded to
the Election of another: One of the number dying, the Survivours, according to
their custom, proceeded to an Election, and diverse being named, and either for
their manners or abilities not approved of, at last one of the youngest amongst
them having liberty to speak, proposed Jesus the Son of Joseph the Carpenter,
who was inferior to none but in age, nay excelled them all; Against our
Savior there was only this Objection, that he was not of the Tribe of Levi,
Joseph being of the Tribe of Judah; unto which was replied, that anciently the
Tribe of Levi and Judah did intermingle one amongst another, so that Joseph was
of both Tribes; which answer being satisfactory they all concurred in him. Now
it being the custom upon the Registring of the Priests name, to set down both
his Fathers and Mothers name, they understanding before by the Proposer of him,
that his Father Joseph was dead, thought fit to send for Mary his Mother, to
examine her if he was her Son, and to understand the name of her husband; which
being done Mary came to them, and they telling her the custom of Registring
both the name of her Son, and of his Parents, demanded whether he was her Son:
The Virgin answered, he is my Son, and there are yet living both men and women
that can attest it; but for his father he has none upon earth; and so relating
the story of the Angels saluting her in Galilaea, and withal assuring them,
that notwithstanding this Birth she was still a Virgin; they thought fit to
send for faithful Midwives to examine the truth of this. The Midwives being
come, found her, as she reported, still a Virgin; and withal there came some
also that witnessed her bearing Jesus: This amazing them all they desired the
Virgin Mary frankly to tell them whose Son he was; she told them he was her
Son, and the Son of God: Which thing being heard, they fetched out the Book,
and wrote down; This day this Priest dyed, the Son of this Father and Mother,
and by the common consent of all is put into his place Jesus the Son of the
living God, and the Virgin Mary. And this Book (says Theodosius) was kept by
the chief of the Jews from being taken at Jerusalem, and is now preserved in
the City of Tyberias; and this was revealed to me. Philip all this while
hearing this story, told Theodosius he would acquaint the Emperor that he
might send to Tyberias and publish this Book, to convince the Jews of their
incredulity: Unto which the Jew replied, it is to no end, for the Jews will burn
the Book, and you will only by it destroy our Nation by Wars, and not obtain
your desire. This (says he) I tell you that you may believe I have a great
affection for you. This story Suidas tell us in the name of Jesus, and that
they received it from those to whom Philip told it; and withal adds, without
he had been nominated and constituted a Priest, the Jews would not have
suffered him to have performed any sacred Office in the Temple. And that he did
so, Josephus confesses in his Book of the destruction of Jerusalem, and Luke
cap. 4. v. 16. mentions. Thus much Suidas. I can say nothing more to confirm
this Testimony, but what these excellent Compilers say for it themselves, only
thus much; It seems too punctual to be forged; and that the learned Reporters
firmly believed it, as in the last words they tell us, may persuade us to do so
too.

3. Of this Prophecy I have been the larger, because I find both from the
Atheists and Jews such opposition to it. I shall proceed to name others, and
only name them. The Messiah was to come of the Tribe of Judah, and of the
Family of David according to Esay's Prophesies: Esaias 11.1, 10.
There shall come forth a Rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a Branch shall
grow out of his roots, and the Spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him: And
again, In that day there shall be a root of Jesse, which shall stand for an
Ensign of the people, unto it shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be
glorious. Now this we find verified in our Savior, as the Evangelists teach
us. Mat. 1.1 Hez. 14.
The Messiah was to be born at Bethlem, as we may see not only by Micah's
prophecy: Micah 5. v. 2.
And thou Bethlem Ephrata, though thou be little amongst the thousands of
Judah, yet out of thee shall he come forth unto me, that is, to be Ruler in
Israel; whose goings forth have been from old, from everlasting; But from the
Jews themselves, as S. John tells us, being scandalized at him, as if he had
been born in Galilee, demanded, Shall Christ come out of Galille, John 7.41, 42
has not the Scripture said that Christ comes of the Seed of David, and out
of the Town of Bethlem where David was? And the Jews since Christ's coming
acknowledge Bethlem to be the place of his Birth, as R. Selomo Jarchi, Rab.
David Kimki, Rab. Elieza, and others. Now that our Savior was born at Bethlem
the Evangelists teach us, and withal the occasion of her leaving Nazareth in
Galilee, Luke 24.
that according to the Emperor Augustus commands Joseph and his espoused wife
Mary might be taxed with the rest of their kindred at Bethlem in Judaea, being
that they were of the House and Lineage of David. I might particularize many
more, but I shall proceed to his sufferings, because I find that did so much
stumble the Jews.

4. Under this of sufferings we may consider the mean condition he lived in,
which we find evidently foretold by the Prophet Esaias: Isai. c. 53. v. 2, 3.
He has no form and comeliness, and when we shall see him, there is no beauty
that we should desire him: And he is despised and rejected of all men. And we
may find the Apostle teaching us, that though he was in the Form of God, and
thought it no robbery to be equal with God; Phil. 2.6, 7.
Yet he made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a Servant.
We see he lived under the command of his parents for 30 years, who were but of
mean profession, and upon this account many were scandalized by him; as S.
Matthew tells us: Mat. 13.53.
Nay this contempt of him was so great, that we must acknowledge it fulfilled,
That he was a man of sorrows, and acquainted with grief, Isai. 53.3.
as Esaias foretold of him. Add to this his sufferings, in which every
particular we shall find foretold. If Zachary tell us, Zach. 11.12.
They weighed for my price 30 pieces of silver; Mat. 26.15.
S. Matthew will show us, that Judas fold Jesus at the same rate: Isai. 53.3.
If Isaiah say, He was wounded for our transgressions; If Zachary, Zach. 12.10.
They shall look upon him whom they have pierced: Psalm. 22.16.
If the Prophet David more particularly, They have pierced my hands and my
feet; John 20.25.
The Evangelist will show us, how he was fastened to the Cross, and Jesus
himself the print of the nails. Psalm. 22.
If David say, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me! the Son of David will
say, Eli, Eli, lama-sabacthani! Mat. 27.46.
Let Isaiah say, Isai. 58.12.
He was numbered with the Transgressors, Mar. 15.27.
and you shall find him crucified between two Thieves, one on the right hand,
the other on the left. Psalm. 69.21.
If the Psalmist tells us, In my thirst they gave me vinegar to drink, you
shall find in the Evangelist, Jesus, John 19.28.
that the Scripture might be fulfilled, said, I thirst. And they took a sponge
and filled it with Vinegar, and put it in a reed, and gave it him to drink. If
you read in the Psalmist, Psalm. 22.13.
They part my garments among them, and cast lots upon my vesture, the Soldiers
shall fulfill it, Who took his garments and made four parts, John 19.23, 24
every Soldier his part, and also his Coat: Now the Coat was without seam,
woven from the top throughout: They said therefore amongst themselves, Let us
not rent it, but cast lots for it whose it shall be. And lastly, let Isaiah
tell us, He shall be brought like a Lamb to the slaughter, Isai. 53.7, 8.
and be cut off out of the Land of the living; All the Evangelists will tell
us, how like a Lamb he suffered, not opening his mouth. To these let me add
his sufferings after his death. Isaiah tells us, Isai. 53.9.
He made his grave with the wicked; and the Evangelist tells us, He was buried
in the Tomb of Joseph of Arimathaea. If Hosea tells us, Hos. 6.2.
After two days he will revive us, and the third day he will raise us up; we
shall find our Savior by his Resurrection will not only revive but raise us
all.

5 And thus we have done with the sufferings of our Savior before, in, and
after his Passion, and showed you how all the Prophesies were fulfilled in him.
Before I come to treat against the Jews, I shall show you how our Savior was a
King, a Ruler, a Captain, and executed that spiritually which the Jews
understanding of a temporal Prince, were both deceived in their expectation,
and frustrated in their hopes. The Messiah was to be a Leader and Commander of
the People, as Isaiah tells us; Isa. 55.4. Dan. 9 25. Mic. 5.2.
A Prince, as Daniel; A Ruler of the People, as Micah. His Dominion was to be
from Sea to Sea, and from the River unto the ends of the Earth. They that dwell
in the wilderness were to bow before him, and his Enemies were to lick the
dust. The Kings of Tarshish and the Isles were to bring presents. Psa. 72.8, 9,
10, 11.
The Kings of Sheba and Seba were to offer gifts. Yea, all Kings were to fall
down before him; all Nations were to serve him: So the Psalmist. Psa. 68.18.
The Messiah was to ascend on high, and to lead captivity captive, and to
receive gifts for men, as David teaches us. To name no more, we shall find
our Savior exactly performing all these Prophesies. Who fitter to be a King
than he to whom all power both in Heaven and Earth was given? Mat. 28.18.
Who fitter to reign then he that shall destroy all our Enemies; yea, our last
Enemy, Death? 1 Cor. 15.26.
Who fitter for a Commander of his people than he, who having spoiled
Principalities and Powers, 2 Cor. 15.
made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it? What Dominion is like
our Saviors, which for duration has no other bounds but Eternity, and, for
extent, has no limitation but what he pleases? Who more properly a Conqueror
than he that overcame Hell, Rev. 18.18. Rev. 23.14. Deuteronomy. 18.15.
chained the Devil, and conquered death? In a word, our Savior was to be a
Prophet; A Prophet, says Moses, shall the Lord God raise unto thee: A Priest,
and that after the Order of Melchisedech, Psa. 110.4.
as David teaches us: And a King to conquer and subdue his Enemies. Now who
more a Prophet to teach the way of Salvation, than he that was the way himself?
Joh. 14.6. Heb. 7.24, 25, 26.
Who more a Priest than he who offered himself a Sacrifice for his people? And
who more a King than he that must Reign till he has put all things under his
feet? 1 Cor. 15.25.


To conclude, It is evident the Messiah was to suffer, and undergo what
sufferings were foretold of him; and of this the Jews themselves were no ways
ignorant, as may appear by their imagining a double Messiah, the one a
suffering, the other a conquering Prince; the one the son of Joseph, the other
the son of David; the one was to be slain, fighting against Gog and Magog, the
other, succeeding him, was to obtain the Kingdom: These dreams the Targum in
Zach. 9.9. and in Malachy 3.1. Jarchi Abravanel, and all the Jews expound to
us, as Hoornbeck teaches me; li. 3. ca. 1. p. 240.
and that remarkable place in Zach. 12.10. They pierced my hands and my feet,
they understand of their Messiah Ben Joseph. The whole story of this Messiah of
theirs you may find repeated by Hoornheck; but it is too large, and too
frivolous for me to transcribe out of him; All that from the premises I can
gather is this, That the Jews, rather than they would imagine the son of David
to be a spiritual Prince, rather then they would believe they should not
temporally be delivered, and through the conduct of the Messiah conquer the
Earth; and by no means knowing how to solve those predictions which foretell his
sufferings, would feign a double Messiah, of which there is no footsteps in
Scripture. So that this advantage we Christians have, to prove that our Savior
(having both done and suffered whatever was foretold of the Messiah; nay, in
his Conquests far exceeded what the greatest earthly Conqueror ever reached
to, by subduing that which overcame them all, even Death it self) ought to be
admitted as the only Messiah of the world; and the Jews, if their Infidelity
amounted not to obstinacy, must necessarily be convinced, that he who was able
to perform what, and more then they expected of their double Messiah, ought to
be received as the only Savior of the world.

The fifth Thesis I lay down is this, Thesis 5.
That the Religion delivered by Jesus Christ is, where it is not above reason,
most reasonable, and upon the Principles of Reason ought to be admitted: Where
it is above the reach of Reason, and depends upon the Authority of the
Lawgiver, is confirmed by miracles, which, carrying Omnipotency, and Gods Seal
perpetually annexed to them, need not desire but command admittance.

I have here a Theme so large, that to handle every part of it will require a
far greater length in this discourse then I aim at. I shall but touch upon the
first part of this Thesis, and handle that of Miracles more largely; and my
reason is, because I find Miracles may persuade men when Arguments cannot.
Caligula feared not the Gods till they thundered; and fear is such a passion
that it always persuades more then the greatest Rhetoric. For our
understanding this, we must consider there are two sorts of Precepts, Natural,
and Positive. The first of these Nature imprints in every man; the second are
those that each Lawgiver, upon his own Authority, in joins his Disciples. The
first of these we are bound to do, as men; the second, as Christians. The first
of these we are bound to observe, because to that end we were created; The
second, which we admit upon the authority of the Lawgiver, we are to obey upon
the same reason, and for that very account as we admit him our Lawgiver; and so
that which persuades us to be such an ones Disciples, must persuade us to obey
his positive Commands. And so upon this score we ought to believe those future
rewards which are promised. Now though these positive Precepts and Promises,
our blessed Savior has taught us, are in the commands most excellent, and in
the rewards, to a rational Soul most (nay only) satisfactory, and so upon that
account carry along with them strength enough to persuade obedience; yet those
several confirmations of the miracles which forced the world to be Christ's
Disciples, must also force it to obey what he commands, and to believe what he
promises.

These Natural Precepts are that Law which all the world have ever been obliged
to observe, whether you will call them the seven Precepts of Noah, or the Ten
Commandments, or reduce them, as our Savior does, into two Commandments, Mat.
22.37, 39.
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul,
and all thy mind; and thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. For to him
that ponders them it will appear, that they are all but one and the same Law;
and that each of these Precepts natural Reason it self will persuade us to
obey. And though in the fourth Commandment the positive time of serving God is
by many believed a peculiar injunction, appropriated to that Nation; as also
that particular exhibition of this Law, as it is delivered in Exodus 20. is
upon the same account: Yet all these Commandments containing in them nothing
but what is natural, and obliged the world before this delivery; and the fourth
containing in it that which all Nations that ever owned a God, practiced; to
wit, that some time must be set apart for his service, do sufficiently assure
us they are but another Edition, or setting forth of that Law which Nature
teaches every man to observe. Now because the ten Commandments seem to be the
largest copy of this natural Law, I shall briefly examine them, and shall show
you that reason commands them to be obeyed upon natural principles.

That there is a God, is a thing so natural that there never yet was any Nation
that served not some Deity or other. There have been Nations found out that
lived without Laws; but never any that lived without Gods. Diverse Nations have
lived without King, and without house, going stark naked, and wandering like
wild beasts, from place to place, to find their sustenance; yet none of these
but have had some spice of Religion, some God or other they served: From whence
it is apparent, That it is more natural to believe there is a God, than for a
man to be a sociable creature, than for a man by clothes to preserve himself
from the injury of weather, or by houses to fix himself in a settled condition.

The next gradation I follow, is, That there is or can be but one God. For if
God be Omnipotent, there can be but one Omnipotent Power, because two
Omnipotents cannot subsist together. And the reason is, Either their Wills are
different, or alike; If different, then upon the principle of Omnipotency, each
of their Wills must subsist together, which is impossible: If alike, then upon
what reason can a man imagine there should be more Omnipotency, which one if he
be Omnipotent can effect? It Is a Maxim in Nature, That it is in vain to do
that by many which we can do by few. This position has in the world had a
great, though not an Universal consent. Pythagoras affirmed it, as Cicero tells
me. Socrates was forced to drink poison for the belief of one God, as Agellius
tells me: And Plato Socrates's Scholar in his 13 Ep. to Dionysius the King of
Sicily, (if the Epistle be his, and if not, it is as ancient) telling the King
that he was by many put upon writing, which he could not easily avoid; at last
gave him this Note to know his Epistles by. My serious Epistles God begin,
(...). Tom. 3. inter opera Platonis, Ep. 13.
those that are otherwise the Gods. I must but touch upon things, that I may go
forward.

If then there be but one God, one Omnipotent power, who is the Author and
Preserver of all things, then it is most reasonable, that this one God, and
this God alone should be served. The reason of homage and service is merely a
grateful return for benefits received: Now if all that we are and have come
from this God, ought we not only to serve and to do our homage to him? We count
it amongst us impossible for a man to serve two Masters, and can we suppose it
possible or rational for a man to join Idols, and Creatures, those things which
in themselves are inferior to us, in our sacred adorations of God? The reason
why we serve God is, because he is that Omnipotent power which made us, the
Author of our being and preservation, and can we believe it aequitable for us
to divide our services between an impotent Creature and an Omnipotent God; to
share our Devotions with the work of our own hands, which are so far from
preserving us, that it is in our power to destroy them.

To proceed, as this God is only to be served, so upon the former account it is
impious for us to speak slightly of him, of his Name, and of his Attributes.
The Name of God commands awe and reverence. See what Devotions and dread the
Heathens bore to their supposed Gods, and shall not we do much more to the
true? But certainly it is most rational not to use the Name of God, and call his
Majesty to be a witness to our foolish Oaths, much less to our perjuries.
(...); And so our Savior expounds this third Commandment. This last is a sin,
as I have often thought with my self, that flies in the face of God, nay, that
denies him to be a God: For certainly he that uses Gods Name, and calls him to
be a witness to such a promise, by the breaking of it does declare, that God
(in whose presence he made it) either did not regard what he promises, or is
not able severely to punish the nonperformance. But to go on; as this God is
only to be served, and to be had in reverence of all that call upon him; so it
is a necessary deduction from the premises, that there must be some time set
apart for his Service. And though I should allow the seventh day, nay the
seventh part of our time to be a Law particular to that Jewish Nation; yet
certainly if the Jews, who lived under the burden of so many Ceremonies, and
desired to see even that which we enjoy, were commanded to set apart so much of
their time, as a seventh part for Gods Service; it is not reasonable for us who
have received more to do less; but as we exceed them in mercies, so we ought to
exceed them in our Services.

Thus we may see the first Table contains in it nothing else but what he that
will be ruled by reason must be forced to obey. That which the second Table
enjoins us are duties that concern our selves; so that these principles must
appear rational even to Atheists and Scepticks, because in the observation of
them society is upheld, propriety maintained, and men are prevented for
degenerating into Beasts.

These Commands are in number 6. the first an affirmative Precept, the last 5
Negative. The first five are so natural, that I shall forbear to say any thing
of them, because he that considers them must know, they are that Pale of
Commutative and Distributive Justice which preserves Mankind from destroying
themselves. The last, Thou shall not covet, seems to carry in it somewhat more
then Nature teaches; but I think upon due examination it will appear
otherwise: For to desire another man's goods when we know we cannot have them,
must either put us upon unjust endeavors for them, or else torture our minds
that we cannot obtain them. If now Nature it self teach us to do as we would be
done to, if we would not have others covet what we have, we must not covet what
is another man's. The great Objection against the Naturality of this
Commandment, is from that Speech of the Apostle; I had not known lust except
the Law had said; Thou shall not covet. I shall not repeat you many Expositions
of the place, Beza alone shall serve the turn. What therefore (says he) the
Apostle adds, Quid igitur subjecit Apostolus sese ex illo demum legis illius
divinitus latae praecepto didicisse, Cupiditatem esse peccatum, non est
simpliciter and absolute accipiendum, sed duplici respectu, viz. tam quatenus
in illa divinitus lata lege expressius omnis Cupiditas damnatur, quam illa
naturali lege, tum quod vitiofitas illa nostra Cupiditatem nostram quo apertius
reprehendit co vehementius incendit.
that he at last learnt that Covetousness was a sin, out of that precept of
that divine Law, is not simply or absolutely to be taken, but in a double
respect; viz. as in that divine given Law all Covetousness is more expressly
condemned then in that Natural Law, then because our vitiosity, by how much it
openly reproves our Covetousness, by so much it more vehemently enflames it.
But I need not press this nor any other Exposition, if to love our Neighbors
as our self be a natural Precept, since the Apostle tells us in the same
Epistle: Romans 13. v. 9.
For this, Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou shall not kill, Thou shall not
steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou shall not covet: And if there be
any other Commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, Thou
shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. Thus briefly I have examined these
Natural Precepts.

Our Savior that great and most excellent Lawgiver has advanced them higher.
Now because these advancements are to be evinced out of Reason, I shall not
press their obedience upon the authority of the Lawgiver. I shall name the
chief of them.

1. The Commandment Thou shall not kill, Mat. 5. v. 21. to the 27. our Savior
has advanced to this height, that it prohibites the very being angry with our
brother; nay, causless anger is forbidden, though it go no further then the
breast, much more if it proceed to the tongue, or fall into violent railings.

2. The second Commandment that is advanced is, Thou shall not commit Adultery.
Now this our Savior has reduced to the very thoughts; Mat. 5. v. 27.31.
we must not have an adulterous thought. Justin Martyr presses the excellency
of Christian Religion from this very Command. (...). Ap. 2. p. 48.
For he that indeed has committed adultery is not only rejected by our
Savior, but he that has a desire to commit adultery, he that has but an
adulterous thought.

3. Another advancement is the taking away the Law of Retaliation and Revenge.
This doing good for evil is the excellency of Christian Religion: And in this
particular amongst other things Christianity vastly excelled the strictest
Heathen Morality. See what Aristotle says of this point. It is servile to
suffer evil treating. (...). lib. 4. ad Nicomachum, de moribus.
Cicero also in his Book de Inventione places Revenge amongst Natural
Principles. Ad Atticum he says, I hate the man, Odi hominem, and odero, utinam
ulcisci possem. Et in Antonium. Sic ulciscar facinora singula quemadmodum a
quibusque sum provocatus.
and will hate, would I could be revenged. And against Anthony; So I will
revenge every wickedness, according to the manner as I am provoked.

Under these three heads are comprehended all the advancements our Savior has
put upon this Moral Law; and let us examine them, and we shall find them highly
reasonable, and not only so, but most excellent: For that which makes the
Subject most pure, and most happy, has in it self the greatest reason to
command obedience.

Now upon this foundation let us examine the two first, which forbids murderous
and adulterous thoughts, as well as the actions. Are not these thoughts the
causes of the actions? and is there any possibility totally to take away the
effect, if we remove not the cause? Besides every man consists of a Soul and a
body; by actions the body is defiled, the contamination that accrues tothe Soul
is from the thoughts, where every wickedness is hatched before it is produced
to act: Now is there not more reason to keep the Soul pure then the body, in as
much as it is the most excellent part of men? and that if we keep out
wickedness there, we shall keep the body from acting it. If Nature then
commands us to abstain from such actions, does it not command us to abstain
from the causes of them? If Nature teaches purity in the body the worser part,
does it not require it upon greater reason in the more excellent part? I can
but touch these things. The third is, the taking away Revenge, and not only
that, but a returning good for evil. And is it not in it self the greatest
victory to make our enemies acknowledge they have wronged us? Injuries, Tacitus
tells us, Agnitae videntur, spretae exolescunt; they are seen by our taking
notice of them, but vanish if we despise them. Was this counsel for a Heathen,
and is it rational for a Christian to study Revenge? Consider the nature of it:
Revenge is a desire to do another an injury, because he served me so. Very good
reason. Then if a wicked man has robbed me, I must turn Thief too to rob him;
If I have been reviled and railed at, I must do so too. There is in every
Revenge that which in it self is unjust: For it is the injuries and unjust
actions a man has done, that puts in the party injured a desire of revenge:
Now to be revenged of him is to serve him so too, to do him the like or a worse
turn: Is not this a rare foundation to advance humanity on? But on the other
side, let us consider, what great advantages we obtain by doing good for evil;
now that which is most advantageous to Mankind, is most natural and reasonable:
For besides that we shall overcome our Enemies by heaping Coals of fire upon
his head, we shall obtain peace with all men; what man will wrong us that do
good to all, and injure none? If (says Tertullian) we are commanded to love
our Enemies, Si inimicos jubemur diligere, quem habemus odisse? Item si laesi
vicem refer prohibemur, nec de facto pares sumus, quem possumus laedere?
Apol. cap. 36.
whom have we to hate? If we are forbidden to revenge our injuries, we cannot
by our actions be equal with them whom we may hurt. Is not now this principle
most reasonable, which frees us from injustice, makes our enemies our friends,
and establishes peace upon lasting foundations? I refer this to any
indifferent Judge.

These Precepts upon the Principles of Nature being evinced reasonable, the
next thing we must consider is, whether we have obeyed them: For if reason
commands them, a rational man upon the breach of them must acknowledge, he
deserves punishment, because in so doing he has destroyed the end of his
Creation, as to God, and the means of his subsisting, as to man.

This his meriting of punishment will appear more evident, if we consider, that
upon the same reason as he believes there is a God, he must believe this God
does either reward or punish obedience or disobedience to that Natural Law
which is imprinted in every man's heart. For reward and punishments are
necessary Adjuncts to a Deity. The Apostle joins this to the belief of God, as
a thing in its own nature inseparable. Mark his words. Heb. 11.6.
For he that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a Rewarder
of them that diligently seek him. And truly if this was not the consequence of
the belief of a God, this belief would have no influence at all upon man or his
actions; For if God did neither reward nor punish, did not regard nor take
notice of what was done, what Arguments can be forcible to persuade men not to
obey what sense, rather then what nature and reason teaches?

This being then true, that the breakers of these Natural Laws deserve
punishment, and that God will punish such; The next thing we must consider is,
whether all mankind have not broken these Laws; and if so, then all mankind
justly deserve punishment from God. I need not say this is the state and
condition we are all in, every man in his own heart is sufficiently conscious
of his own guilt. Now therefore as every man is necessitated to confess he
deserves punishment, so natural reason teaches us to believe, that this
punishment, as to the pain and duration of it, must have some respect to the
person offended, as well as the persons offending. Thus to strike a private
person, and to strike a Magistrate are in the actions both evil alike; yet it
is most just that he that strikes a Magistrate should be more severely
punished, then he that struck the private person. And we see the Levitical Law
punishes the Smiter or Curser of his Father with death, Exodus 21.15.17
when the same crimes against other persons were punished with far less
sufferings. So then if we consider, the person we have all offended is God, and
add to this what God is; that there is not any comparison between man and him,
and that he does by infinite degrees far exceed the greatest superiority
amongst men; If we consider the person offended is infinite, and acknowledge
that our punishment must have respect to him, we must confess there is reason
for an Eternity of punishment, and that nothing less can satisfy Justice. I
might add to this, that this eternal punishment is more justly inflicted upon
disobedience, since obedience is rewarded with eternal happiness; but this is
not the business I am to infist on. I shall therefore proceed.

This being the state all Mankind is in, the next thing natural reason teaches
us, is to find out a remedy for to free us from this sad condition. In our
selves we cannot, because we are the persons offending, and so are incapable to
act any thing that may tend to our recovery. A Murderer though he should save a
thousand men's lives, yet still remains a Murderer. What is then to be done? we
must look out of our selves, and see whether there is no remedy offered us. Now
if there be a way left to free us from this justly deserved eternal punishment,
it must be by finding out a surety, who must suffer for us, and whose
sufferings must satisfy the person offended: For, as I said before, he that
sins against an Infinite God deserves infinitely to be punished, because the
person offended is infinite. So now upon the same account I say, this Infinite
Person offended must be satisfied, if an Infinite Person, God equal with him,
becomes our surety, and suffers for us; and so that vast debt which in us an
eternity of punishment could not expiate, in our suffering Savior upon the
Cross was absolved, because of the infiniteness of the person suffering. There
remains but this to prove; That this Jesus that did suffer is that Infinite
God; And withal to show how we may come to have an interest in his sufferings.

I might here before I proceed refute those false Foundations Turcisme is
builded upon, and show how ridiculous it is to suppose Mahomet to be a Savior;
but that will run my Discourse to a far greater length then I aim at. I will
therefore fall directly upon the Propositions before proposed; and though the
first in order ought to be first proved, yet because the second brings me to
discourse of the Positive Laws, according to my first Method, and that the
proving of the first will confirm the second, nay will command us to obey all
our Saviors Positive Laws, and believe all his promises; I shall follow that
Method, and begin to show how you may have an Interest in his Sufferings.

The only way to get an Interest in him, is to follow that way our Savior that
does the work for us teaches us; and this brings me directly to treat of those
Positive Laws, which we admit and obey upon the Authority of the Lawgiver, and
those reasons that convince us that he is the Lawgiver, must persuade us to
obey his Laws.

I shall reduce all these Positive Laws into that one Capital Command; Believe
in the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shall be saved. This is the Doctrine the
Gospel teaches us, and this is the way to have an Interest in his Sufferings,
which does not only free us from this eternal torment, but rewards us with
eternal Glory.

I might here tell you, if it were possible for the tongue of man or Angel to
speak it, what great advantages by this Savior we enjoy: I might press the
reasonableness of this Command from the Infinite reward that follows it: I
might prove to you, that nothing but an Immortal happiness can satisfy an
Immortal Soul, and that spiritual enjoyments can only fill our Spirits, when
they are freed from the cloggs of sin and corruption, which in this world
attend our bodies: I might show you, that as the spirituality of the Precepts
declares the excellency of Christianity above other Religions in the obedience
it requires; so the spirituality of the promises does evidence the excellency
of it in the Rewards that follow it. But for brevities sake I will not
particularize on these heads, which every pious Christian by his own meditation
and diligent consideration, may for his particular benefit advance to a higher
pitch then I am able.

That which now only remains to be proved is, That this Jesus is this
Lawgiver, that this Christ that did suffer is this Infinite God: And this I
shall do from the several Arguments that convinced the world to be Christian. I
shall not here in this Argument keep so strictly to the proving Christ to be
that Lawgiver; but I shall handle here more largely all the Confirmations,
that assert either that proposition, or confirmed and increased the Christian
Faith. And these I shall reduce to three Heads: These are,

1. The witness of God. 2. The miraculous power of doing Miracles in our
Savior, and by him given to Christians, together with the success following
this; The destruction of Idolatry, and sudden Conquest of the World. 3. The
holy lives, and wonderful Sufferings of Christians. Of each of these in order.
1. The witness of God. Under this Head I might again repeat those several
Prophesies in the Old Testament which then designed the Messiah, and were
fulfilled in our Jesus: I might tell you the Angels Salutation to the blessed
Virgin, Luke 1.
with his Message sent from God to her, were both Testimonies from God, for the
confirmation of Jesus Christ to be that Lawgiver, that Messiah; but for
brevities sake I shall omit them, and treat only of those two wonderful
witnesses, the Star that directed the Wise men to him, and the Voice from
Heaven that before a multitude audibly declared him.

1. For the Star that directed the wise men to him; we have the whole story
Mat. 2. and in it we may see 'twas not an ordinary but an extraordinary Star:
'Twas a Star the wise men saw afar off, and as soon as they saw it knew it
designed the birth of the King of Judab. How these wise men should come to know
what this new and Wonderful Star designed; whether they attained it by a then
particular Divine Revelation, or else had received a Tradition from their
Ancestors, concerning such an appearance, (which perhaps is probable, since we
find Baalam, a Prophet of their own Nation, foretelling that there should come
a Star out of Jacob, Number. 24.17.
and a Scepter shall arise out of Israel which should smite the corners of
Moab) I shall not dispute, since either of them is sufficient for my purpose.
This is most certain, this new appearance was so wonderful, that it persuaded
wise men to go a long journey to examine the truth of it; and though till their
coming to Jerusalem, that City seems to have taken no notice of it, yet the
truth of it was so evident that upon the very Question, Where is he that was
born King of the Jews, for we have seen his star in the East, and are come to
worship him: Herod and all the City was troubled. The Priests and Scribes were
sent for to inquire where Christ should be born, nay, this is not all. When
these Wisemen according to Gods direction deceived Herod's expectation, by their
return another way, his anger ends in cruelty, and his passion could by no
other medicine be expiated but by the slaughter of all the Children, from two
years old and under, about the Coasts of Bethlehem, the place they told him
that Christ should be born. I need not here tell you that this new Star
designed our Savior, since Herod and all the Jews understood it so; since, as
it brought the wise men to Jerusalem, so it directed them to the place where
the babe lay: But I will show you some footsteps of this Star amongst Heathens.
Cardinal Baronius that Learned Annalist, in the first year of Christ, cites
Calcidius his Comment on Plato's Timaeus for this purpose. There is (says
Calcidius) another more venerable and holy History, Et quoque alia venerabilior
and sanctior Historia, quae perhibet de ortu Stellae cujusdam insolitae non
morbos mortesque denuntiantes, sed descensum Dei venerabilis ad humanae
conversationis rerumque mortalium gratiam quam Stellam cum nocturno itinere
suspexissent Chaldaeorum profecto sapientes viri, and consideratione rerum
Coelestium satis exercitati quaesisse diountur recentem Dei ortum, repertaque
illa Majestate puerili venerati esse, and vota Deo tanto convenientia
nuncupasse. Tom. 1. p. 52.
which tells us of the rise of a certain unwonted Star not denouncing diseases
or death, but the descent of the Venerable God, to converse with men and mortal
businesses; which Star when these wise Chaldeans clearly saw in their night
journey, and being enough exercised in the confideration of heavenly things,
it is reported they sought this New Birth of God, and the Majesty of this child
being found, they worshipped him, and offered gifts agreeable to so great a
God. This testimony is very clear, and in my opinion has nothing of difficulty
in it, but what is meant by this holy History, which without dispute must have
reference to those Books of Prophesies which the Chaldeans kept by them. Some
are so confident to affirm that Baalam, of whom I spoke before, left them Books
of Prophesies, which directed those Magi in difficult cases; it is not
impossible but he might do so; however this is probable, that they received
from their Ancestors some rules of their knowledge, together with former
Observations, and extraordinary Predictions, which they either preserved in
Writings or Hieroglyphics, and unto which, as I suppose, Calcidius, being a
Heathen, by this holy History has reference. To this of Calcidius, I might add
that which Macrobius tells us of the slaughter of these Children; which though
it directly proves not the appearance of the Star, yet it will serve to confirm
us in the truth of that, because this murder was occasioned by it. Speaking of
Augustus, his words are these; When he heard that amongst those Children under
two years old, Cum audissent inter eos quos in Syria Herodes Rex Judaeorum
inter binatum jussit interfici, filium quoque ejus occisum, ait, Melius est
Herodis porcum esse quam filium. Saturnal. lib. 4.2.
whom Herod the King of the Jews had commanded to be killed in Syria, his own
son was slain also, said, It is better to be Herod 's hog than his son. In
which speech the Emperor had reference to the Jews abstaining from swines
flesh, which to Herod would have been a great crime, though this murder seem
none at all, if by that means his usurped Dominion may be better secured. So
much for the first.

2. For the voice before a multitude which audibly declared him, we find three
times to have been done. The first was at his Baptism, where before John
Baptist, and those that came to be baptized of him, the heavens were opened,
the Spirit of God descended like a Dove and light on him; and a voice from
Heaven said, This is my beloved son in whom I am well pleased. The second was
at his Transfiguration, where before three sober men (a sufficient number to
assert any truth) Peter, James, and John, a voice out of the cloud gave
testimony, that Jesus was the Son of God, in whom he was well pleased; and that
it was so we have St. Peter in his second Epistle assuring us. The third was a
little before his death; our Savior praying that God would glorify his Name;
in the presence of a multitude a voice came down from Heaven, saying, I have
both glorified it, and will glorify it. Jo. 12.28.
Now though we cannot produce any authority from Heathens to confirm the truth
of this voice, yet the circumstances in the Story evince it to be true; for
this was not done in a corner, John Baptist and his three Disciples did not
only hear it at two several times, but a multitude at another, and that in a
public place, when our Savior rode in Triumph into Jerusalem; and this
multitude consisted partly of his Enemies the Jews; for we find for all this
they believed him not; and partly of other Nations, ver. 34.
for there were then Greeks that desired to see him. v. 20, 21.
So that had this been false, it had been obvious to the confutation of every
person, and the Pharisees would never have suffered so great a Miracle in the
confirmation of our Saviors Mission to have passed uncontradicted, if so many
witnesses that asserted it had not put it beyond any denial. This voice now
which we find attesting our Savior, does also give witness to his Apostles,
when on a sudden there came a sound from Heaven as of a rushing mighty wind,
and filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them
cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them: Act. 2.13.
And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with their
tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance. And this Miracle was so evident,
that never any attempted to deny it: For besides that it happened at so public
a time as Pentecost, when the City was filled with people of every Nation to
witness it; the nature of the Miracle it self, the enabling of rude and
ignorant men to speak the Language of every Nation, carried along with it its
own confutation, had not the truth of it been evident to as many Nations as at
that time resorted to Jerusalem.

To this of all the Apostles let me add the miraculous Call of S. Paul, who by
an audible voice from Heaven was turned from a Persecuter to a Preacher of the
Gospel: Acts 8.4, 5, 6. Acts 16.12, 13, 14, 15, 16.
The whole story we have recorded by Saint Luke, and asserted by Saint Paul in
his Apology for himself before King Agrippa. If we examine the Circumstances of
it, we shall find 'twas not done privately, but must necessarily be publicly
known. The party converted was the greatest Enemy the Gospel had; 'twas he that
consented to St. Stephen's death: The place of his conversion was when he came
near Damascus with Authority from the High Priests to bring all Christians
bound to Jerusalem: The manner of his Conversion was, he fell to the earth,
being so amazed with the light that shined about him, and more terrified with
the voice that asked him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Add to this,
this was not done alone; for the men that were with him heard the voice, and
not they only must be witnesses of it, but he must be led blind to Damascus,
that Ananias, who by his prayers recovered him, and the whole City of Damascus
that saw him, might know the truth of it. I might to these add those several
fallings of the Holy Ghost upon Believers, which it is probable fell by some way
of visible appearance, as that upon Cornelius by S. Peter's preaching, Acts
10.44. Acts 19.6.
upon the Christians at Corinth by S. Paul; but I hope I need not urge them,
having sufficiently proved this Assertion from the Witness of God.

2. The second Argument that asserts Christ to be this Lawgiver, and confirms
the Christian Faith is, The miraculous power in our Savior of doing Miracles,
and by him given to Christians, together with the success following, the
destruction of Idolatry, and sudden Conquest of the World.

For the better clearing this, it is necessary to take this Argument apieces,
and to handle each branch apart. The whole is the Doctrine of Miracles, which I
look upon as one of the most convincing Arguments against Atheism, or
Heathenisme, or any other Religion whatsoever; and this I shall do by proving,

1. The truth of several remarkable Predictions our Savior foretold.

2. The wonderful Miracles which he did whilst he lived, happened at his
death, and were effected at his Resurrection.

3. The miraculous power that he gave the Apostles of doing Miracles, which
continued in the Church till the world became Christian, and some time after.

4. The destruction of Idolatry, and Conquest of the world to the name of a
crucified Savior, by such weak and ignorant persons as the Apostles were. All
which are reduced under the head of Miracles, some of each of which I shall
prove from the confession of the Enemies of Christianity, Jews or Heathens,
which is the greatest testimony matter of fact is capable of. I shall begin
with the

1. First, The truth of several remarkable praedictions our Savior foretold. I
will begin with that concerning his own sufferings: You shall find Mat. 16.
after S. Peter's confession of our Saviors being the Messiah, and our Saviors
gracious promise to the Church, that the Gates of Hell should not prevail over
it, that he falls directly to tell them what must befall him, v. 21. From that
time forth began Jesus to show unto his Disciples how that he must go into
Jerusalem and suffer many things of the Elders, and chief Priests, and
Scribes, and be killed, and be raised again the third day. This prediction you
see is a clear story of his sufferings as if they were past: 'Twas foretold
long before his passion, and as it was the most unwelcome, so it was the most
unexpected news that could have been told to his Disciples, who it is clear
expected a Temporal Prince: 'Twas such news we see as put S. Peter into
passion, that made that great Confessor so far to forget the duty of a
Disciple, as to rebuke his Master. The truth of this matter of fact I shall
prove when I treat of the Miracles our Savior did. I might to this add what
our Savior foretold to S. Peter himself concerning his denial of him, that
though he was now so confident, that though all should be offended, yet he
never would be; Mat. 26.34, 35, 36.
yet before the cock crew this night, he should deny him thrice. Though this be
but a particular passage, yet it deserves our consideration the more, because
this prediction was told to the person himself that might have prevented it, to
one that had he not really been guilty of such a fall as was foretold, would
never have suffered such a blemish to have been laid upon him without
contradiction. To these I might join the several promises our Savior made to
his Church, which being to be given them after his Church, which being to be
given them after his Ascension, comes under the nature of predictions: As in
particular that of the descent of the Holy Ghost which I have already handled,
John 14.26. Mar. 16.17.18.
and the power of doing Miracles, which I reserve the proving of to its proper
place. But that which here I shall most insist upon, is that prophecy, Mat.
24. which Christ foretells his Disciples of the ruin of the Temple, even at
that very time, when they so much admired the magnificent structure of it:
There shall not be left (says he) one stone upon another that shall not be
thrown down. And if we compare this second verse with the fifteenth; When ye
therefore shall see the Abomination of Desolation spoken of by Daniel the
Prophet stand in the holy place, etc. by which words are meant the profaning
of their Temple by the Roman Eagle; we may probably gather being so to be
profaned that it was never to be built again; and this is clearly S.
Chrysostom's Exposition: (...). Ho. adv. Judaeos tertia.
For speaking of Julian the Apostate, he tells us; That this mad and witless
man did hope to frustrate Christ's prophecy, which would not suffer this Temple
to be built again. This prophecy now was before Christ's death, and then the
Jews polity subsisted, though under a Roman Procurator, yet still they had
their Sanhedrim: If we examine the truth of it we shall find not only the total
destruction of it true, but several attempts of its restoration frustrated,
and that immediately from the power of God. The destruction of the Temple is
obvious to every eye that is versed in History: Hegesippus will sufficiently
inform his Reader, how it was burnt, Lib. 4. cap. 43.
and destroyed by fire when the Emperor Titus took the City, and how miserably
that obstinate people perished. Lib. 5. Historiarum in principio.
Tacitus that famous Roman Historian in the fifth Book of his Histories has
left recorded to all posterity the ruin of that forsaken people, together with
the sad Omens that presaged it; But this is not so wonderful as the several
frustratings of its re-building. If (says Chrysostom) the Jews had never
attempted it they might have said, (...). Ibid.
if we would set about it, we could have done it. But now I declare unto them,
that they have not once or twice but thrice endeavored and attempted it; as is
the custom in the Olympic Games; so that there is no question that the Church
has got the Crown of Victory. Their first attempt was under the Emperor
Adrian in the 136 year after Christ, Tinius Rufus being then Procurator, which
ended in nothing else but the destruction of 50 of their Castles, and 985 of
their Villages, In Hadriano.
in the slaughter of 50000 men, besides those which perished by fire and
famine, as Dio reports. Their second attempt was under the Emperor
Constantine, which the Emperor perceiving soon quelled; as Saint Chrysostom
tells me. His words are these. The Emperor seeing their attempt, (...). Ibid.
cutting off their ears, and imprinting on their bodies marks of disobedience,
carried them up and down as so many slaves and vagabonds. Their last and most
likely attempt was under Julian the Apostate when they set about the work not
only permitted, but encouraged and assisted by that Roman Emperor, both with
money and other materials for the building, which though this Apostate hated
the Jews, yet did, as Sozomen tells me, that he might reprove of falsehood what
Christ had foretold. (...). Sozom. lib. 5. cap. 21.
Now see the event of this. I shall not tell you it out of S. Chrysostom or
Sozomen, who both in the places before quoted relate it; but from Ammianus
Marcellinus a Gentile Historian, whose words are these, speaking of Julian. He
thought with immoderate charges to build up that formerly renowned Temple of
Jerusalem which after many and cruel Wars being besieged by Vespasian first,
Ambitiosum quondam apud Hierosolymam Templum quod post multa and internecina
certamina obsidente Vespasiano posteaque Tito aegre est expugnatum, instaurare
sumptibus cogitabat immodicis, negotiumque maturandum Alypio dederat
Antiochenfi, qui olim Britannias curaverat pro praefectis. Cum itaque rei idem
fortiter instaret Alypius juvaret que Provinciae Rector, metuendi globi
flammarum prope fundamenta crebris assultibus erumpentes, fecere locum, exust
is aliquoties operantibus, inaccessum, hocque modo Elemento destinatius
repellente cessivit incaeptum. Amm Marcel. lib. 23. In initio.
and afterward by Titus, was subdued, and gave the charge of this employment,
that it might be hastened, to Alypius of Antioch, which formerly was Governor
of Britany. When therefore this Alypius set eagerly on the work, being assisted
by the Governor of that Province, dreadful balls of fire bursting forth with
often assaults near the foundation, made the place, some of the workmen being
devoured by the flames, inaccessible; and after this manner the Element
resisting, as with some kind of destiny, he gave over what he had begun. I
shall not comment at all upon these words; the place it self is very clear; not
a tittle that our Savior has foretold but must be true, though there want a
miracle to maintain it. Thus much for the truth of our Saviors Predictions.
That which I am to prove,

2. In the second place is the wonderful miracles which he did whilst he lived,
happened at his death, and were effected at his Resurrection. First, of the
Miracles he did whilst he lived. These Miracles consisted principally in curing
all manner of Diseases, expelling Devils out of persons possessed, and raising
the dead. I shall not here cite you proofs out of the Evangelists (though so
constant and uncontradicted a report, by any four sober Writers, ought to be
credited, and is as much as we have for the belief of many notable actions
(which are received without the least doubt,) but shall endeavor to prove them
from the Testimony of Jews and Heathens; and though the place where our Savior
lived afforded but very few Writers now extant, and the distance of Judaea from
Rome the Imperial City, caused his Miracles not to be much taken notice of by
their Historians; and the great loss of Eminent Writers, and particular
Registers of Roman Procurators, unto which the primitive Christians in their
Apologies appealed to, have left us destitute of such Authorities which former
Ages made use of; Yet I question not in this particular to give some
satisfaction to any indifferent Reader. Let me in the first place set down
Celsus's confession cited in his own words by Origin; (whose Works being lost,
nothing from him can be otherwise had, but from his Answerer.) His words are
these, Do you think him to be the Son of God, (...) Orig. con. Cel. l. 2 (...)
Cy. lib. 6.
because he healed the lame and the blind? Just such another speech we may find
Julian the Apostate saying, as St. Ryril tells me, Unless somebody supposes to
cure the lame and the blind, and to cast out Devils by exorcising in the
Villages of Bethsaida and Bethany be some of those great works. Here we have
confessions of Christ's miracles from two of the greatest Enemies Christianity
ever had, Celsus and Julian: The first endeavored by his pen, the last both by
pen and power to destroy it; and yet the wonders our Savior did were so
evident above denial, that they were forced, though in a scoff, to acknowledge
them. To these let us add the Epistle of Lentulus to the Emperor Tiberius,
which Eutropius has in his Annals of the Roman Senators, and is now commonly
extant in the Bibliotheca Patrum. He thus begins, There appeared in our days,
Apparuit temporibus nostris, and adbuc est, homo magnae virtutis, nominatus
Jesus Christus, qui dicitur a Gentibus Propheta veritatis, quem ejus Discipuli
vocant filium Dei, suscitans mortuos, and sanans omnes languores.
and is yet, a man of great power named Christ Jesus, who is called of the
Gentiles the Prophet of Truth, whom his Disciples call the Son of God, a raiser
of the dead, and a healer of all manner of diseases. This Authority was very
clear, was there not some dispute whether this Epistle be suppositious or no:
That there was one Lentulus, Consul with Calvisius, Sabinus in the twelfth year
of Tiberius Caesar, Baronius assures us, though that very year Pontius Pilatus
succeeded Valerius Gratus in the command of Judaea; And for that following
phrase, Discrimen habens in medio capitis juxta morem Nazarenorum; That he had
a parting in the middle of his head, after the manner of the Nazarens, for
which Cocus and some other suspects this Epistle, as if the Author had supposed
our Savior to have been a Nazarite, Censura quorundam Scriptorum veterum. pa.
1.
savours in my judgment of nothing less; for then the Author would not have
said, he had hair parting like a Nazarite, but being a Nazarite, he wore his
hair after that manner. I shall not wrangle with any that will severely debate
the truth of it, because, if that fails, there are enough that follow to supply
that defect, which I shall end this second branch withal; because they do
comprehend and abbreviate all Christ's miracles. In the mean time I shall handle
that which is the second thing, The Miracles that happened at his Passion. To
find out in Heathen Stories every particular accident that then happened, as we
have recorded in the Evangelists, is impossible; but that most remarkable and
wonderful defection of the Sun at that time, was recorded by the Romans, and
kept in their Archives till Tertullian's time, as is evident from his Apology.
His Words are these; In that moment the day withdrew her self at noon tide.
Eodem momento dies medium orbem signante sole subducta est deliquium utique
putaverunt, qui id quoque super Christo praedicatum, non scierunt, ratione non
deprehensa negaverunt, and tamen eum mundi casum relatum, in Arcanis vestris
habetis. Apol. ca. 21.
They every where supposed a total defection, who did not know, that that was
prophefied of Christ, the reason of it not being understood, some denied it,
and yet that chance of the world you have Registered in your Archives. Lucian in
the acts of his Martyrdom persuading the Gentiles to Christianity, bids them
look into their own Annals, and there they shall find in the days of Pilate the
Sun chased away, Perquirite in Annalibus vestris and invenictis temporibus
Pilati fugato Sole interruptum tenebris diem.
and the day interrupted with darkness. Origin in his second book against
Celsus cites for the truth of this the Authority of Phlegon the Cheirographus
of the Emperor Adrian. His words are these; (...). Orig. lib. 2. contra
Celsum, page 80. Edit. Canta.
Concerning the Eclipse which happened in the time of Tiberius Caesar, in whose
Reign Jesus was crucified, and concerning the then great shaking of the earth,
Phlegon in the thirteenth book of his Chronicles has written. And that this
Phlegon has this in his Commentaries, Eusebius also witnesses in his
Chronicles, in the year 33 of Christ. To these let me add that Letter of
Dionysius to Polycarp, cited by Baronius, in which inveighing against
Apollophanes the Philosopher, he uses these words, Quid de illo qui tempore
crucis Dominicae factus est Solis defectu dicturus es? Eramus tunc ambo apud
Heliopolim, amboque fimul incidentem mirabiliter Soli Lunae Globum notabamus,
(non enim ejusce conjunctionis tunc aderat tempus,) ipsamque rursus ab hora
nona ad vesperum, ad Solis diametrum supra Naturae vires restitutum. In
memoriam autem illi us revoca etiam aliud quoddam; Nempe enim (ut ipse non
ignorant) eam Lunae incidentiam ab Orient caepisse, and usque ad Solaris
corporis, finem pervenisse, ac tum demum refitiisse notavimus. Neque vero cadem
ex part, ut assolet, et incidentia illa, et repurgatio facta est, sed ex
adverso Diametri. Haec sunt quae tunc temporis centigere, naturam profecto
superantia, ac Soli Christo possibilia qui Author est omnium facitque magna et
stupenda, quorum non est numerus. Ista illi, si licuerit, dicito. Ad Annum Chr.
34. p. 179, 180.
What will thou say of that Eclipse of the Sun which happened at the time of
our Saviors Crucifixion? We were then both together at Heliopolis, and we both
together did note the Globe of the Moon after a wonderful manner to fall upon
the Sun, (for it was not then the time of that conjunction,) and the Moon again
restored beyond the strength of Nature, to the Suns Diameter, from the ninth
hour till evening. Remember him also of another thing, which he is not ignorant
of, to wit, that we noted that the cadence of the Moon began from the East, and
went to the end of the Solar body, and then at last leapt back again. Neither
was this cadence (or covering) and restoring again of the Suns light, done at
the same part as was accustomed, but on the oppofite part of the Diameter These
are the things that then happened, exceeding truly the power of Nature, and
possible to Christ alone, who is the Author of all things, and does great and
wonderful things, which are not to be numbered. Speak this, if it be lawful, [to
Apollophanes.] From these Authorities we may easily gather the truth of this
miraculous Eclipse, which happening at full Moon, when in Nature it was
impossible, will sufficiently assure us, that the person then suffering was
God, it being impossible for any but God to have done it: For those Celestial
Bodies as they are above all earthly pollutions, so they are infinitely beyond
any Humane Command or Government. Thus much for the Miracles at his Passion,
those that followed at his Resurrection is that which I am to handle.

3. In the third place Tertullian begins his Book de Resurrectione with this
ezcellent Aphorism: Fiducia Christianorum, Resurrectio Mortuorum
The Faith of Christians is the Resurrection of the dead. Now as the
Resurrection is the comfort and great support Christians have against those
injuries and sufferings which in this world they are exposed to; So the
Resurrection of our Savior, Who was the First Fruits of them that sleep, 1
Cor. 15.20.
was the great assurance that those that dye in his fear shall be raised by his
power, and live with him in glory. This then is the Foundation of our Faith,
the Resurrection; the assurance that we shall be raised is, That Christ is
risen. And this I shall prove. I must not here omit those several witnesses to
this grand Truth which S. Paul, 15. Cor. 1. cites. If when we prove matter of
Fact, the number of Testimonies be weight, our Savior was not only seen, when
risen, by Cephas, and the 12 Apostles, but by 500 at once, which certainly were
too great a number either to be deceived or deceive. Acts 1.10.
He appeared not once only to his Disciples, but at several times, and in their
presence and view ascended into Heaven. This together with the constant belief
succeeding Ages gave to it might persuade any not wilfully obstinate, to admit
it without dispute: But because Atheism now prevails with most, and that in
this Age Principles scarce pass without questioning, I shall produce what other
Authorities my reading affords to this purpose. Josephus shall be my first
Author, who in his fourth Chapter and eighteenth Book has these words. Eodem
tempore fuit Jesus vir sapiens, si tamen virum eum fas est dicere; Erat enim
mirabilium operum patrator, and doctor eorum qui libenter vera suscipiunt,
plurimosque tam de Judaeis quam de Gentibus sectatores habuit: Christus hic
erat quem accusatum a nostris gentis Principibus, Pilatus cum addixisset Cruci,
nihilominus non destiterunt cum diligere qui ab initio caeperant. Apparuit,
enim cis tertio die vivus, ita ut divinitus de co vates hoc and alia muita
miranda praedixerit, and usque ad hodiernum diem Christianorum genus ab hoc
denominatum non deficit.
There appeared at that time one Jesus a wise man, if it be lawful to call him
Man: For he was a doer of wonderful works, and teacher of those who with
pleasure received the truth, and had many followers both Jews and Gentiles:
This is that Christ who though he was accused by the chief of our Nation, and
by Pilate condemned to the Cross, yet was not the least beloved of those who at
the beginning did so. He appeared to them the third day alive, the holy
Prophets foretelling these and many wonderful things of him; and until this day
the Christian Sect is not failed, who from him had their denomination. This
Testimony of Josephus a Jew is very clear, as to the particular to be proved;
there remains only here to be examined, whether these words be Josephus his,
and that they are so, appears from these reasons: First, because this very
Testimony for Christ's Miracles is urged by Eusebius in his first Book of his
Ecclesiastical History, cap. 11. in these words, and for this purpose.
Eusehius, we know, lived at the beginning of the fourth Century, in the days of
Constantine the Emperor, and at that time this trick of forging books was
scarce invented; neither was it necessary to forge an Authority to prove the
truth of Christ's Miracles then, when the power of doing Miracles still remained
in the Church, and was a sufficient Testimony that he that could give that
miraculous power to others wanted it not himself. Secondly, because the
suspicion of this place proceeds from a false supposition, viz. that it is
not found in the Ancient Copy in the Vatican Library, which indeed is true,
it is not found in that Ancient Copy, but there is a blank where formerly it was
written, being just of capacity to contain these words; which evidently assures
us, that by the Impudence or wickedness of some Jew or Heretic these words
were erased; and this being true, I suppose there is none but will credit this
Authority the more for this rasement, since nothing but the consciousness of
this Impostor of the truth of these words, could ever have made him guilty of
so great a Treachery. Now in confirmation of this we have the Authority of
Baronius a learned Cardinal, who himself was Library Keeper to the Apostolic
See, and an eye witness of this Truth. His words are these, speaking of the
Testimony of Josephus. Whose Testimony when it was here at Rome required, Cujus
testimonium in pervetusto Judaeorum Codice in quo ejus Historiae e Graeco in
Hebraicum translatae, antiquitue scriptae sunt, cum hic Romae requireretur (O
perfidorum impudentiam!) abrasum inventum est, adeo at nulla ad excusandum
scelus posset afferri defensio, cum membrana ipsae id exclamare videretur. Ad
annum Christi 34. p. 214.
was found rased out in a very ancient book of the Jews, into which Josephus
his Histories being translated out of Greek into Hebrew, were anciently written
(O the impudence of Infidels!) and so done, that no defense could be brought to
excuse the wickedness, when the Parchment it self seems to cry out of it. Thus
much for Josephus. The next Authority shall be Pilates Letter, which Hegesippus
affords me in his Anacephalaeosis. The words are these; There of late happened
what I my self have tried, Nuper accidit quod and ipse probavi, Judaeos per
invidiam se suosque nosteros crudeli condemnatione punisse. Denique cun
promissum haberent patres little, quod illis Deus mitteret de coelo sanctum, qui
eorum Rex merito diceretur, and hunc se promiserit per Virginem missurum in
terram: Istum itaque me praesile in Judaea Deus Hebraeorum cum mifisset, and
vidissent eum caecos illuminasse, leprosos mundasse, paralyticos curasse,
Daemones ab hominibus fugasse, mortuos etiam suscitasse, imperasse ventis,
ambulasse siccis pedibus per undas maris, and multa alia fecisse. Cum omnis
populus Judaeorum eum Dei filium esse diceret, invidiam contra eum passi sunt
Principes Judaeorum, and tenuerunt eum, mihique traliderunt, and alia pro aliis
mibi de eo mentientes dixerunt, asserentes eum Magum esse, and contra leges
eorum agere. Ego autem credidi ita esse, and flagellitum tradidi illum arbitrio
eorum. Illi autem crucifixerunt eum. and Sepulchra Custodes adhibuerunt; Ille
autem militibus meis custodientibus die tertio resurrexit; In tantum enim
exarsit nequitia Judaeorum ut darent pecuniam Custodibus, and dixerint, Dicite
quia Discipuli ejus Corpus ipsius rapuerunt: Sed cum accepissent pecuniam, quod
factum fuerat tacere non potuerunt; Nam and illum surrexisse testati sunt se
vidisse, and se a Judaeis pecuniam accepisses Haec ideo ingessi, ne quis aliter
mentiatur, and existimet credendum esse mendaciis Judaeorum.
that the Jews did with a cruel condemnation punish themselves and their
posterity: For when at last their Fathers had a promise that God would send his
Holy One from Heaven, who deservedly should be called their King, and him he
promised to send into the earth by a Virgin: When therefore the God of the
Hebrews, when I was Praesident of Judaea, sent him, and when they saw that he
did enlighten the blind, cleanse the Lepers, cure the Palsy, cast out Devils
from men, raise the dead, command the winds, walk over the waters of the Sea
with dry feet, and many other things. When all the people of the Jews said he
was the Son of God, the chief of the Jews were envious against him, and laid
hold of him, and delivered him to me; and when lying they had told me one for
another diverse things concerning him, affirming that he was a Magician, and did
act against their Laws, I indeed believed it was so, and delivered him to be
whipped at their pleasure, but they crucified him, and set guards to his
Sepulcher: But he the third day rose again, whilst my Soldiers were guarding
him. But the malice of the Jews did burn to so great a height, that they gave
money to his Keepers, and bid them say that his Disciples had taken him away.
But they when they had taken their money could not hold their peace of what was
done: For they both witnessed that they saw him rise, and that they had
received moneys of the Jews. These things I have put in, lest some body should
lie other ways, and should suppose that the lies of the Jews should be
credited. Thus Hegesippus. Now because of this there may be justly some
question, both because Hegesippus is not an Author of that Antiquity, but as
Baronius says wrote after Constantines time, Ad Ann. 34. p. 215.
and that the Epistle it self in the front of it carries a great fault, having
Claudius set down for Tyberius, though I know Tyberius his name before he was
Emperor was Claudius. I shall therefore show you from good Authorities that
something to this purpose Pilate writ, and if this Letter should prove forged,
yet the true one did say nigh as much, because of the effect it produced in
Tyberius. First for the Letter, mark what Tertullian says in his Apology. All
these things concerning Christ did Pilate, Ea omnia super Christo Pilatus, and
ipse jam pro sua Conscientia Christianus, Caesari tunc Tiberio nuntiavit: Sed
and Caesares credidissent super.
even he being now in his Conscience a Christian, relate to Tyberius Caesar:
And the Caesar's themselves had believed in Christ, Christo, si aut Caesares non
essent saeculo necessarii, aut si and Christiani potuissent esse Caesares.
Cap.21.
if either for this Age the Caesar's had not been necessary, or if the Caesar's
might have been Christians. And concerning the effect this News had upon the
Emperor, see what the same Apologist says in his fifth Chapter. Tyberius,
Tyberius cujus tempore nemen Christianorum in saeculum intravit, annuntiata
sibi ex Syria Palaestina quae illic veritatem illius Divinitatis revelarunt,
detulit ad Senatum cum Praerogativa suffragii sui. Senatus quia non ipse
probaverat, respuit, Caesar in sententia mansit, comminatus periculum
accusatoribus Christianorum. Ibid. Cap. 5.
in whose time the name Christian entered into the world, did carry to the
Senate with the Prerogative of his voice those things which were related to him
out of Syria Palaestina, which did reveal the truth of that Divinity there. The
Senate because they had not before approved of it, rejected it; the Emperor
still remained of that opinion, threatening punishment to the accusers of
Christians. So that from these words may easily be gathered, that Tyberius
would have had the Senate owned Christ as a God, which could be upon no other
account but from the Miracles our Savior did in Palaestine; and it is scarce
probable that the Emperor should receive this News from other hands then from
Pontius Pilate his Procurator. There is nothing so clear in History, as that
the several Lievtenants of Provinces did send Registers of their Acts to the
Emperor, and particularly that Pilate had a Register of his Acts, which he
sent to the Emperor, and which was extant in Justin Martyrs time, is evident
from his second Apology to the Emperor Antoninus, where declaring how all the
Miracles onr Savior did were foretold by the Prophets, and withal persuading
the Emperor to believe that our Savior did such, he referres himself to the
Acts of Pilate then registered at Rome. (...). p. 66. Apol. 2. Edit. Syl.
That (says he) our Savior did these things you may learn from the Registers
of the Acts done under Pontius Pilate. And that we may say no more, we find the
Haeretiques called the Quartadecimani, as Epiphanius tells me, boasting that
they had found out of the Acts of Pilate this truth, Et sane ex Actis Pilati se
veritatem comperisse, Salvatorem die ante Octavium Calendarum Aprilium possum
esse. Lib. 2. Hae. 50.
That our Savior did suffer the day before the Octaves of the Calends of
April. It Is probable, I know, that either they saw not these Acts; or, if they
did, 'twas some spurious Copy, as many think; however, it is to me a sufficient
proof there were such Acts, since so early in the Church I find both Christians
and Haeritiques appealing to them. Origin also in his seventh Book against
Celsus, cites us a Confession of his, That our Savior after his death was
seen, although he endeavors to make it signify no more than an ordinary
apparition, or indeed not so much. His words are these, After this Celsus
maliciously speaks concerning the voluntary appearing of the Gods in humane
shapes, spoken of before, that any person shall not see them once passing by,
(...) Lib. 7. page 355. Edit. Cant.
as they did this deceiver of them, but ever conversing with them that desire
it. From these words may be collected, that our Savior did appear was known to
Celsus; and that it could not be a Phantasme, Origin sufficiently may convince
us, when he demands this question. How can a Phantasme only named chase away a
Devil, (...) Ibid.
and effect these operations which are no ways to be contemned? And this
certainly is a most excellent and absolute answer: For how is it possible for
that which is nothing, or at the most appears but to be something, to do these
strange and wonderful effects? that the only appearance of a man (for no more
does Celsus allow Christ to be) should give that power to his Disciples to
overcome and destroy those whom Celsus acknowledges real Devils, only by
naming the Name of Jesus. I must not give over this subject till to what is
already said, I add this, That the Jews themselves acknowledge that Christ did
these Miracles, when they say he did them not by his own power, but by Magic
Art, either that which he learnt in Egypt, and brought thence, or by Schem
Hamphorasch, Hoorn. li. 3. c. 1.
the power of the fourlettered name, known to himself. I more wonder they
should so ingenuously confess these Miracles to be done, then that they should
suppose our Savior did them by Magic Art, or by their Kabala; because I find
them a very mysterious people, and such as fancy great things may be done that
way. Manasse Ben Israel in his Book of the Creation says: That there are found
many which in their adjurations call upon Devils, Multi sane reperiuntur qui
daemones istos adjurationibus sais advocant, and Necromantias opera mira
admodum multa patrant. Quin and libris quibusdam Cabalistarum quales sunt
Perske Ehaloth, Raziel, and aliorum, recensentur little nomina, exorcismi and
incantationes. Prob. 22. de Creat.
and by the help of Necromancy do great things: And that in some books of the
Cabalists, as in Perske Ehaloth, Raziel, and others, their names, exorcismes
and incantations are repeated. But more particularly he says of the Kabala,
Sublimia per ea Mysteria inveniuntur. In Exodum.
that by it sublime Mysteries are found out; besides they make the knowledge of
the Kabala and Magical Art one of the gifts the Sanhedrim was endued withal.
This being now laid down, we may easily see how fond this calumny against
Christ's Miracles was, They were done by Magic, which he learnt in Egypt, when
our Savior was carried thither an Infant, and staid not long there, but till
the death of Herod, which happened too quick for his age or abilities to
comprehend that Art. And if by the Kabala he had done them, why did not the
Sanhedrim, who were so well versed in that mysterious knowledge, do the same
things themselves which he did, or else detect the way how he did them.
Arnobius shall conclude this Subject for me. Therefore were those things which
were done the deceits of the Devils, Ergone illa quae gesta sunt Daemonum fuere
praestigiae and Magicarum Artium ludi? Potestis aliquem nobis designare,
monstrare ex omnibus illis Magis qui unquam fuere per saecula consimile aliquid
Christo millesima ex part qui fecerit? qui sine vi Carminum sine herbarum and
graminum succis sine ulla aliqua observatione sollicita sacrorum, libaminum,
temporum? Non enim urgemus and quaerimus quae sese spondeant facere, vel in
quibus generibus actuum soleat omnis illorum doctrina and experientia
contineri. Advers. Gentes, lib. 1. p. 25.
and the sports of Magic Arts? Can ye design to us any one, or show us out of
all those Magicians, who ever were, who did in the thousand part do any thing
like Christ? who without any force of verses, without any juyces of herbs and
grasses, without any sollicitory observation of sacred Rites, Offerings, Times,
did these things? We neither urge nor seek what they promise to do, or in what
kind of Acts all their Learning and Experience used to be contained. And a
little after he concludes. But it is evident that Christ did all these things
without any help of outward things, Atqui constitit Christum sine ullis
adminiculis Rerum, sine ullius Ratus observatione, vel lege, omnia illa nominis
sui possibilitate fecisse. Ibid.
without the observation or rule of any Rite, and only did it by the
Omnipotency of his Name. I will shut up all this with that excellent saying of
this forementioned Author Arnobius in another place, which is a farther
confirmation of the truth of our Saviors Miracles. Neither was there any thing
(says he) done by him miraculously, Neque est ab illo gestum per admirationem
stupentibus cunotis, quod non omne donaverit faciendum parvulis illis and
rusticis, and little subjecerit potestati. Advers. Gentes, lib. 1. page 30.
to the admiration of all, all which he did not give to be done to these little
and rustic persons, and subjected to their power. Which directly brings me to
the proving my third Position.

3. The miraculous power he gave his Apostles of doing Miracles, which
continued in the Church till the world became Christian, and some time after.

For the better handling whereof, I shall show you fitst, That this gift of
Miracles did continue in the Church for the first 300 years, from the
Authorities of the most eminent Fathers of that Age, and from S. Augustine;
that they were in his time when the world was Christian. Secondly, I shall show
you from the confessions of Heathens, That the Emperor Antoninus Army was
miraculously delivered, which by the Emperors Letter is attributed to the
Christians prayers; and of the Talmudists, that the Christians had the power of
Miracles. Of each in their order.

1. First, That this gift of Miracles did continue in the Church, etc. I shall
not in setting down these Authorities place them under any certain head of
Miracles, but give you them according to the Age the Author lived in; my intent
being to finish one Author before I begin another. And because Justin Martyr is
the Ancientest, I shall begin with him; who proving Christ to be designed of
God a Savior, has these words; Now you may learn this from those things which
are done under your sight: (...). Apol. prima, page 35.
For many of our Christian men have cured, and do even now cure many possessed
with Devils throughout all the world, and in this our City, forcing and driving
the Devils from the men they have hold on, by adjuring these Devils by the Name
of Jesus Christ who was crucified under Pontius Pilate, who could not be
recovered by all your Conjurers, Inchanters, and Witches. In his Dialogue with
Tryphon the Jew we have him assenting, That Christ is the fittest person to be
prayed to for the deliverance from being possessed by unclean spirits, because
at the very force of his Name the Devils tremble; (...). Dial. cum Tryph. p.
191.
and at this day being adjured by the Name of Jesus Christ, who was crucified
under Pontius Pilate, who was Procurator of Judaea, they obey. A little after,
telling us what power of doing Miracles Christ gave to the Church, he verifies
by the power the Church then had. (...). Ib. p. 235.
And now (says he) we that believe in Jesus Christ our Lord, who was crucified
under Pontius Pilate, adjuring all Devils and unclean spirits, have them
obedient to us. And a little after, that I may name no more, being angry with
Tryphon the Jew for adulterating the prophesies, as particularly that of a
Virgin conceiving, he shows him, that our Savior was to come in a mean manner,
and yet to do great things. The first the Jews know; for the second, (...). Ib.
p. 243.
Now it is easy to learn from those things which are done in your sight, if you
will; for by the Name of Jesus Christ, the son of God, the first begotten of
all creatures, born of a Virgin, and being man, subject to sufferings, and
crucified under Pontius Pilate, by your people, who died, rose from the dead,
and ascended into heaven, every Devil being adjured is overcome and subdued.
All these places are in his Apology, or in his Disputation with the Jew; where
having to do on the one hand with a potent, on the other hand with an impudent
and perverse Antagonist, it is not probable to suppose, he relates any matter of
fact which was not true.

Iraeneus comes next, and him we find urging against Simon and Carpocrates,
that all the tricks they did were not beneficial but prejudicial to men; he
proceeds against them negatively, and then affirms this miraculous power to be
in the Church in his time positively. His words are these. For they neither can
give sight to the blind, Nec enim caecit possunt donare visum, neque surdis
auditum, neque omnes Daemones effugare, praeter eos qui ab ipsis immittuntur,
si tamen and hoc faciunt: Neque debiles aut claudos aut Paralyticos curare, vel
alia quadam corporis part vexatos, quemadmodum saepe evenit fieri secundum
corporalem infirmitatem, vel earum quae a foris accidunt infirmitatem, bonas
valetudines restaurare: Tantum absunt ab co, ut mortuum excitent, quemadmodum
dominus excitavit and Apostoli per Orationem, and in fraternitate saepissime
propter necessarium, ea quae est in quoquo loco Ecclesia Universa postulante
per jejunium and supplicationem multam, reversus est spiritus mortuo, and
donatus est homo Orationibus Sanctorum, ut ne-quidem credant hoc in totum posse
fieri, esse autem Resurrectionem a mortuis agnitionem ejus quae ab eis dicitur
veritatis. Iraeneus advers. Haereses. lib. 2. cap. 56.
nor hearing to the deaf, neither can they chase away all Devils, unless they
be those who are put in by themselves, if truly they can do that: Neither can
they cure the weak or the lame, or those that are afflicted in any other part
of their body, which according to bodily infirmity often happens, or the
infirmity of those which happen without, can they restore good health to. It Is
so far from them that they should raise the dead (as our Lord raised, and the
Apostles by Prayer, and in the Brotherhood often for some necessity, the
Universal Church which is in every place by fasting and much supplication
begging it, the spirit is returned to the dead, and a man is given to the
prayers of the Saints) that they do not believe this wholly can be done; for
that there should be a Resurrection from the dead is the agnition of that truth
which is spoken by them. And in the next Chapter disputing against the
Epicureans and Cynicks, and their Miracles, which (says he) are merely
deceits, like to those of Simon Magus, yielding no profit to the persons for
whom, and in whom these works were done, being rather Phantasmes then Miracles,
when our Saviors are evidently so: His Resurrection the third day from the
dead was firm, seen by his Disciples, and in their presence he was received
into Heaven: He thus proceeds. But if they say, the Lord did those by the
appearance of these things, Si autem and Dominum per Phantasmata hujusmodi
fecisse dicunt, ad Prophetica reducentes eos, ex ipsis demonstrabimus omnia sic
Deo and praedicta esse, and facta firmissime, and ipsum solum esse filium Dei;
quapropter and in illius nomine, qui vere illius sunt Discipuli, ab ipso
accipientes gratiam perficiunt ad beneficia reliquorum hominum, quemadmodum
unusquisque accepit donum ab eo: Alii onim Daemonas excludunt firmissime and
vere, ut etiam saepissime credant ipsi qui emundati sunt a nequissimis
spiritibus, and sint in Ecclesia: Alii autem and praescientias habent
futurorum, and visiones and lectiones Propheticas: Alii autem laborantes aliqua
infirmitate per manus Impositionem curant, and sanos restituunt; Jam etiam
quemadmodum diximus and mortui resurrexcrunt, and perseveraverunt nobiscum
annis multis. Et quid autem? Non est numerum dicere gratiarum, qua^ per
universum mundum Ecclesia a Deo accipiens in nomine Christi Jesu crucifixi sub
Pontio Pilato, per singulos dies in opitulationem gentium perficit, neque
seducens aliquem, neque pecuniam ei auferens. Ibid. cap. 57.
bringing them back to the Prophets, we will demonstrate out of them, that all
these things were foretold by God, and most truly done, and that he only is
the Son of God: Wherefore in his name, they who are truly his Disciples,
receiving Grace from him, are enabled to benefit the rest of men, even as every
one has received a gift from him: For some cast out Devils most really and
truly, so that they who are cleansed from these unclean Spirits, do often
believe themselves, and are in the Church. Some have the knowledge of things to
come, Visions, and Prophetical Readings: And others by the Imposition of hands
cure those that are sick of any infirmity, and restore them perfectly whole:
And even now, as we have said, both the dead have risen, and many years have
remained with us. But what? I cannot repeat the number of those graces which
the Church throughout the whole world receiving from God, does every day
perform by the name of Jesus Christ who was crucified under Pontius Pilate, for
the benefit of all Nations, neither deceiving any of them, nor taking away
their money for doing of it. Thus Iraeneus. Origin follows next, who was
Iraeneus his Contemporary, and was born but 20 years after him: I shall produce
his Testimony only out of his Books against Celsus; and that which offers it
self in the first place to be considered by us, is his reply to Celsus
Objection, who demanded what great and eminent work did our Savior ever do;
Unto which this Father gives this answer. If thou will not believe those
wonderful things which the Evangelists testify Jesus did, (...). Lib. 2. page
80. Edit. Cant. 1658.
and which happened at his suffering, yet believe what thou see now: For it
is the magnificent work of Jesus, to heal even to this day, in the name of
Jesus, whom God pleases. In his third Book showing the difference between the
Religion of the Heathens and that of Christians, the great disproportion
between their gods, and our Jesus: He tells us, That the Magicians did not
register his name amongst the gods, being compelled to do so by the Decree of
some King or Emperor; but that the Maker of the whole World, by the wonderful
efficacy of his Doctrine, did appoint him to be worshipped in the hearts of his
Believers, and to be dreaded by Devils, and all other invisible Powers. Who
(says he) even now appear dreading the name of Jesus, as of some Greater,
(...). Lib. 3. page 133.
or receiving this as a piece of Worship even from the Laws of their Ruler: For
if this efficacy was not given from God, the Devils at the naming only of his
Name would not willingly depart from those bodies they have so long possessed.
In his seventh Book he answers Celsus his Objection against the Prophets, why
they being as ambiguous as any of the most mysterious Oracles should only be
believed Divine, when the Oracles Pythia, Dodonaea, etc. that were dispersed
throughout all the world, should be esteemed of no worth. To this he thus
answers: Though (says he) I might from the Authority of Aristotle and other
Peripateticks produce many things abrogating from the belief of the Pythian
Oracle, yet he lays that aside, and only desires Celsus to consider how unfit
it became an Holy Spirit to utter Oracles through that place which is not
becoming a wise man to see; (...). lib. 7. page 333.
and how unlike Pythia her self in her delivering Oracles is to one possessed
with an Holy Spirit, who knows not what she either does or says when she
delivers them: When (says he) the Prophets were enlightened by the Holy Spirit,
and their minds by its operation made more perspicuous, and the effects of it
appeared in their lives. Then he proceeds to tell us how contrary the Pythian
Oracles were to the Prophets, who by their ambiguity and obscurity, instead of
enlightening the minds of their hearers blinded them more. His words are these.
If Pythia be carried beyond her self, when she prophesies, (...). Ibid.
what is that Spirit to be esteemed, who poures upon the mind and reason
nothing but darkness; and how great is that kind of Devils, whom not a few
Christians chase away from those that suffer by them, without any Circles or
other act of Magicians, or Witches, but only by prayer and simple adjurations,
and those things the most ignorant man can bring to pass; for oftentimes very
Idiots do them, etc. I might add another place out of this Father to the same
purpose, but having more Authors to cite, these shall suffice.

Tertullian the third Writer amongst the Latins, and of the same Age with
Origin, being born but a little above twenty years after him, is next in order
to be produced. And his first testimony is not a bare assertion, but a
challenge which he sends the Roman Senators, in that most excellent Apology of
his, to try the truth of this miraculous power in the Church. His words are
these, Let any one be brought before your Tribunals who is apparently possessed
with a Devil; Edatur hic aliquis sub Tribunalibus vestris quem Daemone agi
constet, jussus a quolibet quolibet Christiano loqui Spiritus ille, tam se
Daemonem confitebitur de vero, quam alibi Deum de falso. Ae que producatur
aliquis ex iis, qui de Deo pati existimantur, qui aris inhalantes numen de
nidore concipiunt, qui ructando conantur, qui anhelando profantur: Ista ipsa
Virgo Caelestis pluviarum pollicitatrix, iste ipfe Ae sculapius Medicinarum
demonstrator, alia die morituris Socordiae; and Thanatio and Asclepiodoro vitae
sumministrator, nisite Daemones confessi fuerint, Christiano mentiri non
audentes, ibidem illius Christiani procacissimi sanguinem fundite. Apol. cap.
23.
that Spirit, being commanded by any Christian, shall confess of truth himself
to be a Devil, as otherwhere falsely he has, a God. Let also any of them be
produced who are supposed to suffer by God, who breathing on the Altars fancy a
Deity from the smell, who strive by belching, who speak by panting. Let that
holy Virgin, the promiser of rain be produced, that Aesculapius, the teacher of
Medicines, the restorer of life to Socordius, and Thanatius, and Asclepiodorus,
who were about to dye the other day, unless they confess themselves to be
Devils, not daring to lie to any Christian, shed the blood of that shameless
Christian there. In his book to Scapula the Procurator of Afric, speaking
against those bloody Oblations the Heathens Gods delighted in, he tells them,
that God does hate that food of Devils. And the Devils (says he) we do not
only reject but overcome, Daemones autem non tantum respuimus verum and
revincimus, and cotidie traducimus, and de hominibus expellimus ficut pluribus
notum est. Ad Scapulam, c. 2.
and traduce daily, and expel from men, as it is known to many. And in the
fourth chapter of the same book he repeats several miraculous cures done by
Christians. Quanti honesti viri (de vulgaribus enim non dicimus) aut a
Daemoniis aut naletudinibus remediati sunt Ipse enim Severus pater Antonini
Christianorum memor fuit. Nam and Proculum Christianum, qui Torpacion
cognominebatur Euhodiae Procuratorem qui eum per Oleum aliquando curaverat
requisivit, et in Palatio suo habuit usque ad mortem ejus, quem et Antoninus
optime noverat lacte Christiano educatus. Ibid. c. 4.
How many Honorable persons (for we speak not of the meaner sort) have been
remedied either from Devils or Diseases? Severus himself, the father of
Antoninus, was mindful of the Christians. For he sought out Proculus a
Christian, Procurator of Euhodia, who was Sir-named Corpacion, and who had
formerly recovered him by oil, and had him in his Palace till his death; whom
Antoninus well knew, being himself brought up by Christian milk. In cap. 57. of
his book De Anima, we have yet a further Testimony to this purpose, where
asserting how much mischief, how many immature and cruel deaths the Devils have
caused, by taking upon them the shapes of dead persons, he proves that thsy do
sometimes take upon them such shapes in these words, We evidently prove this
deceit of the wicked Spirit that lurks under the shape of the dead, Hanc quoque
fallaciam spiritus nequam sub personis defunctorum delitescentis; nifi fallor,
etiam rebus probamus, quum in Exorcismis interdum aliquem se ex parentibus
hominem suis affirmant, interdum Gladiatorium aut Bestiarium, sicut and alibi
Deum, nihil magis ourans excludere quam hoc ipsum quod praedicamus, ne facile
credamus animas universas ad inferos redigi: Et tamen ille Demon postquam
circumstantes circumvenire tentavit, instantia divinae gratiae victus, id quod
in vero est invitus confitetur. De Anima. cap. 57.
when sometimes in Exorcismes they affirm that they are a man in the number of
their parents, sometimes that they are Gladiators, or Beast-keepers, as at
other times that they are gods, endeavoring to shut out nothing so much as
what we preach, that we might not easily believe that all Souls are carried to
that separate state of the dead: And yet this Devil after that he has
attempted to circumvent the standers about him, being overcome by the force of
divine grace, unwillingly does confess that that is true.

I should say no more out of this Father did not the Elegancy of the words, and
the Excellency of the sense persuade me to what is already said, to add this
excellent advice which he gives Christians under persecution, not to fly, but
to stand to it: Mark his words. That Soldier is the gallanter that is lost in
fight, Pulchrior est miles in praelic amissus quam in fuga salvus. Times
hominem Christian, quem timeri oportet ab Angelis, siquidem Angelos
judicaturus es, quem timeri oportet a Daemoniis, siquidem and in Daemonas
accepisti potestatem, quem timeri ab universo mundo, siquidem and in te mundus
judicatur. De fuga in persecutione. Cap. 10.
then that is saved in flight. Do thou fear man, O Christian, who thy self
ought to be feared by Angels, because thou art about to judge them, who
ought to be feared by the Devils, because over them thou have received
power, who ought to be feared of the whole world, because the whole world in
thee is judged. Thus much for Tertullian.

The next in age that I shall make use of is Minutius Felix, and him we have in
his Octavius not affirming only this miraculous power to have been in the
Church, but appealing to their knowledge of the truth of it. All these things
(says he) the greatest part of you know that the very Devils do confess of
themselves, Haec omnia sciunt pleraque pars vestrum ipsos Daemonas de
semetipsis confiteri, quoties a nobis tormentis verborum, and orationis
incendiis de corporibus exiguntur. Ipse Saturnus, and Serapis, and Jupiter, and
quicquid Daemonum colitis, victi dolor quid sunt eloquuntur; nec utique in
turpitudinem sui nonnullis praesertim vestrum assistentibus, mentiuntur. Ipsis
testibus esse cos Daemonas, de se verum confitentibus credit. Adjurati enim
per Deum verum and solum, inviti miseris corporibus inhorrescunt, vel exiliunt
statim, vel evanescunt gradatim, prout fides patientis adjuvat, ant gratia
curantis aspirat. Edit. Luge. Bat. cum notis, page 31.
as often as by us they are driven from bodies, by the torments of words and
heat of prayer. Saturn himself, and Serapis, and Jupiter, and what other Devils
you worship, being overcome with torture, speak out what they are, neither
(though it be to their disgrace) do they lie, although some of you be there
assisting. Believe these witnesses confessing truly of themselves that they are
Devils; for being adjured by the true and only God, unwillingly, and miserably
roaring in their bodies (whom they have possessed) they either leap out
presently, or else vanish by degrees, as the faith of the Patient does help, or
the Grace of the Curer does aspire. Thus he.

S. Cyprian the Bishop of Carthage and glorious Martyr shall follow him in
place, as he does in age; and him we find in his Epistle to Demetrianus
Proconsul of Asia urging this of Miracles to persuade him to Christianity. O
that thou would hear and see when the Devils are adjured by us, O fi audire
velis and videre, quando a nobis Daemones adjurantur, and torquentur
spiritualibus flagris, and verborum tormentis de obsessis corporibus ejiountur;
quando ejulantes, and gementes voce humana, and potestate divina, flagella and
verbera sentientes venturum Judicem confitentur. Veni and cognosce vera esss
quae dicimus. and quia sic deos colere te dicis, vel ipfis, quos colis, creed,
aut si volueris and tibi credere. De te ipse loquetur, audiente te qui nunc
pectus tuum obsedit, qui nunc mentem tuam ignorantiae noote coecavit. Videbis
nos rogari ab eis quos tu rogas, timeri ab eis quos tu adoras: Videbis sub manu
nostra stare vinctos, and tremere captivos, quos tu suscipes and venerar is ut
Dominos. Certe vel sic confundi in istis erroribus tuis poteris, quando
conspexeris, and audieris deos tuos quid sint, interrogatione nostra statim
prodere, and praesentibus licet vobis, praestigias illas and fallacias suas non
posse celare. Ad Demettianum
and when they are tortured with spiritual whips, and are driven out of
possessed bodies by the torments of words, when howling, and groaning with an
humane voice, and feeling by the power of God whippings and tortures, they
confess the Judge that is to come. Come and know that these things which we say
are true; and because thou say that thou do worship the Gods, either
believe them whom thou worshippest, or if thou will, believe thy self: For out
of thee he shall speak, thou thy self hearing him who now does besiege thy
breast, who now has blinded thy mind with the night of Ignorance. Thou shall
see us entreated of them whom thou petitionest, feared of them whom thou
worshippest: lacias suas non posse celare. Ad Demetrianum.
Thou shall see them stand bound under our power, and being Captives to
tremble, whom thou admirest, and adorest as Lords. Certainly either so thou
may be confounded in these thy errors, when thou shall see and hear thy
gods whom thou worshippest presently betray themselves what they are, when we
ask the Question, and not to be able to conceal their deceits and fallacies,
although ye be present. And to this let me add that of the same Father to
Donatus, where we have him laying down this truth more affirmatively, without
any Rhetorical flourishes. There is (says he) power given to compel unclean
and wandering Spirits, Facultas datur immundos and erraticos spiritus, qui
expugnandis se hominibus immerserint, ad confessionem minis increpantibus
cogere, conflictantes, ^julantes, gementes, incremento poenoe propagantis
extendere, flagris coedere, igne torrerc. Res illic geritur nec videtur,
occulta plaga, poena manifesta. Cypr. ad Donatum.
who have entered into men that they might destroy them, by repeated threatenings
to confess themselves, to make them howl, cry, and groan, by reason of the
increase of the punishment that follows them, to beat them with whips, to roast
them with fire. The thing is there done but is not seen, the punishment is hid,
but the pain is manifest. Thus I have from the Authority of six of the most
eminent Church-Writers of the first 300 years proved, that all their time
Miracles were in the Church. I shall in a few words show you they were not
ceased in S. Austines and S. Chrysostomes times, before whose days the world
became Christian.

St Austin was Bishop of Hippo almost at the end of the fourth Century, and in
the 22 d. Book De Civitate Dei, cap. 8. he has set apart to treat of Miracles;
In which having told us, That Miracles were necessary before the world
believed, Possem quidem dicere necessaria fuisse priusquam crederet mundus.
Quisquis adhuc Prodigia ut creda^ inquirit, magnum est ipse Prodigium, qui
credente mundo non credit.
that the world might believe; and that whosoever does inquire after Prodigies
now, that he might believe, is a great Prodigy himself, who does not believe
when the world believes: And referring us to the Miracles reported by the
Evangelists, at last he adds some that happened in his days, and were upon his
own knowledge true. That Miracle (says he) which was done at Milan when we
were there, Miraculum quod Mediolani factum cum illic essemus, quando
illuminatus est coecus, ad multorum notitiam potuit pervenire, quia and grandis
est Civitas, and ibi erat tunc Imperator, and immenso populo test res gesta
est, concurrente ad corpora Martyrum Profusii and Gervasii, quoe cum laterent
and penitus nescirent, Episcopo Ambrosio per somnum revelata, reperta sunt ubi
caecus ille depulsis veteribus tenebris diem vidit.
when the blind man had his sight restored him, may come to be known of many,
because the City is great, and the Emperor then was there, and the thing was
done, a great multitude being witness of it, running to the bodies of the
Martyrs Profasius and Gervasius, whose bodies when they lay hid were not known,
being revealed to Bishop Ambrose by a dream, were found out, where this blind
man shaking of his ancient darkness saw the day. He tells us that Innocentius
at Carthage, he and his Brother Alypius being present, was by prayers
miraculously recovered of a Fistula, which being once cut was not cured, and
could not be done the second time without danger of life as well as infinite
torture. Innocentia also of the same City, a most Religious Woman, was cured of
a Cancer in her breast, which the Physicians judged incurable, by praying at
the Font, and being signed with the sign of the Cross on the part diseased, by
the first woman that Easter was baptized, according to the admonition she
received from God in a dream. He tells us of a Physician in the same City, that
when he was baptized was cured of the Gout; of one Curabilanus, both of a
Palsy and Rupture, by the same Sacraments; of a Presbyter, who cured a Virgin
of Hippo by prayers, and anointing with Oil, from being possessed of a Devil.
He joins to these a whole Catalogue of Miracles that were done before the
Shrines of St. Stephen that glorious Martyr, In Colonia Coelumensi.
in the Colony of Calunica; at last he concludes with a most remarkable Miracle
done in his presence, which, though long, yet conducing much to my purpose, I
think necessary to repeat. There was one Miracle done with us, not greater
indeed then these I have spoken of, Unum est quod apud nos factum non magis
quam illa quoe dixi, sed tam clarum atque illustre miraculum, ut nullum
arbitror esse Hipponensium qui hoe non vel viderit vel didicerit, nullum, qui
oblivisci ulla ratione potuerit. December quidem fratres fuerunt, quorum septem
fuerunt mares, tres foeminae, de Casaraea Cappadociae, suorum Civium non
ignobiles, maledicto matris recenti patris little obitu, destituae, quae
injuriam sibi ab eis factam acerbissime tulit, tali poena sunt divinitus
coerciti, ut horribiliter quaterent omnes tremore membrorum; in qua foedissima
specie oculos suorum Civium non ferentes, quaquaver sum cuique ire visum est,
toto pene vagabantur orb Romano. Ex his etiam ad nos venerunt duo, frater and
sorer, Paulus, and Palladia, multis aliis locis miseria defamante cogniti.
Venerunt autem ante Pascha ferme dies quindecim, Ecclesiam quotidie, and in ea
memoriam gloriosissimi Stephani frequentabant orantes, ut jam sibi placaret
Deus, and salutem pristinam redderet: Et illa and quacunque ibant convertebant
in se Civitatis aspectum; Nonnulli quod cos alibi viderant, causamque tremoris
eorum noverant, alii ut cuique poterant indicabant. Venit and Pascha, atque
ipso die Dominico mane cum jam frequens populus praesens esset, and loci sancti
cancellos ubi Martyrium erat idem juvenis orans teneret, repent Prostratus
est, and dormienti simillimus jacuit, non tamen tremens sicut per somnum
solebat. Stupentibus qui aderant, atque aliis paventibus, aliis dolentibus, cum
cum quidem vellent exigere nonnulli prohibuerunt, sed potius exitum expectandum
esse dixerunt. Et ecce surrexit, and non tremebat, quoniam sanatus erat, stabat
incolumis intuens intuentes. Quis ergo intuentium se tenuit a laudibus Dei?
Clamantium gratulantiumque vocibus Ecclesia usquequaque completa est, Inde ad
me currunt ubi sedebam jam processurus; irruit alter quisque post alterum,
omnis posterior quasi novum quod alius prius dixcrat, nuntiantes: Meque
gaudente, and atu^ me gratias Deo agente ingreditur etiam ipse cum pluribus,
inclinatur ad genua mea, erigitur ad osculum meum: Procedimus ad populum, plena
erat Ecclesia, personabat vocibus gaudiorum, Deo gratias, Deo lauds nemine
tacente, tunc atque inde clamantium. Salutavi populum, and rursus eadem
ferventiore voce clamabant. Facto autem silentio Scripturarum divinarum sunt
lect^ solemnia: Ubi qutem ventum est ad mei sermonis locum dixi pauca pro
tempore, and pro illius jucunditate laetitiae; Magis enim eos in opere divino
quandam Dei eloquentiam non audire, sed considerare permisi. Nobiscum homo
prandit, and diligenter nobis omnem suae ao maternae fraternaeque calamitatis
indicavit Historiam. Sequenti itaque die post Sermonem redditum, narrationis
ejus libellum in crastinum populo recitandum promisi: Quod cum in Dominico die
Paschae tertio in gradibus exedrae, in qua de superiori loquebar loco, feci
stare ambos fratres cum eorum legeretur libellus. Intuebatur populus universus
sexus utriusque unum stantem sine deformi motu, alteram membris omnibus
contrementem: Et qui ipsum non viderant quid in eo divinae misericordiae factum
est, in ejus sorore cernebant: Videbant enim quid in eo gratulandum, quid pro
illa esset orandum. Inter haec recitato eorum libello de conspectu populi abire
eos praecepi, and de tota ipsa causa aliquanto diligentius coeperam disputare:
Cum ecce me disputante voces aliae de memoria Martyris novae gratulatione
audiuntur. Conversi sunt eo qui me audiobant, coeperuntque concurrere; Illa
enim de gradibus descenderat, in quibus steterat, ad sanctum Martyrem crare
perrexerat: Quae mox ut cancellos attigit, collapsa similiter velut ad somnum,
sana surrexit. Dum ergo requiremus quid factum fucrit, unde ist^ strepitus
laetus extiterit, ingressi sunt cum illa in Basilica, ubi eramus adducentes came
sanam de Martyris loco. Tum vero tantus ab utroque sexu admirationis clamor
exorsus est, ut vox continuata cum lachrymis non videretur posse finiri.
Perducta est ad cum locum ubi paulo ante ste^crat tremens: Exultabant came
similem fratri factam, cui doluerant remansisse dissimilem; Et nondum fusas
preces suas pro illa, jam tamen praeviam voluntatem tam cito exauditam esse
credebant; Exultabant in Dei laudem voces sine verbis, tanto sonitu, quanto
aures nostrae far vix possent. Quid crat in cordibus exultantium nisi fides
Christi pro qua Stephani sanguis est. De Civit. Dei. lib. 22. Cap. 8. In fine.
but so evident and renowned that I suppose there is no Inhabitant of Hippo who
had not either seen or learnt this, neither is any that could upon any reason
forget it. There were ten children, whereof seven were men, and three women, of
Caesaraea in Cappadocia, amongst their Citizens not ignoble, who by the curse
of their mother (newly deprived by the death of their Father, who bitterly took
some injury done her by them) were inflicted from God with such a punishment,
that they did most dreadfully shake with the trembling of their joints, in
which most sad condition, no ways being able to endure the being seen by their
Citizens, it seemed good unto them to go every where about; and they did wander
almost throughout all the Roman world. Of these, two of them came to us, a
Brother and a Sister, Paulus and Palladia, known in many places by this
defaming misery. They came thither almost fifteen days before Easter, and
praying they every day frequented the Church, and in it the Shrine of the most
glorious Stephen, that God would be appeased with them, and restore them their
former health; and wheresoever they went they drew upon them the eyes of the
whole City; some because they had seen them in other places, and knew the cause
of that trembling, others that they might tell it to as many as they could.
Easter comes, and in the Lords day in the morning, when even now there was a
great multitude of people present, and this youth praying and holding fast the
Rails of that holy place where the Shrine was, fell suddenly down, and lay as
one sleeping, yet not trembling as be was wont when he slept. Those that were
present being amazed, and some being afraid, others grieving; when therefore
some would have raised him up, they hindered saying, the event was to be
expected: And he himself rose up and did not tremble, because he was healed; He
stood up whole looking on those that looked on him. Who therefore of the
beholders could hold himself from praising God? The Church every where was
filled with the acclamations of shouters, and givers of God thanks. From thence
they ran to me where I sat, being now about to go on procession: One after
another they rush upon me, the last relating to me that as new, what another
had before told me. When I was rejoicing, and by my self giving God thanks, he
himself comes in to me, with many more, he falls down at my knees, stands up to
my kiss: We go forth to the people, the Church was full and did echo with the
voice of Rejoycings, and every where crying, Thanks be to God, Praise be to
God, none holding their peace. I saluted the people, and again they ecchoed the
same things with a more servent voice: Silence at length being made, the
accustomed Lessons of the Holy Scripture were read: When therefore it was come
to the place of my Sermon, I spoke a few words for the time, and for the
pleasantness of this joy; for I thought fit they should rather consider a kind
of divine eloquence in the holy work, then hear it. The man dined with us, and
exactly showed us all the Story both of his Mothers and Brothers Calamity. The
following day, after the Sermon was done, I promised on the morrow that a Book
of this Story should be read to the people: When this thing was done in the
third Lords day of Easter week, upon the steps of the Chore, in which I spoke
from a higher place; I made both these brothers to stand whilst their Book was
read. The whole people of both sexes did see one standing without any deformed
motion, the other trembling in all her joints; and they which did not see what
of Gods mercy was done in him, might perceive it in his Sister: They saw in him
what was to be thanked for; what for her was to be prayed for. Amongst these
things when their book was read, I commanded them to go out of the sight of the
people, and began of the whole cause to dispute a little more diligently; when
behold whilst I was disputing, othee new voices of rejoicing were heard from
the Memorial of the Martyr. They turned about thither who heard me, and began
run: For after she had gone down the steps where she stood, she went forwards
to pray at the holy Martyrs Shrine; who presently as she had touched the Rails,
falling down in like manner, as asleep, rose up recovered. When therefore we
did require what was done, from whence that joyful noise came, they entered with
her into the Chore where we were, bringing her whole from the place of the
Martyrs Shrine. Then there began so great a noise of admiration from both
sexes, that the voice being continued with the former weeping for her, did seem
not to have ended: She is brought to that place where a little before she stood
trembling: They rejoiced to see her made like her brother, whom before they
pityed to have remained so unlike; and they saw, though the prayers for her
were not yet put up, yet that their praevious desire was so suddenly heard.
They did lift up to the praise of God their voices without words with so great
a sound as our ears could scarcely bear it: For what was in their hearts but
the Faith of Christ, for which Stephen's blood was shed? Thus he. And though
this Story be long, yet not unworthy either of our reading or considering.

S. Chrysostom, that I may hasten, does sufficiently testify Miracles to have
been in the Church in his time; and of that purpose has made an Oration to the
Martyr Babylas, and of the wonderful effects his dead bones had to hinder the
Oracle from prophesying. Every where (says he) where the Memorial of the
Martyr is, (...). Orat. de S. Babyl^.
there will be the shame of the Heathens. And a little after showing how the
Devil caused his bones to be removed, he says: The Martyr indeed is removed,
(...) Ibid.
but the Devil is not so freed from fear, but presently learnt, that it was
possible for him to remove the Martyrs bones, but impossible to fly the
Martyrs hands; for when the Skeleton was carried into the City, thunder from
above fell upon the Devils Temple, and devoured it. I choose this amongst the
many others S. Chrysostom affords me, because I see the learned Grotius citing
the authority of Lucian in his Pseudomantei for this very Miracle, although I
confess upon search I can find nothing of it, and that the Oracle of Apollo in
Daphne answered; This place is full of dead bones, and this hindered the Oracle.
(...). Grotius. Notae in de veritate Religionis Christianae, p. 275. Edit.
Lugd. Bat.
And thus I have proved unto you the continuance of Miracles all the first 300
years, and till S. Austins and S. Chrysostomes time, from the best
Church-Writers.

I must now proceed to show you from the authority of the Enemies of
Christianity, the Heathens and Jews, that by the Christians miracles were
performed, which under this third head I promised to do.

2. In the second place; and that which I shall here insist on shall be the
victory obtained by the Christians prayers, when Antoninus and his Army were
reduced in Germany to the utmost extremity. Now that our English Reader may
understand this story, I shall first tell it him out of This Xiphilin the
Epitomizer of Dion, was either he that was a Monk of the Mountain Olympus, and
afterward Patriarch of Constantinople, or his Grandchild, and flourished in the
time of Michael the Emperor, as Vostius tells us in his De Historicis Graecis.
Xyphilin, and then show you what the Heathens confess of it. In his life of
Marcus Antoninus Plut. speaking of the great danger the Emperor and his Army
were in, both by reason of the number of their Enemies, and want of water, he
has these words; This which I speak of was so; Marcus had a Brigade (the
Romans call a Brigade a Legion) of the Romans of Mitilene, and they were all
servants to Christ; Now therefore in the fight the Lievt. General going to
Marcus, (...), etc. Xiph In vira Marc. Phi. p. 367. Ed. Sylsb. Francofurti. An.
1590.
not knowing what to do by reason of the encompassing by their Enemies, and
being fearful of the whole Army is reported to have said, That there is nothing
with those that are called Christians, but they can do by their Prayers; This
is also justified by ^usth. lib. 5. Orosus lib. 7. and pressed by several of
the ancient Fathers to this purpose.
and that amongst them there was one whole Brigade of that sort: When M^rcus
heard this, he is reported to have used entreaty to them, that they should pray
to their God; whilst they were yet praying God presently heard, and smote the
Enemies with thunder, and refreshed the Romans with a shower; by which accident
Marcus was so a mased, as he is said to have decreed, That the Christians
should be honored, and that this Legion should be called the Thundering
Legion. It is reported that there was a Letter of Marcus concerning these
things; and the Graecians themselves know and do witness, that this Legion was
called the Thundering Legion; but tell us not the reason of that name: Thus he.
Now that there was such a miraculous deliverance of the Romans Army, we have
several Heathens that witness it in their Histories, only they ascribe it to
other causes than the Christians prayers. Julius Capitolinus, in his life of
their Emperor, tells us, That the Emperor did extort from heaven by his
prayers, Fulmen de Coelo precibus suis contra hostium Machinamentum extorfit,
suis pluvia impetrata quam fiti laborarent. Cap. 24. Edit Lugd. Ba^* 1661.
thunder against the Machines of his Enemies; R^^^ being obtained for his
Soldiers when they did languish for thirst. Xiphilin tells us that Dion
attributed it to Magic; For, says he, there is a report that a certain
Egyptian Magician named Arnuphus, (...) Ibid.
was with Marcus, who did invocate the Aerial Mercury, and other Demons, by
his Magic Arts, and by them did obtain this rain. This concerning these things
Dion tells us. Baronius in the year of Christ 176. tells us. That there is yet
to be seen at Rome in Antoninus his Pillar, the representation of this
miraculous Victory; and he has in his 2. Tome, page 108. given us a Cut of it;
and there it is attributed to Jupiter, If the Judicious Reader should with
Salmasius judge the Letter annexed to Justin Martyr to be spurious, yet it is
sufficient there was such a Letter, though perhaps it is now lost.
descending to the Romans with rain, and their Enemies with thunder. This put
together, there is no doubt of the Story, but of the Cause; and methinks it is
more than probable, since such eminent Writers differed about it; and assigned
such contrary Causes, that they knew the true one, and avoided it. But there is
no question at all but that Marcus wrote to the Senate of this Victory, and
ascribed it to the Christians prayers, when we had Tertullian appealing to it:
But we on other side produce you a Protector; if the Letters of Marcus Aurelius
that most grave Emperor be required, At nos e contra edimus Protectorem, si
literae Marci Aurelii gravissimi Imperatoris requi^antur, quibus illam
Germanicam sitim Christianorum forte militum precationibus impetrato imbri
discussam attestatur. Ap. Cap. 5.
in which he witnesses, that that German thirst was dispelled by a shower,
which was by chance entreated for in the prayers of the Christians. And the
very Letter Justin Martyr, with some others, has annexed to the end of his
second Apology to Antoninus Pius the Emperor; which being of great length, and
containing in it nothing but what Xephilin has before afforded us, I judge it
fitter to refer the Reader to him, than to transcribe it out of him. Thus for
the Heathens.

For the Jews, I shall only cite their own Talmud, who in the Treatise of
Idolatry, Abodazara, cap. 1. as Hoornbeck tells me, does celebrate James the
Apostle and Disciple of Jesus Christ, Jacobum Apostolum Jesu Christi Discipulum
celebrat dono miraculorum pollentem, a quo tamen R. Samuelis Nepos a Serpente
ictus curare noluerit, ideo quod Jesu Discipulus sanare esset solitus in nomine
Praeceptoris sui Jesu. Haec in Talmude isto occurrunt Capite. Hoornbeck do Con.
and Conver. Judaeis. Cap. 1. lib. 3. page 233.
as eminent for the gift of Miracles, by whom the Nephew of Rabbi Samuel, being
bit of a Serpent, would not be cured, because every Disciple of Jesus was wont
to heal in the Name of their Master Jesus. These things are in the Talmud, and
in the forecited Chapter. Thus I have, though in much length, finished my third
branch of my second Argument, which asserts Jesus Christ to be the great
Lawgiver: I hope the necessity of the subject will excuse my tediousness in it.
I proceed to the

4. Fourth branch of this Argument, which is, The destruction of Idolatry; and
the Conquest of the World to the Name of a Crucified Savior, by such weak and
ignorant persons as the Apostles were. And this naturally divides it self into
two parts.

The first is the destruction by Idolatry. And for the proving of that, what
does fitter begin our Discourse then Porphyrius own Testimony, who, though the
bitterest enemy Christianity ever had, yet confesses, as Eusebius tells me in
his first Chapter of his fifth Book De praeparatione Evangelica, That since
Jesus came to be worshipped no man has received public benefits from the
gods. (...).
And it is no wonder he should say so, because we find, before the coming of our
Savior into the world, the most famous Oracle of Apollo of Delphos was shut
up. The Orator in his second Book De Divinatione, seems to slight that Oracle
altogether: For it is long (says he) since she uttered these Verses; and when
she did do it, they were barbarous ones. But what is most (says he) to be
observed, Sed quod caput est, our iste modo jam Oracula Delphis non eduntur,
non modo nostra aetate, sed jam diu, adeo ut nihil posset esse contemptius.
Cicero De Divinitat. li 2. To. 4. p. 296. Edit. Par, 1565.
Why are not the Oracles after the same manner uttered at Delphos, not only in
our Age, but even now a pretty while since, even so that nothing now seems to
be more contemptible. And then see how he proceeds. When they are therefore
urged from this place, Hoc loco cum urgentur, evanuisse aiunt vetustate vim
loci, unde anhelitus ille terrae fieret quo Pythia mente incitata, Oracula
ederet. De vino aut salsamento putes loqui, quae evanescunt vetustate. Ibid.
they reply, that the power of the place is vanished, by reason of the oldness
of it, in which Pythia did utter her Oracles with a disturbed mind. You suppose
certainly you speak of wine or salt, which grows worse by age. Thus he. But if
you would have the true reason of its ceasing, Nicephorus for me shall tell it
you. Caesar Augustus (says he) being renowned by his many great Actions, (...).
and being proclaimed the first Monarch, and now being grown old, went to the
Pythian Oracle: And having sacrificed to the Demon an Hecatomb, did ask who
should govern the Roman Empire after him: But when from thence no answer came,
he both offered a second Sacrifice, and asked the reason why that Oracle, who
formerly spoke so much, was now silent. (...)
The Oracle being a little silent gave that answer to him.

The Hebrew Boy that does the gods excel
Bids me leave this my house, and go to Hell: (...).

Therefore depart at last from this my Cell.
Caesar having had this answer went to Rome, and building in the Capitol a
great Altar, (...).
he wrote these words about it in the Roman Language. Nicep. Hist. Eccl. lib.
1. cap. 77.


This is the Altar of the firstborn of God.

This Story Suidas tells us also in the word Augustus; and Cedrenus in his
Compendium of Histories. I confess I am not absolutely satisfied of the truth
of this, that is that these very words were spoken to Augustus, but in this
particular am inclined to Baronius his opinion, whose words, because they will
conduce to our understanding this Story, merit our inserting. Which Story
(says he) I would they so should understand, Quod tamen ita velim intelligant,
qui ei rei majorem fidem adhibendam putant, quam his quae ex Graecis Autoribus
recensuimus: Non quod Sybilla aliqua Augusti temporibus, quae illum haec
docuerit, superstes fuerit; siquidem Cumaea, quae novissima omnium fuisse
traditur, quinquagesima Olympiade (auctore Solino) vixit, temporibusque
Tarquinii Regis Romae fuerit: Sed sic accipiendum, ut ea ipsa Augustus a
Sybilla, hoc est, Sybillinis carminibus, quae Sybilla nomine citari a majoribus
consueverunt, acceperit; Non autem a Sybilla quasi adhuc vivente vate, quae
diximus ei oftenta fuerint. Augustum nam que multum fuisse in cognoscendis,
scrutandis, expurgandisque carminibus Sybillinis, quae proxime diximus satis
superque ostendunt. In apparatu. Sect. 26.
who think greater faith should be given to these words than those that out of
Greek Authors we repeat: Not that any Sybill was alive in Augustus his time,
who should teach him these things; Because the Sybill of Cumaea, who is
reported to be the last of them all (as Solinus in the eighth Chapter of his
History witnesses) lived in the fiftieth Olympiade, and was at Rome in the
time of King Tarquin: But that it was to be understood, that those very things
Augustus had received from the Sybill, that is from the Sybilline Verses, which
in the Sybills name were wont to be repeated by their Ancestors; But not from
the Sybills, as if the things we have spoken were shown him whilst the Prophet
lived. Now that Augustus spent much of his time in knowing, searching, and
examining the Sybilline Verses, those things which immediately before we have
spoken of, do sufficiently show. Thus he. Concerning this diligence of Augustus
about the Sybilline Verses, I shall, omitting many others, make use only of
Suetonius his Authority, who in the life of Augustus has these words. Postquam
vero Pontificatum maximum, quem nunquam vivo Lepido auferre sustinuerat, mortuo
demum suscepit: Quicquid fatidicorum librorum Graeci Latinique generis, nullis,
vel parum ideonis auctoribus vulgo ferebatur, supra duo millia contracta,
undique cremavit, ac solos retinuit Sybillinos, hos quoque delectu habito,
condiditque duobus forulis auratis sub Palatini Apollinis basi. Sucton. in
Octavio, cap. 31. Something to this purpose has Tacitus in the fifth Book of
his Annals.
After that he had taken upon him the High Priesthood, Lepidus being dead,
which whilst he lived he could not endure to take away: Whatsoever Books of
Prophesies, whether Greek or Latin, that were published abroad, either with
none, or very unlikely Authors, having got together above two thousand he burnt
them, and only kept the Books of the Sybills, and of those too choice being
had, he hid them in two golden presses under the Basis of the Pillar of the
Palatine Apollo.

I have set down this the larger, that every eye might perceive whether he may
upon reason judge this relation of Nicephorus true; however I have obtained
from it what I aimed at, to show you the real reason why this Oracle ceased. To
proceed.

That the Oracle of Daphne ceased we have several sufficient Authorities of
Eminent Writers, who lived after the Birth of our Savior. I will begin with
the Satyrist Juvenal, who in the sixth Satyr of his second Book has these
words, which I shall translate as near as I can reserving the sense. --
Quicquid Dixerit Astrologus credent a font relatum
Hammonis, quorum Delphis Oraculacessant:
Et genus humanum damnat caligo futura.



-- What The Astrologer says, because from Hammon's he
Relates it, as they think, they presently
Believe; for the great Oracles do cease
At Delphis, and are forced to hold their peace:
Thus Mankind is deprived of joyful light,
And stands condemned to a perpetual night.
What Juvenal says of the famous Oracle at Delphis, Lucan speaks of all the
Gods in the general. Excessere omnes adytis sacrisque relictis
Dii, quibus Imperium steterat --

The Gods by whom this Empire stood alone
Have left their Temples, and from hence are gone.


Celsus the Epicure confesses, that the Oracles of Claros, Delphos, and
Dodonaea are ceased. Julian the Apostate says as much for Egypt: And S.
Austin in his nineteenth Book de Civitate Dei, gives us out of Porphyry the
answer of an Oracle, which though not then ceased, yet seems to intimate the
lasting of it not to be long. For (says Porphyry) to one asking the Oracle by
appeasing what God he might call back he wife from Christianity, Interroganti
inquit quem Deum placando revocare possit uxorem suam a Christianismo, deinde
verba Apollinis ista sunt: Forte magis poteris in aqua impressis literis
scribere, aut inflans pennas leves per era ut avis volare, quam semel pollutae
revoces impiae uxoris sensum. lib. 19. de Civit. Dei, Cap. 23.
Apollo gave this answer. By chance you may more easily write letters in
waters, or stretching out thy wings fly as a bird through the air, then to
call back the sense of thy wicked and once polluted wife.

These words are worth our noting, they are, as S. Austin says, in Porphyry's
Book (...) And what a sad condition must the Devil that gave that answer
suppose himself to be brought to, when he says it is impossible to bring back
to Heathenisme one Christian woman? He could not but imagine his Dominion
short, that was not able to give a better satisfaction to one of his
worshippers, then that it was out of the power of the Gods, or rather Devils,
to bring about a Christian to Idolatry. And certainly the ruin and decay of
this Oracle could not but be obvious to the eye of Porphyry from this very
answer, by which he might see the God that gave it saw his condition desperate,
and without remedy.

Plutarch has written a whole Book of the cause why the Oracles ceased; and
because it is conducing to the Subject I have in hand, I shall give you
contracted the Contents of the whole Book. The sum of this whole Book seems to
be a conference between Demetrius and Cleombrotus, which they entered in when
they were at the Temple of Apollo at Delphos: For one of them having rehearsed
a wonder of the Temple of Jupiter Hammon, moved thereby a further desire of
Disputation; and after some by-discourse they came to the main point, namely,
why all the Oracles of Greece (excepting that only of Lebadia) ceased. To which
demand Planetiades another Philosopher there answered; That the wickedness of
men was the cause of it: Ammonius another Philosopher attributes all unto the
Wars which had consumed the Pilgrims that had used to resort thither. Lamprias
proposes one opinion, and Cleombrotus inferring another, they fall into a
Discourse touching Demons, whom he verily ranketh between God and men,
disputing of their nature according to the Greek Philosophy; Then he proves
that these Demons have the charge of Oracles, but by reason they departed out
of one Country into another, or dyed, they ceased. And to this purpose he
tells us a notable story of the death of great Pan. Ammonius confutes the
Epicureans that say there are no Demons. Demetrius demands why they have this
power to govern Oracles, and they all agree with the Platonic Philosophy of
the principal, efficient, and final cause of those things that are effected by
reason, and particularly of Divination and Praediction. In fine, Plutarch
attributes all to Exhalations from the Earth, which breathing out has touched
the understanding of men with such efficacy as to cause them to foresee future
things: That as some grounds are more fertile, so some places of the Earth do
naturally engender and incite Enthusiastic and divining Spirits; and that this
power is divine, but not eternal or perdurable, but by process and succession
of time does diminish and decay; and that this great number of Spirits are not
at once engendered, neither proceed they forward or retire backward continually;
but that this virtue of the Earth moves by certain Revolutions, and by that
means is puffed up, and after that in time it has gathered new vapors it
fills the caves and holes so full, until they discharge themselves, and send
them up again: Whereupon it comes to pass, that the Exhalations stirred in the
said Caves, and desirous to issue forth, after that they have been beaten back
again, violently assail the Foundations, and stir the Temples built upon
them, in such sort as if being shaken by Earthquakes, more or less to one
place then another, according to the avertures and passages made for the
Exhalation, they find issue through the streights, break forth with forcible
violence, and so produce these Oracles. This is the Contents of this Discourse;
and I judged it most convenient to give you the Heads of it all, that as you
may see on one hand we have him confessing, That all the Oracles of Greece
(excepting that of Lebadia) were ceased; so on the other hand we may see how
empty the reasons of this great Philosopher are for their ceasing, and making
these gods mortal, who were those they worshipped, how contemptible their whole
Religion was. But because the story of this death of Pan here related, carries
in it self a particular relation of the destruction of their greatest Deity, I
shall here repeat it out of the Author. Concerning the death of the Geniuses,
(...). P^uta. de defectu Oraculorum.
I have heard the relation of a man neither simple nor vapouring: For it was
Epithersis the Father of Aemilianus the Rhetorician, whom some of you knew, he
was my Fellow Citizen and a Teacher of Grammar. He says, that intending to
sail into Italy, and to that purpose ascending into a Ship that carried in it
much Merchandise and many passengers; that about evening when they were near
the Islands Echinadas, the wind went down, and the Ship was carried near about
the Island Paxos, and there they heard one calling aloud Thamous, that all
admired. Now this Thamous was an Egyptian Ship-master, and not known by name
to many of those that sailed with him. Being twice called he held his peace,
but the third time answered the Caller, who then spoke these continued words.
When thou come over against the Palodes, declare that the great god Pan is
dead. Those things being heard, Epithersis reports, that they were afraid, and
did reason amongst themselves whether they had better obey this command, or
without any curiosity do otherwise; but that Thamous did determine, that if
there was wind if there was a great calm about that place, that then he would
publish what he heard. When therefore they came over against the Palodes, and
there being no wind, nor wave, Thamous in the Prow of the Ship spoke toward
the Land what he had heard, that the great god Pan was dead: Which when he had
done, he further reports, that there was a great groaning mixed with
admiration. Which things, there being many present, did suddenly spread at
Rome, and Thamous was sent for by Tyberius Caesar who believed this relation,
and made diligent enquiry after what this Pan was. And so he goes on to produce
more witnesses of this matter of fact, which indeed is in it self strange, and
affords us to what I have formerly said, the Devils Testimony, that he was
overcome, and that all Idolatry must be destroyed. But if to this we add, That
this happened, as Baronius tells me, Ad annum 34 Christi, p. 181.
in the eighteenth year of Tyberius Caesar, which was the very year our Savior
suffered, which we may find pressed by Eusebius in his ninth Chapter of his
fifth Book de Praeparatione Evangelica, we have great reason to suppose this
happened just at the time of our Saviors Crucifixion, who as in his life he
cast them out, and made them tremble, so at his death he overcame and
vanquished them.

I might add to this of the failing of Oracles, the decay of their Idols
Temples, and Statues, which we shall find every where falling down, or
miraculously burnt, or, what is more, their very gods confessing themselves
devils. I before named unto you the Answer the Oracle gave Julian, why he could
not speak, by reason of the bones of the Martyr Bahylas; it is not out of his
place, if to St Chrysostoms Authority, which there I used, I show unto you the
destruction of that Temple confessed by Julian. After (says he) we had removed
the dead body from Daphnes, (...). Juliani Misopog. page 97. Edit. Parisi. 1630.
some of the most modest amongst you attributed that which happened to the
Temple of Daphne, to the anger of the Gods for the removing of the bones;
others, whether secretly or no, fired the Temple, which was an horrid spectacle
to others, but afforded your people much pleasure, and as yet by your Senate is
not taken notice of. But it was evident to me before the fire, that God had
left this Temple; for the Statue, when I first entered in, showed as much to
me; and to those that believe not this, I call the great Sun to witness it. How
frivolous Julians accusation of the Christians for burning this Temple is, is
obvious to every eye, who were too narrowly looked to then, that had they done
any such thing, to have passed unpunished: And withal, how contemptible does
Julian make his Gods, that they are not able to protect their Temples, not able
to prevent disturbance from the dead Martyrs bones, nor to preserve their
houses from the fury of fire.

To this of the destruction of their Temples, comes next to be handled the
confession of the Devils; but this I have handled largely in another place;
only give me leave to add the story of Apollonius Tyanaeus, which because I
find he is by some Heathens magnified so high, as to be set in opposition to
Christ, is not unworthy our consideration; and we shall see his end just like
the rest; the poor Devil that spoke in his Statue was forced by a Christian to
confess himself a Devil. I shall tell you the chief of his Miracles, which
Philostratus in his life reports: He is said to have raised Hercules Ghost;
to have raised a wench, almost dead, to life; and to have worn a Ring made by
the Constellations. The vanity of the last declares the falsness of it: The
second is far from a Miracle, since Plilostratus dares not avow the maid quite
dead: And the first is no more than what many Sorcerers have done, and all
pretend to be able to do. (...). Ques. 24.
Justin Martyr in his Questions and Answers to the Orthodox, moves this of
Apollonius, and sets you down some of his chief Miracles, and asks the
Question why God suffered him to do them. The tricks of Apollonius do forbid
the violence of the Seas, the force of the Winds, the incursion of Mice and
wild Beasts. Unto which this Learned Father gives this Answer; That in all the
effects that he brought to pass, (...).
he always wanted matter to work on. He was, it seems, a very great
Naturallist, and knew many secrets of Nature, which he learnt from the
Magicians; and so it is no wonder if by Conjuration he did some strange things,
which might persuade some they were real Miracles, when upon the knowing of the
reason of them would appear far otherwise. But see how this Father proceeds;
The Lord did not hinder these works of his, (...): Ibid.
because, according to bodily knowledge, they were worked for the good of man;
but he silenced that Devil which was in his Statue, who by his Oracles did
deceive men, to worship and reverence Apollonius as a God, and destroyed his
Oracles; nay, Apollonius lived himself to see his Statues destroyed, the Temple
dedicated to him burnt, insomuch that his book which he writ of his
consultations with the Devils at the Den of Trophonius, are perished with him,
and all the Ceremonies of that Cave, as Du Plessis tells me. But allow this,
Apollonius did great things, as much as it was possible for Art or Nature to
reach unto; has not Christianity now quite baffled him, and made his Magic as
well as himself contemptible? Is not his name buried in oblivion? and, to those
that by chance hear of him, what other reputation has he left behind him, but
that he was a Sorcerer and a Magician?

To this I have said of Apollonius, it is but equal I should add something of
Apuleius, who I find by the Heathens was set up in opposition to Christ, as may
appear by Marcellinus his Letter to St Austin, S. Aug. To. 2. Ep. 4.
who joins them both together, as an objection made by the Heathens against the
Authority of our Saviors Miracles. Now mark how St Austin in the next Epistle
answers Marcellinus; Who does not think those persons worthy of laughter, Quis
autem vel risu dignum non putet, quod Apollonium and Apuleium, caeterosque
Magicarum Artium peritissimos confer Christo vel etiam praeferre conantur?
quanquam tolerabilius ferendum sit quando ipsos ei potius conferent, quam Deos
tuos. Multo enim melior, quod fatendum est, Apollonius fuit quam tot stuprorum
Author, and perpetrator, quem Jovem nominant. Ista inquiunt fabulosa sunt; Adhuc
ergo laudent Reipublicae luxuriosam, licentiosam, planeque sacrilegam
foelicitatem, quae ista Deorum proba confinxit, quae non solum in fabulis
audienda posuit, verum etiam in Theatris spectanda proposuit. Aug. op. To. 2.
Ep. 5.
because they endeavor to confer, nay, to prefer Apollonius, and Apuleius, and
other skilful Magicians, with Christ, although that more tolerably is to be
born, when they confer those to him, than their Gods. For it is to be
confessed, that Apollonius was much better than the Author and Actor of so many
whoredoms, which they themselves name Jupiter to be. I, but, say they, these
things are fabulous. They do therefore commend a luxurious, licentious, and a
sacrilegious happiness of a Commonwealth; which honest actions of the God
Apollonius has feigned, and did not only put them to be heard in Fables, but
proposed them to be seen in the Theaters. And as touching Apuleius his works,
see what this Father says in his Eighth Book de Civitate Dei; Ipse Apuleius
nunquid apud Judices Christianos de Magicis Artibus accusatus est? Quas utique
sibi objectas, si divinas and pias esse noveraet and divinarum potestatum
operibus congruas, non solum eas confiteri debuit, sed etiam profiteri leges
culpans potius quibus haec prohiberentur, quae haberi miranda and damnanda
putararentur and veneranda oporteret. Ep. 8.
Was not this Apuleius accused before Christian Judges of his Magic Arts? And
although this was of every side objected unto him, if he had known they had
been divine, and holy, and agreeable to the works of divine powers, he ought
not only to have confessed but professed them, blaming rather the Laws by which
these things were forbidden and condemned, which ought to be admired and adored.

These were the most confiderable opposites our Savior had; and see how lamely
they come off in all their undertakings. I know nothing so fit to end this
branch with as that saying which St. Austin affords me in his 42 Epistle to the
Medaureness. Ye see (says he) the Idols Temples partly tumbled down without
reparation, partly shut, Videtis certe simulachrorum Templa, partim sinae
reparatione collapsa, partim diruta, partim clausa, partim in usus alios
commutata, ipsaque simulachra vel confringi, vel incendi, vel includi, vel
destrui; atque ipsas hujus saeculi potestates quae aliquando pro simulachris
populum Christianum persequebantur victas and domitas, non a repugnantibus sed
a morientibus Christianis, and contra eadem simulachra, pro quibus Christianos
occidebant, impetus suos, legesque vertisse, and Imperii nobilissimi
emine^tissimum culmen ad Sepulchrum Piscatoris Petri submisso Diademate
supplicare. Ep. 42. To. 2. in Op. Aug.
partly changed into other uses; and the Idols themselves either to be broke,
burnt, shut up, or destroyed; and the very Powers of this Age, who sometime
prosecuted the Christians for Idols, overcome and tamed, not from resisting but
dying Christians, and against those very Idols for whom they slew the
Christians, to have turned their forces and Laws; and the most Eminent head of
this most Noble Empire, laying down his Diadem, praying at the Sepulcher of
Peter the Fisher. Thus much for the destruction of Idolatry.

2. The second is but a consequent of the first, The Conquest of the world to
the Name of Jesus. And is it not a Miracle, That Tyberius (in whose Reign our
Savior both preached and suffered) was the first Emperor that refused to have
Priests or Temples dedicated to him, ^ent. 1. li. 2. cap. 15. page 683.
as the Centuriators of Magdeburgh well observe? Nero was the first Emperor
that persecuted Christianity, Apo. c. 5.
which, as Tertullian says, had it not been some very great good, he would not
have done it. All the good Emperors favored it; Vespasian, Adrian, Trajan,
Anthony the meek, had Christ in great esteem. Tiberius, as I said before, would
have had the Senate allowed him for a God. Alexander-Mameeus as Aelius
Lampridius tells me, would have made a Temple to Christ, Christo Templum facere
voluit, eumque inter Deos recipere, quod and Hadrianus cogitasse fertur qui
Templa in omnibus Civitatibus sine simulachris jussit fieri; quae hodie idcirca
quia non habent numina, dicuntur Hadriani quae ille ad hoc parasse dicebatur:
Sed prohibitus est ab iis qui consulentes sacra, repeterant omnes Christianos
futuros, si id optato evenisset, and Templa reliqua deserenda. Aelii Lam. Cap.
43.
and received him amongst the Gods, which thing Hadrian is reported to have
thought on, who commanded that Temples should be built in all Cities without
Images, which Temples are to this day called Hadrians, because they have no
gods in them; which he is reported to have done to this end; but he was hindered
from those who consulting the Oracles brought this news back, that all they
would become Christians, if this happened according to wish; and that all other
Temples would be forsaken. In Justin Martyrs time, which was but 150 years
after Christ, Christianity had so great a Conquest, that he says, There is no
Nation of men, whether they be Barbarians, (...). Dial. cum Tryph.
or Graecians, or of whatsoever other name they be called, whether So rendered
by Sylsburgius; but the word properly signifies those people, that changing
their houses often, did it in Carts.
Amaxobii, or those that want houses, or those that dwell with their Cattle in
Tents, in which Prayers and Thanksgivings are not read to the Father and Maker
of all things, through the name of Jesus that was crucified.

Iraeneus lived but a little after Justin; and see what a progress Christianity
had in his time. Although (says he) the Languages in the world be different,
Quamvis enim dissimilia sunt in mundo genera linguarum, una tamen eademque est
vis Traditionis: Nec quae constitutae sunt in Germania Ecclesiae aliter credunt
aut tradunt, nec quae in Hispanis, nec quae in Galliis, neque in Orient, neque
Aegypto, neque in Lybia, aut in medio orbis terrarum fundatae sunt. Cap. 3.
lib. 1.
yet the force of Tradition is one and the same: Neither do the Churches that
are constituted in Germany believe or deliver other ways, nor those in Spain,
nor France, nor those which are founded in the East, or in Lybia, or Egypt, or
in the middle of the world. You see he reckons up all the most eminent places
of the world in his time; and yet we shall find Tertullian that lived a little
after him stretches the bounds of Christianity much larger. Their sound (says
he, speaking of David) went through the earth, In universa, inquit, terra,
exiit sonus eorum, and usque ad terminos terrae verba eorum. In quem enim aliae
universa gentes crediderunt, nisi in Christum qui jam venit? Cui enim and aliae
Gentes crediderunt? Parthii, Medi, Elamitae, and qui inhabitant Mesopotamiam,
Armeniam, Phrygiam, Cappadociam, and incolentes Pontum and Asiam, and
Pamphiliam; Immorantes Aegyptum, and Regionem Africae quae est trans Cyrenem
inhabitants; Romani and Incolae, tunc and in Jerusalem Judaei and caeterae
gentes, ut jam Getulorum varietates, and Maurorum multi fines, Hispaniarum
omnes termini, and Galliarum diversa Nationes, and Britannorum inaccessa
Romany loca; Christo vero subdita, and Sarmatarum, and Dacorum, and Germanorum
and Scythiarum, and abditarum multarum gentium, and provinciarum, and insularum
nobis ignotarum, and quae enumerare minus possumus? In quibus omnibus locis
Christi nomen qui jam venit regnat, utpote ante quem omnium Civitatum portae
sunt apertae, and cui nullae sunt clausae; ante quem serae ferrae sunt
comminuta and valvae aereae sunt apertae. Advers. Jud. Cap. 7.
and their words to the end of the world. In whom other did all Nations
believe, but in Christ that is now come? To whom do all Nations believe? Whom
do the Parthians believe, Medes, Elamites, and those that inhabit Mesopotamia,
Armenia, Phrygia, and Cappadocia; those that inhabit Pontus, Asia, and
Pamphilia; those that dwell in Egypt, and the Regions of Africa; those that
inhabit beyond Cyrene? The Romans and strangers Inhabitants, and them in
Jerusalem, Jews, and other Nations, as now the varieties of the Getulae, the
many bounds of the Mauri, the limits of the Spaniards, the diverse Nations of
the Gauls, the places of the Britains, to the Romans inaccessible, but subdued
to Christ; and of the Sarmatae, of the Daci, of the Germans, and of the
Scythians, and of many hidden Nations, and many Islands unknown to us, and
which we are less able to repeat? In all which places the name of Christ who is
now come does reign; as before whom all the gates of every City are open, and
to whom none are shut; before whom Iron bars are broken, and brass Gates are
open.

To this let me add what Julian the Apostate, after all his attempts, and
designs to ruin Christianity, was forced to confess, viz. That Christ had
overcome him: For being slain by an Arrow that none could guess from whence it
came: They report (says Theodoret) That he receiving the wound, (...), etc.
Theo. Eccl. Hist. lib. 3. Cap. 20.
did presently fill his hand with his blood, and casting that blood into the
air, said; Thou have overcome me, Galilaean. I need not to this purpose repeat
more Authorities: 'Twas an Argument against Heathenisme most of the Fathers
pressed; and though the Universality of the Victory now makes it less regarded;
yet if we seriously consider the Instruments that begun this work, poor
unlearned Mechanics; the means they propagated it by, not by fighting but by
suffering; the Enemies that opposed it, not only the great and wise men of the
world, but self-interest, the loss of friends, enjoyments, every thing: And if
to this we add the speed of the Conquest, we must of necessity acknowledge it
was the finger of God that crowned such contemptible means with so great
success, and gave so great a Victory beyond any humane apprehension.

I cannot here shut up my Argument from Miracles, till I have given you from
two considerable Heathens some account of their Miracles. I have showed you
what Apollonius and Apuleius were; I shall here only tell you what Valerius
Maximus, a sober Roman Writer, says of them, in a particular Chapter of that
Subject. Neither am I ignorant concerning the motion and voice of the Immortal
gods, Nec me praeterit, de motu and voce Deorum Immortalium, humanis oculis
auribusque percepto, quam in ancipiti opinione aestimatio versatur, sed quia
non nova dicuntur, sed tradita repetuntur, fidem autores vindicent. Nostrum est
inclytis literarum monumentis conservata, perinde ac vana non refugisse. Val.
Max. Lib. 7. Cap. 8.
perceived by humane eyes and ears, in how ancipitous an opinion the estimation
was versed; but because they are not told as new, but repeated as delivered,
let the Authors of them vindicate their truth. It is our work, not to shun
those things which are preserved in the famous Monuments of Learning, no nor
those things that are in themselves but vain. And what Valerius says in
general, Livy speaks of in his time. Prodigia eo anno multa annuntiata sunt,
quae quo magis ^redebant simplices, and religiosi homines, eo etiam plura
nuntiabantur. Lib. 24. Ca. 10.
Miracles (says he) many that year were told, which the more simple and
religious men believed them, by so much more they were told. And this shall
serve me instead of answering all those Heathen Miracles, which the Fathers
every where in their Apologies have done; but the decay of their Doctrine has
sufficiently confuted their Religion, and their Miracles have vanished with
their Faith; and the only way to revive their follies, is to think them worthy
of repetition. Thus much for my second Argument of Miracles; which confirms
Christ to be the only Lawgiver, and increased the Christian Faith.

3. The third and last is the holy lives and and wonderful sufferings of
Christians, which I only press as an Argument, that in the first times adorned
the Christian Faith. And of this briefly. For their lives, we need not question
the holiness of them, if we find them answerable to their Doctrine; which that
they then observed, Lucian can inform us. For when (says he) they once have
gone aside, (...). Lucian. de morte Peregrini.
they deny the Gentile Gods, they worship that crucified deceiver of them, and
live according to his Laws. And Julian the Apostate, writing to Arsacius
Pontifex of Galatia, does propose the Examples of Christians for him to
imitate, assuring him the holiness of their lives did increase their Religion.
His words are these; Do not we see what it is that chiefly increased this
Atheism, (...). Ju. Ep. 44.
their humanity to strangers, their care for burying the dead, and their
feigned holiness of life; which word [feigned] was necessary for this Apostate
to put in; however, we have this confessed, That they were charitable to
strangers, pious to dead bodies, and in their life, to outward appearance,
unblamable. But a little after he tells this Arsacius, speaking of the
inhumanity of the Gentiles, That it was a shameful thing to be so, when none
of the Jews beg, (...). Ibid.
and the cursed Galileans do not only feed their own, but ours that are in
want. I might to this purpose add much more, but this is sufficient. For their
sufferings, never was maxim so true as that, Sangusis Martyrum Semen
Ecclesiae; The blood of the Martyrs was the Seed of the Church.

To reckon up their several miraculous sufferings, were to repeat their ancient
Martyrologies, and to stretch the bounds of this discourse to an endless
length: I shall therefore only insist upon one particular, wherein the
Christians in their sufferings have exceeded all other sufferers; that is, in
their offering themselves to suffer. We shall find many examples of men who
were so obstinate to their opinions, that they have chosen death rather than a
recantation of their errors; but yet I never heard of any that went so far, as
in defense of an error to offer himself to suffer; and this the Christians
did, if we will believe Julian the Apostate, who in his fragments tells us of
the Christians, that many of these Atheists out of zeal do persuade, (...) Jul.
Arag. in principio.
That death is to be desired, because they think to fly to heaven, when men
violently tear their Souls from them.

Now this offering themselves to be Martyrs was not done by a few, and those
the most eminent Christians, but by people of all sorts and conditions. See
what Tertullian says to Scapula, speaking of the cruelty of Arrius Antonius in
Asia; If it pleased that this be done here at Carthage also, Hoc si placuerit
and hic fieri, quid facies de tantis millibus hominum, tot viris and faeminis,
omnis sexus, omnis aetatis, omnis dignitatis, offerentibus se tibi? Ad
Scapulam, cap. 4.
what will thou do concerning so many thousands of men and women, of each sex,
every age, and every dignity that will offer themselves unto thee? Nay, to omit
more, this voluntary Martyrdom did so increase, that the Church was forced by
her Canons to forbid it, in charity to her Children. I shall not produce you
many, because this discourse already has exceeded my intended bounds; but I
shall conclude the whole with that excellent answer S. Cyprian gave Panterus
the Proconsul to his demand of the names of the Presbyters, as well as the
Bishops in that City. When (says he) our discipline forbids us voluntarily to
offer our selves, Cum disciplina prohibeat ne quis se ultro offerat, and tuae
quoque censurae hoc displiceat, nec offerri se ipsi possunt, sed a te exquisiti
invenientur. Act. Mart. Edit. a Pamelio.
and this very thing does displease thy own Decree, they cannot offer
themselves; but being sought by thee will easily be found.

FINIS.

