July 12th. 1642.

NEWS FROM IRELAND, Relating HOW CAPTAIN Vaughan put to the Sword 300. armed
Rebels, and how the Earl of Castle-haven, Sir Hen: Elmar, Sir Nich: White, and
his 2. sons are imprisoned as Traitors in Dublin Castle.

Together With the Copies of 2. Letters from YORK, Dated Julii 8. 1642.

RELATING HOW THE KING has besiedged Hull, and how Sir JOHN Hotham has
drowned the Country thereabout.

LONDON, Printed for John Sweeting, July 12. 1642.

TRUE INTELLIGENCE from Ireland, Relating many Passages of great consequence.
Dublin, June the 16. 1642.
WE had a Messenger came from the Army, with news of the taking of
Kneck-Linch Castle, 18. miles off, a very strong Castle, one Plunket being
chief that was in it, who stood out to the last, but when they saw our men so
violent, not fearing to come upon the walls of the Castle, then all the women
cried for quarter, and it was granted them, but the men fired the stayres and
rooms about their own ears, so our men at last went in, and put all to the
Sword, but the women, save only 7. that would not have quarter, we had 20. men,
as they say, lost, Lieutenant Colonel Kirk shot in the back, who will hardly
escape it; of the enemy 80. killed, and some Commanders taken.

Upon the taking of that Castle, Lord of Trimbestons Castle, a Rebel was left
by them that kept it.

The seventeenth day, the Earl of Castlehaven, Sir Henry Elmer, Sir Nicholas
White, and his two sons, were called to the Kings Bench, from thence committed
close Prisoners as Traitors; but the Earl fained himself sick, and went not,
and still remains in the Sheriffs hands.

The eighteenth day, one Russell, and one Archbald were hanged and quartered,
able men in estate, their fact I know not: That night we had some Cattle
stolen by the Rebels, within two miles of us.

The twentieth day, one Captain Lloyd was buried, a Captain of the
Firelocks, which is a great loss, being a valiant man: that day the Lords had
notice that the Rebels would come near us, out of Wicklow side,
South-westward, that night 700. foot and 2. troops of horse went that way,
under the command of Colonel Gilson, and so burnt all the way as they went,
14. miles outright, and none to oppose them, but all run away to the Woods, and
Mountains, but took their Cattle with them, for I believe they had notice of
our Armies coming. That day some came from Dundalke, that brings word, that
Captain Vaughan, Governor of the Town, had pillaged a protected House within
two miles of the Town, having notice of some design this man had, to bring the
Rebels to take Dundalke, he being familiar with our Army, and protected by Sir
Henry Tichborne, but as God would have it, our Army mistrusted him, and upon
that Captain Vaughan went, as his usual course was, to this man's house, but
gave order to Captain Codogan, to bring some Companies after him: so Vaughan
took on him nothing, but called the man out, and rid about the fields, in the
mean time Captain Codogan entered the house, and found there 300. men, most
of them armed, put them all to the Sword, and found Letters from Sir Philem O
Neale, to wish him to stop the Post from Drogheda to Dundalke, and withal writ
to him that he would be with him upon Sunday night with 12000. men to take
Dundalke, and found with the man a protection from Sir Philem O Neale, the man
they have prisoner, and two Priests besides.

Sunday night, they looked for Sir Philem O Neale, and had prepared themselves
for his coming, but he came not.

That night likewise we had some Cattle stolen by the Rebels, this they do
always when our Army is abroad, thinking that will turn them home.

The Parliament does sit here, the Bishop of Kiffanoxah made a brave Speech
against Papists, and to have the Law in force against them, and they not to sit
in Parliament at all; the House of Commons drew up an Order to that purpose;
all that sat took the Oath of Supremacy, and now they are about to make an
Act against Jesuits and Priests, and all Papists, to be in force here as it is
in England. That night our Army that went out the day before, came home very
well, and brought home some Pillage, about an hundred Cowes, many sheep, and
some horses, burnt forty or fifty Towns and Villages: Also that day a
Proclamation proclaimed, that no Soldiers should pillage them that came to
Market, neitheir cut or mow grass or green corn without warrant from the
Lords, or their Colonel, as they have done, both robbed and pillaged, and cut
grass, corn, and spoil all that come near them; but now if they do so,
they are to be executed by Martial Law; the Provost Martial of the City has
a strict command to look to the business, and to execute the offenders.

Thus I have given you a short Relation of what has happened this week,
Farewell, till the next, I rest,

Yours to Command. Dublin, June 26. 1642.
FINIS.
Sir,
THese are to entreat you, if that you have not sent the Wares by Sea yet, not
to send them until I send you farther word, for there is nothing can come nor
go by Sea, for we hear his Majesty has blocked up Hull on every side, so
that there can nothing stir, and Sir John Hotham has drowned all about him;
but it is certainly reported with us, that his Majesty planted his ordnance so,
that they can get neither meat nor water, but only by the Haven for the other
is cut off from him; Sir John has made diverse shot at the Kings Army, but did
not harm, save only that a Bullet struck down a man, but he recovered again:
I will shortly send you your money, and so I rest,

Your loving Friend. July 8. 1642.
Sir,
YOur Letter was sent to Hull, but we heard no word back: Hull is besiedged
round about, that no man can come out of the Town, women and bearnes may come
out, I purpose to go to Hull this Saturday, and I shall send you word of your
Letter by the next Post, your loving friend to his power,

Tho: Richardson.
York, July 8. 1642.

