THE JURISDICTION OF THE ADMIRALTY Of England Asserted, AGAINST Sr. EDWARD
COKE'S Articuli Admiralitatis, In XXII Chapter of his Jurisdiction Of COURTS.
By RICHARD ZOUCH Doctor of the Civil Law, and late Judge of the High Court of
ADMIRALTY.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Tyton, and Thomas Dring, and are to be sold at
their Shops in Fleetstreet. 1663.

Thomas Foley of Great Witley Court in the County of Worcester Esqr.
blazon or coat of arms

TO THE READER.
I Do certify and attest, that the Treatise Entitled, The Jurisdiction of the
High Court of Admiralty asserted, etc. by Dr. ZOUCH, was delivered into my
hands by the Author himself to be Printed, and which he intended to have
Dedicated to his Royal Highness JAMES Duke of YORK, Lord High Admiral of
England.

Drs. Commons Febr. 25. 1663. Tim. Baldwyn.

ASSERTIONS Concerning the JURISDICTION of the ADMIRALTY OF ENGLAND.
1. THat in all places where Navigation and Trade by Sea have been in Use and
Esteem, and particularly in England, Special Laws have been provided, for
regulating the same.

2. That in all places where Laws have been provided for businesses concerning
the Sea, as also in England, special Judges have been appointed, to determine
differences, and to redress offenses concerning the same.

3. That in all places where special Judges have been appointed, for Sea
affairs, as also in England, certain Causes, viz. all such as have relation to
Navigation, and Negotiation by Sea, have been held proper for their Conusance.

4. That the Jurisdiction of the Lord High Admiral of England, as it is granted
by the King, and usually exercised in the Court of Admiralty, may consist with
the Laws and Statutes of the Realm.

5. That the Lord Admiral of England may hold Conusance of Contracts, and
Writings made at Land, touching businesses of Navigation, and Trade by Sea.

6. That the Admiral of England may hold Conusance of things done in Ports, and
Navigable Rivers, as touching damage done to Persons, Ships, and Goods,
Annoyances of free Passage, and unlawful Fishing.

7. That the Lord Admiral of England may hold Pleas of Contracts, and other
things done beyond the Sea, relating to Navigation, and Trade by Sea.

8. That the Courts and Judges of the Common Law do intermeddle with, and
interrupt the Court of Admiralty in Causes properly belonging to that Court.

9. That the Trial of Causes concerning Navigation, and Trade, in the Court of
Admiralty, is more commodious for the Kingdom, and the Subjects thereof, than
in the Courts of Common Law.

Sir EDWARD COKE'S Jurisdiction of COURTS. CAP. XXII. The Court of the
Admiralty proceeding According to the Civil LAW.
THe Complaint of the Lord Admiral of England to the Kings most Excellent
Majesty, Articu^i Admiralitatis.
against the Judges of the Realm concerning Prohibitions granted to the Court
of the Admiralty, 11 Febr. penultimo die Termini Hillarii, The process and
proceedings in this Court are in the name of the Lord Admiral.
Anno 8. Jac. Regis, the Effect of which complaint was after by his Majesty's
Commandment set down in Articles by Dr. Dun, Judge of the Admiralty, which are
as follows, with answers to the same by the Judges of the Realm, which they
afterward confirmed by three kinds of authorities in Law, 1. by Acts of
Parliament, 2. by Judgments and Judicial proceedings, and lastly by Book cases.

The Title of the Complaint.
Certain grievances whereof the Lord Admiral and his Officers of the Admiralty
do especially complain, and desire redress.
Obj^ct. 1.
THat whereas the Conusance of all Contracts and other things done upon the Sea
belongs to the Admiral Jurisdiction, the same are made tryable at the
Common Law, by supposing the same to have been done in Cheapside, or such
places.

Answer.
By the Laws of this Realm, the Court of the Admiral has no Conusance, power,
or Jurisdiction of any manner of Contract, Plea, or Querele, within any County
of the Realm, either upon the Land, or Water, but every such Contract, Plea, or
Querele, and all other things rising within any County of the Realm, either
upon the Land, or Water, and also Wreck of the Sea, ought to be tried,
determined, discussed and remedied by the Laws of the Land, and not before, or
by the Admiral, or his Lieutenant in any manner; So as it is not material
whether the place be upon the water, infra fluxum, and refluxum aquae; but
whether it be upon any water within any County: Wherefore we acknowledge, that
of Contracts, Pleas, and Quereles made upon the Sea, or any part thereof, which
is not within any County (from whence no trial can be had by Twelve men) the
Admiral has and ought to have Jurisdiction. And no President can be showed,
that any Prohibition has been granted, for any Contract, Plea, or Querele,
concerning any marine cause made or done upon the Sea, taking that only to be
the Sea, wherein the Admiral has Jurisdiction, which is before by Law
described to be out of any County. See more of this matter in the answer to the
sixth Article.

When Actions are brought in the Admiralty upon Bargains or Contracts made
beyond the Seas, Object. 2.
wherein the Commom-Law cannot administer Justice, yet in these causes,
Prohibitions are awarded against the Admiral Court.

Bargains or Contracts made beyond the Seas, Answer.
wherein the Common Law cannot administer Justice, See hereafter in the proof
by Judgments, and Judicial Presidents.
(which is the effect of this Article) do belong to the Constable, and Marshal:
for the Jurisdiction of the Admiral is wholly consined to the Sea which is out
of any County. But if any Indenture, Bond, or other Specialty, or any Contract
be made beyond Sea, for doing of any Act, or Payment of any money, within this
Realm, or otherwise, wherein the Common Law can administer justice, and give
ordinary remedy, in these cases, neither the Constable and Marshal, nor the
Court of the Admiralty, has any Jurisdiction. And therefore when this Court of
the Admiralty has dealt therewith in derogation of the Common Law, we find
that Prohibitions have been granted, as by Law they ought.

Object. 3.
Whereas time out of mind the Admiral Court has used to take Stipulation for
appearance, and performance of the Acts and Judgments of the same Court, It is
now affirmed by the Judges of the Common Law, that the Admiral Court is no
Court of Record, and therefore not able to take such Stipulations, and hereupon
Prohibitions are granted, to the utter overthrow of that Jurisdiction.

Answer.
The Court of the Admiralty proceeding by the Civil Law, is no Court of Record,
and therefore cannot take any such Recognisance as a Court of Record may do.
And for taking of Recognisances against the Laws of the Realm, we find that
Prohibitions have been granted, as by Law they ought; and if an Erroneous
sentence be given in that Court, no Writ of Error, but an Appeal to certain
Delegates does lie, as it appears by the Statute of 8 Eliz. Reginae Cap. 5.
which proves that it is no Court of Record. 8 Eliz. Cap. 5.


That Charter-parties made only to be performed upon the Seas, Object. 4.
are daily withdrawn from that Court by Prohibitions.

If the Charter-party be made within any City, Answer.
Port, Town, or County of this Realm, although it be to be performed either
upon the Seas or beyond the Seas, yet is the same to be tried and determined by
the ordinary course of the Common Law, and not in the Court of the Admiralty;
And therefore when that Court has incroached upon the Common Law, in that case
the Judge of the Admiralty, and Party suing there, have been Prohibited, and
often times the party condemned in great and grievous damages by the Laws of
the Realm.

That the Clause of non obstante statuto, Object. 5.
which has foundation in his Majesty's Prerogative, and is current in all
other grants, yet in the Lord Admirals Patent, is said to be of no force to
warrant the Determination of the Causes committed to him in his Lordships
Patent, and so rejected by the Judges of the Common Law.

Answer.
Without all question the Statutes of 13 R. 2. Cap. 3.15 R. 2. Cap. 5. and 2 H.
4. Cap. 11. 13 R. 2. Cap 3.15 R. 2. Cap. 5. 2 H. 4. Cap. 11.
being Statutes declaring the Jurisdiction of the Court of the Admiral, and
wherein all the Subjects of the Realm have interest, cannot be dispensed with
by any Non obstante, and therefore not worthy of any answer; but by color
thereof the Court of the Admiralty has contrary to those Acts of Parliament,
incroached upon the Jurisdiction of the Common Law, to the intolerable
grievance of the Subjects, which have oftentimes urged them to complain in your
Majesty's Courts of Ordinary Justice, at Westminster, for their relief in that
behalf.

Object. 6.
To the end that the Admiral Jurisdiction may receive all manner of
impeachment, and interruption, the Rivers beneath the first Bridges, where it
ebbeth and flows, and the Ports and Creeks are by the Judges of the Common-
Law affirmed to be no part of the Seas, nor within the Admiral Jurisdiction,
and thereupon Prohibitions are usually awarded upon actions depending in that
Court, for Contracts and other things done in those places, notwithstanding
that by use and practice time out of mind, the Admiral Court have had
Jurisdiction within such Ports, Creeks and Rivers.

The like answer as to the first; Answer.
and it is further added, that for the Death of a man, and of Mayhem (in those
two cases only) done in great Ships, being and hovering in the main stream
only, beneath the points of the same Rivers, nigh to the Sea, and no other
place of the same Rivers, nor in other causes but in those two only, the
Admiral has cognizance. But for all Contracts Pleas and Quereles made or done
upon a River, Haven or Creek, within any County of this Realm, the Admiral
without question has not any Jurisdiction, for then he should hold plea of
things done within the body of the County, which are tryable by the verdict of
Twelve men, and merely determinable by the Common Law, and not within the Court
of Admiralty according to the Civil Law, for that were to change, and alter the
Laws of the Realm, in those cases, and make those Contracts, Pleas, and
Quereles tryable by the Common-Laws of the Realm to be drawn ad aliud examen,
and to be sentenced by the Judge of the Admiralty, according to the Civil Laws,
and how dangerous and penal it is for them to deal in these cases, it appears
by Judicial Presidents of former ages. See the answer to the first Article.

Object. 7.
That the agreement made in Anno Dom. 1575. between the Judges of the Kings
Bench, and the Court of Admiralty, for the more quiet, and certain execution of
Admiral Jurisdiction, is not observed as it ought to be.

Answer.
The supposed agreement mentioned in this Article has not as yet been delivered
unto us, but having heard the same read over before his Majesty (out of a paper
not subscribed with the hand of any Judge) we answer, that for so much thereof
as differs from these Answers, it is against the Laws, and Statutes of this
Realm, and therefore the Judges of the Kings Bench, never assented thereunto,
as is pretended, neither does the Phrase thereof agree with the Terms of the
Laws of the Realm.

Object. 8.
Many other Grievances there are, which in discussing of these former will
easily appear worthy also of Reformation.

This Article is so General, Answer.
as no particular answer can be made thereunto, only it appears by that
which has been said, That the Lord Admiral his Officers, and Ministers,
principally by color of the said void non obstante, and for want of Learned
advice, have unjustly incroached upon the Common Laws of this Realm, whereof
the marvail is the less, for that the Lord Admiral, his Lieutenants, Officers
and Ministers, have without all color, encroached and intruded upon a Right
and Prerogative due to the Crown, in that they have seized, and converted to
their own uses, Goods and Chattels of infinite value, taken by Pirates at Sea,
and other Goods and Chattels which in no sort appertain unto his Lordship, by
his Letters Patents, wherein the said non obstante is contained, and for which
he and his Officers remain accountable to his Majesty. And they now wanting in
this Blessed time of Peace, causes appertaining to their natural Jurisdiction,
they now incroach upon the Jurisdiction of the Common Law, lest they should sit
idle, and reap no profit; and if a greater number of Prohibitions (as they
affirm) have been granted, since the great benefit of this happy Peace, than
before in time of hostility, it moves from their own encroachments, upon the
Jurisdiction of the Common Law; so that they do not only unjustly incroach,
but complain also of the Judges of the Realm for doing of Justice in these
cases.

The particular Authorities promiscuously alleged by Sr. Edward Coke, are
distinctly inserted in the Chapters following, in such places as they seem to
concern.

THE JURISDICTION of the Admiralty of England Asserted.
That in all places where Navigation and Trade by Sea have been in use and
esteem, Assert. 1
and particularly in England, special Laws have been provided for Regulating
the same.
LA Mer a ses loix comme la terre, Commene sur les Cutumes de Normandy Te d^
V^^ces.
The Sea (says Godfrey a learned Author,) has its laws as well as the Land.
And it is certain, that Navigation was no sooner invented, and men had
experience of the commodity proceeding from Negotiation by Sea, but they
established laws for the maintaining and regulating the same. So much may be
confirmed by what is observable from the use, and practice, First of those
Nations and States which border on the Mediterranean Seas; and secondly of
those which confine on the Western Ocean, and the Seas Northward.

Touching the first, Amongst the Grecians, the Inhabitants of the ^sle of
Rhodes have been most eminent for their policy in the affairs of the Sea,
Orat. pro Lege Mamlia.
Cicero says Rhodiorum usque ad nostram memoriam Discipliplina navalis and
gloria remansit. And Constantinus Harmenopulus a famous Judge at Thesolonica,
and Conservatour of the law there, gives that credit to their Laws, that he
affirms, Pro^heio^ l. 2. l^. 11.
(...), etc. All business concerning Navigation, and all causes concerning
things done at Sea, are decided by the Rhodian Laws, for the Laws of the
Rhodians are of all Sea-Lawes the most ancient. Those Sea-Lawes of the
Rhodians, or some part of them, are extant, published in Greek and Latin by
Simon Schardius, and Marquardus Freherus, and out of them related by Marisotus,
in the first part of his Orbis maritimus.

The Romans, who in the beginning of their Republique, received their Laws of
the Twelve Tables, from the Athenians, under the Empire, when their State was
at the heighest, and abundantly furnished with Laws for other matters, in the
time of Tiberius Claudius, admitted the Rhodian Laws for the regulating of the
affairs of the Sea, whereupon, when one Eudaemon a Merchant of Nicomedia
complained to the Emperor Antoninus, L. Deprecatio D. de l. Rhod
that he with others had suffered Shipwreck, and were spoiled of their goods by
certain Officers of the Islands called Cyclades, the Emperor answered him
(...), that indeed he was Lord of the World, that is to say, of the Land, or
Continent, but that the business, and rights of the Sea had a special Rule
set down in the Rhodian Laws, to which he did referr them. These Rhodian
Laws, D* Dominio Maris l. 1. c. 10.
as Mr Seldom observes, were afterward inserted into the body of the Civil
Laws, by the Emperor Justinian and others, and were in high esteem both in the
Roman and Greek Empire: The titles to which they are reduced in the Civil Law
are collected by Petrus Peckius, who has commented upon them, and are likewise
set forth by Morisotus, Orbis marit^^i. lib. 1 c. 30.
and as they were in use in the Greek Empire, they are set out by Leunclavius,
amongst the Basilica, or Laws from Rome received at Constantinople.

The wisdom and equity of the Roman Civil Laws, in Process of time, have been
received and allowed in all Nations, and states of Europe, for the regulating
and determining of businesses at Sea, as it plainly appears in all Authors of
several Nations, Tract de Navigat, et mercatura.
who have written of, or handled matters of that nature; To which have been
added, diverse Ordinances, and Constitutions of their own, for confirmation of
those Laws, and supply, where it seemed necessary: So the Provinces and places
bordering on the Mediterranean Seas, according to former usages, and customs,
and upon new emergent occasions, established several orders, and constitutions
for Maritime businesses, which some eminent persons residing at Amalphia, (a
Town in the Kingdom of Naples) reduced into a Monument, called Tabula
Amalphitana, of which Marinus Frecria writes; In succeeding times, Maritime
businesses were not determined only by the Rhodian Laws, D^ Sulseudis T^t. de
Officio Adm^^alli.
but suites and controversies touching matters of the Sea, were determined by
the Law which is contained in the Table of Amalphia unto this ^ay.

The like was done by the people of Venice, Praefat del Cont. solato de c. 44.
Morea, or Peloponnesus, Rome, Genua, Marsellis, Aragon, Barcelona, etc. of all
which places the Constitutions are comprehended in the Book, called Il
Consultate del Mare, of which it is related in a distinct Chapter, Questi sono
buoni stablimenti, these are the good Constitutions and Customs which belong
unto the Sea, the which wise men passing through the World have delivered to
our Ancestors.

Touching the Nations confining on the Western and Northern Ocean; It appears
likewise, That in Spain there were special Laws and Ordinances provided for the
businesses of the Sea, for occasions both of War and Peace, as in the Partidas
of Alphonsus the ninth, under the Title of De los navios, Partid. 5. et. 9.
and under the Title De la guerre per la mer, and under the Title De los navios
in the Recopilation of Philip the 2d. which are illustrated by the Comment of
Alphonsus, Azevedo, and others.

So the French for maritime affairs have diverse Edicts or Ordinances which are
styled Reglements sur la fait de Admiralty, Fontavon Les Edicts de Flance Tom.
3.
which were established by Charles the sixth, Lewis the twelfth, Francis the
first, and lastly by Henry the third, most fully, upon review of all former
Acts, which were afterward ratified by the Court of Parliament at Paris; But
for ordinary matters of Navigation, and Trade at Sea, the Laws, or Judgments
of Oleron, (which is an Island situate at the mouth of the River Charenton,
near the Coast of Aquitain) are of special Observation in that Kingdone, as
appears by an Ancient Record, extant amongst the Royal Edicts, Ar^^^ 19.
Entitled Droits et preminences del Admiral, wherein it is declared, That the
Admiral ought to do justice to all Merchants, according to Rights judgments,
etc. and usages of Oleron. And Grotius affirms, Flores ^^ar sae ad ^^deprecatio.
That as the Rhodian Laws in the Mediterranean Seas, were reputed as the Laws
of Nations, so in France are the Laws of Oleron, and says further in that
place, That in what esteem the Laws of Oleron have been in France, the same
have Leges Wisbuiences amongst the Nations beyond the Rhine, A bridge. of Sea
Laws. c.
which if Welwood mistakes not, are the same with the Laws of Oleron,
Translated into Dutch for the use of the Sea Coasts in those parts.

Part. 1. c.
Malines in his Lex Mercatoria, sets forth a Catalogue of the Laws of the Hanse
Towns; And Loccenius in his Preface to his Book, de Iure Maritimo, mentions,
jus nauticum Suesicum, and Leges Wisbuiences, which he says are observed both
in the Hanse Towns, and in the Northern Kingdoms, and also the Ordinances of
the Hanse Towns themselves, and of the Belgic Commonwealth.

It is likewise apparent, that the Kingdom of England is not destitute of
special Laws for the regulating of Sea businesses, which are distinct from the
Common Laws of the Realm; as namely, the Civil Law, and others, of which the
Books of Common Law take notice by the names of Ley Merchant, and Ley Meriner.

Touching the Civil Law, how it is observed in the Admiralty of England, Sir
Edward Cook shows in his Comment upon Littleton, ad Sect. 3.
where he mentions diverse Laws which are in use in this Kingdom; And Mr.
Seldom in his dissertation, ad Fletam, c. 8.
says, Iuris Civilis, vel Caesarij usus ab antiquis seculis etiam number
retinetur in foro Maritimo, Sir John Hayward in the life of Ed. 6.
seu curia Admiralitatis. And accordingly in the time of King Edward the sixth,
when Monsieur Villandry being employed for the King of France, upon occasion of
some differences, happening betwixt the Subjects of England, and of France,
concerning Sea businesses, Signified that the King his Master was desirous that
the Ordinances, and the Customs of England, might be reduced into one form,
without any difference betwixt them, and the French, answer was made, That the
English Ordinances for Marine affairs, were no other than the Civil Laws, and
certain ancient Additions of the Realm, wherein they could not conceive any
reason or convenience of change.

The Law Merchant is likewise mentioned, and allowed by Sir Edward Cook in his
Comment upon Littleton, ad Sect. 3.
as a Law distinct from the Common Law of England; And so does Mr. Seldom
mention it in his notes upon Fortescue. c. 32. p. 39.
And Sir John Davis, more fully ownes it in a Manuscript Tract touching
Impositions, where he affirms, That both the Common Law and Statute Laws of
England take notice of the Law Merchant, and do leave the ca^ses of Merchants
to be decided by the Rules of that Law, which Law Merchant, he says, as it is
part of the Law of Nature, and Nations, is universal, and one and the same in
all Countries of the World; For as Cicero says of that Law, Offic. 3.
Non erit alia lex Romae, alia Athenis, alia nunc, alia post haec, sed et omnes
gentes, et omni tempore una eademque Lex obtinebit, whereby it is manifest,
that the Causes concerning Merchants, are not now to be decided by the peculiar
and Ordinary Laws of every Country, but by the general Laws of Nature and
Nations. He says further, that until he understood the difference betwixt
the Law Merchant, and the Common Law of England, he did not a little marvel,
that England entertaining traffic with all Nations of the World, having so
many Ports, and so much good Shipping, The King of England also being Lord of
the Sea, what should be the cause, that in the Books of the Common Law of
England, there are to be found so few Cases, concerning Merchants, or Ships:
But now the reason thereof was apparent, for that the Common Law of the Land
did leave those cases to be ruled by another Law, Namely, the Law Merchant,
which is a branch of the Law of Nations.

The Law Mariner, to which happily the answer to the French Agent, mentioning
Ancient additions of the Realm, related, were such things as are contained, and
preserved in the Ancient black Book of the Admiralty, as certain Royal
Ordinances, made by Ancient Kings of the Realm. 2ly. The Judgments, or
Resolutions of Oleron, in the time of King Richard the first.

3ly. Certain verdicts given upon an Inquisition at Quinborough, in the time of
King Edward the third, and some other matters touching the Admiralty of England.

Touching the black Book of the Admiralty, Mr. Seldom styles it, De Dom. Maris.
l. 2. c. 28.
Vetusti Tribunalis maritimi Commentarii. And Codex Manuscriptus de Admiralatu.
And in his notes upon Fortescue, ad cap. 32.
he says, that there are in it worthy of Observation, Constitutions touching
the Admiralty of Henry the first, Richard the first, King John, and Edward the
first.

Touching the Judgments or Laws of Oleron, De Dom. Maris p. 254.
and the use of them in the Admiralty Court, Mr. Seldom, where he from them
argues the Sovereignty of the Kings of England, in regard, King Richard the
first did publish the Sea Laws in the Island of Oleron, which was then in his
possession, says, that they are still in force; And Sir Edward Cook likewise
argues, Coment on Liltt. Sect. 234.
that the Jurisdiction of the Lord Admiral was long before the Reign of Edward
the third, from the Laws of Oleron, So called because they were there made by
King Richard the first.

The Inquisition at Quinborough was taken in the year 1376. in the 49. of King
Edward the third, by eighteen expert Seamen, before William Nevill Admiral of
the North, Philip Courtny Admiral of the West, And the Lord Latimer Warden of
the Cinque Ports, And relates, as by the Title appears, to the usages of former
times; The verdicts there given were desired to be established by the Kings
Letters Patents, in the Cinque Ports and Towns adjoining to the Thames, to be
observed by the owners, Masters and Mariners of Ships, under penalties, Part.
1. c. 17.
etc. And Malines writes, That he had seen them enrolled amongst the Records of
the Tower, for the Government of the Admiralty.

Assert. 2
That generally where Laws have been provided for business concerning the Sea,
as also in England, several Judges have been appointed to determine
differences, and redress offenses concerning the same.
Syntag. l. 47. c. 37.
GRegorius Tholosanus says, Iudicum diversorum ratio eo dirigitur, ut lites
facilius expediantur, ne immortales sint sub judicibus mole negotiorum
occupatis and proinde cum commercia hominum sint maximae utilitatis, placuit
Negotiatoribus proponi proprios Iudices, and accordingly.

First, the Grecians had their special and proper Judges appointed for those
businesses, So Suidas (...), etc. The Natodicae were Magistrates who did
Justice to Seamen and others who trade by Sea. And the Athenians had an
express Law to that purpose, Petit de Legib. Atticis.
(...), etc. That actions concerning Seamen and Merchants should be commenced
before the Judges called The smothetae according to their Instruments of
Contracts, and dealings.

Secondly, Amongst the Romans there was anciently an Officer called Praefectus
Classis by Tully and Livy, in Verrem 7. Decad. 3. l. 3. l. 46. ad Senatus
Trebes. l. Lib. 14.
and Iavolenus makes mention of Seius Saturninus Archigubernius Classis
Britannicae, and Tacitus of Praetor Classis, which name imports a power of
Judicature; in latter times they had also a Magistrate who was called Comes
Commerciorum, 1 ult. C. de Commercijs.
whose Office was to over-see matters of Commerce or Negotiation.

Thirdly, the Roman Empire being broken into several States, the lesser as
Republiques, had their Consuls, and the greater Kingdoms had their Admiralls
to order and determine those businesses. The office of the Consuls is described
in the Consolato Del Mare, Consoli determinano ^utti le controversy, cap. 20.
etc. The Consuls determine all controversies which are for Fraights, for
Damages done to goods on shipbord, for parts of ships to be set to sale at an
outcry, for Commissions given to Masters and Mariners, for Debts contracted by
Masters for the necessary use of the Ship, for things promised or undertaken
betwixt Merchants and Mariners, for goods taken up at Sea, and generally for
all other Contracts and businesses which are declared amongst the Customs of
the Sea.

Morisonis l. 2. c. 27.
Fourthly, The Venetian State being a Seigniory, when any great War is expected,
or undertaken, have their General or Supreme Commander of the Navy, who is of
as high an esteem as any Magistrate of the City, having absolute power over all
Officers, and others of the Navy; at other times the Legatus classis, or
Vice-General, has the power of disposing of the Navy, and over the Captains of
the Galleys, and other persons of the Navy: Sansovinus lib. 17.
They have besides four Consuls, who Judge and determine all matters concerning
Negotiation, and Trade.

Chassan, Catal. p. 9. cons. 26.
Fifthly, Admirals in Europe, had their beginning (as most affirm) in the time
of Constantine the Emperor, and that in Magna Graecia, which is now the
Kingdom of Naples, where the dignity of Admiral is the third place, to wit
after the Vice Roy, Freeca de offic. Admir.
and Constable, To whom belongs the Building, Repayring, and keeping of the
Ships Royal, and setting out of the Fleets for War, with the Kings consent;
He has also Jurisdiction Civil, and Criminal, amongst Commanders, Officers,
and others, employed about the Navy, and all others who get their livelihood
by the industry and art of the Sea, which are held to be such, which transport
in Ships, and adventure their Estates by Sea, as also such that make it their
Trade to take Fish, or do build Ships. This Court is called Magna Curia, and
from it there lies an appeal only to the supreme Council; Garsias Mastrilli
says, he has all Jurisdiction, both Civil, and Criminal, in Maritime causes,
exclusive to all others.

The King of Spain has diverse other Admirals, Moris l. 2. c. 22.
both in Europe, and the Jndies of equal power, Marinus Siculus says, of the
Admiral of Castile, that he is next unto the Constable, and has supreme
Authority over all that use the Sea, and is held to be Lord and chief Commander
of the Sea, as it is also largely described in the Partidos; besides, for the
dispatch of ordinary Maritime business, by the same Laws, Judges are appointed
to reside in Port Towns, and other places on the Sea Coasts, which are to hear
the causes of Seamen concerning Freight of Ships, and Contributions for goods
cast overboard, or any other matter, which Judges were to proceed plainly
without solemnities, and with all expedition, etc.

Edit. per Fontan.
In France, by an Ordinance of Henry the third, made upon a survey of all other
former Ordinances, ratifyed by the Parliament of Paris, The Office of the
Admiral in the Kings name is thus declared.

1. That of all Armies, which shall be raised and set to Sea, the Admiral of
France, shall be chief, and our Lieutenant General, and shall be obeyed in all
Maritime Towns and places, which are or may be, without contradiction.

Secondly, He shall have Jurisdiction, Conusance, and determination of all
things done or committed on the Sea, or shoars of the Seas; likewise of all
acts of Merchandise, fishing, freighting or letting to freight, or breach of
ships, of Contracts made touching the matters aforesaid, of Charter parties of
Sea briefs, and of all other things whatsoever happening upon the Sea, or
shoars thereof; as our Lieutenant General alone, and to all purposes, in the
places aforesaid, which Jurisdiction, Cognizance, and determination, we have
interdicted to all other our Judges.

He shall hold his principal Court at the marble Table, in the Palace at Paris,
and shall appoint Judges Deputies in Maritime Cities, and Towns, who shall hear
ordinary matters happening within their Circuits, and if any business fall out
worthy of greater consideration, they shall refer the same to him.

In Denmark the third place of dignity in the Kingdom belongs to the Admiral,
who is commonly called Ry^ks Admiral, and as Morisotus, Tit. 2. c. 14.
writes, He has the same Right and Power as the Admiral of France.

In Scotland (as VVellwood a Scottish man writes) the Admiral and Judge of the
Admiralty has power within the Sea-flood, Abrigd. c. 1
over all Seafaring men, and in all Seafaring Causes and debates, Civil and
Criminal, So that no other Judge of any degree may meddle therewith, but only
by way of Assistance, as it was found in the Action brought by Anthony de la
Tour against Christian Martens, 6 November. 1542.

The Admiral of England (as Mr. Seldom observes) has another manner of Right,
De Them. Maris l. 2. c. 27.
and Jurisdiction, than the Admiral of France, or other ordinary Admiralls,
for that the Jurisdiction over the Seas of England, and Ireland, and the
Dominions and Isles of the same as a Province are committed to his Custody and
Tuition, as to a President to defend the same, as in the Dominion of the King,
by whom he is Authorized, The bounds of which Jurisdiction are limited, and
determined in those Seas; and besides, as the French, and other Admiralls, he
has the power over the Navy, and the Government over the Seamen, and
Jurisdiction over the persons and moveable goods which come under his
Judicature, pour raison ou occasion del faie de la mer; which Jurisdiction has
no bounds, but extends to the Mediterranean, African, and Indian Seas, or any
other far remote.

What Mr. Seldom delivers concerning the Admiral of Englands special
Jurisdiction, in the first respect, is confirmed by an ancient Record in French
in Archivis of the Tower of London, Iurisdictiones p. 142
set out at large by Sr. Edward Cook, the effect and tenor whereof is, That
whereas during the Wars between Philip King of France and Guy Earl of
Flanders, Reginerus Grimbaldus Admiral of the French Navy, had spoiled the
Merchants of diverse Nations sailing toward Flanders, in the English Seas, and
Commissioners being appointed by the two Kings, to hear and redress the
Complaints concerning the same, the Deputies of the Prelates, Nobility, and
Commonalty of the Towns of England, and of diverse Maritime Countries, as of
Genua, Catalonia, Spain, Germany, Zeland, Holland, Friesland, and Norway
declare, That the Kings of England, by reason of that Realm, time out of mind,
have been in peaceable possession of the Sovereign Dominion of the Sea of
England, and of the Islands therein situate, by ordering, and establishing
Laws, Statutes, and Counter-mands, of Arms, and Vessels otherwise furnished
than for Merchandising, and by taking security, and giving protection in all
Causes needful, and by ordeining all other things requisite for the maintaining
of Peace and Right amongst all other People, as well of other Seignieuries, as
of their own, passing through the same. And all manner of Cognizance and
Jurisdiction high and low touching those Laws, Statutes, Ordinances, and
Countermands, and all other Acts which may appertain to the Sovereign Dominion
aforesaid, and that A. D. B. Admiral of the Sea deputed by the King of
England, and all other Admiralls appointed by him, and his Ancestors,
heretofore Kings of England, have been in peaceable Possession of the said
Sovereign Protection, together with the Conusance, and Jurisdiction, and all
things before mentioned thereunto appertaining (except in case of Appeals to
their Sovereign Kings of England, for default of doing Right, or giving wrong
Judgment) and especially in making Restraint, doing Justice, and taking
security for the peace of all manner of People, bearing Arms on the Sea, or
Ships sailing otherwise apparelled, or furnished than belongs to Ships of
Merchandise, and in all other points in which a man may have reasonable Cause
of Suspicion against them, touching Robbery or other misdemeanors.

Besides the Jurisdiction Extraordinary of the Admiral of England concerning
Protection against depredations in the English Seas (as Mr. Seldom writes) his
Ordinary Jurisdiction is over the persons, and goods moveable, which come under
his judicature by occasion of businesses relating to the Sea, is not only
agreeable to the Jurisdiction of the French and other Admiralls, but is also
warranted by the Kings Commissions, as it is apparent by ancient, and later
Patents, granted by the Kings of England, in which the Admiralls of Englands
Ahthority and Jurisdiction is expressly and fully declared, as follows,
Seldom l. 2. c. 16.
Damus and Concedimus etc. We give and grant to N. the Office of our great
Admiral of England, Ireland, and Wales etc. And we make, appoint, and ordain
him Governor General of our Navies, and Seas of the Kingdoms aforesaid: And
be it further known, that we of our special Grace and certain knowledge, do
give and grant to the same our great Admiral and Governor of our Navies all
and all manner of Jurisdictions, Liberties, Offices, Fees, Profits,
Preheminences, and Privileges Whatsoever belonging or appertaining; So far is
recited in the Solemn form of the Admiralls Commission, by Mr. Seldom, as
sufficient to his purpose, and then says he follow many things declaring that
most ample power, and Jurisdiction, amongst which is expressed in Civil Causes,
that to him it is granted, Ad cognoscendum de placitis etc. To hold Conusance
of Pleas, Debts, Bills of Exchange, Policies of Assurance, Accounts,
Charter-parties, Contractions, Bills of Lading, and all other Contracts, which
may any ways concern Moneys due for freight of Ships hired, and let to hire,
moneys lent to be paid beyond the Seas, at the hazard of the lender, and also
of any Cause, Business, or Injury whatsoever had, or done, in or upon, or
through the Seas, or public Rivers, or fresh Waters, Streams, Havens and
places subject to overflowing, whatsoever, within the flowing and ebbing of the
Sea, upon the Shoares or Banks whatsoever adjoining to them, or either of them,
from any the said first Bridges whatsoever, toward the Sea, throughout our
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, or our Dominions aforesaid, or else where,
beyond the Seas, or in any Ports beyond the Seas whatsoever, with diverse other
Clauses, containing power of coercion for the maintenance of that Jurisdiction.

By the Commission of Oyer and Terminer granted likewise under the Great Seal,
according to the Statute of the 28th. of Henry the 8. chap. 15. and other
Statutes for the punishing of Offenses and matters Criminal committed within
the Jurisdiction of the Admiral, Power is granted in the Kings name, to hear,
and determine De omnibus and singulis proditionibus etc. of all and singular
Treasons, Robberies, Murders, Felonies, and Consederacies etc. as well in and
upon the Sea, or any River, Port or Fresh Water, Creek, or place whatsoever,
within the flowing of the Sea to the the full, beneath the first Bridges
toward the Sea, as upon the shore of the Sea, or elsewhere within the Kings
Maritime Jurisdiction of the Admiralty of the Realm of England, and the
Dominion of the same. As well against the Peace and the Laws of the Land, as
against the Kings Laws, Statutes, and Ordinances of the Kings Court of
Admiralty. And also touching all and singular other matters, which concern
Merchants, Owners and Proprietaries of Ships, Masters, Shipmen, Mariners,
Shipwrights, Fishermen, Workmen, Laborers, Saylours, Servitours or any others.

Assert. 3
That in all places, where Judges have been appointed for Sea businesses, as
also in England, certain Causes, viz. such as have Relation to Navigation, and
Negotiation by Sea, have been held proper for their Conusance.
MAritime Laws, says Gode^ry, concern persons or Dealings between Merchants
and Seamen, Tit. de Varl^t.
which is agreeable to the subject matter of the several Laws mentioned in the
first Chapter, and what appears to have belonged to the office of Maritime
Judges.

Amongst the Grecians, Causes happening betwixt Merchants and Seamen were
called (...), Causes Concerconcerning Trade, G^omat. verb. (...).
as Julius Pollux, and (...), as Suidas testifies, The Rhodian Laws, although
as they are now extant, are not ranked under distinct Heads or Titles, yet they
may be reduced to these particulars, As first, Concerning hiring and freighting
of Ships; Secondly, Concerning transporting Passingers and Goods; Thirdly,
Touching the delivery ad discharging the things received in good Condition;
Fourthly, Touching Contributions for Losses, in Common danger, and for salvage
of Goods. Fifthly, For borrowing and trusting of money for Sea-voyages.
Sixthly, Concerning Mariners duties, their wages, and the like.

The same were the matters taken into Cosideration, Iac. Godefred. Comment. ad
1. Deprecatio.
when the Roman Senate entered into a Consultation to settle the business of
the Sea; For when Tiberius Claudius had signified to them, that the Seamen and
Merchants trading by Sea, had besought him, that such businesses which were
incident to the Sea, might be reduced into some order, Nero, then a Senator,
advised, that some might be sent to the Isle of Rhodes, who should diligently
enquire, and take notice of what was there observed, Concerning Mariners,
Seamen, Merchants, and passengers Goods put on Board ships, Partner-ships,
Building, Buying, or Selling of Ships, Entrusting Gold, and Silver, and diverse
other things. All which was done accordingly, as appears by the titles of the
Roman Civil Laws, into which the Rhodian Laws were inserted, and by the Laws
touching Sea affairs, which afterward the Greek Empire received from the
Romans, (...). lib. 33.
as in the Title De Nauticis Obligationibus etc. Touching the obligations, or
duties of Mariners, and all manner of actions which may be brought concerning
Ships, or those who sail in Ships, Owners, Masters, or Passengers: Moreover
touching wrecks of Ships, casting forth of Goods, and Contributions, and also
Fishermen and Fishing.

The same businesses also are regulated by the Constitutions of the Consolato
del Mare, in which are contained, the Statutes and Ordinances of Ancient
Authority, provided for all Causes of Merchandising, and Navigation, as it is
more fully signified in a Chapter of that Book, Cap. 24.
Nello progresso di questo libro. In the progress of this book it is declared,
how the Masters of Ships ought to demean themselves, toward Merchants,
Mariners, Strangers, and all other sorts of people, which pass in their Ships,
and also how Merchants ought to perform with Masters of Ships, and how
Strangers and others ought to pay freight for the transporting of their persons
etc. All which are made good in the particular Ordinances and Constitutions
therein contained.

The Sea-Lawes in the Spanish Partidaes have the same scope, Partid. 5. and 9.
as it is in the Title, We intend here to speak of shipping hired to undergo
the Adventure of tbe Sea, and we will show what things the Master of the Ship
ought to observe toward the Merchants, and how the damage that shall happen
to goods cast over board by occasion of storm ought to be divided, and of the
price due for the hire of Ships, and of other matters with may concern the same
affair.

So much is likewise signified in the Title of the Laws of Oleron, which in the
Edition annexed to the Customs of Normandy, are called Ordonances Royaul
touchant le fait de la Mere, as also Judgments, de la mere, des nef, des
Mariners, and aussi des Merchants, and de tout leur estre, and in the Edition
set out by Peter Garrias La maniere comme les Maestres de Navire. The manner
how Masters of Ships, Merchants and Mariners, ought to regulate and govern
themselves, according to the Judgments of the Roll of Oleron.

Notwithstanding these Examples of the usages of all other Nations, some
amongst us, as take upon the^ to determine, that to the Jurisdiction of the
Admiralls of England, no special, or certain Causes do belong; so the Lord
Hobard, in Audly and Iennings Case affirms, That their Jurisdiction is not in
respect of any certain Causes, as the Causes of Tithes and Testaments are in
the Spiritual Court, but only in respect of place, and no doubt but Sir Edward
Cook, and others who talk so much of Altum Mare, are themselves persuaded, and
would persuade others, to be of that opinion; but it is apparent, that it is
not the place only, but the nature of the Case, happening within such a place,
that makes the Jurisdiction, and therefore if a Contract of Marriage, or a
Testament be made at Sea, the Admiral claims no conusance thereof, which he
might do if the place alone were sufficient to give the Jurisdiction, and so
Godfry in his Comment upon the Customs of Normandy says, Tit. de Vareos.
that the Jurisdiction of the Marshal of France, and of the Admiral, are
limited to certain Causes and matters, whereupon it follows, that they cannot
Judge, but of things, of which the Conusance belongs unto them, for their
Jurisdictions are not regulated only by the Territory or place, but also by
the Causes and matters over which a competent power is granted unto them. And
so Justice Reeves, in an Argument in Communi Banco delivered, Lenthal and alii
contr. D. Will. Russel and alii.
that he differed in opinion from the Lord Hobard, and affirmed, that the Cause
as well as the place gave Jurisdiction, for if a man upon the Sea do seal a
Lease, or an Obligation, the Common Law shall have the Jurisdiction, and not
the Admiralty, because the Cause is not Maritime, and this he says agrees with
the Lord Hobard himself in Bridgemans Case, and Sergeant Callis in his Readings
does acknowledge, That the King rules on the Sea by the Laws Imperial and the
Roll of Oleron, and others, But that is, says he, in the Causes of Shipping,
and of Merchants and Mariners. And whereas the Sergeant says well, and I
suppose no man will deny but the Civil or Imperial Laws, the Roll of Oleron and
others (by which I suppose may be understood, the Articles of the Inquisition
of Quinborough) are of force in the Admiralty of England, For further
Illustration that there are certain Causes properly belonging to the Conusance
and Jurisdiction of the Admiralty Court of England, It may be more particularly
deduced and showed from these several, and respective authorities.

And first, as touching the particular Causes, which may be deduced from the
Civil Laws, some things have been already showed, out of what the Romans
derived from the Rhodian Laws, and if any will be further satisfied, he may
find it perspicuously declared, in a Tract. De Iure and judicio Maritimo,
wherein the particular Causes, not only Civil, but also Criminal, concerning
Navigation, and Negotiation by Sea, are summarily set down, with Relation to
the Text of the Civil Laws.

And touching the Laws of Oleron, which are less obvious, it may be observed,
that the particular Cases therein are, as first Touching Ships hired for
Sea-voyages, and their proceedings in the same.
1 How Masters, and Mariners, are to be satisfied, when the Merchant provides
not his goods ready, to be laden at the time agreed upon. 2 How the Master
ought to consult with his Company before he put out of the Harbor, and proceed
with their advice, and what he is liable unto, if he do otherwise. 3 How the
Master ought to make satisfaction when the Merchant is prejudiced by his stay,
in any place, and is not proceeding in the voyage. 4 How the Master, in case
his Ship be disabled by some misfortune, may repair it, or hire another, or if
the Merchant refuse, what freight may be demanded.
Secondly, Touching the safe keeping, and delivering of goods received into the
Ships.
1 How the Merchant shall be satisfied if his goods be damnified in the Ship,
by evil stowing, or other bad usage, and how the Master and Company may clear
themselves. 2 How the Master and Company are liable unto the Merchant, if any
goods brought into the port of discharge, miscarry in the unlading by occasion
of the Tackling or Cordage which are found unfit.
Thirdly, Touching the Engaging of Ships or goods in case of necessity.
1 First, Whether the Master wanting means to proceed in his Voyage, may sell,
or dispose of the Ship without Commission from the Owners, and how, and in what
case he may Engage some tackle, or furniture of the Ship. 2 How far, in case of
necessity, the Master may intermeddle with the Merchants goods, and if he
dispose of any, how he is to make account, and give satisfaction.
Fourthly, Touching Contributions to be made for loss, upon occasion of Common
danger.
1 First, How the Master with advice of those in the Ship, or otherwise, in
extremity of tempest, may cast out some men's goods, to save themselves and the
rest, and how average, or Contribution is to be made. 2 How the Master in the
tempest cuting down his Mast, and casting it over Board to save the Ship and
goods, ought to have satisfaction from those whose goods were saved.
Fifthly, Touching damages done by, or betwixt several Ships.
First, How and in what manner the Damage is to be born when a Ship sailing
into a Port bruizes or br^aks another Ship riding there at Anchor. Secondly,
How if two Ships riding at Anchor in a Haven, and the water being low, the
Master of the one observing some danger from the Anchor of the other, may give
notice thereof to the Master of that ship, and if he neglect to remove it, may
cause it to be done by his own Company, and if he be hindered therein, and
damage done, what reparation may be recovered.
Sixthly, Touching the charge for hiring of Pilots, and their duty.
1 The Master being bound by Charter-party to pay Pilotage, in what places, and
how far he is bound thereunto. 2 How far the Pilot is liable to make
^atisfaction of the ships miscarriage under his charge, and whether he be bound
when he has brought her into the Harbor, if she miscarry by misplacing there.


There be many other Cases contained amongst these Judgments of Oleron, but
these may suffice for our purpose.

As the Roll of Oleron does contain Judgments or Verdicts especially in Civil
Causes, which did belong to Maritime Judicature, so in the Inqui^ition at
Quinborough are presented matters Criminal, and Offenses concerning which
anciently inquiry has been made in the Admiralty Jurisdiction, which may be
reduced into these heads, as First, Offenses against the King and Kingdom; as
1 Of such as did furnish the Enemy with Victuals and Ammunition, and of such
as did Traffic with the Enemies, without special License. 2 Of Traitors goods
detained in ships, and concealed from the King. 3 Of Pirates, their Receivers,
Maintainers and Comforters. 4 Of Murders, Man-slaughters, Maymes, and
Pety-felonies, committed in ships. 5 Of ships arrested for the Kings service,
breaking the Arrest, and of Sergeants of the Admiralty who for money discharge
ships arrested for the Kings service, and of Mariners who having taken pay run
away from the Kings service.
Secondly, Offenses against the Public good of the Kingdom; as
1 Of ships transporting Gold and Silver. 2 Of carrying Corn over Sea without
special License. 3 Of such as turn away Merchandises or Victuals from the Kings
Ports. 4 Of Forestallers, Regrators, and of such as use false Measures,
Balances, and Weights, within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty. 5 Of such as
make spoil of wrecks, so that the Owners coming within a year and a day cannot
have their goods. 6 Of such as claim wrecks, having neither Charter nor
Prescription. 7 Of Wears, Riddles, Blind-stakes, Water-mills^ etc. whereby
ships or men have been lost or endangered. 8 Of removing Anchors, and cutting
of Buoy-Ropes. 9 Of such as take Salmons at unseasonable times. 10 Of such as
spoil the breed of Oisters, or dreg for Oisters, and Mussels, at unseasonable
times. 11 Of such as fish with unlawful Nets. 12 Of taking Royal Fishes, viz.
Whales, Sturgeons, Purpoises, etc. and detaining the one half from the King.
Thirdly, Offenses against the Admiral, the Navy, and Discipline of the Sea.
1 Of Judges entertaining Pleas of Causes belonging to the Admiral, and of such
as in Admiralty Causes sue in the Courts of Common Law, and of such as hinder
the Execution of the Admirals process. 2 Of Masters and Mariners contemptuous
to the Admiral. 3 Of the Admirals shares, of Weifs or Derelicts, and of
Deodands belonging to the Admiral. 4 Of Fletson, Jetson, and Lagon, belonging
to the Admiral. 5 Of such as Freight Strangers bottoms, where Ships of the Land
may be had at reasonable rates. 6 Of Ship-wrights taking excessive wages. 7 Of
Masters and Mariners taking excessive wages. 8 Of Pilots, by whose ignorance
ships have miscarried. 9 Of Mariners forsaking their ships. 10 Of Mariners
Rebellious, and dis- obedient to their Masters.


In the same ancient Book of the Admiralty there is a Copy of a more ancient
Enquiry touching Admiral Causes, wherein some things relate to Constitutions
made by King Richard the first at Grimesby, ( viz.) That ships arrested for the
Kings service, breaking arrest, shall be confiscated to the King; and by King
John at Hastings, That no private man should appropriate to himself the benefit
of any salt waters, by Meers, Ridles, and the like, and that the same should be
pulled down.

And the fishing cried common to all people was likewise ordered by King John.

This may suffice to confirm that there were certain special Causes, both Civil
and Criminal, which did anciently belong and properly to the Conusance of the
Admiral, and to show that his Jurisdiction was not wholly confined only to the
Sea.

Assert. 4
That the Jurisdiction of the Admiral of England, as it is granted by the King,
and is usually exercised in the Admiralty Court, may consist with the Statutes
and Laws of this Realm.
FIrst it appears by ancient Record of the time of King Edward the first, De
superioritate Maris, That it was acknowledged by the Deputies of the Parliament
of England, and of diverse other Nations, That the Kings of England time out of
mind enjoyed the Dominion and Sovereignty of the English Seas, by prescribing
Laws and Statutes for the preserving Peace and Justice, and by exercising all
kind of Authority in matters of Judicature, and all other things which may
concern his Sovereignty in the same, which being granted, his power to depute a
Magistrate or Officer to those purposes, with so much of his authority as he
shall think fit, cannot be denied.

Secondly, That the Jurisdiction and power granted by the King in his Letters
Patents to the Admiral, is agreeable to Commissions anciently granted, and
which have been passed from time to time by the Kings learned Counsel, and by
the Lord Chancellor, or the Lord Keeper for the time being, who have thereunto
set the Great Seal: Iurisd. of Courts c. 6. F. 127.
and that the authority and Jurisdiction of the Constable and Marshal is
designed by St Edward Cook, by referring to Grants of those Offices anciently
made by many several Kings, with exception only to one irregular precedent, in
the time of King Edward the fourth.

Thirdly, That Mr. Seldom shows, that all the Patents of the Office of the Lord
Admiral, De Dom. Maris l. 18 c 17.
from the beginning of Queen Mary's time to the time of King Charles, have been
conceived after one and the same form and tenor, as of Edward Lord Clint^on,
afterward Earl of Lincoln, under King Philip and Queen Mary, of Charles Howard
Lord Effingham, afterward Earl of Nottingham, under Queen Elizabeth, of
Charles Duke of York, after King Charles, under King James, and of George Duke
of Buckingham, under King James, and King Charles, to which may be added the
Patent of Algernon Earl of Northumberland under King Charles the first, and of
James the most Illustrious Duke of York under King Charles the Second.

Fourthly, That the Lord Admiral and his Deputies proceeding according to his
Commission, is expressly allowed by King Philip and Queen Mary, where they by a
Statute restraining the exportation of Corn without License, ^ and 2 Phil. and
Mar.
make a special provision, That that Act shall not be prejudicial or hurtful
to the Lord Great Admiral of England, for the time being, or to the King and
Queens Majesty's Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, but that the said Lord Admiral
or his Deputies shall exercise, use and execute all kinds of Jurisdiction
belonging to the Sea, according to his or their Commissions: which provision,
although it seems to have been made in respect of that Statute, yet it shows
what respect the King and Queen intended to their Lord High Admiral, their own
Admiralty Jurisdiction in all matters belonging to the Sea, and to the
Commission by them granted.

Against the Jurisdiction of the Admiral as is granted by the King, and as it
is exercized in the Court, it is pretended in general, That it is not agreeable,

First, To several Acts of Parliament, Secondly, To diverse Judgments,
Book-Cases and Judicial proceedings, to which may be added the Resolutions of
the Judges upon the complaint of the Admiral, in Sir Edward Cooks Articuli
Admiralitatis, All which more specially may be reduced to three heads.

First, Where the Admiral meddles with Contracts and Writings concerning Sea
businesses made within the Realm. Secondly, Where he meddles with other things
done within the Bodies of Counties, and Thirdly, With such things as are made
or done beyond the Sea.
The Acts of Parliament are, First, The Statute of the 13. Rich. 2. chap. 5.
which restrains the Admiral from meddling with things within the Realm.
Secondly, That of the 15. of the same King, chap. 3. which declares, that he
has no Jurisdiction within Bodies of Counties. Thirdly, That of 2 Hen. the 4.
which inflicts penalties on those who sue or proceed contrary to that of the 13
Rich. 2. Fourthly, That of the 5 of Elizabeth, which is pretended to exclude
the Admiral from meddling with things done within Ports and Rivers.

The First of these, being more general, may in this place be considered, the
rest being more particular may, in discussing of some other particular points
to which they are appliable, be examined.

That of the 13 Rich. 2. chap. 5. ordains, that the Admirals and their Deputies
shall not meddle of any thing done within the Realm, but only of things done
upon the Sea, as it has been used in the time of King Edward the Third.

Touching this Statute it may be observed what Sir Edward Cook delivers out of
Plowdens Commentaries, Iurisd. of Courts p. 330.
That the Praeamble of a Statute is the Key to open the meaning of the makers
of the Act, and the mischiefs which they intended to remedy; now in the
Praeamble of the Statute it ^s suggested, that the Admiral had encroacht diverse
Jurisdictions and Franchises belonging to the King and other Lords, from whence
it may be conceived, that the Parliament intended only to restrain him from
meddling in his Courts with such things within the Realm, wherein he had
encroacht upon the Jurisdiction of the King and other Lords, which what those
things were, it does no ways appear; but it cannot be imagined or reasonably
conceived, that it was intended the Admiral should be debarred from proceeding
in Causes of Navigation and Negotiation by Sea, which never did belong to any
other Courts of the King or other Lords, and were formerly held proper for the
conusance of the Admiral, and as things were then stated could not be held
encroachments.

So much may the rather be supposed, because the Statute restraining him from
meddling with things done within the Realm, but only with things done upon the
Sea, further adds, according to what has been duly used, in the time of the
Noble Prince King Edward, Grandfather to the King, which was King Edward the
Third.

Sir Henry Sp^^man writes, Gloss. ^. Admiral.
that some men did conceive Causarum Nauticarum cognitionem, and forum rei
maritimae, quod hodie Curiam Admiralitatis vocant, sub Edwardo Tertio
illuxisse; and it is probable, that in that Kings time, who did many other
glorious things for the good of this Nation, the Court of Admiralty received
some setlement, and grew more conspicuous than it was before; but the
Constitutions observed by Mr. Seldom in the Book of the Admiralty of Henry the
First, Iurisd. of Courts p. 142.
Richard the First, King John, and Edward the First do manifest, that the Court
was much more ancient: and Sir Edward Cook, to show the antiquity of the Court
of Admiralty to have been long before the time of Edward the Third, in whose
days, he says, that some had dreamed that it had begun, recite, the ancient
Record De superioritate Maris, Ibid. 144.
before mentioned, and likewise another quoted also by Mr. Seld^n, Lib. 2. c.
16.
wherein it is showed that King Edw. the Third in the 12 year of his Reign did
consult with all his Judges, ad finem quod retineatur and continuetur ad
subditorum prosequutionem forma procedendi quondam Domini Regis etc. that is,
To the end that the form of proceedings at the suit of the Subjects begun and
ordained by his Grandfather King Edward the First and his Counsel, for
retaining and preserving the ancient Sovereignty of the Sea of England, and the
Right of the Office of the Admiralty in the same, might be resumed, and
continued, touching the correcting, interpreting, and declaring the Laws and
Statutes lately ordained for the maintaining of Peace and Justice amongst the
people of all Nations whatsoever, passing through the English Seas, and for
punishing of Offenses, and for giving of satisfaction to such as were
damnified, which Laws and Statutes were corrected, declared, interpreted, and
published by King Richard the First King of England in his return from the Holy
Land, and were entitled Le Ley Oleron in the French tongue.

And it is manifest, That the Law was continued all that Kings time, in regard
that in the 49 year of his Reign, the selected Seamen for the Inquisition at
Quinborough, in the conclusion say, That touching some businesses proposed in
the Articles of the Inquisition, they know no better advise nor remedy than
that which had been formerly used and practiced after the manner which is
contained in the Law of Oleron.

All which being admitted and duly considered, it may be presumed, that such
Causes as did originally by Civil Law belong to the Admiralty, and what former
Kings had anciently ordained for the regulating of the same, as likewise such
as were agreeable to the matters decided in the Judgments of Oleron, and what
are contained in the Inquisition taken at Quinborough, in the time of King
Edward the Third, were within the conusance of the Admiralty Court, and
consequently the same are permitted to be tried and determined in the same
Court by the Statute of the 13 of Rich. 2.

Touching the Judgments, Judicial Acts, and Book-Cases intended to restrain the
Admiral of England in exercise of his Jurisdiction as it is granted in the
Kings Commission, it may be answered in general, First, That those Judgments,
Judicial Acts, etc. are in Causes of difference in respect of Jurisdiction
betwixt the Courts of Common Law and the Admiralty Court, and it is incident to
all professions, where there is any competition or emulation with others, to
incline to that which is most to their advantage. Secondly, Such Judgment sand
Book-Cases have been grounded upon the common understanding of the Statutes,
without any notice or respect to the Laws of the Sea, or the condition of
Maritime Causes, the circumstances of the places being the chief Rule by which
they have been framed. Thirdly, That many of them upon due examination may be
found not so concluding as they are pretended, and although much respect and
reverence be due to the Authors, yet we are not bound to believe that their
judgments are infallible. Fourthly, That the Judicial proceeding as
Prohibitions, being the results of the former authorities they may be weighed
accordingly. Lastly, Touching the main piece, Sir Edward Cooks Articuli
Admiralitatis, carrying the reputation of the Resolutions of all ^^e Judges
touching the matters therein contained, it will appear that they very much
differ from the Concessions of the Judges of the Kings Bench 1575, and from the
Resolutions of all the Judges the 18 of February 1632, subscribed unto by them,
in the presence of King Charles and twenty Lords of his Counsel.

The particular authorities which may be collected out of Sr. Edward Cooks
Notes, to prove that the Admiral of England has no conusance of things done
within the Realm, but only of things done upon the Sea, are as follows, 1
That in the 2 Rich. 2. Hibernici sunt sub Admirallo Angliae, de facto super
alto Mari. 2 That the 7 Rich. 2. in an Action of trespass brought for a Ship
and Merchandises taken away, the Defendant pleaded that he did take them, en le
haut Mer, ou les Normans que la enemis la Roy, and it was allowed a good Plea.
3 That Fortescue who lived in the time of Hen. the Sixth says, Siquae super
altum mare extra Corpus Comitatus in placito coram Admirallo deducantur per
testes terminari debent. 4 That Dyer in the time of Queen Mary says, That by
the Libel in the Admiralty Court* the Case is supposed to commence sur le haut
mer, and intra Iurisdictionem de l' Admiralty.


To these authorities may be answered in general, First, That whereas some of
them speak of Altum Mare, the Statute of the 13 of Rich. 2. has no such
Attribute, but mentions simply the Sea.

2 That the same Authorities granting that the Admiral has jurisdiction on the
Sea, do not declare, much less conclude, that he has no jurisdiction
elsewhere: And as to the particulars,

1 The Authority of 2 Rich. 2. which affirms that the Irish were subject to the
Admiral of England, for a thing done on the Sea, mentions not for what kind of
thing, and happily it might be for some offense against the Crown, or against
the Peace, in offering violence to the Kings Subjects, or the subjects of his
Allies; and in such Cases it might be understood, that he had Jurisdiction over
the Irish, as over the Subjects of England, and other Nations, only extending
to the high Sea; but it cannot from thence be argued, but that if it were a
business concerning Navigation, or Negotiation by Sea, he might also have had
Jurisdiction over the Irish, as well as over other persons, not only super
alto mari, but also in other places elsewhere.

2 The Plea to the Action of Trespass, in the 7 Rich. the 2. might be good, and
allowed in two respects; First, In regard the thing was done where the Country
could take no notice, and therefore no Jury by twelve men could be had.
Secondly, In regard the Ship and goods were taken from the Kings Enemies,
against whom no ^respass could be committed, because that to offend them any
ways was lawful; and in that respect the Plea might have been allowed,
although the Ship and Merchandise had been taken in a Port, or Navigable River.

3. Whereas Fortescue says, that things done upon the high Sea, prosecuted
before the Admiral, ought to be determined according to the Proofs made by
Witnesses, and no more, Sir Edward Cook affirms, That it proves by express
words that the Admiralty is confined to the high Sea: Fortescue having given
reason for Trials by Jury, when the Neighborhood of the Country could take
notice of the business, Grants that for things done in other places, the Law of
the Kingdom does allow of proofs by Witnesses, as in Causes commenced before
the Admiral for things done on the high Sea, and likewise before the Constable,
for things done beyond the Sea; so that it is evident he does no more expressly
confine the Admirals Jurisdiction to the high Sea, than he does the Constables
to places beyond the Sea; it being notorious that his Jurisdiction extends to
Deeds of War, and Arms within the Land; as it will be proved that the Admirals
Jurisdiction likewise to matters of Navigation, and Negotiation by Sea.

4 Touching the Authority of Dyer, that by Libel in the Admiralty Court, the
Case is surmised to commence, Sur la haut mer, etc. It may be answered, that
the Libels in the Admiralty, sometimes (as the business falls out) declare,
Super alto mari and infra jurisdictionem Curiae, but ordinarily Causes are laid
only intra fluxum and refluxum Maris and Iurisdictionem Curiae, and generally
the Causes are no otherwise described, but A contra B. in causa civili, and
Maritima.

Assert. 5
That the Admiral of England may hold Conusance of Contracts, and Writings made
at Land, touching business of Navigation and Trade by Sea.
BY an ancient Record in the Black book of the Admiralty (of which Mr. Seldom
takes notice) it appears, Notes upon Fort^^cue B 6. p 29. v. 557.
that it was ordained by King Edward the first, and his Lords, at Hastings, Que
comment div^rs Seigneurs avoient francheses, etc. That although di^ers Lords
had ^ivers Franchises to try Pleas in Ports, yet that neither their Steward,
nor Bailiffs should hold any Plea, if it concerned Merc^ant or Mariner, as well
for matter of Fact, as of Ships, Obligations, and other D^ed^; which although
it extends only to inferior Lords, yet it may be said, that it was done in
favor of the Admirals Jurisdiction, in such matters.

Secondly, by Commissions from time to time Granted by the Kings of England, to
the Admirals, power is given, Ad cognoscendum, etc. to hold the Conusance of
Charter-parties, Policies of Assurance, Bills of Bottomry, Bills of Lading, and
of Sale of Ships.

Thirdly, The Causes and Suits arising by occasion of businesses contained in
such Writings have in all observable times and places been held to be Maritime,
and the Conusance of them has been allowed to Martim Courts, as it has been
before fully showed; and it may be further considered, that such Contracts and
Writings have their Original from ancient Maritim Laws, and are both in names
and nature, things foreign to the Laws of this Realm: And so much may be
gathered from the order which Wes^ observes in his Book of Presidents, where
after the form* of Deeds and Contracts proper to the Common Law, he handles
those which concern Merchandising and Trade by Sea, as things of a distinct and
several nature.

Touching the particulars, First, Charter-parties seem to have been derived
from the Rhodian Laws, by which it was provided, Si quis na^em conduxerit,
instrumenta consignata sunto, If any man shall hire a ship, let there be
Writings drawn and sealed thereupon.

There is likewise mention of Charter-parties in the Role of Oleron, and in the
French later Ordinances, made for the reglement of the Admiralty of France, and
it is supposed that no mention of them can be found in any Law or Statute of
this Realm, until the 32 of King Henry the 8. cap. 14. where the Conusance of
them is referred to the Admiralty, as it shall be hereafter showed. Moreover
Malines confirms, that anciently in Charter-parties it was expressed, Lex Market.
p. 1. cap. 21.
That the Contents thereof should be understood according to the Law of Oleron;
and at this time there are Clauses usually inserted into them, enjoining, That
the Merchants besides the payment of Freight, shall make allowance for Primage,
Average and Pettelodmenage, things no where occurring in the Books of Common
Law, and anciently determinable by the Law of Oleron.

Secondly, Policies of Assurance are grounded upon the Civil Law, which
allows an Action for the undertaking a hazard which is doubtful, for reward
or consideration first given, which is commonly called a Praemio, they are of
later Civillians called Sponsiones Mercatoriae, and Assecurationes, P. 1 cap. 24
which Malines affirms, were taken up in this Kingdom from the Laws of Oleron,
practiced on the Sea coasts of France, but it is manifest that now they are
likewise in use in Venice, Naples, Genua, Ancona, Spain, and Portugal, and in
other places where the affairs of the Sea are regulated by the Civil Law, the
Consolato, and Laws of Oleron.

Thirdly, Bills of Bottomry, when an Owner, or Master of a Ship, to furnish his
Voyage, takes up money upon extraordinary interest to be paid when the Ship
arrives at the Port appointed, and thereby engages his Ship for the performance
of the same, are grounded on the ancient Grecian and Roman Laws. Julius Pollux,
a learned Expositor of terms, or words used amongst the Grecians, calls a Bill
of this kind, (...), D. lib. tit. 2. C. lib. 4. t. 33.
quae de nautico soenore conscripta est, of which nauticum foenus, there are
several Titles in the Digest and Code of the Civil Law, and the moneys so lent
to be transported at the hazard of the Lender, in the Civil law is called
Pecunia trajectitia, of which Salmatius, Pecunia trajectitia dicitur, quae
trans mare vehenda accipitur, D. Vs^ris cap 2.
and usurae quae ex pacto in eam pecuniam praestantur, Maritimae, and nauticae
dicuntur.

Fourthly, Bills of sale of Ships are made conformable to Maritine Laws; for as
West in his Presidents delivers the form, it is in such Bills of sale expressed
and declared, That he that sells the Ship binds himself, his Executors, and
Administrators, the said Ship so bargained and sold, to warrant and defend,
against all men, for one whole year, and a day, according to the Law of Oleron,
the danger of the Sea, Fire, and Enemies, only excepted.

These things being considered, it may be thought reasonable, that such
Contracts and Writings being grounded upon the Civil Law, the Laws amongst
Merchants, and other Maritime Laws, the Suits arising about the same should
rather be determined in those Courts, where the proceedings and Judgments are
according to those Laws, than in other Courts which take no notice thereof.

For the restraining of the Court of Admiralty from proceeding in Suits arising
from such Contracts and Writings made at Land, although the businesses therein
contained, are to be performed at Sea, amongst the Authorities cited by Sir
Edward Cook, there may be intended appliable to this purpose, First the Act of
Parliament of the 15. of Richard the 2. Chap. 15. Secondly, some judgments
given, and Prohibitions granted in the Courts of Common Law, concerning causes
of this sort, commenced in the Admiralty.

Touching the Statute of the 15. of Richard the 2. Chap. 34. which is the
ground of the main Objections against the Admirals Jurisdiction, it may be
conceived, That whereas that of the 13. Chap. only in general restrains the
Admirals from meddling with things done within the Realm, and allows them to
meddle with things done on the Sea, that is relating to the Sea, This Statute
was intended to declare more expressly, both in what places, and in what
matters they should not meddle, And touching the places, in regard the word
Realm, Comment in Littleton Sect. 43.
as Sir Edward Cook observes, in a general sense extends to the Sea within the
Kings Dominions, as well as to the Land, declares the restraint, to be only
within the bodies of Counties, And it may be supposed that he intended a
difference betwixt the Bodies and the Extremities or bounds of Counties, as the
Statute of the 3. of Edward 1. makes a difference betwixt things done within
the Shires, and things done within the Marches, and Borders of Shires, whence
the Statute of the 5. of Elizabeth, Chap. 5. allows to the Admirals
Jurisdiction, as the main Sea, so also the Coasts of the Sea, being no parts of
the Bodies of any Counties of the Realm, and in that respect this Statute
specially excepts from the Admirals Jurisdiction, the Conusance of wreck of
Sea, as happening on the Coasts or Shores of the Sea, out of the bodies of any
Counties, so that as to the place, or Territory of the restraint, this Statute
declares it streighter, than that of the 13. of Richard the second.

Touching the matters, with which the Admiral by this Statute is not to meddle
within the bodies of Counties, they are expressly declared. First Contracts,
Pleas, and Quarrels, That is personal Actions concerning Contracts; and
Secondly are employed matters Criminal, and the prosecution of them.

Touching the First, which concern this Assertion, the words are, That the
Court of Almiralty has no manner of Conusance of any Contract, Plea, or
Quarrel, rising within the bodies of any Counties; But all such Contracts,
Pleas, and Quarrels shall be tried, determined, and remedied by the Common Law.
Which words are so general, that it is pretended, they ought to be understand
of all Contracts, and Writings whatsoever, even of such as concern Sea
businesses, if they be made, or written within the Bodies of any Countries.

In answer whereunto, there may be taken into consideration, a General Rule
cited by Sir Edward Cook, allowed as he says by all Laws, Iurisdict. of Courts
p. 330.
in construction of Statutes, viz. Quamvis lex generaliter loquatur,
restringenda tamen est, ut cessante ratione, and ipsa cesset, cum enim ratio
sit anima, vigorque ipsius legis, non videtur legislatur id sensisse, quod
ratione caret, ^tiamsi verborum generalitas prima facie aliter suadeat. And the
reason of this Statute, as may be gathered from the Praeamble, as the Key
thereof, was to hinder the Admirals encroaching of diverse Jurisdictions,
Franchises, and Profits pertaining to the King, and other Lords, besides those
they were wont or ought to have of right; by which words it is acknowledged,
that the Conusance of some ma^ters did formerly belong to that Jurisdiction;
And not to diminish any of their Ancient and just rights in things belonging to
the Sea, which are permitted, and allowed to the Admiral, by the Statute of the
15. of Richard 2. and unto which neither the Kings Courts, no^ the Courts of
any other Lords had formerly before this Statute any pretense.

Sir Edward Cook in his Answers to the 1. Objection of the Complaint, 8^.
Iacobi, says, That the Judges acknowledge, that of Contracts, Plea^, and
Quarrels made upon the Sea or any part thereof, etc. the Admiralty has and
ought to have Jurisdiction, and that no President can be showed, that any
^rohibition has been granted for any Contract, Plea, or Quarrel concerning any
Marine cause made or done upon the Sea. By which words he implies, that
although the Admiral had and ought to have Jurisdiction upon the Sea, yet it
was only concerning Marine Causes, but if a Contract, Plea, or Quarrel were
made or done upon the Sea concerning any Terrene Cause, or matters concerning
businesses of the County, a Prohibition might be granted. Now it may seem
worthy of Consideration, whether any Reason can be showed why the Courts of
Common Law ought to have cognizance of Contracts, Pleas, and Quarrels which
concern Terrene Causes, or Matters concerning businesses of the County, made or
done upon the Sea; Yet if Contracts, Pleas, or Quarrels, which concern Marine
Causes, or Matters belonging to the Sea, be made or done within the Bodies of
Counties, the Admiral ought not to have the like Cognizance, And if no reason
thereof can be showed, how according to the general Rule which Sir Edward Cook
delivers touching the Construction of Statutes, the common Interpretation which
is made of that of the 15. of Richard 2. Chap. 3. by which Contracts, Pleas,
and Quarrels arising within the Bodies of Counties, are extended to Contracts,
Pleas, or Quarrels relating to Marine affairs, can be justified, the reason of
the Rule being, Cum Ratio sit anima Legis, non videtur Legislator id sensisse,
quod ratione caret, etiamsi Verborum generalitas, prima facie aliter suadeat.

And that the place only, where a Contract is made of written, should alter or
transferr the Jurisdiction to the Courts of Common Law, may seem very
unreasonable, for the reasons following.

First, for that Contracts, Pleas, and Quarrels, being things incorporeal, or
matters of right, may more properly be said to arise from that, from which they
are caused, or occasioned, than from the place where they happen to be made,
and so Contracts, Pleas, and Quarrels occasioned by the businesses of the
County, may be said to arise within the Body of the County, and Contracts,
Pleas, and Quarrels occasioned by the businesses of the Sea, may be said to
arise from the Sea, in what places so ever they happen to be made, or Written.
So it is properly said, Ex facto jus oritur, and actio oritur ex delicto.
Because the Law results from the fact, and the Action is occasioned by the
fault. So where the Jurisdiction of the Admiral of France, is said to be, pour
le fait de la Mer, Mr. Seldom renders it in Latin, Artic. 49.
ob causam aliquam a re maritima ortam, and Salmatius (as before) says, De
Vusuris c. 2.
usurae propter pecuniam trajectitiam praestandae maritimae and nauticae
vocantur, etsi nummi in terris dantur.

Secondly, that the end of a Contract, being to have something performed, and
Pleas and Quarrels are occasioned by the nonperformance, or ill performance of
the same, The place of performance is more considerable, than the place where
the Contract was made, or written; So Ulpian a famous Roman Lawyer says,
Mulier exigere dotem illic debet, l. exigere, D. de Iudiciis.
ubi maritus ^omicilium habet, non ubi instrumentum dotale conscriptum est, nec
enim id genus contractus est, ut tam eum locum spectari oporteat, in quo
instrumentum dotis actum est, quam locum domicilii, in quem mulier per
conditionem matrimonii reditura erat, When a Dowry is to be restored to a Wife,
after her Husbands death or divorce, it is not to be estimated, according to
the value of things where the instrument or deed of the Dowry was made, but
according to the value of the place where the Dowry was to be made good, that
is the place, where her Husband lived.

Thirdly, for that if the Question be whether a Maritime Contract were made or
no, it may be determined by a jury of the place, But if the Plea or Suit be (as
most commonly it is) whether the Contract be performed, or not performed, it
cannot be determined but upon proofs, made from the place of performance, of
which the Vicinage to the place where the Contract was made, can take no
notice, and therefore it is improbable that the Statute should intend that such
Suits should be tried, discussed, and determined only by the Courts and course
of Common Law.

Fourthly, the Common Law is not so strict, but that according to the nature of
the business, it allows Jurisdiction to other Courts; For although Promises and
Contracts of money, are generally Pleadable in the Courts of the Common Law,
Donatio in Matrimonium.
yet as Bracton writes, causae de rebus promissis ob causam matrimonii, in foro
Ecclesiastico terminari debent, quia cujus juris, id, and jurisdictionis, est
principale, ejusdem erit accessorium; And in an other place he gives a reason
for the same, quia semper videndum propter quid aliquid sit, vel promittatur.
And again, although Suits touching Tenures and Services belong to the same
Courts of Common Law, Sect. 136.
yet Littleton shows, That if Tenants in Franck Almain, fail to perform divine
Service, the Lord may complain thereof to the Ordinary; and Sir Edw. Cook in
his Comment thereupon observes, that the Law does appoint every thing to be
done, by those to whose Office it properly appertains, and so says he, the
Lord has remedy for his Divine Service (albeit it issue out of temporal Lands)
in foro Ecclesiastico, by the Ecclesiastical Court. And certainly if what
constructions are made of the Law, were made of this Statute, it would be more
easily admitted, That a Maritime Contract, although made, or written within the
County, should be tried before the Judge of the Admiralty, whose Office it is
to determine Maritime causes.

Thirdly, For the better discerning of the meaning of this Statute, it is
offered to consideration what has been the sense of Parliaments in preceding
and subsequent Statutes; as first in the Statute of the Staple made in the 27
of Edw. the 3. in 3 Chap. where it is declared, That the Mayors and Constables
of the Staple, shall have Jurisdiction and Conusance within the Towns where the
Staple shall be, of all manner of things touching the Staple, which shall be
ruled by the Law Merchant, and not by the Common Law of the Land, nor by the
usage of Cities, Buroughs, or other Towns, etc. So that all manner of
Contracts and Covenants made betwixt Merchant, and Merchant or other, where one
party is a Merchant, whether the Contract be made within the Staple, or
without, the Plaintiff may sue his action or Quarrel before the Justices of the
Staple by the Law of the Staple, unless he make choice to sue in some other
place of the Common Law; from which may be observed, First, That the Merchants
businesses, by the Judgment of the Parliament, were held fitter to be
regulated by a special Law, viz. the Law-merchant, than by the common Laws or
customs of the Countries. Secondly, That where Contracts or Covenants did
concern Merchandise, or matters belonging to the Staple, it was not thought
considerable, to point of Jurisdiction, whether the Contract or Covenant were
made within or without the precincts of the Staple.

The susequent Statutes are that of the 32 of Hen. 8. Chap. 14. which declares
that the Court of Admiralty may hold plea of Charter-parties; and that of the
43 of Elizabeth, Chap. 12. which hinders the Courts of common Law from meddling
with Policies of Assurance, which two things are the main matters endeavored
to be maintained by the Statute of the 15 of Rich. the 2. to belong to the
Conusance of the Courts of common Law, because they are usually made at Land,
within the bodies of Counties.

The Statute of the 32 of Hen. 8. Chapter 14. prohibiting the employment of Foreign
ships, ordained, concerning the shipping of this Kingdom, That the Owners, or
Masters make their departure from the Port of London, after the Freighting, or
Lading of the Ship, as soon as wind and weather will serve, according to the
Charter-party made betwixt the Owner, or Master, and the Merchants, without
protracting of time, and also that they, and every of them to his power, shall
see and provide that all Wares and Merchandises, which shall be by the said
Merchants, and their servants brought into any Ship or Vessel, shall be
honestly and in good order saved and kept; Provided always, that if any
Merchant stranger, or other, find himself grieved, or damnified, by negligent
keeping of his Wares, or Merchandises, or by long delaying, or protracting of
time, in making of the Voyage, by the said Owner, his Master, or any of the
Mariners of the said Ship, otherwise than shall be agreed in, or by the said
Charter-party, not having been le^ten by wind or weather, he shall and may have
his remedy by way of complaint, before the Lord Admiral of England for the time
being, his Lieutenant, or Deputy, against the said Owners or Masters, who shall
or may summarily, and without delay take such order therein, as shall be
thought to their discretions most convenient, and according to right and
justice in that behalf. It is true, that the Cases expressed, are for the
Merchants to recover satisfaction for delay, or damage done to their goods,
according to the Charter-party from the Owners, and the Masters of Ships; and
it were very unreasonable, if the Master or Owner having d^ely performed their
Voyage, might not seek the like remedy before the same Judge against the
Merchants, not observing the Charter-party, either in not Lading their goods
within the time appointed, or not paying the Freight according to agreement in
the same contained and expressed, the causes being hinc inde reciprocal, and it
being sometimes held an absurdity, Illud quod in uno eodemque judicio terminari
potest, apud diversos Iudices ventilari.

The Statute of the 43 of Elizabeth, Chap. 12. declares, That whereas
differences growing upon Policies of Assurance had been ordered by discreet
Merchants, approved by the Lord Mayor, who did speedily decide those Causes,
until that of late years, diverse persons did withdraw themselves from that
arbitrary course, and have sought to draw the parties assured, to seek their
moneys of every several assurers by Sules commenced in her Majesty's Courts, to
their great charges, and delay, thereupon it was enacted, that a Commission
should be granted, giving power to certain Commissioners (the first whereof is
the Judge of the Admiralty) to order and decree such Causes, in a brief and
summary course, without formalities of pleadings and proceedings. Malines
affirms, P. ^ c. 24.
that he amongst others, was one who upon experience of the great
inconveniences which followed upon the drawing of those Causes, to the Courts
of Common Law, solicited the Parliament to pass that Act.

The Legal authorities which may be conceived to be intended to debar the
Admiral from the Conusance of Contracts, and writings made at Land, touching
things to be performed at Sea, or such as show that since the making of the
Statute of the 15 of Rich. 2. Chap. 3. and not before, the Courts of Common Law
have admitted, and held Pleas of Charter-parties, of Policies of Assurance, and
declared something concerning Mariners wages. Touching Charter-parties, it is
showed first that in the 31 of Hen. 6. an Action was brought upon the Statute,
of double damages, by William Hoar against Ieffery Unton, who had sued the said
Hoar in the Admiralty for fourscore pounds upon a Charter-party of Freightment
of a Ship of the said Ieffryes, employed to go toward Island, in regard,
Contractus ille apud novam Sarum infra corpus Comitatus, and non super altum
mare factus, and junctus fuit; whereupon damages were assessed against the
Defendant to an hundred Marks, and costs to 40 l.

Again, that in the 28 of Elizabeth in the Kings Bench, upon a Charter-party,
by a Deed indented which was made at Thetford in the County of Norfolk,
Evangelist Constantine sued Hugh Glynn, for the breach of Covenant, in not
staying at Mu^trel in Spain so many days as were limited by the Covenant,
whereupon he was condemned in 500 l. and in arrest of Judgment it being
showed, That the issue did arise out of a place in a Foreign Kingdom from
whence no Jury by Twelve men might be had, and that therefore the trial was not
sufficient, Sir Christopher Wray, and the whole Bench resolved, that the
Plaintiff should recover 500 l. besides the costs and damages, because the
Charter-party was made at Thetford within the Realm.

Concerning Policies of Assurance, That in the 38 of Hen. 8. in a Case betwixt
Crane and Be^l, touching a promise made at Dartmouth, That the Ship should pass
without taking, which was afterward surprised by the Spaniard upon the high
Sea, it was held not determinable in the Admiralty, for although the taking
were upon the Sea, yet the promise was upon the Land.

Again, that in the 36 of Elizabeth, an Action of the Case was brought in the
Kings Bench upon an Assumpsit, from a Policy of Assurance, where it was
undertaken, That a Ship should sail safely from Melcomb Regis to Abbevil in
France, the Ship being arrested by the French King in the River of Sum, in
the Realm of France, and the matter was there adjudged: ^o which may be added
what Sr Ed. Cook delivers for Law in Dowdales case, Cum combein le contract
comme le performance, etc. when as well the Contract as the performance of it,
is wholly done beyond the Sea, and it so appears, the Trial fails at the Common
Law: But here, says he, the Assumpsit was made at London, which is the ground
and foundation of the Action, and therefore the Trial of necessity shall be
there, or otherwise it shall not be tried at all; and the Arrest which is in
issue is not the ground of the Action, but the Assumpsit, etc.

Touching Mariners wages is, that of the Book of 48 of Edw. 3. where it is
said, That if a Mariner make a Covenant with one to serve in a Ship on the Sea,
yet if his wages be not paid they shall be demanded in that Court, by the
Common Law, Nemy per ley Mariner.

To these Authorities it may be replied in general, that all, but the last, are
grounded upon the commonly received sense of the Statute of the 15. Rich. 2.
that the Contract does rise only there, where it is made or written, with out
any respect to the nature of the business, and the occasion thereof, from
whence in truth it does more properly arise; And whereas other acts of
Parliament have in some special points ordained and declared otherwise, it may
be hoped that it may not be held a crime unexcusable, if a man should doubt of
the reasonableness of those authorities.

Touching the particulars, As First of the 31. of Henry 6. betwixt Hoar and
Unton, wherein double Damages were given for suing in the Admiralty Court upon
a Charter-party, it is said, that the Suit was upon a Charter-party of
Freightment, for four score pounds, It does not appear that it was for the
freight of the Ship, although it be most probable; and if it were so, why the
Master of the Ship should not as well sue for his freight, by virtue of the
Statute of the 32. of Hen. 8. as the Merchant by virtue of the same Statute,
might sue in the Admiralty for damage done to his goods, aboard a Ship,
contrary to the Charter-party, without any respect to the place where it was
made? if no reason can be showed, that Judgment may be thought not to have been
grounded so much upon reason as it was upon the common received opinion of the
meaning of that Statute, as it is therein related, quia contractus ille apud
novam Sarum, factus and junctus fuit. Touching that of the 28. of Elizabeth,
whereby Glynn was condemned to Constantine for breach of Covenant, in a
Charter-party, in the sum of 500. l. it seems a Case far more reasonable,
though something grievous, because it is not denied, but that a suit upon a
Charter-party may be commenced at the Common Law, upon a penalty, as it seems
that was, for breach of Covenant, in not staying at Madrill, so many days as
were limited by the Charter-party, Only that is thought no concluding
argument, against a suit in the Admiralty for freight grounded on a
Charter-party; But whereas when in the Arrest of judgment, it was alleged that
the Trial was not sufficient, because the issue did arise out of a place in a
Foreign Kingdom, from whence no Jury, by Twelve men might be had, Sir Edw. Cook
says that Sir Christopher Wray and the whole bench resolved, That the
Plaintiff should recover cost, and damages, because the Charter-party was made
at Thetford in Norfolk, within the Realm, it is as much as if Sir Edw. Cook had
said, that whether the suggestion in the issue, were true or false, tried by a
competent, or incompetent Jury, yet if the suit were brought upon a
Charter-party, the Conusance thereof did belong to the Common Law, and whether
the former Judges, had proceeded well or not, was not material, so that what is
premised formerly touching Judgments and judicial Acts, in the First Chap. may
from this case be excused.

And as touching the infinite prohibitions granted upon suits commenced in the
Admiralty concerning Charter-parties, there may be something declared, and made
appear reasonable hereafter, in an other place.

As to the instances of Policies of assurance held tryable at the Common Law,
although by the Statute of the 43. of Elizabeth, it has been showed, that the
proceedings in those causes at the Common Law, were altogether inconvenient to
the Kingdom, yet in regard Sir Edward Cooks reasons in Dowdales case for the
maintaining of proceedings in such businesses, may be applied to other matters,
to the prejudice of the Admiralty Jurisdiction, something may be observed
concerning the same, in Sir Edward Cooks reasons, as first, That the Assumpsit
is the ground, and foundation of the Action, and that the Arrest, or Imbargo in
that case had been no ground of an Action, if there had been no Assumpsit,
neither could the Assumpsit have produced an Action, if there had not been an
Arrest. But what was the nearest, and immediate ground of the Action? without
doubt, the Arrest, And what was chiefly in question? not the Assumpsit, for it
was taken for granted, that that was done in London; but it was the Arrest,
which (as it was declared) was in issue; And it is likely that the Common Law
which intended a Trial of the Vicinage, intended it of the thing or matter
which was in issue, to be tried. But he further argues, That the Trial must be
of necessity where the Assumpsit is made, for otherwise there could have been
no Trial, at the Common Law, which might have savored of some reason, If
possibly there could have been no Trial in any other Court, but the Cause being
Maritime, and amongst Merchants, it might more properly, have been tried in the
Admiralty or in the Assurance Court, without a Jury, or Trial of Twelve men, by
witnesses, as Fortescue acknowledges.

Thirdly, touching that of the Book of 48. of Edward the 3. where it is said,
That if a Mariner make Covenant only to serve in a Ship on the Sea, yet if the
wages be not paid, they shall be demanded in that Court, by the Common Law, not
by the Law Mariner, the occasion was, that an action of debt being b^ought at
the Common Law, upon an Obligation dated at Harflet in Kent, whereas in truth
it was made in Normandy, and the consideration was Service done in War in
France, thereupon one of the Judges said, That the sum demanded growing due
for Service done in War, the Cause ought to be tried in the Constable, and
Marshals Court; Another (as it seems willing to retain the cause) said that he
hired a man to go in a message to Rome, although the service were done in
another Realm, yet what was due by covenant, might be recovered in that Court;
Another said, if a Mariner make a Covenant with one to serve in a Ship on the
Sea, yet if his wages be not paid, they shall be demanded by the Common Law,
etc. So that it is plain it was not a Resolution of the Court, but a fuit dic,
as they say, and one man's opinion, by way of argument to another purpose; And
the ground thereof might be, that if it were in issue whether such a Covenant
were made, it might be tried at the Common Law, but it does not conclude but
that if the Question were, whether the service in the Ship were performed on
the Sea, it might more properly be tried in the Admiralty Court.

For confirmation on this point.

First, To the 4. Request of the Judge of the Admiralty to the Lord Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench 12. May, 1575. viz. That the Judge of the Admiralty
may have and enjoy the knowledge of the breach of Charter-parties made between
Masters of Ships and Merchants for voyages to be made to the parts beyond the
Sea, according as it has been accustomed, time out of mind, and according to
the good meaning of the Statute of 32. Hen. 8. chap. 14. though the same
Charter-parties be made with in the Realm, The answer is, This is agreed upon
for things to be performed upon, or beyond the Seas, though the Charter-party
be made upon the Land, by the Statute of 32. Hen. 8. chap. 14.

Secondly, it was agreed unto by all the Judges and Attorney General before the
King and his Counsel, That if a Suit be before the Admiral, for Freight or
Mariners wages, or for breach of Charter-parties for Voyages to be made beyond
the Sea, although the Charter-parties happen to be made with in the Realm, and
although the money be payable within the Realm, so as the penalty be not
demanded, a Prohibition is not to be granted. But if the Suit be for the
penalty, or if the Question be made whether the Charter-party were made or not,
or whether the party did release, it is to be tried by the Kings Court at
Westminster, So that at first it be denied upon Oath that a Charter-party was
made, or a denial upon Oath tendered, to which it may be added, that it was
there further agreed, That if Suit shall be made in the Court of Admiralty, for
building, amending, saving, or necessary victualling of a Ship, against the
Ship it self, and not against any party by name, but such as for his interest
makes himself a party, no Prohibition is to be granted, though this be done
within the Realm.

Assert. 6
That the Admiral of England may hold Conusance of things done in Ports, and
Navigable Rivers, as touching Damages done to persons, Ships, and goods,
Annoyances of the Public passage, and unlawful fishing.
FIrst it is apparent that Ports, and Navigable Rivers are places where
Maritime businesses, and causes of difference concerning the same, may happen,
as well as on the main Sea it self, and in truth are more proper for such
affairs, than for any ordinary businesses of the Land, Portus (says Ulpian)
est locus conclusus quo importantur merces and exportantur, l. 39. D. de verb.
signif*
and importation, and exportation of goods do chiefly concern Navigation, and
Merchants affairs.

Secondly, Flumina navigabilia, that is navigable Rivers, are of the same
condition and use, and it is allowed by the Common Law, that every water which
flows and reflows, is an Arm of the Sea, and Mr. Seldom maintains that
Navigable Rivers, are in the Kings special Dominion, De Dominio Maris lib. 2.
cap. 18.
and Protection, and under the King, within the Jurisdiction of the Admiral:
for he showing the difference betwixt the Admiral of France, and the Admiral of
England, says, the Government of Rivers, which are in the Dominion of the King
of France, belongs not to the Admiral of France, but to the special
Jurisdiction of those who are called the Presidents or Masters of the Waters,
and Forests: for the Public Rivers, as he affirms, within the limits of that
Kingdom, belong wholly to another Office, and not to that of the Admiral, as
it does to the Admiral of England.

Thirdly, it is evident by the Judgments of Oleron, established for Law in the
Admiralty of England, That many causes are resolved concerning Damages done by
one Ship to another, sailing in the River, and for falling foul one upon
another, in the Port or Harbor, as also for loss done to Merchants goods in
the Ports of discharge, by miscarriage, in the unloading, by reason of unfit
coardage, and tackling. It may likewise be showed out of the Inquisition taken
at Quinborough, that many things done in Ports and Navigable Rivers, are within
the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, as Ship-wrights taking excessive wages,
removing of Anchors, cutting of Buoy ropes, and taking Salmon at unseasonable
times, the using of unlawful Nets, the spoiling of Beds of Oysters, the
dregging for Oysters and Mussells at unseasonable times, and diverse other
matters. Against the Admirals Jurisdiction in this respect are pretended
likewise Statutes, Book-cases, Judicial Acts, etc. by which it is endeavored
to be proved, That the Admirals Jurisdiction is confined only to the high Sea,
and wholly excluded from things done in Ports, and Navigable Rivers, which are
said to be within the bodies of the Counties of the Realm. The first Statute is
that of 15. Richard 2. which declares, that the Court of Admiralty has no
manner of Conusance, Power, or Jurisdiction of any Contract, etc. or any other
thing rising within the Bodies of Counties, either by Land, or by Water; which
later part is so General, and uncertain, that according to the General rule
delivered by Sir Edw. Cook before mentioned, lex generaliter loquens
restringenda est, etc. for by the general understanding of it, as it is most
generally understood, by the Professors of the Common Law, it does not only
debarr the Admiral from the Conusance of those causes, which he is supposed to
have encroached to the prejudice of the Courts of Common Law, but also from the
Conusance of those things, which they were wont, or ought to have of right,
contrary to the express meaning of the Praeamble of that Statute, as all those
Causes which before this Statute did belong to the Admiral by the Roll of
Oleron, and the Inquisition at Quinborough.

But it may reasonably, and probably be conceived, that the Statute intending
to restrain the Admirals Jurisdiction, intended by the words, Other things in
general, such things, about which Actions and Suits at the Common Law might
arise, And having before mentioned Contracts, Pleas, and Quarrels, wherein
private persons might have an interest by way of personal Actions, did
afterward add other things arising within the Bodies of Counties, intending
thereby public offenses, and such as are against the Crown, as Treason,
Murder, Manslaughter, Mayhemes, Robbery, Trespasses vt and armies, and the
like, which interpretation, First is agreeable to the Praeamble, which mentions
encroachments upon the Jurisdiction, etc. pertaining to the King. Secondly,
because the Statute ordaining that such things shall be tried, discussed, and
determined by the Laws of the Land, and not before the Admiral; seems to intend
things, which might be tried either way, as Offenses of that Nature, which done
on the Sea, might have been tried before the Admiral, and being done on the
Land were to be tried in the Courts of Common Law. Thirdly, because the
reservation in the conclusion of the Statute Provides, that nevertheless of the
death of a man, or Mayheme done in great Ships, being, and hovering in the main
stream beneath the Bridges next to the Sea, the Admiral shall have Conusance,
which being in the nature of an Exception, implies, that the things before
mentioned in general, were to be understood of Offenses, or matters of the same
nature, and condition.

Sir Edward Cook where he cites the Statute of 15. Rich. 2. notes, that it was
to be observed, how curious the makers of it were, to exclude the Admiral from
all manner of Jurisdiction, within any Water which lies within any County of
the Realm; but if his words be considered, his curiosity goes far beyond them,
for whereas the words of the Statute Anciently and generally have been
received, only beneath the Bridges next or nigh the Sea, he renders it only
beneath the Points of the same Rivers, The French word Pounts, being easily
turned into Points, which Criticism might have the better passed, if it might
be known what were meant by Points of Rivers; we understand by Points of Land,
some extreme parts or ends, which in respect of the rest, are of a more accute
figure, but Rivers toward the Sea, (which way the Criticism looks) grow
broader, or wider, far from any Angular acuteness; Again, we commonly say
above, or b^neath the bridge; but if we speak of the extremites, we say
behither or beyond, within or without the Lands end; besides, whereas the words
in that place are ships riding in the main stream of Navigable Rivers, it may
be doubted where that main stream can be found beneath the points of the River.

The former reading of the Statute, viz. beneath the Bridges, is agreeable to
an ancient Edition of the Statutes at large printed 1543. above a hundred years
since; so Rastals Abridgement, and Poultons Collection of the Statutes, and is
so received by Crompton in his Jurisdiction of Courts, where he writes of the
Admiralty, according to the Statutes. It is further confirmed by a manuscript
Copy of the Statutes in French, in the Library of Merton College in Oxford, in
which are these words, Niene meyns de mort de omme, and de mayheme, engrosses
neifs, estants and o^erant^s, a my le haut fio des grosses reviers tant
seculament, par-avali des pounts, des mesmes les riviers, and L'n Admiral
co^usance.

The second Statute that may be applied to this purpose is that of 5 Elizabeth,
Chap. 5. which relating to diverse things made offenses by that Statute,
ordains, that all and every of the said offenses, done on the main Sea, or
Coasts of the Sea, being no part of the bodies of any Counties of the Realm,
and without the Precinct, Liberty and Jurisdiction of the Cinque Ports, and out
of any Haven or Pier, shall be determined by the Lord Admiral.

Touching this Statute it may be observed, That the end thereof was according
to the Title, for the maintenance of the Navy, and as for a mean to that end,
for the employing of English shipping, especially for the bringing in of Fish,
for which purpose it provides, That Wednesdayes should be held Fish-dayes; That
none shall demand toll of Fish brought in Subjects ships; That no Herring
unsalted should be bought out of strangers bottoms; besides, that no Wares
should be carried from Port to to Port; and that no Wine, nor Woad shall be
brought in but in English ships, of which businesses it might be more fit for
the Officers of Corporate Sea-Towns to enquire, than for the Admiral, which the
Parliament understanding, might without prejudice to his Jurisdiction in other
matters except from him touching offenses of that kind, the enquiry within
Havens and Piers.

Besides, whereas Sir Edw. Cook recites the words, That all such Offenses shall
be tried before the Admiral; the words of the Sta^ute are, before the Lord
Admiral of England, or his Lieutenant or Deputy or Deputies, and other Justices
of Oyer and Terminer, according to the form of the Statute of the 28 Hen. 8.
for Causes of Piracy. So that it concerns not the Admiral in his ordinary
capacity, but as he is chief in that Commission. And whereas Sir Edw. Cook from
this concludes, That by the Judgment of the whole Parliament, the Jurisdiction
of the Admiral is wholly confined to the Sea, and Coasts of the Sea, being no
parcel of the County, how strongly soever he conceives it, under favor it is
no good argument, to infer from these new created offenses, of which he is to
enquire in an extraordinary way, that he has no Jurisdiction in other matters,
which did formerly belong unto him, especially touching Navigable Rivers, of
which in this Statute there is no mention, nor exception.

Moreover, whereas the Judgment of the Parliament in this Statute is so
confidently urged for the limiting of the Admirals Jurisdiction, it is de^^red,
that to the points in question, two other Statutes, the one long subsequent to
that of Rich. 2. the other not long preceding that of the 5 of Queen Elizabeth,
may be taken into consideration.

The first is that of 28 Hen. 8. Chap. 15. concerning the trial of Piracies,
and other crimes committed within the Admirals Jurisdiction, wherein it is
declared, That all Treasons, Felonies, Murders, Robberies, Confederacies
committed in or upon the Sea, or in any other Haven, Creek or place, where the
Admiral, or Admirals have, or pretend to have Jurisdiction, shall be enquired,
tried, heard, or adjudged by the Admiral, and others appointed by the Kings
Commission under the Great Seal, in such shires and places of the Realm as
shall be limited in the Commission, as if any such offense had been committed
upon the Land, etc.

The end of this Statute was, that whereas Piracies, and other offenses
committed within the Jurisdiction of the Admiralty, were formerly tried
according to the Civil Law, and Offenders could be convicted only by
confession of the parties, and proofs by Witnesses, to reduce the Trial of the
same to the course of the Common Law by a Jury of Twelve men; by which Statute,
although the Manner of the trial of Offenses were altered, yet the Limits of
the Admirals Jurisdiction are allowed to extend not only to the Sea, but to
Havens, Creeks and places, where the Admiral, or Admirals have, or pretend to
have Jurisdiction. And in the Commission of Oyer and Terminer grounded on that
Statute, the places of Offenses committed, to be heard and determined before
the Admiral, and others, are thus described, Tam in aut super mari, aut aliquo
portu, rivo, Aqua dulci, Creca, seu loco quccunque infra fluxum maris ad
plenitudinem, a quibuscunque primis pontibus versus mare, quam super littus
maris, and alibi ubicunque infra jurisdictionem nostram Maritimam, aut limits
Admiralitatis Regni nostri, and Dominiorum nostrorum: By which words, not only
power is given to hear and determine offenses in those places; but it is
likewise declared that those places do belong to his Majesty's Maritime
Jurisdiction, and of his Admiralty.

The second Statute is that of the first of Elizabeth, Chap. 17. made for the
preservation of Spawn and fry of Fish, and the remedies thereof being provided,
it is ordained, That the Lord Admiral of England, and the Lord Mayor of London
for the time being, and all and every other, which lawfully have, or ought to
have any conservation, or preservation of any Rivers, streams or waters, shall
have power to enquire according to that Act, which plainly shows, that the
Parliament then conceived, that the Admiral of England had power and
Jurisdiction to some purposes in Rivers and Streams, salt and fresh, otherwise,
he had not been named in the first place, amongst those who had right of
conservation of the same.

The Jurisdiction of the Admiralty as to public offenses and causes criminal
since the Statute of 15 Rich. 2. has been so well settled by the Statute of 28
Hen. 8. that there can be little occasion of difference touching those matters
betwixt the Courts of the common Law, and the Court of the Admiralty; yet Sir
Edw. Cook having unnecessarily collected many other legal authorities which may
be applied to maintain that by the Common Law the Admirals Jurisdiction did not
extend to Ports and Navigable Rivers, it may not be amiss to examine the
grounds and weight of the chiefest of them, which may be reduced to two heads;
First, such as show that Havens and Navigable Rivers are within the bodies of
Counties, and that the common Law has held plea of things done in them.
Secondly, That the Courts of common Law have punished such as have sued in the
Admiralty Court, for things done in Ports and Navigable Rivers.

Touching the first, these Authorities might be intended.

First, That in the time of Edw. the first, a Replevin was brought for the
taking of a ship on the coasts of Scarborough in the Sea, and carrying her into
the County of N. The Defendant although he pleaded that the thing was done on
the Sea, was overruled to answer, from whence amongst other things Sr Edw. Cook
makes a special observation, That when the taking of a thing is partly on the
Sea, and partly on the Land, the Common Law shall have the Jurisdiction.

Secondly, That in the time of Edw. the 2. It was held, That where one may see
what is done on one part of the water, and on the other, it was held no part of
the Sea, and that the Coroner shall exercise his office in this case, and of
this the Country may have knowledge.

Thirdly, That in the 43 of Edw. the third, sixty Acres of Marsh ground over
which the Sea did flow and reflow, were adjudged parcel of the Manor of
Brancaster, belonging to the Abbot of Ramsey, and by consequence were within
the body of the County to the low water mark.

Fourthly, That in the 46 of Edw. 3. an Action of Trespass being brought in the
Kings Court against certain persons of Hull, for taking a ship in the Haven of
the Town, the Mayor and Bailiffs demanded Conusance by Charter of the King, by
which it is granted, that the Citizens and Burgesses of Hull, should not be
impleaded, Alibi de transgressionibus infra Burgum, quam infra Burgum, which
was allowed, and the Haven lying within the Borough, by consequence was within
the County.

How far these Authorities conduce to the proof of the head proposed, may be
doubted, but as to the ground of the head it self, which is so much insisted
on, That where the Courts of Common Law have Conusance, the Court of Admiralty
can have no Jurisdiction, under favor it is insufficient, for in the same
place several Courts to several purposes may have distinct Jurisdictions,
Robberies and diverse other Offenses committed in forests, are prosecuted before
the ordinary Justices, and yet the Justice in Air concerning vert, Iurisdict.
of Courts p. 283. lib. 2. de Eaux and Forests art. 1. cap. 1.
venison and other things retains his special Jurisdiction. In France as
Sanction writes, the Lords of manors adjoining to Navigable Rivers, have
several rights of fishing, and other commodities, by the Kings grant or by
prescription, and if they be disturbed they may have their remedies, in the
Ordinary Courts of Justice, but as touching the free use of the Rivers in
respect of Navigation, and that which concerns the Public, the special
Officers called the Masters of the Waiters, (whose Authority in this Kingdom
belongs unto the Admiral) have the charge thereof, and if any Impediments be
given, or Annoyances done in those respects, it belongs to their Jurisdiction
and power to reform the same.

Touching the particulars, and first of that of the Replevin in the time of
Edw. 1. concerning a Ship taken in the Sea, and brought into a River, and the
defendants being overruled to answer, the Reason was, as Berry the Chief
Justice said, because the King would have the peace kept, as well by Sea, as by
Land, Mr. Seldom in his notes upon Fortescue, cap. 32. p. 31.
recites the case more fully and gives another reason, viz. That William Crake
de Holtham was summoned to answer a complaint of Robert de Beause, for taking
away a Ship of the value of 40. l. on the Sea, near Scarborough, to which it
was pleaded by the Counsel, that the Plaintiff did count or declare of a thing
taken on the Sea, out of any County, So that if the matter were put in issue
before the Country, it could not be resolved what Sheriff should summon the
Country, and that the Admiral was appointed by the King to hear and determine
suits of things done on the Sea, etc. Whereunto Berry Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas answered, we have a general power throughout all England, but of
the power of the Admirals of which you speak, we know nothing, neither will we
assign our power to them, without commandment from the King, touching which you
show nothing; Haward said, The place is so near, that if a man had killed one
there, he should have been taken, and brought to the Land, and hanged, as well
as if the fact had been committed on the Land; Mettinggam said more, we tell you
that we have power of things done on the Sea, as upon the Land, and therefore
we order you to answer; The reason which Mr. Seldom gives, was because in those
times the Common Law had Conusance of things done on the British Sea within the
view of the Land, although afterward it kept its limits, infra corpus
comitatus, Leaving the Sea wholly to the Admiral; So that according to the
Verse, sometimes applied by Sir Edward Cook, Iudic^s officium est, ut res ita
tempora rerum Quaerere, the case adjudged in the time of Edw. ^. can be no
president for subsequent times, when the Admiralty Jurisdiction was better
settled; and so it falls out with Sir. Edw. Cooks observation upon that case,
viz. That when the taking of a thing is partly in the Sea, and partly in a
River, within the County, the common Law shall have the Jurisdiction, because
that in later times, it has been resolved otherwise, as in the Mayor of
Harwich his case, which was, That the Vice Admiral of England having seized a
Mast floating on the Sea, caused certain Fishermen to draw it to shore at
Harwich in Suffolk, where the Mayor then claiming Admiralty Jurisdiction,
likewise seized it, for which he being sued in the Admiralty Court of England,
moved for a Prohibition; but the Judges were of opinion that it did be^ong to
the Admiral of England, and denied a Prohibition, because the ^eizure at Sea,
and drawing to shore at Harwich was one continued act; and therefore the
drawing it to shore at Har^ich, gave no right to the Mayor of Harwich. The like
may be gathered from a Resolution in communi banco, 40 Eliza. viz. An
Inhabitant of Ply^outh, being Owner of a ship, joined in the furnishing and
victualling her, and sent her to Sea, in which employment the Captain of the
ship by Piracy took a French man's ship laden with salt, and brought her into
Plymouth, and sold his salt to the Owner; whereupon the French men sued the
Plimouth-man being Owner, in the Admiralty Court, for the Ships goods, and upon
suggestion that part of the wrong was done upon the Land, a Prohibition was
awarded, but after a long debate, a Consultation was granted, because the first
wrong was done upon the Sea.

Secondly, Touching the Coroners exercising his Office (in the time o^ Edw. 2.)
in an Arm of the Sea, where one might see what was done on on^ side, and on the
other; whereupon Standford concludes that by the Com^mon Law, before the
Statute of the 2 Hen. 4. (or rather of 15 of Rich. 2.) the Admiral had no
Jurisdiction, but on the high Sea, which only Authority, sait^ Sir Edward
Cook, was sufficient to overrul^ all Questions. It may be observed wha^ was
delivered in the precedent Case concerning those times; and it may b^ further
noted what Mr. Seldom writes (...) the power and authority of the Sheriffs in
those times, Lib. 2. c. ^4 p. 188.
Saeculis priscis antequam summorum Admirallorum authoritas, etc. In ancient
times before the Authority of the high Admirals of England was sufficiently
established by our Kings, and so distinguished, that the Government of the Sea
did wholly belong unto ihem, the Sheriffs had some Authority in the Sea
adjoining to the County, which did appear in that they did execute the Kings
Precepts upon the Sea, and convey the Kings ships from one Port to another,
through the Seas, which was done about the time of Hen. the 3. and of Edw. ^he
1. but in subsequent times, it was never ^eard of, postquam omnimoda Maris
custodia, etc. after that all manner of guarding the Sea, etc. was by our Kings
re^erred to the high Admiral, and to them ^nely and their Deputies, which now
belon^s unto them by right unquestionable. In which times if the Coroner did
exercise is office, where at this time he cannot, ^or the reason aforesaid, it
may be ^ranted, but no good argument can be ^rawn from those times to the times
^ollowing, when the Admiralty Juris^iction was better settled.

Thirdly, The authority of the Marsh grounds, over which the Sea did flow and
reflow, adjudged to be within the Manor of Brancaster in the time of Edw. the
3. whence it is concluded to be within the County, is taken up by Sir Edw.
Cool upon the credit of Dyer: But Sergeant Callis in his Readings cites the
Record in this manner, Contra Abbot de Ramsey de quodam processu facto, versus
dictum Abbot, ad ostendendum quare sexaginta acrae Marisci in manum Domini
Regis non debent seiziri. Et Abbas respondet quod ipsa tenet Manerium de
Brancaster quod scituatum est iuxta Mare, and quod est ibidem Mariscus qui
aliquando per Fluxum Maris minoratur, aliquando per Fluxum Mardo augetur, etc.
By which it is apparent, that those grounds were claimed by that King, as waste
and floted grounds, and no parcel of the Manor, which the Abbot did justify,
and howsoever they might be part of the County, yet they could not be places
concerning which there might grow any question of Jurisdiction, for although
they were subject to flowing and reflowing of the Sea yet they were not either
fit for the sailing, nor arriving of Ships; and admitting that some thing may
be inferre^ from thence to prove that places where the Sea flows may be
within the bodies of Counties, yet it does not wholly exclude the Admiral from
having Jurisdion, by Sir Edw. Cooks learning, in Sir Henry Constables Case,
where he shows, That it has been resolved by the whole Court, that the soil
over which the Sea does flow and reflow, inter le High Water mark, and the
Low Water mark, the Land may be parcel of a Manor of a subject, and yet it was
resolved, That when the Sea did flow ad plenitudinem, the Admiral should have
Jurisdiction of any thing done upon the water, betwixt the High Water mark, and
the Low Water mark, by the ordinary and natural course of the Sea, and when the
Sea does reflow the Land may appertain to a subject, and then any thing done
upon the Land shall be tried at the Common Law, for it is then parcel of the
County, whereupon he makes an observation, That beyond the Low Water mark the
Admiral always has Jurisdiction, and betwixt the High Water mark, and the
Low Water mark, the Common Law, and the Admiralty have divisum imperium
interchangeably, and why the same should not hold as well in Arms of the Sea,
as in the open Sea, may deserve some consideration.

Fourthly, The allowance of the Common Law of the Haven of Hull to be within
the Borough, in respect of an Action of Trespass determinable at the Common
Law, for the reasons before showed in general, it does not hinder but that in
the same place if damage be done by one ship to another, remedy may be given
according to the Judgments in the Roll of Oleron, and so in respect of the
place, though not of the cause, the Common Law, and the Admiralty may have
conjunctum imperium occasionally.

Secondly, There remain those Authorities which show that the Courts of Common
Law have punished, and restrained such as have sued in the Admiralty for things
done in Havens, and Navigable Rivers, as by actions of double Damages,
Praemuniries, and Prohibitions.

Touching the first it is related, That 6 Hen. 6. John Burton in the Common
Pleas recovered against Bartholomew Putt, for double damages 1400 l. for that
the said Putt had sued Burton in the Admiralty for entering and taking away
three ships with Merchandises and Prisoners, with force of Arms, Super Al^um
mare, whereas the taking thereof was in the Haven of Bristol, intra corpus
Comitatus.

Again, That the like Action 12 of Henry 6. was brought by Robert Cupper,
against John Reyner, who had sued him in the Admiralty Court for entering his
ship in the Haven of Yarmouth, infra Corpus Comitatus Norf.

Secondly, Concerning Praemunires, it is said, That 38 of Hen. 6, one was
brought by John Cassy, against Richard Beauchamp, and Thomas Paunce, for that
they sued him in the Admiralty Court for taking away certain Jewels super Altum
mare, whereas he took them apud Stratford-Bow infra corpus Comitatus
Middlesexiae.

Again, That in the 9 of Hen. 7. a Praemunire was brought for a S^te in the
Admiralty Court for taking and carrying away, Quandam naviculam apud Horton
Key, at South Lynn, supposing the same to have been done super altum mare.

It cannot be denied but that these Authorities especially contain forcible
Arguments, and fit to fright men from suing in the Admiralty Court, but how
reasonable, it may be considered.

Touching the Action of double Damages, in the leading Case of Burton against
Put, the point of Issue was (as it may be supposed) whether the thing done in
the River of Bristol, were done within the body of the County, and eight Terms
(as Sir Edw. Cook relates) were spent in deliberation of the Case, which argues
that the Judges could not easily agree upon the same, and happily the reason
was, because the Statute of Henry 4. for double Damages, relates only to that
of the 13 of Richard the 2. chap. 5. and the Action was laid upon that of the
15 Richard the 2. chap. 3. Touching things done within the Bodies of Counties,
it being not proper to extend a penal Law from one Statute to another; and how
rightly it was so adjudged, may be better considered; and it may be thought
upon, why that being a leading Case, and having received so long deliberation,
the Reasons of the Resolutions of the Judges are no way published.

It may be farther noted as to our purpose, that the taking of Ships in the
Haven of Bristol was done with force of Arms, which made it more than an
ordinary business, of which the Admiral claims the Conusance in such places,
but was of the condition of those matters which belong unto him only upon the
Sea; the other Cases of double Damages, for ought appears to the contrary,
might be for matters of Trespass, committed likewise by Force and Arms.

Touching Praemunires brought for suing in the Admiralty Court, Sir Edw. Cook
says, That they being brought upon the Statute of the 16 of King Rich. 2. for
suing in Curia Romana aut alibi, are so evident, and of so dangerous a
consequence, as no application shall be made thereof. And for the dangerous
consequence it is most true, for that the penalty intended in that Statute
extends to the imprisonment of the person during pleasure, and the loss of all
his goods, and of the profits of his Lands during life; and for the application
which he forbears, it may be conceived that his meaning was that the Admiral,
or his Judge might be made liable thereunto; but for the Evidence that by Curia
Romana aut alibi, the Court of Admiralty should be understood, under his favor
it is not so clear; nor if the Statute be well considered, can it with any
reason be maintained; the word Alibi, or elsewhere in that Statute was in truth
intended of Avignion in France, or some other place, to which the Pope and his
Court in those times did usually remove; and that Statute being intended to
exclude the foreign authority of the Pope, it might be thought necessary to
debar the people of this Kingdom from having intercourse to the Popes
Consistory, whether at Rome or any where else; and when the Popes authority and
his Laws were in force in this Kingdom, and no way depending upon the Crown,
the word Alibi, or elsewhere, was held to extend to Bishops Courts, if they
meddled with temporal causes belonging to the Kings Courts, especially if they
took upon them to reverse, or disparage Judgments given in the Courts of
Common Law; but how the word Alibi should be applied to the Kings Court of
Admiralty, never relating to any Foreign power, and proceeding only by those
Laws which are allowed by the King to be in force in that Court, it is a
mystery beyond any ordinary imagination. It may be further noted, that although
it be said that the two Praemunires were brought upon such occasions, yet it
does not appear that any Judgment was given upon either of them.

Lastly, For confirmation and conclusion of this Point, it may be added, that
before the King and his Council it was likewise agreed unto by all the Judges,
That the Admiral may inquire of, and redress all Annoyances and obstructions in
Navigable Rivers beneath the first Bridges, that are any impediment to
Navigation and passage to and from the Sea; and also try all personal Contracts
and injuries done there which concern Navigation upon the Sea, and that no
Prohibition is to be granted in such Cases.

Assert 7
That the Admiral of England may hold Plea of Contracts, and other things done
beyond the Sea, relating to Navigation and Trade by Sea.
TO maintain that the Court of Admiralty may hold Plea of Contracts, and other
things done beyond the Sea; B. b. p. 3. and p. 157.
It is alleged, First, That by an Ordinance made by King Edward the first, and
his Lords, at Hastings, which is extant in the ancient Book of Admiralty, it
was ordained that Charum Contract, etc. That every Contract made between
Merchant and Merchant, or betwixt Merchant and Mariner beyond the Sea, or
within the flood-mark, shall be tried before the Admiral, and no ways
elsewhere.

Secondly, It may be taken into consideration, That such businesses amongst
Merchants and Seamen, are to be determined according the Civil Law, and equity
thereof, as also according to the customs and usages of the Sea; Mr. Seldom in
his Notes upon Fortescue, observes out of Bartolus, Quod in Curia mercatorum
debet judicari ex aequo and bono, omissis juris solennitatibus, which the
Admiralty Judges may, and do observe, but the Courts of Common Law hold they
must do otherwise. P. 1. c. 13.
Malines relates an instance of a Merchant-stranger, who having sold
Commodities to three several Merchants of London, took one Bond of them all for
the payment of 300 l. and one of them breaking, and being imprisoned, he was
contented to compound with him for the fifth part of his Debt, or for 20 l. in
lieu of a 100 l. conceiving him as a third party to be liable for no more; and
having received that sum, gave him a release, and afterward the two other
parties neglecting to pay him their parts he was advised to sue them at the
Common Law, where he was given to understand, That if a man release one of his
debtors, who is bound with others, by way of acquittance, they are all released
and acquitted thereby, which was contrary to the rule of Equity, and that
simplicity and just dealing which is expected amongst Merchants, which do not
admit that a man's action should operate beyond his intention, and that a favor
yielded to one in necessity, should not extend further to his prejudice, in
respect of those which were in better condition.

Thirdly, to the like purpose, it is observed, that in Contracts and Bargains,
betwixt such persons, those solemnities are not required which are necessary in
Deeds at the Common Law, as of signing, sealing and delivering, to make their
Bills and Obligations of force, and the bearers of such Bills according to the
course of Merchants, shall be admitted to demand, and recover without Letters
of Attorney.

Fourthly, It is considerable, that Instruments made beyond the Sea, have
usually Clauses relating to the Civil Law, and to the Law of the Sea. Malines
shows, P. 1. c. 13.
That when two or three take up money at interest, and all bind themselves as
Principals, generally according to the Civil Law and custom of Merchants,
every person is bound, but for his own part, and therefore, where it is
intended, that for the better security, every man should be bound in solidum,
in the instrument of the Contract, there is a declaration and renunciation made
of all privileges, and especially of those which are called, Exceptio
divisionis, and ordinis excussiones, and beneficii Epistolae divi Adriani. In
Wests Presidents concerning Merchants affairs, there are the like forms, as
where a man obligat se haeredes and Executores suos, omnia bona mobilia and
immobilia, praesentia and futura, tam ultra quam citra mare, ubicunque
existentia, renuncians omnibus and singulis exceptionibus, etc. and amongst the
rest he declares the form of a gneral procuration to sue for Debts in a Foreign
Country, wherein it is specified that power is given ad Libelles, Petitiones,
etc. articulos dandum, datisque respondendum, ad Lites contestandum, and de
calumnia vitand^ juramentum, in animam constituentium praestandum; all which
are as strange to the Law of this Land, as the places from whence they proceed.

Fifthly, For that, as Fortescue affirms, Contracts and Bargains made amongst
strangers in another Realm, must be proved (otherwise than in the Courts of
Common Law) by witnesses, which, says he, comes to pass, because in those
parts there be no neighbors, by whose oaths Juries of twelve men may be made,
as in Contracts and other cases arising within the Realm, is accustomed to be
done.

To avoid the Admirals Jurisdiction in holding Pleas of Contracts, or things
done beyond the Sea, Sir Ed. Cook affirms, that Bargains and Contracts so made,
wherein the Courts of Common Law cannot administer Justice, did belong to the
Constable and Marshal, for the Jurisdiction of the Admiral is wholly confined to
the Sea, which is out of any County; whence it may be gathered, that as to this
point he intends for Authorities the Statutes of the 13 of Richard 2. which
sets forth the Jurisdiction both of the Constables and Marshals Court, as also
of the Court of the Admiralty.

That concerning the Constable and Marshal, is as far from the purpose, as it
was from Sir Edward Cooks thought to give any addition of power to that Court.
The Act declares, That to the Constable and Marshal it belongs to have
Conusance of Contracts, and Deeds of Arms out of the Realm, whence it is
inferred, that therefore out of the Realm, the Admiral shall have no Conusance
of Contracts, or matters concerning Navigation, and Trade; It may be better
argued from that Act, That as the Parliament allowed to the Constable and
Marshal, Jurisdiction in Causes of Arms, and War, arising both within and
without the Realm, which cannot be determined by the Common Law, so it did
intend Causes of Navigation and Trade arising either within or beyond the Seas,
to be tried by the Admiral, The nature and the Quality of the business, more
Conducing to the point of Jurisdiction, than the Circumstances of the place
where it happens; The Statute which allows the Admiral to meddle with things
done upon the Sea, by Sir Edward Cooks leave, does not confine his Jurisdiction
to the Sea, in respect of any place beyond the Sea, It is rather ^retended to
debarr him from meddling with things done within the Realm, which
notwithstanding, it being formerly showed, that the Admiral may ^old plea of
Maritime Causes arising from Contracts made within the Land, (...) may be less
needful to labor to prove that it does not hinder him from taking Conusance
of Suits concerning Navigation and Trade, arising from Contracts made and
businesses done beyond the Sea.

The other Authorities which may be collected, to prove how the Admiral has no
Jurisdiction of things done beyond the Sea, are a writ in the Register, and
Fitz Herbert, and a number of Prohibitions.

That of the Register is, If goods be taken from an Englishman in Spain or
beyond the Sea, and the party cannot obtain Justice there, he shall have a writ
of the Sheriff to arest the Bodies of the offenders, and to seize their goods
to the value, which proves, says Sir Edwar^ Cook, that the Admiralty cannot
hold plea thereof, for that the party has remedy at the Common Law; That
Argument is as good, as if he had said There lies a writ of Withernam at the
Common Law, therefore no Letters o^ Reprisalls can be granted in the Admiralty.
It stands with great reason, that i^ a Subject be spoiled of his goods, in
ano^ther Realm, and can have no remedy there, that the party, or the goods
belon^ging to him, being found within the Ju^isdiction of the Common Law, they
should be made liable to satisfaction; And why should it be thought
unreaso^able, that upon the like occasion, if the ^arty, or his goods be found
within the ^urisdiction of the Admiralty, the Subject should have remedy there?
But this Authority concerns not Contract, or bar^ains made beyond the Sea.

Besides, how far this writ agrees with ^he Common Law, it may be conside^ed,
in regard, Mr. Seldom writes, in Tri^unalibus nostri Iuris Municipalis, etc. in
^ur Courts of Common Law, the Ju^^sdiction has been ever held to be such, ^^at
according to the strict Laws anti^^tly practiced, an Action could not be ^ought
upon a business, happening else^here, than within the Kingdom, as for ^any Ages
since it has been held, that ^^e Action ought to be rejected, unless ^^e
ground of it be arising from some^^ing done within the Body of a Coun^^: And
Sir Edward Cook recites diverse ^^thorities, by which the same is main^^in'd as
agreeable to the Common Law. ^^t this Law, he allows, where the ^^ings were
totally done out of the ^^alm, and Implies, that it is otherwise, where the
Contract is made in o^ Realm, and the performance ought to b^ in another, for
then (says he) as to the present purpose, of necessity, the Conu^sance must be
where the Contract wa^ made, for otherwise there can be no tri^al had at the
Common Law, and that i^ is most reasonable that it should be so because the
Contract is the ground an^ foundation of the debt; But now in cas^ a Contract
be made in partibus exteris and transmarinis, whereby payment or per^formance
is to be made within the Realm, notwithstanding the Contract b^ the ground, and
foundation, yet the Ju^risdiction follows the place of paymen^ and performance,
and no doubt for the same reason, because otherwise the^ could be no pretense
for a trial, at the Common Law, so that the Rule is fra^med to the building,
and not the buildin^ to the Rule.

The last Argument is, that diverse Pro^hibitions have been granted upon sut^
brought in the Admiralty, for thin^ done in partibus exteris and transmarin^^
and the first is as ancient as the 36. Hen. 8. But upon what Contracts,
bu^^^nesses, or occasions those suits we^ grounded, and Commenced, it is not
^pecified; and to conclude this point as the former, First, the third request
of the Judge of the Admiralty in the year 1575. ( viz.) That the Judge of the
Admiralty according to such ancient order made by King Edw. 1. and his Council,
and according to the Letters patents of the Lord Admiral for the time being,
and allowed of other Kings of this Land ever since, and by Custom time our of
memory of man, may have Cognition of all contracts and other things arising as
well beyond, as upon the Sea, without ^et or prohibition, The answer is, that
it ^s agreed upon by the Lord Chief Justice and ^is Colleagues.

Secondly, All the Judges before the King and his Council Octavo Caroli a^reed,
That if suits shall be commenced ^n the Court of Admiraly for Contracts ^ade,
or other things done beyond the ^ea, or upon the Sea, no Prohibition is ^o be
awarded.

Concerning the Concessions of the ^udges of the Kings Bench, and the
Re^olutions of all the Judges alleged for ^^e Confirmation of the precedent
As^ertions, it may be noted, That touching the former, by them are intended
certain Answers of the Chief Justice and other Judges of that Bench, to the
Requests of the Judge of the Admiralty in the year 1575. of which mention is
made in the complaint of the Admiral, 7. Object. wherein it is set forth, That
the Agreement made in anno Domini 1575. between the Judges of the Kings Bench,
and the Court of Admiralty, for the more quiet and certain Execution of Admiral
Jurisdiction, was not observed, to which Sir Edward Cook answers, that that
supposed agreement, had not been delivered unto them, but having heard the same
read before his Majesty (out of a Paper not subscribed with the hand of any
Judge) they answer, that for so much thereof as differs from their present
Answers, it was against the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, and therefore the
Judges of the Kings Bench never assented thereunto, as it is pretended, neither
does the phrase thereof agree with the Terms of the Laws of the Realm.

It is not probable that Dr. Dunn then Judge of the Admiralty would have
produced such an Agreement to the Judges before the King, but that he had some
ground for the same, which being supposed, it may as well infer that those
Concessions were agreeable to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, because those
Judges did assent unto them, as that they did not assent because they were not
agreeable to the same; And it may as well be doubted, whether those things
wherein those Answers at that time did differ from the Resolutions of all the
Judges in the 8. of King Charles, 8 Carol.
were agreeable to the Laws and Statutes of the Realm, as it is confidently
affirmed, that wherein those Concessions did differ from those Answers were
against the same, wherein the phrase of the Requests and Answers is not
agreeable to the terms of the Common Law is not so much considerable, as how
the matters therein contained may consist, both with Law and Equity, and to
that end it may not be amiss to recite them, as they are extant in several
Manuscripts in which are collected things of those times remarkable, both
concerning the Ecclesiastical Courts, and the Court of Admiralty, as follows.

12. Of May 1575.
Sir Christopher Wray, L. chief Justice, Dr. Davy Lewis, Judge of the Admiralty.
The Requests of the Judge of the Admiralty to the Lord chief Justice of her
Majesty's Bench, and his Colleagues, with their Answers to the same.

That after Judgment or Sentence given in the Court of Admiralty, in any
cause, or Appeal made from the same, to the high Court of Chancery, Request.
it may please them to forbear the granting of any Writ of Prohibition, either
to the Judge of the said Court, or to her Majesty's Delegates, at the suit of
him by whom such Appeal shall be made, seeing by choice of Remedy in that way,
in reason he ought to be contented therewith, and not to be relieved any other
way.

Answer.
It is agreed by the Lord chief Justice, and his Colleagues, that after Sentence
given in the Delegates, no Prohibition shall be granted. And if there be no
Sentence, if a Prohibition be not sued for within the next term following
Sentence in the Admiralty Court, or within two terms after at the farthest, no
Prohibition shall pass to the Delegates.

That Prohibitions hereafter be not granted upon bare Suggestions or Surmises,
Request.
without summary Examination and Proof made thereof, wherein it may be lawful
to the Judge of the Admiralty, and the party defendant, to have Counsel, and to
plead for the stay thereof, if there shall appear cause.

They have agreed that the Judge of the Admiralty, Answer.
and the party defendant shall have Counsel in Court, and to plead to stay, if
there may appear evident cause.

That the Judge of the Admiralty according to such an ancient Order, Request.
as has been taken by King Edward the first, and his Council, and according to
the Letters Patents of the Lord Admiral for the time being, and allowed by
other Kings of the Land ever since, and by custom time out of Memory of man,
may have and enjoy cognition of all Contracts, and other things, rising as well
beyond, as upon the Sea, without let or Prohibition.

This is agreed upon by the said Lord Chief Justice, Answer.
and his Colleagues.

That the said Judges may have and Request.
enjoy the knowledge of the breach of Charter-parties, made betwixt Masters of
Ships and Merchants for Voyages to be made to the parts beyond the Sea, and to
be performed upon, and beyond the Sea, according as it has been accustomed
time out of mind, and according to the good^ meaning of the Statute of 32. of
Henry 8. chap. 14. though the same Charter-parties be made within the Realm.

Answer.
This is likewise agreed upon, for things to be performed, either upon, or
beyond the Sea, though the Charter-party be made upon the Land, by the Statute
of 32. Hen. 8. cap. 14.

Request.
That Writs of Corpus cum Causa, be not directed to the said Judge, in causes of
the nature aforesaid, and if any happen to be directed, that it may please
them to accept of the Return thereof, with the Cause and not the Body, as it
has always been accustomed.

Answer.
If any Writ of this nature be directed in the causes before specified, they are
content to return the Bodies again to the Lord Admirals Gaol upon Certificate
of the cause to be such, or if it be for contempt or disobedience to the Court
in any such cause.

Touching the Resolutions of all the Judges, 8. Caroli, it may be considered,
That in the presence of the Kings Majesty, and twenty three Lords, and others
of his Majesty's Council, they were subscribed unto by all the Judges, (viz.)
Thomas Richardson, Robert Heath, Humphrey Dawenport, John Denham, Richard
Hutton, William Jones, George Crook, Thomas Trevor, James Weston, Robert
Barkley, Francis Crawly, and also by Henry Martin Judge of the Admiralty, and
William Noy the Attorney general, and the Transcript thereof was ordered to be
Entered in the Register of the Council causes, and the original to remain in the
Council chest, 18. Feb. 1632.

Sir Edward Cook concerning the answers and resolutions of the Judges, to those
things which he calls Articuli Cleri, 3 Jacob says* That although they were
not enacted by the authority of Parliament, as the ^tatute of Articuli Cleri,
in the 9. of Edwa^^ 2. was, yet being resolved unanimously* by all the Judges
of England, and the Barons of the Exchequer, they are for matters of Law, of
highest authority, next unto the Court of Parliament; And it may be thought
that these resolutions of all the Judges touching the Jurisdiction of the
Admiralty, ought to be of no lower esteem, the rather for that the unanimity of
all the Judges to the former, must be taken upon the credit alone of Sir Edward
Cook, but as to the latter, the Evidence thereof does appear by the joint
subscriptions of all before named, which is likewise attested by Sir George
Crook, who was one of them, who in his reports of Hillary term 8 Caroli, under
the title of Resolutions upon causes of Admiral Jurisdiction, writes that it
was agreed, as follows.

First, if suit should be commenced in the Court of Admiralty, for Contracts or
other things personally done beyond the Sea, no Prohibition is to be awarded.

Secondly, if suit be before the Admiral for freight, or Mariners wages, or for
breach of Charter-parties, for Voyages to be made beyond the Seas, though the
Charter-party happen to be made within the Realm, so as the Penalty be not
demanded, a Prohibition is not to be granted; But if the suit be for penalty,
or if question be made, whether the Charter-party be made or no, or whether the
Plaintiff did release, or otherwise discharge the same within the Realm, this
is to be tried in the Kings Courts, and not in the Admiralty.

Thirdly, if suit be in the Admiralty, for building, amending, saving, or
necessary Victualling of a Ship, against the Ship it self, and not against any
party by name, but such as for his interest makes himself a party, no
Prohibition is to be granted, though this be done within the Realm.

Fourthly, although of some causes arising upon the Thames beneath the Bridge,
and diverse other Rivers beneath the first Bridge, the Kings Courts have
conusance, yet the Admiral also has Jurisdiction there, in the point
especially mentioned in the Statute of 15. of Richard 2. and also by
Exposition, and Equity thereof, he may enquire of, and redress all Annoyances,
and Obstructions, that are or may be any Impediment to Navigation, and passage
to or from the Sea, and also to try personal Contracts, and Injuries done there
which concern Navigation on the Sea, and no Prohibition is to be granted in
such cases.

Fifthly, if any be imprisoned and upon habeas Corpus brought, it be certified,
that any of these be the cause of his Imprisonment, the party shall be
remaunded.

Subscribed the 4. Feb. 1632. by all the Judges of both Benches.

Sir George Crooks Reports being published by Sir Harbotle Grimston, are
approved and allowed as for the Common benefit, by the Judges then being,
(viz.) by John Glynn, Oliver St. John, Edward Atkins, Robert Nicholas, Matthew
Hales, Hugh Windham, Peter Warburton, and John Parker.

It may be presumed, that what so many persons Eminent both for their place,
and also for their knowledge of the Laws, and Statutes of the Realm, did so
deliberately, and cautiously resolve upon, and others of like quality have
countenanced, ought to be received, and respected as sufficient Authorities, as
to those points whereof they did declare their Resolutions, notwithstanding the
confident opinions of any others, either private, or singular persons, to the
contrary: And that the Kings Majesty and his Councels approbation being added
thereunto, should be of force enough to settle all doubts and differences
concerning the same, the rather, for that anciently (as before is showed) the
Kings of England, with their Council only, have made Constitutions concerning
the Admiralty, and that in point of Jurisdiction, and it is apparent by the
ancient Record, cited both by Mr. Seldom, and Sir Edward Cook, That the most
famous Prince, King Edward the 3. (in whose time the Admiralty received its
chief establishment) in the 12. year of his Reign, did consult and advise with
his Council, and his Judges concerning the same; And it may seem strange, Stat.
1. c. 2.
that whereas by the Statute of the 13. of Richard the 2. (whose Acts are
insisted upon as the greatest obstructions to the Admirals Jurisdiction) the
Kings Council alone are enabled to decide, what belongs to the Constables and
Marshals Jurisdiction, the King himself with his Council, and Judges, should
not have as much power to determine, what belongs to the Jurisdictions of his
Admiral.

Assert. 8
That the Courts, and Judges of the Common Law, do intermeddle, and interrupt
the Courts of Admiralty in causes properly belonging to the same.
HItherto it has been Endeavored to be made appear, That the proceedings in
the Courts of Admiralty, in the chief points in difference with the Courts of
Common Law, may consist with the Laws and Statutes of the Realm; It may now be
taken into Con^ideration, how far the proceedings of the Courts and Judges of
the Common Law, in intermedling with causes properly belonging to the
Admiralty, and in obstructing the proceedings of that Court, may be justified;
By the former, is intended their drawing of such causes by actions of Trover,
and of Trespass, to their Conusance, by the later their disparaging of
Stipulations, and prescribing the forms of libells in such causes.

The former may the rather be insisted upon, in regard Sir Edward Cook does so
often, and so earnestly in general inveigh against the encroaching of the Court
of Admiralty upon the businesses belonging to the Courts of Common Law, and in
particular where he charge, That in the blessed time of peace, those who
belong to that Court, wanting businesses proper to that Jurisdiction, do
encroach upon matters belonging to the Kings Courts, lest they should sit idle,
and have nothing to do; the like practice of encroaching being far more
unexcusable in those, who belong to the Kings Courts, which do always abound
with businesses sufficient for the same.

Concerning the Actions of Trover. Amongst the grievances complained of by the
Admiral, 8 Jacob. It is presented in the first place, That whereas the
Conusance of all Contract, and other things done on the Sea, belongs to the
Admirals Jurisdiction, the same are made triable at the Common Law, by
supposing the same to have been done in Cheap Side, or such places: And under
favor, the answer thereunto is neither clear, nor direct, nor to the purpose;
For the ground of that answer being laid, That the Admiral has no Conusance of
any thing done within any County, it is said, That it is not material whether
the place be upon the Water, Infra fluxum Aquae; but whether it be upon any
water within the County; wherefore it is acknowledged, That of things done upon
the Sea, out of any County, the Admiral ought to have Jurisdiction, and that no
presidents can be showed that any Prohibition has been granted for any
Contract, Plea, or Quarrel, for any Maritine cause done upon the Sea. In this
Answer it is confessed, That the Admiral ought to have Jurisdiction of things
done on the Sea, and that no Prohibitions have been granted for any such
causes; but whether by the supposal or fiction of a ships arriving in
Cheap Side, the Courts of Common Law do hold Plea of things done on the Sea, it
is nether confessed, nor denied, much less is there any reason given for the
same. Where it is said, It is not material whether the place be upon the water,
infra fluxum and refluxum Aquae, but whether it be upon any water within the
County, That may be true, in respect that it is supposed that all things done
in the County belongs to the Conusance of the Common Law; but when the place
where a thing is done belongs apparently to anothe Jurisdiction which pretends
as well to the right of the place, as to the right of the cause, the place of
the action can in no ways be suppressed, and another suggested in the room
thereof; for if that be permitted, the one Jurisdiction being the greater, a
more potent may soon swallow up the other, not only to the prejudice of the
subjects for whose good the diversity of Courts were erected, but also the
wrong of the Prince from whom those Jurisdictions are derived.

Sir Thomas Rydlye in his view of the Civil Laws, further shows how injurious
to the Admiralty, and unreasonable this practice is, in regard that in Law no
Fiction ought to be admitted, but such as is both possible, and equitable;
First, That it ought to be Possible, because otherwise it were to admit that by
way of supposition, which nature will not allow; and therefore although one that
is dead, to some constructions of Law, may be feigned to be alive, if at that
time any of his equals in age be still living, yet one who dyed two hundred
years since, cannot to any purpose be supposed to be living, all of the same
age being long before dead. Secondly, The Fiction ought to be Equitable,
because if there be no reason for it, it is altogether unnecessary and useless;
and therefore although the Law may admit a Fiction or supposition, that a
child in the mothers womb, is already born, for its benefit, in regard that
otherwise it might be deprived of its filial portion, or some other right in
equity belonging to it; yet where there is no such reason or equity, it ought
not to be admitted, as vain and ridiculous; but for the fiction of a ship to
arrive in wardo de cheap, where there is no water to bear or carry, is of a
thing utterly impossible; and it is wholly void of equity, because a Trial of
any business thereupon cannot obtain any just and fait remedy thereby at the
Common Law, which might not have been had in the Court of Admiralty, which is a
more competent and proper Court, for the trial of such things, than any Court
of the Common Law.

Secondly, Concerning Actions of Trespass, the Admiral in his ordinary capacity
claiming no Jurisdiction of offenses against the Crown, but only on the Sea,
and of wrongs and injuries done in other places without force or violence, to
make such causes triable in the Kings Courts, it is suggested, that they were
done vi and armis, which is the usual form of Endictments of Trespasses in the
Kings Bench (as of cutting of a purse) although in truth there were no fear,
nor violence used in committing the same.

Touching the interrupting and obstructing the proceedings in the Court of
Admiralty in causes properly belonging to the same, concerning Stipulations and
Libels, although it may be presumed, that what Sir Edward Cook affirms, Cook 4
Reports, p 29.3 H 6 14 ^ 1^. H. 7.9.
That where the principal matter is acknowledged to be of Ecclesiastical
Cognizance, the Temporal Judges ought not to call in question the form of
proceedings, though they be against the reason of the Common Law, because
Cuilibet in sua art merito credendum, that the same should be allowed in the
Admiral Court.

Yet in the third Objection of the Complaint 8 Jacob, it is showed, That
whereas time out of mind the Admiral Court has used to take Stipulations for
appearance and performance of the Acts and Judgments of the same Court; It is
now affirmed by the Judges of the Common Law, that the Amiralty Court is no
Court of Record, and therefore not able to take such Stipulations, and hereupon
Prohibitions are granted to the utter overthrow of that Court. The answer
whereunto is, That the Admiralty proceeding by the Civil Law is no Court of
Record, and therefore cannot take any such Recognizances as a Court of Record
may do, and for taking of Recognizances against the Law of the Realm, we find
that Prohibitions have been granted, as by the Law they ought: And if an
erroneous sentence be given in that Court, no Writ of Error, but an appeal to
certain Delegates does lie, as it is apparent by the Statute of the 8 Eliz.
Reginae Cap. 5. which proves that it is no Court of Record. Whereunto it may
be replied:

E.^ p. 28. and p. 15.
That some things done by, or before the Admiral, are matters of Record, may be
maintained from an ancient Ordinance of King Richard the first, with advice of
the Lords, at Grimsby, viz. That when the King writes by his Letters Patents to
the Admiral to arrest Ships more or less for his service, and that the Admiral
should write to his Lieutenant to see things put in execution accordingly,
forasmuch as the Admiral and his Lieutenants are of Record, After the Admiral
shall have written to the King, or to the Chancellor of England the names of
the Ships arrested, together with the names of the Owners and Masters of them,
in that case neither the Owner of the Ship, nor the Master, shall be admitted
to say that the Ship is not arrested; but admitting that the Court of Admiralty
is not a Court of Record in ordinary matters, no more are the Stipulations
taken there, such Recognizances as are required to be taken in Courts of Record
by the Common Law, those Stipulations causing no privileged obligations before
other bonds, nor extending to any part of men's Lands, which is otherwise in
Recognizances taken in Courts of Records by the Common Law; And it may seem
strange th^^ (...) Edward Cook acknowledging and ^^^^^ing the proceedings of
that (...) according to the Civil Laws (...) Stipulations or bayls for the
(...) appearance, and the performances of De^crees and Sentences in that Court*
pr^scribed by the Civil Law, Ne judicia sint elusoria, and unversally
practiced, where judicial proceedings are according to that Law, as likewise in
this Kingdom in the Constable and Marshals Court, and in the Courts of the
Universities proceeding by the Civil Law, the same should not be allowed in the
Admiralty Court.

And the complaint in this point may seem the more considerable, in regard
that, to the public Notaries about the Exchange, with out Exception or
Control it has been allowed, That Merchants appearing before them, (in a
manner nearer to the Recognizances of the Common Law) do acknowledge bonds, and
bind, Se and Executores, and bona tam immobilia quam mobilia praesentia in
futura, And sometimes themselves being absent, the same things are done in
their nam^s by their servants, or factors, Exhibiting Procurations from them to
that purpose; And it may be noted, that amongst Sir Edw. Cooks Authorities
there cannot be discerned any Statute, Judgment, or Book-case, to make good
the Answer to that Objection, in the Complaint.

Secondly, concerning Libells in the Court of Admiralty, The Lord Hobard in
Audly and Iennings case affirms, that if a Contract in truth were made at Sea,
and in the Admirals Court it be laid generally, without saying super alto mari,
a Prohibition might lie, for the Libel must warrant the sure in it self; But
Justice Reeves in his Argument, Paschae 22. Garoli, differs from him in
opinion, and distinguishes betwixt a particular Jurisdiction, created in
diminution of the general Courts of Common Law, and a particular Jurisdiction
over things that never did belong to the Courts of Common Law, but which is
wholly distinct from the same: In the first case he confesses that it is
necessary to allege the cause of Action to arise within the new created
Jurisdiction, because prima facie, nay de Iure, the Courts of Common Law have
general Jurisdiction of those things, but in the later case, as of the
Admiralty, if the cause be Maritime, there is no need to averr it to have been
done upon the Sea, out of any respect to the Courts of Common Law, for that it
does not tend to the diminution of any of those Courts, and for Confirmation
thereof he affirms, that the Jurisdiction of the Marshalsey, stands partly upon
the Statute Articuli super Chartas, and the words of that Statute are as
restrictive as any words of the Statutes touching the Admiralty, and by the
books of the Common Laws, the Marshal cannot hold Plea in some cases unless
both parties be of the Kings Household, nor in any case unless one of the
parties be so, yet it is resolved, that the Declaration is good, although it be
not averred therein, that any of the parties be of the household, and therefore
a Fortiori it is not necessary in the Admiralty to specify in the Libel the
thing to have been done, super alto mari, the Admiralty Jurisdiction being more
distinct from the Common Law, than that of the Court of Marshalsey.

That the trial of Causes concerning Navigation and Trade in the Court of
Admiralty, Assert. 9
is more commodious for the Subjects, and Kingdom of England, than in the
Courts of Common Law.
HOw much the maintenance, and advancement of Navigation, and trade by Sea,
concerns the Kingdom, and Subjects thereof, Sir Edward Cook delivers, Comment
upon Magna Chart. Fol. 28.
who says, That Trade and Trafique is the livelihood of a Merchant, and the
life of the Commonwealth, wherein the Kingdom, and every Subject has
interest; For the Merchant is the good Bailiff of the Realm, to Export, and
Vent the Native Commodities, and to Import and bring in the necessary
Commodities, for the defense and benefit of the Realm. So much is confirmed by
several Acts of Parliament, framed by common consent of the Kingdom. The
Statute of the 32. of Henry the 8. chap. 24. sets forth, That it is notoriously
known that the Realm of England, for the most part is environed with the Seas,
so that the Subjects cannot convey, and transport their Wares, Merchandises,
and Commodities by Land, but only by Ships, and that the Navy, and multitude of
Ships of the Realm, is very commodious, and necessary, as well for the
intercourse, and concourse of Merchants, conveying, and transporting their
Wares, and Merchandises, and a great defense and security to this Realm, as
well to offend and defend, as also for the maintenance of many Masters,
Mariners and Seamen, and also has been the chief maintenance and supportation
of Cities, Towns, Havens, and Creeks near adjoining unto the Seacoasts:
Likewise that of the 43. of Elizabeth, chap. 12. declares, That it has always
been the Policy of this Realm, by all good means to comfort and encourage the
Merchant, thereby to advance the general Wealth of this Realm, the Kings
Customs, and Strength of Shipping, etc.

Sholes syntag 47. ^it. 37.
It has been formerly observed, That for the encouragement of those who
maintain trade by Sea, in all Nations and States there have been special Judges
appointed to hear and determine causes concerning Trade and affairs of the Sea;
and it may be further noted, that such Judges have been directed to proceed at
such times, and in such manner, as might best consist, with the opportunities
of Trade, and least hinder or detain men from their Employments. Petitus de
Legibus Atticis l. 5. tit. ^.
Amongst the Graecians, as at Athens, it was provided, That all suits betwixt
Seamen and Merchants should be determined in those vacations when the Seas
were barred, or in those Months when Navigation was restrained; So much is
confirmed by Salmatius, Eo tempore quo oritur Arcturus navigationes suas ut
plurimum desinebant mercatores, domumque redibant; Boedromion quippe mensis qui
septembri respondet, quo tempore fere Arcturus oritur, terminus erat
navigationum Atticarum, ideo ab eo mense Munichi^nem usque quo mense iterum se
mari committebant, ac vela dabunt, Mercatores Athenienses in urbe desidebant,
and lites suas disceptabant, ut videre est apud Demosthenem adversus Apaturium.
C. de Naufragiis l. 5. and ibi Cujacius.
Amongst the Romans likewise, for the better dispatch of causes concerning
Sea-businesses, the Judges were ordered to proceed, Levato velo, and de plano,
without that Solemnity, and formality which was used in ordinary Courts, and
Causes; So in Italy, Spain, and France, the Judges proceed in causes concerning
the Sea, Summarily and in a more compendious way than other Judges use; And the
like, as Sir John Davies relates, has seemed to the wisdom of this Kingdom,
Our Parliaments, says He, have not only made extraordinary provisions, for a
more speedy recovery of debts due unto Merchants, for their Merchandises, than
is provided by our Common Law, as appears by the Statute of Acton Burnel, made
the 11. of Edward 1. and the Statute De Mercatoribus, made the 13. of Edward 1.
but also has allowed a Court of Proceedings in cases of Merchants, different
from the course of our Common Law; For by the Statute of the 27. of Edw. 3.
cap. 2. it is declared, That the proceedings in causes of Merchants shall be
from day to day, and from hour to hour, according to the Law of the Staple, and
not according to the course of the Common Law; and by another Article in the
same Parliament, That all Merchants coming to the Staple shall be ruled by
Law-merchant, touching all things coming to the Staple, and not by the Common
Law of the Land; and by another Article, That neither any of the Benches, nor
any of the Judges of the Common Law shall have any Jurisdiction in those cases.
To which may be added the Statute of 32 of Hen. 8. Chap. 15. and of the 43 of
Elizabeth, Chap. 12. which direct, That such causes betwixt Seamen and
Merchants shall be ordered summarily, and without delay, and as in discretion
shall seem most convenient. All which was, and may be observed in the Court of
the Admiralty, which in many causes proceed at any time, and in all causes
summarily, and according to Equity, but neither is, nor can be observed in
Courts of Common Law, which are open only in Term times, and proceed in an
ordinary and strict way.

Secondly, For the advantage of those who use Navigation, and Trade by Sea, The
Law-merchant and Laws of the Sea admit of diverse things not agreeable to the
Common Law of the Realm, which may be better insisted on in the Court of
Admiralty, than in the Courts of the Common Law. So much is likewise declared
by Sir John Davyes, relating several instances to that purpose. 1. If two
Merchants, says he, be joint Owners, or Partners of Merchandises, which they
have acquired by a joint Contract, the one shall have an Action of account
against the other, Secundum Legem Mercatoriam, but by the Rule of the Common
Law, if two men be jointly seized of other goods, the one shall not call the
other to account for the same. 2. If two Merchants have a joint interest in
Merchandises, if one dye, the surviver shall not have all, but the Executor of
the party deceased, shall by the Law-Merchant call the surviver to an account
for the Moity, whereas by the Rule of the Common Law, if their be two joint
Tenants of other goods, the surviver Perjus accrescendi shall have all. 3. In
an Action of Debt upon a simple Contract, (which is without a Deed in Writing)
the Defendant by the Common Law may wage his Law, That is, he may bar the
Plaintiff from his Action, by taking an Oath that he does not owe the Debt, but
when one John Cumpton Merchant brought an Action of debt Secundum Legem
Mercatoriam against another Merchant upon a Contract, without Deed, and the
Defendant would have waged his Law, he was not permitted so to do, and the
Judgment was given for the Plaintiff. It is not hereby intended that the
Courts of Common Law cannot or do not take notice of the Law-Merchant, in
Merchants cases, but that other things likewise considered, it might be thought
reasonable, if they so desire, to allow them the choice of that Court, where
the Law-Merchant is more respected, than to confine them to other Courts, where
another Law is more predominant. Besides, there may be danger of doubt thereof,
because those things are not approved for proofs at the Common Law, which are
held sufficient in the Admiralty amongst the Merchants; for as Sir John Davies
further observes, At the Common Law no man's Writing can be pleaded against him,
as his Act, and Deed, unless the same be sealed, and delivered: But in suits
between Merchants, Bills of Lading, and Bills of Exchange, being but ticquets,
without Seals, Letters of advice, and Credence, Policies of assurance,
Assignations of Debts, all which are of no force at the Common Law, are of good
credit and force by the Law-Merchant. To which may be added, what Malines
observes, That the bearer of such Bills, by the course amongst Merchants, shall
be admitted to demand, and recover the Contracts, without Letters of Attorney,
which is not admitted in the Common Law. It is moreover considerable, That the
Law of the Sea looks one way, when the Common Law looks another; As for
instance, A Ship is Freighted, or hired for a Voyage to the Indies, at 20 l.
per month by Charter-party, it appears that having been eight Months in the
Employment of the Merchant, who Freighted her, before she makes any Port, with
her Lading she perishes in the Sea, in this case by the Common Law, as it has
been averred, the Owner of the Ship ought to have Freight for eight Months:
but by the Law of the Sea, which has always been allowed, The Merchant losing
his goods, the Owner loses his Freight; Again, if the Owner loses his
Freight, the Mariner, although he escape, loses his Wages, for the time he
served, which happily would not be thought so if he sued at the Guild Hall for
the same.

Thirdly, for encouragement and advantage of those who use Navigation and Trade
by Sea, it is considerable, That in the Court of Admiralty, one and the same
Action may be brought against diverse and several persons, undertaking the same
business, as when many join in subscription to a Policy of assurance, but if a
suit be brought at the Common Law, every man must be sued severally, which the
Parliament in the Act concerning assurances, held inconvenient; and in the like
manner, diverse and several Persons may join in the same suit, as Mariners for
wages, at a small charge to themselves, with little prejudice to the Masters,
or Owners which are sued, and obtain a Decree or Order all together, whereas
when they sue at the Guild Hall, every man sues severally, to the great charge
of every particular, and to the excessive damage of the Masters, or Owners, if
Judgments be given against them, Besides the inconvenience (of which the
Statute of the 28. of Hen. the 8. cap. 15. takes notice) That if Mariners or
Shippers, which by reason of their often Voyages and Passages must depart,
without long tarrying and protracting of time, be enforced to attend the
ordinary terms of the Common Law.

Fourthly, the Court of Admiralty for the convenience and dispatch of
Merchants, and Sea-mens causes, admits of proofs, which the Courts of Common
Law do not allow, for in that Court according to the Civil Law, the Plaintiff
may be relieved by the Defendants answer, upon Oath, which in the ordinary
Courts of the Common Law is not afforded; Again, whereas in those Courts the
Evidence must be produced at the Bar, before the Jury, Seamen, and Mariners,
which are many times necessary witnesses, for the reason before expressed, cannot
be present without great prejudice to themselves and the Trade of the Kingdom;
But in the Admiralty Court they may be produced at any time, after the suit is
begun, and their Examinations being taken in Writing, they have liberty to
follow their own, and the common occasions. Moreover, many times in causes
concerning Navigation, and Trade by Sea, no proof can be made, but by Witnesses
remaining in Foreign parts, to which the Writs of the Common Law do not extend,
but those Witnesses by Commission out of the Admiralty Court, are usually sworn
and examined by Magistrates in those places, and their examinations so taken
are allowed for sufficient proof upon return.

Diverse other instances might be given, by which it would appear that the Court
of Admiralty can give redress in Suits concerning Navigation and Trade with
more convenience than the Courts of Common Law; but these considered, and how
much it concerns the good of the Kingdom, and those who s^pport Navigation and
Trade, may be sufficient to discover, which Court may be best justified in
proceeding in causes of that nature.

What inconvenience may follow both to the Private and Public by the
interposing of the Courts of Common Law, and by obstructions made unto the
Admiralty in such businesses, may appear in one particular, that is concerning
Charter-parties and Freight due for employment of shipping. There is but one
instance given of a Suit brought at the Common Law upon a Charter-party, viz.
the 28 of Elizabeth, which was on the Merchants part for breach of Covenant,
viz. for not staying in a Port of discharge so many days as were agreed upon,
for which the Owner was condemned in 500 l. without any respect to the Loss or
Damage which the Merchant had sustained: And if it be considered how many
clauses there are in Charter-parties, and Covenants of things to be performed
for which the Owners are bound under a general penalty, if upon every breach
advantage should be taken in extremity, no man would have great comfort in
hiring out Ships to the Sea: And it may be observed, that there is no President
that ever any man sued for Freight at the Common Law, which argues much
difficulty in that way, as probably the performance of the Voyage being to be
maintained by such proofs as cannot be produced in those Courts. And whereas it
is affirmed, That infinite Prohibitions have been granted in causes commenced
in the Admiralty upon Charter-parties, it must follow, that thereby was
occasioned infinite loss to the Owners of the Shipping, it being most probable
by what has been observed, That the cause for Freight being stopped in the
Admiralty, there was no means to recover the same in the Courts of the Common
Law. For that is a certain Rule, That that Merchant which declines that Court
knows he is in no danger elsewhere; and it falls out many times, That for long
Voyages great sums are due for Freight, and Merchants not always having good
success, are sometimes put to their shifts, but how far it stands with the
dignity of the High Courts to countenance, or in truth afford protection to
such shifts, we leave them to consider, but no man can conceive otherwise, than
that those courses must needs more weaken the Shipping of the Kingdom, than
diverse Ordinances and Constitutions intended for the maintenance thereof can
possibly advance the same. Besides the decay of Shipping, these things conduce
to the impoverishing of Mariners who are the life of Shipping, for Freight is
said to be the mother of wages, and the Owner losing his Freight, the Mariner
cannot so well obtain his wages, and in consequence must betake himself to some
other course of life.

The like inconvenience falls out in Trade and Commerce, when Prohibitions are
granted for Contracts, or things done in partibus exteris and transmarinis, The
Merchant if he can avoid the Admiralty where he must answer upon Oath, and
proof may be made by Commission, thinks himself secure from any danger at the
Common Law. And although it may be supposed that remedy may be given in the
Chancery, yet howsoever it is possible it is not usual for that Court to send
Commissions into Foreign parts, and the pretense is for the right of
Jurisdiction in the Kings Courts of the Common Law, without respect to the
Chancery, to which sir Ed. Cook seems to be no great friend.

FINIS.

