WOUNDS OF THE BRAIN Proved CURABLE,

Not only by the Opinion and Experience of many (the best) Authors, but the
remarkable History of a Child four Years old cured of two very large
Depressions, with the loss of a great part of the Skull, a Portion of the BRAIN
also issuing, thorough a penetrating Wound of the Dura and Pia Matter.

Published for the Encouragement of Young Surgeons, and Vindication of the
Author, JAMES YOUNG.

Haec dixi ut contradicerem Opiniosis, qui non credunt cerebrum posse sanari,
-- juia ego cognosco, and Cerebrum sanari, and alias medullas. Jac. de Carpio,
Tract. de Fr. Cranii. LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Henry Faithorn and John
Kersey, at the Rose in St Paul's Churchyard. 1682.

Non audita loquor, narranti credit, vidi
His Oculis, tetigi non dubitante manu.
Accr erat Juvenis, medio cui Vulnus adactum
Est Capiti; Cerebri pars quoque caesa fuit,
Ille tamen vivit. Si credas Art Melampi
Id factum, peccas; hic Medicina silet.
Monstra sed in Morbis Arabum Flos ille Sophorum
Quod fieri dixit, re patet apse palam.
G. F. Hildan. obs. m. Chir. 13. To the HONORABLE Sir HUGH PIPER Knight,
Lieutenant Governor of His Majesty's Royal Citadel at Plymouth.
SIR,
BEfore I enter the Lists with my Adversary, and engage in a public
Vindication of my self and Fraternity, I presume to put my self under Your
Patronage and Protection; For the World will have good reason to conclude my
Complaint true, and my Cause just, when I dare take sanctuary under Your Name,
who (besides Your impartial knowledge of us both) are in such (other)
circumstances as render the right or wrong of our pretenses easily discernible
to You, and who have long since been well assured of the truths here related,
and (by an unquestionable hand) the falsehood of those reflections my Antagonist
has made thereon.

These considerations encouraged my presumption, and is all the Apology I can
make for it. I know there needs none, for the smartness wherewith I have
treated my Opponent, to a Person that understands so well as You the justice of
such resentments, and has with more bravery vindicated his honor by his
Sword, than ever any Writer did an Hypothesis by that sharper Weapon his Pen.

Nor shall I, according to custom in applications of this nature, seem to bribe
and biass Your Favor, by soothing Flourishes, and complementing Harangues,
though Your constant and unblemished Loyalty, Your great Age and Courage, with
the wonderful Briskness and Vivacity that accompany them; be Subjects so
manifestly large and rare for Encomium and Celebration, that I might without
flattery praise and admire: Yet because severe Men and Censurers will say, It
looks more like the mercenary Addresses of Plays and Poems, than Seriousness
and that Integrity with which I profess to appeal, and defend my self and my
Cause, and is an Entertainment which few good men receive with delight; I shall
decline it.

But thus much I dare affirm, That how short soever I may come of obtaining
satisfaction by this method of vindicating my self, and confuting my malicious
Opposer; I am sure of gaining one Point of my design (for which I thank Him)
that is, to let the whole World know that I am,

SIR, Your Obliged, Humble Servant, JAMES YOUNG.
Plim. April 26th 1682.
THE PREFACE.
I HAD not ushered this small Tract into the World, with the formality of a
Preface, had it not been extremely necessary to give my Reader an account of
the occasion inducing me to publish this Case, and the provocations I had to
handle my Opponent so roughly.

About two years since I had the good fortune to be a successful Surgeon to
the Child, whose Case is contained in the following Narrative: But I had scarce
wiped my Instruments, and put up my Plaister-Box, before a Physician of this
Town, sneakingly and maliciously endeavored to stifle the reputation Dr.
Spenser and my self got by that Cure, insinuating that it was impossible to be
performed, because Wounds of the Brain were absolutely mortal.

We endeavored to rescue and secure our credits from so spightful a calumny,
by producing the Parent, the Apothecary, and others who handled and saw what
came out thorough the Wound of the Meninges. But that not satisfying, we sought
Compurgators in our Books, where we found more than we expected, and produced
their suffrages, to the number of no less than fifty.

This was so unanswerable a Proof, and clear eviction, that my Enemy retreated
and became silent. Had he so continued, this Story had remained a Secret to the
World: But he, impatient and dissatisfied with peoples believing so many men
and Books, against his single and groundless opinion; very lately took occasion
(unprovoked by any man) in company of diverse Gentlemen, in a public place, to
renew his reflections on us, repeating with the utmost advantage his great
malice and little wit could afford, those objections we had so long ago baffled
and confuted; and, not content to bound his scurrility there, he proceeded to
vilify all the Surgeons in this place, calling us, A Company of
Ignoramus's, fit for nothing but to cut Corns.

Judge, if these repeated provocations and affronts were not enough to raise
resentments in any man that had but common sense, or regard of his credit, and
tenderness for his good name: I accordingly took a speedy opportunity to
confront him, offered to produce Authorities against his Objections, and to
vindicate our own affirmation. He himself nominated time and place for the
deciding the Question; but as ungenerously (absenting) declined the Test, as he
rudely gave the occasion. I resolved therefore, since he would not abide a
private trial, to refer my Cause to the World, and by a public Vindication
stop his mouth for ever.

Having thus signified the occasion and provocation to this Effort, I hope the
sharpness wherewith I have treated him will not be thought rude, nor those
little heats and excursions in the Epilogue, causless. Had he stuck to his
first reflection, (though that wanted not its Dirt) and acted like a Disputant
only, I had behaved my self accordingly, and continued to oppose him with as
soft words and hard arguments as I could. But when he forsook the Scholar, and
took up the part of a Railer, when he became reproachful and contumelious; I
resolved to deal with him according to his demerit.

I am not insensible how little esteem this contentious way of Writing has in
the World, and that a superfoetation of Controversies has surfeited even a
wrangling Age: But certainly for a man to be called Fool and Knave unjustly, to
be disparaged in his reputation and way of living, belied and reproached in his
Practice, on which the life and happiness of himself and Family depends, and
this by a series of words and actions some years long, is such an intolerable
indignity and barbarous affront, as will excuse and justify the sharpest
resentment: To suffer such abuses tamely, is to betray and expose a man's self
to the lash of every injurious Calumniator, and encourage illminded men to
trample on and abuse us.

Wherefore, let Controversy and recrimination be ever so immodish, I shall not
be thereby deterred from acting once more out of fashion. If my Adversary
perform his threatening promise, and answer me publicly, I will rejoin, and
that with so little favor to him, that in comparison with it, the smartest I
have here said will appear very inferior.

But I know my Cause to be impregnable against the strongest attacks he can
make; and how otherwise inconvenient (to say no worse) it is for him to attempt
what he has menaced.

An Alphabetical Catalogue of the Authors quoted to prove, Wounds of the BRAIN
not absolutely mortal.
ACademia Curiosa Germ. Alexander Benedictus, Alexander Read, Amatus Lusitanus,
Ambros. Pareus, Andreas Laurentius, Bartapalea, Bernardus Gordonus, Cabriolus,
Caspar Bauhinus, Cornelius Celsus, Cornelius Gemma, Christopherus a Vega,
Danielus Senertus, Desiderius Jacotius, Felix Wurtz, Franciscus Arceus,
Franciscus Sanchez, Franciscus Valeriolus, Gabrielus Fallopius, Galenus,
Georgius Horstius, Glandorp, Guido Cauliacus, G. Fabricius Hildanus, Henricus
Petreus, H. Fab. ab Aquapendente, Hilkiah Crook, Horatus Augenius, Jacobus de
Carpio, Jann Van Beverwik, James Cook, Jaques Guilleameu, Joannes And* a Cruce,
John Banister, John Brown, Joannes Bilgerus, Joannes Fernelius, John Goulart,
Joannes Heurnius, Joannes Langius, Joannes Rhodius, Joannes Scultetus, Joannes
Skenckius, Joannes Tagaultius, Joannes Veslingius, Leonardus Fuchsius,
Marcellus Donatus, Musa Brasavolus, Nicolas Nicolaus Flor* Paul Barbet, Peter
Borellas, P. J. Fabrus, Petter Forestus, Phil. Jacobus Sanchz, P. J. Lotichius,
Peter de Marchetis, Peter Pigreus, Sergeant Wiseman, Simon Aloysius, Symphor,
Campegius, Theodoricus, Thomas Bartholine, Volcher Coitarus, Zacutus Lusitanus.
ERRATA.
PAge 11. line 20. read viii. p. 19. l. 19. r. Rad. Poeoniae, p. 27. l. 12. r.
Cephalic Julep, p. 46. l. 12. r. all else, p. 49. l. 18. r. Objection.

THE HISTORY OF A Wound in a Child's Brain, cured, although some part thereof
issued forth, together with a large piece of the Skull; with Remarks thereon.
ON Saturday the 28. of February 1679. I was called to Swilly, a House above a
Mile distant from Plymouth, where Mr. John Stone was retired with his Family,
to secure them from the small Pox, at that time raging in Town: He had a
Daughter, almost six Years old, and a Son that was then four Years, and two
Months, a sanguine fair Child, but somewhat sickly.

These two endeavoring to get into a Field, where they espied a Maid milking
of Kine, pulled at the Gate thereof, which she had shut; they unhappily tug'd
at a part of it which was heaviest, and loose, and by their little strength,
made the defective hinges give way, so that the Gate fell upon them; the Girl
escaped without hurt, but the Boy unluckily falling, had his head crushed
between the heavy end of the Gate, (so heavy, that a man could scarce lift it)
and a small stone, that stood above the level of the ground: this stone bore
against the left Bregma somewhat above the Ear; opposite to which on the other
side, about the same distance from that Ear, a pin of Wood an inch square, that
stood out half an inch from the Gate, and served to fasten an oblique piece to
the bars; being forced by the weight of the Gate, made a small wound, but a
very great depression; it bled much, the Child cried a little, did not faint,
nor convulse, only vomited two or three times.

This Accident happened some hours before I came to the House, in all which time,
nothing had been applied to, or removed from the Head; I presently laid it
bare, and upon examination by my fingers, found where this little wound was,
and that the Skull under it was largely deprest; I cut and shaved away the hair
from about it, in doing which, I used warm Sack diluted with water, and glowing
coals, (not charcoal, it being hurtful to the head, and suffocating) to prevent
ill impressions from the air, at this time cold and raw.

That being done, I entered my Probe at the wound, and found the scalp separate
from the skull a great way, and that there was a very large depression of the
latter; I therefore resolved without delay to dilate it, and free the Dura
Matter from any shivers or splinters of the bone, that might prick or offend it.
Mr. Knotsford the Apothecary, was just then (unknown to me) come into the
chamber, and stood behind me, when withdrawing my Probe, some of the Brain came
out upon it; I rubbed it on my hand, and bruised it with my finger, and found it
to be Brain. Before I would proceed to incision, I entered my Probe again with
the eye forward, and endeavored to get out what I could at once (the
instrument being both times without the skull only) it brought forth as much as
two Pea's, Mr. knotsford presently apprehended it, and whispered to me that it
was Brain; I then put it from my Instrument on his hand, and proceeded to
dilate the wound by an incision knife; after doing it, several parcels of Brain
appeared among the blood, I cleaned it off, and finding the depression to be
but of one piece, and that none of it, or ought else offended the Dura Matter, I
dressed it up with Dossils, dipped in Mel Rosatum, and Spirit of Wine made warm,
and covered all with a plegent of linimentum Arcei.

This great mischief, I found, was done by the Pin of the Gate, a Figure of
which I have here inserted, that every Reader may be able to understand this
part of the Story. The place where the Pin was, is marked +

disagram of a gate

This Wound, thus dressed up, I examined the rest of the Head, and found on the
other Bregma, an Ecchymosis; and under it another depression. I shaved off the
Hair from thence also, and with the same Razor excised a piece of the Scalp, as
big as a Shilling, which laid bare the depression and fracture, which was such
as I could not then elevate. I filled this wound with Dossils of dry Lint,
covered with a plegent of Arceus liniment, over all laid a Plaster, rolled up
the head, and laid the Child (who endured all with incredible courage) to Bed,
his head bolster'd as high as he could well lie.

Having dispatched a Messenger to Plymouth for necessaries, I examined that part
of the Brain which I had taken out; the Father, Mr. Knotsford, and others, saw
it, and were assured that it was such; no man of brains can imagine what else
it could be. I then gave the Father a dreadful Prognostic, though not of
positive death, (as I secretly thought) but the utmost hazard thereof, and
desired the assistance of Doctor Spenser.

That Evening I gave the Child a Clyster, which having wrought two or three
times, I got him to take the following mixture to sweat, and a little draught
of a Cephalic Julep upon it, these kept him in a small Diaphoresis all Night,
the Julep in little quantities being sometimes repeated to him; they being
Diaphoretical and Cephalic, were good for the design I then had, viz. to
comfort and relieve the Brain and Head, so egregiously hurted; and to prevent
coagulation, or other mischievous effect, of the Contusion.

The Clyster.
Decoct. com. pro Clyst. x. Mel. Anthosat. Ol. Hyperrici c. ana ij. Succini
Chym. Gut. 8. Sal Gemmae sx. M. fiat Clyst.
The Sudorifick Mixture.
Pulv. ad Casum s. Sperm. Ceti gr. 12. Balsam. Peruv. gut. iij. Sir. Betonicae
ss. misce.
The Cephalic Julep.
aq. Cerasor. nigr. Flor. Tiliae. Jugland. s. Betonicae ana iij. Sir.
paralyseos Aq. poeoniae comp. ana ij. Pulv. guttetae Tinct. succini ana i. M.
The Child sweated very well, and slept quiet most part of the Night, had no
more vomitings or convulsions, etc. but was as if he ailed no other than a
common slight wound of the head.

The next Morning, the Child being brisk and lively, the Doctor come, a
fomentation and all things ready, he being taken up, and held on a Woman's lap,
I cut off all the Hair close to the Head, and opened the left wound first;
where we found a depression, with a fracture, the shape and exact bigness with
this Figure:

The sharp Point was deprest so, as the surface of it was contiguous with the
inside of the Skull, from whence it was separated, so that it was fallen just
the thickness of the Child's cranium; this made us fear it might hurt the Dura
Matter, and therefore we resolved (though no symptom argued any such thing) to
at tempt the raising of it. I was so close, that we could not enter an
Elevatory, and therefore at that time left it, as it was, and dressed it up as
the day before; all this while the whole head was guarded with woollen stuphes,
wrung out of the following fomentation, made hot.

The Fomentation.
Fol. Betonicae m. iij. Verbenae, Centaurii, Hyperici, Paralyseos ana. m. ij.
Herb. Salviae, Rorismarini, Lavendulae ana. m. j. Praep. and coq. aquaf. q. s
f. colatura.
Opening the other wound, and taking out the Dossils that I had laid in the day
before, several small portions of the Brain showed themselves among the grumous
Blood, and on the dress; but we were not more astonished at that, than when we
saw a prodigious piece of the skull, beaten in, and wholly separate from the
rest, and (which was a very ill circumstance) the outward table being broken
narrower than the innermost, made the deepest piece larger than the hole it had
made, so that at that time we could not get it out, and indeed we were not
sollicitous of it, since it no where hurt the Dura Matter, and for ought we
knew, might succor the torn Meninges and keep the Brain from spewing out
extravagantly. So that having cleared the part of matter, etc. I then only made
yesterdays incision into a cruciat, by which that whole fracture lay open; we
dressed him as before, and rolled up his head upon a Stuphe, dry wrung from the
fomentation. A little before, and during this dress, he took of his Cordial,
Cephalic Julep, though the Child's courage seemed not to need it. He had no
heats upon him, nor made any complaint, but a little of the incision; although
he was as perfectly sensible and apprehensive as ever. The same Julep was kept
by him, that was first ordered, excepting that instead of Sir. Florum
Paralyseos, was mixed Sir. Poeoniae simpl. and the addition of Aqua Hirundinis,
Rond. i. The Clyster was repeated every day for some considerable time, as
being extremely necessary to divert humors from a too great recourse to the
head.

His Diet was Water-Grewel, with Corinths, etc. thin Broth of a Chicken,
wherewith was boiled Pearl Barley, Hartshorn, Raspt Ivory, Flowers of single
Poeony, Sage and Rosemary; he sometimes drank small beer (not bitter) with a
Tossed rubbed with Nutmeg, but more commonly the following Julep:

Flor. Poeoniae Rorismarini ana P.j. Hordei perlat. Ras. C. Cervi Eboris ana
ss. Poeoniae M. iij. Visc. Quercin. iss. Tamarindar. i. coq. aq. Font. lib.
iij. ad lib. ij. Colaturae lib. ij. Sir. Poeoniae ij. Aq. Poeoniae comp. j.
Misce.
The second Night the Child slept indifferently well, and continued in good
temper and courage; we again opened the left side, and attempted to fasten a
Terebra into the depressed Skull, and thereby to raise it: But it seemed so to
shake, and yield to the pressure of that Instrument, that we desisted, doubting
it might force it wholly in, to which (considering how small the sound part
was) we feared it would be very incident.

I endeavored therefore by a Head Saw and a Rasp, to enlarge one of the Seams,
that we might enter an Elevatory; but when we had done so, we could not raise
it, without hazard of forcing down the sound part of the Skull, or breaking in
pieces the depressed, the one was so thin and weak, and the other so tied down,
to its depression.

Considering therefore that we had made breathing enough, that there was no ill
symptom, and that when any occurred we should have time enough to use force;
we resolved to let it remain, and, strewing Cephalic Powder on it, with dry
Plegents of Lint, dressed it up as besore, and betook our selves to the other
more dangerous part of our work. Upon opening of which, we saw again some
little owzings of the Brain among the matter; but not so very distinct as
before: we now resolved to extract the piece of Skull. After some little time I
did it, by turning it so that the narrowest part of it might come to the
broadest of the Gap, when holding it fast with a Crow's Bill, it easily came
forth. It was dreadful to behold what a breach it left, as may be imagined by
the following Figure, which is exactly its shape and bigness.

diagram of the piece of skull

A is the part that was undermost, next toward the ear. B is a rima or
fracture of the outward Table only, the inward remaining whole, but on the
depression bent, and yielded so, that the Angle of that part, marked A (the
edge whereof was very keen, by the oblique transient division thereof) ran
throught the Meninges, into the Brain. This we concluded from the place where
the wound was made, and the length of it, both corresponding with the
situation, of that part of the deprest Skull, and the length of that end of it,
which bent at that crack, like a half broken Stick. C is the end toward the
Lambdoidal suture. D that toward the Coronal. E the upper part toward the
Sagittal.

The wound on the Membranes we saw plainly, with some effusion of the Brain;
but it happened (though in the inferior, and consequently most disadvantageous
place, because more apt to shed Brain) that it was below the edge of the sound
Skull, so that it became succored thereby, and (the Child being young, the
Membranes more soft, and apt to consoliclate) coalesced the sooner, for after
four days we saw no Brain.

We made our dress this time after this manner. We had a good Guard of hot
Stuphes, to defend from the Air, and having cleansed out the part, and smoothed
the uneven edge of the Skull, we dipped a Synclon (that is a piece of fine
Cloth, bigger than the extracted Skull, having a thread fastened to the middle
to draw it forth by) into a mixture of warm Spirit of Wine, Honey of Roses, and
Balsam of Peru, and with a Probe thrust the edge of it between the Skull and
Dura Matter. Upon it was strewed Cephalic Powder, covered with dry Lint. Then I
snipt off the lips of the Cruciat, and, laying on a plegent, armed with
Arceus's Liniment, rolled him up. This day we ordered Tinctura Ambrae Griseae
to be given in his Cordial, six or eight drops at a time, as there appeared
need. The Cephalic Cordial he took at pleasure.

And here I cannot forbear to celebrate the admirable, and as it were prudent,
courage of this little Gentleman, more especially remarkable in three things;
First, That he was very quiet and steady, scarce wincing at whatever was done;
and this from a sense of its being beneficial and inevitable: as appears by the
second, That when one of the Bystanders (whilst I cut him) observing him mute,
feared him to be in a swound, and peeping into his face, asked him how he did,
he briskly replied, Pretty well; and, as if he had apprehended the cause of her
enquiry, added, They don't hurt me. Thirdly, That once, on a more painful and
tedious dress than ordinary, he prevented himself from crying by biting a
Linen Cloth hard in his teeth, and pulling it with both hands; A cunning way
to ease himself, and be silent!

Next Day, being the 4th from his hurt, we found he had had a good Night, and
was courageous to a Miracle; I shaved the whole head, anointed it with a
Cephalic, Balsamous Liniment, and laid on a Plaster of equal parts,
Opodeldoch, and Empl. de Betonica, then dressed the wounds as before, and
covered them with Plasters made of equal parts of Diapalma and de Detonica;
some Vulneraries were added to the common Julep, and the Flowers of Betony,
Rosemary, Sage, and Poeony, seethed in his Broths and Grewel, by which they
were not only made Cephalic, and good for the part offended, but balsamous,
and a remedy for the wounds, and other effects of the contusion. Each dressing
we did also anoint the Neck all round, the Temples, behind the Ears, and on the
Backbone, with the following Liniment, (the same wherewith we had anointed the
Head before the Plaster was laid on) the design being to comfort, strengthen
and heal those parts.

Ol. Catellorum, Hirundinis, Castorei, ana ss. Nucis M. per Inf. ij. Succini
rect. j. Balsam. Peruviani j misce.
The Child continued in great heart and courage, under the use of these means,
for many days, no remarkable symptom or alteration occurring, save that the
wound became more tender. After a few Days, when we saw the continuance of that
Balsamous Dress, to the crassa meninx, had united the wound there, we used
instead of it, what might be more digestive,

Liniment. Arcei, Ol. Rosarum ana ss. Terebinthinae ij. Bals. Peruviani j.
misce.
The Syndon being dipped in some of this, made warm, produced good digestion in a
short time, but the Skull scaled very slowly, a thing not unusual, and without
cause in Children, whose Bones being soft and moist, are therefore tedious in
exfoliation; we used nothing at first to induce it, but this Cephalic Powder,

Rad. Aristoloch. R. Iridis Florent. Dictamni, Rorismarini sic. Sarcocollae,
Myrrhae, Olibani, ana j, fiat pulv. subtilis.
and toward the end to have it more drying, to suppress or prevent fungus, and
quicken desquamation, added the Bark of Guaiacum in Powder to it. In all that
time the Powder by exsiccating the moisture that causes fungus's, kept any
from arising, a thing so usual and vexatious in Children, that scarce a small
wound in their heads can be cured without it. To be short, the Dura Matter
united in four or five days, the unition was confirmed, so as we used digesives
after five more, digestion was procured in a Week after. And in about six Weeks
from the first dress, the Skull scaled, the Flesh grew up from the Dura Matter,
and under the scalings of the Skull, and became level with the Skin; it would
sometimes be exuberant, and soft or spongy, before it could be cicatrized, a
gentle touch of Roman Vitriol, and sometimes strewing prepared Lapis
Calaminaris thereon, shrank it up, and cicatrized the left wound in seven
Weeks; but the right remained three months. For it was not only difficult to
make a final desiccation thereof, because of the moisture gleeting from within
the Cranium, but necessary to delay it, that the matter might discharge it
self, as it gradually decreased. In performing this last part, I used a very
desiccative Sparadrap-Plaster, (that is, made by dipping Cloths in it when
relented) which being laid double served not only as a desiccative and a
defender from confluxion, by its gentle adstringency, but by its stubbornness
and strength defended the part from hurt by blows, falling, and such other
accidents as Children are liable to.

During the Cure, besides the frequent use of Clysters, we purged him four
times, beginning after five Weeks; at which time we made him a Cephalic
Electuary to take twice, or oftener in a day, the quantity of a Nutmeg. About
the time of exfoliation, he began to be vexed with a Cough and Catarrh, for it
he was purged twice, had some pectoral things, etc. which removed that
accident: and in the conclusion we ordered ten or twelve drops of Elixir
Proprietatis Paracelsi, to be some mornings given, in what Vehicle was most
acceptable to him.

This is truly and bona fide an account of the whole process in this Cure,
which while I was writing I resolved to make as particular in the manner of the
operations, and matter of the curatory method, as I could, having always
thought it a great defect in many Relators of Observations, that they have not
given a Diary of their principal applications, successes, variety of symptoms,
etc. most seeming rather to report that they cured such a Disease or accident,
than how they did it.

And that my Reader or Adversary may not surmise or object, That at the
distance of time, and intermixture of other avocations, some circumstances may
be less certain to me, it being improbable I should remember so particularly as
I seem to relate; I do assure them (and will at any time demonstrate it) that I
keep a Diary of all accidents occurring in my Profession and Practice, though
very much inferior and less considerable than those I have here recounted; from
whence I supplied the defects of my memory in drawing up this History.

And as a proof a posteriori, of the firmness of his head since we left him,
it is well known he has recovered once of a malignant Fever, and another time
of the Measles; in the former he did indeed complain much of his head paining
him; but that I imagine to be nothing, or little more than he would have done,
had that accident never betided him: At this day is he alive, brisk and sound,
has no obvious fign of any infirmity but a wan face, and that not
considerable, resulting rather from his constitution than sickness, being no
other than he had before he was hurt.

Thus have I finshed the History of fact and success: I must beg my Readers
permission to make a few Remarks thereon; they are such as I hope may
compensate for the time and trouble of a perusal. First, therefore, we will
look back and consider the greatness and plurality of the wounds and fractures,
the loss of so large a piece of the Skull, the wounds of the Dura and Pia
Matter, and of the Brain, together with the loss of part of it; the coldness of
the Season (a most injurious time for such an accident) the hereditary
infirmness and age of the Patient, and confess it is not usual to have such an
accumulation of very ill accidents and circumstances, to be not only
accompanied with such slight symptoms, but recovered so fortunately. This is a
suggestion which I make not vaingloriously, but to document and encourage young
Practitioners, that they be resolute, not despairing of success in cases that
seem the most difficult. To give a favorable Prognostic where there is
apparent danger, is rashness, and frequently discredits the Artist. I would not
put courage into his tongue by this Inference, but hope and vigorous vigilance
into his heart and hand; and how terrible and discouraging soever the Case be,
to proceed strenuously, as if there were the greatest probability of success.
No mischief (only a little disappointment) can be the worst effect of a
courageous endeavor; but many and great evils have been the result of despair,
and great and stupendous the success and benefit that have attended a
courageous and resolute Undertaker. Despair! the great Enemy to all
Achievements, and remora to improvement of all good things; Courage! the great
Discoverer and Columbus of Art, a temper to which the most noble acquisitions,
not in War only, but in useful knowledge, are owing. Neglect is the consequence
of despair, for men do but by halves what they think is impossible to be
finished; whence they too truly verify their own Prognostic: G. Fallop. cap.
45. lib. expos. Hip. de Vulner. Sennertus p.m. lib. 1. part. 1. c. 23.
whereas hope and courage, with a diligent use of proper remedies might have
saved the Patient. Hildanus Obs. cent. 1. obs. 13. Exempl. 4. cent. 4. obs. 2.
And this I find to be the advice many Authors infer from the Cure of wounds in
the Brain. -- Itaque nunquam derelinquatis aegros, semper sprerate salutem.

Nothing has been more the Parent of despair, or benumbed men's courage and
endeavors, so much as the Maxims and Prognostics of former, especially the
first Writers, if such as are delivered down to us with great Name and
Character; for then they seem confirmed by universal consent and constant
Tradition. Macrobius, Langius and others speak idolatrously of Hippocrates; and
a more modern Physician little less, calling his Aphorisms and Predictions,
Heurnius Com. in Aphor. Hippocrat.
Books full of Divine Oracles. Indeed among all the first Physicians,
Hippocrates and Galen are of the biggest Name, and most continued and deserved
repute; the former so happy to escape the censure, and have the praise of him
that ranted all that were before this Age, Helmont.
and spared very few in it: and yet it cannot be denied that some of his
Aphorisms are not only contradicted by daily experience, but confessed fallible
by his many Expositors and Commentators, although such as extravagantly admired
him. I will instance but in two or three, on one of which I shall remark at
large, as being that which seems to have been the Parent of this Principle I
am laboring to destroy. Indeed the high veneration I have for so great a name
as his, to whom the Art of healing is so much a Debtor, renders it uneasy to
me to object against any thing he has delivered, Sed magis amica veritas.

Sect. 5. Aphor. 31. Mulier utero gerens, sanguine misso ex vena, abortet --

Sect. 6. Aphor. 58. Si omentum excidat, necessario putrescit.

Sect. 6. Aphor. 18. He that would see more of these let him read Sanctus
Sanctorius, Methodi vitandorum errorum omnium qui in art medica contingunt;
especially lib. 1. cap. 31.
Vesica descissa, aut cerebro, aut cord, aut septo transverso, aut aliquo ex
tenuioribus intestinis, aut ventriculo, aut jecore, lethale est.

Diverse have been the ways his many Commentators have taken to expound this
Aphorism, and interpret the word lethale: By it some would have us understand
he meant that they are for the most part deadly; others that there is danger of
death; and some, that he means only large or very deep wounds of those pares,
vide the Comments of Galen, Jacotius, Brasavolus, Chr. a Vega, Fallopius,
Forestus, Heurnius, Fuchsius, etc. I shall note in general only, That there are
numerous instances against each part of this Aphorism, produced by these
Commentators, by Tagaultius, the German Vertuosi, etc. and betake my self to
that especially therein which seems to authorize the Objections of my Adversary
against what I have here delivered; which is, That Wounds of the Brain are
absolutely mortal and incurable: An opinion that so far obtained among even the
remotest Successors of Hippocrates, as to make some of them write after his
Copy, as J. de Vigo, Mr. Woodall, P. Low, Paracelsus, and Jaques Guilliameau,
(though the last, after he had so prognosticated, (without reserve) in his
Chapter of Wounds of the head, concludes his Apology, at the latter end of his
whole Work, with a prodigious Story of one cured by himself) and others I fear,
to rely thereon so far, as to despond, and become negligent, and consequently
suffer to be lost the life of that Patient, who by a man of other persuasions
might have been preserved. Such is the mischief of implicit credence, and
receiving for Oracles the Dixits of men, who (we all confess) dyed before the
most considerable and advantageous things in Anatomy, Medicine and Surgery
were born. The folly and vanity of so doing in this Particular will be
abundandy manifest, when I come to reckon the Authors and Observations that are
opposite to it.

But before I proceed to that, I must make a necessary Note or two more, for
the benefit of my young Brother, and observe to him the great advantage of
sufficient breathing in fractures of the Skull, or hurt of the parts within it;
for to no other but such a liberal and copious vent, for the discharge of
matter, etc. can be attributed the wonderful lenity or remisness of symptoms in
this Child: It Is usual for want of it to have vehement accidents, Sopor,
Vomitings, Convulsions, Fevers, intolerable headache, haemorrhagies at the
Nose, Eyes, Ears, etc. and all to vanish upon discharge given by a Trepan.

By this Observation more particularly I have seen the falsehood or mistake of
that Objection which H. Rhoonbuyse, Observe. Med. Chir. part. 2. Obs. 1.
and Monsieur de Foy urge against the use of a Trepan, viz. That the Dura Matter
adheres firmly to the inside of the Cranium, and that it cannot be separated
therefrom without laceration; nay it sticks, says Monsieur de Foy, so fast as
Paper pasted to a Board. And hence they take occasion to render not only
Trepanning and all Perforations impertinent and useless, but make an absurdity
of what is a most common Observation, viz. (which I just now noted) that large
breathing or discharge prevents the severe symptoms of Convulsions, Vomiting,
Sopor, etc. by venting off the matter: For if the Dura Matter so closely and
firmly adhere to the Skull, and therefore trepanning be dangerous and useless;
upon the same reason and principle must all discharges be of no benefit, yea
they are impossible; so that they deny not only what is commonly inferred, That
the discharge prevents the deadly symptoms; but tacitly disown the possibility
of any such efflux: since it the Dura Matter and the Skull be so united, there
can be no room for matter there to lodge. But forasmuch it is frequently seen
that large quantities of blood and matter ure to gleet out of cracks and
perforations of the Skull; we may conclude them mistaken till they tell us from
whence that should come, and where it lay, except there be a space between the
Dura Matter and Cranium. I have, upon opening the Skull of one dead by a fall or
blow, seen almost all the Dura Matter covered with coagulate blood, and in some
places near half an inch thick; but more remarkably does the History of this
Child confute the pretended observation of these two men (although they say
Sylvius de Boe and Blasius were Eyewitnesses) for here was many days a
sensible evacuation from under the Skull, of much matter, at first serous, and
sanguinary, but afterward concocted and laudable. If it be alleged, that this
was matter descending from the wound of the Calvaria, it does not answer me;
for come it whence it will, it supposes that there was room to contain it
under the Skull, and consequently that there was no such adhesion as they
pretend. If it be further urged, That upon such accidents as fractures of the
Skull, Concussions of the Brain, etc. the extravasate blood, separates the Dura
Matter, as Serum does the Cuticula in application of Cantharides, or scalding;
then their inference against Trepanning is out of doors, and it remains as safe
and needful as, if their exploration had never been made. I must profess that I
never found any truth in their discovery by diverse dissections, trepannings,
etc. nor in this Child, but that the large piece of Skull I extracted had not
the least adhesion to the Dura Matter; certainly had it been so common, or, as
they say, constant an Observation, it is probable in one so young, where parts
are usually less distinct, and separation imperfect, it must have been found.

The Summary of all that has been said in the Remarks on this Case are
reducible to these five Consectaries, First, That improbable and discouraging
accidents have been cured, and that therefore we never ought to despair or
esteem any thing absolutely mortal; Secondly, That we may be deceived by
relying on the Axioms, Aphorisms and Prognostics of the Ancients, though of
the most constant and universal reception; Thirdly, That wounds of the Brain in
particular, are curable, Fourthly, That ample vent thorough the Skull in
fractures thereof prevents the direful symptoms, and the want of it, occasions
them; and lastly, That the Dura Matter does not always adhere to the Skull, but
trepanning is safe and necessary, and, Monsieur de Foy and Rhoonhuyse in an
error.

My next Work is to produce my Vouchers, the Authors that affirm wounds of the
Brain curable. Some from their opinion, confirmed by History; but most of them
from their experience: the number of the Evidencesare sixty four, that of the
Experiments a hundred. I hope it will not seem superfluous and redundant to
produce so many, since in matters of great dispute, and where an Adversary is
very cofident, it is not only usual, but a great credit to the Cause to have a
multitude of Witnesses. It Is no less necessary to produce all those, and more,
if I had them, to show the wonderful ignorance of my Adversary, in not knowing
any of them; or his wickedness in dissembling that knowledge (so common and
familiar to men of reading, in his Profession) and that only because he might
have the better pretense and color to abuse.

A COLLECTION OF THE Opinions of sundry good Authors concerning Wounds of the
Brain, wherein no less than sixty affirm them curable, and confirm it by above
an hundred Observations.
GAlen in Comment. ad Aphor. 18. lib. 6. Hippocratis -- Cerebrum vulneratum,
saepius sanatum vidimus, and semel, and bis in Smyrna Ioniae, vivente adhuc
Praeeeptore Pelope, and erat Vulnus satis effatu dignum --

Idem, de usu partium, cap. 10. lib. 8. -- Admirabile spectaculum, atque
incredibile, quod Smyrnae in Ionia accidit, aliquando sumus conspicati,
Adolescentulum Vulnere in alterum anteriorum Ventriculorum accepto, superstitem
fuisse Dei (ut plerisque videbatur) voluntate.

Nicolas Nicolaus Flor. Sermon. 7. Tract. 4. cap. 91. writing of one wounded in
the head by a Sword, says, Profundato vulnere, usque ad substantiam Cerebri,
super verticem in anteriore part Frontis, usque ad medium Capitis, qui
sequenti die post vulnerationem, incurrit paralysim universalem, -- rectus
evasit.

Jacobus Carpus Tract. de fract. Cranii -- Vidi ad hunc usque diem, sex
homines, a quibus notabilis quantitas medullae cerebri exivit, and sanati sunt,
-- and habui fideles and peritos physicos in societate, a quibus in prima vet
secunda visitatione aegro, extraxi a labiis vulnerum magnam cerebri partem,
quae ex se exierat cranium; he proceeds to give very particular accounts of
each, and brings Persons of great Name, one of them being Nephew of the
Cardinal of Histrigon: Et ad istum habui multos Nobilissimos Testes.

M. Brasavolus Comment. ad Aphor. 18. lib. 6. Hippoc. Nos in Cerebro vulner at
is mira vidimus: in uno, qui Magnificis Valengis inserviebat, tanta substantiae
cerebri quantitas exivit, quantum est parvum galliae ovum, tamen evasit: --
Alium vidimus ex Corsica mili^em, cui sere dimidium Capitis, cum sua cerebri
portione, ablatum est, qui convaluit.

N. Massa Tom. 2. Lib. 1. Epist. 11. -- Ego testor Deum, and quamplurimi
homines qui adhuc vivunt, testes sunt, me plurimos vulneratos in capite, cum
incisione ossis panniculorum and insignis cerebri substantiae, sanasse art and
remediis medicinalibus -- laceratio in substantia cerebri, cum deperditione non
modicae cerebri quantitatis.

Inter quos vivit adhuc Clar. P. Raymundus, Vir Nobilis Venetus -- who, he
says, was wounded in the backpart of his head with a Sword, whereby the
Meninges and substance of the Brain were hurt; the wound being two fingers
long, and as deep as three fingers are thick. -- Sanitati restitutus est.
Testes sunt imprimis non pauci hujus Civitatis Medici, ac etiam tota and
Nobilium, and Civium Multitudo.

Sanitati etiam mea opera restitutus est Marcus Goro, who was wounded on the
Crown by a Halbert, which drove several pieces of the Skull through the
Meninges into the Brain. We lay dead till he drew them out, and then like one
newly awake cried out, Ad Dei laudem, sum sanus; for witnesses hereof, he
brings the like persons as in the Case before: Medicorum omnium, Nobilium
Senatorum.

Alphonsus quoque Bononiensis, qui percussus fuit cum ense, in part sinistra
capitis, inter suturam sagittalem and mendosam, cum incisione non solum ossis
and Membranarum, sed etiam insignis quantitatis substantiae Cerebri: etenim
vulnus erat ad longitudinem unius digiti cum dimidio, ita ut manifestissime
substantia cerebri incisa inspiciebatur, and digito tangebatur; cui
supervenerunt accidentia omnia mala mortem and interitum attestantia, -- Qui
tandem Domino auxiliante evasit. --

He also cured Theod. Bua a Greek, who not only lost his left hand, but
received four great wounds on his head with a Sword; they were horrible to see,
the Brain was considerably wounded, and terrible accidents followed, which he
removed, and cured the Patient, non sine maximo stupore totius Civitatis.

He also cured a young man whose Brain was wounded by a Blow, made with a Staff
by a strong man.

He cured a Servant of D. Pasch. Myshochiae, whose Brain was wounded between
the Coronal Suture and the Forehead, -- Possem quamplurimos alios mirabiles
casus cum incisione, and laceratione substantiae cerebri sanatos enumerare, --
dicant antiqui and moderni Medici, quicquid sibi placuerit.

Christopherus a Vega Comment. ad Aphor. 18. lib. 6. Hippoc. -- Multa vidimus
sanata, quae ad cerebri substantiam perveniebant, and amissa cerebri ipsius
portione.

Fr. Arceus lib. 1. cap. 6. de Cur. Vuln. -- Nos Dei auxilio, multos e maximis
and gravissimis vulneribus liberatos testari possumus; inter quos bactenus
novem jam sunt, quibus non exigua cerebri pars perierat. -- One wounded by a
Sword, whence issued as much Brain as three Wheat-Corns; secondly, A Boy of ten
years old, wounded in the forehead by a Mule, the edge of whose Iron-Shoe stuck
in the Bone, and lost as much Brain as the quantity of a Lentil; the fourth, A
man who had the hair, flesh and skull beaten through the Meninges into the
Brain, by a blunt Dart [Telo obtuso;] a fifth, Servant to the Marquess de
Falcis, wounded after the same manner, by a blow of a Candlestick; a sixth
wounded by the fall of a Stone, a Cubit long and broad, weighing twenty four
pounds, on the Sagittal Suture.

Corn. Gemma lib. 1. cap. 6. Cosm. Sic in vulneribus Cerebri, fragmento
Calvarivae ad mollem usque Meningem, per duram prorsus adacto, nonnulloque
ipsius substantiae apparente effluvio, nuper e populo quidam, Nobis manum
admoventibus est restitutus.

J. Andr. a Cruce lib. 1. tr. 2. cap. 14. Chirurgiae -- Hoc anno -- ac alibi
dum juniores essemus, vulnera Meningarum and cerebri sanavimus, and sanata
vidimus, nec sumus decepti, -- he then names many Witnesses -- Et paulo post
Feltriae nos fuimus in curatione cujusdam Adolescentulae, quae cum a cuspide
falcis, vulnus cum cerebri laesione passa fuerit, ex quo terebrata Calvaria,
notabilis portio ipsius cerebri exivisse competum est, transacto quarto mense
sanitati fuit restituta --

Horatius Augenius Tom. 1. lib. 9. Epist. 2. Vidimus nos aliquando totam
substantiam cerebri vulneratam, ventriculos dissectos, aliquam etiam portionem
cerebri, cum vulnere jam primum illato, for as profluxisse; hominem tamen
vulneratum, sanitati fuisse restitutum.

Bartapalea de fract. Cranii cap. 5. Et semel habui unum, Rusticum, cui erat
remota pars medullar is cerebri, qui est sanatus.

Theodoricus lib. 2. cap. 2. Chirurgiae. -- Quia multos fractis ambabus
membranis, and aliquos a quibus non parva quantitas medullae exivit, perfect
sanari vidimus. -- Scivi hominem, cui una Cellularum tota evacuata fuit, and
tandem repleta carne loco cerebri, per Dom. H. sanatus est. --

Volcherus Coiter. lib. obs. Chir. and Anatom. tells us of one be cured in the
house of Caesar Malvaticus a Noble Man in Bononia, wounded by a Sword. Vulnus
vero ab osse Bregmatis sinistri lateris, paulo post aures incipit, and
transversim per musculum temporalem, qui totus transcissus fuit, ad oculi
canthum majorem sese extendebat, atque in cerebri profundum ad ejusdem lateris
ventriculum fere penetravit, -- horrible symptoms followed, much Brain came
out, -- postquam curatus fuit.

The same Author in the same place relates at large the Story of a Soldier,
who by the splitting of a Gun received a wound -- inter supercilia pefregit,
and ad dimidii digiti longitudinem, in cerebrum oblique dextrorsum ingressum
est. Some other pieces wounded him on the eye, and several other places; so as
he seemed dead: a Barber dressed it at first, very ill; when by Command from
the Duke of Bavaria our Author was called, many very horrid symptoms attended,
and yet -- ac tandem 13 post inflictum vulnus mense, valetudinem pristinam
recuperavit.

Guido Cauliacus, The same qoutation I find in the Scholia Obs. 2. l. 6. P.
Forest. Obs. Chirurg. A. Parcus l. 10. c. 22.
as quoted by Desid. Jacotius Comment. ad Aphor. 15. lib. 1. sect. 3 coac.
Hippoc. and Tagaultius, Inst. Chir. lib. 2. c. 3. se quendam vidisse affirmat,
cui ex vulnere part capitis postica accepto, parva quaedam portico substantiae
cerebri exierat. -- and tamen is a tali. vulnere convaluit.

Er. Valleriolus lib. 4. obs. 10. lib. 5. obs. 9. lib. 6. obs. 4. gives three
Histories of wounds of the Brain that were cured.

Cabrolius obs. 16.22. and 24. relates. the Histories of three more cured.

Gabr. Fallopius Expos. in lib. Hip. de vuln. c. 45. directs to a method of
curing wounds of the Brain, and concludes, Ego etiam mirabilia expertus sum:
Vidi Zinganum, Januario mense frigidissimo, partisanone percussum, and sectum
est dimidium fere caput, and major quantitas Cerebri exiit, quan includi possit
in ovo gallinaceo, and sanatus est. Notate tamen, quod vidi multos in quibus
egressum est cerebrum, and aliquot remansere stolidi, aliqui supervixere usque
ad 120 dies, aliqui sanantur, and integri remanent.

The same Author Tom. 2. cap. 4. de Vuln. in genere, disputing against this
common acceptance of Hippocrates 's Aphorism, faith, Quinimo and ego ipse
praeter alia multa, exemplum habeo de quodam, cui Ferrariae in maximo frigore,
ac etiam Pado glaciato resecta fuit quantitas cerebri bri ad instar Ovi
Anseris; and tamen sanatus. -- Ego probo ex eodem Hippocrate 2. Prorh. ubise
interpretatur, dicens, quod parts vulneratae, si inferant mortem, oportet ut
sint validissime vulneratae --

Peter Forestus obs. med. lib. 9. obs. 35, 36. and in obs. Chir. obs. 2. lib.
6. in the Scholia on those Observations, he discourses the various
interpretations of Hippocrates, Aphor. 18. lib. 6. that it denies not, but
that such wounds may be cured; and himself gives diverse instances and
authorities to confirm it.

Amatus Lusitanus curat. med. obs. 83. cent. 2. says, he saw a young man at
Rome wounded in a Duel -- Per frontem ensem immisit, ex quo vulnere illico
laesus in terram concidit, and eum humi prostratum -- All the Physicians and
Surgeons agreed in opinion that he would dye. -- Tam enim penetrans dirumque
vulnus erat, ut cerebri substantia incisa, perforatave crederetur -- He
concludes from the unexpected success, at which all were amazed, that the Sword
went between the Ventricles of the Brain, etc.

H. Fab. ab Aquapendente lib. de vulner. c. 20. Pia Matter omnino tenuis est,
and prorsus cerebro adhaeret, ut vulnerari nequit sine cerebri vulnere; haec
vulnera fere semper sunt lethalia, interdum tamen aeger restituitur, -- ac
nuper in magno cerebri vulnere felicissimo successu, hoc sum usus: farinae
Milii, etc.

Zacutus Lusitanus, Prax. Admir. lib. 1. obs. 5. Decennis Puer percussus est
cum ense in part posteriore capitis. Hic passus est vulnus satis magnum, cum
incisione ossis Velaminum, and deper ditione substantiae cerebri, nam haec
exivit quantitate nucis juglandis; curatus convaluit citra noxam. See the next
Observation in the same Author.

Frans. Zanchez, obs. in opera, pat. 375. relates the Story of one, cui per
Bregma uncus ad cerebri medullam usque penitus adactus est, hujusque
portiuncula for as progrediens exsecta est, convaluit.

J. Veslingius, Syntagma Anatom. cap. 14. Sunt qui magnis cerebri vulneribus
superstites feliciter discrimen evaserunt; quamvis portio ejus aliqua sublata,
aut suborta putredine separata fuerit. Vulnere item coalescente, profundius
adacti Globi plumbei retinerentur, stylorumque fragmenta cerebro, and
meningibus infixa multis annis inhaererent.

Glandorp obs. 5. in curing a wound of the head, took out as much Brain as
would fill an Egg-shell.

Jaq. Guilleameu, although in his Chirurgical Works he be positive in this
Prognostic, That wounds of the Brain are mortal; yet in the end of his
Apology, with which he concludes the Book, gives us this Story: At Chartres
there was the Chamberlain of my Lord the Earl of Chiverny, called the
Peitmontois, who was wounded on his head by a Rapier, whereby the Parietale was
clean rescided thorough, yea and clean thorough the Dura and Pia Matter also,
piercing the depth of ones Finger into the substance of the Brain, whereof in
the second dressing there came out as much as the length and bigness of the
little Finger. He was completely cured by me, Monsieur Le Febure and Duret, the
Kings Doctors, and others of the faculty of Paris, expert in Surgery, diverse
Surgeons of the City of Chartres stood by; viz. Monsieur Chereu, Fauven,
etc. the Patient retaining no accident or impediment thereof.

Ambros. Parey lib. 10. cap. 22. says, he cured at Turenne a Page of the
Marshall Montejan of a fracture, and as much Brain being lost as half an
Hazel-Nut. And in Chapter 19. lib. 25. How many have I seen who -- have had a
portion of the Brain cut off by a wound of the head; yet have recovered!

Peter Pigreus de vuln. c. 9. lib. 4. relates the Cure of a very desperate
wound of the Brain.

G. Fab. Hildanus obs. Chirurg. cent. 1. obs. 13. Vocatus fuit a quodam Rustico
J. H. prove Hattingen, ut ipsius inviserem Sororem, quae vulnus contusum in
dextro osse Bregmatis, cum fractura Cranii -- portiunculam ad instar Fabae, ex
cerebri substantia digitis extraxi, -- denuo extrabit portiunculam ipsius
cerebri, ad Nucis Avellanae magnitudinem, and more afterward, and yet -- tamen
convaluit plenissme --

The same Author Exemplum 2. in this Observe. writes of a Maid, that by a blow
of a Stone had a fracture of the Skull, -- Tribus hebdomadibus ferme quotidie
portiones aliquas, ex cerebri substantia abstuli, natura ipsa expellente; ita
ut pars illa valde concava conspiceretur. -- Sicque pristinam sanitatem, Puella
brevi recuperata videbatur. He names many eminent Persons that saw this Cure
performed.

And in Exempl. 4. he relates the Cure of one that was wounded by a Sword into
the Brain, where the quantity of a Nut was lost, and many desperate symptoms
followed.

In cent. 4. obs. 1, 2, 3. he gives other instances, disputes upon the
Aphorism of Hippocrates, and enconrageth Surgeons to be courageous, and
think nothing impossible to Art.

D. Sennertus p. m. lib. 1. part. 1. cap. 23. -- Dum haec scribo, offertur mihi
and chirurgo, Faber Lignarius curandus, qui in osse sinistro; ad Suturam
Coronalem, securis ex alto projectae acie, vulnus pollicis fere longitudine in
cerebrum penetrans, acceperat; ita ut particula cranii effracta, statim eximi
posset, and cerebri portio Nucis Juglandis fere magnitudine propenderet:
convaluit tamen, cerebri illa portione extra propendente sensim abscedente. Et
quod mirum est, toto morbi decursu nec de dolor capitis, nec de ullo
symptomate conquestus est.

A. Laurentius Histor. Anat. Corporis hum. lib. 10. cap. 6. discoursing of the
Ventricles of the Brain says, Et gemini, ne altero eorum affecto, alterius
functio animali tam necessaria intercipiatur; laeso enim alterutro, levius
conting it perculum, quam si uter que afficiatur: testis est ille Juvenis qui
vulnere in dextro sinu accepto, evasit -- I find two Anatomists more suggest
the same thing, viz.

Casp. Bauhinus Anat. lib. 3. cap. 3.

Dr. H. Crook Microcosm. lib. 7. cap. 11.

J. Cook Mellif. Chir. p. 1. sect. 3. cap. 19. says, Though wounds of the
Brain are accounted deadly, yet experience shows they are of Curation -- One
I saw at Worcester after the Battle of Poick; the other I cured at Warwick, of
which Mr. W. Thorp had a sight.

Jann Van Beverwick, a Dutch Surgeon, in his Heel Ronst. part 2. cap. 1.
says he saw two very remarkable wounds of the Brain cured.

It Is too tedious to transcribe more: I will refer my Reader and my Adversary
to those following, which I will only name.

Symphorianus Campegius ennarrat. Hist. 25. lib. 4.

Desiderius Jacotius Comment. ad Aphor. 18. lib. 6. Hippoc.

J. Langius Epist. Med. lib. 1. Ep. 6.

Felix Wurts, part. 2. cap. 8.

Marcellus Donatus lib. 5. de Hist. Med. Mir. c. 4.

P. J. Lotichius lib. 6. c. 8. obs. 2.

J. Heurnius Com. ad Aphor. Hip. 18. sect. 6.

J. Skenckius obs. med. lib. 1. obs. 40.42.

Hen. Petreus tom. 2. disp. harmon. 36. quaest. 10.

Dr. Alexander Read, lect. of Wounds the 23.

J. Scultetus, Armam. Chir. tab. 32.

An anonymous Commentator on Mr. Bannister of Wounds, lib. 2. cap. 1.

S. Wiseman, page 401.

J. Brown of Wounds, chap. 35.

P. Borellus cent. 1. obs. 88.

J. Rhodius cent. 1. obst. 32.

Leonard Fuchsius comment. ad Aphor. 18. sect. 6. Hippoc.

J. Tagaultius Instit. Chirurg. lib. 2. cap. 3.

Bern. Gordonus Lilium Med. partic. 1. cap. 26.

J. Bilgerus Epist. G. Horstii obs. 14. lib. 2. par. 2.

P. J. Fabrus Chirurg. Spagyrica sect. 2. cap. 10.

G. Horstius Epist. Med. lib. 2. sect. 8.

J. Goulart Mem. and Admir. Histories, page 90.

Sim. Aloysius obs. 124. in Ephim. Germ. Vol. 7.

Ph. Jac. Sachz. obs. 119. miscel. curios. annus secundus.

I might also quote Fernelius lib. 7. cap. 8. de extern. corp. affect. and C.
Celsus de re medica lib. 5. cap. 26. Servari non potest cui Basis Cerebri
percussa est. And P. Barbet page 172. Wounds of the brain are for the most part
deadly; for they seem to pronounce death to wounds of the Brain not absolutely,
but on circumstances; and therefore are not for, but against my Adversary: but
what is defective in them will be abundantly supplied in those three Stories,
with which I will try the faith of my Reader, and conclude.

Alexander Benedictus lib. 4. Anatom. c. 24. as quoted by Zac. Lusitanus, (I
not having the Original) writes of one, quem vulneratum circa tempora sagitta,
post annum 25. Teli partem sternutatione rejecisse affirmat.

Tho. Bartholinus Acta medica pro anno 1676. obs. 55. commends from his own
experience an Oil of Amber, made sine Igne, in wounds of the Brain; but in his
Acta Medica Ann 73. Hist. 132. says, Eques quidam Borussus Telum ferreum
digitum longum and crassum, 14. annis sine insigni molestia, in cerebro
gestasse narratur. -- Tandem per Fauces suppuratum est. He names the person,
all the circumstances, and among them a Copy of Verses in the Church where the
Piece of Dart now hangs for a Monument.

The Academia Curiosa, Germanica miscel. vol. 3. obs. 278. relates from Martin
Schodel, in dissert. de Regno Hungarico, Anno 1629. that one Marcus Buxam a
Captain in Battle against the Turks had -- Lancea Turcica per oculum dextrum
adacta, ut retro per cervicem exiverit mucrone, mortem non intulit, sed
diligenter Chirurgorum manibus tractatus, restitutusque. They add another
Story of a Wound of the Brain cured; and give not only the Figure of this; as
set up in a Monument in Hungaria, but do very well attest it.

P. de Marchetis gives us five very remarkable Histories of Wounds of the
Brain cured: I will not transcribe them at large, but leave you to judge of
them by their several Titles, viz.

Obs. 1. Vulnus cum fractura cranii, and effluxu particulae cerebri, in seen
sexagenario.

Obs 2. Vulnus partis posticae capitis, cum fractura cranii, and cerebri part
corrupta excreta.

Obs. 3. Portio cerebri, cum annexa Dura and Pia Membrana, ex cranii fractura
educta.

Obs. 4. Vulnus mediae partis capitis, ad corpus usque callosum pervadens, cum
magna vi sanguinis effrusi, ad Lipothymiam usque feliciter sanatum.

Obs. 5. Vulnus magnum, cum paralysi Brachii oppositi, and linguae, sanatum,
educto frustulo ossis, cum portione Membranae Piae, and Cerebri.

I will conclude all with the words of that excellent Surgeon Fab. Hildanus,
obs. 13. lib. 1. who having related the Stories of four Wounds of the Brain
says,

Exempla haec in gratiam tyronum Chirurgorum recensere placuit, quos adhortor,
ne unquam de sanitate, aegri, quantumvis morbus magnus fuerit, ac prima front
incurabilis videatur, desperent, quemadmodum Chirurgus ille, cujus in proximo
praecedente exemplo mentio facta fuit, de salute aegri sui desperabat: posita
itaque fiducia in Dei Omnipotentia (facta tamen prius Prognosticatione and
protestatione coram consanguineis and adstantibus, de manifesto periculo)
curationem aggredi omnemque diligentiam adhibere debet Chirurgus, nec impio
illo Dicto, Desperatos non oportet attingere, ab Officio suo avocari.
Saepissime enim in morbis contingunt multa, quae antiquos latuerunt, and quorum
ratio nulla reddi potest.

THE EPILOGUE To my Learned and Civil ANTAGONIST, Dr W. Durston OF PLYMOUTH.
HAving been at the trouble and pains to write an History, and collect so many
Quotations to convince You (Worthy Sir) that Wounds of the Brain are curable; I
could not part so abruptly, or bid adieu to a Person of Your Merit and Candor,
till I had not only expostulated a little with You, but entertained You with
one wonderful Story more, which several modern Observators relate, viz. That on
dissection, they have found not only Sheep, and Creatures of a mere sensitive,
but some of the rational Species, without any Brain at all. Zacut. Lusit. prax.
mir. lib. 1. observe. 5. Fr. Jo^. Burii Epist. 1. ad Tho. Bartholin. Theod.
Kirking Spic. Anatomic. obs. 46. Nie. Tulpius obs. m. lib 1. obs. 24. Miscel.
Curiosa Germ. Vol 2. obs. 36. Tho. Barthol. Acta Med. Anno 71, 72. obs. 131. J.
Rhodius cent. 1. obs. 32. page 19.
They are many that thus say; and indeed they are things that strain a man's
faith no less than his reason. I must confess my self so credulous, and apt to
believe, that I am almost persuaded, Your death (if Your Skull be penetrable)
will furnish the World with an instance more surprising and incredible, viz. a
Man above fifty years old no better stockt in the Noddle than those other
addle-headed Cattle: If the contrary appear, it will certainly be the first
evidence You ever yielded of having any. Had You as much as this Child lost,
(whole Case your incivility has extorted from me) You would not have given the
lie to the eyes and fingers of a Physian, a Gentleman, an Apothecary, a
Surgeon, and diverse others; and (without the help of a Telescope) pretend to
see better at a miles distance, than they at the nearest advantage for
prospect. Who but a brainless Physician would oppose his single and ungrounded
opinion against the sense and observation of a multitude of the best and most
reputable Authors; and not only sneakingly, and in Corners, but publicly averr
and hold Guineys, that Wounds of the Brain were incurable; when the contrary is
affirmed by so many learned and experienced men, living and dead? What! Have
You read nothing but Hippocrates's Aphorisms? Is there not a Galen, nor a
Sennertus, a Bartholine, nor a Sckenckius, a Horstius, nor a Bauhine, a
Fallopius, nor a Laurentius, a Forestus, nor an Hildanus, a Zacutus, nor a
Pareus, in Your Study? Or are they there to be looked upon only? I never thought
your Library a Vatican: But I expected it should exceed that which Rablaias
tells us was in Pantagruel's Study, and Sampson Carasco, in that of Don Quixot.

I have been told indeed by a worthy Person, That You lately in a Bravado
boasted You had done with Books, things were common-plac'd in Your head. I
believe there wants not room for them, and that what is there is common enough;
for things a degree above it, I find are not in your Index.

Honest Doctor, I beg You not to conclude hence that I deny You to be learned:
I acknowledge your skill in Grammar, and I have a particular reason for it: But
in some matters of Art and learning You must confess your self ignorant, or a
wicked and scandalous Prevaricator; for from those numerous Quotations which I
have cited from Authors of the best credit and commonest reading, not only in
Surgery, but Anatomy, Philosophy and Physic; it is plainly inferrible, that
You are the one or the other.

The Dilemma (Civil Sir) lies thus: Either You knew those Authors did contain
those affirmations, or You knew it not; if You knew it, the last Point of the
Dilemma is in your teeth; if You knew it not, the consequence is most plain and
natural, That You are (in some things) ignorant. I have been told, that since
You have been convinced by us, You have excused your self to some by saying You
spoke in jest, to others by suggesting You had forgotten those readings. By
which excuses You entangle your self in both these Noozes. For is a man the
less wicked not a more knavish Prevaricator, for wounding a man's reputation in
jest, and sacrificing the good name and honor, not of a single Artist, but a
whole Fraternity, to sport? You know who betrayed with a kiss. The trivialness
of the inducement, and lightness of the provocation, aggravates the knavery of
the action. What! Cut the throats of men for pastime, and turn Gladiator for a
Farthing? To have pretended revenge, advantage or policy, had been equally
honest, and more generous. In Italy the Slaves slab for a Ryal (that is but Six
Pence) but the Heroes and the Bravoes are those that scorn to undertake it
under a hundred, two or three of Crowns.

Nor will your forgetfulness excuse your ignorance, except You show also the
difference between an ignorant man, and one that neither observes nor remembers
what he reads, especially when of so considerable a nature as this, and so
frequently mentioned. I perceive by your last excuse, that the
Common-Place-Book in your head was but a Vapor, or You lodged it in your Skull
incomplete.

But let us cease to be Satirical like Poets, and argue rationally like
Physicians, and expostulate the Case a little. Suppose it had never been known
de facto that Wounds of the Brain were curable, is that reason enough for a
wise and experienced man, one that daily beholds the prodigious effects of
Art, and the increase of skill, to affirm they never can? How ridiculous is the
memory of those that anathematized the Bishop, for affirming that there were
Antipodes? And they that put Galileo into the Inquisition, for his new
Philosophy, now so much in vogue even among the most learned of the Jesuits
themselves? How imprudent is it to bar Posterity by unreasonable
anticipations, and hang or damn men for opinions that by to morrow possess our
own Brains?

I am so far from denying (what seems impossible) that Posterity may familiarly
make Voyages to the Moon, that I am almost persuaded with Bishop Wilkins and
others, (not less eminent for, their piety than learning) that it will be so.
Navigation, to former times, before Ships were invented, must have seemed as
absurd and impossible; to have said then that men in great numbers together
should travel so many thousand miles on the Ocean, without seeing any Land,
till they hit directly to a small Island (suppose it St. Helena) had been
laughed at as much as this is by some men now. How many prodigious things are
there done in this last Age, that to the former seemed impossible? And how are
we puzzled now to recover and believe many things Pancirollus says were done by
the Ancients, and lost to us? Should all be Scepticks, and think nothing
possible but what they see, we should neither believe him, nor hope any future
improvement by invention. Had our Predecessors, and many Contemporaries, been
of that humor, they had sat down in despair, contented with what they knew;
many useful discoveries and noble inventions had still remained in the hands of
oblivion. I doubt not, at least I will not deny, that the perpetual Motion,
Quadrature of the Circle, Philosophers Stone, Universal n="*" See Helmont's
account of Butler's Stone.
Remedy, the Antichrist; manner of knowing longitude at Sea; so much sought
after, and puzling the minds of many men, together with all the desiderata will
be discovered and invented.

But we will talk more strictly like Physicians: What is there in the Anatomy
of the Brain (especially the Cortical part) as delivered to us by the hands of
the accurate and most renowned Willis, Highmore and Malpighius, that can
justify your opinion? I believe it might be demonstrated (but it were too
tedious, and I have more direct proof) from their several Hypotheses concerning
it, that the opinion (not of Hippocrates, for he wanted those complete
descriptions and notions concerning it) is absurd and groundless, in such who
after those illuminations persist in errors, the defective knowledge of our
Forefathers made them seem guilty of. It Is pertinacity in You, after all those
reasons to the contrary, and being told of so many Authors against You, to
continue two years in a mistake. If it were the opinion of Hippocrates, it was
but in him an error or defect. Diverse of his Commentators make it probable he
meant not as You do, that those Wounds were incurable; but that they were for
the most part so, or that very great ones were mortal.

But should it be allowed according to your apprehension and interpretation,
are his Aphorisms infallible? are there not some of them which every days
experience confuteth? Est magnopere medicis expendendum, quod in morbis
gravissimis sape evadunt, vel imbelles plurimi, etiam omnibus reclamantibus
notis, quae juata Hippocratis sacrosancta oracula mortem in limine esse
designent, sic in vulneribus cerebri -- C. Gemma l. 1. c. 6. Cosmic.
I will give You two for a taste, and refer You to Sanctorius for a Bellyfull,
Method. vi. tand. error. in med. lib. 1. cap. 31.
Sect 5. Aphor. 31. he says, Mulier utero gerens, sanguine misso ex vena,
abortet. Did that ever deter You from bleeding a teeming Woman? Hippocrates
fearing the Precept would not be sufficiently obliging, makes it a part of the
matriculating Oath, which all his Disciples took, that they should not bleed a
gravid Woman. This made Phlebotomy so terrible to big Bellies, that Pleurisies
and the severest cases, could scarce obtain the use of a Launcet, let the Age,
Constitution, Season and Clime be what it would. Nimium antiquos scrupulosos
circa V. S. in gravidis -- in Graeca major apprehensio fuit. -- but now it is
become the common remedy of abortion, frequently done in all times of their
breeding, and an opposite Aphorism set up, Primrof. Vulgi errorib. lib. 4. cap.
27.53.
Gravidis venae sectione mnon esse noxiam; n="" J. Schmidt. obs. 48. Ephim.
Germ. vol. 7.
Certe ego in praxi mea sine noxa, tempore ingravidationis omni, urgente
necessitate febrile, sanguinem tuto detraxi, non raro iteratis vicibus, non
raro in satis bona quantitate, neque unquam aliquam inde percepi noxam -- This
one Aphorism, says the Famous Mr. Boil, Exper. Philos. par. 2. page 5. Edir.
2.
has cost more lives than Draco's Laws, which were written in blood; having
for diverse Ages prevailed with great numbers of Physicians, to suffer
multitudes of their Female Patients to dye under their hands, who might
probably have been rescued by discreet Phlebotomy, which experience has
assured us has been sometimes not only safely, but carefully employed, even
when the Infant is grown pretty big. -- Through this mistake numbers of teeming
Women have been suffered to perish, who might probably by a seasonable loss of
some of their blood, have prevented that of their lives. So far that honorable
Author.

Another says, It has cost more lives than there are Letters in that Book;
and Sanctorius in one Chapter, Ubi supra lib. 15. cap. 11.
Ostenditur exemplo localium, quod quaelibet sententia Medicorum sit methodi
censura moderanda, as it were cries out, Exempla in medicina sunt
innumerabilia -- Ecce quod medica praecepta, nifi methodo ponderentur, and
moderentur, saepe nos fallere possint.

The other Aphorism is the 58th of the sixth Section, where he delivers, Si
omentum excidat, necessario putrescit. I need not quote Authors to show the
mistake thereof; but with Sanctorius conclude, That all the Sentences of
Hippocrates are not of perpetual verity, since Galen himself in his Comment on
that Aphorism says, Si quis vero aliquando vidit omentum, quod parvo tempore
extra prodierit, and deinde ad suum locum reductum, non putruerit, perpetuam
quidem, non esse probabit Hippocratis enuntiationem. And that the World since
he wrote it, has had a thousand Observations, contrary to that Aphorism, even
beyond the enlarged sense that he in the beginning of his Comment thereon would
have it understood, we may therefore make the inference of my Author, Plures
Aphorismos non esse eternae veritatis, and doubt whether this also may not have
tempted our Predecessors immediately to cut off the elapsed part of the Zirbus,
without trying whether they could reduce or preserve it; a thing common now,
even after it has been some considerable time in the crude Air.

Will You not submit to daily experience, loudly proclaiming the mischief of
such Principles, rather than jurare in verba Magistri? Sir Thomas Brown tells
us, He knew a Divine in France, a Man of singular Parts, that was so plunged
with three Lines of Seneca, that all the Antidotes drawn from Scripture and
Philosophy could not expel the poison of his error, -- Post mortem nihil est,
ipsaque Mors nihil. Mors individua est, noxia Corpori, nec parcens animae --
toti morimur, nullaque pars manet Nostri -- We find Wounds not only of the
Brain, but Stomach, Liver, Guts, Heart, Bladder, etc. cured, maugre the admired
Aphorism of Hippocrates that seems to contradict it. And this made good to us
in the Observations not of Pliny, Amatus Lusitanus, Baptista Porta, Goulart, or
Mandevil; but of Fallopius, Forestus, Skenckius, Hildanus, Zacutus; and a Body
of the best Physians in Germany. Shall we not believe them, confirmed by
experience, rather than two ambiguous Lines in Hippocrates?

Dear Sir, I beg your patience one minute more, while I comfort my self after
all your affronts with thinking how general they are. Society, You know,
alleviates misery. It Is not my particular self alone that You have reproached;
all of my way in these Parts are in the same Predicament. But I thank You
kindly, You treat us no worse than You do those of the Faculty to which You
pretend a more immediate relation. Every Doctor is a Novice, an Ignoramus, and
an obscure Fellow, in the presence of such an Apollo as You, like Candles in
the Sun.

Civil Sir, Be advised and persuaded for the sake of your own credit, and the
reputation of your Faculty and mine, to be hereafter more prudent, more civil;
forbear to disparage Artists, for thereby You will find (in the end)
disreputation to redound, not only to the Profession, but your self also, who
must needs suffer in the general contempt and ruin such vituperations will
produce: By your reproaching your Brethren, they are tempted to retaliate and
recriminate; and the World, apt to believe both, will make Conclusions very
ruinous to all. Utrum horum, etc.

If I seem too severe in my reproofs, and guilty of an incivility in treating
You, which I have condemned in your demeanor to my self; I hope my Apology
will be easy to any man that considers who was the Aggressor; that I have
forborne You two years, and that now necessitated to vindicate my self, I have
done it fairly and above board. The Law excuses a man if he kill another in
defense of his own life. If your reputation be wounded by this Vindication and
Defense of mine, the Law of Reason (they say, Reason is the soul of the Law)
will quit me on the same Principle. The Author of the most peaceable and
passive Religion in the World, by recommending the Serpent with the Dove,
tacitly allows us to turn and sting those that tread on us.

But however, I shall not be sorry if your reputation escape; my design was to
defend my own, not ruin yours; nor only to repartee on You by this Epilogue.
It was also to recommend a more prudent Principle to You, and to do You
justice; for to You is the World indebted for what benefit or advantage it may
obtain by the publication of this Narrative. I am very desirous they should not
only pay that thanks that is your due, for so signal a favor; but know also to
how honest, how civil and how learned a Gentleman they are beholden, that they
may proportion their gratitude to the Degree and Merit of the Person to whom
they are redevable. I presume they will be more charitable to us than You were,
and (which is all I have to beg of them) infer more justly and ingeniously,
That they are no Fools and Ignoramus's that can cure at this rate, nor Knaves
that can so well vindicate and justify their actions, and are not ashamed to
display them to the whole World.

And now, my most worthy Opponent, I have done the Epilogue, not for want of
matter, for I have abundance more and better at your service, when your next
courtesy shall draw them from the Pen of

J. Y.

FINIS.

