A SPEECH DELIVERED In the House of Commons, July 7th. 1641. being resolved
into a Committee, (So near as it could be collected together) In the Palatine
Cause.

BY Sr. SIMONDS D'EWES.

Printed in the year, 1641.

A SPEECH DELIVERED BY Sr. Simonds D'Ewes. July, 7th. 1641. in the Palatinate
cause, etc.
Sir,
WE have during this Parliament, fallen upon the debate of the greatest, and
most important affairs concerning our own good and welfaire at home, that
ever were agitated, and discussed at one meeting in the house of Commons. And
we are at this present, by the gracious invitation of his Royal Maje.
expressed in his most just Manifest read unto us, resolved to take into
consideration, the most sublime, and most difficult business of the Christian
World abroad: which has for the space of above twenty years last past, drawn
all the Kingdoms, and States of Europe, into an immediate or mediate
engagement: In which, there have been twenty pitched Battles fought, a Million
of Men, Women, and Children destroyed by the Sword, by the Flames, by Famine,
and by Pestilence; and that sometimes populous and fertile Empire of Germany,
reduced to a most extreme and calumitous desolation. I have in those few
spare-houres I could borrow yesterday, from the public service of the House,
recollected some particulars, which may conduce to the clearing of this great
cause, being drawn out of the Autographs themselves, or out of our Records at
home, or out of the Writings of our very Adversaries, and others abroad. I
shall therefore begin at the Original it self, of the never enough to be
lamented loss of the Prince Palatines Domino^s, and Electorall dignity: that
so we may take along with us, in our intended disputes; not only our
affections, but our consciences. It is therefore very manifest, to all that are
but meanly verst in the Cabinet affairs of Christendom; that the Jesuits have
consulted for many years last past, as well before, as since the furious
Wars of Germany, by what means to ruin the Evangelicall Princes and party
there. Their chief aim has been, so to divide the Protestant Princes
amongst themselves, as they might be made use of each against other, for the
ruin each of other. The first occasion that offered it self within our
memories, was the pretenses of several competitors to the Dukedomes of Cleve
and Iuliers, and they sailed but a very little to have executed their intended
design upon that occasion. But their hopes failing in it, they apply
themselves integrally to Ferd^nand of Austria, Duke of Gratz, a Prince not long
since so poor, and of so mean a consideration to add the weight of but one
grain, to the down-ballancing of the affairs of Christendom, as his name was
scarce heard off.

They find him a fit subject for them to work upon, having from his Cradle
been bredd up in an extreme hatred of the Protestant par^y, who professed the
truth. They resound nothing into the ears of the old Emperor Matthias, but
his Cousin Ferdinands high merits, so as he passing by his own natural
brothers, and the head of his house, the Spanish King adopts Ferdinand of Gratz
for his son, so to prepare a way to make him the successor of his Scepter,
Crown, and Purple.

Then were the sacred Dyets of the Empire, the ancient means to reconcile
differences, and prevent jealousies, as often dissolved abortively as called
insincerely. Rumors were spread of practices and designs against the
Protestant Princes and Cities. And that those rumors might not vanish in
smoke, the Liberties of the great and ancient City of Stratsburgh were
oppressed. The Protestant Princes seeing materials and engines on every side,
prepared for their ruin; were necessitated to meet at Heilburn, and there to
conclud an union amongst themselves.

This gave the Jesuits an assured hope, of making Germany speedily miserable
by a calamitous War; for not only the Pontifician Princes, took the
opportunity to settle a Catholic league, as they called it amongst
themselves: but also, the Elector of Saxony, like a true Pseudo-Lutheran,
neither Protesttant nor Papist, shows as good an affection to the Catholic
league, as the Evangelike union. The old Emperor Matthias begins now to act
his part, and the Jesuits spur on their ready Scholar Ferdinand of Gratz,
to ascend the bloody Theator they had so long designed him. Through the old
Emperors intercession, abusing the Bohemian Protestants credulity, with Sugared
flatteries and large promises, he is admitted to the Crown of that rich
Kingdom; which soon after made way for him unto the Crown of Hungary also.
The Jesuits and the Spaniard did now only want a fair occasion to begin a
War in Germany. The Emperor Matthias labors with the Protestant Princes, to
dissolve their Union; which not taking effect, the Bishop of Spiers is
encouraged under hand to pick a quarrel with the Prince Elector Palatine, and
to build a strong Fortress upon his neighbors Territories, pretending he had
right to that plott of ground, upon which the said Fortress was raised: but an
higher providence did not suffer this Spark to set Germany on fire, though it
had been kindled at the Prince Electors own door (to affront and provoke him)
for he by an incredible celerity, did cause the said Fortress to be demolished
before the Enemy could sit and furnish it for his intended use, which made him
sit still, and study for a new occasion, which that it might not be long
wanting; the Liberties and Privileges of the Protestants in Bohemia, contrary
to their new King Ferdinands oath, were temerated; and by that means in the
Year 1619. the greater part of the Estates of that Kingdom were necessitated
after mature deliberation to abdicate him, and to elect, Frederick Prince
Elector Palatine for their King.

And thus are we arrived at that sadd period of time, upon which so many
fatalities have ensued, in which we may see evidentlie; that the Prince Elector
Palatine was not causallie guilty of any part of that Ocean of blood, that has
been since spilt in Germany, as the Pontifician side pretend he was. The Scene
was long before prepared by the enemies of the Truth; and the Kingdom of
Bohemia was filled with arms and hostilities diverse months, before his
accepting of that Crown, when himself labored by an earnest Mediation, to
have given a peaceable issue to those bloody beginnings. It was the Honor,
and greatness of that matchless Princess that he gained here, and the
considerable succors they expected from hence, that especially drew the
Bohemians to that choice. It therefore concerns us now at length, to provide
that the Prince Elector himself, and the other Princely Branches of that
great Family (being the second without question, if not the first, and most
Ancient of the Empire) extracted by their last match, from the Royal line of
Great-Britaine, should not under color of their Fathers accepting that Crown,
to which they now pretend no title, be for ever despoiled of their ancient
inheritance Electorall dignity: to which calamity they had never been
reduced, had not the French King at that time forgotten the old Maxim of his
Predecessors, which was to keep even the balance of Germany, to which also
did most fatallie concur, the Duke of Bavarias ambition betraying his own
blood, and the Duke of Saxonies taking of Arms against the Evangelicall
party. By this means and the advancing of Spinola with the Spanish Army out
of the Nether-Lands, was not only the Kingdom of Bohemia lost in a few
months, but the Palatinate also, excepting some few places of strength
invested by the Enemy, and that poor people left to slaughter, calamity, and
desolation. The correspondence of some ill Ministers of this State abroad, with
those of Porraine states here, assisted by some fatal instruments at home,
furthered all this mischeife at the instant putting this state in hope of a
Match when supplies should rather have been sent from hence, to have preserved
at least the Electorall Territories from an invading power. It is true, that
the Spanish Match had been generally treated off, some five or six years
before this fatal fire kindled in Germany, being first set on foot by the
Duke of Lerma under Philip of Austria the late King of Spain: but now it was
effectually advanced and fortified with a conjoined treaty of accommodating
the Palatine cause without effusion of blood. This and much more appears in
the Original journall books of the two houses of Parliament in Anno. 21.
Iacobi Regis, which I have so far perused, as so short a time would give leave;
and though that matters are there set down at large, especially in the Records
of the House of Peers, yet I have abstracted it into so narrow a compass, as
may well sort with the little spare time of this House to hear it. The
relation was first made at White Hall during that Parliament, in the presence
of the greater part of both the said houses, on Tuesday Febr. 24. and it was
afterward Reported upon Friday the 27. day of the same month next ensuing, in
the Lords house, by the then Lord Keeper, and in the house of Commons, by Sr.
Richard Weston, at that time Chancellor of the Exchequer. It is there at large
set forth, that his Mties. Royal Father, having had several fair promises
from the Emperor Ferdinand the 2d. and the King of Spain, of a peaceable
restitution of the Palatinate, caused not only such considerable forces, as
were then remaining in Germany under the Prince Electors ensigns to disband;
but procured also, some places of strength in the Palatinate it self, to be
surrendered and consigned over in trust to the late Infanta of Spain. But in
the year 1622. our late Royal Sovereign King James, upon his Ambassadors
return from Bruxels, having discovered the Emperors intentions to be full of
insinceritie and deceit, wrote his Princely Letters bearing date at Hampton
Court October. 3. 1622. to the (then and still) Earl of Bristow his Maties.
extraordinary Ambassador in Spain; to let him know that he now perceived
little sincerity in all the Spanish Kings promises, for the peaceable
restitution of the Palatinate, by whose only means he had suffered the same
to be lost to the Emperor, and that therefore he should presently press that
King, either to give a full and direct answer, under his hand and seal, for
the restitution thereof; or else to join his Arms with his Matie. against the
Emperor for the recoverie of the same: But this matter as it further appears
by the Original Iournall-bookes of the Lords house, being either not thoroughly
pressed, or notably dissembled. So many delays ensued one upon the neck of
another; as in the issue it drew his Royal Matie. then Prince of Wales, to
undertake that dangerous and remote journey unto that Nation, which has bin
the long and hereditarie enemy of England. This Journey, was chiefly undertaken
by so great a Prince to add an end, one way or other, to that unfortunate
treaty, and his stay in Spain so long, did causally proceed from his earnest
desire to have effected a peaceable restitution of the Palatinate, and
therefore I doubt not, but he shall now live to verify that excellent, and
Heroicke expression, which he made to the Conde de Oilvarez a little before his
coming out of that Kingdom.

Look for neither Marriage nor friendship, without the restitution of the
Palatinate.

And I assure my self, that the force and power of great Britain, which was
lately by subtle and wicked instruments, divided against it self, being now
United in one again, will be able to effect such great and considerabl^
actions, as shall render his Majes. Name and Reign glorious to all posterity.
The two houses of Parliament, at that time received the before mentioned
declaration, with so much resentment, as having first rendered glory to God that
had so seasonably discovered the Spanish-frauds, and next their humble
acknowledgments to their then gracious Sovereign, for requiring their Counsels
in a business of so great importance, they did unanimously advize him to
break off the said two treaties touching the marriage, and the restitution of
the Palatinate; engaging no less, then their persons and purses, for the
recovery of the then Prince Electors ancient and hereditarie Dominions. It
appears also in the Original Iournall-booke of this house, De ano. Io.
Caroll, that this great business was again taken into consideration, but was
finally incombed with other matters of great moment, by the fatal and abortive
disolution of that Parliament. If therefore this great Counsel of the
Kingdom, did in those two former Parliaments, account the restitution of this
Illustrious and Princely family to be of such great necesitie for the
preserving of true Religion broad, and securing our selves at home, as to
engage themselves for an assistance therein; certainly we may upon much better
grounds undertake the same now, when I assure my self we may go as far with
a thousand pounds for the present as we could have done with ten thousand at
that time, for let us but take a short view of thee state of Christendom, what
it was then, and what it is now, and we shall easily perseive a great
alteration in the balance thereof.

In France where Monsieur de Luynes did then rule all, being himself acted by
the Popes Legate, that King contrary to the examples of Francis the first,
Henry the second and of Henry the Great his own Father and contrary to the
maxims and interst of that State and his own safety, advanced the formidable
power and spreading greatness of the House of Austria: but now the same French
Kings eyes have been so opened, that shaking off that former unhappy slumber
he was in, he has by his arms and power to his immortal honor and glory
for diverse years last past, endeavored to restore again that Liberty to the
Germane Empire, in the ruin of which himself had so fatallie before concurred.

The Swedes were then involued in several wars or iealousies with the Pole
and enforced to keep at home to defend their own, but now have a strong Army
and possess diverse pieces of important consequence within the very bowels of
the Empire.

The Episcopal Electors with the other Pontifician Princes and Prelates the
sworn enemies the Protestant Religion, were then rich and potent, but since
most of their Countries and Territories have tasted of the same calamities of
War which they had formerly brought upon their neighbors so as now they are
most of them scarce able to defend their own, much less to offend any other.

The Pseudo-Lutheran Elector of Saxony that is causallie guilty more then any
other single person living, of all those calamities and slaughters which have
for so many years wasted Germany and was then so liberal of his Treasure,
and so forward with his arms to ancillate to the Emperors designs to the
almost utter subversion of the true Religion in Germany, is now after the
reiterated temeration of his faith and promises, the fatal survivor of the
several devastations of his own Cuntrie and dominions: So as all those vast
difficulties and great dangers which might well have retarded the forwardnes of
those two former Parliaments the first being held in the 22. year of his
Maiestes royal Father, and the latter in his own first year, being now
removed, we have greater encouragements then ever to concur with our sacred
sovereign in the asserting of this his most just and princely Manifest.

For mine own part I expect no good issue of the present Treaty at the Diet
of Ratisbone, I know the Duke of Bavarit^ ambition too well ever to imagine
that he will part with those large revenues, and much less with the
Septem-virall dignity and suffrage he has obtained by the Prince Electors
calamity and misfortune; unless it be extorted from him by force of arms. My
humble advice therefore is, that we send up to the Lords to desire a speedy
conference with them, in which we may aquaint their Lordships how far we have
proceeded in our approbation of his Majesty's most royal Manifest, and to move
them to concur unanimously with us therein.

FINIS.

