ARTICLES EXHIBITED IN PARLIAMENT AGAINST WILLIAM ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBURY,
1640.

Printed in the year 1640

Articles of the Commons assembled in Parliament, in maintenance of the
accusation, whereby WILLIAM LAVD Archbishop of Canterbury, stands charged with
high Treason.
I.
THat the said William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury, has traitorously
labored to subvert the fundamental Laws and Government of the Kingdom, by
giving his Majesty advice privately, and at Council Table, High Commission,
and in other places said, that he would have them governed by Civil Laws, and
further said, he would make the proudest subject in the Kingdom to give way to
him; and being told it was against Law, he replied he would make it Law, and
that the King might at his own pleasure take away without Law, and make it
warrantable by Gods Law.

II.
His countenancing of Books and their Authors for the maintenance of his
unlimited and absolute power, wherein the power of the Parliament is denied,
and the Bishops power of Prelacie set up.

III.
That he traitorously went about to interrupt the Judges by his threatenings,
and other means, to constrain them to give false Judgment in the case of
Ship Money, as will appear both by writings, and his hand, by testimony of
diverse persons of good worth and quality.

IV.
That he has taken bribes, and sold Justice in the high Commission Court, as
Archbishop, and has not only corrupted the Judges there, but has also sold
Judicious places to be corrupted.

V.
That he has endeavored the encroachment of Jurisdiction and institution of
Canons, which are not only unlawful, but prejudicial to the subject; and
that he has exercised his authority very cruelly, both as a Chancellor,
Commissioner, and Judge.

VI.
That he has traitorously assumed a capital power over his Majesty's
subjects, denying his power of Prelacy as from the King.

VII.
That by false erroneous doctrines, and other sinister ways and means, he
went about to subvert Religion established in this Kingdom, and to set up
Papistry and superstition in the Church.

VIII.
That by undue means and practices he has gotten into his hands the power of
nominating of Ministers to spiritual promotions, and has preserved none but
scandalous Ministers thereunto, and has preferred corrupt Chaplains to his
Majesty.

IX.
That his own Ministers, as Heywood, ^eyfield, and others, are notoriously
disaffected to Religion.

X.
That he has endeavored to reconcile us to the Church of Rome, and to that
end has employed a Jesuit and a Papist, and has wrought with the Popes Agent
in several points.

XI.
That to suppress preaching, he has suspended diverse good men, and has used
unlawful means, by Letters, and otherwise, to several Bishops to suppress
them.

XII.
That he has traitorously endeavored to suppress the French Religion here
amongst us, which is the same that we are of; and the Dutch Church, and to set
division between them and us.

XIII.
That he has traitorously endeavored to set division between the King and
the subjects, and has gone about to bring in Innovations into the Church, and
has induced the King to war with the Scots, and many upon their death beds
to give toward the maintenance of the war; and has caused the Clergy to
give freely toward the same. And has brought in many superstitions and
innovations into the Church of Scotland, And that he procured the King to
break the pacification, whereby to cause a bloody war between the two
Kingdoms.

XIV.
That to preserve himself from being questioned for these and other his
traitorous designs, from the first year of his Majesty's reign till now, he
has labored to subvert the rites of Parliamentary proceedings, and to incense
his Majesty against Parliaments.

By all which Words, Councels and Actions, he has traitorously labored to
alienate the hearts of the Kings liege peolpe from his Majesty, to set division
between them; and to ruin and destroy his Majesty's Kingdoms, for which they
impeach him of High Treason against our Sovereign Lord the King, his Crown
and Dignity.

And the said Commons by Protestations, saving to themselves the liberty of
exhibiting at any time hereafter, any other accusation or impeachment against
the said William Laud Archbishop of Canterbury, and also of replying to the
answers that he the said Archbishop shall make unto the said Articles, or to
any of them; and of offering proofs also of the premises, or any of them, or
any other impeachment or accusation that shall be exhibited by them, as the
cause shall, according to the course of Parliaments require, do pray that he
the said William Laud, Archbishop of Canterbury may be put speedily to answer
for all and every the Premises, that such proceedings, Examinations, Trials
and Judgments, may be upon every of them had and used, as is agreeable to Law
and Justice.

FINIS.

