A GODLY FORM OF HOVSHOLD GOVERNMENT: FOR THE ORDERING OF PRIVATE FAMILIES,
according to the direction of Gods Word.

Whereunto is adjoined in a more particular manner, the several duties of the
Husband toward his wife: and the wives duty toward her Husband. The Parents
duty toward their children: and the childrens toward their parents. The
Masters duty toward his servants: and also the servants duty toward their
Masters.

First gathered by R. C. and now newly perused, amended and augmented by John
Dod and Robert Cleuer.

ISIDORE.

Thou profitest much when thou read, if thou practisest that which thou
read.

BERNARD.

What avails it thee to read often in books the holy Name of our Savior,
except thou study and endeavor to have godliness in thy behavior?

LONDON,

Printed by R. Field for Thomas Man, and are to be sold by Arthur Johnson,
near the great North door of Paul's Church. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVL MASTER ROBERT Burgaine of Roxall, one of his
Majesty's Justices of peace in the County of Warwick: to the right worshipful
Master John Diue of Ridlington Park, in the County of Rutland: and to the
worshipful Master Edmund Temple of Temple hall in the Countse of Leicester,
Esquires, as also to their religious and virtuous wives:
R. C. wishes with heart and mind, grace from God the Father, by Jesus
Christ, and constancy in the truth of the Gospel, to the end, and in the end.

Auing collected and finished this Treatise ensuing, and devising very
carefully with my self to whom I might Dedicate the same: at length I resolved
that none were meeter to undertake the patronage thereof, then some such meet
persons, as did already (in some good measure) practice within their several
charges, the several points and duties contained therein, and so would further
prosecute those other necessary parts, which they have yet in some part
pretermitted. Whereupon, calling to mind the holy exercises daily used and
exercised in all your houses, I was moved for two causes, to make you all
jointly Patrons thereof.

First, for that I acknowledge my self beholden and indebted unto you all
diversely, since my first acquaintanoe with you; and therefore (left I should
deserve the blame of unthankfulness for benefits received) I am bold under
your Names, to offer to the whole Church of God these my simple collections.

Secondly, for that as you are all joined and linked in kindred by reason of
marriage: so also you are, and have bin a long time inseparably knit in a
zealous and sincere profession of Gods word and Religion. And for so much as I
may not (for many respects) accomplish what good I willingly would: yet lest I
should be thought to spend the remainder of my years in an idle condition, or
to hide my talent in a napkin; I have been no less careful then willing, to
labor other ways to do what I may to glorify God, and profit his Church.

Neither will these my labors be utterly unprofitable, if my purpose therein
be rightly conferred with the purpose of my writings. For such Householders as
pretend to be great Protestants and sound professors of the Gospel, may long
enough talk of Discipline, and still complain of the want of Church
government; but all in vain, and to no purpose, unless they will begin this
most necessary discipline, in reforming their own houses according to the
direction in this Treatise, and so suffer the holy religion of God to take
place among their family at home, otherwise they shall travel much, and
profit little.

For although there be never so good laws in Cities, never so pure order in
Churches, yet if masters of families do not practice at home catechizing in
their houses, and join their helping hands to Magistrates and Ministers, they
may in truth (but unjustly as many have done) complain that their children and
servants are disordered, and corrupted abroad, when in truth, they were
disordered, and are still corrupted and marred at home. And therefore it cannot
be, neither is it to be hoped for, that either the father of his children, or
the husband of his wife, or the master of his servants, should look for that
obedience, that reverence, that faithfulness, and that dutifulnes, which they
of right ought to have, and the other in conscience, and of bounden duties are
bound to perform, unless they do now at length endeavor to see these orders
and duties hereafter mentioned, to be practiced within their several
households. For if Parents and Householders shall perform no further duty to
their children and servants, then to provide for them, meat, drink and
apparel, and to pay them their wages: then Papists, Atheists, yea Turks and
infidels, do yield this duty as well as they.

And seeing all men be careful that their horses and bullockes should have
sufficient fodder and prouender, to the end they may have their labor in lieu
and recompense thereof: it does consequently follow, that therefore a Christian
householder ought to have over his children and servants as much more Christian
care, then he has over dumb and insensible beasts, that so he may receive a
singular comfort from the daily conte^plation of their increase in spiritual
graces.

Oh what a sweet and comfortable thing shall this be to the soul and
conscience of such an Householder, when he has been so diligent and careful
in the training and bringing up of his children and servants in the obedience
and ways of the Lord, that he may rightly deserve to have this worthy report
and commendation given unto him, from the mouth and pen of the godly: Namely,
that he has a Church in his house: that is, a company of sound and faithful
Christians, such as fear God indeed? as the like report was given by the
Apostle to those godly housekeepers, Aquila and Priscilla his wife: Romans 16.
5. 1. Cor. 16. 19, as also to Philemon, Phil. 2.

Therefore all Parents and householders are (in the Lord) to be exhorted, that
they would be careful to bring up their children and family, so as they
either (by some good tokens,) may see them the children of God, and heirs of
his Covenant, or at the least, they may be comforted in their own consciences,
notwithstanding that their children and servants (for some cause unknown to
them) do refuse their counsel and instruction; seeing they to the uttermost of
their power and ability, have used all good means to bring them up well, and
have rightly offered them to the Lord.

Now if parents and masters have just cause to bewail and lament, when (thus
traveling in good education and information) they cannot yet see good effects,
and godly fruits in their children and servants: how much more cause of grief
may they have, when they have used and bestowed no labor at all, (either by
themselves, or others for them) to bring them up in the nurture and fear of
the Lord? And yet alas, many will be grieved for the one, that will not be any
thing moved for the other. Wherefore let all parents and masters of families
know and learn, that if they will convey Gods blessings to their posterities,
then they must do and perform the duties belonging thereunto. Yea, let them
(if they be loath to convey Gods judgments to their children) carefully avoid
the means unto it.

And surely as it is a blessed thing in the hour of death, with Simeon, to
depart in peace, leaving their Luke 2. 29.
wives, children, and servants members of Christ, spouses to Christ, children
to God, and servants to the Lord: so in extremity of death, no one thing will
be more grievous unto parents and householders, then (the Lord having given them
the charge of so many souls to be furthered to salvation) that (...) own
tormented consciences shall press them, in as much as they have helped their
children and servants forward to their damnation; and so (which is more
fearful) they shall have them spewing and foming on their faces, continual
curses in hell, then accusing them for ever to be the murderers of their
souls, and cutthroats of their salvation.

Is it any marvel, if householders many times find small obedience, and less
dutifulness and faithfulness at the hands of their children and servants,
seeing they omit and leave undone the performance of these so Christian duties
toward them herein expressed, and enjoined of the Lord? For so does God often
leave manifest tokens of his wrath, in punishing disobedience with disobedience.

How can any master of a household, whatsoever he be, look to have his family
trusty and faithful unto him, and yet he himself is faithless to God? Does
he marvel, that his children and servants fear not him, whereas he himself
fears not the Lord? Will he maintain his authority over those under his
charge, and he himself does not yield obedience unto the authority of God his
Creator?

Moreover, it is manifest, that the good man of the house, by planting Gods
religion in his family, shall not a little advance and set forward his own
private profit and commodity. For wicked and ungodly servants, are for the
most part loyterers, pickers, and deceitful: whereas on the other side, godly
servants are just and faithful, whom in his absence he may trust to Genesis 30.
30. and 39. 5. etc.
do such business and work as he wills them to do.

If masters of families be careful and desirous (as in conscience they ought)
that their wives, children, and servants, should reform themselves, and
endeavor to practice such duties as do appertain and belong unto them; then
they must likewise be diligent and careful to reform themselves, both
inwardly and outwardly, in such points and duties as hitherto they have left
undone: otherwise, they may justly say unto them: Physician healc your self:
er, why do you will us Luke 4. 23. and 22. 32. Romans 2. 21.
to do that which you do not practice your self? For as one candle cannot
light another if it self be out: even so a master of a household shall not
reform those of his charge, and inflame them with the love of God and
godliness, if he himself be void of the same.

Let every master of a household therefore say and perform with Joshua: I and
my family will serve the Lord: Ios. 24. 15. And likewise let every Christian
Lady, Mistress, and Dame, say with Hester: I and my maids will do the like:
Hest. 4. 16. And so no doubt, God will power his blessings on them and theirs
in this life, and everlasting happiness on them in the life to come.

Touching the Book it self, I will not say any thing to the commendation
thereof, but only this: That I am assured, that if such duties as are
mentioned therein, were duly and carefully practiced of all such as are named
in it, then (no doubt) virtue and godly religion would greatly flourish, to the
advancement of Gods glory; and also sin and wickedness would then decrease
and fall down, to the utter subversion and overthrow of Satan's kingdom.

This Treatise I confess is not garnished with eloquence, nor full of great
cunning, nor beautified with flowers of man's wisdom, neither yet does it
discourse or treat of high or dark things, neither is it stuffed with subtle
questions and arguments, nor indicted with Rhetorical and eloquent style, as
those commonly be, which are propounded and set forth to the world, rather for
boasting and vainglory sake, then for any desire to edify, and to do others
good: but it is plain, and without any great gayness; yet so full of good,
necessary, The profit of this book.
and wholesome instructions, that whosoever reads, and marketh it with a
right disposed mind, and willing to practice it, without respect to any other
things, then God, the reformation of his life, and the (...) of his (...)
(which is the only work which Christians must level at) he may reap
singular, profit thereby.

And undoubtedly, it may well be said, that unto Good books (...) to climb up
to heaven.
true Christians, good and holy books are as ladders to climb up unto heaven:
as sparks to kindle the (...) of the Spirit, when it is quenched, or waxen
cold in them; and as props to stay up their faith, that it may increase.

Praying therefore your Worships, to accept of my dutiful good will, and to
pardon my boldness, I cease to add any further things: beseeching God of his
endless mercy for Christ's sake, to strengthen you still in that good and
happy course of his word, and all other good learning: to furnish you all
abundantly with all spiritual and heavenly knowledge, to the careful
practicing of the same, in the fruits of your most holy and blessed callings,
to the advancement of the glory of our God, and to your own everlasting
comfort in Christ Jesus. So be it.

Your Worships in all Christian dutifulness, most willing, R. C.

A GODLY FORM OF HOVSHOLD GOVERNMENT: CAREFVLLY TO be practiced of all
Christian Householders.
AN Household is as it were a little Commonwealth, by the good government
whereof, Gods glory may be advanced, and the commonwealth which stands of
several families benefited; and all that live in that family receive much
comfort and commodity.

But this government of a Family is not very common in the world: for it is
not a thing that men can stumble on by chance. By Wisdom The rule of good
government is wisdom:
(says Solomon) is an house builded, and with understanding it is established;
and with knowledge shall the chambers thereof be filled with all precious and
pleasant riches: that is, shall obtain all kind of Pro. 24. 3. 4
blessings. See also Pro. 28. 2 by which two places it is manifest, y such
families as are not ordered by hap hazard, or as it falls, but by wisdom,
discretion, and counsel, do prosper in inward and outward goods, and endure
long. When we Not carnal wisdom.
speak of wisdom, we do not mean that this government can be in all points
exercised by natural reason and wisdom: for man's wisdom reaches but unto
one point, and that the least of that which family-gouernment tends unto.

But the wisdom that we speak of, is not But learned out of the word.
natural, but fetched from the fountain of all wisdom, God himself: who by
his word gives unto us pure light to walk by, not in the Church alone, nor in
public society of men only, but even within the secret of our own walls,
and toward such as be abiding under the same roof. And if we desire to walk
with God as Enoch did, we must set up this light for Genesis 5. 24. Psalm. 119. 3.
Wisdom is great wealth.
our selves to live by at home: For then we do no iniquitic, when we walk in
his way. Where no wisdom is used in governing families, there all goes to
wrack, and there many enormities are Without wisdom whatsoever a man takes
in hand, turns to his own hurt.
to be found, as woeful breaches between man and wife, gracelesnesse and
vnthrifrinesse of children, lewdness of servants, and foul escapes. And where
carnal policy rules, and not the wisdom which is from above, there all
that is done, tends to the ease, pleasure, and profit of this life, wherein
it is fitter for brute beasts then for men to seek their felicity.

Now that there is a good kind of governing of a family, which they who follow
wisely, may be said to govern well, appears out of the first Epistle to
Timothy 3. verse. 4. 5. One that It is out of doubt that the wise and skillful
government of a house is found out by Prudence, defended by Science, and
conserved by Experience.
guides his house well. etc. And after: He that knows not to govern his
own house, etc. Whereby it is evident, that there is a way of ordering the
family aright, and there is no misgouerning of it.

To set down this good government exactly, is a hard matter. Here only we
will note some things which do appertain unto that government which we speak
of. And to do it more orderly, that it may be the better understood, we must
consider, that (as may also be gathered out of that place of Timothy) there
are two sorts in every perfect family.

1. The Governors. 2. Those that must be ruled.
And these two sorts have special duties belonging to them, the one toward
the other: in Whereof a family consists.
the careful performance whereof, from the one to the other, consists the
good government of a family.

The governors of a family, be such as have The first sort are such as have
authority in the family.
authority in the family by Gods ordinance, as the father and mother, master
and mistrisse.

To whom as God has given authority over their children and servants, so he
would have them to use it to the wise government of Who must use their
authority.
them, not only for their own private profit, credit, or pleasure, but also
for the good of those whom they are to govern: for by a wise government, much
good comes to the parties governed. If masters then or parents do not If the
governor be charged with weighty affairs, he may appoint one to govern his
house, as Abraham, and Potiphar did.
govern, but let servants and children do as they list, they do not only
disobey God, and disadvantage themselves, but also hurt those whom they should
rule: for when as any have such liberty to do as they list, it makes them
grow out of order, to the provoking of Gods displeasure, and curse against
themselves, whereas if they had been held: in by the bridle of Government, they
might be brought to walk so, Genesis 24. 2. and Genesis 39. 4.
as the blessing of God might follow them in their courses.

All government of a family must be in comeliness A property of good
government.
or decency, that is, it must be such as is meet and convenient both for the
governor, and for the persons governed. And therefore it 1. Tim. 3. 7.
is impossible for a man to understand how to govern the common wealth, that
does not know to rule his own house, or order his own person; so that he that
knows not to govern, deserves not to reign.

Lordlinesse is unmeet in an household government, and yet familiarity with
such as are under government breeds contempt. Again, for the persons
governed, all in the family are not to be governed alike.

There is one rule to govern the wife by, another for children, another for
servants. One rule for young ones, another for old folks.

The government of a Family tends unto two things specially. First,
Christian holiness: The marks that families government aims (...).
And secondly, the things of this life. By the first, God is glorified; by the
second, this present life is sustained, in such sort, as God sees good for us.

How-soeuer, where Humane policy is the rule of Household government, there
men only have an eye to the things of this life: yet they which fetch their
Wisdom to rule by out of the Word, shall understand that their government
must not only be civil, but godly also: that is, they must seek to have
holiness found in their habitation, whereby God may be glorified, as well as
riches gotten, that they may be comforted. This has been the course of holy
men in former Ages.

Abraham flected often from place to place, Genesis 12. 7. 8. and 13. 18. and 11.
33. 1. and 22. 9.
yet he built an Altar wheresoever he became; yea, and trained up his Family
in the fear of God. He did not seek excuse in his unsettled estate, to let
pass the cares of holiness. Holy Job was not contented only to worship God
himself alone, but sanctified his sons, that is, Job. 1. 7.
prepared them to worship God with him. Jacob at his return from Padan-Aram,
purged his Family, and set up Gods worship there. Iosuab says; Though others
would forsake the Lord, yet he and his Family would cleave unto him, Joshua.
24. 25.
and serve him, The virtuous Woman opens her Prou. 31. 26. etc.
mouth in wisdom, and teaches mercy unto her servants.

Many of the faithful, when they themselves believed in Christ, labored to
bring their families to the faith also. Parents are also commanded to bring up
their children in the instruction Acts. 10. and 16. 14. 15. Ephesians. 6. 4.
and information of the Lord. By all which places it is evident, that religion
must be stirring in Christian families, and that good government looks to
bring godly behavior into families, as well as thrift and good husbandry.

For want of this care, many parents leave their children fair faces, and
foul minds; proper bodies, and deformed souls: full coffers, and empty
hearts. For want of this, God may dwell in Churches, if he will, but he has no
abode allowed him in private families. For will God be where he may not rule,
but must be an underling, and stand and look on, when profit and pleasure
shall be served, and aloft? Yet the Spirit of God says; That God will come and
dwell with them that love him, and keep 1. Ioh 3. 24. and 12. 13.
his Commandments. Where therefore holiness is not sought for in families,
there God has no friends, norlouers, nor walkers with him, howsoever they will
sometimes come visit him in the Church.

Besides, the ill success that such walkers have, who make their houses
Temples to Mammon and riches, should teach us to have a principal respect to
God, in Christianity ruling our houses. Many thrive not, but put that which
Mat. 6. 24.
they get into a bottomless bag. For God who has none, or the lowest regard
in their courses, and household affairs, withholds his blessings from them:
and then in vain do men rise early, and go late to bed, and eat the bread of
Hag. 1. 6. Psalm 127. 1.
carfulness. Others thrive, but it is a woeful thrist, that serves to harden
the heart, and to bewitch the soul, with love and liking of this world. For
Gods just judgment is upon many this way; because they will needs serve their
own commodity chiefly at home, the Lord giving them up to themselves, they
never serve him but coldly, and for custom sake at the Church: and God
accepts no more of their worship they do there, then they love and like of
his government in their houses.

The Governors of families, if (as it is in marriage) there be more then one
upon whom the The sorts of governors. Householders or housekeepers, are persons
authorized ower their households and charge.
charge of government lies, though unequally, are, first the chief governor,
which is the Husband, secondly, a fellow-helper, which is the Wife.

These both, do owe duties to their family, and duty one to another.

The duties they ow to their family, both concerning godliness, and the
things of this life, belong either to the Husband especially, or to the Wife
especially. The duties that belong to the Husband touching holiness, are such
as The duty of the Husband touching holiness, which he must perform to them.
either

He must 1. Perform to them of his family. 2. Or require of them.

The duties which he must perform to them, are; first, touching the public
ministry of the Word, to provide that they may live under an 1 To see that
they have the Word ordinarily, the (...) whereof is the greatest plague that
can be.
ordinary ministry of the word, or else to take order, that always upon the
Sabbath, and at other times when it may be, they resort to such places where
they may have the word ministered unto them: for else how shall they be brought
into the Sheepfold of God, (from which naturally Amo 8. 11. Esa. 32. 1. 2. 3. 4.
they go (...)) but by hearing the voice of the chief Sheep-heard, speaking
unto them by those whom he sends? How shall they believe, To. 10. 14. Iam. 1.
28. 19. 21.
and so be begotten again, by the seed of the word, except they hear such as
God sends, 1. Pet. 2. 2. Heb. 2. 1. Ephe. 4. 11. 12. Iam. 2. 11.
for the begetting of men unto him? How shall they be reconciled unto God, but
by hearing his messengers, into whose mouths he has put the word of
reconciliation? How shall they grow in faith, and increase in grace, but by
receiving with meekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save their souls?

Seeing then the word preached is the means to beget men to a new life, and to
nourish them in it: a great duty lies upon the Governors of Familyes, to
provide by some means that they may have it. For where the word is not
preached, there the Lords Sabbath cannot be hallowed as it ought.

Now the Lord would not only have Masters of Families to keep holy the
Sabbath themselves, in all the parts of his worship, public and private: but
also that every one should in his several place and room, carefully to take
order that so many as be committed to his All superiors ought to be careful
that their inseriors do keep holy that day, as well as themselves.
charge should sanctify the Lords day, as well as himself. Which though it be
true in all other commandments; (namely, that whatsoever we are bound to do
our selves, we must be means to further others in doing the same, because the
love of God, and of our Neighbor, spreads it self over all the
Commandments: and therefore though it be not expressed, it is necessarily
understood) yet in the fourth commandment, it is so much the more required,
because besides the analogy and proportion between it and the other
Commandments, which do enforce it, the very words themselves do bind us
thereunto. For when it is said, Thou and thy Son, and thy Daughter, thy
Man-sernant, and thy Maid: though it speaks by name only of resting upon
the Sabbath; yet because the end of that is, that the day might be sanctisied,
look how many reasons there be to bind the inferiors to rest, and the
superiors to provide that they do so indeed; so many are there to compel them
to sanctify the day in their own persons, and in so many, as belong unto them,

Therefore, when first of all it is generally said in this fourth Commandment,
Remember the Deuteronomy. 5. 15.
Sabbath Day, that thou keep it holy; And afterward: The seventh day is the
Sabbath of the Lord thy God; that is, which must be dedicated unto his service:
and in the end you must therefore rest, that you might serve him in it as he
requires: and then names the several parties that should rest: His meaning is
to declare the right end of their resting: and so speaking by name to the
Governors, says; Thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, thy man-seruant, and
thy maid, the stranger that is within thy gates; to show unto them that it is
not sufficient for them to look that they under their government should rest,
unless they sanctify the day of rest also; which they must be so much
careful of, by how much the sanctification of the day is greater then the
ceassing to work upon it, as the end whereunto this is but referred: and
therefore if it be a sin in them at any time, not to have a sufficient regard
unto them that they do not work, then it must needs be a great sin, if that
through their negligence they do not sanctify and keep holy the day of rest.

So that here the Lord God requires, that in all places, there should be such
good laws publicly in the Common wealth, and privately in men's houses
established, and diligently executed, as thereby not only the rulers, but also
all in subjection, should be compelled to They ought not to leave it to their
discretion as a thing indifferent: but to compel them thereto.
sanctify the Lords day, and that they should be sure they do it indeed. And
as he must not leave it indifferent to them, to choose whether they will work
or rest, and so think it sufficient that they do not lay any work upon them;
So is it not enough that they hinder them not from serving God upon that day,
unless they procure all the means unto them, whereby God might be worshipped
of them, and see that they worship God in them, as well as themselves.
Therefore, the masters of families, must provide as much as lies in them,
that the word be publicly preached where they dwell: not for themselves alone,
but for their children and servants take, that they might keep holy the day
together with them: and they must not only come themselves to the place of
common prayer, and divine service, but bring these also with them, and spend
the rest of the day in all private godly exercises themselves, and cause others
to do so also.

And here, lest this might seem too heavy unto us, and that it might not be
grievous to take so great a charge upon us, we must remember, that as we have
great help by our inferiors in many things, so the Lord would have us to help
them in the chief and principal: and as he has made them our servants, so we
should make them his servants; and when they have served us six days, we
might cause them to serve him upon the seventh. And as the Lord has preferred
us above them with their service, so he would humble us with this charge and
care over them, or rather exalt us, in that he would have us to be, as it were
the overseers of his work: and not only serve him our selves, but also see
his service done by others committed to our charge; which if ye do not, wherein
shall the Christian Governors of Householdes, differ from the Infidels and
Heathen? and what greater thing shall we do for our Servants then they? Nay,
what shall we do more for them then for the brute beasts and cattle that
work under us? to whom we give rest and ease from labor upon the Sabbath: if
we cause them not to Sanctify the day of Rest; in which they shall differ from
all other, not only Beasts, but Men.

And this is the meaning of that Law, which Moses gave to the Israelites,
Commanding them Deuteronomy 11. 10. So have the Servants of God done in times past,
in their sever all families.
to write the word of God upon the Posts of their houses, and upon their
Gates. Whereby all under government, were taught, what should be required of
them so long as they lived in those houses, namely, to serve God: and all
governors were taught, what specially to look after in all them that went in
and out of their gates, and lived under the roof of their houses, even to
serve the Lord in all parts of his worship, for which end he has given them
such authority over them. According to which Commandment, the worthy
Captain of Gods people Iehoshua, made this protestation before all the Elders
of Israel a little before his death, exhorting them to do the like: I and mine
house will serve the Lord: promising not Josh. 24. 15.
only for himself, but for all his, which though it was too hard to do, yet
because he knew how many means the Lord had given him to bring it to pass,
which also God would bless (as all godly exhortations, admonitions, and
chastisements, whereby if they did not profit, he had authority to thrust them
out of his house, and to rid himself of them all, which he was purposed to put
in practice,) therefore he was bold thus to speak of himself, thereby showing
what all men should propound to themselves, and may attain unto. The like
whereof David speaks of himself, in that worthy Psalm, 101. which is left
as a pattern for all Christian governors to rule by: wherein he shows, how
he would rule not only himself, but his household, nay the whole kingdom, by
having an eye to them that were good, to reward them, and to them that were
bad, to punish them: that so not only himself, but all his, might serve the
Lord. After the same manner in the time of the Captivity, when the noble
Queen Hester willed all the dispersed Jews to keep holy three days together
in fasting and prayer, that so they might entreat the Lord to deliver them
from that final destruction and utter ruin, which Haman the cursed Amalekite
and sworn enemy of Gods people, had determined to bring upon them speedily,
she said, That she and her maids would do the like. Hest. 4. 16. Whereby no
doubt, she insinuated unto them, that in every household, her meaning was, that
it should be thoroughly kept on all sides, not only of the rulers, and some few,
but of all others, even unto the maid servants.

Now, the Sabbath, and the day of Fast, are both of one nature, as the word
does sufficiently bear witness. Therefore if this has been the practice of
the Church upon that day to fast; and not the chief alone, but their families
also: then must we needs be persuaded, that upon the Lords day, we ought our
selves, and our households to serve the Lord, and to say with Joshua, I and
mine house will serve the Lord: and with Hester, I and my servants will do the
like.

And how could that have been verified of the religious captain Cornelius,
which is written of him, That he was a devout man, and one Acts. 10. 1.
that feared God with all his household? unless he had not only frequented
the common assemblies upon the Sabbath days, but had also acquainted his
servants therewith? Therefore as the Lord himself speaks of Abraham, who is
the father of all believers, I know that Genesis 18. 10.
he will command his sons, and his household after him: that they keep the
way of the Lord, to do righteousness and judgment, that the Lord may bring
upon Abraham, that he has spoken unto him: So it must be practiced of all them
that will be the children of this faithful Abraham; and enjoy the same promise
that he and his posterity did, even that they cause their children and their
servants, to keep holy the Sabbath, wherein consists the true worship of the
Lord, that so they might walk in that way which has the promises of this
life, and the life to come.

So then it may most evidently appear, both by the words of the Commandment,
and by the practice of the best men in the old and new Testament, that this
duty is laid upon all householders, diligentlyto ouersee the ways of their
families, that they serve God, as in all other duties, so especially in
sanctifying the Sabbath, as they will answer to the contrary at their peril,
to him that has put them in authority, and as they will give an account for
their souls, which otherwise might perish through their default.

Which though it be so strictly required of all men, and under so great a pain
laid upon them, yet it is so generally neglected of the But in our time, it is
for the most part, wholly neglected.
greatest part, that we may rather complain of it justly with grief, then
have any hope of the speedy reformation of it. For besides that a great many
have no care to sanctify the day themselves, and therefore cannot with any
conscience require it of their servants and children, but either set them to
work, or play, and to do any thing upon that day, saving that which they
should, and do encourage them thereunto by their own ill example and words:
there be others also, who though they seem to have some care to keep holy the
day themselves, (and have indeed) yet either through ignorance, or negligence,
do not once look to their household, whether they come to Church or no, and
sit there attentively, and continue there with profit to the ending, nor how
they spend the rest of the day: but being demanded where their servants were,
how chance they came not to Church, etc. they answer securely, (and as they
think sufficiently) as though it were a thing merely impertinent unto them,
that they cannot tell, they do not hinder them from the Church, they may come
if they will, they are of age to look to themselves, and are past boys now,
and I cannot tell what, etc.

But they must consider, besides that which has been already spoken concerning
this matter, that they do too foolishly and grossly imagine to stop (as it were)
the mouth of the Lord, with that simple answer in his business, which they
will not receive at their servants hands in their own. For in the six days,
when their servants are in their own business, they will not let them come and
go at their own pleasure, and content themselves with a bare imagination that
they be at their work, but will be sure of it, and therefore set them to it,
look upon them in the doing of it, and call them to an account for it, which
if it be well done in themselves, because they know otherwise they will be
negligent, how must it not then needs be a great unkindness and
unthankfulness in them unto God, that upon this day (which is but one among
seven) his service should be so slenderly looked unto, that there is no such
diligence used toward their servants, that they might perform it?

And how must it not needs be a great injury to their servants, (who are
naturally and for the most part more negligent and careless in Gods service,
by reason of their corruption, then they can be in the service of men) to be
deprived of that benefit of their governors (which is the chiefest, and for
which cause especially they are committed to their government) namely, to be
furthered by them in the service of God: but use them more like beasts then
men, even that they might be serviceable unto them, and then care not whether
they serve God or the devil.

We know that servants look to be preferred by their masters (and so there is
good reason, when they have served them faithfully) but what kind of reward is
this, when having bestowed some earthly benefit upon them, by having no care
to make them serve the Lord, and sanctify the Sabbaths, they do in the end not
only make them lose the everlasting reward, but preserve them to eternal
destruction?

Moreover, there are a company of idle Seruing-men, Especialy in great
households, where there are many servants.
who in spending their time all the six days having almost nothing therein to
do, are seldom looked unto upon the seventh day, but permitted to bestow it as
vainly as the other: and as they never almost do any good days work to their
masters, so much less do they spend any Sabbath in the Lords service; but
they especially are left to go and come at their will.

Others that have any office of great charge and attendance (as the Cooks,
Butlers, and such like, in great houses) seldom or never come to the Church,
and that but by pieces, either when half is done, or else they are ready to
depart before half be ended, and so both hinder the Lord from that service
which he should have by them, and themselves from that blessing which they
should idherit that way: and both cause the name of God to be ill spoken of,
and pull upon themselves and their masters that curse which belongs to the
continual polluting of the Sabbath.

And how can they look that that service, and that meat and drink, should do
them good, which is thus prepared, and bought (as it were) with the continual
danger of the souls of their servants, besides the dishouour of the name of
God?

When David had inconsideratly desired to drink of the water of Bethleem,
three mighty men brake into the host of the Philistines, and drew water, and
brought it to him: but he would not drink thereof, but powered it for an
offering unto the Lord, and said: Oh Lord, be it 2. Sam. 23. 15. 16.
far from me that I should do thus: is not this the blood of the men that
went in ieopardie of their lives? How much less then ought men to eat and
drink of that for which their servants do venture the lives of their souls?
And besides, if we justly find fault with them, who do never or seldom preach
to the people committed to their charge, and so cause their souls to starve
and die eternally: how can they be blameless, who seldom or never bring their
servants to the preaching of the word? And must they not needs be culpable of
the same judgment before God, seeing it is all one with the servants, whether
they live in the place where the word of God is not preached at all, or if it
be, yet they come not unto it?

But whereas men are ready to object, that in Objection.
a great family, many must needs be absent.

We grant it to be true in some part, that is, Answer.
at some time, and upon some occasion: but so ordinarily and so continually (as
they themselves in their own consciences are privy to, who make this question)
we know no necessity that can excuse that. Nay, we are sure that the Lord has
laid no such calling upon any man, that should keep him in a continual breach
of the Sabbath, and therefore both master and servant may suspect, that he is
in such a calling as is not agreeable to Gods word, or that he uses it not
aright, when it makes him, if not wholly, yet for the most part, to neglect the
service of God upon the Sabbath day.

And we know (where there is great care to serve and please God by prayer,) the
Lord will give to them such wisdom, that they shall be able to redeem, if
not the whole, yet at least a great part of the day, which otherwise will be
misspent: namely, by letting pass many needless things, by preparing so much
before as conveniently may be, by rising so much the more early in the
morning, and by the interchangeable help of our servants: especially, when
they will for these causes be contented with so much the less, though not in
quantity, (for the relief of others) yet with less exquisite and curious
dressing, which especially takes up the time: and so we are sure, and they
that will try it in the fear of God, and with a care to serve him, and in a
love to the souls of their brethren, shall find it to be true by experience,
that many might keep holy the Sabbarh, which now do it not at all: others might
keep it, more then they do. Which if yet it be thought impossible (because we
go not about to practice it) let us but observe that which we shall see done in
the house when the servant is very desirous to go to a Fair, and the master
is as willing to let him go: you would wonder to see how things shall be
dispatched up suddenly, and in good order, they shall be absent many hours, and
yet not greatly missed: if any thing be otherwise then is usual, it is horn
with, because it is a day of provision for themselves, and that day is not
every day. So then, if the masters were persuaded of the Lords day as they
ought to be, even that it is the time of making provision for the soul, and
were as careful for the souls of their servants, as they are for their
bodies, and did esteem it more for their worship and credit that their
servants were religious, then that they were costly and well set out in
apparel; they would be better contented to spare them, during the time of that
market, where they may buy without money all the graces of Gods Spirit, and the
riches of the kingdom of heaven: whereby they should not only save their own
souls, but be made more fit to do duties to their masters of conscience.

Therefore (to end this point) it is the duty of The governors of families
should take order that their whole household might come to the Church together.
all household governors, to cause the whole family to be in a readiness to
attend upon them too and fro the Church, and that it be not left at every man's
discretion to come when he will, but that they should go together. And indeed,
this has been the orderly coming of Gods people in times past to the place of
his worship, that they have not come scattered and alone, but many together,
and by companies; whereof the holy Prophet speaks; When I remembered Psalm. 24.
4.
these things, I powered out my very heart, because I had gone with the
multitude, and led them into the house of God, with the voice of singing, and
praises, as a multitude that keeps a feast. In which place, the man of God
complaining, that he was banished from the holy Assemblies, (says) that his
grief was increased, by remembering his former estate, when he used to go with
a great company to the Temple, even as to a feast: whereby he declares, what
was the manner of their going; even as men go to a market, or to a feast, not
only with joy, but also by companies; and so many of one house as go, will go
together: So they did not only go to the house of God cheerfully, but many of
them together, even as to the market and feast of their souls. By which
practice of theirs, as the doing of many is condemned; so it appears that the
men of our time are led by another spirit then they were, and are otherwise
persuaded of the worship and place they go unto. For all the people, nay, the
several households, come not together, but scattered, and one dropping after
another, in a confused manner.

First comes the man, then a quarter of an hour after, his wife; and after
her, we cannot tell how long, especially the maid-seruants, who must needs be as
long after her, as the men-seruants are after him. Whereby it comes to pass,
that either half the service of God is done before all be met: or else if the
Minister tarry till there be a sufficient congregation, the first comers may
be weary, and sometimes cold with tarrying, before the other shall be warm in
their seats.

Now, if it be demanded of the masters, why they alone make such have, and
leave all the rest behind them; and they answer truly, because the time is
come, wherein usually public prayer begins: can they be persuaded that it is
time for themselves to come (as it is indeed) and yet no time for the rest to
come with them? Has the master no longer time to tarry, and have his servants
time to tarry so long after him? As though there were one law for him, and
another for them: or rather, that the same law of the Sabbath, which moves him
of conscience to do that which he does, did not as forciblie bind them all as
himself: nay, did not bind him to look to them, that they should keep holy
the day as well as himself, which if he grant to be true, and yet is not able
to bring it to pass, (where the Lord has given him so great authority for
his own sake) partly through the frowardness of his wife, and partly through
the obstinacy of the rest in his family: his case is to be pitied, and he is
rather to be governed, then to govern: and he might do well to set up one of
1. Cor 6. 4.
them in his stead: seeing he does suffer himself wilfully so to be abused,
and is contented to be ouer-ruled by them in the chiefest thing.

Therefore that he might bring this matter happily to pass, as he must go
before them by his own example, and be ready betimes, even first of all, so
he must earnestly call upon them for this duty, and exhort them unto it; and
the slower that they are, and the more they draw back, the more fotward must
he be, and by his practice and words draw them forwards also. For this is that
readiness which David observed in the people of his time: I rejoiced when they
said unto me, we will go into the house of the Psalm. 1221.
Lord; or, Let us go to the house of the Lod (for they are words of exhorting,
and encouraging one another thereunto,) even as the Prophet Esaias also
foretells, that this shall be the zeal of Gods people in the time of the
Gospel, that they shall go together to serve God, and therefore call upon one
another for the same purpose, saying: It shall be in the last days, that the
mountain of the house of the Lord shall be prepared Esaias. 2. 2. 3.
in the top of the mountains, and shall be exalted' above the hills, and all
nations shall flow unto it, and many people shall go and say, Come, and let us
go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob.

And truly this want of zeal in us to Gods worship, and love to the salvation
of our brethren, (bewraying it self in the neglect of this duty of calling one
upon another) is the cause of this slownesse. For the husband going first out
of the doors, says to the wife, Make have, and come as soon as you can: she
coming at her leisure, gives the same charge to her servants, Dispatch, and
tarry not long behind; but here is no saying: Come let us go, Let us go
together: and if it be once said, it is not pursued, that it might be performed.

In going to market, and to a feast, what earnest calling will there be upon
one another: and it would seem strange to behold the household go divided: and
it were a thing that would much be marked, and every one that knew us, and
whither we were going, it should be the first question they would ask us; How
chances this, that you come alone? Where is your husband, your wife, or your
children? Why come you not together? So no doubt, the dispersed and broken
coming of housholdes to the Church, is a thing greatly observed of the Lord
God, and of his Angels, which are present at their assemblies: and it is that
which grieueth the rest of the Church, and as soon as they see one come in
alone, they are ready with grief to ask, Where 1. Cor. 11. 10.
are the rest? What means this party to come alone? Therefore let all
Governors be persuaded, that it is their bounden duty thus to look to their
families, and to be sure that they sanctify the Lords day as well as
themselves: and that they not only thus bring them to the public ministry,
but also look unto them, that they spend the rest of the day in holy exercises
so much as may be, examining them in that which they have heard, and causing
them to confer about it themselves; and to appoint some to read the
Scripture unto them, and all of them to sing Psalms: and generally, whatsoever
they have seen before, that they ought to do themselves, to call upon their
servants for the same, and to take such order, that they be sure they do it:
and let them be sorry that they have neglected this duty so long heretofore, and
thereby have charged so many sins of their household upon themselves: and now
at the last in Gods holy fear, let them begin to put this in practice, lest
they do further provoke the most patient Lord to their endless destruction.
And though it be a thing so rare in the world as it is, and men altogether so
unacquainted with it, as they be, nay, so loathsome and tedious to flesh and
blood, that they are afraid once to begin with it: yet let the bare
commandment of God prevail more with us to take it in hand, and to continue
in it, then all that can be said or thought against it, should weigh with us,
either to keep us from it at the first, or afterward cause us to give it
over. And, that all men might do it, so much the rather, The want of this care
in household, is the cause of much wickedness, rebellion, and disorder in their
families.
let them be assured that the want of this especially, is the cause of so many
wicked and rebellious children, untrusty and disobedient servants, nay,
unfaithful and unkind wives, every where: even for that their husbands, their
fathers, and their masters do not call upon them to serve God, and see them
sanctify the Sabbath. It is a common and just complaint in all places, in the
mouth of every man, that servants and children will not be ruled; that they
cannot tell where to find a good servant, they know not whom to trust, but they
see not the greatest cause of it to be in themselves, and so go not about to
remedy it. For whiles they labor not to make their children the sons and
daughters of God by adoption; and to bring their servants within the household
of God, that they might be his servants by grace, and to make their wives the
chaste spouses of Jesus Christ, and so all of them to serve him: the Lord justly
punishes them, making wives, children, servants, and all disobedient unto
them. For how can they do duties unto men, if they have not learned to do
duties unto God, and so of conscience for Gods sake, to do duties unto men?
Nay, must not the Lord needs punish them with disobedience against themselves,
that by their own experience they may know how grievous the neglect of his
service is unto himself, when he justly measures out unto them with the same
measure, that they have meat unto him before?

And whereas men are ready to imagine, and we know it is that which many do
object against Objection.
this, that to deal so straightly with their household, were the next way to
rid themselves of all good servants; and that then they might soon be
master and man themselves.

They must again, on the contrary understand, Answer.
that it is a great wickedness in them, once to think that the Lord should
require that of them, which would necessarily drive them to such inconvenience:
Nay rather, they must be assuredly persuaded, That godliness has the promises
1. Tim. 4. 8.
of this life, as well as of the life to come: and that if we first seek the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness, Mat. 6. 23.
in our selves, and others, all needful things shall be cast unto us. Even as
it is said of Abraham; I know that he will command his sons, Genesis 18. 19.
and his household after him, that they keep the way of the Lord, to do
righteousness and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham, that he
has spoken unto him. So that thus to do, is the very high way, not to keep
us. from, but to bring us unto the fruition of all Gods promises, if we give
credit unto him, who as he only makes them in the beginning of mere mercy,
so must he only accomplish them in the end by his constant verity and truth.
We confess indeed, if he be an ill servant, this is the readiest way to be rid
of him, whose room is better then his company: for he thinks himself to be
in a prison, nay in hell all the while: but in the end he shall perceive that
he is gone from the way of heaven unto hell, if the Lord be not more merciful
unto him. And why should we be loath to depart from the service of them that
have no care to serve God? or can we look that they should do any faithful
service unto us, that are so unfaithful in the service of God?

But as concerning the rest, if any be religious, To have such good orders in
our houses, is not the next way to drive away our servants from us.
this is the best mean to retain and keep them: if they be but indifferent,
this may win them: if they be falling away, this may recover them. For what
shall we think of all the godly fathers in times past, that when they vowed
diligently to look to their households, that they should serve God with them,
and did constantly perform it, that then they had no servants at all? Was so
great a man as Iehoshua without servants, when he promised before so many
witnesses, that he and his house should serve the Lord? Was David left alone,
and constrained to do all himself, when as being a mighty King, he bound
himself unto it by that song which he made for the same purpose, wherein he
says: Mine eyes shall be unto the faithful of the land, that they may dwell
with me: he that walks in a perfect Psalm 101. 6. 7
way, he shall serve me: there shall no deceitful person dwell in mine house:
he that tells lies shall not remain in my sight? Had not Abraham a great
Genesis 14 24.
household, when he was able on a sudden to carry forth with him, of them that
were borne and brought up in his house, three hundred and eighteen men in
armor, to rescue his brother Lot? Ofwhom notwithstanding it is said, that he
would teach his children the way of the Lord: as it appears he did indeed,
when by his only persuasion at the word of God, all the males were contented
to be Chap. 17. 12.
circumcised, and to receive that Sacrament, unknown before, and painful,
and also ignominious to the flesh, if they had looked only to the outward
sign. And must not that worthy Captain of an hundred Italian soldiers, needs
have a greater family then many of these that cavil at this doctrine? of whom
the spirit of truth reports, That he feared God, and all his Act. 10. 2.
household.

What shall we think of all these men? Shall we ignorantly presume to the
further deceiving Objection.
of our selves, and hardening us in this sin, that the times were then
better, and good servants then more plentiful? Or must we needs confess, as
the truth is indeed, that these men Answer.
used more means to make their servants the servants of God, then men do now a
days, and that so the blessing of God was greater upon them? And is it not set
down in writing for our learning, to show us what is that which we might look
for at Gods hands, if we would walk in the same way that they did, seeing
there is no respect of persons, times, or places with him?

Secondly, he must set an order in his house for the service of God; to wit,
that morning and evening, before meals, and after meals, prayers and thanks
may be offered unto God, and so he acknowledged to be the author, not only of
all spiritual graces that belong to a better life, but also of all temporal
blessings that belong to this life. For seeing that it is Gods good hand over
us, that does defend us and all our family in the night from outward dangers,
and gives us freedom from fears and terrors, and from Satan's rage, and also
gives us rest and comfortable sleep, for the refreshing of our frail bodies,
is it not meet we should beg it at his hand by prayer, before we prepare our
selves to rest, and praise him for it when we rise from it? Again, seeing that
every day we are subject to innumerable dangers, which we know not of, and both
wisdom and strength to follow good and honest callings, and also the blessing
upon our labors to make us prosper by them, are from God alone: should we not
begin the day with fear unto God, for his gracious protection, and for his
merciful blessing of us? And seeing meats and drinks are sanctified unto us
on Gods part by the word, and ours 1. Tim. 4. 5.
by prayer: doubtless though God has by his word sanctified them, they are
unholy unto us, when we do not for our part sanctify them by faithful prayer
and thanksgiving. And this was David's practice, Psalm. 55. 1. Evening and
morning, and at noone tide, will I pray, and make a noise, and he will hear my
voice. If any say, it is sufficient for the governor to charge every one in
his family to do it privately by himself: so might the Prince say, it is
enough to do as Darius did, to charge every one in all his dominions to worship
no God, but Daniels God. Yet godly Princes Dan. 6. 26.
thought it their duty to set up the worship ofGod in their dominions, and to
take order that God might be worshipped publickely and jointly of all in their
land. So did Job, for his Job. 1. 5 6.
household, not only bid his children pray to God by themselves, but he
appointed set times of praying together, and sacrificing, and commanded his
children to come prepared thereunto. Again, if the master lay the matter upon
the consciences of such as be of his family, then if they be negligent, God
shall have no honor and worship in that family.

But we read of Abraham that wheresoever Genesis 12 7. 8. and 13. 8. and 21. 33.
and 22. 9.
he became, he built an altar to God, where God should be worshipped jointly in
his family. If God should measure out his goodness to thee, as thou measurest
honor and glory to him, in what a case were thou? He does give a charge to his
Angels to keep thee, he commands the earth to allow thee meat for thy
sustena^ce; and his Commandment is an effectual word, that makes them to do
the thing that he charge them withal. Will thou now only bid thy servant or
son to serve and honor God, and not see that he do it, and help him in it?
Then thou do not measure out unto God, as thou would have him measure to
thee.

This duty then belongs to a Christian head of a family, to worship God with
all his family, and to take order that when he shall be absent upon necessary
occasions, it may be done reverently, and only by some one in his family, that
by reason of wit and age may be meet for it. The neglect of this duty,
lets into families many grievous enormities, and outward miseries, while God
in his justice refuses to bless such, as by their carelessness in serving of
him, do show, that they take not him to be the author of all welfare to soul
or body, but think to do well enough without him, or else think to have their
turns served without requesting.

The third duty, which the chief governor must perform to all in his
family, is private instruction, Private instruction.
and dealing with them in matters of religion, for the building of them up in
true faith, and for the inuring and bringing of them to a conscience toward
God, that they may not only know and profess religion, but also feel and
show the power of religion in their lives. This duty has these specials
belonging to it: First, a familiar and plain opening unto them the principles
of religion, after the manner of a Catechism. This duty the holy Ghost lays
upon parents. Ephesians. 6. 1. Train them up in doctrine and holy precepts, drawn
out-of the word. The like was commanded to parents in the old law: Let these
words which I command thee this Deuteronomy. 6. 6. 7. 8. 9.
day, be in thine heart, and whet them upon thy children, and speak of them
when thou sit in thy house, when thou walk in the way, when thou lie
down, and when thou risest up, etc. So that it is not enough to bring thy
children to be catechized at the Church, but thou must labor with them at home
after a more plain and easier manner of instruction, that so they may the
better profit by the public teaching. Look Proverbs 22. 6. Thou even by
breeding thy children have helped them into corruption, and (...) damnable
estate: how ought thou then, by all holy care and pains taken with them, in
teaching them the knowledge of God in Christ, to help them out of it, that
they may not be firebrands of hell? And for servants, seeing they spend their
strength, and weary out their bodies, and bestow their days and years in
seeking thy profit and ease: ought not thou then to seek the salvation of
their souls? Solomon says, The just man has regard to his beast: much more
should thou have regard to thy servant, who is made according to the image
of God with thee, and is redeemed with as dear a price as thou art. And thy
care for him should not stretch to his body alone, but especially to his soul;
that seeing his calling will not suffer him to use so many, and so often means
for the good of it as were requisite, he might herein be helped by thee.

The second special is, an acquainting them with the Scriptures, by reading
them daily in Reading the Scripture.
thy house in their hearing, and directing them to mark, and make use of those
things which are plain and easy, according to their capacity. So Timothy
was trained up by his parents in the Scriptures, so that he knew them from a 2.
Tim. 3. 15.
child: that is, was made acquainted with them by reading them, and being
instructed in them according to his capacity. This shall make them the fitter
to hear and profit by the public ministry: whereas the neglect of this
duty, makes them unable to hear and understand the Preacher when he cites
examples, or quoteth texts out of sundry places of Scripture. The help that
their family might reap by it should make them careful in this reading of the
Scripture.

The third is, a diligent care and regard that they profit by the public
ministry of the word and Sacraments, every one according to their capacity.
And this duty requires, that they should not only look that they do
diligently frequent the preaching of the word, and carefully come to the
Sacraments in due time, but also that they show them how, and put them in mind
of preparing themselves to the word and Sacraments, as lob did his sons. They
must prepare them to hear the word, by willing them to consider Gods
ordinance, his promise, and their own necessity, etc. by commanding them to
lay aside all such cares, thoughts, and affections, as might hinder them from a
diligent hearing. To the Sacraments they must prepare them, by willing them to
consider of Gods institution, the ministry of his Sacraments, his mercy in
Jesus Christ, their faith, their repentance, and their wants: that so seeking
assurance of grace, of reconciliation, and comfort, they may come preparedly to
the Lords table.

Again to further their profit, they must diligently examine them, what they
have learned, what use they can make of such doctrine; and also help and
direct them wherein they fail. Thus did our Savior Christ his Disciples.
Besides, they must call upon them, for the practice of Mat. 16. 15. 16. 17.
that which they learn out of the word, that the word grow not to a common
matter, of no further use but to talk of upon the Sabbath day.

The fourth special duty that belongs to instruction, is the use of Gods
works, either past, or present: as of examples of his mercy and goodness, to
be encouraged by them to trust in him: by works of his justice, to be moved to
fear him, and so to sow the seed of conscience and religion in them. Thus did
Abraham Genesis 18. 19. which care of his moved the Lord to reveal to him his
purpose of destroying the Sodomites.

The duties which they are to require of them concerning godliness, be to use
the public ministry carefully: to be diligent and reverent in the private
worship of God; to submit themselves to private instruction of all sorts, and
to make their use of it, to the building up of themselves in faith. And (...),
to practice all holy and Christian duties, which being comprised briefly in the
Commandments, are more largely laid open by the public ministry of the
word, and by private Catechizing.

But after what manner must they require these duties? We answer, not only by
telling of them what they must do, and calling upon them for the doing of it,
and by gentle admonition when they be backward: but also by correcting them, if
they shall be negligent and contemptuous in the practice thereof. This
correcting is, either by Rebuking, or Chastising them,

according to the quality of the fault, and the condition of the party that is
so to be dealt with.

A rebuke, is a pronouncing of some misbehauiour, Leuit. 19. 17. 2. Tim. 4. 2.
or known wickedness of any, with condemning of the same (by the word of God)
whereby they may have shame, that others might fear.

Correction is a sharp thing, and therefore Prou. 27. 5. and 29. 19.
not easily borne of our nature, which is full of self-love: and through the
corruption of nature, it is turned into an occasion of great frowardness,
sturdinesse, and naughtiness, where it is not wisely dealt in. Now the better
to minister correction, with more hope of doing good by it, we must consider

First, the end of correcting.

Secondly, the matters for which correction must be given.

Thirdly, the manner of correcting.

1. The end in correcting must not be to wreck and revenge thine anger, or
malice, or to revenge thy self for any injury done, nor yet alonely, the
preventing of the like hurt by the like fault afterward: but in zeal of Gods
glory, who is dishonored by the lewdness of the offender, and in love to the
party; thou must seek by wise correction to reclaim him from such evil as
brings danger to him, and to make him more careful of his duty afterward.
Herein they fail, who in correcting have no respect but to their own
commodity.

2. For the matters that deserve correction, this is a rule, that there must be
no rebuking, much less chastising, but where there is a fault. For where any
is unjustly corrected, besides the injury, it hurts him, by hardening him
against just correction. For he will think that it is the rash hastiness of
his governor that puts him to smart, and not his own desert.

By fault I mean, not only the committing of that which was forbidden, but
also the omitting of that good which was commanded.

But every such fault is not to be censured with correction: sometime
ignorance, mistaking, oversight, and a desire to please in one thing, makes
inferiors to offend in others. Except there be contempt, or willing negligence,
or retchlesse oversight, a gentle admonition may serve. And indeed, superiors
must take heed of coming to the greatest remedies of correction too soon: for
so they may soon mar the party by ouer-sharpe dealing, which by a wise
proceeding by degrees might have been gained. Furthermore, Governors must know
yet more expressly, for what to correct. Some never correct but for their own
matters, never regarding the faults committed against God. But the godly
governor, that aims at Gods glory, and seeks the Lord, and not himself,
is most grieved for those disorders in his family, that tend to Gods dishonor,
and such he corrects most carefully. And as for the defaults of his family
that are against himself, he looks more to Gods dishonor by them, then to
his own hurt or loss, and in zeal of God is drawn to correct, and not of
self-love. He therefore counts these things worthy of correction; if any
delight in the ignorance of God, or be careless to approve himself, as one
that wholly depends on him, loves him, fears him, reuerenceth him,
labors to approve all his ways before him: if any be given to idolatry and
superstition, and cares not in every part of the worship of God, to follow his
revealed will, or if in the parts commanded, he appear negligent and cold, or
put them to any other use then is commanded, or be given to images or
superstitious monuments, customs, occasions, or such like; if any dishonor
the name of God, either in the vnreuerent using, or abusing, or (...), and not
using it with that preparation before, feeling at the present time, and fruit
after, which is prescribed, his titles, word, Sacraments, or works: if any
profane his Sabbath by vain pastimes, and gaming, as cards, dice, dancing,
etc. going to plays, or give not himself to the exercises appointed for that
day out of the Word: if any neglect special duties toward their equals,
superiors, or inferiors, in years, gifts, authority, as Magistrates,
Ministers, Masters, parents, servants, children, or people: if any declare not
a conscience to fly evil, anger, malice, contention, quarelling, fighting, or
any hurting of the person of man, either in soul or (...) being careful to
succor the same, according to his calling; if any be found unchaste in body,
words, countenance or gesture, intemperate in diet, in apparel, dissolute, not
caring to maintain the contrary holiness in himself and others: if any be
not careful to preserve the goods of another man, or shall by falsehood,
flattery, and oppression diminish the same; if he be negligent in increasing of
his own, by honest and lawful means, or mis-spend them in cards, dice,
gaming, etc: if any care not to maintain the good names of others, but be
given to vnnecescary blazing of other men's (...), by lying, slandering, (...),
taunting: if any show himself care less to (...) the motions and enticements,
unto sin, and the lust of the same: and he will use the means following to
redress them.

The manner of correcting must like wise be looked unto: for to fail in that,
makes correction hurtful oftentimes, but always (...). For this point then,
we must know, that correction must be

Ministered in Wisdom, and Patience.

Wisdom is that by which we observe comeliness Ephesians. 5. 14. 10. 17.
in every action; that is to say, by which we observe what we do, how, in what
place, at what time, before whom: that all things may be done in a convenient
place, time, and manner.

Wisdom will 1. Find out the right party that committed the fault, that he
that is innocent be not unjustly burdened. 2. Consider of what sort and nature
the fault is. 3. Weigh circumstances of ages, discretion, and occasions that
moved the party, and whether it be customary, or a slip by oversight. 4. Look
to the mind of the doer, whether negligence, frowardness, or simplicity, and
want of wisdom brought him to it.

And according to these things, wisdom will teach a man to measure out
correction, or to be sparing in it. Besides, wisdom will not correct before
the fault be evident, or before she be able to wind the offender out of all
shifting holes. For when the offender is not thoroughly convinced, he shifteth
off the shame of the fault and of the correction, which is a part of the
purgation to cure his disease: and besides he will be bold to open his mouth
against his ruler, and seek to bring him into hatred or contempt with the rest
of the inferiors, for correcting unjustly. Wisdom therefore will wink at a
fault a while, and make as though she saw it not, that she may have a fitter
opportunity to correct: yea, toward some of a good nature, wisdom will show
that she sees a fault, but yet for love of the party, and desire to have him
amend of his own accord, she will pass over the evil. Moreover, wisdom
will never reproach the offender, by reuiling or taunting him with the fault,
but minister correction in love, and desire to have his sore cured, and his
credit salued. For the casting of faults in their teeth, and disgracing them,
especially before others, (which is common in the world,) makes them lay off
shame of offending, by little and little: whereas if they saw thee careful of
their credit, they would have much more regard to it themselves. Lastly,
wisdom will avoid partiality, and deal with all in the same case, after the
same manner.

Patience is also needful, that through anger Patience and steadfastness in
suffering the offense that comes to us by any work, so that they cannot
discourage us. Phil. 4. 5.
or hastines, a man do not fight nor chide before he has made the fault
manifest to the offender: that if it may be, his conscience may be touched for
it. Again, by patience one must hear what the offender can say in his
defense, and not disdain to hear him modestly alleging for himself: and
when his defense is made, by equity to allow, or disallow the same. So did
Job, Job. 31. 13. And Balaam had no reason to disdain the defense of his
beast. Number. 20. 30. etc.

This patience will also keep a man from bitterness, which might sooner make
the party angry, then draw him to amendment; which thing the Apostle would
have avoided in superiors, Col. 3. 21. Ephesians. 6. 4. 9.
toward those that be under them. For want of this, many are but a word and a
blow: many first correct, and then tell the fault; many lay on load, or rail,
and revile, brawle, and scold without measure.

Lastly, this patience will keep thee from immoderate anger, a thing dangerous
in a corrector. For he that comes to reform with too much anger, shall hardly
keep a measure in rebuking, or chastising.

Now for the several kinds of correction, the first is rebuking, which is a
sharp reproof for a fault committed, measured according to the nature of the
fault. Example whereof we have in Jacob, Genesis 30. 2. Ioh. 2. 10. Our Savior
Christ, to Peter Mat. 16. 23. and to James and John, Luke 9. 55. So Eli, 1.
Sam. 2. 23. etc. rebuked his sons, but not according to the quality of their
fault, which turned to his, and their ruin.

This reproof may have some threatening of chastisement joined with it, if need
be; to the end to make it sink the deeper. Prou. 19. 19. Be thou very angry
when thou pardonest a fault; saying, that thou for sparing him now, wilt punish
him the soarer, if he transgress again. But threatenings must not be vain
words without effect, but always if amendment follow not, thou must perform
what was threatened, lest thou become light and vain in the offenders eyes.

Chastisement is, when with a sharp rebuke punishment is also laid upon the
offender, according to discretion.

If any man think fighting unmeet for Christians, or be loath to foil their
hands, lest they should get themselves an ill name; let them know, that Gods
ordinance is not a matter of an ill report, but only among fools, that know
not what is good and meet. Now, that houshold-chastisement is agreeable to
Gods will, is evident out of the Proverbs, where the wisdom of God does very
often commend it to us, as Chap. 13. 24. He that spares the rod hates his
son: but he that loves him, chasteneth him betimes. Where he requires, that
it be not deferred till it be too late, that is, till the offender be hardened
in ill: but given in time, before he be past recovery. Secondly, he says, that
it is a fruit of true and pure love, to correct in due time: and very love in
parents, and care of their children, must draw them to it.

Thirdly, he says, that such parents know not what true love of children
means, but embrace fondness, and foolish pity in stead of it, who do spare
to correct, when correction is deserved.

Fourthly, that this fondness and foolish affection is indeed hatred and not
love. The reason why it is to be counted hatred, is set down, Prou. 19. 18.
Chastise thy son while there is hope, and let not thy soul spare him, to his
destruction. Where he plainly says, that fond pitying and sparing of
children, is to work the destruction of them. And is it not a token of great
hatred, to be a means of another destruction? Elsewhere he shows the
necessity of correction, and the good which it does: Prou. 22. 25.
Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child, but the rod of correction shall
remove it far from him. As if he should say, much folly and (...) is couched
in a child's heart, which if it be not purged, will burst forth into foul
enormities, and therefore a purgation is but needful; and what may that be,
but the rod of correction?

The same is commanded, Prou. 29. 17. Correct thy son: where also he shows
what benefit comes thereby to the parents: He shall give thee rest, yea he
will give pleasures to thy soul: that is, thou shall be free from sorrow,
heaviness, and many troubles, which many parents have with ungracious
children: and on the other side, thou shall have much comfort and delight by
him. Great benefit also comes thereby to the children, as he shows in the
15. verse, The rod and correction give wisdom, and Chap. 23. 13. 14. Whereas
the neglect of it brings hurt to the child, and to the parents, as follows:
A child set at liberty makes his mother ashamed. And for servants, the
Wiseman does closely show, how they must be dealt withal, where he says,
Prou. 29. 21. He which brings up his servant delicately from his youth, at
length will be deprived of his children. And a little before, verse 19. he
says, A servant will not be chastised with words: though he understand, yet he
will not answer or regard.

These Scriptures show, that God has put the rod of correction in the hands of
the Governors of the family, by punishment to save them from destruction;
which if the bridle were let loose unto them, they would run unto. Where men
and women are content to go contrary to their own nature, and to undergo ill
reports to obey the ordinance of God, there God will give a blessing, that is,
a well ordered family, wherein all shall be of good hope. The wives duty,
touching Christian holiness.


These be the duties that the chief of the family owes to them of his
family within doors, as touching godliness. The wife also, which is a
fellow-helper, has some things To be a fellow helper is to yield help to her
husband, especially at home, in all the matters of the family.
belonging to her to further godliness in her family: As for example, in her
self to give example to her household of all ready submission to all good and
Christian orders, to order her household affairs so carefully that no exercise
of religion be hindered, or put out of place, at 1. Tim. 5. 14. Tit. 2. 3.
such time as they should be done in her husbands absence: to see good orders
observed as he has appointed: to watch over the manners and behavior of such
as be in her house, and to help her husband in spying out evils that are
breeding, that by his wisdom they may be prevented or cured. Solomon says of
the virtuous woman, that she ouerseeth the ways of her Prou. 31. 27. Verse. 26.
household. And a little before, she opens her mouth with wisdom, and the
law of grace is in her tongue. And Saint Paul requires, that wives, specially
the elder, be teachers of good things, and that they instruct the younger. They
may also do much good in framing the tender years of their children unto good,
while they be under their hands. For even as a child cockered and made a wanton
by the mother, will be more intractable, when the father will seek to bend him
to good: so on the other side, a child wisely trained up by the mother in the
young years, will be the easilier brought to goodness by the fathers godly
care. We read, that Timothy was made acquainted with the Scripture from a
little child, by means of his godly mother, and grandmother; a good pattern
for Christians. And mark the proof, God recompensed their godly care
exceedingly: for Timothy proved a rare young man, of excellent graces, to the
great joy and comfort of his parents. Mothers may also power good liquor into
their childrens tender vessels, the savor whereof shall stick in them a long
while after: I mean, they may sow in their minds the seed of religion and
godliness. These and such like duties, if the wife perform constantly, she
shall bring no small help to her husband, for the godly and religious ordering
of his house. And thus much of that part of Household government, which
concerns godliness.

Now we come to the other part, which pertaines The 2, thing whereat household
government aymeth.
to the things of this life: wherein is to be considered, what is the duty of
the husband and of the wife: namely to

Take order for Provision, and Health.

They must take order for provision for necessaries, to the maintenance of
themselves and Many are careful to (...), but very careless to (...) well.
all their charge. These necessaries are food and raiment. Also care must be
had of the health of such as be in their families, both to preserve it by rest,
and recreation if need be, and to restore it if it be hindered, by good looking
to such as are fallen into sickness.

That the governors of the family must make honest provision for themselves,
and their charge, and not live upon the Churchalmes, (...).
or by begging, purloyning, borrowing, or cousining. It is most evident by that
saying of Saint Paul to Timothy: He that provides not 1. Tim. 5. 8.
for his own, and especially for them of his house, has denied the Faith, and
is worse then an infidel. And Solomon says, The just man regards the life
Prou. 12. 10.
of his beast: much more of his servants and children.

And as the Spirit of God charge us with this duty; so he sets us about
such things whereby this may be compassed, and forewarneth us of those things
whereby it might be hindered.

The things that he teaches us for the making of this provision, are first;
That every one What things be needful for the making of provision.
should have some honest and good calling, and should walk diligently in it:
that it may bring in honest gain, whereby necessaries for the family may be
prepared.

That every man must apply himself to some A calling. Genesis 3. 10. Calling is
our appointed charge and manner of life, in some honest work, wherein we are
daily to labor, as we may best profit therein.
study and calling, is so known, that it needs no proof; In the sweat of
thy brows thou shall eat thy bread, etc. Which condemns all such as live of
the labors of other men, and themselves take no pains or travail, do no good
in the world, benefit not humane society any way, but devour the good
creatures of the earth, which indeed belong to them that take all the pains.
In this rank do a number of Gentiles in the world march, devising gay toys,
which might well be spared; who are but unprofitable burdens of the earth,
that fill up number like Ciphers, who glory in their shame, that is, in their
ease, pleasures, and bravery, whereof (if they knew whereto a man was Ephesians.
4. 1. (...). These. 2. 12.
borne) they would be ashamed.

These be they for whose maintenance in their iollitie, a number are feign to
toil very hardly, fare meanly, and spend their strength to the very skin
and bones, and yet can get but a slender recompense, through their unmerciful
exactions. But enough of them: to return. The good governor of a house must
be none of these: but he must have a calling that is good, honest, and lawful;
not only gainful to himself, but also holy and profitable to the society of
mankind: For thus much does Saint Paul comprehend within the compass of his
words, Ephesians. 4. 28. But let him labor the thing that is good.

It is not enough to have a calling, though it be never so good, but it must be
followed: so as it may bring in maintenance for thee and thine, such as is
meet for thy estate.

But how must it be followed? First, with diligence: 2. The manner of following
a calling.
for as Solomon says, Prou. 8. 9. He that caryeth himself slothfully, or
loosely in his business, is the brother of a great waster: that is, he is
another waster: and does as much as an vnthrist, or spend-good.

To diligence belongs the blessing. Prou. 10. 4. The hand of the diligent
makes rich: and Chap. Prou. 13. 4. Diligence, is that by which we execitte
(...) well as we can the labor of our calling.
12. 11. He that tilleth his land shall be satisfied with meat. Yea, and a
large blessing: The soul of the diligent shall be fatted: that is; he shall
have abundantly. And lest that any should say, that in some callings a man may
well thrive, but not 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10. Romans 12. 11.
in mine: it is said, Prou. 14. 23. In all labor, that is, diligent following
thy calling. Moreover, this diligence will bring a man to renown. Prou. 22.
29. Thou see that a diligent man in his business stands before Kings, etc.

The better to kindle thy affection unto this Of the enemies to diligence.
diligence in following thy calling, consider what is said of the Spirit of
God, of those evils that are enemies unto it.

Many a man is idle and slothful, because labor and toil is irksome and
painful to him, Sloth. Slothfulness is a weariness or tediousness in any
godly, spiritual, or eiuill exercises which one ought for Gods sake to do, for
the benefit of the Commonwealth: or for the sustentation of himself and his
family.
as Prou. 20. 4. The slothful will not plough, because of Winter: but what is
his reward? It follows, Therefore shall he beg in Summer, and have nothing.
Poverty is the fruit of slothfulness. Prou: 18. 4. A slothful hand makes
poor. And lest any man should think that he could keep away poverty, at
least a great while: it is said in Prou. 23. 24. that it comes violently, and
with great power, and swiftly upon such a man, and he shall not withstand it:
Thy poverty comes as a light traveler, and thy necessity as an armed man. In
the same place also, the means whereby it comes is expressed: verse 30. He
through folly neglects his ground, and left it unfenced, and untilled, and
so it yielded him no increase. Which being there spoken of husbandry, may be
drawn to a general, that to let such things lie idle and unused, which should
bring in commodity, is the highway to poverty

The slothful, is further described to be a great wisher and woulder, but no
good householder: Sloth, gluttony, and prodigality, are the true paths that
conduct and lead men to poverty.
Proverbs 13. 4. The Sluggard lusts, but his soul has naught. And again:
All the day long he wishes, but his desire is not accomplished: which wastes
him with sorrow. Besides, he persuades himself that he has some sufficient
stay or let, to withold him from diligent labor, and so dare not go forward,
as the wiseman says, Prou. 15. 10. The way of the slothful is Prou. 26 13.
14. 15. 16.
a hedge of thorns. And in another place he says; Prou. 26. 13. A Lion is in
the way: but in truth it is ease and laziness that lets him. As the door
turns upon the hinges, so does the slothful in his bed. And to show that
such a man is in a down-hill to beggerie: Solomon says, that he thinks
himself very wise in his doing: The Prou. 26. 14.
Sluggard is wiser in his own conceit, then seven men that can render a
reason. What hope is there of saving of him that the beggar catch him not, who
Prou. 26. 16.
pleases himself in his sloth, which does summon him to beggerie? That also
is not to be omitted, that such a sluggard, who suffers his own ground to be
over grown with thorns and nettles, stones or thistles, serves in the world
for an example, to make other men wary. Under this, is that same luskishnesse
which makes men love their ease and sleep, which brings forth the same
fruit that sloth does. The sleeper shall be clothed with rags. Prou. 13. 21.
and therefore, the wiseman labors to draw men from it. Prou. 20. 13. Love
not sleep, lest (...) come to poverty; open thine eyes, and thou shall be
satisfied with bread.

Another enemy to diligence, is, following 2. Idle company keeping.
of vain and idle company. For though a man be eager minded toward his
business, yet by vain and idle company, he shall be drawn away to other
delights, and lose his good hours, and let go the occasion of doing some
things in the fit season. Therefore Solomon says, Prou. 11. 12. The man that
follows the idle, is destitute of understanding. And again, that he shall
come to no better pass, then the idle man. Pro. 28. 19. He that follows the
idle, shall be filled with poverty. This harm gets he by haunting vain
company, None can walk in simplicity besore God, that delights in the
company of the ungodly.
and leude persons. For as sweet waters are corrupted and spoiled, when they
run into waters which are salt, bitter, or unwholesome, and so lose the virtue
thereof: even so, he that joins himself in friendship, and does couple
himself in familiarity with wicked and ungodly men, becomes wicked and
ungodly himself, and is stained and blemished with their vices, although
heretofore he had been inclined to virtue and godliness. For a little leaven
(says the Apostle) does leaven the whole lump. 1. Cor. 5. 6.

Pastime also carries many from their callings, 3. Pastime. Lewd pastime
causes naked purses.
and likewise from thrift: Pro. 21. 17. He that loves pastime, shall be a
poor man. Which being a punishment threatened of God against that evil; though
a man would be wary of loosing much at play, yet the Lord might some other way
Thrift consists not in gold, but grace.
bring him to poverty, and so punish him for his corrupt delight in that thing
which the Scripture has so branded.

Lastly, unto true diligence, Solomon opposes and sets talking and great
reckoning of what 4. Great reckoning.
they will do, Prou. 14. 23. In all labor there is abundance, but the talk of
the lips brings only want. For commonly, such as make great account of their
doings, when it comes to doing, can find no fit time to begin.

Now to finish this point of diligence to be used in our calling, mark the
good husbandry which the Spirit of God teaches, Prou. 27. 23. Be diligent to
know the state of thy flock, and take heed to thy herds, for riches remain
not always. Where he wills men not to trust all to servants, for the care of
their cattle and other commodities, but to look diligently to them
themselves. The reason is, for that their riches be not so glued to them, but
that if they be not carefully looked unto, they will take their leave and be
gone. And so we see it often comes to pass, that they which do their business
by others, have others to thrive for them.

But here peradventure, some husbands and wives will say: Ye speak much of
good husbandry and good huswiferie, but how would you have them to be good
husbands and good huswifes, that have not where with to be good husbands or
good huswifes on? Whereunto we answer, that good husbandry and good
huswiferie, consists not so much in having much or little, as in the wise,
careful, discreet, and good fore-casting of that which God in mercy has
enabled and enriched them with, to see every thing well ordered, and employed to
a good end and use. For we see by experience, that some husbands and wives, can
so husbandly and huswifely dispose of things, that they will make a fairer show
of a little, and cause it to stretch further, then many can of much. Yea, some
can do as much with twenty nobles, as some other can with twenty or thirty
pounds.

As a calling must be followed with diligence, so also there is wisdom, skill,
and discretion to be used in it. For as in lifting of a great weight, a mighty
strong man wanting cunning, cannot move that, though he strain and busy
himself much, which a weak man will do with a slight. So dealing in any
calling, some man shall toil exceedingly much, and yet for want of wit and
discretion, not do half the good that another shall with more ease, Prou. 13.
23.

He that has a trade, let him learn to be cunning in it, and able to go
through with it: Prouer. 16. 20. And to the end he may walk on surer ground,
let him not disdain to ask advice and counsel. For the praise of contriuing
matters well by his own wit, is not so great, as is the loss and ignominy
(when for want of counsel) a man enters a wrong course. Besides, Solomon does
commend this wisdom unto us often, to take heed of hastiness, headiness,
and self-will; and to beware of ouer-weening in our own reach: Proverbs, 15.
22. Without counsel, thoughts, that is, intents and purposes, come to naught:
but in the multitude of counsel there is steadfastness. And 22. 18. Establish
thy thoughts by counsel, and by counsel make war. Whereas on the other
side, Have brings waste. Whosoever is hasty, that is, rashly goes about his
business without counsel, comes surely to poverty. Prou. 21. 5. That is
notable, Proverb. 29. 20. See thou a man hasty in his matters, there is more
hope of a fool then of him. The same is said of the conceited man, See thou
a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool then of him. Prou
26. 12.

When the Spirit of God does so carefully commend this thing to us, we must
needs thereby see, that it is a matter of great necessity, and of excellent
use. For, as the proverb is, Two eyes see more then one. And many times, men
see more clearly in other men's matters then in their own. In this case also,
it is good to look to the examples of others, and our own experience in such
like cases; for much light comes into a wise man's mind by this window. And to
the end that thou may make thy use of experience and examples, when occasion
shall serve, it is good to mark things which shall fall out, to observe the
beginnings, proceedings, and events of matters, and to keep them in mind to
stand thee in stead. For he that never marketh any thing, it is all one as if
he had never seen or heard any thing: and such a one must always be running
for counsel in every light matter, or else may take a wrong course, except he
can stumble on the right way by good hap. This observation, and pondering of
events, with the causes that went before, is the ripener of wit. But
idle-mindednesse, and careless letting pass of matters, makes an emptiness
in the head, of such good things as make one man excel another.

Thirdly, in following thy calling, let not justice Justice is a virtue, that
yields to every man his own.
and upright dealing be forgotten, but order thy dealing by them. If there were
no other, yet this reason should weigh with thee, that so thou might look
to reap good dealing at other men's hands, as it is said, Prou. 21. 21. He that
follows after righteousness and mercy, shall find life, righteousness and
glory. Whereas such as measure out hard measure to others, have the like
measured to them again, according to the saying of our Savior Christ.
Besides, the riches gotten by ill means, have a heavy destiny uttered
against them: The gathering of riches by a deceitful tongue is vanity, tossed
too and fro, of them that seek death. Prou. 21. 6.

* As justice and equal dealing toward all men must be looked unto, so God
will have us not to Mercifulnes a compassion and (...) of an other man's (...),
with best (...) (so far as may be) to comfort, (...) and succor them.
omit mercifulness and friendly dealing to the poor. Be not then so tied to
thy business, that thou can never look out to the necessities of others,
nor spare time to serve their occasions. Among many ways of helping the poor,
which are commanded, this is one, to go or ride for them, to save them from
wrong, or to further them in their right; to be their mouth to plead for them,
when by fear and simplicity they cannot plead for themselves. And toward
them especially a sparing hand is forbidden, and that with a sore item, Prou.
21. 13. He that stops his ear at the crying of the poor, he shall also
cry, and not be heard. And to show liberality, (especially to the Saints and
faithful,) there is Psalm. 16 3. Gal. 6. 10. Heb. 6 10 and 13. 16. (...) 3. 16.
Prou. 22. 9.
persuasion with a sweet promise. Prou. 15. 17. He that has mercy upon the
poor, lends unto the Lord, and the Lord will recompense him that which he
has given.

If any fear, that if he tie himself so short, as never to pass the bounds
of equity, and besides, open his hand so wide to the poor, he shall never
live and thrive of his calling: let him remember what is written, Proverb. 16.
3. Commit thy works to the Lord, and thy thoughts shall be directed. And let
that promise encourage him to follow the Lord whithersoeuer he calls,
notwithstanding any fear or misdoubt. Besides, let him have that in mind,
which is in Prou. 28. 22. against covetousness, and posting to be rich: A man
with a wicked eye hastes to be rich, and knows not that poverty shall come
unto him.

And again, in the 20. verse, He that makes have to be rich, shall not be
innocent. Whereto agreeeth that of Saint Paul. 1. Tim. 6. 9. 10. He that will
be rich falls into tentation and snares, etc. And the vanitte of riches ill
gotten, or ill kept, is declared, Prou. 13. 1. and 20. 23.

Hereunto men must join contentation, with Contentation is a virtue, whereby a
man is well pleased with that estate wherein he is placed.
that allowance which God as a wise Father (that knows what is best) makes
unto them. For a restless and discontented mind, breeds hast-making to
riches, dries up the rivers of liberality, and sets the conscience upon
the rack; and stretches it beyond the bounds of equity 1. Tim. 6. 6. Phil.
4. 11. 12. Mat. 6. 31. Heb. 13. 5. Esa. 33. 1. Pro. 22. 12. 13 Eccles. 5. 7.
and 4. 1.
and just dealing, when hope of gain is offered. Wherefore Solomon, (to
prevent those evils in men, and to make them to like of their present estate,
tells them, that better is a little with righteousness, then great revenues
without equity; And the like is in Psalm. 37. 16. There is a double reason for
this: First, because store gotten with wrong, breeds a sore trouble, sometime
of mind and conscience, and sometimes outward; whiles the right owner of the
goods suffers thee not to go so quietly away with them: or God stirs thee
up an enemy mightier then thy self, that shall pull from thee, as thou did
from another.

The second is, because such have the hatred of many, for that which they
purloyne or get by wrong and oppression: which a good man would not have for so
small commodity.

Hitherto we have showed what thou must stick unto in following thy calling.
Now concerning other things not unworthy to be mentioned, as of him that would
provide for his family well. Though we would not have a man feign himself
poor, and a niggard, when he has abundance, as a number do, by whining and
complaining without cause, who are neither good to the Commonwealth, nor kind
to themselves: yet it is not wisdom to carry an higher port and countenance
in the world then a man's ability will warrant. Such shall be To spare, that
thou may have to spend in honesty and necessity for Gods sake, is well
done. A thing is sooner spared the^ gotten.
envied: so long as they do bear it out by the hard-edge, they shall be laid
at for charges; and if through necessity in the end they be feign to yield,
they shall be scorned of their enuiers, and little pitied of all others.
Wherefore it is wisdom rather to bear a low sail, and to keep within
compass, and rather to come short of that thou might do, remembering that
which is, Prou. 12. 9. He that is despised, and is his own man, is better then
he that boasts himself, and lacks bread.

Again, as they which love to pearke alost, and desire to be carried with a
full sail by the wind Ambition is an unlawful or wicked desire of glory,
namely, when a man seeks to be above al other in honor, and seeks to effect
the same by unnecessary and unjust actions, besides his vocation: trusting to
his own wisdom and strength.
of Ambition, and Vainglory is a certain disordinate desire to be well thought
of, well spoken of, praised, and glorified of men.
Vainglory, rather then to have sea-roome, do oftentimes rush upon the rocks
of want, and there stick till they sink: so they, which in fear of such
rocks choose to ride with half or quarter sail, where they have not room at
will, are more safe from danger, and may more conveniently provide against a
tempest. Yea, they may so fail, that when God shall remove them hence, they
shall not be constrained to leave their children to the wide world, which thing
nature binds a man to have a care of.

Another rule may be drawn out of that which is Prou. 10. 5. A wise son
gathers in summer: but he that sleeps in harvest is the son of confusion.
Where he teaches, that when a man spieth an opportunity of honest gain and
commodity, he is to follow that while the time serves: but he that for a
small matter, lets slip occasions, and reckons of this time and that time,
this day and that day, thinking then to have more fit opportunity, that will
bring all to nothing.

A good neighbor (says one) is a good thing. Agreeable to this, Solomon
says, Prou. 1. 17. A friend loves at all times. And 18. 24. A friend is
nearer then a brother. As if he should say, there is many a friend that is more
kind then a brother, and more ready to do pleasure then he that is more bound
by nature and duty. He says also, Prou. 27. 7. As ointment and perfume
rejoice the heart, so does the sweetness of a man's friend by hearty counsel.
That is also notable, which is, verse. 17. Iron sharpneth iron, so does a man
the face of his friend: to wit, because mutual communication of friends one
with another, quickens the spirit, and cheereth the heart.

All these places contain motives, to give heed to this exhortation, verse 19.
Thine own friend, and thy fathers friend, for sake not, neither enter into
they brothers house in the day of thy calamity: for better is a neighbor that
is near, then a brother that is far off. In the end of the eighteenth
Chapter, verse 24. he shows how a man shall preserve this treasure which is
so good: A man that has friends, must show himself friendly. Hereto agrees
that of the heathen: He that would have a good neighbor, must be a good
neighbor. In the 24. verse 27, he seems to give a rule for the right order
of managing a man's household affairs; saying: Prepare thy work without, and
make ready thy things in the field, and afterward thou may build thine
house. As though he should say, first look after things that are needful and
necessary for housekeeping, as that thou may have provision etc: and then,
when that is provided for, thou may fall a trimming up of thy house. But
many fools begin first to deck their houses, before they lay for
necessaries, and are feign afterward to sell their ornaments with loss, to
provide more necessary matters. It is a good point of wisdom, to bear the
want of that longest, which may best be spared.

The last rule is, that a good governor of a Sparing is good getting, and the
greatest rent that one can have.
family, for the better maintenance of his family, must be frugal, or (to
speak english) a good husband, that is, spating and saving, and that he so
order and moderate himself, that if his goods and revenues be not sufficient
for him and his charge, he make himself sufficient for his goods, and dispose
of himself according to the old proverb: To cut his coat according to his
cloth, and to eat within nis own tether. Yet we would not have him pinching,
or niggardly, and so dried up for liberality, that nothing should be wrong from
him for good uses. That is too far on the left hand, as prodigality is on
the right. But where there is no just cause to spend or lay out, and it might
be as well spared, there we would have him save. For his riches be the Lords
goods, which God has made him a steward of. When the Lord therefore wills him
to open his hand, there let him not be straight handed, but where nothing but
unruly lusts and pomp, or vain glory, bid him draw, there is he to hold fast:
for he is an ill steward that will lay out his masters goods where there is no
need, or where less would serve. There be many, who of a greedy and covetous
mind, will easily embrace this precept of sparing: but as they do it with a
wrong purpose so they fail in the matters wherein they should save and be
sparing. Many misers pinch their servants in their meat and drink, allowing
them not enough, or not good enough, and this they take for frugalitie and
thrift: whereas to pranke, and prick up themselves in bravery, and that
sometimes above their calling, they are very lavish. This is no more to be
counted frugalitie, or good husbandry, then to roba poor man to give to the
rich, is true liberality. When therefore thou think of sparing, let not the
greedy desire of gathering draw thee to it, but conscience of well using that
which God has lent thee. And this mind will draw thee to spare and save only
there, where it may be well done, and not there where in conscience thou
ought to spend. Now the better to further out selves in this honest
thriftinesse, or frugalitie, which is called of one, a great revenue: the
occasions of needless expenses must be avoided. Love not mirth and pastime,
for they have often occasion of expenses. Again, they cause loss of time, and
neglect of business at home, yea, and often men do buy their pleasure with
loss in their goods, while retchlesse masters have either theeuish or
careless servants. Therefore Solomon tells such their fortune, Prou. 21. 17.
He that loves mirth or pastime, will be a poor man.

Secondly, a sweet tooth, and a fair mouth, that is daintiness, or
choicenesse in diet, is an enemy to frugalitie: a needless charge, to delight
in the taste for a moment, whereas wholesome meat and drink, would be more
ease for the purse, and more healthful for the body. He that loves wine and
oil, that is, sweet delicates for his senses, will not be rich, Pro. 21. 17.

In this rank does march gluttonte: I mean Gluttony is a vice, when any does
(...) and fill his body.
cramming and pampering of the body, and also drunkenness. These dull the mind
and wit, darken reason, and make a man become sottish. Besides, they stuff the
body with gross humors, which breed diseases, and diseases bring other charges
of physic, or at least, loss of time, and neglect of business, which do
cost a man as much as his diet wherein he was excessive: so that these evils
have double expenses.

To be brief in this point, God having set Drunkenness is a vice, when any
dot gull in overmuch drink.
the destiny of the drunkard and the glutton, namely, that many evils, and
namely poverty, shall betide them, Prouer. 23. 21. 29. 30. 31. by some way or
other he will effect his judgment: for no one piece of his word shall fall to
the ground.

A great back-friend to thrift is good fellowship, and company keeping: for it
has loss of time, and draws thee away from thy calling, and hinders the
due ouerseeing of good husbands affairs: it makes a man ouerslip occasions of
doing good things in a due and fit season: besides, it draws home others to
thy house, or draws thee to others houses, as tauernes, alehouses, and such
like, the haunting whereof is a thing of no good report: and it makes thee
lavish in spending, or else it is no good fellowship, (as they say) and by
means thereof thou shall feed the gluttons, and spend that upon others, which
belongs to thine own family: which Solomon says, Pro. 28. 7. is shame to
thy father.

Thy company keeping has many other enormities: He that touches pitch, shall be
defiled therewith. And as thou art a party with him in his evils, so shall
thou be also in his punishment: The companion os fools shall be afflicted.
Wherefore avoid such, and rather follow the wife: He Prou. 13. 20.
that walks with the wise, shall be wise: Who are they? Even they that have
the lips of knowledge, whose words teach good things. But such whose talk is
nothing but froth, their words unsavory, bringing no good to the hearers:
though there be no outward evil in their lives, yet they must not be admitted
for companions, further then upon some urgent occasion thou must deal with
them: Prou. 14. 7. Depart from the foolish man, when thou perceiuest not in him
the (...) of knowledge.

As to have a faithful friend, is a matter auailable to thrift, so by some
friends a man may be endammaged. There is a friendship, which is very costly,
and chargeable to maintain. He that desires familiarity with great men, must
have other things suitable; as costly apparel, well trimmed houses, often
inuitings to bankets to recompense their kindness, he must follow their
humors, and not stick to neglect his affairs to keep them company.

This will cost a man sweetly, but what shall he gain? A friendly countenance
before his face, and perhaps a dry flower behind his back, especially if
things go not well with him for the world: then oh it is pity, a frank
hearted man, no bodies foe but his own, and such like. Solomon gives thee
warning of this kind of friendship, Prou. 23. 1. 2. 3.

There is another man's friendship, which Solomon would have thee to avoid as
hurtful unto thee, Prou. 22. 24. Make no friendship with an angry man,
neither go with the furious. The choleric man, though never so good a fellow
while he is pleased, yet is soon turned to hate thee. And no beauier foe, then
he that was a friend: which Solomon declares, A brother offended, is harder to
win then a strong City, and their contentions are like the bar of a
Palace. If a man could always keep in with the angry man (which cannot be
done without putting up many injuries) yet may that be hurtful: for the wise
man adds, Lest thou learn his ways: that is, become like to him in
furiousness, and that is as hurtful on the other side. For the furious man
abounds in transgressions, Prou. 29. 22.
which do often cost him the setting on, even from men, who being by his rage
hurt, or reproached, do watch their occasions to work him some woe. Whereupon
we say in a common proverb: The angry man never wants woe. There be also
trencher friends, who to win favor and good will, will smooth it in words,
fawn, and glauer: they will say as you say, and bring you tales of your
enemy, so to feed your humor, that he may wind within you: a beast that
biteth sorest of all tame (...) For whiles a simple-hearted man suspecteth no
hurt, he watches his occasions to speed himself of a booty: a matter, that by
the counsel of the holy Ghost often repeated in the Proverbs, is as carefully to
be avoided, as it is hurtful to a man's estate. If he can do none of these, yet
he has not lost his labor: for he had many a good welcome for his fair
talk: and by often resorting to thy house, he has furnished himself with
some thing to discredit thee, except thou have walked marvelous warily, which
a man can hardly do before flatterers.

To end this matter of friendship, have some near friends, but not many.
Choose the best nature (...) and the best graced; that is, such as besides
single-heartednesse and plain simplicity, are by grace brought to have
conscience of their dealing. And lest under a show of simplicity, wiliness
should be hid, try before you trust, and grow into familiarity not all at a
push, but by steps; tell things of no great secrecy (as secrets) to try their
taciturnity. Be not over credulous, upon sight of a little kindness, to
account them amongst thy nearest friends. Many have been wiped of their
commodities by falsehood in fellowship. Some have been betrayed by untrusty
friends, and brought into great troubles. Many opening their minds to blabbes
that can keep nothing, have their purposes openly known and scanned, before
they can compass them, and so are oftentimes prevented through the malice of
their enuiers. Wherefore, except a man can find a faithful friend indeed, it
is good to remember the old saying: My secrets to my self; whereto our common
proverb answers: Two may keep counsel, if one be away. The Wiseman ascribes
it to folly, to power out a man's secrets lightly: The fool powers Prou. 29.
11.
out all his mind, but the wise man keeps it in.

As hurt comes by some friends, so also by enemies many are sore annoyed.
What charges in lawing, and other troubles be there in the world, through
enmity? Wherefore it is good wisdom by all good means to avoid breaches
which breed enmity: and by all friendly, just, and wise dealing, to keep
peace and good will, even with the meanest. The weakest enemy is not to be
contemned. It shall go hard but at one time or other, he will work thee some
displeasure; at least his mouth shall always be open to speak ill, to
misconster thy actions, and to blaze abroad thy infirmities and scapes.

He that would have no enemies, must make himself none, by unjust, unkind, or
vnneighbourly dealing; but he must rather by couttecusnesse of speech,
helpfulnesse, and good neighborhood, win the love and liking of men: yet a man
may be too wise in this point. Many being Ioth to incur any man's displeasure,
will not seek to uphold right and equity, they will not speak for the poor,
nor stand out to maintain Gods cause, when he is dishonored by open sin: as
swearing, lying, railing, and such like. Many to keep in with all, use all
companies alike: for avoiding a man's company breeds a grudge.

But the good will of men is never to be purchased with forsaking of duty. Such
things as may justly be ill taken, avoid for peace sake. Whereof the Wiseman
noteh some: as meddling in others men's matters. He that medleth with a strife
that belongs not to him, is as he that takes a Prou. 26. 17.
dog by the cares: that is, casts himself into dangers.

2. Be not hasty to go to Law, no not in a right cause, but agree at home. For
besides that a man does seldom escape without great loss, (in which respect it
is also to be avoided, as an enemy to thrift) thy neighbor is openly put to
reproach, he becomes thy mortal enemy, and will always watch to do thee hurt.

3. Sometime to seek recompense of a wrong breeds greater malice in the
author of the wrong, and makes him double it; as a man spurreth his horse for
kicking, when he was spurred. Say not, I will recompense evil, but wait upon
Prou. 20. 22.
the Lord, and he will save thee.

4. Ost haunting of another man's house may bring thee into mislike: wherefore
the Wiseman says, Withdraw thy foot from thy neighbors Prou. 25. 17.
house, lest he be weary of thee, and hate thee. If by careful avoiding of
all just occasions, thou can not avoid ill will, (as the world loves none
but her own) never seek to win favor by departing from duty, but commit thy
self to God, and turn thy mind to make use of thine enemy. Let enmity, which
is always prying, and seeking occasions to hurt, by word or deed, make thee to
walk, not more closely, but more uprightly: and then may thou defy thine
enemy: For be that walks uprightly, walks boldly. Pro. 10 9.


Another enemy to thrift, (which is also a breaker of peace and good will among
men) is much borrowing. He that is to borrow, does spend much time, and lets
slip many occasions of doing his business in the due season: he must repay in
better measure then he borrowed, or else ill words, or ill will, will follow.
If it be a matter of any value which is borrowed, then as Solomon says, The
borrower is servant to the lender: Prou. 22. 7.
that is, beholding to him, and in his danger. The thriftiest men love least to
be beholding to others, and therefore seldom seek, and often refuse, even
when they be offered to receive benefits at others men's hands. He that goes a
borrowing, goes a sorrowing: and every denial he receives, where he thinks he
should speed, is the seed of grudge in the mind of the denyer, and of him who
is denied. But of all borrowing, to borrow up on usury is the dearest buying,
and the rankest poison to thrift. When David would wish a sore plague to his
enemy, he prays, that he may be given into the usurers hand; Let the usurer
eat him up: If the usurer be a deuourer, woe be to them that come in his Psalm.
109. 1.
hands.

To avoid borrowing, a good husband must cut off all unnecessary expenses,
that he may have all necessaries in his house. To avoid borrowing of money
take heed of suretiship, of dealing in bargains, which you are not fully able
to compass: of dealing with many things, and having too many irons in the fire
at once. Look how you may compass matters before you enterprise them. Provide
long before against any day of payment, and have not money to seek upon the
sudden: for that drives a man to borrowing, yea, to usury; or to sell Robbin
Hoods peny-worths.

Besides, he must keep none in his house idle, or half set to work; none
more then needs must. Let every one have his charge, that will thoroughly
occupy him. Also, look that they do their taskes every one in his place: and
have an often eye unto them, whether they have done as they should do. The
masters eye makes a fat horse: so also the mistress eye makes a friendly
dairy. Except you have rare servants, such as truly fear, God, and have good
consciences, trust them not further then you see them, except necessity drive
you.

Hitherto of the duties that be belonging to the chief ruler os the family,
that is, the husband, touching honest provision for it.

Now seeing that God has joined the wife The wives duty touching the things of
this life.
to her husband as an helper, she must help him in the provision for her
family, so much as lies in her power, and is meet for to do. And indeed her
industry and wisdom may do much herein, that though her husband should be
much wanting in his duty, yet she might hold in the goal. Thus many have
done, and so Solomon says, the wise woman will do: A wise woman Prou. 14. 1.
builds her house. But it is not every woman's case, because that all are not
wise, as she that Solomon speaks of. This wise woman is els-where called a
gracious woman, Prou. 11. 16. And a virtuous woman, Prou. 12. 4. because many
graces and virtues meet together in her.

For she is To her husband, dutiful, faithful, Dutifulness or dutiful will,
is that which does shine in the declaration and performance of duties.
and loving. Toward those of her family, wise and prudent. In her business,
diligent, and painful. Toward her neighbor, modest, humble, kind, and
quiet.

First, if she be not subject to her husband, to let him rule all the
hous-hold, especially outward affairs: if she will make against him, and seek
to have her own ways, there will be doing and undoing. Things will go
backward, the house will come to ruin: for God will not bless where his
ordinance is not obeyed. This is allowable, that she may in modest sort show
her mind; and a wise husband will not disdain to hear her advice, and follow
it also, if it be good. But when her way is not liked of, though it be the best
way, she may not thereupon set all at six and seven, with what should I labor
and travail? I see my husband takes such ways, that he will bring all to
nothing.

This were nothing else, but when she seeeth the house falling, to help to
pull it down faster. Solomon says, The wise-woman builds her house; much
more then does she underprop it, and hold it up, that by her husbands
indiscreet dealing it be not pulled down. She must not think her self freed
from duty, because he walks not in his duty; but hold her place, and labor
for her part to uphold all: and so God will either bless the works of her
hands, to the maintenance of the house; or give her husband more wisdom and
care: or else give her a contented mind with a low estate, which is great
riches. One point of subjection is, to be content with such apparel and
outward port as her husbands estate can allow her. They fail in this, who by
importunity and disquietnesse, wring from their husbands more then he can well
cut out from his revenues, or gettings.

It is a part of unthankfulness, secretly to purloyne 2. Faithful.
and powle from him, for to prancke up her children, or her self, her house,
and chambers in bravery: and besides, it is a close undermining of her house.

Love and peaceablenesse in the wife toward 3. Loving. Love is a natural
affection of the mind, inflaming all the powers of the lover, with willing
duty toward the beloved.
her husband, is available for the weal of the family. For where they agree
lovingly, there they counting the good of the one the benefit of the other, do
jointly watch against all such things in their family, as might endammage it.

There the servants know, that in pleasing one they shall please both: and
contrariwise, be careful in all things to deal well: whereas division in the
governors makes partaking in the servants; and when they care not for
pleasing, but only that side which they affect, all such kind of service is
but smally beneficial to thriuing. It can hardly be avoided, but there will be
some squaring and diversity between the man and his wife: but they must labor
to compose such matters privately and quickly, that they grow not to breaches,
for they be dangerous to thrist.

Let there be therefore reasonings secretly between themselves, of such
matters as might breed a scarre; and let them be soon ended after the
occasion is offered, before the minds be much exaspetated. Let there be no
hard words of either side, not opening of old matters. Let it be done privately
between themselves, and not before children, or servants: for they will not
stick to carry tales, to please the humor of the party to whom they are
most affected. Besides, they will spy your infirmities, and grow to a less
regard of you, and they will blaze abroad such matters to your discredit.

Now for her behavior toward her servants A good huswife is a great
patrimonte, and she is most honorable, that is most honest and godly.
and children, if it be prudent and with wisdom, it does much good in a
house: but it contains many points. That which her care for the most part
rendeth unto, is saving. She that will be a good sauer, must not be a slender
huswife, but skillful in all points, whereof she A good sauer, is as good as a
good getter.
shall have use in her family. She must not let her maids have their own
ways, for want of skill: but she must be able to direct and prescribe, what,
and how, in every business. Where she has little skill, by reason of her
education, she must be careful by conferring, and marking to learn skill,
against she is to deal in such things, that she may be able to direct her
servants, and to find them out when they have done amiss.

She must have a good forecast to contriue As a word spoken in his place, is
like apples of gold with pictures of silver, Prou. 25. 11. Even so is a
business or work done in a fit and due time.
and dispatch things in due time, and good order, that necessaries be not
wanting when they should be used, and confusion do not make more labor then is
needful. She must be wise, to mark the nature of her servants and children,
to deal with them as their natures require, for the training of them to her
hand.

All must not be dealt with one way: and yet many have no way but one to deal
withal: and that is chiding, and brawling, which they fall to upon every
occasion, and that wearieth servants, and makes often changes, discourageth
children, and makes both careless, whether they do their duties or no: yea it
breeds stubburnnesse, frowardness, and contempt in their minds. She must be
wise, to mark and see what needless burdens, unnecessary expenses and
losses there do upon occasions fall out within doors, and prevent such
occasions afterward. She must know the best ways of doings things to greatest
use, with least charges. Briefly, she must know which way to save a penny, and
lay about her to save it, for many a little makes a great deal. She must know
what is meet for servants, what for workmen, and what not: what is meet for
ordinary, and what is meet for strangers. Above all, she must know how to
keep within her compass, and yet to avoid the reproach of a pincher. She must
know what servants may do within the compass of so much time, and what is
above their strength. She must have a diligent eye to the behavior of her
servants, what meetings and greetings, what tickings and toyings, and what
words and countenances there be between men and maids, lest such matters
being neglected, there follow wantonness, yea folly, within their houses,
which is a great blemish to the governors.

In her business she must be diligent and painful. Hither to belongs that
Prou. 31. 15. She Painfulnesse is a labor or endeavor unto weariness, to
bring any thing to pass.
rises before day: and verse 18. Her candle is not put out by night. She
borrows of the morning and the evening, for to dispatch her business. When
she is up, does she sit down and cap a stool? No, she looks that her
servants have their necessaries, that they may go soon to their work: she
sets her maids to work: and tasketh them, to keep them occupied: yea, she
suffers none to be idle in her house, but either doing somewhat that is
profitable, or else learning somewhat that is meet for them. She must not
think to sit and command, but she must be a stirrer in every place, to ouersee
whether duty be done of all hands, and that in good sort, yea, and to quicken
the diligence of her family: and that things may be well done, she must be at
an end of every good work, sometimes setting to her hands to encourage the
doer, sometimes gently teaching, sometimes commending, sometimes speaking
fair, but never brawling: sometimes showing what is amiss in gentle language,
letting them see what loss comes by ill doing of a thing: sometimes friendly
putting them in mind, how by sloth, forgetfulness, or sluttishnesse, they
shall get an ill name for their service, and so become turneawayes from every
good house. She must lay a diligent eye to her household-stuffe in every room,
that nothing be embezelled away, nothing spoiled or lost for want of looking
to, nothing marde by ill usage, nothing worn out by more using then is
needful, nothing out of place. For things cast aside are deemed to be stolen,
and then there follows uncharitable suspicions, which breed much
disquietnesse. And though nice Dames think it an unseemly thing for them to
soil their hands about any household matters, (and therefore if they do any
thing, it is but pricking of a clout) yet the virtuous woman (as Prouer. 31.
17.) girdeth her loins with strength, and strengthens her arms: that is,
she sets her self painefully about some work that is profitable: For she
sells it afterward. verse, 24. Yea, the particular work is described: She
seeks wool and flax, etc. She puts her band to the wheel, and her hands
handle the spindle: She makes carpets. The meaning is: that she gets some
matter to work on, that she may exercise her self and her family in, and it
is not some idle toy, to make the world gay withal, but some matter of good
use: Her family is clothed with double, and her husband is known in the gate,
he is so comely and trimly apparelled by her diligence at home, that he is in
regard among men, and known when he goes.

But what need such as can live by their lands, to labor with their hands?

What need had the woman that Solomon speaks of? The conscience of doing
good in Answer.
the world should draw them to do that which no need drives them unto.
Remember that the virtuous woman stretches out her hand to the poor and
needy, Prou. 21. 20. She gives not of her husbands, she gives of her own:
she found a way to do good without the hurt of her husband. S. Paul requires,
that women should array themselves with good works, the comeliest 1. Tim. 2. 10.
ornament in the world, if women had spiritual eyes to discern it. Dorcas in
the Acts, teaches wives how to get this array, for she made Act. 9. 36.
garments to cloth the naked and the poor. Thus might women find how to set
themselves a work, though they could live of their own. But for such as have
but a mean allowance, God thereby shows, that he will have them occupy
themselves in some honest labor to keep them from idleness, and the evils
that issue therefrom. They therefore must labor, if not to sell cloth, as
Salomons woman did, nor to cloth the poor, as Dorcas did; yet to cloth her
family, that they may not care for the cold. Let her avoid such occasions as
may draw her from her calling. She must shake of sloth, and love of ease: she
must avoid gossiping, further then the law of good neighborhood does require.
S. Paul would have a woman a good home keeper. The virtuous woman is never so
well, as when she is in the midst of her affairs.

She that much frequenteth meetings of gossips, seldom comes better home.
Some count it a disgrace to come much abroad, least they should be counted
gossips, which name is become odious: but they must have tatlers come home to
them, to bring them news, and to hold them in a tale, lest they should be
thought to be idle without a cause. They perceive not how time runs, nor how
untowardly their business goes forward while they sit idle. They know not, that
great tale-bringers be as great carriers, and that such make their gain of
carrying and recarrying. The wise woman will be wary whom she admits into
her house to sit long there, knowing that their occupations is but to mark and
carry. Toward her neighbors she is not sour, but courteous, not disdainefull
to the basest, but affable with modesty: no fcorner, nor giber, but bearing
with infirmities, and making the best of things: not ready to stomach them for
every light matter, and so to look big, but passing by offenses for unities
sake; not angry, but mild: not bold, but bashful; not full of words, pouring
out all her mind, and babbling of her household matters, that were more fitter
to be concealed, but speaking upon good occasion, and that with discretion. Let
her hear and see, and say the best, and yet let her soon break off talk
with such in whom she perceives no wisdom, nor savor of grace. Let her not
be light to believe reports, nor ready to tell them again to fill the time
with talk: for silence is Silence is a gravity, when she abstaineth and holds
her peace from speaking when it does not become her to speak.
far better then such unsavory talk. Let her not be churlish, but helpefull
in all things to prevent breaches; or else to make them up again, if by the
waywardness of others there be any made. Let her not be envious, but glad of
the good of others, nor fond of every thing that she sees her neighbor have,
but wisely considering what is meet for her self, and what her state will
bear. Let her not be garish in apparel, but sober and modest: not nice nor
coy, but handsome and huswife-like: no talker of other men's matters, nor given
to speak ill of any, for fear of the like measure, Math. 7. 2.

1. The duty of the Husband toward his Wife.
THis duty consists severally in these three points.

First, that he live with his wife discreetly, according unto knowledge.

Secondly, that he be not bitter, fierce, and cruel unto her.

Thirdly, that he love, cherish, and nourish his wife, even as his own body,
and as Christ loved the Church, and gave himself for it, to sanctify it.

But before we shall speak of these three points, we will a little touch the
original and beginning of holy wedlock; what it is, when, where, how, and of
whom it was instituted and ordained.

Wedlock or Matrimony, is a lawful knot, What wedlock is.
and unto God (...): acceptable Mat. 19. 5. 6
yoking and joining together of (...). 1. 27. 1. Cor. 16. Ephesians. 5. 31. Prou.
5. 18. 19. 20.
one man and one woman, with the good consent of them both: to the end that
they may dwell together in friendship and honesty, one helping and comforting
the other, eschuing whoredom, and all uncleanness, bringing up their children
in the fear of God: or it is a coupling together of two persons into one
flesh, according to the ordinance of God; not to be broken, but so to continue
during the life of either of them, Genesis 22. Malach. 2. 14. Romans 7. 31.

By yoking, joining, or coupling, is meant, not only outward dwelling together
of the married Yoking and dweiling together what it is.
folks, as to be ordinarily in a dwelling place for the better performance of
mutual duties each to other, Mat. 1. 18. 1. Corin. 7. 10. 12. 13. 1. Pet. 3.
7. Ruth. 4. 11. 12. but also an uniform agreement of mind, and a common
participation of body and goods; for as much as the Lord says, that they two
shall be one flesh: that is, one body. This is to be remembered, that Genesis 2. 24.
Matrimony, or Wedlock, must not only be a coupling together, but also must
be such a coupling together as comes of God, and is not contrary to his word
and will. For there be some marriages made whom God coupleth not together, but
carnal lust, beauty, riches, goods and lands, flattery and frienship. In
such marriages God is not thought upon, and therefore they sin the more
against him. These and such like marriages be disliked and condemned in the
Scripture, Gene. 6. 12. etc. Math. 24. 38. 39. God himself did appoint and
ordain matrimony in Paradise; so that he is the author of the same, Genesis 2
20. Yea, and so our Savior Christ himself (who was the very natural Son of
God) being borne in wedlock, (although of a pure Virgin) did honor and
commend matrimony, while he did vouchsafe to show his first miracle (Ioh. 2.
1.) at a Marriage: whereby he did declare, that the Lord is able to make the
bitterness of marriage sweet, and the scarcity thereof to abound with plenty.
And the Apostle gives this excellent title to Marriage; saying, that it is
Marriage honorable: 1. For the author, which is God. 2. For the time which was
during the state of Adams innocence. 3. For the place, which was Paradise.
(Honorable among all) Heb 13. 4. that is, among all estates, and all nations.
Matrimony then, being an indissoluble bond and knot, whereby the husband and
wife are fastened together by the ordinance of God, is Genesis 24. Mat. 15. 5.
Mark 10. 7. 1. Cor. 6. 16. Ephesians. 5. 31.
fat straighter then any other conjunction in the society of mankind. In
so much that it is a less offense for a man to forsake father and mother, and
to leave them succourlesse, (who notwithstanding ought, by Gods commandment to
be honored) then it is for him to do the like toward his lawful married wife.
Wherefore let them look well what they do, that are ready for light and small
causes to separate man and wife: seeing that Christ himself says, Mat. 19. 9.
that whosoever is separated from his wife, saving for whordome, and marries
another, commits adultery.

This is a thing worthy to be remembered, both on the behalf of the suter and
wooer, as also on her part that is wooed: Namely, that they deal plainly and
faithfully one with the other, and not guilefully, and craftily go about to
deceive one the other, in body or in goods. For so doing, they shall never use
one the other so lovingly and commodiously as they hoped and desired they
might, when the one has fraudulently and deceitfully enticed and beguiled the
other, either in body or substance: for naturally we hate him or her, that does
be guile us. Neither is there any thing that displeases a man or woman more,
then to lack and fail of a thing they both hoped and looked for. And
therefore it were convenient, and also much better, that both parties should
disclose the one to the other, the imperfections, infirmities, and wants, in
either of their bodies; as also the mediocrity and meannesse of their goods and
substance, as in truth it is: yea, though it should be with peril and loss
one of the other, rather then the one to obtain and get the other, with
fraud, guile, and discord.

But before we shall come to speak of the causes of marriage, we purpose (God
so willing) briefly to show, how every one that intends to marry, should
choose him a meet, fit, and honest mate: for there lies much weight in the
Genesis 1. 18.
wise election and choice of a wife. As he that will plant any thing, does
first consider the nature of the ground in the which he minds to plant: even
so much more ought a man to have respect to the condition of the woman, out of
whom he desires to plant children, the fruits of honesty and welfare.

The first thing that is to be remembered of Such as are of kind red in the
flesh, may not contract matrimony.
such a one as minds to marry, is, that he do not choose his wife within such
degrees of consanguinitie and affinity, as are by Leuit. 18. 6 etc.
Gods Law forbidden.

Secondly, Deuteronomy. 7. 3. 2. Cor. 6. 14. 15. etc.
religion and faith must be considered, lest he make divorce of the true faith,
or bring it into peril. For although he think himself as wise as 1. King.
11. 4.
Solomon, and as strong as Judge. 16. 17. 18.
Sampson, yet may he be overcome as they were. Therefore great advertisement
beforehand is to be taken in this behalf, left afterward, with much grief
and sorrow of heart he do too late repent.

Now if any that has matched himself with a wife that is an infidel,
irreligious, or of a corrupt religion, would put her away for this matter,
herein he deceives himselse, as the Apostle manifestly proves. For we must
put a difference 1. Cor. 7. 12. 13 1. Pet. 3. 11.
between that marriage that is made and done already, and that which is yet to
do. Wherefore he that is snared and matched with such a wife as is either
froward, waiward, or else is poisoned with superstition and popery, in such a
case must call upon God, and live in his fear, in faithfulness, in patience,
with discretion and godly counsel, laboring to win her from the same. For
like as the husbandman does with great labor and diligence, till that ground
which he has once taken to farm, although it be never so full of faults: as
if it be dry, if it bring forth weeds, brambles, or briers; or though it cannot
bear much wet; yet through good husbandry he wins fruit thereof. Even so in
like manner, he that has married a wife that is irreligious or froward, if he
shall use like diligence to instruct and order her mind, if he diligently and
courteously apply himself to weed away by little and little the noisome weeds
out of her mind, both by wholesome and godly precepts, and by Christian
conversation; it can not be but in time he shall feel the pleasant fruit
thereof to both their comforts. Every one therefore that purposes to marry,
ought also to remember that there be three manner of riches in man.

1. The riches of the mind. Three manner of riches in man.
2, The riches of the body. 3. The riches of temporal substance.
The best and the most precious, are the riches of the mind: as without which
the other two are more hurtful then profitable.

The riches of the mind, are the fear of God, Riches of the mind.
faith, a desire of Gods glory, the knowledge of his will, soberness,
liberality, chastity, silence, humbleness, honesty, and such like virtues.
These virtues lie not still, neither hide themselves wheresoever they be, but
will break out diverse ways, so that they may well be spied and discerned.

As then a traveler has marked in his way, that he may proceed aright so
likewise the man or woman that intends to marry, have also marks in their
ways, by which they may make a right choice.

There be certain signs of this fitness and godliness, both in the man and
in the woman; so that if the man be desirous to know a godly woman, or the
woman would know who is a godly man: then let them observe and mark these six
points.

1. -- The report. Six rules to be observed in the choice of a good wife or a
good husband.
2. -- The looks. 3. -- The speech. 4. -- The apparel. 5. -- The companions.
6. -- Lastly, the education and bringing up, which are like the pulses, that
show whether a man be sick or whole, well or ill.
Report.
The report, name, or fame, that he or she has had, and yet have, and what
opinion honest folks have of them; because as the market goes, so the
market-men will talk. A good man Pro. 10. 7. and 22. 1.
and a good woman, commonly have a good name, because a good name is one of the
blessings Preach 7. 3. Psalm. 112. 6.
which God promises to good men and good women. But a good name is not to be
praised from the wicked; and therefore our Savior Christ says, Woe be to you,
when all men speak well of you: Luke 6. 16. that is, when evil men praise and
commend you; for that is a plain argument, that you are ambitious,
vainglorious, and of the world: For the world likes and praises her own.
Ioh. 15. 19.

Nevertheless, it is convenient that every Christian should so live in the
world, that although he cannot say as Christ said, Whuh of you can rebuke me of
sin? Ioh. 8. 40. yet so as in truth he may with a good conscience boldly say;
Which of you can accuse me oflying, sweating, whoring, dissembling, dishonesty,
deceit, covetousness, or such like? Though therefore, no man can clear
himself in thought before God, of these and other notorious vices, yet every
one before men should avouch it, and approve it in their doing; and live so
uprightly, holily, justly, and unblameably, that none could iusily charge them
with any open sin. Luke 1. 6. 15. Job. 1. 1. 1. Thessal. 2. 10. and 3. 13.
Tit. 2. 12. 1. Pet. 1. 15.

The looks. Prou. 17. 4.
The next sign is, The look; For as Solomon says; The wisdom of a man does
make his face to shine, Eccles. 8. 1. that is, procures him favor and good
liking.

So also, godliness is in the face of a man, or of a woman; and so likewise,
folly and wickedness may many times be seen and discerned by the face of a
man or a woman. And therefore it is said in Esaias, The trial of their
countenance Esaias.
testifies against them: as though their looks could speak. And therefore we
read of proud looks, and angry looks, and wanton looks, Psalm.
because they bewray pride, and anger, and wantonness. Ieb. 13. 7.


It is truly said, that a modest man dwells at the sign of a modest
countenance, and an honest woman dwells at the sign of an honest face: which
may fitly be compared to the gate of the Temple, that was called Beautiful:
Act. 3. 2.
showing, that if the entry be so beautiful, within is great beauty.

To show how a modest countenance, and womanly shamefastness do commend a
chaste wife, it is observed, that the word Nuptiae, does declare the manner of
her marriage: for it imports Under fair faces are sometimes hidden filthy
minds.
a covering; because virgins which should be married, when they came to their
husbands, for modesty and shamefastness did cover their faces: as we read of
Rebecca, who when the saw Isaac, and knew that he should Genesis 24. 65.
be her husband, cast a veil before her face: showing that modesty should be
learned before marriage, which is the dowry that God adds to her portion.

The talk.
The third sign is her talk or speech, or rather her silence. For a man or a
woman's talking, is the mirror and messenger of the mind, in the which it may
commonly be seen without, in what case the man or woman is within, according
to the common proverb: Such as the man or woman is, such is their talk.

Now silence is the best ornament of a woman To Adam first and to (...) after.
and therefore the law was given to the man rather then to the woman, to show
that he should be the teacher, and she the hearer; and therefore she is
commanded to learn of her husband. 1. Cor. 14. 34. 35.

Maids must speak like an Echo.
As the Echo answers but one word for many, which are spoken to her; so a
Maids answer shoud be in a word: for she which is full of talk, is not likely
to prove a quiet wife.

The eye and the speech, are as the glasses of the mind: For out of the
abundance of the heart Mat. 12. 34.
(says our Savior) the mouth speaks. As though by the speech we might know
what abounds in the heart: and therefore he says, By thy mordes thoushalt be
instified, and by thy words thou Mat. 12. 37.
shall be condemned. That is, thou shall be justified to be wife, or thou shall
be condemned to be foolish; thou shall be justified to be sober, or thou shall
be condemned to be rash; thou shall be justified to be humble, or thou shall be
condemned to be proud; thou shall be justified to be loving, or thou shall be
condemned to be envious. Therefore Solomon says, A fools lips are a snare to
his own soul. Snares are made Prou. 18. 7.
for other, but this snare catches a man's self, because it bewrays a man's
folly, and causes his trouble, and brings him into discredit. Contrariwise,
The heart of the wise (says Solomon) guides his mouth wisely, and the words
of his Prou. 16. 23.
mouth have grace.

Now to show that this should be one mark in the choice of a wife; Saloman
describing a right wife. says: She opens her mouth with wisdom: and the
law of grace is in her tongue: Prou. 31. 26.
for that she delights to talk of the word of God. A wife that can speak
this language, is better then she which has all the tongues. But as the open
vessels are counted unclean, so also account that the open mouth has much
uncleanness.

Apparel. Luke 16. 19.
The fourth sign is, the apparel; for as the pride of the (...) is noted, in
that he went in purple every day: so also the humility of John is noted, in
that he went in haire-cloth Mark. 1. 6.
every day. For doubtless by a man or a woman's apparel, excessive laughter,
and going, they may partly be discerned of what disposition they are. It is
convenient that he that will be a suter to a woman, mark what apparel she
customably uses to wear; whether it be vain, whorish, wanton, light; or
comely, modest, and mannetly, and beseeming her estate and condition: to wit,
honest and sober raiment. For apparel does often give a certain and sure
testimony of pride, lightness, wantonness, inconstancy, unshamefastness,
filthiness, or vncleaunesse, and other vices, or virtues, that be either in
the man or woman. For a modest man or woman, are for the most part known by
their sober attire: as the Prophet Eliah was known by his rough garment. So
that we are to look 2. King. 18.
for no better within, then we see without; for every one seems better then
they be. If then the face be vanity, the heart is pride. He that bids us
abstain from the show of evil, would have us to abstain from those means,
Husbands 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
or wives, who have the shows of evil: for it is hard to come in the fashion,
and not to be in the abuse. And therefore the Apostle says: Fashion not your
selves like unto the world; as though the fashions of men did declare of what
(...). 12. 2.
side they are.

Company.
The fifth sign is the company, by means whereof much may be perceived. For
as whole and found eyes, with beholding and looking on sore eyes, be annoyed
and hurt: even so, good and honest folks be oftentimes stained Men are
commonly conditioned, even like unto them that they keep company withal.
and hurt with the company of the wicked and ungodly; according to the common
proverb: Such like is every one, as the company is with whom they keep. For
birds of a feather will hold together: and fellows in sin, will be fellows
in league; even as young Rehoboam Prou. 1. 11. and 13. 20. Psalm (...). Ios. 23.
12. Number 16. 20. 1. Cor. 6. 14. Ephesians. 5. 7.
chose young companions, 1. King. 12. 8. The tame beast will not keep with the
wild, not the clean dwell with the leaprous. If a man can be known by
nothing else, then he may be known by his companions: for like will to like, as
Solomon says; thieves call one another.

Therefore when David left iniquity, he said: Away from me all ye that work
iniquity; showing, that a man never abandoneth evil, until he abandon evil
company: for no good is concluded in this parliament. Therefore choose such a
companion of thy life, as has chosen company like thee before. For they which
choose such as loved profane companions before, in a short time are drawn to
be profane too.

The bringing up. It skilleth more by who^ and by what ways men be brought up,
then of whom they be begotten.
The last sign is education, which gives also great testimony, namely by
whom, and how every one is brought up, whether the man or the woman were
conversant among virtuous or vicious persons, and whether the parties having
continued in the nurture of the virtuous, and showed themselves obedient to
them under whom they were brought up, or whether either of the parties have
broken out of this discipline, and followed his, or her own wilfulness. For
it is a small matter for either of them to have dwelt among, or with virtuous
and religious folk: but herein lies the force and weight, how far, and how
much, either or both the parties have followed those, and profited under them,
and were dutiful and obedient unto them. For Judas was among, and accompanied
with the Apostles, brought up certain years under Christ, but for all this he
was never the better: for he left not his wicked pranks, neither was he
obedient. Nevertheless good education and discipline forms good To be good
it does much profit to be well brought up.
manners: men and women commonly savor most of those good or evil things,
which in youth they learned. Therefore to prove good, honest, and virtuous, it
imports and forces much, from the infancy to be well governed, and
Christianly brought up. For we retain much more of the customs wherewith we
be bred, then of the inclinations wherewith we be borne.

All these properties are not spied at three or four commings and meetings of
the parties, for hypocrisy is spunne with a fine thread, and none are so often
deceived as lovers. He therefore which will know all his wives qualities: or
she that will perceive her husbands dispositions, and inclinations, before
either be married to the other, had need to see one the other eating, and
walking, working, and playing, talking and laughing, and chiding too: or else
it may be, the one shall have with the other, less then he or she looked for,
or more then they wished for. Here is to be remembered, a thing adjoined to
marriage, and going before it, namely, Betrothing, being a solemn and laudable
custom of Gods children, as is proved Deuteron. 20. 7. and 22. 23. 24. This
betrothing, is a covenant What betrothing (...).
between the parties to be married, before fit witnesses appointed thereto:
whereby they give their troth, that they will, and shall marry together,
except some lawful vnmeetnesse and disliking each of other do hinder it in the
mean time. The practice of it we see, Mat. 1. 18. Luke 1. 27. where the
Virgin Marie was betrothed to Joseph, yet they had not met together, to wit,
to accompany together according to the end of marriage. This custom, noted and
marked in diverse places of the Scripture, has diverse good grounds to be
observed, which prove that there ought to be a contract before marriage. And
for the better understanding of this point of betrothing, it shall not be
amiss, in some plain and short manner, to make known the holy doctrine
hereof, with the doctrine also of marriage, and marriage duties. First then we
must know, that every marriage that has been well and orderly used, either of
the heathen (which were only enlightened with the law of nature) or of the
people of God, who also were to be directed by his word, was perfected by two
solemn actions: that is, by an apparent and open contract, and by public
marriage, the true and unfeigned confirmation thereof. Wherefore we will first
speak of a contract (which is also called espousing, affiancing betrothing, or
handfasting) then of marriage it self. And for betrothing, or espousals, we
read in the writing of ancient Philosophers, Histories, Orators, Poets and
others, that they be of great antiquity, of necessary use, and have been
ordinarily practiced. Insomuch as the users thereof are highly commended, the
neglecters and abusers hereof sharply rebuked and condemned.

Which seeing they could not do, but upon knowledge and judgment, it does
manifestly declare, that they did it by natures law, written and bred in their
breasts. And therefore even nature it self (though in some matters stark
blind, and in many of very dim sight) has in all ages, bewrayed the
lawfulness, the necessity, and the use of espousals, to be the first step and
degree to a lawful and comforrable marriage.

But to omit this law, and to come to the written word, let us further consider
what allowance thereof we find in the same, and consequently what it is, not
only to marry, but to be betrothed, not according to the direction of nature
alone, but in the Lord also. First it is certain, that the Lord approves this
betrothing as his own sacred ordinance. For we read in Exodus 21. 7. 8. 9.
10. 11. how carefully he provides by sundry and many straight commandments
for the maid-seruant that is betrothed. First, that she shall not go out of her
service, as the men-seruants do. Secondly, that her master shall have no power
to sell her to a strange people. Thirdly, that being betrothed unto his son,
he shall deal with her as with his own daughter. Fourthly, if another wife be
taken with her, that neither her food, her raiment, nor recompense of her
virginity, shall any whit at all be diminished. Fifthly, that whenever she
goes out of her service, she shall pay no money at all. None whereof the Lord
would have done (much less all of them) unless espousals had been his own
ordinance, instituted, ordained and commanded by himself to be used, even of
the maid servant, that was bought and sold. Again, the Lord in Deuteron. Cap.
22. 23. etc. requires no less punishment to be inflicted upon them that
violate the bonds of espousall, then if they brake wedlock. For he commands,
that if any man shall abuse a betrothed virgin in the City, both shall be
stoned to death, the maid because she cried not, the man because he has
humbled his neighbors wife.

Where by the way is to be remembered, how God calls the betrothed a Wife. If
then such wickedness by justice deserves death, and if betrothed persons be
truly to be termed man and wife, only in regard of the precedent espousals,
we may then plainly see, how highly the Lord does esteem and honor them: the
breach whereof he punishes with the punishment of adultery: and the persons
betrothed, he honors with the names of man and wife. If indeed he had not
ordained and allowed them, but that they had been of humane institution alone,
he would not have honored them with such titles, or have imposed death by
stones, for the breach of man's ordinance. Again, if a man abuse a betrothed
maid in the field, he says that the man shall die, but unto the maid thou
shall do nothing, because there is in the maid no cause of death.

Now imposing death upon this man, and not upon him that abuses a maid not
betrothed, the Lord does hereby evidently teach, that espousals are a degree
beyond a single estate, and of the nature of marriage: and therefore the
unlawful breach thereof deserves death. For what else should the Lord grace
them with such large privileges, and punish the breach thereof with severe
punishment?

Further, the faithful in all ages instructed by these and such commandments,
approved and practiced these espousals, not only by themselves, but also by
their children. Sampson, liking Judge. 14. 1. etc
and loving a woman of the Philistims in Timnah, desired his father and mother
to give her unto him to wife, and so they did: at which time Sampson made a
feast, according to the custom of the young men. Albeit her father afterward
would not suffer him to marry her, but gave her to another; for which injury
Sampson revenged himself of the Philistims, by burning up their shocks and
standing corn, vineyards, and olives: for which the Philistims burnt both the
father and the daughter. So David begged Micholl of her father Saul, who gave
her unto him to wife, with condition, that he 1. Sam. 18. 25. 26 27. 2 Samuel 3.
24. 25.
should bring him a hundred fore-skinnes of the Philistims, and therefore when
Saul was dead, he required her of Ishbosheth Saul's son, who (...) her unto
him. Also Joseph and Marie the mother of Christ were betrothed, which God would
never have permitted, if it had not been of his own ordinance, and agreeable
to his own will, of if it might any manner of way have stained, (...) her
Joseph's honesty, or Mary's virginity: nay, if it had not much more graced and
adorned both, then the want of espousals could have done.

And to avoid rediousnesse in so plain a truth, seeing the Scripture gives
power and authority to parents, to give, and not to give their children in
marriage; saying, Let him do what he will. Again: He that gives her in
marriage does well, and he that gives her not to marriage does better, (whereof
we shall speak more at 1 Cor. 7. 36. 37 38.
large anon:) there must needs be before the public act of marriage, some
special time appointed, wherein both parents and parties may testify and
signify their mutual liking and consents, unless they despise to marry in
the Lord.

Wherefore, if the law of Nature, the Law of God, the practice of the heathen,
the custom of the faithful, especially of the parents of Christ: if the
punishment of the espowsall-breakers, and the rewards and privileges of the
espowsed: and finally, if the fatherly authority over children, do approve and
require the continual use of this ordinance of God, it must needs be confessed
to be both lawful and necessary: yea, being the first principal part of
marriage it self, it must needs be honorable in his kind, as well as marriage
it self is. Now then, in the next place, let us see and learn what a Contract
is, to the end, that upon sound knowledge and right judgment, we may always
use it well, and never ill, for want of good understanding.

A Contract is a voluntary promise of Marriage, mutually made between one man
and one woman, both being meet and free to marry one another, and therefore
allowed so to do by their parents.

This short sentence, shows the whole nature, quality, property, use and
abuse, with all other things that are to be observed or eschued in a right
Contract, as shall appear by the unfolding of every word contained therein;
for, as there is none vain and idle, void of his proper signification; so
every one has his proper weight, serving for special and necessary use.

1. First, we call a Contract, a promise; and so it is indeed; for what is a
promise, but a speech, which affirms or denies, to do this or that, with
purpose and words of testimony, to perform and accomplish that which is
affirmed, or not to do that which is denied? And what other thing is indeed a
marriage Contract, but this? so that it must be in nature, a true and right
promise: not the vow of a promise in time to come, but a present promise
indeed. For if one party do say, I will promise to marry thee; this is no
promise indeed, but a promise of a promise, and consequently no Contract, but
a promise of a Contract: and therefore tyeth not binds neither parties nor
parents to keep the same; for it is not in nature any Contract at all.

Again, if a Contract be in promise, it is not only a purpose of the heart,
nor a dumb show or doubtful signification of promise, but a plain promise,
uttered and pronounced in a right form of speech: as when one says, I do
promise to marry thee, or I do espouse, affiance, or betroth my self to thee
in marriage, or such like: wherein all ambiguity and doubtfulnesse of speech is
to be eschued: that as the meaning of the heart is simple and plain, so like
wise the words of the tongue might be simple, plain, and void of all deceit.

2. Secondly, we call a Contract, a promise of marriage; because it is not a
promise of every thing, neither of honor, of inheritance, of riches, or of any
other thing else, saving only of marriage. Now we mean by marriage, not only
the parties married, but also conjugal and marriage duties and offices, that
peculiarly belong to this honorable estate, and are necessarily to be
performed mutually of both. For this promise touching persons themselves, is of
such force and weight, that it tends to the alienation of the property of
bodies; for so it is written: The wife has not the power of her 1. Cor. 7. 4.
own body, but the husband: and likewise also the husband has not the power
over his own body, but the wife. For, although this is not perfectly done,
till the act of marriage be ended, yet this promise is the principal beginner
and worker thereof: because they that promise marriage, do necessarily thereby
promise, that two shall become one flesh, and that they will always give
mutual benevolence one to another.

Touching the peculiar duties of Husbands and Wives, which likewise are
promised by this Contract, we will here only recite them, leaving the doctrine
thereof to another place and time.

1. The Husband, his duty is, first to love his wife as his own flesh.

2. Then to govern her in all duties, that properly concern the state of
marriage, in knowledge, in wisdom, judgment, and justice.

3. Thirdly, to dwell with her.

4. Fourthly, to use her in all due benevolence honestly, soberly, and chastely.
1. Pet. 3. 7.


1. The Wife, her duty is, in all reverence and humility, to submit and
subject her self to 1. Cor. 7. 4. 5.
her Husband, in all such duties as properly belong unto marriage.

2. Secondly, therein to be an help unto him, according to Gods ordinance.

3. Thirdly, to obey his commandments in all things, which he may command by
the authority of an Husband.

4. Fourthly and lastly, to give him (...) benevolence. As for the rest of
mutual duties, as they may be all comprehended under these, so there shall be
a fitter occasion to speak thereof.

Thirdly, we call this promise of marriage voluntary, because it must not come
from the lips alone, but from the wel-liking and consent of the heart: sor if
it be only a verbal promise, without any will at all, (and so merely
hypocritical and dissembled) though it binds the party that promises to the
performance of his promise made before God and man: yet if the parents
afterward shall certainly know this, and that there was no will, nor unfeigned
meaning at all in the party, neither yet is, but rather a loathing and
abhorring of his Spouse betrothed, though he be not able to render just and
sufficient cause thereof, they may upon this occasion, either defer the day
of marriage the louger, to see if God will happily change the mind of the
party; or utterly break and frustrate the promise: if all good means and
occasions having been used, none will prevail: but that the party rather
grows worse and worse.

For, a Contract being a willing and a voluntary consent, there is no cause why
the parents, and such as have authority, and power in sueh cases, when they
shall vndoubttedly know that the promise was altogether unwilling, and
therefore made in mere hypocrisy and dissimulation, neither can be by tract
of time, or any other good means used, be bettered, but rather waxes worse
and worse, may not break and frustrate the same. For why did Rebeccaes parents
deny her to Isaac, neither would send her with Abraham's servant to be married,
before such time as they had asked her consent: yea, when as they said, We will
call the Genesis 24. 57.
maid, and ask her consent: do they not plainly show, that both the law of
Nature, and the Law of God taught them, that this consent was of great moment,
and absolute necessity? And when the Apostle does command men and women to
marry in the Lord; how can the marriage be in the Lord, when one party does
not only not love, but hate the other? And how can such two become one flesh
lawfully, when as there wants the union and conjunction of the heart, the true
natural mother of all marriage duties? Wherefore this promise must be in this
respect, at least willing and voluntary.

For, albeit it is not necessary, neither yet possible, that there should be
such great measure of true, holy, and sanctified love at that time as
afterward, (for that grows by little and little according to the blessing of
God, and the faithful performance of other duties afterward even to their
lives end,) yet if it be voluntary and unfeigned, it is enough, and sufficient
to make a true contract in the Lord. So as no man ought to separate those, whom
God has thus joined.

Secondly, we call it voluntary, in respect of constraint and compulsion,
contrary to a free consent. For if either party be urged, constrained, or
compelled, by great fear of their parents or others, by threatening of loss of
preferment, of health, of limb, of life, or of any such other like, or by any
other violent manner of dealing whatsoever, to yield their promise, clean
contrary to the motion or good liking of their hearts; this kind of promise, as
it does not bind the party to keep it, so it ought to be frustrated and
broken, by the parents themselves, or by such masters as may and ought to
command and rule them in such cases. If this were not so, how could the parties
keep the commandments of God, giving them direction whom to marry? First,
that they should marry only in the Lord.

Again, that they should not be unequally yoked with infidels: neither of
which they can keep if their parents might compel them to Contract and
marry. It becomes the parents to persuade their children by all good means
to yield their consent, rather then to draw them by wicked sleights and
cunning, drunkenness, or any other wicked and violent means. For, as that is
not to marry in the Lord: so all such forced Contracts, may be broken and
frustrated by the Magistrate, who is Gods Lieutenant, to redress such
intolerable enormities among the societies of men. For, if parents may deny
marriage to such as have only by force and violence obtained the word and body
of their child, much more may the magistrate deny marriage, where only a
verbal promise nath been gotten by violent compulsion: and for these causes,
and in this sense and meaning alone, we conclude, that Contracts must be
voluntary.

Fourthly, it must be a mutual promise, that is, either party must make it to
other, not the man only, nor the woman only, but both the man and the woman:
though decency and order require the man to do it first, and then the woman,
because he is her head, and she his glory: and ought to lead and guide her in
all things, wherein the Lord has put a pre heminence.

For, if this promise be not mutually made of them both, but of one alone, it
is no true and perfect Contract: and therefore may be broken by parents, and
such as have authority herein: because the party vnpromising, is not bound by
word or deed, but is free, in so much that such a Contract is rather so termed,
then that it is any true Contract indeed.

But if it be mutual, then it does mutually and muiolably bind both: so that
in this regard, neither parent, magistrate, nor any other, can or ought to
break it: for this being fully performed and accomplished, is one principal
cause of making two one flesh, in such sort as it is written: Therefore a man
shall leave his father and mother, and shall be joined to his wife, and they
two shall be one flesh, etc. Genes. 2. 24. Also that the man has not power
over his own body, nor the woman over hers: and so to be short, hence arises
all mutual benevolence between them. And therefore a point of great weight
and necessity, in no wise to be omitted in a Contract.

Fifthly, we say, it must be between one man and one woman: where first it is
to be noted; that it may not, nor ought not to be between any other creatures,
but mankind: nay, neither among brute beasts nor Angels. For God has not
ordained or instituted marriage for them, neither can it be between man and
man, or woman and woman. If any such Contract be either voluntary, or by fraud
and deceit, by ignorance or error, it is no Contract at all, but a mere
wicked profanation of Gods ordinance, who gave only woman to man, not woman to
woman, nor man to man. Likewise, it cannot be between Angels good or bad, and
woman, because God has set no such ordinance in the nature of these creatures.

If therefore there has been any such matter, or shall be attempted by Satan,
with any woman (as some stories report) it is nothing (...) but a mere
illusion and devilish practice, to deceive and draw superstitious into the
kingdom of darkness, and to entrap them in the chains of condemnation:
against which, and all other diabolical illusions, we ought to watch and pray
continually.

Secondly, it is to be observed, that between one man and one woman: and not
two men and one woman, or two women; not between two women and one man, or more.

By which is condemned, as mere nullities and prophanations, all Contracts
whatsoever, made between more then two. For it is written; And they twain
shall be one flesh: to which Mark adds: So that they are no more twain, but
one Mat. 19. 5. Mar. 10. 8. Ephesians 5. 31. 1. Cor. 6. 16.
flesh.

Wherefore seeing that Christ and his Apostles, expound the first institution
of marriage of two only, and not of any more; it is certain, that the Contract
or promise thereof, ought to be of two alone, and no more. So the holy Ghost,
saying; Let every man have his own wife, and every woman her own husband: and
not, Let every one 1. Cor. 7. 2.
have his own wives, or her own husbands. It is therefore plain and
questionless, that he would have a Contract and marriage to be only between
one and one.

Again, saying: his own, and her own; does he not plainly infinuate, every
other person and persons, not to be their own, but mere strangers, with whom
they ought to have nothing ado in respect of marriage duties, especially
considering that the Greek word Idion, can import no less. Now then, if there
be at any time, or any place, a promise between more then two, as it is a
wicked and mere profanation of the holy ordinance of God: so it may and ought
to be broken; yea, severely punished by parents and Magistrates. If against
this it be objected; that many of the Patriarchs and good men under the Law,
had many wives, or at least more then one: we answer, It was their secret sin,
and great infirmity, though proceeding from ignorance of the first institution
of Marriage, of the Law, and the holy Prophets, (or else they had warrant from
God, which we have noted.) Of the institution: because Christ interpreting it,
says: From the beginning it Math. 19. 8.
was not so: proouing that Moses permitted diuorcement of the first wife, and
marriage of the second, not moved or warranted by the authority of Gods
institution, but by a fearful and timorous consideration of the hardness of
the peoples hearts, whom he ruled, lest they should have rebelled against him
if he had not so done. Of the Law: because there was by this means great
injury done to Gods truth, and to the wives divorced: besides, the Law it self
well understood (as Christ expounds it, Matthew. 5. (...)) admits no
diuorcement, except it be for fornication. And that the Lord did disallow and
hate all other kinds of diuorcement, made without Deuteronomy. 24. 14.
the cause of fornication, it is evident, in that he condemns the second
marriage, after the first diuorcement, affirming that the woman so divorced, is
defiled by her second husband: which could not be true, if their marriage had
been lawful and warrantable by the commandment of God; for where the marriage
is lawful and honorable, there the bed is undefiled. Of the Prophets: Because
the Lord has been Hebr. 13. 4. Mal. 2. 14. 15. 16.
witness between thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou have
transgressed: yet is she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant. And did
not he make one? yet had he abundance of the spirit: and wherefore one? because
he sought a godly seed: therefore keep your selves in your spirit, and let
none trespass against the wife of his youth. If thou hate her, put her away
(says the Lord God of Israel) yet he covers the injury under his garment
(says the Lord of hoasts:) therefore keep your selves in your spirit, and
transgress not. Then which words, what can be more plainly spoken against
contrary commandment to that wicked custom of diuorcement, and marrying of
others? when he says; Keep your selves in your spirit, and let none
transgress against the wife of his youth, and of his covenant. Surely, none
can be so blind, but reading this portion of Scripture, he must needs plainly
see and acknowledge the same.

Wherefore, if the first sacred institution of God, do bewray this corruption
of having more wives then one: if the Law do condemn it, and if the Prophets
do so sharply censure and rebuke it, why should any be so impudent and wicked,
as to justify it in word, or to approve it in thought? Rather as here we
teach, let us judge and believe, that every lawful Contract and marriage,
ought to be only between one man and one woman. And the rest to be so many
breaches of Gods ordinances and commandments, which cannot but be hateful to
him, and injurious to mankind: but especially to the Church of God, which ought
to arise of a holy and godly seed. Now if any Contract be made between more
then two, it is altogether void, and of none effect, and ought to be broken by
the party, and punished by the magistrate.

The sixth point concerns the persons between whom the Contract is made, in
whom there is required two properties: meetnesse for marriage, and freedom or
liberty to marry one another. Touching the first, those especially are fit and
meet to marry, whom God does call to that honorable estate, and commands
them to use it as his lawful means, appointed and sanctified for procreation:
for so it appears by the first institution, wherein God gave the woman to the
man to be an helper meet for him, as in other things, so especially in this:
whom he blessed, saying: Bring forth fruit and Genesis 1. 28.
multiply, etc. And that we may know more particularly what sort of persons
they be, the holy Ghost describes them to be such, as to whom the gift of
continency is denied, yet the gift of procreation is vouchsafed and granted.
For if marriage (as the Apostle says, Hebrews 13. verse 4.) be honorable
among all sorts of persons, then amongst those that be strong. Again, it is
written: I say to the unmarried, and to widows, it is good for them if they
abide even as I do: 1. Cor. 7. 8. 9.
but if they cannot abstain let them marry: for it is better to marry then
to burn. In which words we may plainly see, that he pointed out, as with his
finger, those that are called and commanded by God to marry: namely, such as
have not received the gift of abstinence and continency. Which calling and
commandment is so much the straighter, and the more to be regarded and
followed, because the Apostle gave it to those persons that were molested and
presfed with many and grievous persecutions: a season of all other most unfit
for any to marry in, in as much as beside the ordinary incommodities of
marriage estate, it cannot but bring with it many extraordinary grieuances and
troubles. Notwithstanding, if such persons be called and commanded then to
marry, when as there were most grievous persecutions; much more in the time of
peace and prosperity.

By this then we see, that all persons which have not received the gift of
abstinence, and are fit for procreation, are called and commanded to marry,
and therefore may lawfully enter a Contract of the same.

But are none else meet for marriage? We answer, that no other is called,
commanded, or warranted by God, to make Contract with any of these meet ones,
because they are unable to perform the principal duties of marriage. As for
children under age, they are altogether unfit to take upon them this honorable
estate, and therefore debarred by Gods Commandment from making any promise or
Contract. If they have done it, it is but a mere profanation of this holy
ordinance, worthy great punishment, and also to be broken, if that (being come
to years of discretion and state of marriage) they do not by wisdom and
religion supply all that was wanting in their former rash attempt, to the full
contentation of all that have interest in them. As for those that have received
the gift of continency, they are called and counseled to chastity, during the
whole time of that gift, for so says our Savior Christ, All men cannot
receive this thing, (aue they to whom it is given: Matthew. 19. 11. And again,
He that is able to receive this, let him receive it. So the Apostle says, It
is good for them if they abide even as I do: 1. Cor. 7. 7. Again, Art thou
loosed from a wife? seek not a wife: So likewise are those that are borne
chaste, or made chaste by men, or by themselves for the kingdom of heaven. But
you will say; What if any of these do make a Contract and marry? We answer,
first, if they be utterly unfit for marriage, their contract is of no
validity, and may be broken by superior authority; but if they be fit for it,
we say with the Apostle, Art thou loosed 1. Cor. 7. 27.
from a wife? seek not a wife, but if thou take a wife, thou sinnest not:
and if a virgin marry, she sins not, etc.

Last of all, as consanguinity and affinity do restrain and bind from this
former Contract and marriage: so likewise do natural frigidity, and coldness,
infancy, incurable diseases that deprive men of all fitness for the use of
marriage. So as if any such by fraud, ignorance, or any other sinister means
be contracted, it is nothing; and the parties may be lawfully separated,
because they were never joined together in the Lord, but against the Lord.

And here, when we say, meet and fit to marry one with another, there would
be a wise and holy regard had of equality in years, of agreement in religion,
or similitude in nature and manners, outward estate and condition, and quality
of person, and such like necessary circumstances.

For what is more unmeet, then for an old person to promise to be contracted
to a young one? for an infidel to Contract with a believer? for a good natured
and well mannered, with a crooked and froward person? for a Prince with a
beggar? For although all these do not annihilate and make void the Contract
altogether; yet such Contracts cannot be in the Lord. And thus much shall
suffice to have taught, touching the fitness of Marriage.

Now concerning the freedom and liberty, it is clear, that those alone have
liberty and freedom to Contract, who have liberty to marry.

Now if we will know who those be, they are diversely described and noted in
Leu. 18. where certain degrees, as well in affinity as in consanguinity are
expressly forbidden: so that if such parties shall Contract themselves together,
their Contract is vain, and a mere nullity; such as ought to be broken and
punished.

Again, every one either betrothed or married, is bounden and tied from
contracting with any other; for that were nothing else but to promise gross
and beastly adultery. And as the Apostle teaches, that the wife is bound by
the Law, as long as her husband lives: so likewise is the betrothed wife;
insomuch as if any such shall Contract themselves with another, it is a mere
nullity and wicked profanation of Gods ordinance, and ought upon knowledge
thereof to be broken and punished. And thus we see what manner of persons the
Lord has called and commanded to marry, and who they be that are meet and
free to marry together, and who not.

The last point is the consent and allowance of their parents: which though it
be very material and necessary, yet it is not the sole form or formal cause
which makes a true Contract.

For if the parents should yield their consent to their children, being neither
meet nor free to be married together, it were nothing: and such a Contract,
though warranted by parents consent, ought to be broken by the Magistrate, and
both parents and children are to be punished.

For this cause we have not said simply, and allowed: but therefore allowed so
to do; because consent of parents to such children as are not meet and fit to
be married together, does not make that Contract good, true, and inviolable:
which nevertheless, wanting their consents, though in other respects never so
good, is a mere nullity, and cannot be accomplished without the manifest
breaches of the institution, and guilt of adultery.

Now by parents we understand not only the natural parents, but such as by
the law of nature and of God, supply their places: as grandfathers, great
grandfathers, uncles, aunts, great uncles and aunts, brethren, sisters,
kins-men, and kins-women, Magistrates, and those to whose families the parties
do especially belong. For all these are honored in Scripture by the name of
parents. Neither may we exempt out of this number, Gardians, Masters, and such
to whom the continual custody and tuition of any is lawfully committed. For
if such be commanded to provide for them, as parts of their own families,
there is no reason why they should not especially be respected, as well in
bestowing them abroad out of their family, as they were in taking them into
it. For if their consent be necessary at their coming in, why should they go
out without their consent?

Further, we say their parents, and not his or her parents, because parents on
both sides ought necessarily to consent and allow their children to betroth
themselves. For this is the privilege not of some parents, but of all; and in
that they be parents. Moreover, we say allowed, and not required, neither
commanded, nor yet exhorted or instructed so to do; because, that albeit the
parents do neither call their children to this Contract, neither command them,
neither require them, neither exhort them, (all which notwithstanding they
ought to do) yet if they do but only allow them, and give them bare consent
that they shall contract themselves, it is enough for the tying of the knot,
and the substance of the Contract. And to prove that this contract is
necessary, we need no more reasons but that which the Apostle sets down,
saying of the father, Let him do what he will. By Cor. 7. 36.
which words he puts it in the will and power of the father, either to
bestow or not to bestow his daughter in marriage: saying, In doing either of
the twain, he sins not. Yet it is written in another place: If the father
refuse to give Exodus 22. 16. 7.
her to him, he shall pay money, according to the dowry of Virgins. In which
words the Lord does give an absolute authority to the father, to yield, or not
to yield his consent: to give, or not to give his daughter. For if he have
power to deny it to his daughter that is deflowred, and so (by the Apostles
judgment) made one flesh with another; much more lawfully may he deny his
consent Cor. 6. 16.
to her that is no manner of way bound, but is every way free. And if he have
power to deny his consent in such a case, much more has he power to give his
consent.

Now his authority and power to deny his consent, is apparent by the express
commandment of God in that behalf, which says, Take heed to thy self that
thou make no compact Exodus 34. 16.
with the inhabitants of the land, and so take of their daughters unto thy
sons, etc. More plain; Neither shall thou make marriages with them, neither
give thy daughter unto his son, nor take his daughter (...). 7. 3.
to thy son. How could those parents observe this commandment, unless God
had given them power to deny consent to their children; or why does he rather
forbid to the parents, then to the children? but to show that the power to give
or not to give, was in the parents and not in the children? especially
considering the children being the principal parts of their parents goods, are
no less in their power and authority to give and bestow, then the rest are.
This was so well known in the Church, and so usually practiced amongst the
people of God, that the greatest among them, who might seem to have greatest
liberty in that behalf, durst not disobey the holy commandment of God. For
Sampson the strongest of all, though he loved a Maid of the Philistims, yet he
durst not betroth Judge. 15.
himself unto her, before he had entreated his parents to give her unto him.

David a mighty valiant Prince, begged Michol at the hands of Saul her father,
and after 2. Sam. 3. 14.
his death (being betrothed unto her) he desired her of Ishbosheth her brother.
Jacob agreed with Laban for his wives. And Abraham, (the father Genesis 24.
of the faithful) by his servant, entreated Rebeccaes parents, to give her to
wife unto his son Isaac. All which testimonies and examples do plainly prove
the great interest, power, and authority that parents have in bestowing their
children, and that their consent added to the six former points, whereof we
have spoken, does make for so sure a Contract, as cannot be loosed and untied
by any authority under heaven. For here in this, that saying of Christ, Matthew.
19. 6. is truly verified: Let no man put asunder that which God has coupled
together: but if this, or any of the former be omitted, the Contract may be
broken and disanulled. And lest we should be ignorant or forget what those
errors are, which disauow and lawfully frustrate a Contract. These they be:

1. First, if there be only a naked show of a promise, and yet no promise
indeed.

2. Secondly, if any other thing be promised then Marriage.

3. Thirdly, if the promise be convinced to be mere hypocritical or forced.

4. Fourthly, if one of the parties alone do promise, and not both.

5. Fifthly, ifit were wade between other creatures, or between more then one
man and one woman.

6. Sixthly, if the persons contracted, or either of them be altogether unfit
for marriage.

7. Seventhly, if either of them be formerly betrothed, or have committed
adultery after the Contract, or be allied, or ofkinne, or for any other cause
not at liberty to marry.

8. Eighthly, if there lack the consent of the parents.

If all or any of these be undoubtedly known, and clearly proved, they do
jointly and severally frustrate or nullify the Contract, so as the Magistrate
may lawfully dissolve the same, and set the parties at liberty. But
contrarily, if all these concur and accord, the Contract is as inviolable as
marriage it self: neither can the parties be set at liberty by themselves, or
by any power whatsoever, because this Contract and every parcel thereof is in
the Lord: which being a sacred ordinance of God, as it cannot but have special
use and fruit among his Saints; so now it is time to declare and teach the
same.

First therefore it serves as a strong bridle to pull back the force and
headiness of carnal, natural, and brutish lust. For if this Contract be
holily and dutifully kept, according to the former doctrine, it would never
come to pass that any person, man or woman, should abuse their bodies suddenly
or hastily upon every instigation oflust, (like brute beasts) but would
willingly, in all modesty and sobriety, take sufficient time of deliberation
for the making and accomplishing of this necessary and holy Contract, which is
ordained to this end, that men might have sufficient time of deliberation to
learn all the uses and abuses, all the commodities and incommodities, all the
comforts and discomforts; with all the duties and breaches of duties, that can
befall in the honorable estate of marriage.

2 Secondly, it serves to discover betimes, and in good season, all sorts of
impediments and lets that may or ought to hinder the marriage that is promised.
Hence came that ancient and most excellent custom of asking the banes of
Matrimony thrice, or three several days, to the end that every material
defect might be learned in time when it might be remedied, rather then after
marriage accomplished, when it is remediless.

3 Thirdly, it serves for the keeping and preservation of honest chastity;
seeing by this means, not only former promises and contracts, but also
fornications (if any have been) and adulteries, may be descried and discerned.
For after Joseph was contracted, before he was married, his wife was found to
be with child; though without ill demeanor on her part, yet it made Joseph so
afraid, that he had intended in his heart privately to relinquish and forsake
her, and had so done indeed, had not Gods Angel commanded the contrary.
Nevertheless, it was the Contract that discovered this truth, and so preserved
Mary's virginity, that the Scripture might be fulfilled, which says, A
Virgin shall conceive, etc. If this were not, men might upon knowledge or
ignorance make two several contracts with several persons, and commit
fornication and adultery with other men's wives, either betrothed or married,
and so lose their honesty and chastity, to their great infamy and hinderance.

4 Last of all, it serves to condemn and avoid all private Contracts and
secret marriages: and contrarily, to justify and grace the honorable estate
of Marriage, as well in the beginning as in the end thereof, that all things
touching the same might be begun, continued and finished in the Lord, according
to his commandment, that his promised blessings might ensue upon it
accordingly.

This being done, the parents and parties are to be charged in the name of God,
as they will answer at the day of judgment; plainly to bewray and declare if
they know any of the foresaid impediments in themselves, or in their children,
for which this Contract ought not to be made. If they say they know none, or if
they declare none; then the consent of the parents is to be demanded; which if
they yield, then the consent of the parties is also to be required. And so the
parties are to be betrothed and affianced in these words, or such like;

1. N. do willingly promise to marry thee N. if God will, and I live,
whenever our parents shall think good and meet: till such time I take thee
for my only betrothed wife; and thereto plight thee my troth. In the name of
the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost: So be it.

The same is to be done by the woman, the name only changed; and all in the
presence of parents, kinsfolks and friends. After this the parents are to be
admonished, to set and appoint the day of marriage, neither too near nor too
far off, but to appoint a competent space of time, that it may be sufficient
for the learning and trial of all lets and impediments whereby promised
marriage might be hindered, and yet give no occasion by reason of the length
thereof, to provoke the parties to incontinency. In the mean time the parties
affianced, are to be admonished to abstain from the use of marriage, and to
behave themselves wisely, chastely, lovingly, and soberly, till the day
appointed do come. And so with a Psalm and prayer to conclude the holy action.
Now that there should be a competent space between the time of the Contract
and the day of marriage, it is very necessary for these causes.

1. That there might be some preparation for the things pertaining to
housekeeping, between that time and the celebrating of marriage; but this is
not a chief cause.

2. Because the Lord would by this means make a difference betwixt brute
beasts and men, and betwixt the profane and his children: for they even as
beasts do after a beastlike manner, being led by a natural (...) and motion,
come together: but God will have this difference, whereby his children should
(...) severed from that brutish manner, in that they should have a certain
distance of time between the knitting of affection, and enjoying one of
another, and a more near joining of one unto another.

3. That they should in that time think on the causes why they are to marry,
and the duties of marriage. For many enter thereinto not considering at all of
the great duties belonging to them in the same, nor thinking of the troubles
and afflictions that follow marriage. But the Lord would have these things
thought on, and a consideration to be had, both of the causes of marriage and
the duties to be performed, and the troubles to be undergone.

A good and careful householder so orders and frames his household, as it may
manifestly appear, that it is indeed the house of a faithful Christian, and
that he himself is a Pastor over his family, that he instructs it diligently
in the fear of God, and keeps it in good and godly discipline by continual
exercise of godliness. So that in his house you shall find the chaste wife, the
shamefaced, plain and modest wife, decked without as she is within: no painted
nor marked thing, rendering true obedience to her husband, and having a careful
eye upon her family, servants and children: the master, father, and husband,
the children and servants, every one likewise in his degree, employing himself
sincerely in his duty and office, approving his doings as before God.

Now, like as in the mind there are such virtues as we have before spoken of:
so are (...) Froward wicked qualities of the mind. 1. Cor. 5. 10. 11 and 6. 9.
Gal. 5. 19. 20. 21. 2. Tim. 3. 2. 3. 4. 5.
in it also noisome wicked vices and detractions, as ungodliness, despising of
Gods word, unbelief, idolatry, superstition, ignorance, churlishness, lying,
falsehood, hypocrisy, unrighteousness, swearing, backbiting, distemperance,
drunkenness, gluttony, covetousness, unchastity, unshame fastness,
misnourture, rashness, furiousness, wantonness, pride, presumption,
vainglory, childing, brawling, and vnhandsomnesse. Who so now chooses him a
wife, or the a husband, that is infected and tangled with such noisome vices,
he seeks not a spouse, (...) she a husband, for a right, peaceable, good,
honest, and Christian life: but an hell, a painfulness, and destruction of
all expedient, quiet, and virtuous living: but specially, there is little good
to be hoped for of him or her, whereas ungodliness and contempt of the word
remains. For like as the fear of God draws the whole garland of virtues
with it: so ungodliness and despising of Gods word, bring all vice and
abominations; yea, and shuts up the way to amendment.

When these points and rules are duly and warily observed on either part, they
may join together, and say as Laban and Bethuel said, This comes of the Lord,
therefore we will not speak against it. Oh how happy are those in whom faith,
love, and godliness are married together, before they marry themselves? For
none of these carnal, cloudie, and whining marriages can say, that godliness
was invited and bidden to the bridal: and therefore the blessings which are
promised to godliness do fly from them.

The riches of the body.
After the riches of the mind, do the riches of the body follow next: of which
sort is a comely, beautiful, or well-fauoured body, health, a convenient age,
etc. A beautiful body is such a one as is of right form and shape, Beauty.
meet, and of strength to bear children, and govern an house; even such a
one as both the man and woman can find in their hearts unfeignedly to love above
all other, and to be content withal, etc. As concerning the beauty or
comeliness of the body (where there is else no good property or quality
beside) Solomon says, Prou. 31. 30. Favor is deceitful, and beauty is
vanity: but the woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised. And Prou.
11. 22. As a jewel of gold in a swines snout: so is a fair woman which
lacks discretion: or is of uncomely behavior, and has not wit nor
government to behave her self. For beauty is a frail gift and a slippery,
and more profitable to those that behold it, then to those that have it.

The beautiful woman can take no great pleasure in beauty, but a little as it
were in a glass, and yet incontinently she forgets that she beheld and saw:
and yet it is many times both to her self and to them that behold her beauty,
a provocation to much evil. She that is fair waxes proud of it, and he that
does behold her becomes subject unto filthy love. But in the mind (which is
judged to be the man) consist the true lineaments and properties of fairness,
which entice and provoke spiritual and heavenly love, being mixed with nothing
that is shameful, either to be done or spoken. And therefore there is no man
so far without wit, that had not rather have her which is foul and hard
favored, but yet is honest and virtuous, then to have her which is fair and
dishonest, and also irreligious.

Happy, and twice happy is that man and that woman that are coupled in
marriage with a godly and virtuous mate and bedfellow; they are doubtless
greatly blessed of God. For house and riches are the inheritance of the
fathers, but a prudent wife comes of the Lord. They therefore are not well in
their wits, but greatly deceive themselves, that make choycc of wives or
husbands, having regard only to their stature, comeliness of personage, or to
their beauty, and esteem not more the riches of the mind.

Health also must be considered in their choice, lest otherwise great
inconveniences come thereby, and lest the whole house be poy soned and infected.
But we speak here of contagious sicknesses, and not of such common infirmities
and usual diseases, that both men and women are subject unto. As of madness,
frenzy, french pockes, or such like: which every wise man and woman does
utterly detest.

Nevertheless, where any married parties are now together, and be visited with
any such diseases, they must one comfort and suffer with the other, as they are
now one body, etc.

To have temporal preferments, is to be borne of noble parents, or to come of
a worshipful stock, to have lands, livings, riches, great offices, gains, or
occupyings, and such like. But the chiefest nobility, and most worthy of
commendation, is indeed to be noble in virtues, in good works, manners and
conditions. But to be borne of gentilitie, and to use and behave himself
ungently, is even as much as to shame himself and his kindred.

Such therefore as purpose to marry, ought carefully to foresee and look to
this matter; lest being too greedy of honor, worship or wealth and intending
to have the gold, they catch the hot coals, and burn themselves without
recovery: for a man may buy gold too Choose a wife for virtue only. Pro. 19.
14.
dear (as we usually say.) For temporal goods sake, the matter miscarieth,
and is in danger.

There is sometimes great wealth, but with little honesty, and with less good
conscience it is gathered together. And with the same riches will not continue
always, prosperity, peace and quietness. Many so trust to their wealth, as
that they will not frame themselves to any lawful calling, neither will they
learn any. Therefore also can they do nothing to profit their country, and the
commonwealth, but live ioly and daintily, and with pride, riot, excess, and
dishonesty, do quickly wast that which has been long in gathering together.
Now when there is always taking from the heap, and nothing laid thereto, it
wastes away in process of time, how great soever it has been: then follows
poverty, yea an intolerable and impatient poverty: for they that now lavish
and spend prodigally altogether, have had no necessity hitherto, but flowed in
all wealth; therefore after such a Sunshine, there comes ever an extreme
heat, and thenceforth begin they to warm themselves at the bare pans, and to
spare when all is spent.

Such then as in their choice, look to the multitude of goods, and regard not
how they were gotten, and whence they came, have customably such smoky hats set
upon their heads, that all the water in the river cannot wash away the
corruption thereof. For goods without God, honesty, and good conscience, are
deadly poison, and the bodily (...) himself. Yea, goods and riches in the hand
of an indiscreet and ignorant man, are as a sharp knife in the hand of a
child, that does no good therewith, but wound and hurt himself. Wherefore every
man and every woman in their election ought to have more respect to virtue,
godliness, discretion, and knowledge, then to riches. Moreover, an hand that
is occupied, and wins, and gets his living, godly, Christianly, and
honestly, does far excel any riches that are (...). For although the world
esteem them happy, which live in wealth, ease, and idleness: yet the holy
Ghost approves and allows them best that live of the mean profit of their
labors. Psalm. 128. 1. 2.

And this also is a very necessary point to be observed, that the man choose
such a woman, and the woman such a man, as that there be equality betwixt them,
both in blood and estate.

For by how much the greater and streighter Seek no match in marriage, above
thy (...). Equality in marriage to be respected.
the conjunction is of the husband and the wife, so much the more ought every
one to provide to be indifferently matched. And truly this equality of
marriage, is in two special things to be considered; to wit, estate, and age.
For as two horses, or two oxen of unequal (...), cannot be coupled under one
self same yoke: so a noble-woman, matching with a man of base estate: or
contrarily, a gentleman with a beggar, cannot be consorted, and well matched
under the bands of wedlock. But yet when it happens that a man marries a
woman of so high a birth, he ought (not forgetting that he is her husband) more
to honor and esteem of her, then of his equal, or of one of meaner
parentage, and not only to account her his-companion in love, and in his life,
but (in diverse actions of public appearance) to hold her his superior: which
honor is not yet accompanied with reverence, as is that which for manners sake
we are wont to do to others. And she ought to consider, that no distinction or
difference of birth and nobility can be so great, but that the league which
both Gods ordinance and nature has ordained betwixt men and women far
exceeds it: for by nature woman was made man's subject. But if a man shall
take to wife an inferior or mean-woman, he also ought to weigh, that matrimony
makes equal many differences: and further, that he has not taken her for a
slave or servant, but for a fellow and companion of his life. And seeing that
election and choice, is nothing else, but to take Of the choice of a wise.
a thing meet and convenient, to the end it is prepared for: therefore every
one that must choose, ought to regard the end, and to know what thing is
convenient for it. So that it is needful that he be wise and discret, or else
he cannot dispose it, nor perceive what thing is convenient for it. Therefore,
if a man would advisedly consider, that he is to live with his wife
continually, and she with him, he would then be very circumspect in the choice
of her; which choice makes either very much for his felicity and comfort, or
else for his great misery and discomfort. For by how much the more a thing is
united and knit unto man, so much the more it may either help him, if it be
good, or hinder him if it be evil. Those damages and hurts which are inwardly
in the body, are worse then those which are without the body: and those of the
soul, then those of the body: and likewise men do judge of those things which
are called good.

But peradventure it may seem unto some, that these (...) are not universally
true. For unto some the loss of their goods, is more then the loss of their
health. But this thing does not arise nor happen of the goods or money it
self, but because some man does persuade himself, that to lose his goods, is
a thing intolletable. And yet for all that, goods are not of more estimation
then is life or health, but it is a man's affection that does rule in this
thing: and therefore it seems less to some, to be driven out of a kingdom,
then to other some to lose a small portion of their possessions. Some will
revenge a word most cruelly; and some other well beaten and buffeted, will not
revenge it at all.

All these things do proceed and come of the soul, which is most in wardly
joined and knit unto a man, and has more power in him then the body.

If it be then of so great importance, what (...) of friend thou have, to live
commodiously or incommodiously withal; which shall none otherwise dwell, or be
in the selfsame chamber, bed, or house with thee, but that thou may shake
him off at thy pleasure? how much more ought thou to take heed when thou
chusest thee a wife, which must be continually conversant with thee, at thy
table, in thy chamber, in bed, in thy secrets and finally, in thy heart and
breast? If thou go from home, thou do commit thy house, thy family, thy
goods, and thy children (of all other things the most pleasant) unto her; she
is the last that leaves thee at thy departing, and the first that receives
thee at thy returning: thou departest from her with sweet embracements and
kisses; and with sweet kisses and embracements she receives thee at thy
return home: unto her thou disclosest thy joy and heaviness. So that it is an
heavenly life to be conversant and in company with those that a man delights
in, and loves. But it is a calamity infernal, to be bound and forced to see
those things that a man does greatly hate and abhor, or to be in company with
those that a man would not be withal, and yet cannot be separated, nor depart
from them.

Hereof comes (as we do see in some marriages) so great ruins, so wicked and
vile deeds, as maimes, and murders, committed by such desperate persons, as
are loath to keep, and yet cannot lawfully refuse, nor leave them.

Therefore young folks ought not to be too rash and hasty in their choice, but
to have the good advice and direction of their parents and trusty friends in
this behalf, who have better judgment, and are more free from the motions of
all affections, then they are. And they must take heed, lest following the
light and corrupt judgment of their own affections and minds, they change not
a short delectation and pleasure, into a continual sorrow (...) repentance.
For we learn by great and continual use and experience of things, that the
secret contracts made between those that be young, do seldom prosper, whereas
contrariwise, those marriages that are made and established by the advice of
wise and religious parents, do prosper well.

But especially, and before all things, such as A good wife is above all things
to be craved of God by prayer.
purpose to marry, must faithfully with feruentnesse, and steadfast belief,
(without ceassing) make their intetcession and prayer unto God, to whom all
hearts are open and known, that he would not suffer them to go amiss, but (as
a tender father) help and direct them, to make a right choice; so as they may
live honestly, and prosperously, as good Christians ought, to his glory, and
their own comfort. For this purpose, there is a notable example of Eleazar,
Abraham's servant, who being sent to get, and make choice of a wife for Isaacke
his masters son, begins his matter with prayer. Genesis 24. 12. etc. So did
Isaacke also, as it appears in the same Chapter, verse 60. When any have
determined with themselves to marry, and have used all diligence thereto
required, they must desire of God, by humble and earnest prayer, good and
prosperous success, in whose hand and power it is to give it; so doubtless he
will effect it, if they above all other things shall have an undoubted hope and
confidence in him, For if they, after they have settled themselves, and have
satisfied their appetites, shall then resort unto God by prayer, desiring him
that they may obtain the thing that they most desire: it appears that they
would make him the minister of their voluptuous desires and pleasures, and so
doing, their vows and prayers become most manifest blasphemy.

And therefore a man should not come unto marriage as unto a profane thing,
with a loose and unprepared heart, but with a quiet, and well purged mind, as
to a thing most sacred and holy. For Matrimony does not consist only in the
conjunction of the body, neither yet in dancing, nor banketting, proceeding
and brought unto us with many other things from the Gentiles: but it should
rather beseem Christians, most studiously to pray unto God, that so weighty a
thing as Matrimony is, might have good and prosperous success. For Matrimony
is a thing sanctified of God, the which wills the matrimonial imbracements
to be chaste, the bed to be undefiled, and Heb. 13. 4.
their progeny unspotted: and it is after the mind of S. Paul, a sign of the
great mystery wherewith Christ does in dissolubly unite himself unto his
Church. Therefore thou ought so Ephesians. 5. 25. 26. 27.
much as shall lie in thee, to lift up thy mind, and to remember how great and
worthy an image thou do represent; and that thy wife shall be unto thee as
the Church, and thou unto her as Christ; therefore thou should show thy
self unto her, as Christ showed himself unto his Church. The love of Christ
unto his Church is incredible: and thy love also to thy wife ought to be most
effectual.

Society, and to live together, is the most surest and strongest knot to knit,
and join amity and love among men, and beasts themselves.

There can be no greater society or company then is between a man and his
wife; whose house, whose goods, whose chamber, etc. is common, their children
are common, and they themselves partakers of all good and evil success, of
prosperity and adversity: the which society and fellowship, were sufficient
to stir and provoke him that loves not his wife, to love and benevolence.
And what company or love shall a man look to have of him that loves not his
wife? There are, that in love and amity look for gain, as the vile Epicures
do, unworthy to be beloved, men which love themselves, and not their friends.
And if we have regard unto commodity and profit, there is nothing that gives
so much as does a good wife, no not horses, oxen, servants or farms: for a
man's wife is the fellow and comforter of all care and thoughts, and does more
faithful and true service unto him, then either maid-seruant or man-seruant,
which do serve men for fear, or else for wages: but thy wife will be led only
by love, and therefore she does every thing better then all other.

And this does God declare, saying: Let us make Adam as helper like unto
himself: By the helper, is signified the utility and profit of the service,
and by the similitude and likeness are signified love and helpefulnesse. For a
servant and he that is hired are insufficient to supply that place; there can
neither be so much love, and ability to minister help and comfort to a man, as
will be found in a faithful wife.

The child is part of the father, and through a natural pity, they love each
other: but yet the wife is more annexed and joined to her husband. The father
does labor and takes pain for his children, but the children seldom labor
or take pains for their fathers, and oftentimes are sent to inhabit and dwell
in other men's houses, whereby in a manner it appears, that their straight and
fast society does dissolve and break: but the wife clean contrary, does
continually take pains for her husband, who may (as long as she lives)
neither change house nor bed. If commodity and prosit be looked for, no
commodity excels this: if thou shall love thy wife, thou shall live most
pleasantly, if not, thy life will be most miserable and wretched. For there is
nothing so sharp nor so bitter, as to hate the thing that does favor and love
thee, nor any thing more happy, then to love him that loves thee. Therefore
love, that thou may be loved.

Now we will in few words show the occasions of Wedlock, why and wherefore it
was ordained, and for what purpose it should be contracted; that every man and
woman may the better understand to what thing they consent, when either of them
grants to marry the other.

Doubtless it cannot otherwise be, but that marriage, which was ordained of
such an excellent author, as of God himself, and in such a worthy place as
Paradise, and of such an ancient time, as in state of Adam and Eues innocence,
and after such a notable order, must likewise have special causes for the
ordinance of it. Therefore the holy Scripture does declare Three causes of
marriage.
chiefly three causes thereof. The first is, the procreation, begetting, and
bringing up of children, Genesis 1. 27. 28. and 9. 1. For in the children do
parents live (after a sort) even after death.

And, if they be well and virtuously brought up, God is greatly honored by
them, the commonwealth is advanced: yea, their parents and all other fare the
better for them. For they are their parents comfort next unto God: their joy,
staff, and upholding of their age: and therefore parents ought to begin
betimes to plant virtue in their childrens breasts: for late sowing brings
sometimes a late, but never an apt harvest: young branches will bow as a man
will have them, but old trees will sooner break then bow, etc. But more of
this shall be said after, in the duty of Parents.

Although marriage be an holy and sanctified ordinance, yet none may use the
benefit of it without some acknowledgement of original Psalm. 51. 5.
sin, in that uncleanness may be practiced therein, which should cause Gods
children to use this means with as much chastity as may be, and husband and
wise to keep themselves together in the fear of God, and in all modesty and
sobriety. If then in marriage it self there be such mischiefs, what hellish
mischief is there in those lusts, which are not expressed with these
considerations? So that marriage is not a mad and dissolute estate, to give
liberty to their wives in uncleanness, nor wives to consent with their
husbands in impuritie, by immoderate, intemperate, or excessive lust.

Many think they cannot sin in this behalf if they pass not their own
wives: but they may make their marriage polluted and defiled, if they use it
without prayer and soberness, etc. 1. Tim 4. 4. 5.

Therefore the husband is to forbear the company of his wife, when it is with
her, as it is common to women, etc. Ezechiel, 18. 6. Leuiticus 18. 19. 24. 22
and 19. 18. This was one of the sins for which the Lord rooted out the
Canaanites out of their land.

The second occasion why marriage was ordained, was, that the wife might be a
lawful remedy The second cause. wedlock lawful for such as have not the gift
of chastity.
to avoid whoredom, fornication, and all filthy unclean lusts, 1. Cor. 7. 2.
3. etc. Touching this point, I will say no more: for it is handled at large by
others already, and I have elsewhere sufficiently discoursed of it.

The third and last cause was, for man's commodity, The third cause.
to the end to avoid the inconvenience of solitariness, that the one may help
and comfort the other, in sickness, in affiction, and in all household cares
and trouble, as education of children, and keeping the family in order. For
this cause old men and old women may lawfully marry. So that a wife is called
by God himfelfe, an helper, and not an impediment, or a necessary evil, as
some unadvisedly do say: This is often found most true, that such as are
contemners of marriage, are most offenders against marriage, and live most
unchastly.
and as other some say, It is better to bury a wife, then to marry one:
again, if we could be without women, we should be without great troubles.

These and such like sayings, tending to the dispraise of women, some
maliciously and vndiseretly do vomit out, contrary to the mind of the holy
Ghost, who says, that she was ordained as a helper, and not a hinderer. And if
they be otherwise, it is for the most part, through the fault, and want of
discrerion, and lack of good government in the husband. For married folks,
for two eyes have four: and for two hands as many more: which being joined
together, they may the more easily dispatch their handy business, and household
affairs.

For like as a man having one hand or one foot, if by any means he get
himself an other, may thereby the more easily lay hold on what he lists, or
go whither he will: even so, he that has married a wife, shall more easily
enjoy the healthful pleasures, and profitable commodities of this present
life. For in trouble, the one is a comfort to the other: in adversity, the one
a refreshing unto the other: yea, and in all their life, the one is a help and
succor to the other.

Most true it is, that women are as men are, reasonable creatures, and have
flexible wits both to good and evil, the which with use, discretion, and good
counsel, may be altered and turned. And although there be some evil and leude
women, yet that does no more prove the malice of their nature, then of men. And
therefore the more ridiculous and foolish are they, that have inueighed against
the whole sex for a few evil: and have not with like fury, vituperated and
dispraised all mankind, because part of them are thieves, murderers, and such
like wicked livers.

But the marriage and company of the husband and wife, is made amiable, sweet,
and comfortable by these five means: by godliness, virtue, (...) forbearing,
mutual love, and by dut (...) performed busily and godlily on both sides.

1. Godliness of right holds the chief place: for there is no stable and
steadfast friendship, unless it have his beginning from God; and therefore must
godliness needs shine before the rest. For when couples have determined to
obey God, all things afterward become more easy.

2. Virtue and honest conditions breed mutual delight between man and wife.
For when virtue is exercised, it makes conversation of living more amiable.

3 Mutual forbearing, whereby we take in good worth one another conditions
and faults is very needful. For in this weakness of nature, there happens
many scapes, which will breed strife, if they be not covered by mutual
forbearing.

4. Mutual love, having his beginning of godliness and true virtue, makes
the husband and wife not to be too sharpe-sighted, in spying into one another
fauits: but that many things either they mark not, or if they mark them, they
cover them with love. For love covers a multitude of sins. 1. Peter, 4. 8.
Prou. 10. 12.

5. Duty performed godlily, caresully, and cheerfully on both sides, makes
the marriageyoke light and sweet. For when man and wife mark one another, and
find like heedfulnesse and buxomnesse in their duty, both their company is
made more pleasant, and they are the more stirred up on both sides to render
dutifulness, that the one may requite the otheralike. Where these five duties
be not, the company of their life is both loath some and bitter, or rather
more sharp then death. Therefore, the godly couples must do their endeavor
that these virtues may be seen in their life continually for ever.

Now we will (through Gods assistance) say something concerning the three
several points contained in this duty, and mentioned in the beginning hereof,
and so end this duty.

21. Pet. 2. 7. By honor is meant that the husband is to sustain and relieve
the wants of his wife, to support, uphold, and bear with her infirmities, as
the weaker vessel.
1 The first whereof is, that the husband must live with his wife according to
knowledge. This point of doctrine is most plainly proved by the Apostle Peter,
where he says a Ye husbands, dwell with your wives, as men of knowledge;
giving honor unto the woman, as unto the weaker vessel, even as they which
are heirs together of the grace of life, that your prayers be not interrupted.
Whereby he teaches the husband his duty, to wit, that the more understanding
and wisdom God has endued him with, the more wisely and circumspectly he
ought to behave himself in the bearing those discommodities, which through his
wives weakness, oftentimes cause some jar and dislike one to the other.
Nevertheless, though she be by nature weaker then he, yet she is an excellent
instrument for him, made for very profitable use: whereupon it follows, that
she is not therefore to be neglected because she is weak, but on the contrary
part, she ought to be so much the more cared for. Like as a vessel the weaker
it is, the more it is to be favored and spared, if we will have it to
continue: even so a wife, because of her infirmities, is so much the more to be
borne withal of her husband, 1. Peter 3. 7. And for so much as the husband and
wife are equal, in that which is the chiefest, that is to say, in that
gracious and free benefit, whereby they have everlasting life given them,
though otherwise I confess unequal, as touching the governance and
conversation at home, the wife is not be despised, although she be weak. And
besides, all brawlings and chidings must be eschued and cast away, because they
hinder prayers, and the whole service of God, whereunto both the husband and
the wife are equally Besides the prayers had with their family, they must pray
privately. Genesis 25. 21. 1. Cor. 7. 3. 4. 5.
called.

Also for the more confirmation of this point, the Apostle Paul likewise says:
Let the husband give unto the wife due benevolence, and likewise also the wife
unto the husband: The wife has not power over her own body, but the husband:
and likewise also, the husband has not the power of his own body, but the
wife. Defraud not one another, except it be with consent for a time: that ye
may give your selves to fasting and prayer; and again come together, that
Satan tempt you not for your incontinencie. Which is, as if the Apostle should
say, the parties married must with singular affection, entirely love one the
other; for that they are each in others power, as touching the body: so that
they may not defraud one another; except the one abstain from the other by
mutual consent, that they may the better give themselves to prayer: wherein not
withstanding they must consider what is expedient; lest by this long breaking
off as it were, from marriage, they be stirred up to incontinencie.

The second point is, that the husband should not be bitter, fierce, or cruel
unto his wife: which point is approved by the said Apostle, saying: Husbands
love your wives, and be not bitter unto them. Col. 3. 19.


First, and above all things, the husband must be circumspect to keep the band
of love, and Anger in a husband is a vice.
beware that there never spring up the root of bitterness betwixt him and his
wife.

If at any time there happen to arise any cause The root of bitterness to be
weeded out by the spade of patience.
of unkindness betwixt them, (as it is impossible always to be free from it)
then he must be careful to weed up the same with all lenity, gentleness and
patience, and never suffer himself nor his wife to sleep in displeasure.
Ephesians, 4. 26. And if he shall have occasion to How and when the husband
ought to reprove.
speak sharply, and sometimes to reprove; he must beware that he do not the
same in the presence of others: but let him keep his words until a convenient
time, (which is the point of a wise man) and then utter them in the spirit of
meekness, and in the spirit of perfect love: and he must not let sometimes to
cover faults, and wink at them, if they be not too great and intolerable.
Whatsoever loss or mischaunce shall happen unto them, let him take it
patiently, Faults sometimes must be covered with love.
and bear it cheerfully: yea, though the same should come partly through his
wives negligence; yea rather let it be a loving warning to take better heed in
time to come, then a cause to sorrow for that which is past, and cannot be
helped.

Every wiseman (by his own experience) knows, that he is in his life
subject to many inconveniences, and that of nature he is prone to displeasure,
and ready to take unkindness for every trifle, and especially with his best
Not to take unkindness for every trifle
friends; yea, soonest with his loving wife, who is lothest to displease him.
Let him therefore beware of this cankered corruption, and consider that he
ought most of all, in love, to bear with his wife, according to Christ's
example toward his Church, who gave himself for it, That he might sanctify
it, and cleanse it, by the washing of water, through the word: That he might
make Ephe. 5. 25. 26 27. 28. 29.
it unto himself a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing: but that it should be holy, and without blame; so ought men to love
their wives as their own bodies: he that loves his wife, loves himself. For
no man yet ever hated his own flesh, but nourishes it, and cherishes it,
even as the Lord does the Church. As if the Apostle had said: The husbands
duty is, to love their wives as themselves: of which love, the love of Christ
toward his Church is a lively pattern. And The husband is to the wife in Gods
stead.
because many husbands pretend the infirmities of their wives, to excuse their
own hardness and cruelty, the Apostle wills them to mark what manner of
Church it was when Christ joined it to himself, and he does not only not
loath all her filth and uncleanness, but ceasseth not to wipe the same a way
with his cleanness, until he have wholly purged it, and made it holy. And
seeing that every man loves himself, even of nature: Therefore (says the
Apostle) the husband shall strive against nature, if he love not his wife:
which he proves; first, by the mystical knitting of Christ and the Church
together, and then by the ordinance of God: who says, that the husband and
wife are one: that is, not to be divided.

The husband is always to remember, that he be not fierce, rigorous, hasty,
nor disordered Husbands may (...) be rigorous (...) their
with his wife: for then there will never be unity and concord betwixt them.
If the wife do wives, especially when they be new married. Prou. 20. 3.
not learn to keep silence, and the husband to have patience, it shall rather
be the dwelling of fools, then the house of friends. For where the husband
wants wisdom to gonerne, and the wife patience to suffer, they shall be
forced (it is to be feared) in continuance of time, to part house, or else
every day to be iarring and brawling.

Every married man ought also to remember The wife is not to be used or
entreated as a handmaid or servant, but as a fellow. Prou. 8. 7. and 14 9 and.
15. 5. and 18. 2. and 27. 22. Prou 9. 9. and 19. 25. Gen 16. 6.
this, that either his wife is wise and religious, or else she is foolish and
irreligious. If he be matched with a wife that is sottish, foolish, and
ignorant of God and his word, it will little avail or profit him to reprehend
or chide her: and if he be married to one that is wise and religious, and
knows her duty out of Gods word, then one sharp and discret word is
sufficient: because, if a woman be not corrected by that which is wisely and
discretly said, she will never amend by that which is threatened. When the wise
shall be inflamed with ire, wrath, malice, or envy, the husband ought to
suffer her; and after the heat is somewhat cooled, and the flame quenched,
then mildly to admonish her; for if she once begin to lose her shamefastness
in the presence of her husband, then it is likely that there will often follow
brawlings and quarrels betwixt them. And as the husband ought at all times to
shun brawlings and quarrellings with his wife, so much more he ought to avoid
the same, when they shall be newly married. For if at the beginning she shall
have cause to abhor and hate him, then late or never will she return to love
him faithfully. Therefore at the beginning of their marriage, the wise and
discret husband ought to use all good means to win the good liking of his
wife toward him: for if then their love be fixed, and truly settled one
toward the other, although afterward they come to some household words and
grudgings, yet it proceeds but of some new unkindness, and not of old rooted
hatred; and The falling out of lovers is a renewing of love.
therefore the sooner remedied. For love and hatred be mortal enemies, and the
first of them that takes place in the heart, there it remains a dweller, for
the most part, all the days of life: in such wise, that the first love may
depart from the person, but yet it will never be forgotten at the heart. But if
the wife from the beginning of marriage, do take the heart to loath and abhor
her husband, then a miserable life will follow to them both. For although the
husband shall have power to force his wife to fear and obey him, yet he shall
never have strength to force her to love him.

Some husbands do boast themselves to be served, feared, and obeyed in their
houses, because the wife that abhors does fear and serve her husband, but
she that indeed likes, does love him, and cherish him. As the wife ought with
great care to endeavor, and by all good means to labor to be in favor and
grace with her husband: so likewise the husband ought to fear to be in
disgrace and disliking with his wife: for if she do once determine to fix and
settle her eyes and liking upon another, then many inconveniences will ensue
and follow.

The husband ought not to be satisfied with the use of his wives body, but in
that he has also the possession of her will and affections: for it suffices
not that they be married, but that they be well married, and live Christianly
together, and be very well contented. And therefore the husband that is not
beloved of his wife, holds his goods in danger, his house in suspicion, his
credit in balance, and also sometimes his life in peril: because it is (...)
to believe that she desires not long life unto her husband, with whom she
passes a time so tedious and irksome. And if any unkindness or displeafure
should happen to be at any time betwixt the husband and the wife, yet neither
of them ought to impart, or to make it known unto any one of their neighbors:
for if they be such as wish them evil, they will rejoice at it, and if they be
such as wish them well, then they minister matter whereof to talk.

That husband that is matched and does That man is miserable that is married
unto a foolish woman.
encounter with a wife that is a dizzard, a fool, a babbler, light
ofbehauiour, a glutton, a chider, slothful, a gadder abroad, intractable,
jealous, or dissolute, etc: it were better for him to be a slave to some honest
man, then a husband to such a wife.

The best rule that a man may hold and practice with his wife, to guard and
govern her, is to admonish her often, and to give her good instructions, to
reprehend her seldom, never to lay violent hands on her, but if she be good
and dutiful, to favor her, to the end she may continue so; and if she be
shrewish and way ward, mildly to suffer her, to the end that she wax not
worse. But some husbands be of so sour a nature, and so unpleasant in their
behavior, that they can hardly be loved, no not of their wives; their
countenance is so lowering, their company so currish, that they seem angry,
even when they are best pleased; they cannot speak fair; scarce will they
laugh, when their wives laugh upon them: a man would say, they were borne in an
angry hour.

This is also a duty (not to be forgotten,) namely, that (...) be diligent and
careful Husbands must provide things necessary for the house.
to make provision for their houses; to cloth their wives decently, to bring
up their children virtuously; and to pay their servants duly; because that in
voluntary matters men may be A man's house will continue by provision before
hand, and by order in his expenses
negligent, but the necessities of the house do neither suffer negligence nor
forgetfulness. The duty of the husband is to get goods: and of the wife to
gather them together, and save them. The duty of the husband is to travel
abroad 1. Tim. 5. 8.
to seek living: and the wives duty is to keep the house. The duty of the
husband is to But where disorder is in a house, it cannot endure.
get money and provision: and of the wives, not vainly to spend it. The duty
of the husband is to deal with many men: and of the wife to talk with few.
The duty of the husband is, to be intermedling: and of the wife, to be
solitary and withdrawn. The duty of the man is, to be skillful in talk: and
of the wife to boast of silence. The duty of the husband is, to be a giver; and
of the wife to be a sauer. The duty of Spare in time, and spend in time, for
sparing is a rich purse..
the man is, to apparel himself as he may; and of the woman, as it becomes
her. The duty of the husband is, to be Lord of all: and of the wife, to give
account of all. The duty of the husband is, to dispatch all things without
door; and of the wife, to ouersee and give order for all things within the
house. Now, where the husband and wife performs these duties in their house,
we may call it a College of quietness: The house wherein these are neglected,
we may term it a hell.

It is to be noted, and noted again, that as the provision of household
depends only The honor of the husband depends on the wife.
on the husband: even so the honor of all depends only of the woman: in
such sort, that there is no honor within the house, longer then a man's wife is
honorable. And therefore the Apostle calls the woman, The glory of the man.
But here it must be noted and remembered, 1. Cor. 11. 7.
that we do not entitle honorable to such, as be only beautiful, comely of
face, of gentilitie, of comely personage, and a good huswife: but only to her
that is virtuous, honest of life, temperate, and advised in her speech.

3. The last point is, that the husband love, The third point.
cherish, and nourish his wife, even as his own body, and as Christ loved his
Church, and gave himself for it, to sanctify it. And this point is plainly
proved by the Apostle Paul, as is sufficiently declared in the second point.

There are few husbands or wives that know in truth how they should love one
the other. If a man love his wife only for these respects, because she is
rich, beautiful, noble, or because she contenteth and pleases him after the
sensual appetite of the flesh, and for such like causes; that is no true love
before God: for such love may be among harlots and whoores, yea among brute
beasts. But a Christian husband Can. 4. 9. 10. 1. Cor 9. 5. 1. Pet. 3 7.
must love his wife, chiefly, because she is his sister in the (...) of the
sound and Christian religion (...) so an inheritour with him of the kingdom of
heaven. And he must also love her for her virtues, as for her shamefastness,
modesty, chastity, diligence, patience, faithfulness, temperance, secrecy,
obedience, and such like Christian qualities and graces of God: yea, although
she be but hard favored, and of poor parentage.

But as we would that the man when he loves, should remember his superiority,
so we would that when he rules, he neither forget to love, nor to temper his
love with gravity. And when he does think himself to be the head and the
soul, and the woman (as it were) the flesh and the body, he ought in like
manner to remember, that she is his fellow, and companion of his goods and
labors, and that their children be common between them, bone of the bones,
and flesh of the flesh of man. And thus there shall be in wedlock, a certain
sweet and pleasant conversation, without the which it is no marriage, but a
prison, a hatred, and a perpetual torment of the mind. So that the husband
must let his wife perceive and know, that for the good opinion that he has of
her, he does love her simply, and faithfully, and not for any utility or
pleasure. For who so does not perceive that he is beloved for his own sake,
will not lightly do the same to another: for the thing that is loved, loves
again.

If money or nobility could perceive and understand that they were beloved,
they would, if they had any feeling at all of love, requite it with love: but
when the soul is loved, in as much as it may love, it gives love for love,
and loves again. The breaker of horses, that does use to ride and pace them,
does handle the rough and sturdie colt, with all craft, rigor, and fierceness
that may be: but with the colt that is more tractable, he takes not so great
pains. A sharp and shrewd wife must be pleased and mitigated with love, and
ruled with authority: and the more gently thou do use and show thy self
unto her that is meek and honest, the more benign and meek thou shall find
her. But she that is noble, and of a stout mind and stomach, the less thou
do look to be honored, the more she will obey and honor thee. But yet the
wise husband shall never set himself so far in love, that he forget that he
is a man, the ruler and governor of the house, and ofhis wife, and that he is
set (as it were) in a station to watch, and diligently to take heed what is
done in his house, and to see who goes 1. Cor. 11. 3. Ephesians. 3. 23.
out and in. And although the husband by Gods ordinance, be the head over his
wife, yet he may not abuse or despise her, but most lovingly defend and keep
her from all injuries, and all evils as his own body. For like as the head
(...) and hears for the whole body, rules and guides the body, and gives
it strength of life: or as Christ does defend, teach and preserve his Church,
and is the Savior, comfort, eye, heart, wisdom, and guide thereof: even so
must the husband be head unto his wife, in like manner to show her like
kindness, and after the same fashion to guide her, and rule her with
discretion, for her good and preservation, and not with force and wilfulness
to entreat her, but to be her defender, instructor, teacher, and comfort. So
that when the husband has obtained that his wife does truly and heartily love
him, there shall then need neither precepts, nor laws: for love shall teach
her more things, and more effectually, then all the precepts of all the
Philosophers. He ought therefore to endeavor, and more force himself, that
his wife may love him, then that she may fear him. When his wife shall offend
or displease him, he may nor hate her or quarrel with her, but patiently and
mildly admonish her: For no man ever hated (says the Apostle) his own body,
but Ephesians. 5. 28. 29
cherishes it, and makes much of it. So then he that loves his wife, loves
himself: for thereby he enjoys peace and comfort, and help to himself in
all his affairs: therefore in the same verse Paul counsels husbands to love
their wives, as their bodies. And after in the 33. verse, as though it were too
little to love them as their bodies, he says: Let every one love his wife as
himself: that is, as his body and soul too. For if God commanded men to love
their neighbors as themselves, much more are they bound to love their wives as
themselves, which are their next neighbors. As Elkanah did not love his wife
less for her barrenness, but said: Am not I better unto thee then ten
sons? as 1. Sam. 1. 8.
though he favored her more, for that which she thought her self despised: so
a good husband will not take occasion to love his wife less for her
infirmities, but comfort her more for them, as this man did, that she may bear
with his infirmities too. And so the one helping to bear the others burden,
they shall Gal. 6. 2.
the better fulfill the law of Christ. For as in a City, there is nothing more
unequal then that every man should be like equal: so it is not convenient,
that in one house every man should be like and equal together. There is no
equality in that city where the private man is equal with the Magistrate, the
people with the Senate, or the servant with the master, but rather a confusion
of all offices and authority.

The husband and the wife are Lords of the house: for unto them the Lord said,
Be ye Lords over the fish of the sea, and over the foul of the Genesis 1. 28.
heaven, and over every beast that moves upon the earth. And the selfsame
Creator said, that the woman should be an helper unto the man. Therefore the
husband without any exception, is master Genesis 2. 18.
over all the house, and has more to do in his house with his own domestical
affairs, then the magistrate. The wife is ruler over all other things, but yet
under her husband. There are certain things in the house that only do
appertain to the authority of the husband, wherewith it were a reproach for
the wife, without the consent of her husband, to meddle: as to receive
strangers, or to marry her daughter. But there are other things, in the which
the husband gives over his right unto his wife: as to rule and govern her
maidens: to see to those things that belong unto the kitchen, and to
huswiferie, and to their household stuff. Other mean things, as to buy and
sell certain necessary things, may be ordered after the wit, wisdom, and
fidelity of the woman. It cannot well be rehearsed, how many virtues and
profits, the mutual concord and love of man and wife does bring to great
things, both at home and abroad, nor how many losses and incommodities do grow
of the dissension and discord between them. For the household, when their
master and their mistress, or dame, are at debate, can no otherwise be in
quiet and at rest, then a City whose rulers agree not, but when it sees them
in concord and quietness, then it rejoices, trusting that they will be even
so unto them, as it perceives them to be among themselves. Wherein surely they
are not deceived, for if the man and his wife do lovingly and gently support
and entreat one another, they learn not to disdain, or for every light fault
to be angry with their servants, or yet for any household words to be vexed or
angry one with the other, but they set aside all hasty and cruel words and
correction, with all other things that issue and proceed of a disdainefull and
a furious mind. And the servants are not only merry therefore, but also they
do their service the more obediently and cheerfully, showing reverence unto
the authority that proceeds and increases of quietness and concord. For the
husband does defend his wives estimation, with love and benevolence: and the
wife her husband with honor and obedience. So that unity and concord, causes
them to be accounted wise, honest, and virtuous; and they must needs be good,
seeing they have loved so long together. But there can be no long amity or
friendship, but between those that are good, who do suffer and devour up
those things for the which other men leave and forsake amity, and break off
charity. Neither does there grow of any other thing so great reverence and
honor, as of the opinion and estimation of another man's goodness and
wisdom: the which reverence is not only honored within the doors, but also
shines and extends it self into the City; so that he is taken for an
honest man, and accounted to be loving and gentle, seeing that he loves his
wife so constantly: and also he is reputed for a wise man, considering that he
can so moderately (...) difficult and hard matters: and he is reckned worthy to
rule a commonwealth, that with such wisdom, discretion, and judgment, does
rule and govern his own house; and that he may easily conserve and keep his
Citizens in peace and concord, that has so well established the same in his
own house and family. And on the other side, none will think or believe, that
he is able to be a ruler, or to keep peace and quietness in the town or
City, who cannot live peaceably in his own house, where he is not only a
ruler, but as it were a little King, and Lord of all. And in matrimonial
debate and discord, the man is more to be blamed then is the woman, because
that he being the chief ruler and head, does not purge and remedy her of that
vice the which engendered that discord, or else patiently bear and suffer the
same. For the blame of all discord is commonly laid on him that is chief,
because he would not moderate nor stay the thing to come to such a strife and
discord, or else because he was not able to do it. In the first, there
appears manifest malice, in the second impatience and weakness, the which
ought to be far from him that is esteemed to be most worthy, and appointed to
rule and govern others. And thus he comes into hatred, for as much as he
has left off to do his duty and office, when necessity required it. That
husband that loves not his wife after that he has enjoyed her for a season,
but does wax feeble and cold, (which is a thing most usual and ordinary with
such as are kindled with bodily lust and lechery) is a very beast and no man,
having no reason, but is drawn to those deeds through the motion of his
senses, which, after the heat is a little past, will clean change their
opinion.

Also there are other occasions, that should move the husband to extend this
love to his The causeswhy the husband should love his wife.
wife, in case he be not duller then a stone. As for that his wife has
suffered so great travel and labor, that she has borne and brought him forth
children, the heirs of his name and substance, and the vpholders of his
family: and that she has forsaken her fathers goods and riches, to follow him,
and to suffer with him both good and evil: and that she setting her whole mind
now upon him, knows no other father nor yet any of her kin. What one thing
shall suffice if these and others cannot do it? Who so will then obey nature,
humanity, and wisdom, shall every day love his wife more and more: and the
better he knows her, the more he will trust her, and so open and disclose his
love, and show her greater signs and tokens of love and benevolence,
manifesting that to be borne and nourished through the experience of her
virtue, and through hope to be continued and kept, that in time to come she may
be like her self, and strive to overcome herself with virtue. As the husband
ought to love his Wife tenderly, so from her as from a The husband must love
his wives kinsfolks.
fountain, he must extend his love also unto her parents and kinsfolks, to
the end that they may well know and perceive, how greatly their cousin does
aid and help them, and that she in like manner may understand, that his
benevolence and love to her is such, that it redoundeth among her friends and
parents; and of this he shall receive no little profit at home. And seeing he
loves his wives kinsemen for her sake, how much more ought he then to love her
children, that she in like case may love his, if he have any? And thus the one
seeing the mutual love of the other, they shall knit and couple themselves in
good and steadfast love unto their lives end. The duties which are to be
performed of the husband and the wife, are either pertaining to piety and
godliness, or else mutual several duties concerning the parties themselves.

1. The first common duty is prayer, that they pray together by themselves.
For as they are to pray with others in their families for things which concern
their household: so there are certain things, which belonging to themselves,
are not to be mentioned in their families, but privately; as namely, for a
godly posterity, and that in the birth the childrn be comely, and not monstrous
in coming forth like monsters, which might be a grief unto them, or an
occasion that the wicked should speak evil of the Gospel, etc. And further,
they are to pray, that they may have comfort by them, in their well-carriage,
and good behavior: as likewise for their household, and diverse other affairs,
which they cannot so commodiously pray for in their public family. As Isaac
and Rebecca, besides the prayers in their house, which they used with Abraham's
family, did also pray together privately, as Genesis 25. 21. it is said, Isaac
prayed before his wife: for so the words signify, that they might have
children.

2. A second duty of piety is, that they admonish one another. As the husband
is to admonish the wife, and also to teach her: so the wife is to admonish the
husband; and in her place admonishing, bringing sufficient reason is to be
heard. For even as the master is to counsel the servant, and likewise to
hear the good counsel of his servant, as Naaman 2. King. 5. 13. 14. heard his
servant which counseled him to wash in Jordan, according to the saying of the
Prophet: so in like manner the husbands duty is, to counsel and to admonish
his wife: yet so, as when he fails in duty, he is to hear her good counsel
and admonition, either concerning heavenly matters, or earthly affairs, she
notwithstanding considering her estate and condition under him, and in
humility, confessing her self to be the weaker vessel. 1. Pet. 3. 7.

Their mutual and several duties pertaining to themselves, are: First, the
holy familiarity which ought to be betwixt man and wife: whereby they have a
more familiar usage one of another, and do more familiarly behave themselves in
a comely sort one to another, then any other parties whatsoever: in regard
whereof, Abimelech Genesis 26. 8. 9.
king of Gerar, after that Isaac had said of Rebecca his wife, She is my
sister, seeing Isaac playing and sporting with her familiarly, knowing that
familiarity which ought to be between the husband and the wife; and knowing
that Isaac was a godly religious man, and therefore would not use that kind of
behavior to any other woman, save to his wife, discerned thereby, and
concluded certainly, that she was his wife, howsoever he had denied it before.
Noting, that a woman is not to be familiar after that sort with any other man,
save her husband; and contrary, that the husband ought not to use this
familiarity with any other woman, which he does with his wife. And therefore,
Pro. 5. 19. we see that the wife should be to him, as the loving Hind; namely
delightful, and one in whom he may delight: that as the Heart delights in the
Hind, so the wife should be a delight unto her husband; and so in like manner
she ought to take delight in him.

2. Again, there is another mutual duty, pertaining to themselves, to wit,
that near conjunction, even in regard of their bodies, for an 1. Cor. 7. 4.
holy procreation of children, in respect whereof the Apostle says, The
husband has not power over his own body, but the wife etc. Only when it is
with the wife (as is common to women, Ezech. 18. 6.) or that she be sick of
her disease, he is not then to have the use of her body, etc.

Such as do aspire and purpose to enter into Duties common both to the husband
and the wife. 1. Cor. 7. 2.
the holy estate of matrimony, are to begin in prayer and holiness to God.
And having attained to that estate, ought to use the benefit of marriage, as an
holy ordinance of God, in all godliness and purity, for a remedy against the
weakness of the flesh, and not for the provocation and lust to intemperancie.

True it is, that honesty of marriage grounded upon Gods ordinance, does cover
the shame of incontinencie; yet not so, as that married folks should defile
and pollute that holy estate, by admitting all things, but that they should so
use it, as there might be no excess in dissoluteness, neither any
intemperancie contrary to the holiness thereof: So that to abuse it in
lascivious excess, is fornication.

When God created the woman, he said: It is not good that man should be alone.
I will make him a Genesis 1. 18.
help meet for him; but whatsoever is said of the woman, that she should be
an help to the man, must also be put in practice, and exercised by the husband
to wards his wife, according to the doctrine of the Apostle Saint Paul, 1. Cor.
7. whether in avoiding fornication, whether in procuring generation, and the
education and bringing up of children; whether in maintaining a family, or for
the service of God, and salvation of souls.

Hereby it evidently appears, that the duty common both to the husband and
wife, imports, that the one should aid and help the other.

First, that they may lead their lines in chastity and holiness. Next, to
avoid fornication. So that the duty of the husband and the wife consists in
this, that they live together in all chastity and pureness, and that they
take great heed and beware of breaking the bond, and infringing and violating
the says of marriage, by fornication or adultery, which is a detestable sin
in the sight both of God and man. If such as wanting the remedy of marriage, by
committing fornication, do incur an offense worthy everlasting damnation,
what may those deserve, who having a remedy for their infirmity, do
nevertheless ouerflow in adultery? Yet it is not enough only to abstain
from this abomination, unless we also forbear from every thing that may
seem to tend thereunto, or to continue any beginning, appearance, allurement,
or occasion of evil.

First, because, that by the Law, all this is forbidden even in these express
words: Thou shall not commit adultery. For the word adultery, comprehends
all prouocations, gestures, specches: yea, even unchaste looks. And therefore
says Jesus Christ: He that looks upon another man's wife, to lust after her,
bath already committed adultery with her in his heart. Next, that we prevent
all occasions of jealousy, a most dangerous disease, and of great difficulty
to cure. For where either the husband or the wife, is tainted with jealousy,
they belecue every word that they hear spoken touching their passion, albeit
it bear no appearance of truth. And therefore Christian husbands and wives,
must so bear themselves, that they incur no suspicion of enill: but rather
they ought to practice this, as well to avoid occasion of offense, as for fear
lest jealousy should convert marriage into a most miserable and wretched
estate.

The care and burden to maintain their family is common to them both; yet so,
as properly the husband is to get it, and to bring it in, and the wife to order
and dispose it. Howbeit the duty of the wife, or of the husband, does not so
exempt either of them. but that she also, according to her ability and power,
must help her husband to get it, and he likewise, in his discretion, direct
her in the dispensation thereof: He that does not orderly govern his house,
shall inherit the wind, (says Solomon.) And order consists in this, that
the husband follow his business, traffic, or calling, without any
molestation of the wife, who ought not to meddle or control him therein, but
with great discretion and gentleness: as also the husband is not to deal but
soberly, and in great discretion with affairs that are proper to the wife. The
man is jealous of his authority and reputation, and the woman inclined to
respect her self to be despised. Wherefore, as the husband cannot well abide
that his wife should show her self more skillful and wise in his business
then himself: so cannot the wife suffer that her husband should despise and
account her a fool, by meddling with her small household affairs.

As the duty therefore of the husband and wife, consists in looking to that
which is aforesaid, to the end their marriage may be quiet, and themselves live
together in love; even so an idle and unthrifty husband, and a prodigal and
slothful wife, are two ready ways to destruction. The husband that has such
a wife, casts his labors into a bottomless sack, and the wife that is
matched with such a husband, draws a cart heavy laden through a sandy way
without a horse.

Such a husband, especially, if idleness draw him to love and haunt alehouses
and tauernes, is cruel to his wife and children, and such a wife confounds her
husband, and brings reproach and poverty to her whole family. The remedy for
the husband that has such a wife, is patience, with discret admonition and
prayer to God: as also the help for the wife that has such a husband, is
tolleration, gentle exhortation, and cheerful and loving entertainment of her
husband, whereby to enduce him willingly to keep home.

They are also to be mutual helpers each to other, in matters concerning their
own salvation and the service of God. First, if one of them (as says the
Apostle) be an unbeliever, the other must labor to draw his party to the
knowledge of the truth. Saint Paul exhorting the husband and wife of contrary
religions, not to part, but to dwell together; adds a notable reason, saying:
What know thou, o man, 1. Cor. 7. 5.
whether thou shall save thy self: or thou o woman, whether thou shall save
thy husband? therein declaring, that the faithful person in duty is to labor
and endeavor to win his party to the knowledge of truth, and so to save her.

Saint ' Peter exhorts wives to be subject to their husbands, albeit
unbelievers, and such as' obey not the word: that so without speech, by their
holy and virtuous conversation, they may (...) them.

Secondly, if both be believers, their duty is, to confirm and strengthen each
other in the time of persecution, that they constantly follow Jesus Christ.
They are also each to help and comfort other, if either of them happen to fall
into any fault or sin. They ought also each to persuade other to charity, to
relieve the poor, diligently to frequent Sermons, to use prayers and
supplications, and praise and thanksgiving to the Lord, to comfort each other
in the time of affictions; to be short, either to exhort other to walk in the
fear of God, and in all duties and exercises beseeming the children of God. In
this manner did that holy woman Elizeus hostess, exhort her husband to prepare
a chamber for the Prophet to lodge in. Saint Paul also says, that women
desirous to learn, should question with their husbands at home. Whereby he
shows, that the husband ought to be so instructed, as that he may be ready to
instruct his wife at home. And therefore the husband (after the example of the
Be,) should every where gather every good instruction, that he might be able
to impart it to his wife, and by having a communication, acquaint her therewith.

There are other duties which be common both to the husband and the wife, as
among the rest, such as proceed of the union and conjunction of marriage,
whereof it is said, They are one slesh: Genesis 2. 24. Matthew. 19. 5.

And of this union proceeds the mutual love betwixt them. For no man (says
the Apostle) hates his own flesh, but loves and cherishes Ephesians. 5. 15.
Tit. 2. 5.
it. But for as much as the foundation of this mutual love, is the unity of
marriage, whereby the husband and the wife are made one flesh; the husband as
the head, the wife as the body: it follows, that this love must be steadfast,
not variable; and that the union of marriage continue notwithstanding,
whatsoever befall either the husband or the wife.

Notwithstanding whatsoever complexions, (we say) natures and infirmities may
appear, whatsoever sickness, loss of goods, injuries, griefs, or other
inconveniences that may arise, yet so long as the foundation of love that is
the union of marriage does continue, so long must love and affection remain.
God commands Mat. 5. 44.
us, to love our neighbors as our selves, because they be of our flesh. Albeit
therefore, that he contemn, hate, offend, or wrong us: albeit he be our
enemy, and in respect of himself, deserves not that we should love him, yet
because he is of our flesh, the foundation of love remaining, we must love him.

How much rather ought they to put this in practice, who by the bond of
marriage are made one flesh? the rather, because the union between man and
wife, is without comparison more strait, and binds them each to love other
much more then the conjunction whereby man is united unto his neighbor.

But this is the mischief, that in many their love is not grounded upon the
union of marriage, but upon beauty, riches, and other carnal and worldly
considerations, subject to change, alteration, and loss.

This corruption that respects beauty, is old, and noted to be among the
causes of the flood. The sons of God (says Moses) seeing the Genesis 6. 2.
daughters of men were fair, lusted after them, and took them in marriage.

But indeed it is money that makes love, and riches engender affection,
witness the experience of our days. Yet such love resembles only a fire of
straw, which is but a blaze, and is soon out, unless it be continued with
great wood, or other like substance. Love growing of beauty, riches, lust, or
any other like slight, uncertain, and frail grounds, is soon lost and
vanished, unless it be maintained with the consideration of this union, of two
in one flesh, and the virtues thereto adjoined: and therefore must every man
think upon this union in marriage, that he may enjoy, nourish, and continue
the love that there of proceeds, the rather because such love is the nurse of
concord, that makes marriage happy: as contrariwise, the want of this love, is
the fountain of strife, quarrelling, debate, and other like afflictions, that
convert the paradise of marriage into a hell. For dissension between man and
wife, is the trouble and overthrow of the household.

They that will avoid such strife, must therefore love each other: and
especially they must have care hereof when they are first married. For as a
vessel made of two pieces, and glewed together, may at the first be easily
broken, but in time grows hard: so is it also with two persons that are
glewed or joined together by the bond of marriage.

This love, the mother of peace, will engender a care and duty each to support
other, and so to practice the same, which Saint Paul requires in all
believers: that is, To be gentle one to another, friendly, and each to forgive
other, even as God has forgiven us through Christ. Let the husband think, that
he has married a daughter of Adam, and all her infirmities: and likewise let
the woman think, that she has not married an Angel, but a child of Adam,
with his corruption. And so let them both resolve to bear that, that cannot be
soon amended. Let not the body complain of the head, albeit it have but one
eye, neither the head of the body, albeit it be crooked or misshapen. Such
defaults do never break union and love between the head and the body: neither
must the infirmities of the husband or the wife, infringe the love that
proceeds of the union and conjunction of marriage. If the husband be given to
brawling, or the wife to chiding, let them both beware of giving any occasion.

The bell has a loud sound, and therefore he that will not hear it must
beware how he pulls the rope and shake it: so if the one will begin to chide
without a cause, let the other be either deaf, and so not hear it, or dumb,
and so make no answer. So that where the husband is deaf, and the wife blind,
marriage is quiet and free from dissension. Whereby is meant, that the wife
must wink at many infirmities of her husband, as if she saw them not, and the
husband put up many shrewde speeches of his wife, as if he heard them not.
Neither can it be any reproach to the husband and wise, so steadfastly united,
to practice this duty, considering that David protests, that he used the
like patience and discretion among his enemies: They that seek after my life
lay Psalm. 38. 22.
snares, and they that go about to do me evil, talk wicked things, and
imagine deceit continually: But I as a deaf man, heard not: and am as a dumb
man which opens not his mouth. Thus I am as a man that hears not, and in
whose mouth are no reproves.

This union between man and wife, does also engender that duty which the holy
Ghost notes, saying: For this cause shall a man leave his Mat. 19. 5. Ephesians.
5. 31.
father and mother, and cleave to his wife. And also the wife in the like
respect is bound to the like duty toward her husband. Not that marriage
exempteth any from their due honor and obedience to parents, but to declare
that the union between man and wife, is greater then between the children and
the parents. And indeed, the true love of the husband to the wife, and the wife
to the husband, surmounteth all love of children to their parents.

The husband and the wife have their secret counsels and communication of
matters concerning their profit and commodity. The wise it more obedient to her
husband, and the husband more desirous to please his wife, then their Parents:
yea and at length it falls out, that they depart from their parents, to keep
house by themselves. And this plainly appeared in Lea and Rachel, being
sisters, and the wives of Genesis 31. 4. 5. etc.
lacob. For lacob grieved at the wrong offered him by their father Laban,
boldly made his moan to them.

Whereupon they also complaining of their father, agreed with lacob, and
consented together, to leave their father, and to follow their husband lacob.
Herein likewise consists another duty of the husband to the wife, and of the
wife to the husband: namely, that they show no greater secrecy or
communication of their household affairs to their parents, then mutually each
to other: and this rule is especially to be put in practice, when there grows
any discontent between themselves. For if the husband shall complain to his
parents of his wife, or the wife of her husband, such dealing might breed a
most dangerous jealousy, and consequently perhaps irreconciliable dissension
and strife. But if it should grow to any complaint, it were requisite, so
discreetly to prosecute the matter, as that the wife should come to her
husbands parents, and the husband to the wives parents. So would all cause of
jealousy cease, and the complaint procure most assured remedy.

This love and agreement in marriage produces yet another duty, common both
to the husband and the wife. And that is, that they never seek, neither once
think of divorce. And to that end, let them remember what is written: That
which God has joined together, let no man put asunder. Likewise, that nothing
but adultery, Math. 19. 6.
may separate those that are united by marriage.

All other agreements and contracts, made by mutual consent, may be broken and
dissolved, by the like consent of both parties: but in the contract of
marriage, Almighty God comes in as a witness: yea, he receives the promise
of both parties, as a joining them in that estate.

And this does Solomon note, where he obiecteth to the harlot, that she has
forgotten Pre. 2. 27.
the covenant or alliance of her God. But Malachie speaks more plainly, and
gives a reason, why God punished such husbands as leaving their lawful wives
took others: Because (says he) the Lord has been witness between Mal. 2.
14.
thee and the wife of thy youth, against whom thou have transgressed, yet is
she thy companion, and the wife of thy covenant. The promise therefore to God
cannot be broken, but only by his authority.

In the days of Moses, husbands were easily and soon entreated to sorsake
their wives, by giving them a bill of divorce: yet so far was this course
from being lawful, that contrariwise Jesus Christ says, that it was tolerated
only Mat. 19.
in respect of the hardness of husbands hearts, who otherwise would have vexed
their wives, and entreated them cruelly.

And this libell containing the cause of divorce, and putting away of the
woman, did justify her, and condemn the man. For seeing it was never given in
case of adultery, (which was punished with death) all other causes alleged in
the libell, tended to justify the woman, and declare that she was wrongfully
diuourced, and so condemned the husband, as one that Leuit. 20. 10. Ioh. 8. 5.
contraryed the first institution of marriage; whereto Jesus Christ condemning
this corruption, does return them, saying: It was not so from Mat. 19. 8.
the beginning: And therefore, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it be
for whoredom, and marries another, commits adultery, and whosoever
marries her which is divorced, does commit adultery with her; So straight is
the bond of marriage.

Here of it follows, that notwithstanding whatsoever difficulties may arise
between the husband and the wife, whether it be long, tedious, and incurable
sickness of either party: whether natural and contrary humors, that breed
debate, wrangling, or (...), about household affairs: whether it be any vice,
as if the husband be a drunkard, or the wife a slothful, idle, or (...)
housewife: whether either party forsake the truth, and profession of religion,
and do fall to idolatry or heresy: yet still the bond of marriage remains
steadfast, and not to be dissolved. Neither may they be separated, even by their
own mutual consent: for as the holy Ghost has pronounced: That which God
has joined together, let no man put asunder. Mat. 19. 6. 1. Cor. 7. 12.
And therefore Saint Paul says, If any brother has a wife that believes not;
if she be content to dwell with him; let him not forsake her: and the woman
which has an husband that believes not, if he can be content to dwell with
her, let her not for sake him. And because some did suppose, that the unbelief
in any of the parties might breed some pollution in their marriage, and make
it profane and unchristian, he answers no.

His reason is, For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by his believing
wife; and the unbelieving wife, by her believing husband. And this he proves,
by affirming that the childre^issuing of such marriage be holy; that is to say,
partakers of the covenant of God, and consequently, accepted into the
fellowship of the Church. Only he adds this exception: If the unbelieving
man depart, and for sake the believing wife, she is not subject to follow him.

And yet must this be understood, where such departure arises either upon
hatred that he bears to the true religion that bis wife prosesseth, or upon a
desire to use his polluted and false religion. For therein cannot his wife
follow him without danger of defiling, and depriving her self of the
profession of the truth; together with the food of her soul.

Likewise, where Saint Paul speaking of the husband and wife, both believers,
says: If the 1 Cor. 7. 11.
woman depart from her husband, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to
her husband: he therein means not, that it shall be lawful for the woman,
because she cannot bear the troublesome nature of her husband, or to avoid
strife and debate, to depart, and live as a widow; but only he (...), that
when the husband upon such like occasion, shall put away, or cast off his wife,
yet is not she at her liberty to marry another, but must remain unmarried,
and labor to be reconciled.

And therefore those women, which upon the hard dealing, or troublesome
disposition of their husbands, do for sake them, are greatly to be reproved, as
thereby giving occasion of great mischief and trouble: as also are those
husbands, who upon like occasion do forsake their wives. For seeing nothing may
make divorce but adultery, every purpose and determination to part upon any
other occasion or reason, is restrained by Gods ordinance and the law of
marriage.

And (...) as it is not lawful for us to continue in such desperation the
whole course of our lives, neither is it lawful so to abide at all, or so much
as enter thereinto: if therefore, upon such occasion the husband forsake his
wife, or the wife her husband; rather then to continue the mischief begun, let
them return together again, and think that the shortest follies do least
hurt.

If they allege their entreaty, in their opinion intolerable, and their
nature so contrary, Objection.
that they cannot live without strife and debate: and that being asunder, and
quiet in conscience, free from trouble, they may the better apply themselves
and employ their time in prayer: the answer is that such (...) must not
dissolve, Answer.
or break the bond of marriage, and their duties to live together: but let
them think that God has called them to the exercise of patience, which upon
hearty prayer he will grant to them: Let them labor to bear each with other,
that they may live in peace; and continually pray to God to give them grace so
to do.

Let them remember, that the devil transformeth himself into an Angel of
light, when by propounding a desire to live in quiet, and consequently a mean
to pray unto God; for the compassing thereof, he induces them to gainesay Gods
prohibition, and also to separate that which God has joined together. For as
the conjunction comes of God, so the separation and divorce proceeds from
the devil.

If they reply, that by living asunder, so that they marry not again, they
break not the bond of marriage; let them remember, that marriage being
ordained for a remedy against fornication, for the generation and bringing up
of children, and also for an help each to other in mutual society, and
inseparable conversation oflife, yet does there appear no token or effect of
marriage in those that live asunder, albeit they marry not again.

So that the benefit of marriage consists not only in the procreation of
children, but also in the mutual society of the two diverse Sexes. Otherwise
it could not be said, that there were any marriage between two old folks.

This union of marriage, yet teaches us another duty, common both to the man
and to the wife, which is, that their goods be common between them. That
Commonwealth may in some sort be said to be happy, where they have no use of
these words: Mine and thine; but in marriage especially they ought not to be
heard. If the wife have brought most goods in marriage, the marriage once
consummate and made, her part is gone, and they are gone, and they are made
common: as also are the debtes, whether hers or her husbands. And therefore can
neither of them say, this is mine; but this is ours. When a woman has brought
great goods, yet may she not say, I will do with mine own what I list: for she
her self is not her own, but her husbands.

The husband (as the head and chief guide of the family,) must have the
custody and chiese government of the goods in the house, yet may he discharge
himself of the whole, or of part, as himself shall think meet and
convenient.

Yet let him remember, that he entreat her not as a servant, by giving her
money as it were in mistrust, or with condition to return him a particular
account: for the husbands mistrust does many times provoke the woman; and the
wives vain expense breeds mistrust in the husband. But the faithful and
discret employment and good usage of the wife, and her husbands confidence in
her, will procure, that as the goods be common to both, so each alike shall
undertake the custody and employment of the same. Hereunto for a conclusion of
this point, we will yet add two duties, common both to the husband and the
wife.

The first, that they daily pray to God to give them grace to live together in
peace and love, and that each may be an help to others salvation. Let all such
as desire to enjoy such a selicitie, understand, that they must daily pray to
God for the obtaining thereof. And let those that live in strife and debate,
examine themselves whether they have no cause to impute their miserable estate
to their neglect of this duty.

The second, consists in the practice of the same: which Saint Paul teaches,
saying: Let 1. Cor. 7. 29.
those that be married, be as if they were not married. But how? by so enjoying
the commodity and contentation of marriage, that the benefit of their
conjunction breed no divorce between God and them.

Likewise, that thereby they be not hindered, or made slack in any duty
toward God, and their neighbors; as also, that no affliction (depending or
proceeding of marriage) withdraw them, or force them to resolve any thing
contrary to the union of marriage, and these Christian profession that they be
the children of God.

The particular duties of the husband toward the wife, are first, to protect
her, to have regard and care over her, etc. Ruth 3. 9. Secondly, that he
unfeignedly love her, out of which fountain springs this duty, that he must
bear with her infirmities, and not by and by, to enter into bitterness and
wrath: Colossions 3. 16. To the same end Saint Peter exhorting husbands to
behave themselves discreetly, 1. Pet. 3. 7.
and with knowledge and wisdom toward their wives, he requires of them two
things.

First, that they never say nor do any thing that may justly offend their
wives, as some there be, who being prodigal, great spenders, or idle and
slack in their business, do cause their wives and children to languish in
poverty: Others, who haunting tauernes, alehouses, and gaming, do consume and
wast that which should maintain their family: Others who coming home drunk,
do beat and vex their wives, and as it were drive them into despair: Others,
who by vile and bitter speeches, by threatenings, and other unchristian actions,
unworthy a husband, do provoke their wives; and so stir up such strife and
debate, as do convert the comfort of marriage into an hell. Seeing therefore,
that the husband is head, he ought in such wisdom, reason and discretion to
bear himself, that he give his wife no just occasion of offense, or
provocation: yet he must remember, that if the head be drunk, the whole body
is in danger of weak government, even oflying in the mire.

Secondly, that albeit the wife should minister just cause of grief and
displeasure, yet that the husband should not thereof take occasion against his
wives infirmities; or enter into bitterness, taunts, or disquietnesse: but
discreetly, and patiently bear with her; that so they may quietly and lovingly
live together.

The hurt or weakness of any one member of the body, provoke not the head to
wrath or bitterness, but rather to compassion, and an inclination to help it.
And indeed, whereas God having created the woman the weaker vessel (as Saint
Peter notes,) and did so join her to man, it was not to the end that he
striving with so frail a vessel, should bruise and break it, but that by
gentle and discreet entreating, he should quietly enjoy the help that God has
given him.

Let him therefore after the counsel of Saint Peter, so respect her, as one,
who albeit she be 1. Pet. 3. 7.
weak, is nevertheless a profitable vessel for him.

Moreover, let him love and honor her, as one, whom (notwithstanding the
frailty of her Sex) God has so honored, and Jesus Christ so loved, that
being together with man redeemed with his blood, she is, together with her
husband, co-heire of life everlasting.

A crystal glass, is a precious and profitable vessel, yet brittle: so is
the married woman. But albeit she be brittle, yet is she profitable to her
husband, and precious in the sight of God, as a child of God, and member of
Christ. As therefore a man does more carefully take heed ofbreaking such a
glass, then some earthen or tin vessel, the one being more base, and the
other more strong: so likewise should the husband have such regard of the
frailty of his wife, that he may bear with her, and entreat her with
gentleness and discretion, that he may use her as a precious and profitable
vessel, to his comfort and joy. And in as much as prayer is an excellent
service that God requires of us, and the ready means to purchase his
blessings, let the husband discretly bear with his wife, lest otherwise
through their strife and contention, their prayers (as Saint Peter says) be
let and interrupted, 1. Pet. 3. 7.

Yet must we not say, but the husband both may and ought to tell his wife of
her infirmities, that she may amend. But here we are to enter into
consideration of sundry points.

First, he is especially to reprove her offenses against God: as when Rachel
said unto Jacob: Give me children, or else I die: he reproved Genesis 30. 1.
her of impoitunitie, saying: Am I in Gods stead, who has withholden from thee
the fruit of thy womb? Also when Jobs wife said to her husband: Do thou
abide in thy integrity? Curse God and die: he wisely reproved such a wicked
speech, saying: Thou speak as an unwise woman. What? shall we receive good
at the hand of God, and not receive evil?

Secondly, that it be with gentleness and testimony of good will: as Elkanah
dealt with his wife Hanna, when she mourned because she 1. Sam. 1.
had no children. And indeed it is meet that the husband should reprove his
wife lovingly, rather by persuasion then by force. For as in a great stormy
wind, a man lappeth his cloak about him, and holds it fast for fear
oflosing it, but when the wind is down, and the weather calm, he lets it
hang easily: so, when husbands will (as it were) perforce wrest away their
wives infirmities, many of them will obstinately resist; yet contrariwise, by
sweet words and loving exhortations, they might be won voluntarily to
forsake them.

Thirdly, the husband must seek diligently to remove the occasion and stone
whereat his wife stumbleth, and takes occasion of grief. So when Sarah was
moved against Abraham because of Agar, and objected Genesis 16.
unto him, albeit wrongfully, that he was the eause that she contemned her:
bearing with his wife, (...) removed the cause of the contentation, in
suffering her to turn Agar out of doors.

He must also take heed, that he himself be not tainted with the same vice
which he reproves in his wife, lest she stop his mouth with a reproach of the
same fault: but rather by giving her example by the contrary virtue, let her
be induced and led to follow him. In reproving the wife, the husband must
always use such discretion, that she be not brought into contempt: and
therefore it should never be done in the presence of more then themselves. For
as it is mere folly for an husband to praise and commend his wife in company:
so is it as dangerous to check and reprove her before witness. For indeed
thereof it comes, that women, not being able to bear that disgrace, will
reply, and so ptouoke strife and dissension in open presence, which will
redound to great reproach and offense. And therefore, as the husband must not
flatter his wife, so he must not reprove her before strangers. A wise husband,
and one that seeks to live in quiet with his wife, must observe these three
rules: Often to admonish: seldom to reprove: and never to smite her.

Let the husband also remember, that the infirmities of his wife, must be
either taken away, or borne witball. So that he that can take them quite away,
makes his wife far more commodious and fit for his purpose: and he that can
bear with them, makes himself better, and more virtuous.

The husband is also to understand, that as God created the woman, not the
head, and so equal in authority with her husband: so also he created her not
of Adams foot, that she should be trodden down and despised; but he took her
out of the rib, that she might walk jointly with him, under the conduct and
government of her head.

And in that respect, the husband is not to command his wife in such manner as
the master his servant, but as the soul does the body, as being conjoined in
like affection and good will. For as the soul in governing the body, tends to
the benefit and commodity of the same: so ought the dominion and commandment
of the husband over his wife, to tend to rejoice and content her.

To conclude, as God has testified his singular goodness unto man, in
creating him an helper to assist him: so let him consider in how many sorts she
is to him an helper, to pass over this life in blessedness. And let this
daily seeking of such a benefit received at the hands of God, induce and stir
him up to render thanks, and to dispose himself to use it well, to his own
comfort and salvation: and not to abuse it, to the destruction both of himself
and his wife.

But if he chance (as many do) upon troubles and afflictions in marriage, let
him remember, that the same does proceed, not properly from marriage, but from
the corruption of the parties married: and for his part, let him study to
amend his infirmities and faults, by amendment of life: and withal, pray to
God to grant the like grace unto his wife; to the end that the more they
recover the Image of God, the more feeling they may have of the felicity of
marriage, which Adam and Eve had enjoyed, had they continued as they were
created in the Image of God. And the particular duties of the wife to the
husband, are principally these:

First, that she be a helper unto him.

Secondly, that she be obedient unto him, etc. These special duties are partly
touched before, and partly afterward.

As love matrimonial is greatly allowed of God, and much commended of all good
men, as an ordinate, holy, and godly love: so contrariwise hatred, dissension,
strife, debate, unquietness and frowardness in marriage, highly displeases
God, and much grieueth all good and godly men.

And therefore the devil, the enemy of all unity, concord and agreement,
labors by all means he can (specially at the first coming of the married
folks to dwell together) to sow dissension and discord, and to cause them not
to agree, but to dislike one of the other; against whom they must diligently
watch, by seruent and earnest prayer to God, that the devil prevail not
against them, by such too early disagreement. For as two boords, if at the
first they be not well coupled and joined together, are never fastened right
afterward, but if the first coupling and joining together be good, then can
there afterward no violence drive the boordes asunder: yea, the whole board
does sooner break, then the glewing of them together: even so, the husband and
wife must be very careful and diligent, that their first cohabitation and
dwelling together be loving, delectable, and friendly, and not separated
through any The best policy in marriage, is to begin well.
spiteful contention or discord, so shall the whole estate of their marriage
be more comfortable, and prosper the better so long as they shall live.

And though there happen to arise any spark of discord betwixt them, yet let
them beware that at the last there be not too much displeasure, disdain, and
inconvenience kindled thereby.

For, if at the first dwelling together there shall fall out such unto
wardnesse, and uncomely discord, then will it now and then be breaking out.
Even as it fares with great wounds, and broken legs or arms, which seldom
are so thoroughly healed, but sometimes they have pain at the change of the
weather: so likewise, if married folks behave themselves thus untowardly and
unhonestly, the one toward the other at the first, and if larres and discord
be once begun between them, the old canker of hatred will breed again,
though it be scaled afterward. Let the one therefore learn betime to be
acquainted with the nature and condition of the other, and to apply themselves
according to the same, in as much as they must needs dwell together, one to
enjoy another, and the one to live and die with the other, and so steadfastly
and unfeignedly to love one the other, that neither of them have any thing so
dear, which they cannot be content to give and bestow one upon the other: yea
even their own life if need require.

And therefore husbands and wives must even at the beginning of their marriage,
give their diligence, that all injuries and offenses may be avoided, for tender
and lost love is soon dissolved and broken.

So that this new love and conjunction of the mind, must be nourished, with
benign, sweet, and gentle conversation, until it be so increased and
fastened, that no great storm be able to dissolve and break it. And all
suspicion must be at all times, but especially at the beginning of matrimony,
eschewed and shunned, lest they should first begin to hate, or ever they begin
to love: yea, and they must beware they do not feign any suspicion, nor
conceive it of any light occasions and conjectures; for unto such they in no
wise must give ear, although there were some show and great appearance of
likelihood.

And this will be a good means to effect and work this; namely, if they (...)
themselves to speak kindly and cheerfully one to the other. For as the
ancient Counselors of King Solomon, gave wise advise and counsel unto
Rehoboam King ofIsraell, to the end that he 1. King. 12. 7. 8. etc.
might win the love and good liking of the people: Speak kindly unto them
(said they) and they will serve thee for ever after; which counsel not being
followed, great inconvenience and mischief after befell unto him. Even so
likewise if the husband be (...) to procure the love ofhis wife, and to win
her to God; or if the wife be desirous, and would also procure the love of her
husband, and win him to God, then they must draw on one another with sweet
and gentle words ofloue, speaking kindly one Judge. 19. 3.
to another; because gentle words do pacify anger, as water quenches fire.
But if they shall Prou. 15. 1.
use taunts or words of reproach and despite one against another, much hurt
then may ensue thereof: For a little leaven sowreth the whole Gal 5. 9.
lump. And therefore let them use to give one to the other, their dutiful
names and titles, and to eschew and shun the contrary. For example, like as
the spiteful Jews, which hated the Lord Jesus, would not vouchsafe to give
him his name when they talked of him, or with him, but to show their utter
dislike of him, they used to say; Is this he? or, Art thou he that will do such
a thing? Is not this he? etc. Again, Whither will he go, that we shall not
find him? they would not say, Is not this Jesus Christ? or the Son of God?
but they used a most despitefull kind of speaking, which did bewray abundance
of malice that was hidden in their hearts; even so it sometimes falls out
betwixt the husband and the wife, betwixt the father and the son, betwixt the
master and the servant, etc. that they could speak dutifully one to another,
but contempt, and disdain, anger and malice, will not suffer the one to
afford unto the other their due names and titles, lest they should be put in
mind of those duties, which those names require. Whereout Satan sucketh no
small advantage, whereas many times the very name of husband, or wife, father,
or son, master, or servant, etc. does greatly help to persuade the mind,
and to win the affection; yea, the very mentioning of these names, does
oftentimes leave a print of duty behind in the conscience.

Husbands must not forget this point; namely, that it is not sufficient for
them to declare and outwardly make a show of a good life, in words and precepts
only, but also in life and deed: So that two things are very necessary for
them to rule withal: to wit, wisdom and example, and that they themselves
fulfill the thing that they command to be done. The life and outward
conversation of a man, whether it be good or evil, does not only persuade,
but also constrain and enforce. We do see how mighty and available, this, or
the like exhortation of a Captain is in the time of war and battle; Oh my
soldiers, do that ye shall see me do: the which contempt of death in the
Captain, does so creep through the whole host, that there is not one, be he
never so feeble and weake-hearted, that does esteem his life, for the which he
perceives that his Captain cares so little. Thus did Christ, with his
Apostles and Martyrs, draw the world unto the Christian faith: Leuit. 11. 44.
and 19. 2. and 20. 7. and 21. 8. Ioh. 13. 15. Phil. 3. 17. 1. Tim. 1. 16. 2.
Thessal. 3. 9. For, as they lived, so they spoke, and as they spoke, so they
lived.

Therefore if the husband would have his wife to be temperate, quiet, chaste,
painful in her calling, religious, etc. then he must be careful that he be
not distemperate, unquiet, no whoremonger, nor careless in his calling, nor
irreligious, etc. So that if he command any thing to be done, he must look
that he deny not to do the same himself, and so shall his wife and family obey
the same, and be the more ready, and willing to do it, being both honest and
lawful to be done.

The very name of a wife, is like the Angel which stayed Abraham's hand when
the stroke Genesis 22. 11.
was coming. If David, because he could not express the commodity and
comfort of unity and brotherly love, was feign to say: Oh how good and joyful
a thing it is, for brethren to Psalm. 133. 1.
dwell together in unity! Then let husbands weigh and consider, how harsh and
bitter a thing it is, for them and their wives to dwell together in enmity and
strife. For the first year after marriage, God would not have the husband go
to war with his enemies, to the end that he and his wife might learn to know
one another Leuit. 24. 5.
conditions and qualities, and so afterward live in godly peace, and not war
one with another: and therefore God gave a law, and appointed that the new
married husband that year should stay at home, and settle his love, that he
might not war and jar after: for the God of peace dwells not in the house
of war. As a kingdom cannot stand if it be divided; so an house Mat. 12. 25.
cannot stand if it be divided: for strife is like a fire, which leaves nothing
but dust, smoke, and ashes behind it. We read in the Scriptures, of masters
that struck their servants, but never of any that struck his wife, but
rebuked her. Lot was drunk when he lay with his daughters Genesis 19. 33.
in stead of a wife: and so is he which strikes his wife in stead of his
servants. The law shows how a bondsman should be corrected: the wife is like a
Judge, which is joined in commission with her husband to correct other. Will thou strike one in his own house? no more should thou strike thy wife in her
house. She is come to thee as to a Sanctuary, to defend her from hurt: and
can thou hurt her thy self? Therefore Abraham said to Lot; Are we Genesis 18. 3.
not brethren? that is, May brethren jar? But they may say, are we not one,
can one chide with himself? can one fight with himself? He is a bad host that
welcomes his guest with stripes. Does a King trample on his crown? Solomon
calls the wife, The crown of her husband. Therefore Pro. 12. 4.
he which wounds her, wounds his own honor: She is a free Citizen in
thine house, and has taken the peace of thee the first day of her marriage, to
hold thy hands till she release thee again. Adam says of his spouse, This is
flesh of my flesh. But no man (says Paul) ever Genesis 2. 23. Ephesians. 5. 29.
hated his own flesh. So then, if a man ask whether he might strike his wife?
God says, nay: thou may not hate thy wife: For no man hates his own
flesh; showing that he should not come near blows, but think his wrath too
much.

Some husbands are wont to say, that they will rule their wives whatsoever they
be, or howsoever they came by them, and that it is in the hand and power of the
husband, what, and of what qualities and conditions she shall be. True it is,
that a great part of this does rest and lie in the husband, so that he
understand as he ought to do, that marriage is the supreme and most excellent
part of all amity and friendship: and that it far differs from tyranny,
the which does compel men to obey. Truly it may force the body, but not the
will, in the which all love and amity does consist and stand: the which if it
be drawn and forced, does resist and bow like a Palm tree to the contrary
part. And the husband may assure himself, that there cannot be any quiet
marriage or unity, where he and his wife do not agree in will and mind: the
which two, are the beginning and seat of all amity and friendship. And such
husbands as do brag, and think themselves able to rule and over rule their
wives, by that time they have proceeded and gone a little further, they shall
well feel and perceive themselves to be beguiled, and find that thing to be
most hard and intricate, the which to be done, they esteemed most light and
easy.

Some husbands there be, that through evil and rough handling, and in
threatening of their wives, have and use them not as wives, but as their
servants And yet surely they are but very fools, that judge and think
matrimony to be a dominion. For such as would be feared, do afterward
pitiously lament and complain, that they can find no love in their wives,
whose love and amity through their own cruelty and hard dealing, they have
turned into hatred. And whereas at the beginning, they gloried and cracked thus
cruelly that they were their wives masters, they have now purchased unto
themselves a most miserable and lamentable life in time to come; all love and
pleasure being now cast aside, and compassed with fear and suspicion, hatred
and sorrow.

Surely, if a husband (as nature, reason, and the holy Scriptures do witness)
be the head over his wife, and God their Father, there ought to be between
them such society and fellowship, yea and greater, then is between the father
and the son; and not such as is between the master and the servant.

And amongst many reasons that may be used, to persuade the husband and wife to
live together, lovingly, quietly, and Christianly, this is not the least;
namely, that neither of them is certain how long they shall live together: and
then the party that ouer-liueth, and purposes to marry again, having been
churlish, froward, etc. with his former wife; or she with her first husband:
their so hard dealing one with the other before, being known, will (no doubt)
be an occasion that they shall not speed, and match so well as otherwise they
might, if they had behaved themselves peaceably and dutifully in their first
marriage.

What the duty of a wife is toward her husband.
THis duty is comprehended in these points;

First, that she reverence her husband.

Secondly, that she submit herself, and be obedient unto him.

And lastly, that she do not wear gorgeous apparel, beyond her degree and
place, but that her attire be comely and sober, according to her calling.

The first point is proved by the Apostles, Peter and Paul; who set forth the
wives duties 1. Pet. 3. 1. Ephesians. 5. 22. Col. 3. 18. 1. Cor. 7. 2.
to their husbands, commanding them to be obedient unto them, although they be
profane and irreligious, yea, that they ought to do it so much the more, that
by their honest life and conversation, they might win them to the obedience
of the Lord.

Now for so much as the Apostle would have Christian wives, that are matched
with ungodly husbands, and such as are not yet good Christians, to reverence
and obey them: much more should they show themselves thankful to God, and
willingly, and dutifully perform this obedience and subjection, when they are
coupled in marriage with godly, wise, discreet, learned, gentle, loving, quiet,
patient, honest, and thrifty husbands. And therefore they ought evermore Wives
must be serviceable and obedient unto their husbands and stand in a reverend
awe of them.
to reverence them, and to endeavor with true obedience and love to serve them;
to be loath in any wise to offend them, (...) rather to be careful and diligent
to please them, that their soul may bless them. Ephesians. 5. 24.


And if at any time it shall happen, that the wife shall anger or displease her
husband, by doing or speaking any thing that shall grieve him, she ought never
to rest until she have pacified him, and gotten his favor again. And if he
shall chance to blame her without a cause, and for that which she could not
help or remedy, (which thing sometimes happens even of the best men) yet she
must bear it patiently, and give him no uncomely or unkind word for it; but
evermore look upon him with a loving and cheerful countenance; and so rather
let her take the fault upon her, then seem to be difpleased.

Let her be always merry and cheerful in his Cheerful in countenence.
company, but yet not with too much lightness. She must beware in any wise of
swelling, powting, lowering, or frowning; for that is a token of a cruel and
unloving heart, except it be in respect of sin, or in time of sickness. She
may not be sorrowful for any adversity that God sends: but must always be
careful that nothing be spilt, or go to wast through her negligence. In any
wise she must be quick and cleanly about her husbands meare and drink,
preparing Genesis 27. 9.
him the same according to his diet in due season. Let her show her self in
word and deed wise, humble, courteous, gentle, and loving toward her husband,
and also toward such as he does love; and then shall she lead a blessed life.
Let her show her self not only to love no man so well as her husband, but
also to love none other at all but him, unless it be for her husbands sake,
and the Lords.

Wherefore let the wife remember, that (as the Scripture reports) she is one
body with Genesis 2. 23. 24 Math 19. 5. 1. Cor. 6. 16. Eihes 5. 31.
her husband; so that she ought to love him none otherwise then her self: for
this is the greatest virtue of a married woman, this is the thing that wedlock
signifies and commands, that How the wife ought to behave her self unto her
husband.
the wife should reckon, to have her husband for both father, mother, brother,
and sister, like as Adam was unto Eve; and as the most noble and chaste woman
Andromache said her husband Hector was unto her: Thou art unto me both father
and mother,
Mine own dear husband, and well beloved brother.


And if it be true that men. do say, that friendship makes one heart of two:
much more truly and effectually ought wedlock to do the same, which far
passes all manner both of friendship and kindred. Therefore it is not said,
marriage does make one man, or one mind, or one body of two, but clearly one
person; wherefore matrimony requires a greater duty of the husband to wards
his wife, and the wife toward her husband, then otherwise they are bound to
show to their parents. The Apostle bids, To rejoice with them that rejoice,
and weep with them that weep. With Romans 12. 15.
whom should the wife rejoice, rather then with her loving husband? Or with
whom, should she weep and mourn, rather then with her own flesh? I will not
leave thee, says Elisha to 2. King. 2. 6.
Eliah: so she should say, I will never leave him till death. Bear one
another burden (says Paul.) Gal. 6. 2.
Who shall bear one another burden, if the wife do not bear the husbands
burden? Wicked lezabel comforted her husband in his sickness: 1. King. 21. 5.
1. King. 14. 4.
and Ieroboams wife sought for his health, though she was as bad as he. God did
not bid Sarah leave her father and country, as he did Genesis 12. 1.
bid her husband, yet because he bad Abraham leave his, she left hers too:
showing, that she was content not only to be his play fellow, but his
yoke fellow too. Beside a yoke fellow, she is called an helper, to help him in
his labors, Genesis 2. 18.
to help him in his troubles, to help him in his sickness, like a woman
physician, sometime with her strength, and sometime with her counsel. For as
sometime God confounds 1. Cor. 1. 27.
the wise by the foolish, and the strong by the weak; so sometimes he teaches
the wise by the foolish, and helps the strong by the weak. Therefore Peter
says, Husbands are won 1. Pet. 3. 1.
by the conversation of their wives. As if he should say, sometime the weaker
vessel is the stronger vessel. Abraham may take counsel of Sarah, as Naaman
was advised by his servant. 2. King. 5. 3. and 49.
The Shunamites counsel made her husband receive a Prophet into his house: and
Hesters counsel made her husband spare the Church Hest. 7. 3.
of the Jews: so some have been better help to their husbands then their
husbands have bin to them: for it pleases God to provoke the wise with the
foolish, as he did the Jews with the (...). 32. 21.
Gentiles. Beside an helper, she is called a comforter too; and therefore the
man is bid to rejoice (...). 10 19. Prou. 5. 18. 19.
in his wife: which is as much to say, that wives must be the rejoicing of
their husbands, even like David's harp to comfort Saul. A good 1. Sam. 16. 23.
wife therefore is known, when her words, and deeds, and countenance, are such
as her husband loves. She must not examine whether he be wise or simple, but
that she is his wife, and therefore being bound she must obey: as Abigail loved
her husband, though he were a 1. Sam. 25. 3.
fool, churlish, and evil conditioned. For the wife is as much despised for
taking rule ouet her husband, as he for yielding it unto her. Therefore one
says, that a mankind woman is a monster, that is, half a woman and half a
man. It beseems not the mistress to be master, no more then it becomes
the master to be mistress: but both must sail with their own wind, and both
keep their standing.

Lastly, we call the wife huswife, that is, houswife, not a street-wife, one
that gaddeth up and down, like Thamar: nor a field-wife, like Dinah: Genesis 38.
4. Genesis 33. 1. Why wives are called huswiues.
but a house-wife: to show that a good wife keeps her house: and therefore
Paul bids Titus to exhort women that they be chaste, and keeping at home:
presently after chaste, he says, Tit. 2. 5.
keeping at home, as though home were chastities keeper. And therefore Solomon
depainting Pro. 7. 12.
and describing the qualities of a whore, sets her at the door, now sitting
upon her stall, now walking in the streets, now looking out of the window, like
cursed Iezabel, as if she 2. King 30.
held forth the glass of temptation, for vanity to gaze upon. But chastity
cares to please but one, and therefore she keeps her closet as if she were
still at prayer.

The Angel asked Abraham, Where is thy wife? Abraham answered: She is in the
tent. The Angel Genesis 18. 9.
knew where she was, but he asked, that we might see how women in old time did
keep their tents and houses. It is recorded of the Shunamite, 2. King. 4. 22.
that she did ask her husband leave to go unto the Prophet, though she went to
a Prophet, and went of a good errand, and for his cause as much as her own,
yet she thought it not meet to go far abroad without her husbands leave.

The second point is, that wives submit themselves, and be obedient unto their
own husbands Ephe. 5. 22. 23. (...). Cor. 11. and 14. 34.
as to the Lord, because the husband is by Gods ordinance the wives head, that
is, her defender, teacher and comforter: and therefore she owes her subjection
to him, like as the Church does to Christ: and because the example of Sarah the
mother of the faithful, which obeyed Abraham and called him Lord, moves them
Genesis 18. 12. 1. Pet. 3. 6.
thereunto. This point is pattly handled before in the first point, as also in
the duty of the husband to the wife. As the Church should depend upon the
wisdom, discretion and will of Christ, and Ephesians. 5. 24.
not follow what it self lists: so must the wife also submit and apply her
self to the discretion and will of her husband: even as the government and
conduct of every thing rests in the head, not in the body. Moses writes,
that the Serpent Genesis 3. 1.
was wise above all beasts of the field: and that he did declare in assaulting
the woman, that when he had seduced her, she might also seduce and deceive her
husband. Saint Paul 1. Tim. 2. 14.
noting, this, among other the causes of the woman's subjection, does
sufficiently show, that for the avoiding of the like inconveniences, it is Gods
will that she should be subject to her husband, so that she shall have no other
discretion or will, but what may depend upon her head. The Lord also by Moses
says the same: Thy desire shall be subject to thy husband, and he shall rule
over thee. This dominion over their wives will does manifestly appear in this,
that God in old time ordained, that if the woman had Number. 30. 7.
vowed any thing unto God, it should not withstanding rest in her husband to
disauow it: so much is the wives will subject to her husband. Yet it is not
meant, that the wife should not employ her knowledge and discretion which God
has given her, in the help, and for the good of her husband: but always it
must be with condition to submit herself unto him, acknowledging him to be her
head, that finally they may so agree in one, as the conjunction of marriage
does require. Yet as when in a Lute or other musical instrument, two strings
concurring in one tune, the sound nevertheless is imputed to the strongest and
highest: so in a well ordered household, there must be a communication and
consent of counsel and will between the husband and the wife: yet such, as
the counsel and commandment may rest in the husband. True it is that some
women are wiser and more discreet then their husbands: as Abigail the wife of
Nabal, and others. Whereupon Solomon says: A wise woman builds up the house:
and blessed is the man that has a Pro. 14. 1. and 18. 22. and 19. 14. and 31.
all.
discreet wife. Yet still a great part of the discretion of such women shall
rest in acknowledging their husbands to be their heads, and so using the graces
that they have received of the Lord, that their husbands may be honored, not
contemned, either of them or of others: which falls out contratie, when the
wife will seem wiser then the husband. So that this modesty and government
ought to be in a wife: namely, that she should seldom speak, but to her
husband, or by her husband. And as the voice of him that sounds a trumpet, is
not so loud, as the sound that it yields: so is the wisdom and word of a
woman, of greater virtue and efficacy, when all that she knows, and can do,
is, as if it were said and done by her husband. The obedience that the wife
owes to her husband, depends upon this subjection of her will and wisdom
unto him: as 1. Peter 3. 6. Ephesians. 5. 33. Ester. 1. 12. So that women may
not provoke their husbands by disobedience, in matters that may be performed
without offense to God: neither presume over them, either in kindred or wealth,
or obstinately to refuse in a matter that may trouble household peace and
quiet. For disobedience begets contempt of the husband, and contempt wrath,
and is many times the cause of troubles between the man and the wife. If the
obedience imports any difficulty, she may for her excuse gently propound the
same: yet upon condition to obey (in case the husband should persist in his
intent) so long as the discommoditie imports no wickedness. For it is better
to continue peace by obedience, then to break it by resistance. And indeed it
is natural in the members to obey the conduct and government of the head. Yet
must not this obedience so far extend, as that the husband should command any
thing contrary to her honor, credit, and salvation, but as it is comely in the
Lord: Colos. 3. 16. Ephesians. 5. 13. Therefore, as it were a monstrous matter, and
the means to overthrow the person, that the body should in refusing all
subjection and obedience to the head, take upon it to guide it self, and to
command the head: so were it for the wife to rebel against the husband.

Let her then beware of disordering and (...) the course which God in his
wisdom has established: and withal let her understand, that going about it,
she rises not so much against her husband, as against God: and that it is her
good and honor to obey God in her subjection and obedience to her husband. If
in the practice of this duty she find any difficulty or trouble, through the
inconsiderate course of her husband, or otherwise; let her remember, that the
same proceeds not of the order established by the Lord, but through some sin
afterward crept in, which has mixed gall among the honey of the subjection and
obedience that the woman should have enjoyed in that estate, wherein, together
with Adam, she was created after the Image of God. And so let her humble her
self in the sight of God, and be well assured that her subjection and
obedience is acceptable unto him: and that the more that the image of God is
restored in her and her husband through the generation of the holy Ghost, the
less difficulty she shall find in that subjection and obedience, as many in
their marriage have in deed tried, to their great contentment and consolation.

Further there is a certain discretion and desire required of women, to please
the nature, inclinations, and manners of their husbands, so long as the same
import no wickedness. For as the looking-glass, howsoever fair and
beautifully adorned, is nothing worth if it show that countenance sad which is
pleasant, or the same pleasant that is sad: So the woman deserves no
commendation, that (as it were) contrarying her husband, when he is merry
shows herself sad, or in sadness utters her mirth. For as men should obey
the laws of their Cities, so women the manners of their husbands. To some
women a beck of her husband is sufficient to declare that there is somewhat
amiss that displeases him, and specially if she bear her husband any
reverence. For an honest Matron has no need of any greater staff, but of one
word, or one sour countenance. Moreover, a modest and chaste woman that loves
her husband, must also love her house, as remembering that the husband that
loves his wife, cannot so well like of the sight of any tapestry, as to see
his wife in his house. For the woman that gaddeth from house to house to prate,
confounds her self, her husband and family: Titus 2. 5. But there are four
reasons why the woman is to go abroad. First, to come to holy meetings,
according to the duty of godliness. The second, to visit such as stand in
need, as the duty of love and charity does require. The third, for employment
and provision in household affairs committed to her charge. And lastly with her
husband, when he shall require her. Genesis 20. 1. etc. The evil and unquiet life
that some women have, and pass with their husbands, is not so much for that
they commit The wife must keep a good tongue. When the wife does hold her
peace, she keeps the peace.
with, and in their persons, as it is for that they speak with their tongues.
If the wife would keep silence when her husband begins to chide, he should
not have so unquiet dinners, neither she the worse supper. Which surely is not
so: for at the same time that the husband begins to utter his grief, the
wife begins The cause of domestical combats. Silence becomes a woman.
to scold and chafe: whereof does follow, that now and then most unnaturally
they come to handy-gripes, more beast-like then Christianlike: which their so
doing is both a great shame and foul discredit to them both. The best means
therefore that a wife can use to obtain and maintain the love and good liking
of her husband, is to be silent, obedient, peaceable, patient, studious to
appease his choler if he be angry, painful, and diligent in looking to her
business, to be solitary and honest. The chief and special cause why most
women do fail in Lack of knowledge of Gods word, is the principal cause why
wives do not their duties to their husbands
not performing this duty to their husbands is, because they be ignorant of the
word of God, which teaches the same and all other duties: and therefore their
souls and consciences, not being brought into subjection to God and his word,
they can never until then yield and perform true subjection and obedience to
their husbands, and behave themselves so every way, as Christian wives are in
duty bound to do. But if wives be not so dutiful, serviceable and subject to
their husbands as in conscience they ought, the only cause thereof for the
most part is, the want and neglect of the wise, discreet, and good government
that should be in the husbands: besides the want of good example that they
should give unto their wives both in word and deed.

For as the common saying is, such a husband such a wife. For so much as
marriage makes of two persons one; therefore the love of the husband and wife
may the better be kept and increased, and so continued, if they remember the
duties last spoken of, as also not forget three points following.

1. They must be of one heart, will, and mind, One heart and one will.
and neither to vpbraide or cast the other in the teeth with their wants and
imperfections any ways, or to pride themselves in their gifts: but either the
one to endeavor to supply the others wants, that so they both helping and doing
their best together, may be one perfect body.

2. It does greatly increase love, when the one How the love, faithfulness,
and duty of married folks may be kept and increased.
faithfully serves the other: when in things concerning marriage, the one
hides no secrets nor priuities from the other, and the one does not utter or
publish the frailties or infirmities of the other, and when of all that ever
they obtain or get, they have but one common purse together; the one locking
up nothing from the other: and also when the one is faithful to the other in
all business and affairs.

Likewise when the one hearkeneth to the other, and when the one thinks not
scorn of the other: and when in matters concerning the government of the
house, the one will be counseled and advised by the other; the one of them
being always loving, kind, courteous, plain, and gentle unto the other; in
words, manners, and deeds.

3. Let the one learn ever to be obsequious, diligent, and serviceable to the
other in all honest things. And this will the sooner come to pass, They must
secretly keep no evil will in their minds, but tell their griese.
if the one observe and mark what thing the other can away withal, or cannot
away withal: and what pleases or displeases them, and so from thence-foorth
to do the one, and to leave the other undone. And if one of them be angry, and
offended with the other, then let the party grieved open and make known unto
the other their grief in due time, and with discretion. For the longer a
displeasure or evil will rages in secret, the worse will be the discord. And
this must be observed, that it be done in a fit and convenient time: because
there is some season in the which if griefs were showed it should make great
debate. And if the wife would go about to tell or admonish her husband when he
is out of patience or moved with anger, it should then be no fit time to talk
with him. Therefore Abigail perceiving Nabal her 1. Sam. 25. 36. 37.
husband to be drunk, would not speak to him until the morning. Both the
husband and wife must remember, that the one be not so offended and displeased
with the manners of the other, 1. Cor. 7. 10. 11 12. 13. 14. 15. 16.
that they should thereupon forsake the company one of another: for that were
like to one that being stung with the Bees, would therefore forsake the bony.

And therefore no man may put away his wife Mat. 19. 6. Mat. 19. 9. Luke 16. 18.
for any cause, except for whoredom, which must be duly proved before a
lawful Judge. But all godly and faithful married folks are to commend their
state and marriage to God, by humble and fervent prayer, that he for his
beloved Sons sake would so bless them and their marriage, that they may so
Christianly and dutifully agree between themselves, that they may have no
cause of any separation or diuorcement. For like as all manner of medicines
(and specially they that go nighest death, as to cut off whole members, etc.)
are very loathsome and terrible: even so is diuorcement indeed a medicine, but
a perilous and terrible medicine. Therefore every good Christian husband and
wife ought with all care and heedfulnesse so to live in marriage, that they
have no need of such a medicine. As the holy Scripture makes mention of many
wives and women that were wicked and ungodly, as partly may be seen by these
quotations, 1. King. 1. 2. Prou. 7. 27 and 22. 14. and 25. 24. and 27. 15.
Eccles. 7. 28. So contrariwise, the same sacred Scripture also commends unto
us many women that have been devout, religious, and virtuous; as partly is
manifest by that which has been already said: and also by these places of
Scripture, Ruth 2. 11. 1. Sam. 25. 3. Pro. 14. 1. and 31. 10. Mat. 28. 1. 8. 9.
10. Luke 8. 2. 3. and 23. 55. 56. Acts 1. 14. and 17. 4. and 9. 36. 39. 2. Ioh.
1. 2. Tim. 1. 5.

And whosoever shall observe it in the reading of the word of God, shall find
that it speaks of the praise of as many, and mo good women then men. Yea, and
I am persuaded that if at this day a due survey should be taken of all the men
and women throughout his Majesty's dominions, there would be found in number
more women that are faithful, religious, and virtuous The wife ought to obey
her husband in all things that be honest, and agreeable to Gods word.
then men.

Now if a wife be desirous to know how far she is bound to obey her husband:
the Apostle resolves this doubt; where he says, Ephesians 5. 22. Wives submit
your selves unto your husbands as to the Lord. As if he had said, wives cannot
be disobedient to their husbands, but they must resist God also, who is the
author of this subjection: and that they must regard their husbands will, as
the Lords will. But yec withal, as the Lord commands that which is good and
right: so she should obey her husband in good and right, or else she does not
obey him as the Lord, but as the tempter. The first subjection of the woman
began at sin. For when God cursed her, for seducing her husband, when the
serpent had deceived her, he said, He shall have Genesis 3. 16.
authoritts over thee. And therefore as the man named all other creatures, in
sign that they should be subject to him, as a servant which comes when his
master calls him by his name: so he did name the woman also, in token that
she should be subject unto him likewise. And therefore Assuerus made a law,
that Hest. 1. 20. 22. Numb. 30. 7. 8 9. 1. Pet. 3. 6.
every man should bear rule in his own house, and not the woman. Because she
sinned first, therefore she is humbled most: and ever since, the daughters of
Sarah are bound to call their husbands Lord, as Sarah called her husband: that
is, to take them for heads and governors.

Amongst the particular duties that a Christian It is a special duty of a
mother to give her children suck her self.
wife ought to perform in her family, this is one: namely, that she nurse her
own children: which to omit, and to put them forth to nursing, is both
against the law of nature, and also against the will of God. Besides, it is
hurtful both for the child's body, and also for his wit; and lastly, it is
hurtful to the mother her self, and it is an occasion that she falls into
much (...) thereby.

First, nature gives milk to the woman for none other end, but that she
should bestow it upon her child. We see by experience, that every beast, and
every foul is nourished and bred of the same that did bear it: only some
women love to be mothers, but not nurses. As therefore every tree does cherish
and nourish that which it brings forth: even so also, it becomes 1. Tim. 5.
10.
natural mothers to nourish their children with their own milk.

Secondly, the examples of the Scriptures are many that prove this. As Sarah,
who nursed Isaac, Genesis 22. 7.
though she were a Princess; and therefore able enough to have had others to
have taken that pains. Though she was a beautiful woman, and of great years,
yet she her self nursed and gave suck to her son.

Also Anna, unto whom the holy Ghost has 1. Sam. 1. 23. Exodus 8. Cant. 8. 1.
Psalm. 22. 9.
left it recorded (as a commendation,) that she nursed her own son Samuel.

So when God chose a nurse for Moses, he led the hand-maide of Pharaos daughter
to his mother: as though God would have none to nurse him but his mother. Like
wise when the Mat. 2. 14. Luke 2. 7. 12.
Son of God was borne, his Father thought none fit to be his nurse, but the
blessed virgin his mother. It is a commendation of a good woman, 1. Tim. 5. 10.
and set down in the first place as a principal good work in a widow that is
well reported of, if she have nursed her children. And therefore such as refuse
thus to do, may well and fitly be called nice and unnatural mothers: yea, in
so doing they make themselves but half mothers, and so break the holy bond of
nature, in locking up their breasts from their children, and delivering them
forth like the Cuckoo to be hatched in the sparrowes nest.

Thirdly, the childrens bodies be commonly so affected as the milk is which
they receive. Now if the nurse be of an evil complexion, as she is affected in
her body, or in her mind, or has some hidden disease, the child sucking of her
breast must needs take part with her. And if that be true which the learned do
say, that the temperature of the mind follows the constitution of the body,
needs must it be, that if the nurse be of a naughty nature, the child must take
thereafter. Yet if it be so that the nurse be of a good complexion, and of an
honest behavior, (whereas contrariwise, maidens that have made a escape are
commonly called to be Nurses) yet can it not be but that the mothers milk
should be much more natural for the child then the milk of a stranger. As by
experience, let a man be long accustomed to one kind of drink, if the same man
change his air and his drink, he is like to mislike it, as the eggs of a
hen are altered under a hawke. Nevertheless, such women as be oppressed with
infirmities, diseases, want of milk, or other just and lawful causes, are to
be dispensed withal. But whose breasts have this perpetual drought? Forsooth,
it is like the gowt, no beggars may have it, but Citizens or Gentlewomen. In
the ninth of Hosea, verse 14. dry breasts are named for a curse. What a
lamentable hap have Gentle-women to light upon this curse more then others?
Sure if their breasts be dry (as they say they are) they should fast and pray
together, that this curse might be removed from them.

And lastly, that it is hurtful to the mothers themselves, both Physicians can
tell; and some women full often have felt when they have been troubled with sore
breasts: besides other diseases that happen to them through plenty of milk.

The wise is further to remember, that God has given her two breasts; not that
she should employ and use them for a show, or of ostentation, but in the
service of God, and to be a help to her husband in suckling the child common
to them both. Experience teaches, that God conuerteth the mothers blood into
the milk wherewith the child is nursed in her womb. He brings it into the
breasts furnished with nipples; convenient to minister the warm milk unto the
child: whom he endueth with industry to draw out the milk for his own
sustenance. The woman therefore that can suckle her child and does it not, but
resuseth this office and duty of a mother, declares her self to be very
unthankful to God, and (as it were) forsakes and contemns the fruit of her
womb. And therefore the brute beasts lying upon the ground, and granting not
one nipple or two, but six or seven to their young ones, shall rise in
judgment against these dainty halfmothers, who for fear of wrinckling of their
faces, or to avoid some small labor, do refuse this so necessary a duty of a
mother due to her children. The properties due to a married wife are, that she
have gravity when she walks abroad: wisdom to govern her house, patience
to suffer her husband, love to breed and bring up her children, courtesy
toward her neighbors, diligence, to lay up, and to save such goods as are
within her charge: that she be a friend of honest company, and a greater enemy
of want on and light toyed. So then, the principal duty of the wife, is,
first, to be subject to her husband, Ephesians. 5. 22. Colloss. 3. 18. 1. Pet. 3.
1. 2. To be chaste and shamefast, modest and silent, godly and discreet. 3. To
keep her self at home for the good government of her family, and not to stray
abroad without just cause.

Here it is not to be pretermitted, but we must Stepfathers and stepmothers
their duties.
say somewhat touching men and women that betwise married, and so become
step-fathers and step-mothers. Such husbands and wives as The husband must so
praise his first wife, and she her first husband, as it be not done to the
offense or reproach of either to the other.
marry again after the death of their first wives, or first husbands, are
carefully to remember that they do not displease their wives or their husbands
which they now have, by overmuch rehearsing of their first wife or first
husband. For the course and condition of the world is such, that husbands and
wives do account and reckon things past better then things that be present. And
the reason is, because no commodity Jealousy, which is the suspecting of
adultery in the married parties, ought wisely and carefully to be suppressed
in both parties without apparent matter
or felicity is so great, but it has some grief and displeasure, and also
some bitterness mingled with it: which so long as it is present grieueth us
sore, but when it is once gone, it leaves no great feeling of it self behind
it: and for that cause we seem to be less troubled with sorrows and
discommodities past, then with those that are present. Also age steals and
comes on apace, which causes both men and women to be the less able to
sustain and endure troubles and griefs then before. Therefore such men and
women as be twice married, and be wise and religious, ought not to esteem
their wife or husband which is dead, better then her or him which they enjoy
now alive: remembering the common proverb: That we must live by the quick and
not by the dead: and that we must make much of that we now have. Let the name
of step-father and stepmother, admonish and put them in mind of their duty
toward the children of the one and the other. For step-father and stepmother,
does signify a sted-father and a sted-mother, that is; one father and one
mother dies, The very name of stepfather and stepmother teaches them their
duty.
and another succeeds and comes in their stead and room. Therefore to the
end that both their loves may be seiled toward the children of the one and the
other, they must remember, that they are stead-father and stead-mother; that
is, in stead of their own father and mother: and therefore they ought to love
them, to tender them, and to cherish them, as their own father or mother did.
You must not look upon them like Rehoboam, who told his people that he would
be worse unto them then his predecessor: for then the children will dislike of
you, and turn from you, as his subjects did from him: but ye must come to them
as David came to the people after Saules death, 1. King. 12. 13. 2. Sam. 2. 7.
who said, Though your Master Saul be dead, yet I will reign over you: So ye
must say to them; though your father be dead, or though your mother be dead,
yet I will be a father, or I will be a mother unto you: so the children will
love you, as much as they did their dead father, or dead mother. For that man
that is led with discretion, reason, and consideration, will reckon himself
and his wife all one: And likewise, she will account her self and her husband
as one. And therefore they ought to account both the children of the one and of
the other as common to them both. For if friendship make all things common
among friends, insomuch that they have loved and favored their friends
children as their own, how much more effectually and perfectly ought marriage
to cause the same, which is the highest degree, not only of friendship but
also of all blood and kindred. But step-mothers do more often offend, and fail
in this duty then men, by reason that their affections be stronger then men's,
and many times overrule them: and therefore they are earnestly to be
admonished and warned, that they show to those motherlesse children no
step-mothers friendship, but a right motherly kindness. Let the stepmother
advisedly consider, that God has ordained and appointed her (in steast. of
their own mother) to be to them a right true mother, and not only to regard
them as children, but as orphane children, and that he requires her to love
them, and to do them good as to her own. What a grief would it be to her
heart, if she should know now that her own children whom she has borne in her
own body, should (after her death) have a stepmother that would be rigorous,
churlish, and unkind unto them? Doubtless those childrens mother that dead
is, had upon her deathbed no less care for her children. Let her therefore
always have in mind this saying of our Savior Christ: As you measure unto
others, so it shall be measured to you again: that is, as the stepmother does
entreat the children of her predecessor, so another wife may come after her,
and entreat her children. For he that took away the first mother, and sent
her, can take away the second mother, and send a third, which will not be like
a stead-mother to hers, unless she be like a stead-mother to these. Verily, a
good woman will be unto her husbands children, that which she may hear them
call her so often, that is, Mother. For what Christian woman is so far from
all humanity and natural affection, that will not be moved and mitigated with
this word Mother, of whom soever it be spoken? and chiefly of children, which
cannot flatter, but speak even so from their heart, as they would to their
own mother, of whom they were borne. How sweet is the name of friendship? how
many injuries, hatreds and displeasures does it hide and put away? Then how
much more effectual ought the sweet name of Mother to be, which is full of
incredible love? Therefore every religious and loving wife will be mollified
and moved in her heart and mind, when she shall hear her self named Mother by
any of her husbands children.

Otherwise, she shall show her self to be more unnatural and unkind then the
wild savage beast: for there is no beast so outrageous and cruel, but if any
other young beast of her own kind fawn upon her, she will by and by show
kindness and mildness unto it. And shall not her husbands children make her
kind and loving unto them, when they call and speak unto her, by the loving
and sweet name of Mother?

3. The third and last point that appertains As wives ought to go comely,
plainly, and handsomely in their (...), so they must in any wise beware of
pride, riot, or excess therein.
to the duty of wives, is, that they do not wear gorgeous and sumptuous
apparel, or broidered hair trimmed with gold: but that after the example of
holy women which trusted in God, they be sober in outward apparel, and
garnished and decked inwardly with virtues of their minds; as with gentleness,
meekness, quietness, and chastity; which indeed are most precious things in
the sight of God.

This point is plainly spoken of by the Apostle to Timothy Chap. 2. verse. 10
in which place, he so flatly condemns both the excess and pride of Pride is
hateful before God and man: be not therefore proud, for thou art but dust ana
ashes.
apparel as also the pomp, curiosity, and wantonness which women use in
trimming their heads; by plaiting, criping, broyding, curling, and curiously
laying out, that no man can say more against it in few words, then he has
spoken to the utter dislike thereof. For if a man should occupy himself, and
give liberty to his pen to write of the horrible abuse and excessive pride that
many women are guilty of in this behalf, he should rather want time to write,
then matter to deliver.

Therefore, such women as will not reform themselves, we leave them to the
Lord; who (no doubt will in his appointed time, not only severely punish them,
but also their husbands for suffering this great wickedness and dissoluteness
in their wives, as he did the Jews for the same sin, as plainly may be teene
in Esaias 3. 16. etc.

For so it falls out according to the common Proverb; that pride goes
before, and shame and destruction comes after. And on the contrary Prou. 16.
18.
part, we hope that such women as be true professors of Christ and his
religion, will both attire and dress their heads so decently, and also content
themselves with such comely apparel, as best beseems their calling and
degree; So as by their good example they may draw on Titus 1. 3.
other women to reform themselves in this behalf; and so rather come short of
that which their ability and place would serve to maintain, then any way to
exceed therein, to the slander of their profession.

And let them not so much regard what thing they would feign have, but rather
what they Temperance in apparel.
cannot well be without: so that whatsoever they have no need of, is too dear
of a farthing.

The duty of Parents toward their children.
THis duty consists in four points.

First, that fathers and mothers The duty contains four points: Namely in
teaching or instructing them in religion, in manners, good example of life, and
skill of an occupation.
do instruct and bring up their children (even from the cradle) in the fear
and nurture of the Lord.

Secondly, that they bring them up in shame fastness, hatred of vice, and love
of all virtue.

Thirdly, that they be unto their children examples of all godliness and
virtue.

Fourthly that they keep them from idleness, the mother of all mischiefs, and
bring them up either in learning, or in some good art or occupation, whereby
they may get their living with honesty and truth, when they shall come to age,
and years of discretion.

1. Touching the first point. Parents are to The first point.
be admonished; that they bear in mind, that the cause why the Lord has
blessed them with children, is: First, that they should be careful to see that
their children be so virtuously brought up, that they may become Citizens of
the Church of God; so that whenever they themselves shall die in the Lord,
they may leave their children true worshippers of God in their place. But
alas, there be few that have any great care of this duty.

It is to be remembered, that it is the fathers duty, with all convenient speed
to present the child to baptism, and there to give the name unto his child: as
may appear by the example, Luke 1. 3. Genesis 21. 3.

And it were a thing to be wished, that all parents, when, and at such time as
God blesses The children of Christians ought not to be called by any papish
name.
them with children, would give them such names as are named and commended unto
us in the holy. Scriptures, to the end that when they come to years of
discretion, they by hearing those names, may be excited and moved to follow the
virtuous life and Christian conversation of those men and women whose names
they bear, which the holy Ghost has commended them for, and contrariwise to
(...) We are neither better nor worse in respect of our names. Joshua 10. 3.
and avoid those faults and vices which are discommended in them. And yet we
have to remember, that those children which are named and called by, and after
any of the names of the (...), Prophets, Apostles, or by the name of any other
Saint, man or woman, are not any thing the better, because they have such godly
and Christian names, unless that they do imitate and follow them, in faith,
virtue, The name profits none in whom virtue is not convinced.
and godly behavior: so on the other side, they that be not called by such
Christian names as are mentioned in the sacred Scripture, are not in respect of
their names any thing the worse, having an assured faith in the merits of
Christ his death, passion, and blood: shedding, and leading their lives
agreeable to the same. For as neither the revenues, nor the glorious titles and
names of ancestors, (...) descend of noble parentage, makes men noble and
renowned indeed, unless they themselves be godly, honest, and wise: so neither
the godly names, no nor yet the faith and virtue of the fathers, avails the
wicked and ungodly children any thing at all, unless they repent and become
faithful and godly, as they were. Let us here consider, that so often as in
the race of our life we do hear, or do speak of our name, it does put us in
remembrance, first of Gods mercy showed unto us in our baptisine: secondly, of
our promise to God again. And as in times amongst our ancestors, Infants had
their names given them when they were circumcised, as appeateth in Luke, no
doubt to this end, that Luke 1. 59. and 2. 21.
the circumcised should be admonished by the calling by their names, at what
time and place Proper names are also given unto us for this use and end, that
is, to distinguish between man and man.
they had their names given them, and would think that they are written in the
number of the children of God, and joined in league with him, and made
partakers of his covenant: so likewise after the same manner, must we that have
had our names given us in baptism, remember and bear in mind, that we are by
grace adopted to be the sons of God, and received into his favor, and
therefore that we are Gods own, and as it were his goods and riches, who bear
his name as proper unto him.

2. Secondly, they may assure themselves, that all their labor is lost which
they bestow upon their children, unless they bring them up in the fear of
God, and oftentimes call upon Gods help by earnest prayer, that he in mercy
would vouthsafe to preserve them from the manifold snares; subtilties, and
temptations of Satan, which their tender age is subject unto. We may hear
many parents complain of the disobedience of their children: but they do not
mark and consider that they are justly punished by God, for that they think
by their own industry and wit to make them good and virtuous, without Gods
blessing, which they seldom or never call for in good earnest.

3. Thirdly, let them consider how noble a thing a child is, whom God himself
has shaped and formed in his mothers womb, nourished, brought forth into the
light, and endued with body and soul, to the end he should (as it were in a
table) represent God his first pattern.

4. Fourthly, let them know that these things are to be dealt with all in
order. Unto the body they owe nourishment, bringing up, apparel, Instructing,
correcting, and prayer, make good children, and happy parents.
and sometimes correction, that they may keep children in awe. Unto the soul
they owe catechizing, instruction, and doctrine: and that of two sorts; namely,
of godliness, and of civility. By the one, they shall keep a good conscience
before God; by the other, they shall obtain a good report among men. For these
are the two principal points, which parents ought to be most careful to plant
in this life in their children, both which the Apostle comprehends in one
verse, where he says, Ephesians. 1. 4. Ye fathers provoke not your children to
wrath, but bring them up in instruction, and information of the Lord.

And therefore all parents are diligently to instruct and teach their children
the first principles of Christ his Religion, so soon as by age they are able
to perceive and understand the same, that they may (as it were) suck in
godliness together with their mothers milk, and straight-wayes after their
cradle, may be nourished with the tender food of virtue, toward that blessed
life. To have godly children (no doubt) is the greatest treasure that may be.
For in the children do the parents live, (in a manner) after their death. And
if they be well instructed, catechized, and virtuously brought up, God is
honored by them, the Commonwealth is advanced; yea, their parents, and all
other fare the better for them. They are their parents comfort, next unto God,
their joy, staff, and upholding of their age: and therefore parents ought to
begin betimes to plant virtue in their childrens breasts: for late sowing,
brings a late, or never apt harvest. Young branches will bow as a man will
have them, but old trees will sooner break then bow. And therefore, as arrows
are an excellent weapon of defense, to a strong and a mighty man that can
shoot them with courage: even so children godly brought up, are a special
protection and defense to their parents. And as the strong man's quiver the
better it is furnished with chosen shaftes, the better defense he has: so
likewise, the more godly children their parents have, the greater is their joy
and happinesie. Yea and further, as arrows are at the commandment of the
owner to be used: even so children well-taught, are at the commandment of
godly parents.

5. Lastly, Iet parents remember how many sins they commit and heap one upon
another, which do not their duty in bringing up their children as they ought
to do. First, they transgress the law of nature, which tells all men, that
their duty is to bring up their children godlily and honestly. Secondly, they
sin against Deuteronomy. 6. 7. 8 and 4. 9. and 11. 19. Psalm. 78. 5. 6. 78. Iosu, 4.
6.
God: for they despise the commandment and authority of God: for he
commands that children should be brought up religiously, and honestly; but he
is a despiser of God, that refuses to do as he is commanded. Thirdly, they
offend against their own credit and estimation. For Gods will is, that
parents should, (after a sort) be in his stead, so far forth as pertains
to outward discipline. But such make Exodus 12. 26. 27.
small account of this dignity, who neglect their duty in this behalf.
Parents are further to understand, that it is their duty to have diligent care
to have their children taught to pray to God, and to rehearse the Apostles
Creed, and the ten Commendements. For as by this exercise their hearts and
minds shall the rather be inclined to godliness and reverence toward God; so
as they increase in age, they shall every day better then other, comprehend
that which they learn, to their own comfort, instruction, and salvation.
Also, the tongue is called the glory of man, because that besides all other
reasons, by his speech he is discerned from the bruit beasts; so it is meet,
that so soon as the child can begin to speak, his tongue should be employed
to glorify God, by calling upon him, and by learning some short Catechism
containing the principles and grounds of Christian religion; as also in
repeating the will of God, in such sort as he will that we should serve and
honor him.

If parents do note and perceive any vice in their little ones, as swearing,
lying, choler, envy, filching, covetousness, contempt of parents, readiness
to strike, and other like corruptions: it is their duty, diligently, and in
time to reprove and correct them, as men use to pluck up weeds while they be
yet young, lest growing up among the good seeds, they should hinder their
growth, and choke them up. By experience, we can see that mothers in swaddling
their little ones, do lay their limbs right, each in his place: likewise, if a
child be given to be left handed, they chide him, yea, sometimes they bind it
up, or otherwise restrain the use of it, that he may be accustomed to use his
right hand. Also, if the child have some string under his tongue, they cut it,
lest it should hinder his speech: much more then ought they to beware, that
through their negligence the vices of the soul do not increase. For it is the
duty of the parents, even in the infancy, to begin to shape and frame the
foul unto virtue.

It is also the duty of parents to provide that their children may learn, at
the least to write and rcade: for it may be unto them a great help in the
course of this life and a treasure of much greater account then money. And
therefore the negligence ofmany is sharply to be reproved: besides that the
performance of this duty does greatly bind their children unto them.
Nevertheless, the principal end thereof, should not have respect to such
commodity, as the children may reap thereby toward the use of this
present-life: but rather that they may read the word of God to their comfort,
and instruction to salvation. Also it (...) their parts to use them daily to
read some Chapters of the holy Scriptures, thereby to incline and win their
affections to the word of God, to inure and acquaint them in the phrase of the
holy Ghost, by little and little to learn the heavenly doctrine, to note the
examples of Gods vengeance powered upon the wicked and disobedient: and of his
blessings unto those that walk in his fear. Therefore if parents do look
that their children should obey them, then let them join and accustom them to
Gods word, which will redound much to their parents profit. If they cause their
children to hear and read the holy Scriptures, therein they may learn, Honor
thy father and thy mother: but if parents do otherwise, then they train them
up in the Scriptures of devils, whereout their children will learn most wicked
things: but it is not so when they are instructed in the holy Scriptures.
Parents therefore are diligently to apply themselves to this which God
commands, and so often and earnestly commends unto them: namely, to
instruct their children in the knowledge and fear ofGod, and in the faith of
Jesus Christ: Deuteronomy. 6. 6. 7. and 32. 46. Ephesians. 6. 4. So also to teach them
those things which they are to use in their age. It is then great folly to
linger children in the learning of vain, (...), and unprofitable things, which
as they grow in years they will contemn and forget. Parents can be careful
enough to bring up their children in some course, trade, or other estate,
wherein to get their livings when they come to be men: and verily such fathers
as do neglect that, are unworthy to have children. But as the soul is more
precious then the body, so is the duty of parents, in youth to train up their
children in the practice of those things, wherewith in age, even in this life,
they may glorify God, and be heirs of the Lord. If parents want knowledge, or
bevnwilling to take leisure to teach them; yet let them do as much for their
childrens souls, and the life to come, as for their bodies and this present
life. Parents that either cannot write and read, or will not, or have no time
to teach their children, will yet send them to school: and such as would have
them learn some art or occupation or traffic, if themselves profess not the
same, wherein they like to employ their children, they will yet put them to
dwell with those that do profess the same, to the end they may learn. How
therefore can parents excuse themselves, when their children remain untaught
in those things that concern the glory of God and life everlasting? But
howsoever it be, if they be neither able of themselves, nor do provide to have
them taught by others, they shall be inexcusable in the sight of God: and the
ignorance of the children, ingendring contempt of God, love of the world, and
neglect of heavenly felicity, will cry out for everlasting vengeance against
their parents: so that if they account not their children as beasts without
soul, or if they love them with the due love belonging to parents, let them
declare their love especially to the soul: the Christian instruction whereof
surmounteth all worldly treasure.

Some say, it would be a great comfort for them in heaven to know their near
kindred, and consequently their children: and this comes of natural
affection. But might it not be a greater discomfort for them, even in their
life time, to see them go to hell for want of instruction? Some charge their
children to be dull witted, and hard to be bowed, or brought to any goodness
or virtue. Albeit natural inclination be a great help to profiting, yet
exercise and custom to do well, is a mighty means to bend and sharp them
that way: yea, even such, that by experience we find this old Proverb true:
Use over comes nature: as the wheelewright does by strength bow his timber,
and letting it lie long in that bent, it bideth crooked. Barren ground well
tilled, soyled, and sown with good seed, grows fruitful, and yields good
increase: iron wears with handling: the water by continual dropping wears
the stone: wild beasts may be tamed: and wild colts by custom are brought to
the saddle, and are content to be led by the bridle: even so the dullest
capacities may by instruction and custom be fashioned to virtue. As
contrariwise, the wiz most inclined by nature to virtue, may by bad instruction
and the conversation of the wicked be perverted and grow vicious.

Parents therefore are herein to respect two points: first, to begin to frame
and bend their children in their tender youth to virtue, remembering that a
seal enters deepest into softest wax. They must be careful that they do not
speak or tell any foolish tales, baudie rimes, or ungodly speeches before
their children, lest they infect their tender wits with folly and
astonishment. Experience shows, that children will sooner learn any language
by conversation then elder folks. Also that the younger the twig is, the sooner
it is bent or made straight.

Secondly, it is the parents duty to restrain their children from haunting
and conuersing with such as be vicious, perverse, and wicked. And undoubtedly
we see that they do soon learn villainous and unseemly speeches, and
malicious lewd actions, with their corruptions: and as the old Proverb says,
halting with the lame, they shall learn to halt. A child that naturally
speaks well, by conuersing with such as corrupt their speech, shall degenerate
and speak as badly. Tie a young twig that is crooked, with a straight one that
is stronger then it, and in growing it will become straight, and so continue
when it is undone. And contrariwise, a straight one tied to that which is
crooked, and stronger then it self, will grow and continue crooked.

Moreover, parents when they mean to put forth their children to any trade or
occupation, or to learning, then they ought carefully to see and enquire
whether such as they think to place them withal, be religious and virtuous,
and endued with the fear of God.

In the admittance of a servant, the fear of some temporal or carnal
inconvenience, causes men to enquire of his, or her truth, honesty, or other
qualities. Therefore if parents shall commit their child to the ordering and
instruction of a master, before they make inquiry of his honesty and
Christian conversation, they plainly show, that they have less care of the
corrupting or infecting of their child with vice, then of some small
inconvenience that might happen by an dishonest and unthrifty servant.

When men buy an earthen pot, they sound upon it, to see whether it be broken,
lest they should be deceived in a small piece of money, yet do they not sound
whether the master to whom they commit their child be vicious, or virtuous:
albeit by putting and placing him with one that is vicious and irreligious,
they put him in danger of loss, both of body and soul.

Some do respect their friendship with some masters rather then their virtue,
and so do commit to them their children, lest they should be angry for putting
them to another.

These men do resemble and be like him, who being dangerously sick, uses the advice of an ignorant Physician, that is his kinsman or familiar friend, for
fear he should take offense if he should call another, albeit, without
comparison, more learned and skillful.

If thou should liaue any weighty matter in law, would thou rather
commit thy cause to an ignorant and negligent attorney, because he is thy
friend, then to him that were both diligent and learned? Making a voyage
through some dangerous sea, would thou in a tempest commit thy ship to a
young Pilot, unskillful or drunk, because he is thy friend? What a fool art
thou, that wilt not take the like care of the profit, honor, safety, and
salvation of thy child?

Others commit their children either to him that will take them at the easiest
rate, or by whom they may grow into greatest advancement in the world, but
never respect the hazard of their child, so they may either spare, or get
worldly goods. Let them also be careful to restrain their children from vice,
and to inure and accustom them to virtue: and indeed the fathers that
instruct, or cause their children to be instructed, do far excel such as only
do beget them: for of these they (...) life only, of the other good and
virtuous life. Yet parents ought not so much to rely and rest upon the
diligence of their childrens masters, as never to care to understand how they
profit and go forward in learning and virtue: for the regard of such diligence
would make the masters more carefully to discharge their duties. And thereof
came the Proverb; The masters eye fatteth the horse: and this, The masters
eye is the fruitfulness of the garden.

Upon these sins ensue many punishments, both ghostly and bodily, as well in
the parents, as in the children: yea, and in all the posterity.

The holy Scripture gives great commendation to sundry men and women, for
their godly education, and virtuous bringing up of their children: as to
Abraham, for he commanded Genesis 18. 19. 1. (...). 28. 9. Act. 10. 2. 2. Tim. 1.
5.
his sons and his household, to keep the way of the Lord. So David counseled
his son (...) to serve God with a perfect heart, and a willing mind. It is
said also of Cornelius, that he Parents must perform their duty to their
children moderately, with great gravity and authority.
feared God and all his household. Likewise of Eunice the mother of Timothy,
that she nourished up her son in the words of faith, and good doctrine. For
where a virtuous and godly childhood goes before, there a godly and virtuous
age follows after. Contrariwise, when the parents are not careful to teach
their children to know God, and to know themselves: when they do not breed them
up in virtue, nor reprove them when they do amiss, Which is done by example.
they then become corrupt in their understanding, and abominable in their
doing: ignorant and void of all knowledge and grace, and of reverence or
feeling of nature.

If parents be desirous to have their children virtuous and honest indeed, (as
in conscience they ought) then they must be diligent and careful to practice
godliness and honesty themselves. For we see by experience, according to
Fruits are wont to take their shape and nature of the tree.
the common Proverb. As the old cock croweth, the young learneth; such a
father, such a son: and such a mother, such a daughter. For like as when the
head is well and sound, and also the stomach pure from hurtful humors, the
body is commonly well affected: even so, where the head, or chief of any
family or household, is religious, and sound in the faith, and fears God; it
commonly goes well with all the household.

What shall it avail for parents to teach their children honesty and
modesty, when they themselves in their works and behauiours do inuit them to
wantonness and lewdness? Verbal instruction, without example of good deeds,
is a dead doctrine; and contrariwise, good examples are the life of
instruction, to make it profitable and effectual. If the example of parents be
contrary to their instructions, if they teach their children sobriety,
modesty, and chastity, and yet themselves will follow drunkenness, foul and
lascivious speeches, gestures, and actions: it is as if with their tongues they
should say, be virtuous, and by the hands lead them with them to all vice and
corruption. So that wicked parents are wicked counselors to their children. If
we would take him to be a monster in nature, and unworthy to live in a
Commonwealth, that should counsel his child to drunkenness and fornication:
what shall we think of those, who committing such iniquity, do by their
example much more mightily put forwards their children to such abomination,
then by word they are able? What account can those parents give unto God, who
by their evil example have drawn into hell their children, whom he delivered
to their charge to be given into heaven? Albeit such parents pity not
themselves, yet at least let them take pity of their children; and not carry
them with them into everlasting destruction. Such parents then deserve
grievously to be reproved, as shall use any leude speeches, or shameless
behavior: in brief, any worldly or carnal actions in the presence of their
children, to whom their examples may be as a dispensation to give themselves to
the like. As also, how can they forbid that in their children, which they
themselves do commit? How can they correct them for the faults which they
themselves use? Albeit, children in respect and reverence to their parents dare
not reply and say; themselves do those things for the which they reprove them;
yet will the neighbors or others object it to their shame. Besides, their
authority shall be so much the less, in that they declare in their works and
actions, that they allow that which they forbid in words.

If parents therefore desire that their instruction may be effected and yield
fruit, let them declare the same in holy life and virtuous conversation: let
them so order and govern themselves, that their children seeing the same, as
it were in a glass, may be restrained from dishonest speech, and wicked deeds;
let them do as guides that show the right way over foords and rivers, by going
before those whom they lead: that their children (following the steps and
examples of their parents) may conform themselves to their virtues; and so
with them, and by them, be led to salvation and life cuerlasting.

For this cause Moses gave commandment unto Deuteronomy. 6. 5. 6. 7. and 31. 13.
the Jews, that the Law might be kept in their families, that they might
prosper in all that they went about. When Obed-Edom had received the Ark of God into his house, which signified true religion, the Lord blessed him and all
his household. When the widow of Zarephtah, 1. King. 17. 10. etc.
in the days of Eliah, and the other widow of Israel in the days of Elisha,
had received the 2. King. 4. 1. etc.
Prophets of God into their houses, who is ignorant how mightily and mercifully
the Lord provided for them? When our Savior Christ had Ioh. 4. 53.
restored the Rulers son to his health, the Ruler believed and all his
family. After Zachaus Luke 19. 9.
had received Christ into his house and was converted, salvation came to the
same household.

To be short, when Cornelius the Centurion embraced the Gospel, his family
also believed and Act. 10. 44.
were baptized, and the holy Ghost fell upon them all which heard the
preaching. And how well that house was ordered, where Timothy 2. Tim. 1. 5.
and 3. 15.
was brought up, his knowledge in the Scriptures from a child can witness.

And this is also a point worthy to be remembered, that the Lord by his Prophet
Ezechiel, calls the children of the Israelites which they had begotten ( his
children,) because they were partakers of the Promises, and signed with the
seal of the Covenant: and the Prophet calls Ezech 16. 20. 21. Psalm. 127. 3.
them, The inheritance of the Lord.

Such parents therefore as be Christians must know, that their children are
also the children of God, and partakers of those blessings that are promised to
them in Christ Jesus their Savior: See more of this point in the use and
necessity of catechizing.
and therefore they shall do great injury to God himself whose children they
are, if they shall not see them carefully brought up in his fear: and much
more, if they, as before time many have done, bequeath them, and in a manner,
consecrate and sacrifice them to the service of men, by thrusting the^ into
Abbeyes, Munkeries, Fryeries, Nunneries, and Seminaries, there to be brought
up, and remain in perpetual bondage of ignorance, in (...) and idolatry.

The second point is, that fathers and mothers The second point.
do nourish and train up their children in shamefastness, hatred of vice, and
love of all virtue.

They be charged by the fifth Commandment, to feed, to nourish, and to bring
up their children, to teach them the principles and seed of Christian
religion, to see they learn the Catechism, Deuteronomy. 6. 10. Exed. 12. 26. and 13.
14.
to teach them to praise God before and after meals: as also to teach them by
little and little, and by often repetitions, to understand The proper duty of
good parents to their children, is to (...) them soberly, to keep them vender
obedience, and to teach them good manners.
wherefore the Sacraments were instituted: to teach them manners how to behave
themselves decently in their going, in their speaking, and gesture of their
bodies: how to order themselves reverently in the Church, how abroad in all
places, and toward all men in all honest companies; and so to begin some
conscience in them. For it were better for children to be unborn then untaught.

Now contrary to this, is, when parents suffer their children to have their
will from the beginning: when they discourage and daunt them by severity, and
by being too hasty with them, when they let the common ignorance of the word to
be rooted in them, and have no care to frame them to learn truth and
godliness; and so to prepare them to be apt to receive profit from the
public ministry.

It is therefore meet for all fathers and mothers, if they will have joy of
their children, that then they correct them when they do amiss, Prou. 23. 13.
and 19. 18. and 19. 15. 17. and 22. 15. and 13. 24.
and keep them in shamefastness, hatred of vice, and love of all virtue,
according as the Wiseman in sundry places.

For as the common Proverb is, birch breaks no bones; neither does moderate
correction bring danger of death: but oftentimes it bridleth and keeps back
the child, that otherwise would run headlong into hell, and so is a mean to
save his soul.

For the fountain of all virtue, and chief of all man's felicity, is good
instruction, and right bringing it. And contrariwise, children evil brought
up, bring shame and great heart-break to their parents.

As old Elie was corrected himself, for not 1. Sam. 2. 12. and 3. 12. 13. 14.
1. Kin. 1. 5. 6.
correcting his sons; which is a notable example, necessary for all parents
to imprint in their hearts: that they may see their children well taught and
corrected, lest they procure the wrath of God to fall upon the^, as it did upon
this Elie, who honored his children above the Lord, and therefore the Lord cut
him and them off.

For the comfort he had of his sons was this: the Arc (the witness of the
Lords presence) was lost, thirty thousand of the people slain, his two sons,
Hophni and Phineas killed; himself, when news thereof came unto him, for
sorrow fell backward and brake his neck: upon this his daughter in law fell in
travel, and in travel dyed; the remnant of his house were glad to crave and
beg for a small piece of silver and a morsel of bread.

Also, the two and forty children that mocked Elisha the Lords Prophet, saying:
Come up thou 2. Kin. 2. 23. 24
Bald-head: were rent in pieces with bears. Thus we see, that children
untaught and vnchastized, bring shame and confusion to their parents.

Let them therefore always remember this, that they provide, and bestow
diligent labor, How children should be brought up. Hold thy children in awe,
and they shall have thee in reverence.
that their children be forthwith instructed in virtue and godliness, whilst
their wits are yet void from cares and vices, and whilst their age is tender
and tractable, and their minds flexible, and ready to every thing: for then
they will keep fast good lessons and virtuous precepts (if they be taught
them.) For this is certain, that we remember nothing so well when we be old,
as those things we learn in young years.

It shall be convenient and profitable therefore, to handle the wax straight
way while it is moist: to season those earthen vessels with very good liquor,
whilst they are new: to die, and litte the wool, while it is fair and white,
and not defiled with any spots. The Emmets or Pismires Prou. 30. 25. and 6. 0 7.
are not taught to gather into their holes or hillockes in Summer, whereby they
should live in winter. Bees learn not to make their cells, to gather juice,
and to make honey; but all these things be done by instinction of nature. So
every living thing, the less meet it is to learning, so much the more it has
of native prudence: but man neither can eat, nor go, nor speak, except he be
taught. Then if fertile fields for want of tillage wax barren; if trees being
neglected, either bring forth no fruit, or else the same unsavory, without
diligence or grafting and pruning; if dogs be unmeet to hunt, the horse and
oxen unapt to the plough, except man's diligence be put thereto? how vile then
and unprofitable creatures would children become, except diligently and in due
time they should be fashioned by good bringing up? What a shame is this for any
man, to take great care to have his dog well taught, his horse well broken, his
land well husbanded, his house goodly trimmed and richly furnished, and yet to
have his child shamefully rude in manners, and altogether void of all
garnishing and instruction of virtue and godliness? What a great folly and
madness is this, for a father to take great care and thought how to get money
and possessions, and to have no regard of his child, for whom the same is
gotten? This is no less shame to hear, then if a man taking thought for the
shoe, would set naught by the foot: or with great care and study would
provide that there should be no fault in the childs garments, not regarding
the health of his body. This is (as the common saying is) to be penny wise and
pound foolish: to save a stick, and burn a house: to save a joint and lose
the body. But oh vain man, have thou more care and desire to leave thy son
fair buildings, and full of lands, then for to instruct him in the way of
godliness, and so leave him a virtuous consceince? Have thou rather a desire
to hoord up treasure for him, with Mat. 6. 19.
rust and moth to be consumed, then to teach him the knowledge of God, which
will not canker but last for aye? Most parents (a pitiful thing to remember)
be loving to the bodies of their children, but their souls they care not for:
they desire their welfare in this world, but they pass not what they shall
suffer in the world to come. Yea fathers provide lands, rents, revenues, great
annuities, fees and offices for their children here: but alas, few provide or
be careful to have them brought up in virtue, and the fear of God. For the
loss of their lives and bodies, they will sore bewail and much Iament: but
the health and salvation of their souls they make no reckoning of. If they see
them poor and sick, they sorrow and sigh; but though they see them sin, and
greatly displease God, they are nothing grieved. It behooves that parents do
carefully observe, unto what vices their children are most inclined, and so by
good means admonish and draw them from their sin. As parents be careful to
provide temporal things for their childrens bodies, which are transitory: so
much more careful ought they to be to provide spiritual things for their
souls. And as they be diligent to keep the bodies of their children from fire
and water when they be young: so much more they ought to take care, that their
souls be not poisoned with vices, and false and erroneous doctrine, when they
come to years of discretion: and this is the most acceptable service that they
can do to God. Children are called the fruit of their parents. Therefore, as
sal. 127. 3. lat. 12. 33.
a good tree is known by bringing forth good fruit: so parents should show
their goodness in the good education of their children, which are their fruit.

To teach a child in the trade of his way, as Solomon commands, Prou. 22. 6.
is, not only to instruct him unto godliness, but also unto all other humane
duties: wherefore this duty then belongs unto parents, and they are bound to
do it. For who should teach and inform Reasons.
the child, but they which have the government and commanding of him? But it
is well known, that parents only have the government and commanding of their
children, or such as they shall procure for their better education, and
therefore this charge and duty lies upon them, and they must look unto it.
Again, this is apparent even by the general law of nature, which has taught
the very brute beasts to bring up their young. And further, this duty is yet
enforced from the opportunity of the thing commanded. For even as a plant will
sooner take nourishment, and thrive better in the soil where it first grew or
sprung up, then in any other ground, because it likes his own soil best: so
children will sooner take instruction and good nourture from their parents,
whom they best like, and from whom they had their first being, then from any
other: and therefore you parents are in fault, if your children be not well
taught. For whatsoever good comes from the parent to the child, is natural
and kindly, no otherwise then the warm milk from the mothers dug: you shall
sooner be heard of your children, then either the sage counsel of the ancient,
or the forcible and moving speech of the learned. Lastly, the rule of justice
does require, that even as the first parent Genesis 5. 3.
Adam, and so all other after him, have been a mean of falling to their
posterity, in the begetting of children in their own image, which according
to the law of creation, should have been borne Gods Image: so now in lieu of
this, all parents should lend their hands to lift them up again, and never
cease until they see in some measure the beauty of the first Image, and the
virtue of the second Adam. This is confirmed by many testimonies of Scripture,
as amongst other these do prove. Deuteronomy. 4. 9. and 11. 18. 19. Ephesians. 6. 4.
Psalm. 78. 5. And because this duty of parents, is many times committed to
Schoolemaisters, to Masters of families, to Dames, to Patrons, and Guardians,
and such like: they must therefore understand, whosoever they be, that they are
bound by the voice of the Almighty, to perform and to do the duty of parents,
to all such as are committed to their charge, as if they were their own
children.

Now, the vices which some parents commit, in not performing these duties
before and after named, and ought of them to be eschued, are these.

First, the ignorance of the parents: as if they be so rude that they be not
able to teach their children, then they greatly offend God in the breach of
this so necessary a duty: and therefore they must indcuour to get so much
nurture and knowledge, as that they may be able to instruct others under them.

The second vice is, the profaneness of many parents, who so they may provide
liuelyhood and necessaries for their children, they care for no more.

The third vice is committed of such poor parents, which make no great choice
with what Masters and Dames they place their children, so they may have meat
and drink enough, and wages thereto competent, and are neither backbeaten nor
belly-beaten, as they say. Alas, such poor children, while they serve for
their bellies, they may lose their souls, because they want godly masters and
dames to give them wholesome instruction, to hold them in by good example, and
to govern them continually in the fear of the Lord. Wherefore here let all
parents learn, that it is their duty to make choice of such masters and
dames for their children, as are godly and religious, wise hearted, such as are
both able and well disposed, to train up youth in all good nurture and Gods
service: and not only this (for the greatest care of all lies upon the
parents) but also they must so often as conveniently they may, repair unto
them, and see how they profit, and hold them up by their good counsel, and be
careful to entreat those which have the government of them, to be good unto
them, in this chief point above the rest. For (as Solomon says:) Life and
Prou. 18. 21.
death is in the power of the tongue: so we may well say, life and death is in
the education of our children. If they be well brought up, it shall be life
unto them: but if it be otherwise, they are trained up to everlasting death.

4. The fourth vice is, the fault of many masters and dames, who make no
further reckoning of their servants, then they do of their bruit beasts. For so
long as their work and business be well done by them, they care for no more,
and they will teach them no further then may serve for their own turn and
benefit: that is, to be a profitable servant unto them. Such masters make
their servants drudges to the world and the devil: and the life of such youth
dies while it shoots up. All these sin and trespass against the will and
word of God, because they are contrary to good nurture and godly instruction.
Parents must be very careful that their children may learn some occupation,
or profession of life: and this is either mechanical, which we call handicraft:
or liberal, which is the learning of schools: and the end of this is, either
to get their living honestly, and in Gods ordinance, or else, if they want no
maintenance, to apply their profession and trade to the benefit of the
Commonwealth. No child of what birth or stock soever he be, ought to want
this instruction and bringing up. If thou say, my child has no need of any
trade: yet the Commonwealth and Gods Church has need of him: for no man is
borne for himself, but his friends will require one part, his kindred another,
and his country the third. And if handicrafts like thee not, thou have the
liberal Sciences, of which no man ever was yet ashamed, but many have made
them their crown of glory. Saul was anointed King, while he was seeking 1.
Sam. 9. 2. etc. and. 16.
his fathers Asses: and David was taken from the sheepefold, to feed with his
wisdom, 11. Psalm. 78. 70. 71.
and govern with prudence, that honorable people the children of Israel. And
again, we read that those two famous Prophets, 1. Kin. 19. 19. Amos 1. 2.
Elisha and Amos, the one was called from the plough, and the other from
keeping of beasts: which examples do plainly teach us, that the great and
reverent God despises no honest trade of life, be it never so mean, but
crowns it with his blessing, to draw all good minds to his holy ordinance.
But now adays, such is the pride of our hearts (a thing to be lamented through
all our land) that many gentlemen's children may not be brought up in any trade.
Oh it is too base and beggarly for them: they must live of their lands, they
must maintain their gentry: a small learning will serve their turn: but in
the mean while this ordinance of God is neglected, what misery from hence
ensues? Who are the wasters of patrimonies? Who are the robbers and rouers in
the Commonwealth? Who are the deflowrers of maidens? Who are the defilers of
(...)? Who are the corrupters of youth? and to speak in one word, who are the
seedes-men of all mischief in our country, but these children of Gentlemen,
who have not been taught and trained up in learning, or some occupation, while
they were young? For even as a weed, if it grow in a rank soil, will wax out
of measure noisome: so these children coming of honorable and worshipful
parents, brought up in ease, and pampered with the delights of gentry, they
wax immeasurably vicious, and who may keep them under? neither laws, nor
Magistrates, not any other good mean.

First, parents must teach their children to use Good manners in speech.
fair speech, not only toward themselves, but also toward others, and to
call their betters by a reverent and honorable name: 1. Sam. 25. 24. Mark 10.
17. Prou. 16. 24.

Secondly, to speak modestly and humbly of themselves: and this point of good
manners they may learn of that wise matron Abigail, in 1. Sam. 25. 41. where
we read, that when she was sent for of David to be his wife, she first bowed
her self to the servants, and then made this lowly answer to him that brought
the message: Behold, let thine handmaid be servant to wash the feet of the
servants of my Lord.

Thirdly, to admonish them lovingly to salute their friends and acquaintance,
and generally all others whom they take to be Christians and brethren: which
consists in praying well to others, wishing health and prosperity unto them,
Luke 1. 28. 40. 1. King. 1. 17.

Fourthly, to put them in mind to acknowledge a benefit where they have
received it, with giving of thanks.

Fifthly, to teach them to confess an offense where it is committed, with
humble craving of pardon. An example hereof they may have in that virtuous and
fair spoken matron Abigail, as they may read in 1. Sam. 25. 23. etc. Oh that
men and children saw what great dangers they draw upon them by the neglect of
this duty, and might prevent it: and also what gracious blessings they might
procure, both to themselves and others by means of it, as this virtuous
Abigail kept David from shedding of innocent blood, saved her own life with
the lives of her family; and in the end was received to be a Princes wife, for
the wise carriage of her self in this matter.

Again, parents must teach their children good manners, and civil behavior,
to rise up to their betters, to uncover the head, to make obeisance, to be
courteous toward their equals, to be gentle and lovely to their inferiors, and
loving and kind to all: this is no less needful for youth, then their meat
and their drink.

Also to admonish them, to give their elders and betters leave to speak before
them: Job 32. 45. That they keep silence while their betters are in place,
until they be spoken unto, and then they must make answer in few words,
without unnecessary circumstances, and directly unto the matter. And they may
not be loud, babbling, or hot in speech, but cold and mild: Proverbs 17.
Warn them that they do not interrupt or trouble others whiles they are in
speaking: Prou. 19. 20. Wherefore if children will keep the bounds of good
manners, they must not be streperous or troublesome in talk, but they must
observe and take their due time and course: And if there be any thing spoken,
unto which they would willingly make answer, they must either courteously crave
leave of him that speaks, or else they must carry it in remembrance until
their turn comes to speak, which is the better of the twain. And further,
they must give an intercourse of speech unto others, and suffer others to
speak by them: for there is a time to keep silence, and so to hear others
speaking: for he that will have all the talk, passes the bounds of good
manners.

Moreover, parents ought to teach their children how to frame their gestures to
a reverent Good manners in gesture.
and dutiful behavior toward others: which consists in these points.

1. The first is, to meet those that are coming toward them. And of this
they have an example in holy Abraham: Genes. 18. 2. where it is said; And he
lifted up his eyes and looked, and lo, three men stood by him, and when he saw
them, he ran to meet them from the tent door. Again, another example they
may have in king Solomon, sitting upon his regal Throne: 1. King. 2. 19.
Bethsheba therefore went to King Solomon, to speak unto him for Adoniah; and
the King rose to meet her.

2. The second is, to rise up to elders and betters, when they pass by them.
And this is taught, Leuiticus 19. 23. Thou shall rise up before the hoar-head,
and houour the person of the old man, and dread thy God; I am the Lord. But
here we must warn you of a great abuse, which (for the most part) is committed
in all Churches; and which tends to the high dishonor of God: which is this,
that neither you your selves, neither your children, nor servants, do know the
time of your duties, but you will then rise up to men, when both you and they,
should kneel down to God: as if one that is more honorable among you, shall
come into the Church, while you are upon your knees in prayer unto God,
presently you start up, and leave God, to reverence men. Is this religion? Is
this devotion becoming Gods house? Is not this all one, as if a man should
say, Stay God, here comes in my father, my master, my worshipful neighbor,
and my good friend: to whom I am much beholden; I must do my duty unto him, I
must rise up till he be past, and then I will come to thee again.

What is this, but to prefer men before God? This doing plainly shows,
that such are lovers of men more then of God: and that such as take this duty
and reverence upon them, are robbers of Gods honor, and they shall answer him
for it.

Is there no time to show our duty toward men, but even then when we are about
Gods service? Why (know you) when man stands before God, how honorable
soever he be, he is but dung and filth, and not to be regarded, in comparison
of him. And let parents learn this wisdom, that while they are taught their
duties toward men, it is not to rob God of his worship; but there is an
appointed time to every duty and purpose: as Ecclesiastes in his third
Chapter. well admonishes; To all things there is an appointed time, and a time
to every purpose (...). 3. 1.
under heaven. It is recorded of Levy, to his eternal praise: Deuteronomy. 33. 9.
that in Gods cause he said of his father and mother; I see him not, neither
knew he his brethren, nor his own children: Even so beloved, our eyes and our
minds, and devotions, should be so fixed and intent upon God when we are in his
service, that we should not see nor regard any man in that while.

And again, we read in the second Chapter of the Gospel after Saint John, of
our Savior himself, who though he was the most dutiful child that ever was
borne of woman, yet when he was about his fathers business, he said unto his
mother: Woman, what have I to do with thee? Ioh. 2. 4.
Which examples will teach us, that when we are about Gods service, all other
duties must sleep, and be laid apart.

3. The third duty of good manners to be observed in their gesture, is to
stand while their betters are sitting in place. Example of this we have in holy
Abraham, of his entertaining of the three strangers; as it is written, Geneses
18. 8. And he took butter and milk, and the calfe which he had prepared, and
set before them, and stood by himself under the tree, and they did eat. Well
may Abraham be called the father of the faithful, for giving his children so
good example.

4. The fourth duty is, to bend the knee, in token of humility and
subjection: example of this, 1. King. 2. 19.

5. The fifth thing is, that they give the chief place to their betters, and to
offer the same to others in courtesy, 1. King. 2. 19. Luke 14. 8. 9. 10. Prou.
15. 33. and 16. 18.

6. Their last duty is, to uncover their head. And though we find no example
for this in holy Scripture, as being not used in those former times: yet seeing
the thing is civil and comely, and one of the special courtesies of our
days, we will confirm it also with the authority of Gods word, Philippians
4. 1. Whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things are of good report, those
things do. And again, 1. Corin. 14. 40. Let all things be done decently, and
according to order. Now this kind of civility, is both decent and according to
order, as also honest, and of good report: and therefore warranted and
commended by Gods word, and so worthy to be followed.

Therefore, if our children be not thus trained up in nurture while they be
young, when they be old they shall be found so headstrong, that they will not
be governed, but this consequent must needs follow, that all order shall be
taken away, and then confusion must needs ensue.

For if nurture be neglected, then our elders and governors shall not be
reverenced: if they be not reverenced, they will not be regarded: if they be
not regarded, they will not be obeyed: and if they be not obeyed, then steps in
rebellion, and every one will do what he lists.

These vices and great abuses are to be reformed, and with speed amended; not
only of many parents and masters themselves, but also they must labor with
all diligence, that they may be redressed and amended in their children and
servants. First, the gross ignorance in the grounds of Christian religion,
which yet remains in any parents, masters, and their families, who give
themselves to sleep in the Church, to talk one with another, to turn over
their books there, and using of their own private devotions or prayers in the
time of public preaching and prayer: all which no doubt, are grievous sins
and transgressions: and besides many absent themselves from holy exercises, and
especially upon the Lords day: then lying in their beds, haunting of alehouses
and tauernes, ryding and going abroad about their worldly affairs, for
pleasure and profit, being also weary whilst they be present at prayers and
preaching, seldom do they prevent or come before prayers: Nay, many come in
the midst thereof, to the great disturbance of the same, and others that are
there: and some again, before the Sermons are ended: other some after the
prayers made, and before the singing of the Psalms, and the usual blessing to
be pronounced, depart thence, whereof they, as well as those that tarry,
should be partakers, posting also out of the Church as it were from a play, or
maygame; as though they supposed that no more reverence should be showed there,
then in other places: or that some part of divine Service belonged unto them
and not unto other some: whereas in very truth, every one ought to be alike
partakers of the whole.

And how should we look for any goodness from God, where this, that is the
seed of all sin, and the nurse of all abominations, reigns and swayeth so
much?

Let such as are fathers and mothers, and have children, know in what sort they
must be careful for them. Their children are the good blessings of God, they
be members of the body of Christ, and the sons of God. The kingdom Mat. 18.
10.
of heaven belongs to them. God has appointed his Angels to guide and lead
them, and to shield them from evil; and their Angels be in the presence of
God, and do behold the face of their Father which is in heaven. They be fresh
plants of the Church. Who knows what necessary instruments they may be in the
house of God? It is not enough to seed them, to cloth them, and to nourish
their bodies with necessary sustenance.

For the heathen do this, which know not God, and the savage and brute beasts,
and the birds, which have no understanding, they breed up their young ones, and
are tender and painful to provide for them. The Ass though she be dull, the
Bear and Lion, though they be wild and cruel, yet seek they far and near
to get where with to help their young. Therefore, if there be any, or can be
any, which does forsake and leave his own, he is more beastly then the foolish
Ass, and more unnatural then most cruel Bears, and Lions, and Tigers.

But in this behalf, men are for the most part ouer-carefull. For this cause
many build their houses with blood, and seek possessions by iniquity: they
join house to house, and field to Esaias. 5. 8.
field, and will dwell alone upon the earth: they oppress the poor and
needy, and do wrong to the widow and the fatherless; they make money their
idol, and spoil one another: and all to provide for their children.

This is the cover and cloak for all their mischiefs; they may not leave
their children unprovided for. Unhappy are such fathers, which in this sort
care for their children, by the ruin and spoil of the needy and innocent,
and so break the Commandments of God; because their portion shall be with the
wicked, in the lake that burns with fire and brimstone. And unhappy are
their children, because they are partakers of their fathers wickedness; and
therefore shall also be partakers of punishment with them.

The Prophet David says: I have seen the wicked strong, and spreading
himself like a green Psalm. 37. 35. 30.
Bay Tree: yet he passed away, and lo he was gone; and I sought him, but he
could not be found. His root was deep, his stock strong, his branches
broad, he spread over and shadowed the whole country, yet he passed away; he
departed, his sons died, his house soon decayed, and his name was in little
time quite forgotten.

Oh, how much better then is it, to furnish the minds of our children, and to
instruct them in godliness, to teach them to know God, to lead their life
vettuously, and to rebuke them, and chastise them for ill doing?

The beginning of wisdom is the fear of God. Let them then learn, what that
good and Psalm. 111. 10. Prou. 9. 10.
acceptable will of God is. Show them the way in which they should walk; that
they go neither to the right hand nor to the left. The word Psalm. 19. 7. 8. and
119. 105.
of God is pure, and gives understanding to the simple: it is a light to their
foote-steps; it teaches those that are young to amend their ways. For children
by nature are darkness, and cannot see, except they be enlightened with Gods
word.

And therefore Solomon says: Catechize a child in his youth, and he will
remember it when he is old. This is a right blessing which fathers and Prou.
22. 6.
mothers give to their children, when they cause God to bless them too.

When Christ came into Jerusalem, the young children received him: They cried,
Osanna to the Mat. 21. 15. 16.
son of David, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord. Christ
gives witness of them: By the mouths of babes and sucklings, have thou set
Psalm. 82.
forth thy praise. The words of the little and simple children, were able to
confound the wisdom of the Pharisees. Thus were they taught from their cradle,
so careful were their godly parents over them.

Contrariwise, they cannot have any wisdom that despise the way of the Lord.
They become blind and wicked, and abominable in all their ways. They have no
sense, nor feeling of the will of God. They cannot know light from darkness,
nor God from Belial. Such were the children that derided Elisha, as also
Absolon; 2 King. 2. 13.
whose heart Satan had so possessed with the spirit of pride and ambition,
that he went about 2. Sam. 16. 15. etc.
to despose his father from his kingdom. So also his brother (...) usurped the
kingdom 1. King. 1. 5.
of his father David.

Another care which a father ought to have of his children is, to train them
up in the study of virtue, and of a godly life. Blessed are the pure in Mat. 5.
8.
heart, for they shall see God. They which keep not this way, are the children
of wrath Herein stands the whole profession of a Christian life. For God has
not called us to uncleanness, but unto holiness. 1. These. 4. 7.
This is the will of God, and this is out promise made unto him, that we serve
him in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life, that we increase
in virtue, and grow from grace Luke 1.74.75.
to grace.

A wise and loving father which sends his son on a dangerous journey,
either by sea or land, first instructs him with advise, and tells him in
what sort he shall avoid perils.

Take heed, (says he) the way is dangerous which thou must pass. The sea is
terrible, the waves rise up as high as heaven, and by and by. thou shall see a
pit as low as hell. The sands may swallow thee, the rocks may destroy thee.
Thou shall pass by huge mountains, and through a wilderness, where thieves
will assault thee. Thy heart will quake Thou shaltcrie for succor, and find no
man to help thee. In these and these places has many a good man's child been
cast away. Oh take (...) (my son,) thou art the (...) and comfort of mine
age: if ought come to thee otherwise then well, I shall soon end my days in
sorrow.

If a father be thus careful that his child should escape worldly dangers, he
must also be careful of spiritual dangers, in which whosoever is lost, is
lost for ever. Therefore thus, or to this effect, may he say to him: Oh my
son, understand what God has done for thy sake. Take heed to thy self. The
world is all ouer-strewed with snares. The devil runs and seeks 1. Pet.
5. 8.
whom he may devour. Give not ground to him, but resist him, and he will fly
from thee. I am. 4. 7. Pro. 18. 10.
Be strong in faith. The Name of the Lord is a strong tower of defense. Call
upon him in the day of thy trouble, and he will deliver thee. He Psalm. 50. 15.
will give thee of his spirit. Take heed my son, and be not deceived, let no
wilfulness cast thee away. If sinners entice thee, be not a companion with
them in wickedness. Fashion not thy self Prou. 1. 10. 11 Romans 12. 2.
to the likeness of this world: for the world passes away, and the lust
thereof. He that loves 1. Ioh 215.
this world, the love of God is not in him. Be not like unto them that perish.
Thou wast conceived Psalm. 51. 5. Ephesians. 2. 3. Col. 1. 12. 13.
and borne in sin. Thou art by nature the child of wrath: but God made thee
meet to be partaker of the inheritance of the Saints in light, and has
delivered thee from the power of darkness: and has translated thee into the
kingdom of his dear son: Receive not this grace in vain; but cast away the
works 2. Cor. 6. 1. Romans 13. 12.
of darkness, and put on the armor of light. Be renewed in thy heart, and in
thy spirit, that it may appear I have been careful for thee. Thus a careful
father seeks to train up his son, and to nurture him.

Now there be some necessaire means and helps, whereby godly parents may the
more effectually and virtuously bring up their children, according to the
directions before spoken of, as these:

First, not to suffer their children and youth to have their own will: For
Solomon says, Prou. 11. 20. They that are of afroward heart, are abominable
unto the Lord. And again, in the 29. Chap. verse 15. A child set at liberty,
makes his mother ashamed. But what will some be ready to answer in this case?
Oh he may be broken of that time enough afterward. But what says the wiseman,
Ecclesiastic. 25. 27. Give no passage to the waters, no not a little. The heart
of child is as the violent waters. And as those which have experience in
keeping and repairing the sea banks, can easily tell us, that if the raging
waves should be suffered to break over but one tide, they should hardly in
many days recover it again: so if thou suffer thy child's affections to
have the full swinge and course, yea but a small season, thou shall hardly or
never again win this breach.

2. The second means is, moderation in diet; not to pamper children with too
much meat, or that which is delicate, but to give them that which is wholesome
and sufficient, and no more. For excess breeds disease, both in body and
mind, makes them gluttons and drunkards, consumers of patrimony, and this
vice draws a thousand more with it: and even as the fattest soil brings
forth the rankest weeds, so pampered children brought up without due government
and discipline, thrust forth the greatest and most ouergrowne vices.

3. The third help is, not to cloth them with costly apparel, or to attire
them with new fashions. For this again is contrary to the nature of pains
and labor, and stirs up pride. For even as soft flax is soon on fire: so
youthful nature will soon be inflamed with this vice, as lamentable
experience too much teaches at this day. For, from whence comes this
disguised and monstrous apparel, but from wanton and dissolute education of
youth? This is the special sin of England, and if any thing be the overthrow
of it (which God for his mercy turn away) it will be this: the land is too
heavy of this sin. For the pride of all nations, and the follies of all
countries are upon us, how should we long bear them? How art thou fallen from
heaven, o Lucifer, son of the Esaias. 14. 12. Zoph. 1. 8.
morning? And it shall be in the day of the Lords sacrifice, that I will visit
the Princes, and the Kings children, and all such as are clothed with strange
apparel.

4. The fourth help is reprehension, or chiding. And this is taught, Prou. 19.
15. The rod, and correction give wisdom. Where by the rod, is understood
chastisement: and by correction, is understood, chiding or reprehension. The
want of this help was the utter spoil and undoing of Adonyah, as may be
seen, 1. King. 1. and 2. Chapters. And here we cannot but justly find fault
with most parents, who though they be somewhat careful for their children
while they be tender: yet when they be come to some years of discretion, as to
fifteen or sixteen, which time is most fit for reprehension, because then by
all reason it should soonest enter; and which time again is most dangerous, be
cause then our affections are most strong in us, oh then they be grown to men's
and women's eftate, they may not be reprehended, they may not be disgraced. But
know thou, oh wise parent, that so long as thou have a child, so long thou art
a parent: and so long as thou art a father, so long thou must carry a fatherly
authority and power over him.

5. The fifth help, is chastisement, and it may well be called a help, because
where reprehension will not serve, that must help; and this must be used in
order and method: as the skillful Physician will not give his strong and bitter
pill before his preparatiue, lest the working of it should be hindered by the
stubburne and indurate obstructions: so the wise parent in curing his sons
vices, must not strike before he has reprehended or preadmonished: lest either
he be too much caft down and discouraged, or wax obstinate. This kind of
physic, as it is more strong then the former, so it has a more forcible and
excellent working. For great is the godliness in that severity by which the
power of sinning is taken away. And again, Solomon in the 22. of the
Proverbs, verse 15. says more worthily: Foolishness is bound in the heart of
a child, but the rod of correction shall drive it away. And again in the 13.
Chapter, verse 24. He which spares the rod, hates his son, that is, he is
an enemy unto him. Wherefore know thou this, o thou father, that when thou
feast thy son dangerously sick with the disease of sin, and do not use
this help or remedy, which God in his holy word has prescribed unto thee,
thou art accessarie to thy child's death, as an enemy, and his blood shall be
required at thy hands: because where thou might have saved him, thou have
wilfully cast him away. For Gods love (good parents) look to your children.

Oh that parents had less carnal affection, and more wisdom: for every
parent is blind in his own children.

Oh, is it not a pitiful thing, that parents should themselves make graves for
their own children, and bury them quick without all compassion, and think
they do well in it? And is it not a folly above all follies, that while the
parent lays his hand upon his child's mouth, to keep away the cold wind, he
presses it down so hard, that he strangleth him therewith? Thus many a
father and mother in the world, have killed their dear ones by their
inordinate love and cockering of them, and thus many poor infant must still be
murdered, because parents will not be warned.

Parents are bound by the law of nature to love their children: for what a
cruelty were it, not to love them that they have begotten and borne? But yet
wisdom requires, that they some what dissemble and hide their love,
(specially to those children that be of some reasonable discretion) lest they
should take boldness thereupon, to do what they list.

For if we well consider of man's nature, that Genesis 6. 5. and 8. 21. Mat. 15. 19.
it is evil even from his birth, we shall then find the young child which ly
eth in the cradle, to be both way-ward, and full of affections: and though his
body be but small, yet he has a great heart, and is altogether inclined to
evil: and the more he waxes in reason by years, the more he grows proud,
froward, wilful, unruly, and disobedient. If this sparkle be suffered to
increase, it will rage over, and burn down the whole house. For we are
changed and become good, not by birth, but by education.

For like as planting and carfulness has great power in all growing things:
even so has education greater virtue and strength: yea, and better fruit, in
the diligent bringing up of their children.

Therefore parents must be wary and circumspect, that they never smile or
laugh at any words or deeds of their children, done lewdly, unhonestly,
naughtily, wantonly, or shamefully, not to kiss and commend them for so doing.
For children will commonly accustom themselves unto such things, as they shall
see and perceive to be pleasing and delightful to their father and mother.
Therefore they must correct, and sharply reprove their children for saying or
doing ill, and make it known unto them, that they be neither well pleased nor
contented with their so doing, but that it greatly disliketh them. And again
on the other side, let them kiss and make much of them, whenever they shall
see or hear them do any thing that is a sign of goodness.

But such is the fond and too much cockering affection of some parents toward
their children, that there is more need in these days, to teach and admonish
them, not to love them too much, then to persuade them to love them. For David's
darling, was David's traitor.

And this is the manner of God, and his just judgment; that when any father or
mother begins 2. Sam. 15. all, and 18. 35.
(as it were) to set their child, or any thing else in the room of God, and so
love the same above him which gave it, either to take away the child, or the
thing, or else to take away the parents, before they provoke him too much. For
as the Ape does (with too much embracing) well-neare kill her young whelps: so
likewise, some indiscreet parents, through immoderate love, and overmuch
pampering and cherishing, do utterly spoil and mar their children.

Therefore, if parents would have their children live, they must take heed that
they love them not too much: for the giver is displeased, when the gift is more
esteemed then he.

We may see by experience, how that many Ill bringing up, is a cause of marring
many which are of a good towardness and wit.
children of good wit (...) towardness, are marred and spoiled for want of
good education, and so get those vices from their tender years, which all
their life after, do for the most part accompany them.

For when parents do either too much cocker their children, or by their lewd
example allure to naughtiness, or neglect due instruction; what other thing (I
pray you) can come to pass, then which we see in trees, which from the
beginning being neglected, become crooked and unfruitful?

Contrariwise, they that are pruned, erected, ordered, and watered, with the
hand and cunning of the husbandman, are made straight, fertile and fruitful.
So the manner of life, education, and custom, are of great importance to move
to virtue.

What a great folly is it in parents to toil themselves, and be occupied in
getting riches, and to be nothing careful for their children, for whose sake
riches are gotten? Assuredly, there can none more precious and better heritage
be left unto children, then if they be well and virtuously brought up from
their tender age, and be rightly instructed unto virtue from their infancy.
This patrimony remains with them Two things which much hinder good education.
continually, nothing at all subject to the storms and troubles of fortune.
But we see two special causes why some parents do more negligently provide
that their children be instructed, to wit, too much cockering, and niggardship.

In cockering, mothers do more often offend, and specially those that have but
few children.

These do like as if some husbandman should refuse to till his field, because
he has but one only. Who could suffer this man's folly and perverseness of
judgment?

Is it not much more to be tilled, because it is only one?

Yes verily, that so the profit and increase of one, may recompense the want of
many. Even so after the same sort we may judge it to be the duty of mothers,
so much more diligently to bring up their children, by how much they are fewer.

But we see what does let mothers, that they The fewer the children the more
diligently to be cared for, that they be well brought up.
love their children more dearly then that they can suffer them to be an hour
out of their sight: but this is cruel love, so to love their children, that
they should be (as it were) given over of their mothers unto all naughtiness;
of which perverse and cruel love, not a few shall suffer the just punishment,
which with great grief of mind, and with tears shall be compelled to see the
unbridled wantonness and ungraciousness of their children, unto which they
do now (all too late) go about to provide a remedy.

On the other side, niggardship is oftentimes The second cause which (...) good
education.
greater, then that parents will (...) the cost.

Whatsoever is spent upon horse-keepers, or horse-breakers, fools, minstrels,
dogs, hawks, etc: that some think well bestowed: but if they see any thing to
be spent about instructing their children, they think all ill bestowed; and
are much more careful that an horse be well framed to vauting and leaping,
then that their child be well instructed to virtue.

This inconvenience comes to the minds of children, if they be not well
brought up, that they become servile, and lie open to all sin and naughtiness.

For if a man leave his field untilled, he shall find it to have brought forth
fearne and thystles, and such unprofitable weeds: after the same sort, if he
shall leave the wits of his children unlooked unto; and unexercised, he shall
be sure to reap most abundant fruit of wantonness and ungraciousness.

The holy Ghost, speaking in the Scriptures of foolish sons, as that he that
begets such a one gets himself sorrow. and that the father of a fool
has no joy: Prou. 17. 21. he means it not so much of natural fools, or
idiots, and such as are destitute of common reason, (although it is true, that
is a lamentable judgment of God, and a heaviness to the parents of such a
child) as of wicked children, such as either are ignorant in the word, or not
knowing how to order one right step to the kingdom of God: or else having some
knowledge, abuse it, to maintain their carnal lusts and appetite.

For in this case as it would grieve parents to have natural fools to their
children, or such as either in some imperfection of nature, are dismembered, or
deformed, and misfigured in the parts of their body: even so much more should
it grieve them to have such children, as either for want of knowledge and
heavenly wisdom, cannot walk in the fear of God, or abusing the knowledge
given them, prostitute and give themselves to all sin and wickedness.

It is marvelous how greatly parents can bewail the want of one natural
gift, proceeding of some imperfection, and how easily they can pass over
without any grief, the want of all spiriruall graces, springing from corrupt
education.

In like manner it is strange, that men can take the matter so heavily, when
their children break into such offenses, as either have open shame or civil
punishments following them: and yet can make no bones, but pass over such
sins as are against the majesty of God, accompanied with everlasting
confusion, and unspeakable torments.

Wherein, what does the most part of men bewray, but their great hypocrisy, in
that neither their joy, nor their grief is sound to their children; and that
they love themselves more in their children, then either their salvation or the
glory of God: the tender love and care whereof (no doubt) did increase the
sorrow of David, for the death of his son Absolon; who was not 2. Sam. 18. 33.
so much grieved for the loss of a son, as for that untimely end of his
son, to whom the time of repentance, for his salvation and the glory of God,
was denied, which happily, if he had lived, his father David might have rejoiced
in.

Let parents therefore learn to correct their affections to their children,
and be grieved for ignorance, impiety, and sins; whereof either their
carnal copulation, the not lamenting of their natural corruption, the want of
prayer, and holy seed, or profane education, armed with the wrath of God, may
be a most just occasion.

Can parents hope for a holy posterity? or do they marvel if the Lord crosie
them in the children of their bodies, when they make as bold and brutish an
entrance into that holy ordinance of the Lord, as is the meeting of the
neighing horse with his mate? when being ioyued in that honorable estate of
matrimony, either as meet natural men, without all knowledge of God, they
beget their children: or as too carnal men, without the fear and reverence of
the Lord, neither bewailing their corruptions which they received of their
ancestry, nor praying against their infirmities, which may descend to their
posterity, they abuse the marriage bed.

Lastly, when having received the fruit of the womb, they have no care by
good and virtuous bringing up, to offer it to the Lord, that their child by
carnal generation, may be the child of God by spiritual regeneration.

Surely no: and yet men looking up to God his providence and secret counsel,
without all bethinking themselves of their corrupt generation, from which their
children are descended, without all looking back into their wicked and godless
bringing of them up, will fret against their sins, fume against their
children: yea, often they will correct them, and that to serve their own
corruptions, not so much grieved for that they have sinned against God, as that
they have offended them.

Christians therefore must know, that when men and women, raging with boiling
lust, meet together as brute beasts, having no other respect then to satisfy
their own carnal concupiscence, when they make no conscience to sanctify the
marriage bed with prayer, when they have no care to increase the Church of
Christ, and the number of the elect, it is the just judgment of God, to send
them either monsters, or natural fools, or else such as having good gifts of
the mind, and well proportioned bodies, are most wicked, graceless, and
profane persons.

Again on the contrary, we shall find in the word of God, that noble and
notable men commended unto us for rare examples of virtue and godliness, were
children asked and obtained of God by prayer.

Our first parents Adam and Eve, being humbled Genesis 4. 2. 25.
after the birth of their wicked son Caine, obtained a righteous Abel: of
whom, when by his bloody brother they were bereft, they received that holy man
Seth.

Abraham, be getting in the flesh, had a cursed son Ismael, but waiting by
faith for the accomplishment of God his covenant, he obtained Genesis 21. 2.
a blessed Isaac.

Jacob not content with one wife, according Genesis 30. 24.
to the ordinance of God, was punished in his children: yet afterward being
humbled, he received faithful Joseph.

Elkanah and Hannah, praying and beinst cast 1. Sam. 2. 9.
down, had a Samuel that did minister before the Lord.

David and Bethsheba lamenting their sins, obtained 2. Sam. 22. 24.
Solomon, a man of excellent wisdom.

Zacharias and Elizabeth fearing the Lord, received Luke 1. 13.
John the Baptist, a forerunner of Christ.

Look what sins parents have received naturally, without God his great
blessing, without prayer and humbling themselves, they shall convey them to
their posterity. And although the Lord grants sometimes civil gifts unto
the children of natural and carnal men: yet for the most part they receive
their natural sin.

But if the children of God, by regeneration do see into themselves, and lament
their sins of generation, praying that their natural corruptions may be
prevented in their posterities; they shall see the great mercies of God, in
some measure, freeing their children from the same.

Now when thou shall see such sins to be in thy children, enter into thine
own heart, examine thy self whether they are not come from thee? Consider how
justly the hand of God may be upon thee: and when thou would be angry with
thy child, have an holy anger with thy self, and use this and such like
meditation with thine own soul; Lord shall I thus punish mine own sin, and
that in mine own child? shall I thus persecute the corruptions of my
ancestors? Nay, I see (o Lord) and prove that thou art displeased with me, for
the too carnal conception of my child: I lay then in some sin, I asked it
not of thee by prayer: be merciful unto me (o Lord) and in thy good time show
some pity upon my child.

Thus thinking, thou go about to correct nature in thy child, which he
could not help, arming thy self with prayer, repenting with Jacob, thou shall
be so affected, as desirous to draw thy child out of sin, yet with the mildest
means and least rigor.

And one thing is most wonderful; that some will teach their children to
speak corruptly, and do wickedly whilst they are young, and yet beat them
for it when they are old.

Again, some will imbolden their little ones to practice iniquity toward
others, which when by the just judgment of God, they afterward exercise
toward the parents themselves, they are corrected for it. And yet reason with
these and such like men, for the evil education of their children, and they
will answer: Do not we as much as is of us required? we send our children to
the Church, to be instructed of the Pastor: and to the school to be taught of
the master: if they learn, it will be the better for them: if not, they have
the more to answer for: what can we do more? But remember, o man: consider o
woman, whosoever thus speaks, that for sins sake, and the want of prayer,
there may be a plague upon the Pastors pains, and a curse upon the teachers
travel.

If parents therefore would have their children blessed at the Church, and at
the school, Children profit more by good example in one month, then by
instruction in a whole year.
let them beware they give their children no corrupt example at home, by any
carelessness, profaneness, or ungodliness: for when examples are set before
childrens eyes, they are easily led away to that which is evil: otherwise,
parents will do them more harm at home, then both Pastor and schoole-maister
can do good abroad. For the corrupt example of the one, fights with the good
doctrine of the other: which is so much the more dangerous, because that
corrupt walking is armed with nature, and therefore more forcibly inclines the
affections of children to that side.

And further, experience teaches us, that children like or mislike more by
countenance, gesture and behavior, then by any rule, doctrine, or precept
whatsoever.

Some there be, that will not have their children taught until they be ten or
twelve years old, because (as they say) at that age they have but an apish
imitation.

To whom we answer, that although they cannot then deeply discern, nor
profoundly conceive things: yet how many things before these years, will they
both receive and remember?

And we demand, if children be apish in imitation and following that whilst
they be young, which they will have the habit, quality or property of when
they be old, may they not much better do apishly good whiles they are young,
which they may carefully do when they are old? Besides, let them go so
untaught, and they will grow so headstrong, that they will sooner be broken
then bended: sure it is, that one stripe, or two words, will do more good to a
child in time, then an hundred stripes afterward.

And here let parents be admonished of their indiscreet correction; who do
their children more harm in showing a merry countenance after their
discipline used, then they do good by their chastisement of them whiles they do
correct them.

Neither do we purpose to take away natural affection, and a Christian kind of
compassion in all our censures: for it is our great complaint of the brutish
unmercifulness of many parents here, but we would wish Christians to correct
their indiscreet affections herein by heavenly wisdom.

Neither are we so Stoicall, as to deny a more mild and affable kind of speech
to be lawfully and conveniently used to children, and yet we wish it to be void
of all unseemly lenity, and without all show of foolish, vain, and
unnecessary behavior.

To be brief, how needful household government is toward children, may
appear by the slender thriuing, and small profiting either of religion or
virtue, either in the Church or Commonwealth.

Speak men of discipline never so much, complain they of the want of Church
government never so loud, preach they, teach they never so much abroad, unless
they will begin discipline in reforming their houses, and give religion some
room at home, they shall travel much and profit little.

And surely, if men be careful to reform themselves first, and then their
families: if their charge be greater then their circuites and provinces wherein
the Lord has placed them, it were the best way to move the Lord to bestow
reformation and discipline on his Church among us: and of all means that now
may be hoped for, this seems best: for of particular persons, come families:
of families, towns: of towns, provinces: of provinces, realms: so that
conueying discipline thus from one to another, in time, and that shortly, it
would come into the Church.

Well (we say) let there be never so good laws in Cities, never so pure order
in Churches, if there be no practice at home: if fathers of families use not
doctrine and discipline in their houses, and join their helping hands to
Magistrates and Ministers, they may indeed, but unjustly, as many have done,
complain that their children are corrupted abroad, when they were before, and
are still, corrupted and spoiled at home.

Alas, if parents (to whom the comfort of their children well brought up, is a
precious crown) will not inform and reform their children in the fear of
God, how can hope sustain these men, that others will perform this duty for
them, to whom this charge does far less appertain?

Lastly, let parents remember, that therefore they have disordered and
disobedient children to themselves, because they have been disobedient children
to the Lord, and disordered to their parents when they were young: whereof
because they have not repented, the Lord punishes their sins to others, with
the like sin to themselves.

Will thou know, thou father, how thou may have that blessing, to be the
blessed father of a blessed seed? Will thou know, thou mother, how to avoid
that curse, to be the cursed mother of a cursed seed? Bring thy children within
the compass of the covenant, endeavor to make thy son the son of God, and
thy daughter by nature, the daughter of God by grace: and remember that God on
his part protested to father Abraham, that he was all sufficient for the
accomplishment of his promise, in giving him a blessed seed: and requested
also on father Abraham's part, that he should walk before him, and be upright.

Will thou then have the one part of this covenant, that is, that God should
bless thee in thy seed? then remember also, that thou walk before the Lord,
and be upright.

Will thou have thy children as the blessed seed of Abraham? teach them with
Abraham the judgments of the Lord: pray for them with Abraham, that they may
live in the light of the Lord: be ready to offer them with Abraham, that they
may be an holy sacrifice unto the Lord.

It is thou (o man) (o woman) that may do thy child the greatest good, and
the greatest harm: if thou prayest for them, and repentest for thy self, the
Lord will bless thy care, the Pastors pains, and the teachers travel: but if
thou despisest these duties, the Lord will deny thee these blessings, and the
curse of God will fall upon the child, at home in thy house, abroad in the
Church, and in the school.

And seeing the Lord has promised, that he will be thy God, and bless thy
seed, if thou be faithful; thou may both hope that thou art of the
faithful, if thou have a blessed seed: and fear that thou have not as yet
the blessing of the covenant, when thy seed is accursed.

But had not Jacob wicked children, and David Objection.
ungodly sons? and does not daily experience teach us, that wicked men have
godly children?

Yes; for besides the secret counsel of the Answer.
Lord herein, we must know, that neither the promise of the Lord is so
universal, that every particular child of a faithful man should be within the
Covenant: or if of many there be but one blessed, the promise is performed yea,
which more is, though the faithful man have never a good child, yet, if unto
a thousand generations, there be but one good, the Covenant is not broken.
Noither must we tie the Lord his work so much to man, that a good man may not
have an cuill: son, seeing though the Lord visit not his sins, yet he may
visit the sins of some of his forefathers, to the third and fourth
generation going before.

To the second we say, that an evil father having a good child, though the
Lord show not mercy to that particular man therein, yet he may remember his
promise to some of the forefathers, in the thousand generations going before:
and though that evil man have no cursed child, yet the curse may be
accomplished in the third and fourth generation following.

Wherefore, not speaking of Election or Reprobation, which we leave only to
the Lord, to make good or bad: we exhort parents to the ordinary means to
bring up their children, so as they, either (by some good tokens) may see them
the children of God, as heirs of the covenant, or at least be comforted in
their own consciences.

If their children for some cause unknown, refuse it, yet they may rejoice in
this, that to the uttermost of their ability, they have used all good and godly
means, to bring them up well, and offered them to God.

And if parents have cause to be grieved, when thus traveling in good
education, they cannot see good in their children; how much more cause of
griese may they have, when they have used and bestowed no labor at all, to
bring them up in the fear of the Lord? And yet many will be grieved for the
one, that will not for the other.

Wherefore if we wish to convey God his blessings to our posterities, let us
use the duties thereunto; let us, if we be loath to convey God his judgments to
our children, carefully avoid the means unto it.

And surely, as it is a blessed thing in the hour of death, with Symeon, to
depart in peace; leaving our wives, children, and servants, Zuke 3. 29.
members of Christ, spouses to Christ, children to God, and servants to the
Lord: So in death, no one thing will be more grievous unto a man, then (the
Lord having given him the charge of so many souls, to be furthered to
salvation,) that his own tormented conscience shall press him: How, as much
as he could, he has helped them forward to their damnation: and so (which is
more fearful) he shall have them spewing, and foming out on his face,
continual curses in hell, accusing him for ever to be a murderer of their
souls, and a cutthroat of their salvation.

The end of all this briefly is thus much, that parents having fools, children
not walking either in knowledge or in a good conscience, must make some use of
so just a cause of grief, examining themselves, and accusing their own souls
before the Lord, either for that their meeting was profane, to so holy an
estate, or brutish, because they desired rather a seed like unto themselves in
flesh and blood, then such as might be like Christ, by grace, and new birth;
or, that they begat their offspring as mere natural, or very carnal men: or
because they either profanely neglected all good education, or monstroufly
misliked that in their young children, which they liked in themselves, and
punished in them their own corrupt precepts: or, for that they suffered their
children injuriously to do evil to others, which they could not suffer to do
to themselves: or, untaught them that at home, which was taught abroad: or, in
that they do lie in some sin unrepented of: or else, because they never made
conscience to bring their posterity within the covenant of salvation, but
still loved the flesh of their children, and not their soul.

Let all parents remember, that they are bound by the law of God and nature, as
concerning this bodily life, to make good and honest provision, (according to
their degrees) for the relief and maintenance of their children and family.
And therefore such fathers and mothers, as consume and wast away their money
and substance unthriftily, by dycing, carding, gaming, or by any other indirect
and unlawful means, whereby their children and family should be maintained,
do very unnaturally sin, and break Gods Commandments.

The Wiseman shows parents, when is the best time to sow the seed of virtue
in their children, that it may bring forth the fruit of life, and make them
always ready to die: saying, Eccles. 12. 1. Remember now (says he) thy
Creator, in the days of thy youth. As if he should say; Youth must think on
death betimes, to the end to live to well, and die well.
Be mindful and think on God in thy youth, and do not prolong or defer it
until age. And so all their life shall run in a line; the middle like the
beginning, and the end like the middle: as the Sun sets against the place
where it arose.

One of the principallest. duties that belong to parents toward their
children, is, that they Marriage with Papists, etc. Genesis 23. 24.
be very wary and careful, that their sons and daughters do not match in
marriage with such as are ungodly, wicked, and void of true religion. Which if
they do, they endanger the faith of their children, and so commit a grievous
sin.

For proof whereof, let us consider first what marriage is, and how nigh a
conjunction the Lord has made it. He made the woman of the man's nature; flesh
of his flesh, and bone of his bones: So that we may not imagine, that that God,
which required so near a conjunction in the outward and inferior part, will
suffer the mind and spirit of the husband and wife, between faith and
superstition to be rent asunder. Therefore when God said: They shall be two in
one flesh: we may not think but that he spoke it of the whole and perfect
creature, made of body and soul, that they should be of two one: or that God
did by so holy a Law, set free the holiest part, requiring only such agreement
in the flesh and body, and leave the soul and spirit in dissension. For as
God gave unto both one name, as touching their earthly nature, signifying their
unity, and called them Adam; Genesis 5. 2. so he gave unto them a likeness in
name, as they were joined in marriage; to signify their agreement in mind and
spirit, and called the one man, and the other woman: Genesis 2. 22. 23. Yea, he
gave unto marriage this especial privilege: For this cause Genesis 2. 24.
shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall cleave to his wife, and
they shall be one flesh: but it could never be, that any uniting only of flesh
and blood, should have found a dispensation from the Law, that binds mind
and conscience; Honor thy father and thy mother, Exodus 20. 12.

The holy and faithful bond of marriage between man and wife, is commended to
us by that most holy conjunction of Christ with his Church: Ephesians. 5. 2. Seeing
that this is a conjunction both of body and soul, then such as How should it
marriage (...) well, when (...) bridegroom (...) such a one, (...) whom he
cannot say, God speed, because she is one of Gods friends: 2. Ioh. 10.
are Christian parents, ought to be careful, that their children may rejoice
in it: howsoever it likes others to marry their children, yet they ought to
see that their children do settle themselves, that they may knit their minds in
religion, where they make their bodies one: that so their marriage may be to
them as a looking-glass, to view and behold the love of Christ.

S. Paul gives this general rule to all that will marry, that they marry
only in the Lord; and to 1. Cor. 7. 39. But how do they marry in the Lord, who
marry the Lords enemies?
marry only in the Lord, is not to be led by flesh and blood, with favor,
credit, honor, friendship, riches, or beauty, but rather it is to marry
religiously in the fear of God, and in the fellowship of the Church of Christ,
where true Christians live by one faith, profess one religion, and serve one
God.

Now let us a little call to our remembrance, what fruit such unequal marriages
have brought forth from the beginning.

The sons of God, saw the daughters of men, Genesis 6. 2.
that they were fair, and they took them wives of all that they liked.

This aduenturous marriage in a strange religion, did so infect the world, that
all flesh had As the Jews might not marry with the Cananites, so Christians
may not marry with them which are like Cananites.
corrupted his ways. For this cause God gave this plain and express Law unto
the people of Israel, as touching all the inhabitants of the land of Canaan:
Thou shall not give thy daughters unto his sons; Deuteronomy. 7. 2. 3. 4. Exodus 34.
16. Surely they will turn away thy heart: 1. Kings 11. 2. Ezra 9. 1. 2. etc.
and 10. 18. 19. Read the Genesis 24. 3. and 28. 1. Mal. 2. 11. Ezr 9. 14.
places.

We may not here think, that this inhibition serves not now (...) is, as
touching Pagans, Turks, or Infidels; but rather we must assure our seiues in
the truth, and know that no people in the world are more within the compass of
this law then the Papists, and superstitious idolaters. The holy Ghost
forbids us to keep company with Idolaters, and such as are of a strange
religion: and how can he then permit, that we should marry with them? He
commands If adultery may separate marriage, shall not idolatr y hinder
marriage, which is worse then it?
straightly that we should not draw in one yoke with the unbelieving: 2. Cor.
6. 14. which to do, is as unseemly, as an Ox and an Ass to be yoked together
to plough: Deuteronomy. 22. 10. And how can we possibly devise to violate and break
this commandment more contumeliously, then to yoke our selves in marriage with
the unfaithful? We are charged, To offer up our bodies a lively, a holy, and a
reasonable sacrifice unto God: Romans 12. 1. But if we shall give our bodies to
Papists, we then shall make them one flesh with the Papists: and then we may be
sure, that no corrupt sacrifice can be a sweet smelling sacrifice unto the
Lord our God.

Here godly parents ought then advisedly to consider, that the strengthening
and constant Parents may not give their daughters to a man (...).
standing in religion of their children, is only of God, and from God, and not
of themselves; and therefore although they have brought up their children
religiously and virtuously, and Genesis 34. 14.
think they are so well grounded and settled therein, that they cannot be
removed and drawn from their sound profession: yet they must beware that they
do not tempt God, and venture their children to walk in that way which so many
have fallen in. How can they assure themselves, that their children shall abide
constant, and stand upright, if they shall consent that they may couple
themselves in marriage with Papists?

Sampson was borne by Gods promise, consecrated to the Lord from the day of his
birth to the day of his death, made a Judge of Israel; a deliverer of Gods
Church, and a revenger of his enemies: very great and especial tokens of the
grace of God in him, that it should be continued: yet, when he would attempt to
marry one of a strange religion, he lost his honor, and became a
laughing-stocke unto the enemies of God. Judges the fourteenth Chapter, and
first verse, etc. and 16. 4. 17. 18. etc.

Solomon was a wise man, as ever was any before him, or after him: God has
endued him with heavenly gifts, and had set him up as a figure of his Son
Christ: yet when he had married with Pharaohs daughter (and others, of an other
religion, and strangers from the commonwealth of Israel) he then fell from
worse to worse, till at the last, he fell to miserable idolatry: 1. King. 11.
4.

What was the cause that Ahab king of Israel, Miserable is that man which is
fettered with a woman that likes not his religion. He fears not sin, which
does not shun occasions, and he is worthy to be snared, which leads himself
into temptation, and so makes a trap for himself.
did worse then all the kings before him? a man even sold to work wickedness
in the sight of the Lord: above all his idolatries, and walking in the most
wretched ways of Jeroboam, the Scripture lays this to his charge, even as
his greatest (...), that he took the daughter of the king of the Sydonians to
his wife: 1. King. 16. 29. 30. 31. 23. 33. And lest such parents as either
have, or hereafter shall marry their children to Papists, should think their
case to be better then his, because though they marry them to Papists, or to
Atheists, yet they do not marry them to any Pagans: let them consider what the
Scripture teaches them more.

Iehoram King of Judah, married neither Luke 11. 4. The wife must be meet, as
God said: Genesis 2. 14. But how is she meet, if the husband be a Christian and
sh e a Papist?
with any Sydonian, nor Egyptian, neither with Pagan, nor Infidel; but with
one of his own people, and of the Tribe of Israel: yet because she had
corrupted her religion in her fathers house, the Scripture shows this to to
be the cause of all Iehorams sin: He did evil in the sight of the Lord,
because the daughter of Ahab was his wife: 2. Kings 1. 18. Yea, the Scripture
makes this sin so great, that Iehosaphat a good King, was yet defiled with
it, and it is reported as a great blemish of his virtuous doings, that ever he
suffered his son Iehoram so dangerously to marry. 2. Chron. 1. 18.

When God would blame the idolatry of his people of Israel, showing both how
greatly he did hate it, and what plagues he would bring upon them for it, he
revealed it unto the Prophet (...) this parable: bidding him take unto himself
a wife of fornications: that is, a wife full of spiritual whoredoms, such a
one as a papist is, that in such a marriage (as in a glass) he might behold
how loathsome the peoples idolatries were, Hos. 1. 2. etc.

Parents have further to remember, that they have not this rule and authority
over their children, that they may choose whether they will let them marry or
no, or when they list, and whom they list: but fathers and mothers must
consider, that they have rule over their children under the Lord; so that the
Lord is above them: and therefore parents must deal with their children
according to the will and mind of God, which will of God is revealed unto us
out of his word. Now God by his Apostle says; To avoid fornication, let every
man 1. Cor. 7. 1.
have his own wife: and let every woman have her own husband: Whereby all
parents may see, that God commands them to permit and suffer every one to
marry, that is disposed to marry.

Now, if they may not forbid any man or woman to marry, much less their own
children, whom if they suffer not to marry, not having the gift of
continency, then they break and resist Gods ordinance. For we read, that
when Isaac forbad his son Jacob to marry any Genesis 18. 1. 2.
of the daughters of Canaan, he did not restrain him altogether from marriage:
and therefore he directed him, where, and with whom he should marry.

Likewise the parents of Sampson, when he asked Iud. 14. 1. 2. 3.
a wife of them, did not simply forbid him to marry: but they reproved him,
for because he would marry an Insidell, and a profane woman.

It is the parents duty to give their children that which may help them in
this life, to counsel, or to provide them fit and religious marriages 2. Cor.
12. 14. Genesis 4. 2. 3. 4. Ruth 3. 1.
Therefore such parents as be godly, will have advised consideration and regard
of the infirmities of their children, and whether they can live continent and
chaste, or no: and if they shall make choice, and have a good liking to such as
be honest, religious, and godly, (having craved their parents consent) although
they be not so rich and wealthy as they would wish them to matc h with, yet
they ought not to hinder, (...), and forbid their children to marry, only for
want of goods and substance.

Parents ought to be careful, that their children do marry in such an age
wherein they should understand whom they choose, and very well perceive what
they take in hand, and that they do not seek to match themselves in marriage
above their degree. And it is very expedient, that parents admonish their
children, to make their choice according to their complexion and condition.

This is a most unnatural and cruel part, for When parents do abuse their
authority.
parents to sell their children for gain and luker, and to marry them when
they list, and to whom they list, without the good liking of their children,
and so bring them into bondage. And therefore if parents shall force and compel
their Parents must not match their children only for carnal respects.
children to marry contrary to their mind and liking, then the sorrowful
children may not say they have married them, but for ever they have marred and
undone them. And therefore to the end that marriages may be perpetual, loving,
and delightful betwixt the parties, there must and ought to be a knitting of
hearts before striking of hands.

The places of Scripture, are many and diverse, by which it may plainly
appear, that all When parents do marry their daughters to men of
understanding, they shall perform a weighty work.
godly and Christian parents, are charged by God himself, that they should be
careful in time, to make meet choice of husbands for their daughters, and fit
wives for their sons: amongst many, these quotations do sufficiently prove
it. Deuteronomy. 7. 3. Nehemia 13. 23. 24. Ierem. 29. 6. 1. Corinthians. 7. 36. 37. 38.
Genesis 24. 10. etc and 28. 1. 2. and 4. 4. and 38. 6. 8. Joshua 15. 16. 17. 2.
Samuel 13. 23. Judges 14. 1. etc. Let fathers and mothers therefore (on whom
this charge by God his Commandment lies, to take wives for their sons, and
to provide husbands for their daughters) take diligent heed hereunto, that they
abuse not their power Colos. 3. 21.
and authority over their children, but as in other cases, they are willed by
the Apostle, that they deal not in such sort to wards them, that they thereby
be dismayed and discouraged: so especially in this matter of greatest moment
and value of all other worldly things whatsoever, let them abstain from all
rigor and roughness, and beware that they turn not their fatherly
jurisdiction and government, into a tyrannical sowrenesse and waywardness,
letting their will go for a law, and their pleasure for a reason.

For the rule of parents over their children, ought to resemble the government
of good Princes toward their subjects: that is to say, it must be mild,
gentle, and easy to be borne.

For as they, so likewise parents, so far as concerns them, and lies in
their ability to perform, must carry such an even and upright hand in their
government, that they may by love seek to win the hearts of those over whom
they are set, to be firm and sure toward them: and not to keep them under a
servile or slavish awe and subjection, by too much fear, but rather be a
child-like and reverend fear, which both the subjects owe unto their Princes,
and children unto their parents; and which both the one and the other easily
obtain at the hands of such as are under their government, by their equal,
upright, and modetate behavior toward them.

It does therefore stand parents greatly in hand, that in making choice for
their children, Parents ought to deal sincerely in the choice for their
children.
they be free from all sinister and corrupt affection, and that for luker and
covetousness they seek not to thrust such matches upon their children, as
they cannot brook nor like well of.

Yea, and in this most grave and weighty cause, it is a thing earnestly to be
wished, that all Christian parents would not take this matter and business
lightly in hand, as it were but a toy, or a jest, but that they begin it with
In provision of matches for their children, parents ought to begin with prayer.
prayer: that in the whole action they may in such sort be directed, that they
do nothing against the word of God, or unbeseeming the same authority the
which God himself in this cause has imposed or laid upon them.

And thus doing, God (no doubt) will add a blessing unto their godly endeavor
and holy care, and work obedience in the hearts of their children, as he
framed the heart of Isaac with entire affection to embrace Rebecca, whom his
father Abraham had by his steward provided for him: Genesis 27. 7. etc.

The third point that appertains to parents, is to be themselves examples of
all godliness The third point. Examples do much more persuade then words,
(...) must (...) not by (...)
and vertuousneste to their children. So that they must remember, that they
themselves do not say, or do any thing that is evil, or offensive, in the
presence of their children. For it is certain, that children follow and learn
nothing so much, and so soon, as that which they see their father and mother
do or say. For the virtue, thriuing and prosperity of children, is for the
most part wrought by the fathers and mothers good examples and instructions,
and contrariwise: for that which is done by examples, the inferiors will
think they may lawfully do the like. As good examples do edify and uphold: so
ill examples do destroy and confound. For humanity is taught by the law of
nature.

If therefore parents (by their example) should teach the contrary; what do
they else, but endeavor to transform men into beasts, beginning first to
perform it in their own children? They must be circumspect that their
children do not fight, and injury one another; and if they swear, curse, lie,
or speak any bawdie or ribaldous words, or sing any (...) rimes, or
unchristian songs, then to reprove them sharply for it.

And let all parents always labor, that their children may rather fear them
for love and reverence, then for fear of punishment. For children that obey
their parents for fear of correction, commonly fear them no longer then the
stripes endure. Before all things, it is needful that parents should show
themselves As the father begins, so it is like the son will proceed.
unto their children as a manifest pattern or example, not only by not
sinning and offending God any ways, but also by living godly, and by doing all
things honestly, that so their children may look into their lives, and peruse
themselves as in a glass. And therefore if parents do give good examples, they
shall reap the Gal. 6. 7.
fruit thereof, in the life, behavior, manners, and prosperity of their
children. For children love and delight to do as their parents did before them.

All Christian fathers ought to be most careful, in nourishing and maintaining
natural love and concord amongst the children and family, and in no wise to
suffer any spark of hatred to enter into their hearts, lest it kindle a fire
in their breasts: much less ought they themselves Mat. 18. 7.
to cast in coals of discord among them, by unkind or injurious examples of
dealing. For the state of a family if it be in due order, is like to a frame of
joining work, or building, whereof if some one piece be out of his place, it
tends to the disordering of all the rest: and one disorder following another,
all becomes out of joint, and falls into confusion very dispraiseable.

So that parents therefore ought to be careful to maintain their children in
peace, concord and amity: for if discord and contention be dangerous and
pernicious among all men, how much more between brethren and sisters?

Likewise if it be hard quenching of stomach and debate between those that
are not enjoined in kindred, it is far more difficult to reunite brethren,
because enmity amongst them is mighty and strong, like iron-barres, to keep
them asunder. Neither is there any thing more slipperie or of greater efficacy
to subvert a family, then dissension among brethren.

It is an old saying: by concord small things do grow; but by discord great
things come to naught.

Again, how dangerous it is for parents to show more love and affection to one
child then to another, except upon just and great cause, the example of lacobs
children does testify. For what was the original of their envy and cruelty
executed against their brother Joseph? Geneses 37. 3. Moses there says, that
Jacob (loving Joseph better then his brethren) made him a
partie-coloured-coate, and thereof they took occasion to hate him, and to
speak roughly unto him.

Parents therefore to the end to prevent the like inconveniences, are to use
equality among their children, so near as may be, whether in their ordinary
usage, or in the division of their goods.

For as all men naturally are inclined but too much to the love of earthly
goods: so the unequal sharing and dividing of the same, does oftentimes breed
great brawles, and pernicious debate between brethren and sisters.

Therefore all fathers and mothers are with great diligence to take heed, what
they say or do in their houses, and that they do not commit any leude or wicked
deed, whereby their children may be moved to imitate and follow the same:
neither that they utter or speak any bawdy or ribaldous words; or use to
swear, or lie in their presence: for evil speakings or communication (says
the Apostle) corrupts good 1. Cor. 15. 33.
manners.

Servants also are to be looked unto, and sharply rebuked, if they do commit or
show any lewd tricks, or dishonest behavior in the presence of children,
either in word, deed, or gesture. For if they be justly called murderers,
that kill the children being newborn, and kill but the body; how great
wickedness is it then to kill the minds of children through evil example?
Deserve not such servants severely to be punished by law (think you) that
bewitch young children, and hurt their weak bodies with poisons? What then do
they deserve, which corrupt the chief parts of Infants, with most ungracious
venime (we mean) by filthy talk, and leude conversation of life? Yet it is a
lighter matter to kill the body, then the mind and soul.

Further, parents ought to be circumspect and wary, that their children do not
haunt or use evil company; nor use any dishonest pastime. For if it be so,
that a father will not suffer his child to come into a place where he may be
in danger to take hurt of his body, either by infection of the plague, or
otherwise: how much more is he bound to withold and keep his child from
coming there where he should hurt and poison his soul?

The fourth and last point is, that parents do with all care and diligence,
keep their children The last point.
from all lazy idleness; a vice (no doubt) out of which do spring many
inconuehiences, and is condemned by the holy Ghost in many places of Scripture:
whereby God declares, that he created no man in vain, or to no purpose:
neither is there any man, unto whom he has not allotted (as it were) a
certain standing and Genesis 3. 19. Ezech. 16. 49. Prou. 12. 11. and 18. 9. 1.
Tim. 5. 10. 11. 2. These. 3. 10. 11.
room, and a lawful calling to walk in. Whereupon it follows, that the
order which God has appointed, is troubled by such as live idly: yea, Gods
ordinance is broken, which is a great sin and wickedness.

So then, by the word of God none ought to live idly, and to neglect his
charge and duty, but ought to give himself to some profitable calling to get
his living by, and to do good to others.

Although fathers provide for their children, great store of money, and huge
heaps of treasure; yet in three (...) four hours all may be wasted and come
to naught. For much evil comes through idleness: it is an evil teacher; he
that does nothing is ill occupied. The mind of man is ever stirring and doing
somewhat: if it be not doing well, it is doing ill.

As water, though it be never so clear and fair, fresh and comfortable; yet
if it stand still in a pit or hole, or be kept long in a vessel, whence it
has no issue, it will putrify and corrupt, rot, and smell, and he unwholesome:
Even so fares it with children; yea, and with all the sons of Adam, if they
have nothing to do, no way to bestow their wits, they will rot, and prove
unwholesome, and devise mischief all the day long.

For as labor and exercise of body of one Idleness brings much evil.
man, industry and diligence of mind in another man, are sure forts, and
strong bulwarks of countries; even so, idleness and negligence are the cause
of all evil: for an idle man's brain becomes quickly the shop of the devil.
And as in all things natural, there is one thing or other which is the spoil
of it; as the Canker to the rose; the Worm to the apple, and the Caterpillar
to the leaf: so the common spoil to all youth, is the contrary to pains and
labor, which is idleness. Therefore is idleness worthily called the mother
of all evils, and step dame of all virtues.

The Prophet Ezechiel in his sixteenth Chapter, verse forty nine, teaches that
idleness was one of the principal sins of Sodom, which pulled down fire and
brimstone from heaven upon their heads.

This idleness is the devils confederate: for even as the traitorous servant,
while his master is a sleep, and all thing at rest, sets open the door
for the thief to enter in upon him, and spoil him at his pleasure: even so,
idleness, (while we are not aware) lying soft upon the pillowes of security,
opens the door for the devil to enter into us, with full swing, to the
destruction both of body and soul.

Saint Matthew says, Chapter thirteen, verse twenty five; that while men
slept, the enemy came and sowed (...) among the wheat: So, the fittest time
that the devil can find to work upon us, is when we are idle; for that is
the sleep of the soul.

In the eleventh Chapter of the second of Samuel, we read, that while David
tarried idle at home, in the beginning of the year, when kings used to go
forth to battle, he was soon overtaken with two foul sins, of adultery and
manflaughter.

Oh that men saw to how many vices and evils they shut the door, when they
cease to be idle, and give themselves to honest labors, and (...) lawful
calling!

So long as Sampson (Judge. 19.) warred with the Philistines, he could never be
taken or overcome, but after that he gave himself to idleness and pleasure,
he not only committed fornication with the strumpet Dalilah, but also was
taken of his enemies, and had his eyes miserably put out.

If those two which were such excellent men, endued of God with singular gifts,
(the one of prophecy, and the other of strength) and such as no labor or
trouble could overcome, were notwithstanding overthrown, and fell into
grievous sins, by yielding for a short time to ease; then what crimes, what
mischiefs, and inconveniences are to be feared of them, who all their life
long, give themselves to idleness and loytering? But such has always been
the perverse incredulity of men's hearts, that they will not believe that other
men have perished, until they themselves perish also.

If we be utterly void of understanding, let us go to the brute creatures,
which want those helps of reason and government that man has, and learn of
them: Go to the Pismire, o sluggard, (says Salamon; Prou. 6. 6.) behold her
ways, and be wise; For she having no guide nor ruler, prepares her meat in
summer, and gathers her food in the harvest.

What is it that fills the prisons, and brings so many to the gallows, and
causes so many parents to lament and bewail the untimely death of their
children, but idleness? When the poor condemned wretches have received their
judgments, and come to the place of execution, and stand on the ladder; what
counsel give they to young men and to children, but to beware of idleness?

What is the cause of such, and so many diseases in the body? Ask the
Physicians, and they will tell you, idleness. Whereof rise rebellions in
kingdoms against Princes? Whereof rise mutinies and mutterings in Cities
against Magistrates? You can give no greater cause thereof, then idleness.

Christ our Redeemer says; Of every idle word Mat. 12. 36.
(that is, vain and unprofitable trifles, which the most part of people spend
their lives in) that men shall speak, they shall give account thereof at the
day of judgment. If we shall make an account for idle words, what shall we do
for idle hands, for idle feet, for idle body, for idle soul?

What account for all idleness, especially for wicked deeds, shall we make at
the day of judgment? Seeing then, that idleness is so noisome and hurtful;
let all Christian parents therefore labor and endeavor to avoid it, both in
themselves and their children, as a plague, or contagious disease.

Therefore it is most requisite and necessary, that parents do bring up their
children, either in To learn that Science which they be most apt for.
learning, or in some occupation and handycraft, whereby they may get their
living another day, and so live the better.

But some unadvisedly and foolishly do reason saying; what need is it for noble
and rich men's Objection.
children to have learning? they shall have enough?

We answer, the greater the ship is, and the Answer.
more merchandise it carries about, the more need it has of a cunning
ship-maister: So, the greater the child is (both by birth, and by inheritance)
so much the more need is it for him to be brought up in learning, and in good
literature. For learning, knowledge, and understanding, Pro. 3. 13. 14. 15.
is profitable both for rich and poor: so that (as the Grecians say) he that
is ignorant and unlearned, sees nothing, although he have eyes. The life of
such a one, is (as a tree without fruit) a day without Sun, a night without
Moon or Stars, a house without a man, and an head without a body.

It is found by experience, which is the best Schoole-maister, that unto what
occupation or science soever any young man shall be put, the more skill and
knowledge he has in the liberal Sciences, so much the more sooner shall be
learn his occupation; and the more ready, and handsomer shall he be about the
same.

And besides all this, he that has learning, although it be but small, shall
much better understand the Preachers, and take more profit by hearing of them,
to his great and endless comfort, then he that has no learning. Experience
also teaches us this, that goods, riches, beauty, glory, and health, be
unstable, and fade, perish, pass away, come and go: but learning and virtue
never stagger, always be constant. Therefore of all the charges that parents be
at about their children, that money is best bestowed, that is laid out upon
learning: especially when they are taught to know God aright, and how he will
be served.

It is a lamentable thing, to consider how careless some parents are of their
children, when they put them to the school, in that they make small account
and reckoning to what schoole-maister they put their children to learn, so
they may have them taught for little or no cost, though their children profit
little or nothing in learning; so that oftentimes they not only bestow their
money in vain, but also they suffer their children to loose their time, which
is a thing so precious, as it cannot be redeemed with any money, and so let
them spend two or three years in learning that, which they might by the
diligence and orderly teaching of a skillful schoole-maister, learn in less
then half this time, if there be any aptness and towardness in the children.

Therefore let parents remember, that as the goodness of the ground is not
much profitable for corn, unless there be a meet husbandman to till and sow
the same: so likewise it is not enough to find good towardness in your
children, unless you provide a meet and fit Schoole-maister to further the
same.

And as Noblemen and Gentlemen are desirous to have a good and skillful
horse-keeper, that can keep their horses well, and they spare not to give
stipends to such: even so much more ought Christian parents to be desirous to
have, and maintain a good Schoolemaister, that might bring up their children
in virtue, wisdom and good learning. And like as if their horle be not well
broken, or have any (...) quality, they will be careful to see it remedied,
and that he may be made tractable and gentle: so likewise godly parents ought
to be much more careful, not only that their children may by instruction be
brought to some good order, but also to look that there be no fault in the
teacher, to whom they commit the care to bring them up in learning and good
manners.

But alas, and with grief be it spoken, many men now a days, albe it they
perceive their children to be toward and apt unto letters, and capable to
receive good learning, having wealth and riches enough to maintain them
thereat, yet will they not suffer them to continue thereat until they come to
any good perfection: Why some men bring not up their children to any good
perfection in learning.
some because they themselves do not like of our state and religion: othersome
because they see little preferment, and no worldly advantage to follow
learning, but great trouble and affliction: all which men, in this doing,
declare themselves to be irreligious, ungodly, and destroyers both of
themselves, their children, and of all Commonwealths and congregations. For
what public wealth, Town, City, or Parish, can be well governed, except the
Prince, Magistrate, or Preacher, be learned both in humane and divine laws?

In times past when ignorance and superstition was accounted good devotion, at
which time men saw so many spiritual promotions (as they then called them)
unto rich Bishoprics, Abbeys, Priories, Deaneries, Benefices, etc. then they
would let for no cost to have their children learned in some sort, to the end
they might get them to be Priests, and so to say Mass, and the rest of that
idolatrous service, that so they might live in ease and idleness.

But now that they see how painful and perilous a charge it is to preach, and
rightly to divide Gods word, and to deliver the same freely and faithfully, and
also how unthankful an office and calling it is, to govern well a
congregation: they had rather their children should be bound prentises to some
trade, or else follow any other profession, then that they should study
Divinity.

When children were nothing apt to good learning, and when there was no good
learning to be had, no, nor good teachers; yet then, well was he that might set
his child to School. But now, when youth was never so apt to good learning, as
it is at this day: and learning and all good means never so plenteously
flourishing; being restored and reduced into such a facility, and a
compendious briefness: yea, never so good, learned, and skillful
schoole-maisters: never such plenty of so good and plain books printed, never
so good cheap: the holy Ghost mercifully offering his gifts, as it were, into
the mouths of all men: few there be that will open their mouths to receive
them, their eyes to see the clear light, nor yet their ears to hear so pure,
manifest, and wholesome, and heavenly doctrine, even the word of God, the
means of our salvation.

It is therefore to be feared, that for this our great unthankfulness, these
so manifold heavenly blessings shall be taken from us, and given to some other
nation, that will both be more thankful for them, and also show forth better
fruits of Christianity, then we hitherto have done.

Oh therefore that parents would advisedly consider, that the want of this
Christian duty, of the good education of their children, is the only cause of
great mischief and much misery, both upon children and themselves; yea, in
truth it is from hence that so much sorrow, grief, and shame, befalls many
times upon the fathers and mothers.

And how comes this to pass, that the parents own dung is cast in their
faces by their own children, in mocking and despising of them? and whence
arise all these inconveniences before named, together with all these grievous
plagues and judgments of God upon their children, to the consuming of their
eyes, but from this their own negligence, in bringing up their children? For
it is even just with God, that seeing they have offended him in the greatest
blessings, they should be plagued with the same thing wherein they offended
him, in the greatest judgments.

O you unnatural parents! the rich man in Luke 16. 27.
hell shall rise up against you in the day of judgment, and condemn you: for
he being in hell had a care of his fathers house, that they might be
forewarned: and therefore desired Abraham to send Lazarus to his brethren, to
testify unto them that they came not into that place of torment: but you will
not admonish your children, you will not teach them Moses and the Prophets: and
you will not show them the danger of Gods heavy displeasure hanging over their
heads, and therefore your own children shall be one of the furies of hell to
torment you. The Lord open your eyes to foresee and fly these fearful
judgments.

But if you will bring them up well and virtuously, Prou. 22. 6.
they shall be the better for it all their lives after: nay, the world to come
shall reap this benefit: for such children as you now bringvp, such parents
shall they be after when you are gone: and look what parents you leave behind
you, the like children again shall they rear up.

Wherefore, o you parents, you are either the making or the marring of the
world: for if your children learn no good education at your hands, how should
they be good fathers after you? and how should they leave that to their
posterity by the right of inheritance, which they never received from their
ancestors?

To conclude this point we say, once again, Oh ye parents, endeavor to go
forward in this virtuous education of your children, and then (no doubt) God
neither shall, nor will hide any necessary secret or instruction from you,
neither will he withold any good blessing from your posterity: so shall ye
be fathers of the faithful, as Abraham was, if you will have the same care,
and practice the same diligence for your children and family, that he did.
Genes. 18. 18. 19. and 12. 2. 3.

Parents also have to remember, that they shall commit an act very unnatural,
injurious, and ungodly, if they should undeservedly disinherit their eldest
son. For as nature in all her works, for the most part seems to make some
(...) of the eldest (...) is athing (...).
one thing to be chief before all the rest, whereby the same is, and the
rather continues: so reason in the order of a family, which is an imitation of
a state civil, or body politic, persuades Chron. 21. 3.
by experience, that of necessity there be one before the rest as chief:
whereby may be conserved, that beauty of unity, and harmony of concord,
which the Almighty in his creation so wonderfully and diversely teaches, and
our Savior himself so carefully and especially commended to his Church. And
thereof seems to come that pre-eminence or more special regard, which the Law
of God in the old Testament appointed to his people the Israelites, to Exodus
13. 1. 2. and 34. 19. 20. Number. 3. 13. and 18. 16.
be observed toward the first begotten son, and likewise somewhat concerning
other dumb creatures, which first were brought forth into the world.

By the ancient law of the Jews, the eldest had double so much as the others,
of the fathers goods, and alone to the eldest pertained the blessing of the
father, wherewith should seem always the heritage to go and succeed: as is
manifest by the will of God in Deuteronomy. 21. 15. 16. 17. If a man have two wives,
one loved, and another hated, and they have borne him children, both the loved,
and also the hated: if the first borne be the son of the hated, then when the
time comes, that he appoints his sons to be heirs of that which he has,
he may not make the son of the beloved first borne before the son of the
hated, which is the first borne: but he shall acknowledge the son of the
hated, which is the first borne, and give him double portion of all that he
has: for he is the first of his strength, and to him belongs the right of
the first borne.

The Patriarchs and other the servants of God, although by divine revelation
and other notice of the will of God, they were certified that they might marry
many of sundry wives at one time, yet did they exclude from their heritage the
prerogative of the blessing, all the children of those secondarie and after
marriages. This appears in Genes. 21. 10. The son of the bondwoman shall
not be heir with my son Isaac: yet was he the eldest, but was not the son
of the first marriage, nor borne of a freewoman.

Also an heir is the work and institution of nature, and heritage is due to
the son of nature, therefore it is so due that he must needs have it; seeing
those things which come by nature, or be natural, are not mutable or to be
changed.

Moreover, this name heir, which in a manner with all nations is the eldest,
is the successor of the law national, besides the laws natural and divine.
And that father who makes another heir, then is by the Authorities appointed,
cannot but express himself a Rebel, in disobeying and contemning so great
laws and authorities, beginning a new law of his own head contrary thereunto.
Then what is more unjust, then to do contrary to all laws, and therewith to
disobey the will of God, to pervert the due order of descent, preferring the
second marriage before the first; the younger before the elder; the late
offspring before the first begotten; so much tendered and respected? Now, as
the greatest injury a father can do to his son, is to disherite him: so it
it the most reproachful blot or damage, to suffer. the infamy and discredit
of disherison.

For if the eldest son be worthy to be disherited in his fathers house, he
may be thought not worrhy to draw breath out of it: for that he ought to be
convinced faulty in those crimes and heinous offenses, which be either
repugnant to the duty of a child, or not meet for the profession of a
Christian.

Namely, if he strike or offer violence to his father: Deuteronomy. 21. 18. etc.
if he oppress him with some great wrong: if he seek his death or
destruction, by poisoning, Genesis 35. 22. 1. Chron. 5. 1.
or otherwise: if he lie with his fathers wife, if he will not suffer his
father to make his will: if he be not of the true and Catholic faith, but is
convinced to be an heriticke, whereby his life and heritage is in hazard. Or if
he refuse to succor and deliver his father out of prison, by his surety-ship;
or if he follow the trade and company of such persons, as in the law be
counted infamous, vile, and most dishonest; as Iuglers, Sorcerers, Coniurers,
Thieves, Cozeners, and Pirates.

Or if he be an idiot, a madman, a natural, or lunaticke person. Or if the
father offering him a meet marriage, under five and twenty years, he refuse
it, and delight to live continually in whoredom, and filthy order of life:
These and such like be the causes, that the Civil or Ecclesiastical laws do
assign.

The duty of Children toward their Parents.
THis duty of children, as it may be gathered out of the holy Scriptures,
consists in five points.

1. First, that they Ephesians 6. 1. 2. 3. Colos. 3. 20.
obey their parents, and do serve them, and also do Leuit. 19. 3. Number. 12. 14.
fear, love, honor, and reverence them; not only in word and deed, but in
their hearts and minds also.

2. Secondly, that they follow their good precepts and examples of life.

3. Thirdly, that they patiently take Pro. 15. 5. 1. Tim. 5. 4. Mat. 15. 4. 5. 6
correction at their hands.

4. Fourthly, that they make continual and hearty prayers to God for them.

5. And lastly, that they do relieve, maintain, and nourish their parents, in
case they shall fall Genesis 47. 12.
into poverty or decay.

The sum and effect of all which, is as follows.
AS the Lord our God, has made and created children, through their parents: so
has he cast and made them subject under the power Fathers and mothers are to
their children in Gods stead. Exodus 20. 12. Deuteronomy. 5. 15. By honor is meant all
kind of duty which children owe to their parents.
and authority of their parents, to obey and ferue them in his stead; saying,
Honor thy father and thy mother: which honor consists not in bowing the
knee, or putting off the cap, or giving to their parents the vpper-hand only:
but in this, that they love them with all their hearts, that they fear and
dread them, that they cheerfully do their commandments, will, and pleasure;
that they seek their worship, credit, profit, and preferment in all things
lawful: and if need require, that they give their lives for them: remembering
that they are their parents goods and possessions; and that they owe to them,
even their own selves, and all that they are able to do; yea, and more then
they are able.

By this word Honor, is also signified the love, reverence, duty, obedience,
subjection, entertainment, and necessary assistance that children owe to their
parents. As concerning the love; the summarie of the second Table, comprehended
in these words; Theu shall love thy neighbor as thy self: does manifestly
confirm (...). 23. 39.
it. For who can be a nearer neighbor for the children to love, then their
parents?

Besides that, they are not to be loved only as neighbors proceeding of Adam
and Eve, but also as fathers and mothers. And therefore, what ingratitude is
it, not to love those, of whom (next after God) they have their life and being:
together, with so many great and continual benefits? Also the love that
parents do bear to their children, besides so many their labors, sorrows,
troubles, and vexations, should bind them reciprocally to love them.

The Sun shining a while upon the cold stones, does so heat them, that they
yield some warmth; so, albeit that children be as hard and cold as stones, yet
the experience, and daily feeling of the love of their parents toward them,
ought mightily to inflame their hearts to love them again. Take away the beam
from the Sun, and it will not shine: the springs from the river, and it will
dry up; the bough from the tree, and it will wither; the member from the body,
and it will rot; and so take from children their duty to their parents, and
they are no longer children, but brethren and companions with those unto whom
Christ Jesus said; Ye are children of the devil: Ioh. 8. 44.

This band of the love of children toward their parents, should take such
place, not only toward such parents as are loving and gentle, but also (as
Saint Peter says, of the duties of servants to their masters) even toward
such as be rigorous. For if we ought to love all the children of Adam, even
those whom we know not, yea, out enemies and persecutors: how much rather our
parents, although they should entreat us roughly, and with rigor, either in
word or deed? And verily the principal cause still abides: namely, that they
be our father and mother. This ought children well to note, to the end that
patiently bearing their reprehensions, reproofs, and in general, whatsoever
their troublesome and sharp affections, they may still continue and declare
their child-like affection and love. And to that purpose, children must
remember, the labor, grief, anguisn, weeping, sorrow, and other troublesome
cares that their parents do abide, and endure for them.

This love must be accompanied with reverence and respect: and to say the
truth, albeit the name of Father, belongs properly unto God, as Jesus Christ
says: You have but one Father, Mat. 23. 9.
even he which is in heaven; yet does he so impart it to those that have
begotten us, that they being called fathers do bear the title and Image of
God. And this is it that binds children to respect and honor them, and to
testify the same by their outward reverence. Of this reverence we have a
notable example in Solomon: he understanding that his mother Bethshebah, 1.
King. 2. 19.
was coming to speak with him, arole from his seat, came to meet her, bowed
before her, and seated her upon his right hand. Neither could his greatness,
neither his Royall-estate, privilege him from this respect and honor due to
his mother.

When the son does execute magistracy, or public office, he is greater
then his father, and must bear himself as a magistrate, not as a son: but
when he is out of place, or execution of office, he must (how highly soever he
be advanced) have a respect, and yield reverence to his parents. But many times
it falls out otherwise: for many children when they come to honor or wealth,
do so despise their parents, if they be of meaner calling then themselves, that
hardly they will acknowledge, or call them father: as if they were ashamed of
them. So that, that man puts off the affection of a child to his father, who
by the eminency of an office over him, quenches the name of a son.

But Solomon forgot not himself in this kind 1. King. 2. 20.
of duty, for he did not only bow before his mother, but said, Mother, ask,
and I will not deny thee. And this do we the rather note also, upon an other
consideration; namely, that his example condemns the custom of these days,
wherein this name of father and mother, is accounted so base and contemptible,
that the children of Kings, Princes, yea, even of mean Gentlemen, speaking to
their parents, must not say, father, mother; but Sir: my Lord: my Lady:
Madame: etc.

But the due honor to parents, that we here speak of, implies not only this
outward reverence, but also that we should so esteem of them, as that neither
we our selves should despise them, nor suffer others-to have them in contempt.
And this are we to understand in the saying of Jesus Christ: I honor my
Father, but ye dishonor me. He therefore defends the honor of his Father,
against the Ioh. 849.
false opinions and slanders of the Jews. But some there are so unnatural
and perverse, that forgetting all due reverence and respect to their parents,
they will not only despise them in their own hearts, and suffer others to
speak hardly of them, but also will themselves so far exceed, as even to lay
them open to the scorn of others.

Ham the son of Noah, seeing his father lie uncovered, called his brethren,
to show them his fathers shame. But so odious was this impiety in the sight of
God, that Noah (by the (...). 9. 22.
conduct and direction of the holy Ghost) cursed both him and all his (...).
And therefore, we (well and truly) may say, that those children, who in stead
of defending the honor of their parents, do lay them open to shame and
reproof, do come of the cursed seed of Ham.

This duty of honoring parents, is performed and paid, when they do
worshipfully, The honor due to parents.
and reverently esteem of them, as to think that they are given to them of
God, to the end that they should reverence, love, and always Childrens duty
is, from their beginning to their ending, to be subject, obedient, and helpful
to their parents.
have a care of them: if for nothing else, yet for the Lords sake; who is, and
does think himself despised, so long as the children condemn their parents,
and little regard them. So the children honor their parents, when with their
help and counsel, they aid them in their old age and unweildy crookedness,
when they ease and help them in the time of their need, or succor Mat. 15. 4.
5. 6 Exodus 21. 15. 17.
them otherwise in any case else, and do wholly bestow themselves, and all that
they Leuit. 20. 9. Pro. 20. 20. and 30. 17. Deuteronomy. (...). 16.
have to do them good withal: yea, they ought not to give them a rough or
stubburne answer, or once so much as to mumble, of (...) an answer against
their parents; neither to smite, or curse, or speak evil of their father and
mother: unless they will procure the vengeance of God to light upon them for
the same.

Children ought always to remember, that What children do to their parents,
they do to God, so that they may not purloine or diminish any of their
substance. Pro. 28. 24.
whatsoever they do to their fathers and mothers, (be it good or evil) they do
it to God: when they please them, they please God: and when they disobey them,
they disobey God: when their parents are justly angry with them, God is angry
with them: neither can it be that they may come to have the favor of God
again, (no, although all the Saints in heaven should entreat for them) until
they have submitted themselves to their father and mother.

If children and servants would always keep in mind this saying: so to do
and behave themselves to their parents, Masters, and Dames, as they would have
their children and servants to do, and behave themselves to them, when God Mat.
7. 12.
shall vouchsafe to make them parents, masters, or dames: then (no doubt) they
would obey and reverence their parents and masters, and dames, more dutifully,
and faithfully, then now they do.

For, let them assure themselves, that such measure as they (...) mete to their
parents, masters, Mat. 7. 2.
and dames, such will be measured to them again by their children and servants.

Also the children must be careful to follow the good examples of their
fathers and mothers, and to suffer themselves to be governed by them, and to be
mindful to bestow all pain and diligence to discharge their duty toward
them: And herewithali, they must know, that they are not at their own
liberty, to do as they list, so long as they have a father and mother to rule
them: and that they must not fall out among themselves, but naturally love and
help one another.

And children have always to remember, that they may not in any case obey
their parents, when they shall command them to do or say any thing that is
contrary to the word of God, and yet they are to be thought well of.

For example, Jonathan obeyed not his father Saul's commandment, who charged
him to 1. Sam. 20. 28. etc and 22. 17. Dan. 3. 18. Act. 4. 19.
persecute David: and therefore he is worthily commended in the holy
Scriptures. For, the duties of the first Table are always to be preferred
before the duties of the second Table.

This subjection therefore that children owe unto their fathers, ought in very
deed to be unto them as a ladder, or staire, to lead them to the reverence and
obedience of God, who is our Mat. 23. 9.
chief Father.

As children receive of their parents three things, to wit, life, maintenance,
and instruction: so for these three, they owe other three: namely, for life,
they owe love: for maintenance, they owe obedience: for instruction, they owe
reverence. For their life, they must fervently love their parents: for their
maintenance, they must dutifully obey their parents, as masters: and for their
instruction, they must cheerfully reverence their parents, as their tutors.

And further, children must remember, that the Lord has given to them their
parents, to take of them their beginning of life, and that they might nourish
and bring them up: and that of rude and almost brutish things, they might make
them able to help and live of themseluer: yea, and such mothers as are godly
and virtuous, do suffer and endure more pain and grief in the bearing,
bringing up, and nourishing of their children, then the fathers do.

So that greater are the pleasures and good turns that Christian parents do
for their children, greater is the cost and labor that they bestow on them,
and greater is the care, grief, and trouble, which they take for them, then
any man how learned soever he be, is able to express. And therefore if there
were no other reasons, or causes to move children greatly to love, to esteem
well, to obey, to be kind, faithful, and dutiful, and to reverence their
parents, and that with such a reverence as comes from the heart: yet these
were sufficient.

Maids and young women are to be put in mind, and always to remember, that
the best portion, the greatest inheritance, and the most precious jewel that
they can bring with them on the marriage day, is shamefastness: the want
whereof is most hurtful in all women. And therefore they must carefully shun
and avoid all idle and wanton talk, nice looks, dalliance, and light
countenance, when they walk abroad or be in company. A man needs many
things, as wisdom, eloquence, knowledge of things, remembrance, skill in some
trade or craft to live by, justice, courage, and other things, and qualities
more, which were too long to rehearse: and though some of these be lacking, yet
is he not to be misliked, so that he have many of them. But in a maid, no man
will look for eloquence, great wit, ordering of the Commonwealth, prudence,
etc.

Finally, no man will look for any other thing of a woman, but her honesty:
the which When a woman loses her honesty, then has she lost her chiese
treasure.
only if it be lacking, she is like a man that wants all that he should
have. For in a maid, her honesty and chastity is in stead of all. She verily
may truly be said to be an evil keeper, that cannot keep one thing well,
committed to her keeping, and put in trust to her, with much commendation of
words: and especially which no man will take from her against her will, nor
touch it, except she be willing her self. The which thing only if a woman
remember, it will cause her to take great heed unto, and to be a more wary and
careful keeper of her honesty, which alone being lost, though all other
things be never so well and safe, yet they perish together therewith, because
she that has once lost her honesty, should think there is nothing left.

Take from a maid or woman her beauty, take from her, kindred, riches,
comeliness, eloquence, sharpness of wit, cunning in her craft, and give her
chastity, and you have given her all things. And on the other side, give her
all these things, and justly call her whore, or naughtie-packe: with that one
word you have taken all from her, and left her bare and foul. How precious a
jewel chastity is, may easily be gathered from the example of Dinah the
daughter of Leah, which she bare unto Jacob, who Genesis 34. 12.
when he heard that she was (...) and defiled by Shechem the son of Hamer the
Hiuite, Lord of that country, his mind was grievously wounded with this great
shame and reproach.

Children may not forget this duty; for having received their being from their
parents, and being Children may not marry without the consent and agreement of
their (...): so that an unlawful promise made by the child, may lawfully be
broken.
brought up by them with great pains and much cost, they should not so much as
give any liking, much less speech of marriage, without the consent of parents,
or of those which are set over them by their parents: the duty of thankfulness
requiring it at their hands. And not only in regard of thankful nesse is this
duty to be performed to their parents, but even in regard of their own
inabilitie, as being not experienced in such things, as their wits being not so
ripe as their parents, they wanting wisdom and discretion to behave
themselves as they ought. For some children know not what is mere and
convenient for them, nor whether they be of meet age and condition to marry.
Which inhabilitie being in the sons, is much more in the daughters, as being
the weaker by nature, and more unable to provide for themselves; and therefore
it is necessary that they should not marry without the consent and direction
of their parents, but that they be at their bestowing: for, to do otherwise is
a sin, even that nature it self abhors, and all sound writers, old and
new, do utterly disallow.

And for so much as marriage is the means the which God himself has
ordained, and sanctified for the propagation and increase of mankind, that
being taken in hand in his fear, It is a sweet wedding, when the father and
the mother bring ablessing to the feast: and a heavy union, which is cursed
the firs^t day that it is knit.
a godly seed being multiplied and grown up here on earth, the same may be
blessed, to the constitution and making of a Church, the which may serve him in
holiness and righteousness: when the same is taken in hand with the breach of
his commandment, so far off is it that any blessing is to be hoped for, that
contrariwise, his hot indignation, wrath and heavy curse hangs over that
house and family, where the parties which are the principal pillars and
vpholders of the same, are linked and tied together in such a band of wedlock,
whose linkes and inclosings are not fastened and coupled together with the
necessary and lawful assent and liking of the parents, whose authority and
consent ought to bear the chiefest sway, and strike likewise the greatest
stroke, in this honorable (...).

And likewise, as where marriage is begun and enterprised in the fear of God,
according to his word, there God is well pleased, there the parties so matched,
live together in a joyful agreement, and linking the one to the other, there
God is honored, and served in sincerity and truth: there the children (when
God gives them) with the rest of the family, are instructed and brought up in
knowledge of religion, and grounds of faith: so on the other side, the regard
of that which God especially commands, being shut out of our marriages, there
must needs ensue his dislike, and displeasure: there is a jar and discord:
there Gods honor is neglected: there household discipline and Christian
instruction of such as belong unto our charge, goes utterly to wrack, and is
nothing at all regarded. And no marvel: for, if where God blesses, all things
go well and do prosper: then consequently, where he curses, there nothing
thriueth, has good success, or goes happily forward. It may appear by
sundry examples, both before the Law was given and after, that this is a duty
required of children toward their parents, namely, to have their consent in
contracting of marriage: as these places do plainly show: Genesis 21. 21. and 24.
3. etc. and 29. 19. and 34. 4. Deuteronomy. 7. 3. Judge. 14. 1. etc. 1. Cor. 7. 36.
38. 1. Sam. 18. 1.
Whereby is manifestly proved, that children ought not to match without the
consent of their parents:

First, because it is against the law of nature.

Secondly, because the parents have authority over their children, more then
they have over their servants.

Thirdly, because children are their fathers goods and riches, and therefore
they must not bestow themselves in marriage, but must be bestowed of their
parents.

Fourthly, because parents have authority over the vows of their children.
Numb. 30. 4. 5. 6. Contracts void without the consent of parents.


Fifthly, if a man's daughter be enticed, yet her father may refuse the contract;
being not available, or of any force, without his consent. Exodus 22. 16. 17.

Besides all this, what clearer proof can we have then the fifth Commandment,
in the which children are commanded to honor their fathers and mothers, with
a blessing promised to those which perform the same? whereby we gather, by the
nature of contraries, that there is a curse also belonging to all those
children that shall dishonor them.

And in that God wills that the parents by their children should be honored,
he means that they should in all humility and modesty reverence them, with
all dutiful submission be obedient unto them: and with all willingness show
themselves thankful for their creation, education, sustentation, and all other
benefits that (under God) they have received from them; being ready by all the
means they possibly may, to imitate and express toward them the nature of
the Stroke: whose property (as they write of them,) is to provide meat, and
feed their dams, when through age they grow so old that they are not able to
help themselves: that is to say, they must to their very utmost, seek to make
them recompense and requital of some part of those vnrequitable pains, the
which their loving parents have taken with them, and make some amends for the
vncounteruailable kindness that they have showed toward them.

But where they bestow themselves in marriage without the consent of their
parents, there they do fault, and make a breach of duty, in all these three
respects: that is to say, they neither reverence, obey, nor show themselves
thankful unto them.

For reverence consists in this, that children carry toward their parents, a
certain honest and modest shamefastness, joined with a bashful awfulnesse,
and standing in fear of them: the which works in them a conceiving of such
opinion and estimation of them, as that they have an especial respect and
regard of them, in doing or not doing of things, rather of a care to please
them, then of a fear to offend them.

Obedience herein shows forth it self, in that willingly, without murmuring
or grudging they be willing to be ordered, directed, guided, and ruled by their
parents: being ready to do all lawful things, which they command them, and to
refrain from those things, which they forbid them.

Thankfulness, (besides that there are many other branches) is always
mindful of benefits received, and therefore carries continually a vigilant
and watchful eye toward the party by whom it has been pleasured, that no
discourtesie in any case be offered, or any occasion be ministered, whereby he
may conceive unkindness.

And by this familiar description of these three heads (wherein stands
chiefly the honor due unto parents,) we may clearly see, that those children
which in wedding tarry not for the consent of their fathers and mothers, do
neither stand in awful fear of them, as whom they would be loath to offend or
displease, nor yet give over themselves in all things to be governed and
advised by them: nor have any regard that they be not causers to make their
friends and parents conceive hardly and unkindly of them, when as it is more
then manifest, that in matters concerning their duty toward their parents, no
grief cutteth nearer unto the heart, then this, when their children entangle
themselves contrary to their mind and liking.

And therefore such children as match in this sort, as it were in spite of the
teeth of their fathers and mothers, are neither reverent, obedient, nor
thankful unto them, and so consequently, they do not honor them: whereby they
incur and run into the curse of God, which without true and unfeigned
repentance, must needs pull down upon the heads of themselves and their
families, the fearful plagues of God his most heavy and hot indignation
against them, to their utter subversion, decay and ruin.

Let all dutiful and good nurtured children therefore, in the reverence and
fear of God, consider what honor and obedience they owe unto their parents,
and what power and authority he has in his word sanctified unto them over
their children in the Lord; and in regard hereof, let them yield unto them in
this duty, that their fathers having provided for them such as are not of a
wicked life, nor deformed, nor euill-fauoured, nor of a contrary religion, they
(...) submit themselves unto their Children (...), are to pray unto God to
direct their parents in a godly choice, and to (...) their minds to accept of
the same.
choice, which if for the present, or upon the sudden they cannot yield unto,
let them by earnest calling upon the name of God, not only desire him to
direct their parents in a godly and fit choice, but also to subdue in them this
corrupt affection, and to frame their wills to be pliable unto their fathers,
in such lawsull cases. For the Lord our God in his justice does justly punish
disobedient children, as may appear by the example of Ham, the younger son
of Noah; who derided his father, and was justly punished (...). 9. 22.
for it.

Likewise Absolon using wicked practices to 2. Sam. 15. 1. etc. and 18. 14.
get the kingdom from David his father, for rebellion and disobedience, came
to a most miserable end. Yea, and he has in his law set down a most severe
and sharp punishment against disobedient children: If any man have a son
that Deuteronomy 21. 18. 19. 20. 21.
is stubburne and disobedient, which will not hear (...) unto the voice of his
father, and the voice of his mother and they have chastened him, and he would
not obey them: then shall his father and his mother take him, and bring him out
unto the Elders of the City, and unto the gates of the place where he
dwells, and shall say unto the Elders of his City; This our son is
stubburne and disobedient, and he will not obey our admonition: he is a riotour
and a drunkard. Then all the men of the City shall stone him with stones unto
death: So thou shall take away evil from among you, that all Israel may hear
it and fear. For even Exodus 20. 12. Ephesians 6. 2. Deuteronomy. 28. 15. etc. Leuit. 26.
14. etc.
as a long and a prosperous life is promised unto obedient children: so on the
other side, all disobedient, unthankful, and obstinate children, are assured
of the punishment of infamy, joined with diverse and great calamities and
torments. 1. Sam. 2. 22. 1. King. 1. 25. etc. Deuteronomy. 21. 18. etc. Prou. 20. 20.
and 30. 17.

And although that the temporal officers be negligent in punishing this
disobedience, yet shall they not escape unpunished: for the vengeance of God
shall accompany them, until they be utterly destroyed. For there is nothing
more unnatural then to see children dishonor and disobey their parents; and
inferiors their superiors. Such may aptly be compared to the Viper, that
gnaweth out the belly of her dam, and seeks her own life with her dams
death.

So contrariwise, the word of God does highly commend Joseph for his great
love, beneficence, and obedience extended toward (...) father Genesis 46 29. etc.
and 48. (...) 12.
Jacob, and his brethren: in that he both helped and liberally nourished them,
and prayed for them. Our Savior Christ was also obedient to his parents, even
until death. So that the Luke 2. 51.
Lord (no doubt) will bless obedient children, with many happy days and
years, to his glory, and their souls comfort.

And to the end to inuit and stir up children to honor their parents, as
before is showed, the Deuteronomy. 5. 16. Exed. 20. 12.
Lord adds this promise, That thy days may be long in the land which the
Lord thy God gives thee: And S. Paul does note, that it is the first
Commandment Ephesians. 6. 2.
with promise. For albeit there be a promise added to the second, and others of
the first Table, yet this fifth Commandeme^nt is the first of righteousness;
and none in the second Table, besides it, has any promise annexed thereunto.

For herein has God declared how highly he commends the obedience and honor
that children yield to their parents. But the Lord spoke to the Israelites
properly of the land that he had promised them for an inheritance, which should
be unto them as a testimony and seal of his goodness and love toward them.
It is therefore, as if he should have said: To the end, that living upon the
earth, thou may long enjoy the earnest penny of my goodness and grace
toward thee. But now seeing the whole earth is blessed to the faithful, the
promise of long life upon the earth, is unto us a blessing of God.

First, because we cannot live long without participating of many and great
benefits of God, even in respect of the preservation of this present life.

Secondly, because the faithful may the longer employ themselves to serve and
glorify God.

In confideration whereof, we see what the Church in old time said: The dead
praise not the Psalm. 115. 17. 18.
Lord, neither any that go down into the place of silence: but we will praise
the Lord from henceforth, and for ever. The same does Hezekiah King of Judah
also note in his Canticle: The living, the living, Esaias 38. 19.
he shall confess thee, as I do this day: the fathers to the children shall
declare thy truth.

In as much therefore, as long life is promised as a blessing; God does
continue it to obedient children, so long as it is a blessing unto them. And
hereupon does S. Paul join together these two sentences: That it may go well
with thee, Ephesians. 6. 3.
and that thou may live long upon the earth. As also when God takes away
such obedient children before they be old; yea, before they come unto man's
estate: whether it be, lest malice should corrupt their hearts, or to prevent
some greater calamities, wherein they might (peradventure) be entangled, or
upon whatsoever other considerations, to receive them into a better life, he
does faithfully perform his promise unto such children, because he deals
better then promise with them.

But as contrariwise, this promise threatens such children as will not honor
their parents, with short life: so does experience declare, that many such
children are of short and wretched life. But if contrariwise, such disobedient
children do chance to live long, so far is long life from being unto them a
blessing, that on the contrary, it is an enforcement and increase of woe,
because they enlarge their just condemnation: so as they had been better to
have died in their youth. But howsoever it be, God so disposes thereof, that
by the effects we may perceive, that they which honor their parents are
blessed, and the others are accursed, Eccles. 3. 2. etc.

And although some parents do not perform those duties toward their children
enjoined them from the Lord; yet such children as live wickedly, must know,
that they are not exempt and free from blame, and guiltiness before God.

For although they can say (as the children in Ezekiels time said,) The fathers
have eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge; we say, that
although the occasion be offered of such ungodly and wicked parents, yet the
cause of destruction is still in the children themselves. And besides that, it
is sure, that the soul that has sinned shall die the death.

Seeing there be some young men and maids, who notwithstanding the great
profaneness of the most, the manifold corruptions offered abroad, the ungodly
examples abounding at home, are so mightily preserved by the seed of grace,
that they escape safely in an holy course of life, lamenting when they see the
least occasion of evil, rejoicing at the least occasion of good things: the
rest, who please themselves, and hope to shelter their sins under their
parents defaults, are plainly left without excuse, and are iuftly guilty of the
blood of their own souls.

Labor therefore ye young men and maidens, to wipe away the tears of grief
from your fathers eyes, and stay the mournful and sorrowful spirits of your
tender mothers; and consider in your selves, if ye have any nature in you, and
have not buried the use of common reason, what a shame it is to be a shame unto
your fathers, to whom ye ought to be a glory: think, ye wanton wits, that have
not cast off all natural affections, what a contempt it is, to be a contempt
unto your mothers, to whom you have offered, as it were a despitefull violence,
in that ye are a corrasiue to their grief, when as ye should have been a
crown to their comforts.

Learn therefore ye children, that it is one special property of a liberal
and ingenious nature, to be careful to live, that in time ye may be a glory to
your fathers, and a joy to your mothers: which the Lord for his Christ's sake
grant.

These precepts and admonitions before said, are as a summary of the duties of
children to their parents. And therefore it rests, that they understanding
them, do pray unto God to give them grace to put them in practice to his glory,
and their good and salvation.

Lastly, let them remember, that God is not more inclined to hear any prayers,
then such as parents de power forth for their children. As they are therefore
to fear their curse, for offending them: so must they by honoring and
pleasing them, seek to be blessed in their prayers, which are blessings
ratified unto them in heaven, as the blessing of Isaacke to his son Jacob
does manifestly declare. Genesis 27. 28. 29.

What duties Masters and Mistresses owe to their servants.
THis duty teaches them, that The householder is called Pater Familias, that
is, a father of a family, because he should have a fatherly care over his
servants, as if they were his children.
they are become in stead of parents unto their servants, which duty
consists in four points.

1. First, that they refrain and keep their servants from idleness.

2. Secondly, that by diligent instruction and good example, they bring up
their servants and households, in honesty and comely manners, and in all virtue.

3. Thirdly, that they ought to instruct their apprentises and servants in the
knowledge of their occupations and trades, even as parents would teach their
own children, without all guile, fraud, delaying, or concealing.

4. Lastly, when correction is necessary, that Masters and Dames ought
moderatly to use their authority over theirseruants.
then they give it them with such discretion, pity, and desire of their
amendment, as loving parents use to deal with their dear children; remembering
always that they have a master in heaven, before whom they must make an
account for their doings. These four points are in effect poken of before in
the duty of parents.

For so much as masters and householders are to their servants and apprentises
in place of fathers, they are hereby admonished, that they James 5. 4. Coloss
4. 1. Ioh 13 13. 14. 15.
ought not to withold and keep (...) their due wages, to exact of them, to
oppress them, or to reward their well-doing and good deserving Deuteronomy. 24 14. 15
Mat. 8 5. 6. (...) 7. 2.
slenderly: but to be careful of their servants good estate as of their own,
not only in providing for them wholesome meat, drink, and God made eu ry week
one day of rest, wherein servants should be as free as their masters. Genesis 2.
2.
lodging, and otherwise to help them, comfort them, and relieve and cherish
them, as well in (...) as in health liberally to reward their good deseruings,
as far as Christianity, liberality, and equality shall bind them: but also
that they be careful that they live honestly, virtuously, and Christianly.

And further, they may not grieve their servants with too much labor, but
always remember As the laborer which works but one day is worthy his hire,
even so, much more the (...) that (...) eueryday.
that they are not beasts, but men: so that they ought quietly to govern them,
and also quietly to chide them, when they shall neglect their duty, lest they
be provoked with their hard words: remembering that they also have a Lord and
master in heaven, with whom there is no respect of persons, Ephesians. 6. 9. And
let them bountifully reward the just and faithful labor Luke 10. 7.
of their servants, and pay their covenants in a fit and convenient time, lest
being compelled by necessity they should steal.

Masters ought not (as tyrants) to use their servants as their horses and
asses: but to deal As David did limit Ioab that he should not kill Absolon, so
God has bound masters that they should not oppress their servants.
with them lovingly and Christianly, because they are all members of one body,
whereof Christ Jesus is the head.

There be some masters that use their servants and apprentises more like
beasts then like men and their own members; for which their so doing, let them
assure themselves they must yield to God their master a straight account. 2.
Sam. 18. 5. Job 31. 13. 14. 15.


Oh that Christian Masters and Mistresses would learn, and so practice the
example of For a good man (sauh Salemon. Pro. 12. 10.) will be merciful to his
beast and therefore he ought to be m re merciful to his servants being his
brethren.
Jobs good and upright dealing with his servants, which was far from rigor.
For he says, If I did contemn the judgment of my servant, and of my maid,
when they did contend with me,(that is, when they thought themselves evil
entreated by me,) what then shall I do, when God stands up? If I had
oppressed others, how should I have escaped Gods judgment?) And when he shall
visit me, what shall I answer? He that has made me in the womb, has he not
made him? (which moved him to show pity and favor vpto his servants, because
they were Gods creatures as he was:) Has not he alone fashioned us in the
womb?

Hereby then may those masters and dames see their wickedness, who will not
hear their servants speak, but upon a simple surmise and brain-sicknesse, do
evil entreat them by cruel stripes, when in truth there is no just cause.

Masters and Mistresses ought therefore to use Reuiling words and unreasonable
(...), does much more hurt to servants then good.
their servants and apprentises, with mildness and equity, as every one shall
deserve; for they must remember that they have all one God to honor and
worship, one Prince to serve, one law to keep, one land to inhabit, and one
death to fear: and therefore they must speak unto them as unto brethren and
sisters, and deal with them (...). 16. 17.
as with Christians. And let them always remember this, namely, that God will
never deal mercifully with them, if they make no greater account that their
servants do serve him more carefully then themselves, and sanctify the
Sabbaths. Exodus 20. 10. (...), 5. 14.


And therefore that master is not worthy to be served, which cannot afford
that his servants should serve God as well as himself. He must give unto God
that which is Gods, and then he may the better take that which is his own: for
he that cares not for his family (says Paul) is 1. Tim. 5. 8.
worse then an infidel: because infidels care for their families.

As it is the office of a good householder to carry the burden of care,
travel, and labor: so it is the duty of a wife, to be faithful in keeping
and well ordering of his goods and house, and to see his, her own, and their
childrens best apparel brusht, and handsomely (...), to be patient and
careful to see her husband do well, and both their duties is, effectually to
give good examples, to be diligent to entertain peace amongst their family,
and to see all things neat and handsome, and to keep due order and measure.

For as the Sun in the firmament gives light Servants do rather imitate the
works they see their masters do, then the words which they hear them speak.
to all the regions round about him, and by his bright appearing expels the
darkness, comfort and cheareth the world: even so like wise should
householders labor to banish sin and corrupt religion out of their dwellings,
and to be a lantern of godly life, to comfort and shine to their whole family,
that so they may direct their lives after their good examples, Phil. 2. 15.
Math. 5. 19. A master ought so to behave himself with his servants, that he
be not too familiar with them, which many times breeds contempt, but he is to
admonish them often, and yet he must not discourage them from well doing, nor
be too severe, not too partial, but must moderate all by discretion.

For like as the Centution, who had many servants Luke 7. 8.
under his authority, had them all at his beck and commandment, most ready
to obey him in any thing that he set them about, and this good order and
submission he had brought them unto, by the reason that his said servants were
dear unto him: that is, he made special reckoning of them, and was as a
father unto them: so likewise all masters are in conscience bound to esteem
and account well of their servants, and to use their authority that they have
over them, mildly and Christianly; and then if their servants do perceive that
they are dear unto their masters, so may the masters in time work them like
wax unto their own mind: except they be such as have sold themselves to
Ephesians. 6. 9.
work wickedness.

It is very convenient that a master of a family should so dispose and order
his affairs and business, that he depart and absent himself from home as
little as may be: for it is an old saying and a true: The eye of the master
does make the horse fat, and the ground fertile: for all things are well and
fitly done when the master is present.

Such housekeepers as have much, and yet spend little, are called niggards: and
they that have little, and yet spend much are holden (...), spend thrifts, and
prodigal wasters: and therefore they ought to live in such sort, that they be
not noted either misers for their keeping, or prodigal for their spending.

The covetous miserable niggard passes great toil and travel in gathering of
riches, danger in keeping them, law in defending them, and torment in departing
from them: but a wise man is not careful so much for riches, and how to live
long, as to live well, and dye well.

Some householders are so (...) and sparing, both toward themselves and their
neighbors, that although they have much wealth, yet they cannot find in their
hearts to take part in any frugall and good measure of those transitory
blessings which God in mercy has given them: but feed grossly and very
niggardly, and cloth themselves very meanly, keeping a beggarly house; so
that (as the common Proverb is,) a man may as soon break his neck as his
fast with them. So that the state of such a worldling The covetous wan in
gaining riches, loses himself.
and covetous rich man is most miserable; upon whom God has bountifully
bestowed great wealth, and yet he has not the grace to (...) his riches well,
either to his own comfort, or the good of his neighbor; but heapeth up riches
(as the Psalmist says) and cannot tell who Psalm. 39. 6.
shall gather them.

This shows, that it is the plague of God that befalls upon such a
miserable covetous worldling, when he has plenty of all things, and yet
wants a liberal heart, to employ and use them rightly.

And therefore the holy Ghost, in the book of the Preacher, is not content
once or twice to find fault, and to check this as a great vanity and abuse;
but to speak of it five sundry times. In one place he says: There is an evil
(which I saw under the Sun,) and it is much among men: A man to whom God has
given riches, and treasure, and honor, and he wants nothing for his soul,
of all that it desires: but God gives him no power to eat thereof: but a
strange man shall eat it up: This is vanity, and this is an evil sickness.
Eccles. 2. 24. and. 3. 12. 13. 22. and 5. 17. and 6. 1. 2. and 8. 15.

Such masters and mistresses as would have their necessary affairs and
businesses dispatched That which thou can do conveniently thy self, commit
it not to another.
well, (and in due time) may not always trust to the doing thereof by their
servants: but they must either see it done, or rather dispatch it themselves,
if it be such a thing and business as they can and may well do. For such a
lowliness is always joined with the fear of God, that they that are humbled
with religion, (though honorable and worshipful in calling) do not think
themselves too good to do any good thing.

This undoubtedly is a thing greatly to be wished for: namely, that all
Christians, masters, Masters ought to make good choice of their servants.
and householders, when they go about to hire any servants, would be no less
careful and inquisitiue of their honesty, godly conversation, and how they
have profited in the knowledge of God his religion, then they be to enquire and
know what they can do, and what skill and cunning they have in that Art or
Science which they prosesse, or else, what qualities they have: and so doing,
no doubt they being careful to hire religious and godly servants to do their
work and businesses, that which such servants shall take in hand, the Lord
will much better prosper, and give good success unto, then otherwise if they
shall hire and entertain irreligious and prophaue servants: as may plainly
appear by the examples of Jacob and Joseph, two Genesis 30 26. 27. etc. and 29.
2. 3. 4. 5 6. 23. 23. Esaias. 6. 6.
religious and faithful servants, whose masters and their substance were
blessed, increased, and multiplied for their sakes.

As house-holders ought to have care over It is a rare thing for a master to
bring his servant to be godly, who is not godly him self.
the bodies of their servants: so much more over their souls. One compares
the master of the house to the Seraphin, which came and kindled the Prophets
zeal; so he should go from wife to servants, and from servants to children,
and kindle them in zeal of God, longing to teach and utter knowledge, as a
nurse to empty her breasts.

It is lamentable to think, how careless all masters (for the most part) are
on this behalf: not only such as are profane and ignorant themselves, but
also some that would be counted great professors, and would seem to have great
knowledge; yea, (and with grief may it be spoken) some Preachers also, who
having had servants dwelling with them, 3. or 4. years, or more, as they were
ignorant in the grounds and principles of Christian religion when they came
first into their service, so they went from them as ignorant therein as they
came, and all for want of catechizing: being a principal duty, which not only
Ministers, but also all Christian masters in conscience are bound to perform
to their families. But of this matter I have sufficiently entreated in my last
Edition, of the use and necessity of catechizing: and therefore I will of
purpose here omit to speak of it. Another says, that a master in his family
has all the offices of Christ; for he must rule, and teach, and pray: rule
like a king, and teach like a Prophet, and pray like a Priest. To show how a
godly man Revel. 5. 10.
should behave himself in his household, when the holy Ghost speaks of the
conversion of Act. 16. 31. 32 and 18. 8. 1. Cor. 1. 16.
any housekeeper, commonly he says: That the man believed and all his
household. As Peter, being converted, must convert his brethren; so the master
being a protestant and a good Christian, must endeavor by all good means, that
his servants may be such.

For therefore God said, that he would not hide his counsel from Abraham,
because he would teach his family. And surely all duty of Ge 18. 17. 18.
servants which is not done of conscience, is but eye service, and fails at
most need; as Ziba betrayed his master when he should have defended him.
Therefore before Onesimus was converted, Phil. 11. 16.
Paul said, he was an unprofitable servant, but when he was converted, he
called him more then a servant: because such a servant is better then many
servants. Though Laban was wicked himself, yet he rejoiced that Genesis 29.
Jacob his servant was godly, because God blessed him the better for him.
Ioshuah says, I and Joshua. 24. 15.
my household will serve the Lord: Showing that masters should receive none
into their houses, but whom they can govern as Joshua did: and if any such
have crept into their doors, they must put him forth again: for David says,
I will not Psalm. 101. 7.
suffer a liar to stay within my house. He says, not a swearer, nor a thief;
but a liar: as if he should say, I will rid him out of doors before he be a
swearer and a thief; for a liar will grow to a swearer and a thief, as a
dicer grows to a beggar in a night. Therefore it is noted of Cornelius, Act.
10. 2.
that he himself feared God with all his household.

These examples be written for house-holders, as others are for Magistrates and
Ministers They must keep no idle profane, superstitious, nor disordered (...)
in their house.
and soldiers; that no calling might seek further then the Scriptures for
instruction. Wherefore as you are masters now, and they your servants,
instruct them, and teach them, as if you would show what masters your servants
should be hereafter.

Next unto servants labors and instruction, must be considered their
corrections. As Paul says, Fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: so we
may say, Masters, and mistresses, provoke Ephcs. 6. 4.
not your servants to wrath: that is, use such reproves, and such corrections,
that you do not provoke them, but move them; that you do not exasperate them,
but win them; for reuiling and reproachful words, and immoderate fierceness,
does much more hurt then good. And therefore the Law of God did charge the
Magistrate that he should not cause above forty stripes to be inflicted upon
any offender, lest he should seem despised in his eyes: much less then may a
master exceed that number to his servant.

For while a child, or scholar, or servant, does think that he is reproved
for love, or beaten with reason, it makes him think of his fault, and is
ashamed: but when he sees that he is rebuked with curses, and beaten with
staves, as though he were hated like a dog, his heart is hardened against the
man that corrects him, and the fault for the which he is corrected; and after
he becomes desperate like an horse, which turns upon the striker: and
therefore let masters know, that God even then chides them, whenever they
fight or chide in such rage. For though there be a fault, yet something must be
dissembled and winked at, and some things must be forgiven, and some punished
with a look: for he which takes the forfeit of every offense, shall never be
in any rest, but vex himself more them his servant.

But above all, we think that the charity and tender affection of masters,
and love of servants Masters ought to have a tender care of their servants in
their sickness.
to their fellows in their sickness, is especially to be used and showed: at
which time, the sick are to be severally lodged from the whole, and to be
cherished and nourished with more choice and dainty meat.

For the performance and care of this duty, the Centurion is commended in the
Gospel, which duty very unchristianly is neglected of Mat. 8. 5. 6. Luke 7. 1.
many masters.

The master of the house, should not disdain, or show himself so scornful
or unkind as not to visit his sick servants. For if brute beasts rejoice to
see their masters cherish and feed them, as we may daily see in dogs, etc.
how much more may we believe that men and reasonable creatures, are much
delighted and comforted therewith? Whereupon it comes to pass, that good and
faithful servants, liking and affecting their masters, understand them at a
beck, and obey them at a wink of the eye, or bent of the brow, not as a
water-spaniel, but as the hand is stirred to obey the mind, so prompt and
ready is the dutiful servant to obey his loving and kind master.

For as the hand is said to be the instrument of instruments: being it (indeed)
that serves to feed, apparel, and keep clean the rest of the limbs and
parts of the body, which are also called instruments: so is the servant said
to be an instrument of instruments, because he keeps all the instruments of
household occupied: not only to live, but to live well; wherein he differs
from all other instruments. For where they are things without soul, he is
divinely enriched with a soul: and herein he differs from the hand, for that
the hand is fastened and united to the body, but he is separate and disioyned
from his master: and he is also different from Artificers: for Artificers are
instruments of those things which properly they call workmanship: but the
servant is an instrument of the action, which also is distinguished from
workmanship. So that the servant if you will rightly understand him, is,
aliuely and several instrument of action.

It is very meet and convenient, that the mistrisse or dame, do not make her
self too familiar with her servants, or houshold-folkes, The wives behavior
with servants.
lest they should be too bold, to talk, to jest, or irreverently and
vnmannerlie to behave themselves toward her: and so modestly and wisely to
bear her self among her servants, that they may fear, reverence, and so stand
in awe of her, as the mistress and mother of the house.

And as it is not comely or beseeming, that the wife should take upon her to
rule and correct the men-seruants; so likewise, it is not comely The master
must correct his servants, and the mistress her maids
or meet, that the husband should meddle with the punishing or chastising of
the maide-seruants: so that it is most meet and acceptable to the offender,
that the master should correct the men, and the mistress her maids: for a man's
nature scorneth and disdaineth to be beaten of a woman, and a maids nature is
corrupted with the stripes of a man.

Therefore we read, that Abraham would not meddle with his maid, but committed
her to his wife, and said: Do with her as it pleases thee. As if he should
say, It belongs not to me, but to thee. Andthese are the duties which
masters must perform in their life time. All which must be shut up with
setting order for all things at their death, with especial exhortations and
prayers for religion, for uprightness in their callings, for peace and order
after them, according to the example of Hezekiah, David, of Jacob, and of
Joseph: Esaias 38. 1. and Genesis 47. 29. 30. and 40. 29. So that it is the duty of
Christian masters to have a care, not only that their families be well and
Christianly governed while they live: but also that after their death, love,
peace, quietness, and good order may be continued in their posterity.

The Servants duty toward their Masters.
THis duty confisteth in three points:

1. First, that servants and apprentises do from their hearts, cheerfully, and
willingly, perform the labors and works that their masters, mistresses, or
dames, shall command them.

2. Secondly, that they be faithful in things committed to them by their
masters, mistresses or dames, that so they may keep their goods.

3. Thirdly, that they be careful to observe uprightness of manners, that the
wife, sons and daughters, or other fellow servants, be not corrupted by their
bad counsels, or lewd behavior.

These points are plainly proved by these places of Scripture quoted in the
margin: Ephesians 6.5.6.7.8 Col. 3.22.23.24 Tit. 2.9.10. 1 Pet. 2.18.19.20.21.
whereby servants are straightly charged, reverently, and faithfully to obey
their bodily masters, mistresses, and dames, in all things which may be done
without offense to God. And this obedience and service must be done with fear
1. Tim. 6. 1. 2. Luke 17. 7. 8. 9
and trembling, in singleness of heart, as unto Christ, they being (...) with
a reverence to Godward, as though they served God himself, and that as well in
the absence of their masters, mistresses or dames, as in their presence: not
constrainedly, as it were forced or compelled thereto, but heartily and with
good will, as they that serve the Lord, and not men: not only in respect of
the earthly reward, but because they know, and are assured, that of the Lord
they shall receive the reward of inheritance, in as much as they serve the Lord
Christ. So that hereby all godly servants, may in few words learn what duty
they owe to their masters, mistresses, and dames: namely, to love them, and to
be affectioned toward them, as a dutiful child is to his (...): to be
reverent 1. King. 5. 13. The property of a good servant.
and lowly to them in their words and gestures, to suffer and forbear them: to
obey with ready and willing minds all their lawful and reasonable
commandments: to fear them, and to be loath to displease them: to be faithful
and trusty to them and theirs: in deeds and promises, to be diligent and
serviceable: to speak cheerfully: to answer discreetly: not over boldly to
dally with their masters wife, daughters, or maidens: to be loyal and
dutiful to their masters, mistresses and dames: as Jacob was toward Laban,
and Joseph toward Genesis 29. 18. 19. 20. and 39. 5. etc.
Potiphar. And they must carefully endeavor to do and procure, to the uttermost
of their ability, that which may be to their masters, mistresses, and dames
honesty, credit and profit, and that as well when they are absent and out of
sight, as when they be present and look on. This is a quality and property
belonging to every good servant, both men and maids: to wit, that whatsoever
goods or necessaries of their masters, mistresses, or dames, they shall have
charge of, as committed to their trust and keeping; they carefully see such
things so well and orderly placed, and laid up, that if there shall be at any
time any just occasion to use any necessary in their custody: yea, if it be in
the night season, and that without a light, they then not only can say, in
such a place it lies, but also, if they be required, they can presently fetch
the same.

Servants must take heed that they do not (...) and willingly anger or
displease their masters, mistresses, or dames, which if they do, then they
ought incontinent and forthwith to reconcile themselves unto them, and to ask
them forgiveness. They must also forbear them, and suffer their angry and
hasty words, and in no wise answer again spitefully or scornefully, neither
yet upon any such occasion run away For the Angel taught and willed Hagar the
servant of Sarah, when she fled from Genesis 16. 7. 8. (...).
her mistress, that she should return and humble her self under the hands of
her mistress. So did Saint Paul make agreement betwixt Onesimus a vagabond and
theeuish servant, and sent him again to his master Philemon, from whom Phil.
10. etc.
he was fled away: and it is probable that he admonished Onesimus to submit
himself to his master.

Servants and apprentices therefore according to the rule of Gods word, must
patiently bear, and forbear their masters, mistresses, and dames, and do
whatsoever lawful thing they shall command them, not being against a good
conscience. And therefore they must remember, how How far forth servants ought
to obey their masters.
far forth they are bound to obey their masters, that is, Vsque ad aras: so
far as Christian religion suffers, and so far forth as they may do it with
an upright conscience: for otherwise, if their masters shall command them to
do any thing that is dishonest, unlawful, wicked, unjust, or ungodly, then they
must in no wise obey it, 1. Sam. 20. 28. etc. and 22. 17. Dan. 3. 18. Act. 4.
19. and 5. 29.

The conditions of a good maid-seruant, are, that she be careful, faithful,
patient, neat, and pleasing, that she be (...), quick, and handsome, and of
few words, honest in her word, deed, and attire: diligent in an household, and
have skill in washing, (...), brewing, sowing, and spinning, but chiefly in
holding her peace.

Servants must lay apart all evil conditions, as pride, unfaithfulness,
brawling, murmuring, lying, swearing, and filthy communication, picking,
stealing, and tales telling.

If servants would carefully mark and learn, Mat. 8 9.
and so diligently practice these three short lessons following: so doing (no
doubt) they might both procure and purchase much quietness to themselves, and
also win and get the great good will and liking of their masters,
mistresses, and dames thereby: First, that they would cheerfully go when they
are bidden. Secondly, that they would come willingly and readily when they be
called. And lastly, that they would remember to shut and sparre the doors
after them. The neglect and omitting of this last duty, may happily be thought
no great matter: but if such as be housekeepers will carefully observe it, they
shall find, that they sustain both less and hinderance by it.

And because it sometime happens, that one And among servants, to help and
ease of one another necessary.
servant is too much charged with labor and work, and another of his fellows
has more ease then work, one therefore should help another, as we see by use
in our own bodies, when one leg is weary, we can rest it on the other, or when
the right hand is ouerlaboured, we can ease it with the left: and when
intercourse of love and courtesy intreates and persuades not this favor and
kindness amongst them, then should the master himself command the negligent
and loytering servant, to help and ease the weary, and him that is well
employed and ouer-charged.

Again, servants are to be admonished and Servants must to the uttermost of
their power, seek the commodity and benefit of their masters.
put in mind, that they do not (as some do without all conscience) make spoil
and hauock of their masters goods, wittingly, and willingly: neither yet that
they suffer any of those things that they are put in trust with, through their
heedlesnesse and retchlesse, to be marred and lost: but specially that they do
not make spoil and wast of such broken meat as remains after their meals
or at other times: which doing, is not only an hinderance to their masters
profit, but also a great offense to God, who commands that such broken meat
as remains, be gathered up and saved, that so nothing be lost. loh. 6. 12.
Therefore to conclude, let servants and apprentises, both men and maids, assure
themselves, that as they deal and behave themselves to their masters,
mistresses or dames, and their goods, whilst they are servants, so likewise
the Lord in justice will cause their servants to deal and behave themselves to
them when they shall come to be masters or dames themselves, so punishing
sin with sin.

And as religious and godly masters be very Mat. 7. 2.
wary and circumspect, when they hire and entertain any servants into their
service, that they be such as be godly, honest and religious, or at least such
as will be tractable and obedient to such good order and godly government, as
is, or shall be used and exercised daily in their houses, but contrariwise,
such masters as be profane and irreligious, have no care or regard whom they
hire or receive into their houses, so they will fit and serve their turn for
gain and profit, though they be never so Iewd, vicious, or ungodly in word or
deed: so likewise, such as are Christian and religious servants, ought also to
be very wary and careful, that they do not place themselves with any such
masters as are profane and wicked, or in such towns and parishes where there
wants good means, and exercises both of preaching and catechizing, whereby
they may daily profit and go forward in that good course which they have begun:
whereas on the other side, such servants as are without God, irreligious and
ignorant of the means of their salvation, care not where, or with whom they
dwell: nay, they will not with their good wills, come to dwell either in that
town, or with those masters, where they shall be restrained and kept from
swearing, dicing, carding, tabling, profaning of the Lords day, and other such
wickedness: who in thus doing, do fly from God, and seek and follow after
their own destruction.

FINIS.

