COMPENDIUM POLITICUM, OR; THE Distempers of Government, Under these two Heads,
The Nobilities Desire of RULE. The Commons Desire of LIBERTY.


With their proper Remedies, in a brief Essay on the long Reign of King HENRY
III.

By J. Y. of Grayes-Inne, Esquire

(...). Arist: Ethic. lib. 1. cap. 1.

Ars omnis, itemque actio, and propositum aliquod bonum experete videtur.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Clavel, at the Sign of the Peacock in St. Paul's
Churchyard 1680.

To his most Honored Uncle, but more worthy Friend, Mr. THOMAS STOCK of Upham
in the County of Southampton, Gent.
WHither should we fly for succor against approaching dangers but to such
whose goodness and ability has both sheltered and protected us heretofore?
It Is hard for a Cock-boat to venture to confront a Storm, when the ablest Ship
must be in a great deal of danger. These Tempestuous times seem to threaten
Shipwreck to the Commonwealth her self, and what must a single member thereof
expect, when he steers himself betwixt the violence of Opposite Interests and
Factions? Liberty! Liberty! was too lately the Cry, when in the consequence the
whole Kingdom labored under the greatest Tyranny and Slavery; and those that
affect the People with that, surprise them to their own purposes, in the unjust
and covert propagation of their own affected Superiority: Thus you see the
Rocks on both sides, and from your exemplary moderation I have studied and
learned an impartial guidance in these distractions of time.

Happy is he who can discriminate his Judgment, and (in these times) anchor
his Affections in the blessed Haven of Peace, and infallible impartiallity. We
ought to be as sollicitous about the lawfulness of the means, as about the
goodness of the end; It is a rule in Ethics that Bonum oritur ex integris, and
in Christ's Schole, that We must not do evil that good may come of it; and we
may possibly prevent future cousenage, if we examine the Lawfulness of every
circumstance leading to the end propounded, before we are tickled and
transported with the beauty of the pretense. This Armor I have always thought
and learned from your excellent Example, and from the Principles laid down by
the best Authors to be Faction proof.

This Compendium as your Relation claims your Care; and under that pretense
the Author is emboldned to thrust it into your Closset. It claims your
perusal, because it is Political, and strikes at the Root of such Errors as are
too frequently visible both in the Prince and People: Under the Government of
the first you are concerned in respect to the King's Care, as your Sovereign,
and under the Obedience of the latter, with relation to your Duty, and
Allegiance as his Subject. It had been needless to have writ any Epistle at
all, had I had no design more necessary, than that of commenting on my Labor
(the full Bulk whereof extending it self not beyond the bigness of a moderate
Dedication) But the most enforcing enducement was that of taking hold on this
occasion publicly to exert my gratitude.

And that the World may know how much I am obliged always to render my self,

Your most faithful Friend and affectionate Nephew JOHN YALDEN.
Grayes-Inne Feb. 8. 1679.
TO THE READER.
READER,
I Must first be so just to my self as to avoid Pliny's malediction aagainst
those Thieves who will steal even an whole Author, and not so much as add to
the sense one Paragraph, or alter one Syllable in the Phrase, Reprehensione
dignum est, Majorum tacere nomina, and eorum sibi appropriare ingenia. Whereas
(says the same Author) Benignum etenim est and plenum ingenui pudoris fateri
per quos profeceris; Nevertheless I can only tell thee this, that I have
changed both the Phrase (to a finer Allay) of my Author, I have added many
whole Paragraphs and pages to pursue his excellent design, which he had only
framed, not completed; and which came to my hands in the form of an old musty
Manuscript, which was not capable to tell its Author's name, and very difficult
to express its design, being in many places prejudiced by time (that Edax
rerum) to a great imperfection. I thought it therefore best not to thrust it
into the World crippled and injured as it was, nor to amend its old expressions
with a new sort of Dialect, on purpose to avoid piecing and patching; And if
yet any thing of Lameness shall remain, be thou not a Noverca, but rather a
Nutrix, extenuate thy Candor and suppress thy prejudice and if thou please to
take the pains thou have as much right to put it into a better dress, which I
commend to thy sufficient ability. Yet nevertheless it is expected from some
that this will be upbraided with Bastardy, and be despised and hated as Filius
Populi, by that abounding and multitudinous sort of People who are called
Partialists, who always wedded to their own particular Lusts and private
Interests, that are factious even to Rebellion and Tyranny, that will neither
give God nor Caesar his due: Notwithstanding it is resolved to venture, knowing
that no sorrow is sudden to an expectation; And that it will find some (though
but a few) that will both commend and protect it. It will Court all but Flatter
none: It is the hand that points at The Princes Right and the Peoples Liberty.
It is that little Costick which will twinge all such whose corruptions are ripe
for separation; and though it may make them wince at the touch of their
thwarted passions; yet it is the surest means to work the cure, if they will be
persuaded to endure the Pain.

The design of this is to sweeten the seeming bitter severities, yet just
necessities of Government and render them plausible and palliable to the
People, that so they may delight more in their Duty to obey than the Sovereign
in his Power to Command (Legum servi sumus ut Libri esse possumus, says
Cicero) And the Prince (on whose Head is placed both at once the Weight and
Glory of a Crown) and the People may both mutually know (since the burden of a
Crown is first understood before the Glory is perceived) that Grandeur is both
to compensate as well as dignify the toils and difficulties of Government.

Bracton says Nihil aliud potest Rex, in terris cum sit Dei Minister and
Vicarius, nisi id solum quod de jure potest, which is an Axiom that puts
reciprocal bounds of Justice and Goodness, both to instruct the Prince in his
Duty and Behavior toward God and his Subjects, and the People in their due
Obedience to their Sovereign, since the King is none, but the Almighty's
Substitute or Viceroy, and consequently to be questioned for his Actions, or
punished by none but God himself, who is not to be hastened or directed in the
disposition of his Vengeance, but rather entreated by hearty: Prayer for the
removal of his Plagues and Judgments.

I stand amazed when I consider the many Factions and Seditions amongst us,
that these Kingdoms are not already the Subjects of irritated Justice: when I
hear the open murmurs, and see the many Treasonable Libels in these licentious
times; The Prince abused, and the People deceived by Instruments of Darkness
and wicked practices, by such men, or rather Monsters, who when they most
violently cry up the Kingdoms good under the necessity of reforming the
manners of Magistracy, they only aim at the destruction of Peace and
Innocence, which is the hated Object of such devouring Vultures.

Hence I foresee the Imminent Dangers and miserable Calamities that every
moment seems to threaten inevitable miseries on these divided Kingdoms. One may
perceive the dreadful storm hanging, as it were, immediately over our Heads, We
are confounded on all Hands, and the Disease seems almost Remediless; Rome's
horrid Plots are not yet fully detected, and God knows how much of the Good old
Cause remains yet to this day in the Hearts of partial and ill affected
Puritans. These two are the Sylla and Charibdis of our misfortunes, and seem to
make but one Body, because they aim at one end, the destruction of our Lives,
Religion, and Government.

Let the King and People therefore of the established Church of England take as
much care against the hatred of a Puritan as against the malice of a Jesuit,
the Contrivances of the latter (being commonly prevented) having never acted so
vile a Tragedy, as the Principles and Practices of the former. The Pope in all
his Bulls and Interdicts cannot fulminate more Maledictions than have been
reduced into Practice amongst our Jesuited Fanatics.

Let us then beware of these two; Be obedient to our King; and his Majesty
careful both of himself and us; let the Laws be duly practiced and observed,
and then the King, our Lives, Religion and Government will be safely preserved.

Farewell.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 23. read such tortious. p. 4. l. 17. r. would not. p. 12. l. 14.
r. any matter. p. 16. l. 23. r. as the, l. 25. dele B. p. 18. l. 13. r. and
popularity. p. 32. l. 7. r. the King's necessities. p. 45. l. 16. r. former
restrictions. p. 47. l. 14. r. view of. p. 51. l. 2. r. enraged. p. 51. l. 12.
r. So the. p. 60. l. ult. r. and precipitation. p. 61. l. 17. r. almost, l. 21.
r. bestowing.

COMPENDIUM POLITICUM, OR, The Distempers of Government, With their proper
Remedies, in a short Essay on the long Reign of King HENRY III.
SCarce was that unfortunate Prince, King John, entombed within the bowels of
the Earth, but the People, wearied with the heavy burdens of his time, but
more especially with the lingering Calamities of Civil Arms, and the affrighted
fall of that Prince, their licentious and unhappy Sovereign; but all men stood
at gaze expecting the event of their long desires, Peace, and the issue of
their new hopes, their own particular benefits, for in all changes of
Government, and in every shift of Princes, there are few either so mean or
modest, that please not themselves with some probable object of preferment.

But for the general satisfaction Mat. Paris Hist. minor.
and composure of the minds of all, a Child (whose auspitious looks seemed to
portend the common good) ascends the Throne; mild and gracious, but easy of
nature, whole innocence and natural goodness (the paths of the Almighty's
providence) led him safe along the various dangers of his Father's Reign: Happy
was he in his Uncle William Marshall Earl of Pembroke, the guide and moderator
of his Infancy, and his most faithful Counselor for no less than thirty years
after, whilst De Burgo (that fast Servant of his Father's against the French
both in Normandy and England) with Bigot Earl of Norfolk, and others of great
gravity and experience, did govern, and by their Counsels conduct the whole
affairs of the Kingdom.

Few, and none others, were the Distempers of State, but such as are incident
and concurrent in all, viz. The Nobility's desire of Rule, and the Commons of
Liberty: Fulco de Brent, De Fortibus and some others, men that could only
thrive by Wars, the Balance of whose Lives was their keenest Swords, ready at
all adventures to abscind the right and peace of others; These, and such men
misliked those days of Sloth (for so they termed the calmness and tranquillity
of King Henry's Government) and the rather for that the Justice of quiet times
urged from them to the lawful Owners, tortious Possessions and unlawful
seisins as the sury of War had unjustly given them, and finding that the King
would make his Prerogatives as sacred in their use as they are in their Style,
and that his Majesty would not suffer his Power of Protection to be made a
Stalking-horse to the Rapines and Injustices of wicked men, making good that
Maxim, Rex hoc solum non potest facere, quod non potest injuste Co. 11. Rep.
Magdalen College Case. Histor. S. Alb.
agere: They fell out into the Rebellion that with it ended their Lives and
Competitions, professing that the Swords which had set the Crown upon the
Sovereign, when neither Majesty nor Law could, should secure those small
pittances to their Masters, when Majesty and Law could not: Dangerous are too
great benefits of Subjects to their Princes, when it makes the mind capable of
Merit, nothing of Duty: Ambitious men are dangerous in Councils, and disturb
the quiet of the Commonweal, more than the passionate Winds can toss or
prejudice a ship in the Ocean; No other turbulences did the State after feel
but such as are incident in all, the Malice of Authority.

Good and great men may secure themselves from Guilt, but not Envy; for
greatest in trust for public affairs are still shot at by the aspiring of
those who deem themselves less in employment than merit. These vapors did ever
and easily vanish, so long as the Helm was guided by temperate Spirits, and the
King tied his actions to the rule of good Counsel, and not to young,
passionate, or single advice.

Thirty years now passed, and all the Guides of his youth dead but De Burgo, a
man in whom nothing of worth was wanting but moderation, when length of days
giving him advantage of sole Power, his ambition and age gave him desires and
art to seclude others, which wrought him into the fatal envy of most, and that
was increased in the title of Earl, and an Office the Earl of Kent.
King gave him. Time by this had wrought, as in it self, so in the affections
of the people a Revolution: The Affliction of their Fathers forgotten, and the
Surfeit of long Peace (perchance) having led in some abuses; Hence the Commons,
to whom days present seem ever worst, commend the foregone Ages they never
remembered, and condemn the present, though they neither knew the Disease
thereof nor the Remedy. To these idle and pernicious humors of the unwary and
unsteady Rabble, some young and noble Spirits often adhere, who always covet
Action and rarely consider the Consequence, who being as ignorant as the rest,
first, by fullying the Wisdom and Conduct of the present and greatest Rulers
(making each casual mishap their error) seem to decipher every blemish in
Government, and by holding mere imaginary and fantastic forms of Government,
flatter their own belief and abilities that they can mould any State to those
general rules, which in particular application will prove idle and gross
absurdities: Confirmed in their own worth by Somerie and Spencer, they take it
a fit time to work themselves into Action and Authority, a thing very long
desired, and now (though unwilling to seem so) sue for, and covet it, but the
King taught them by the new Earl Consilia Senum, hastas Juvenum esse.
and that such wits (for so they would be styled) Novandis quam gerendis rebus
aptiores.
fitter in being factious to disorder than to settle affairs, either delayed or
denied their desires, for wise Princes will ever choose them Ministers, Par
negotiis and non supra.
Creatures that are only theirs, otherwise without Friends or Power; It is not
the least happiness for Princes to be served with good Subjects equal to their
affairs, for those abilities that are above their employments cause negligence,
and those that are beneath, ruin of the Agent: Amongst this unequal medly,
there were of the Nobility Richard Marshal Earl Mat. Paris Hist. minor.
of Pembroke, Gloucester, and Hereford, Darlings of the Multitude, some for the
merits of their Fathers, whose memory they held sacred, as Pillars of public
Liberty, and Opposers of incroaching Monarchy at Rumney Meade; and of the
Gentry, Fitz-Geffery, Bardolfe, Gresley, Maunsel, and Fitz-John, Spirits of as
much acrimony and arrogant Spleen as the places from whence they were elected,
(Camp, Court and Country) could afford any, these design to compass their
ends by force, whilst the others effect their purposes by obscure arts and
cunning contrivances, too well knowing that Ars Vim superat, yet though the
latter by their subtle policies could overreach their Competitors, they could
never prevail over wholesome and honest Counsels: But all minds being as much
disturbed as their interests were divided, and designs frivolous and fruitless,
and that so long as the King followed the Counsels and Directions of the Earl
of Kent, they had small hopes of their desires and mischievous purposes, they
made frequent and often meetings, and as one says of them Clam and nocturnis
colloquiis. Mat. Paris Hist. minor.



In the end Somerie and Spencer, two that were far in opinion with the rest,
whose Education qualified them in all respects for greater employments than any
of their times, they having the advantages of foreign experience in their
Travels abroad, and well understanding the individual interests of the King and
his Neighbors; upon these grounds they glossed their own merits, and set upon
their own deserts, the best places when the stream should turn, which one of
them (Spencer) did most unworthily obtain, for he raised in actual Rebellion
Justiciarios Angliae against his Sovereign, and advised that the best means to
remove that great and good Obstacle, the Earl of Kent, out of the way of their
preferment, was by sifting into his actions and siding with his opposite, and
most implacable enemy Peter Bishop of Winchester, an evil man but gracious with
the King, aiming to drive out the most worthy by the worst of men: That being
their Maxim, they made no doubt they should be able to remove the Instrument of
their intended villainies (the haughty Bishop) by dilating his particular Vices,
and making them conspicuous, and him notorious both to King and People, which
will be ever more possible as he is more potent, and so conclude to remove him
at their pleasure, or else this must be the way, to give the King over to such
Ministers as would certainly cut off the affections of his people, and
consequently render the Government odious: So they doubt not (though the first
stratagem miss) that this must certainly hit the mark, and light them the way
to their dark and evil purposes, Honores quos quieta Republica desperant,
perturbata consequi se posse arbitrantur.



This Counsel being heard and approved must now be put in practice, the corrupt
and ambititious Bishop is drawn to their party by Money and an opinion of
increase of Power; men are most easily corrupted in the supreamest Fortunes,
where Lusts may have the advantage of being armed with Power: Articles are in
all have forged and urged against the good and innocent Earl, as, Sale of the
Crown Lands, Wast of the King's Treasure, and Lastly that (which those
ambiguous times held Capital) giving allowance to any that might breed a
rupture between the Sovereign and the Subject, which they charged to be his
design (to work some machinations of his own against the Government) and to
have been done by him, in working the King to annihilate all Patents granted
during his minority, and enforcing the Subject to pay as the Record it self
mentions, Non juxta singulorum facultatem, sed quicquid Justiciarius estimabat.
But the good Earl stood upon his own legs and opposed his innocence singly to
shield him from the mischiefs of their wicked purposes, and he cleared himself
of all their false accusations; but they did worthily perish by their own
Swords, for Arts that fit Princes, end ever in the ruin of the first inventors:
Bad times corrupt good Counsel and make the best Ministers yield to the Lusts
of Princes, Irridenda est eorum socordia, qui Tacit. l. 4.
presenti potentia credunt extingui posse sequentis aevi memoriam.



Therefore this King cannot pass blameless, that would so easily banish all
former merit of so good a Servant for that wherein himself was chief in fault:
But Princes natures are more voluble and sooner cloyed than others, their
Favors transitory; and as their minds are large, so they easily out-look their
first elections, having no farther necessity in the fastness of their
affections than their own satisfactions: When it is once past Noon with a
Court-favourite, it is suddenly Night with him. The eminent Virtue of men, if
it be Marq. Virgil. Malvezzi.
not the cause of their natural, is frequently of their civil and political
destruction; at first they are sought to, and raised by the necessities of the
Prince, and under color of the same pretext, or cause, they meet with ruin;
The Tree that was esteemed for its Shadow to shelter us from the heat of the
Summer, is afterward cut down to defend us from the cold of the Winter; the
same man whom Princes advance, and embrace in the heat of their necessity, is
he whom they cut down in the cold of their jealousy.

The Bishop now sits at Helm and mannageth the State as he pleases, Chron. de
Litchfield.
having chosen for his Instruments, Peter Rivalis, a man like himself; he
displaceth the Natives, and obtrudes the Britains and other Foreiners into
Offices and Places of the largest benefit and greatest trust: by whose conduct
in Affairs, the King is drawn into an evil opinion of his people: For nothing
is more intolerable with and against the nature of the English, than to have
Strangers rule over them. Of these times Wendover an Author then living,
says, Judicia committuntur injustis, Leges ex legibus, justitia injuriosis.

Thus the Plot of the tumultuous Barons went clear, and had not the discreter
Bishops calmed all by dutiful persuasions, informing the King of the pernicious
consequences that must inevitably follow this bad man's counsels and power,
whose carriage before had lost his Father Normandy, his Treasure, the love of
the People, and in that the Crown, and would (by teaching the Son passionately
to reject the just Petitions and Rights of his loyal Subjects, as of late the
Earl of Pembroke Earl Marshal of England, the due of his Office) drive the
whole Commonweal into distraction and discontent, by his bad advice and corrupt
manners; and doubtless the rebellious Lords had ended this Distemper as they
designed in a Civil War, had not these and the like wholesome Counsels stopped
them in their career. Denials of Princes must be supplied with gracious usage,
that though they cure not the Sore, yet they abate the sense of it: But it is
best that all Favors flow directly from the Princes themselves, as the proper
Fountains of principal goodness and mercy: Denials, and things of bitterness
from their Ministers, are the proper Heralds of their Justice. Thus are the
strangers all displaced and banished: B. Rivalis Extortions, ransackt by many
strict Commissions of Inquiry, the Bishop himself sent disgraced to his See,
finds now that Nulla quesita scelere potentia diuturna:


And that in Princes Favors there is no subsistence betwixt a mediocrity and
precipitation; so dangerous are the ways of Majesty, and men so foolish as to
quicken their approaching ruins, by their partial Counsels, the effects of
their own indulgence to their wicked Politics: Policy is a Sea so inconstant
and so turbulent, that there is no place to be found in it where we have not
seen one or other cast away; it is a piece of Architecture so decayed, that it
always threatens to tumble.

The affections of a corrupt mind, like those of a diseased body, are always
pernicious: The Lords begin now to sow upon this late ground of the peoples
discontent, Querelas and ambiguos de principe sermones; Monac. de Bur.
and take the readiest way to destroy the Government, by slandering the King
and his Counsels, which is the best Expedient for them to procure the peoples
affection, who always love change; and those who have the greatest tyranny in
projection, will be the most vehement and earnest Assertors of the peoples
liberties and power, or popularity acquired by fraud or violence, will never be
employed in the exercise of Justice: The King whose Nature was too gentle for
such insolent Spirits, was forced as Fre. says) to seek as he Regist. de Ma.
Paris.
presently did the advice and counsels of strangers, seeing his diligent care
and greatest merits could not procure or purchase it within his own Dominions;
all bearing and behaving themselves more like Tutors and Controllers, than like
Lib. de Bermonsey.
Subjects and Counselors.

It Is the Almighty that rules the hearts of Princes, and it is he alone that can
pry into, prosper, or divert their purposes: Nihil est quod Deus efficere non
potest, and ullo sine labor; It Is he whose auspicious Providence ever works,
and yet never labors, but is eternally concerned in the preservation of all
Sublunary Beings; more especially of those whose eminence exceeds all others
(as Princes do) and stands next in relation (in respect of their Office) to the
same Providence that finds means both to preserve and direct them: Whilst by
the former Factions, the Affairs of State seem to go retrograde; Heaven sends
the King such a Counselor as the necessity of those times required: Mountfort
a Frenchman is now become the Subject of the Kings Favors; and the choicest
Object of his delight; a Gentleman of noble blood, and ample education; whose
comely features and exact delineaments seemed nevertheless to adapt him more
for a Mistress than a Counselor.

The King seemed to be never more concerned than when this Favorite seemed to
be troubled, and on this man's content, the strongest affections of his Prince
did so dote, that at the first essay of the Kings Favors and grace, his
Majesty (in spite of the Nobility) created him Earl of Leicester, and in no
less offense of the Clergy (by violating the Rites of holy Church) gave him his
vowed veiled Sister to Wife. More of art than usual, some have deemed this Act
of the Ma. Par. Rog. Wend.
Kings making the tie of such dependency, and the strength of this assurance
both at his will. Mountfort made wanton thus with the dalliance of his Master,
sorgetteth his moderation; for discretion in youth seldom attends great and
sudden Fortunes: He draws all public Affairs into his own hands; all favors
must pass from him, all preferments by him: the King stands but as a Cipher to
add the greater Number to this Figure; and his Majesty thought himself Chron.
Jo. de Salgr.
never more secure and glorious, than when this State-Statue was most adored;
there was such a perfect union betwixt them, that the crosses and prosperities
of the one, were bewailed and accepted by the other, and the King looked upon
him no more as a Subject, but as his dearest Friend and most familiar
Companion. Great is the Sovereign's error, and dangerous his condition, when
the hope of Subjects must acknowledge it self beholding to the Servant for
matters of the greatest importance, and acts of the greatest grace, which ought
always to be owned as the immediate bounty and good election of himself. The
most eminent Exertions of the Sovereigns Grandeur, is always conspicuous in the
most elevated choice of great Actions; for, Non vacat exiguis rebus adesse Jovi;


The Poets feign, that the Universe is born on the Shoulders of Atlas. So great
Actions (which ought always to be the Princes own work) are the best Supporters
of universal Sovereignty: Though Princes may take above others some Cabinet
Friend, with whom they may participate their nearest Passions, yet it is their
greatest prudence, so to moderate and temperate the Affairs of their Favorite,
that they corrupt not the effects of their Principalities: Mountfort is this
Minion which grated the Spirits of the great men, and they conclude him
unworthy to deal alone in those Matters which should pass through their hands,
and are implacably incensed to see him leap over all their Heads to the
greatest Honors and Offices; they presently run along with the rising Grace of
the Kings half-brethren, (though Strangers) hoping thereby to divide that power
which otherwise they saw impossible to break. Leicester confident of his
Masters love, and impatient to bear either Rival in Favor, or Partner in Rule,
opposes them all, and arrays his audacity against their malice; yet he found
in the ebb of his Fortunes the mischance of others; that this King could as
easily transfer his Fancy, as he had unadvisedly settled his Choice. Great (we
see) must be the experience and cunning of that man that can Pilote himself
amidst the various streams and sudden gusts of Princes Favors, since the
mutability of their Affections are as certain, as their Resolutions are
difficult to be fixed: whosoever intends to effect this, must not aim only at
the Honor and Service of his Master, dispoyled of all other respects,
transform himself into his inward inclinations, work into a necessity of
emplyoment, by undergoing the Offices of greatest Secrecy, either of public
Service, or Princes Pleasures, he must tumble down Competitors of worth by
others hands, conceal his own Grandeur in public, with a pretended humility,
and what in Popularity or Government he affects, let it rather seem the work
of others, than any appetite of his own. Thus were the Reigns of Government (by
this advantage) made by the rebellious Lords, put solely into the hands of the
Kings half-brethren, Adam Guydo, and Godfrey, and William himself as before; Ex
magna fortuna licentiam tantam usurpans: H. Kinston
So now to act his own part was warily withdrawn, when he had such eminent and
worthy Relators of all his Actions about the King, as would frequently for his
honor and advantage opportunely urge them. These Masters (as Wallingford
termed them) Tanta elati jactantia quod nec superiorem sibi intelligunt nec
parem, mellitis, and mollitis adulationibus animum Regis pro libito voluntatis
ex rationis tramite declinantes, do alone what they list, they fill up the
Courts and places of Justice, and trust their Countrymen under the conduct and
rule of Foreiners, exact on whom and how they please, consume the Kings
Treasure, and dispose the Crown Lands upon themselves and followers, set prices
on all Offenses, darraign the Justice of the Law within the rule of their own
breast, the usual reply of their Creatures or Servants, being to the complaints
of the Kings Subjects. Quis tibi rectum faciet, Dominus Rex vult quod Dominus
meus vult? W. Bishang.




These Strangers seemed in their lawless carriage not to have been invited, but
to have entered the State by conquest, exercising rather the Severities of
Conquerors; than behaving themselves as good Magistrates or Friends, knowing
that such power as is acquired by fraud, must be maintained by violence: The
Nobility they compel not to obey but serve, and the meaner sort to live so as
they may justly say, they had nothing, bringing in the greatest miseries that
an unlimited power could inflict. Plenitudo potestatis est plenitudo
tempestatis: Yet least the King should hear the groans of his people (which
able and honest men would tell him) they bar all possibility of access to such
men, suspicion and jealousy being the best means to conceal their own defects,
always aiming at the ruin of those who have more of virtue than themselves,
having the greatest cause to fear them most. Omnis facultas gubernandi quae est
Grot. de jure B. and P. l. 1. c. 4. Sect. 6.
in Magistratibus, summae potestati ita subjicitur, ut quicquid contra
voluntatem summi Imperantis faciant, id defectum sit ea facultate, ac proinde
pro actu privato habendum.



Thus happens the incapacity of Government in Princes, when it falls to be a
prey to such lawless Minions, the ground of all corruption in all the members
of King Henry's State. Contagions easily attaque the fairest Fortunes, and men
take example generally from their Prince's Weakness and Licentious Liberty; and
Greatness frequently makes Gain a Monopoly, which gives way to the growth of
evils, and they matter nothing more than their own private Lucre. A Famine
accompanies these Corruptions, and that so violent, that the King is enforced
to direct Writs to all the Shires, Ad pauperes mortuos sepeliendos faucis media
deficientis, (Famine Rot. clang. 42 H. 3.
proceeds) and secutus est Gladius tam terribilis ut nemo inermis secure
possit Provincias pervagari.

For all places within the Realm were left a Prey to the Fury of the lawless
and irresistible multitude (Plebs aut humiliter servit aut superbe dominatur)
who, Per diversas parts itinerantes velut per consensum aliorum (as the Record
says)

did imply that the factious Lords suspected by the King, had given some heat
to that Commotion, Seditious Peers being too frequently the fomenters, but ever
Fuel to such popular Conflagrations. Neither were the Churchmen without their
parts in this Tragic work, as, Walter Bishop of Worcester, and Robert of
Lincoln (to whom Mountfort and his Faction percordialiter adherebant) were much
engaged: These Contagions infect the Church as well as the State, and the
Clergy in such designs are rarely backward: and the disgust of the present
Government in the Church as well as in the Commonwealth, will be but one
design carried on by the united Will. Rishanger.
resolutions in the members of both; for such turbulent and unquiet Spirits,
who propose to themselves a better fortune in the new modeling, or clean
extirpation of the old, and introducing some new form of Government, which
always in the minds of the giddy multitude wins an applause both for the
Design and the Projectors, and did at this time fitly suit the peoples humor,
so much distasted at the new Courts of the Clergy, their Pomp, their Avarice,
and the Pope's Extortions: Fair pretext it was to these Factious Bishops to use
their embittered Pens and Speeches, which they did so severely against some
Religious Orders, Ceremonies, and State of the Church, that one of them
incurred the Sentence of Excommunication at Rome, and Treason at home; for he
enjoined the Earl of Leicester, In remissionem Peccatorum ut causam Mat. Paris
Will. Rishanger.
illam (meaning the rebellion) usque ad mortem assumerit, asserens pacem
Ecclesiae Anglorum sine Gladio materiali nunquam firmari.

Falsely grounding his opinion and practices on the saying of St. Isidore, Quod
non praevalet Sacerdos efficere Isidor. sent. li. 3. ca. 15.
per doctrinae Sermonem, Potestas hoc imperet per disciplina terrorem.



It was not the best Doctrine this man might plant to preach its firmation and
establishment by a disordered Liberty, and Civil Wars, when the first Church
propagated its Discipline and Doctrine by Fasting and Prayer: True Piety
binds the Subject to deliver a good Sovereign, to bear with a Bad, and to
take up the burden of Princes with a bended Knee, hoping rather in time to
merit Abatement than resist Authority: The Vices of bad Princes are to be born
with the like patience as we endure Dearths and Tempests, or such like
Deviations of Nature from her usual course; because though Princes (as they are
men) may be vicious, yet as such are not immortal; and a pious Successor may
repair the ruins of a former Oppressor. Churchmen ought not to lead us in the
rule of Loyalty, but instruct us in the knowledge of our Christian and
Spiritual Duties, in difficult points of Religion (where an humble ignorance is
a safe and secure knowledge) we may rely on them.

To suppress these troubles, and supply the King's enormities, a Parliament was
summoned much to the liking of these Lords, who as little meant to relieve the
King's wants as they did desire, and endeavor to quiet His Majesty's Realms,
their end at this time being only to discover the Nakedness or Poverty of their
Master at home, that so they may be able to diminish his Credit and Glory
abroad, and so the better to brave out their inclinations freely; which those
licentious times did permit. Here Chron de Worcester.
they began to be barefaced, and audaciously to tell their Sovereign that he
had wronged his Subjects, and injured the public good, in that he had taken
to his private choice the Chief Justice, Chancellor, and Treasurer, that should
be only by the Common Council of the Realm, commending much the Bishop of
Chichester for denying M. Paris. R. Wendov.
the delivery of the Great Seal but in Parliament where he received it. They
blame him to have bestowed the best Places of trust and benefit (that were in
his gift) upon Strangers, and to leave the English unrewarded. To have Jo.
Wallingford. M. Paris. Ma. Paris.
ruined the Trade of Merchants by bringing Maltolts, and Customs, and to have
invaded the Liberty of the Subject by Non Obstantes in his Patents to make good
Monopolies for private Favorites. That he has taken from his Subjects,
Quicquid habuerunt in esculentis and poculentis. Rusticorum enim Equos, Bigas,
Vina, victualia ad Libitum caepit.



That his Judges in their Circuits under color of Justice do Fleece the People
Causis fictitiis quoscunque poterunt diripuerunt.

And Sir Robert de Parslaw had Chron. de S. Albani.
wrong from the Borders of his Forests under pretense of Encroachments, and
Asserts great sums of Money, and therefore they wonder he should now demand
Relief from his so pilled and polled Commons, alleging the saying of Tiberius,
Quod boni Pastoris est pecus tondere non deglubere, Sueton.


And that by these, and such like former extremities, Et per auxiliae prius
data, ita depauperentur, ut nihil habeant in Will. Rishanger.
bonis.



And therefore they advise him that since his needless Expense (posteaquam
Regni caepit esse dilapidator) was summed up by them to above 800000 lib. It
were most just and expedient to retrench or resume from his Favorites who had
degluberated the Kingdom's Treasure, divided the old Lands of the Crown, for,
and amongst, themselves. Some of them they undertake to describe: Saying one is
Clericus militaris, or, Literatus Chron de Litchfield.
Miles, that in a short space from the possession of an Acre had grown up to
the Inheritance of an Earldom. And that Maunsell Mat. Paris Hist. minor. W.
Rishang.
another inferior Clerk did constantly expend 4000 marks, as the Product of his
yearly Revenue, whereas a more compendious Stipend would have more aptly suited
the dignity of Clerks better qualified than with the mean and ordinary fruits
of a Writingschool.

Notwithstanding all which grievances, if a moderate supply would suite with
the King's occasions they were content to perform Relief in obedience, and as
the Ad Reges potestas omnium pertinet, ad singulos proprietas.
desert of his carriage toward them should merit, and so (as the Record says)
Dies datus fuit in tres septimanas Mat. Paris Regist. R. de Waling.
ut interim Rex excessus suos corrigeret, and magnates voluntati ejus
obtemperarent.



At which day upon his Majesty's new grant of the Great Charter, admittance to
his Council of some persons elected by the Commons, and promise to rely upon
natural Subjects of England, and not upon strangers for his Counselors
hereafter, they grant him such a Supply as his occasions must shortly after
oblige him again to their Devotion for another. Thus Parliaments that were ever
before the most infallible medicine to heal up any Distempers or Malignities,
are now grown worse, and almost less desirous, than the Maladies themselves,
since malevolent humors and factious Spirits did most of all sway in them, and
the well-composed Tempers had the least share and prevalency in all their
Consultations.

Thus the King did demonstratively experience the purposes of his Rebellious
Subjects, and finding that the ebb of his Treasure caused his Calamities to
flow the higher, he begins to play the good Husband, conclude all
Extravagances, and close the mouth of his overspending and over-open Purse, and
resolves himself, though too late, to stand alone. Such experience is always
pernicious to the private and dangerous to the public good of the State, when
it never learns to do but by undoing, and never sees Order but when Confusion
shows it: Yet still, alas, such was his flexibility that he could not refrain
his assent to the vast, and as it were unlimited desires and importunities of
his Foreigners, tending to endless wast and destruction, so that an Author
living in those times says it became a Hist. minor. S. Albani.
by word amongst the Natives, Our Inheritance is converted to Aliens, and our
houses to Strangers. Servants to a King excessive in Gifts, measure their
demands by his bounty, and put them not out by reason but by example. Men
naturally affect no bounty but what is merely future, the more that a prince
weakeneth himself by giving, the poorer he is of Friends, for prodigality in
the Sovereign seldom ends without the Spoil and rapine of the Subject,
self-interested Ministers ever building their Power, and conceive themselves to
be as Arbitrary as their Master's Liberality to them is profuse.

The Kings Treasure is again exhausted, and yet he resolves, that before he
will submit himself again to and bear as he had done the last Parliament; so
many bravadoes and strict enquiries, and severe scrutinies of his factious and
disobedient Subjects, he resolves to pass through all the shifts that extremity
of need with greatness of mind could lay before him. He 46 H. 3.
begins first, with the Sale of Crown Lands, and then of Jewels, pawneth
Gascoigne, and after that his Imperial Crown: And when he had neither credit to
borrow, (having too often failed the reputation he had gotten) nor pawns of his
own to procure any more, he then engaged the Jewels, and other Ornaments of
Saint Edward's 49 H. 3.
Shrine: And in the end, being destitute both of Means and Money to defray the
ordinary Expenses of his Court; was constrained to break up house: and (as
Paris says) with his Wife and Children: Hist. minor.
Cum abatibus and prioribus satis humilibus hospitia quaerunt and prandia. This
Exigence (that again the Kings improvidence had reduced him to) gave great
assurance to the rebellious Lords, they should now have the sovereign power
left a prey to their ambitious designs; And (as the quickest expedition to such
their machinations) they covet nothing more, than that the Kings necessities
might be so many and so great, as to constrain him to call a Parliament; for at
such times Monarchs are ever less than they should, Subjects more: For as the
Moon is furthest off from the Sun which gives her light, when she is at the
Full; so bad Subjects are remotest from the interest of their Prince, when they
are fullest of riches and ambition, and so by consequence further off from that
justice and equity, which ought to give them light in all their proceedings.

To hasten on the time then for this Session from whence they expect so much,
and to fit the means to compass their ends, there are cast abroad certain
seditious rumors, that the Kings necessity must supply it self upon the
estates and liberties of the people; That his Majesty having nothing of his own
left; he might and meant to take from others what his own occasions did
require; for Kings must not want as long as their Subjects have means to
supply: This never-failing Touchwood took fire just to their Minds, and wrought
a little moving in the State, which doubtless had gone further if the King had
not timely prevented by his Proclamations, Quod quidam Claus. An. 49 H. 3.
malevoli sinistra praedicantes illis falso suggesserant illum velle eos de
debito gravari ac jura, and libertates regni subvertere, ut per suggestiones
dolosas and omnino falsas eorum corda a sua dilectione and fidelitate
averterent: But desires them, hujusmodi animorum suorum perturbatoribus ne
fidem adhiberent; for that he was ready to defend them from the oppression of
the great Lords, Et omnia jura and libertates eorum debitas bonas and consuetas
in omnibus and per omnia before observare. But the King seeing that he could
neither right himself nor his Subjects, without means and power, and himself
had of neither so much as would stop the present breach in his own wants, or
his Subjects loyalty, he flies to the Bosom of his people for relief and
counsel: At Oxford they met in Parliament, where his necessities met with so
many undutiful demands, that he was forced to give up to their rebellious will
his Regal power, and lay down his Prerogative to their unjust desires. Here the
Commons knowing, that Cum eligere inceperunt, they were Ma. Paris.
loco libertatis, required of the King to have the management of the Affairs of
the public put into the hands and under the care of Twenty four, whereof
Twelve by their Chron de Worcest.
Election (to which they look strictly) and the other twelve to be nominated by
the King, who in all things else stood but as a Cipher, and in this, whether by
fear or remisness, filled out his number with Mountfort, Gloucester, and
Spencer: which besides the weakening of his own part, won to these late
Opposites an opinion of great interest they had in his Favor: He has now left
neither election of public Office or private Attendant: He is now constrained
to despoil his Brethren and their Friends and followers of all their Estates
and Fortunes, and by a Writing under his own hand to banish them his Dominions,
commanding the Ports Pro tranfretatione Claus. An. 49. H. 3.
fratrum suorum to be guided and directed by the Earls of Hereford and Surry,
and not to suffer them to export with themselves, either Money, Arms, or
Ornament, Nisi in forma quam dicti Comites injunxerunt: And after their
departure, enjoined the men of Bristol that they should not permit any
Strangers, sive propinquos ipsius regis applicare in porta; but so to behave
themselves herein, that as well the King quam magnates sui merito debeant
commendare.

Thus we see how difficult a thing it is to apply ill Acquisitions to a good
use, and how hard it is to fix the wavering dispositions of chance on a firm
basis. Richard Elect of the Empire, the Kings full Chron. St. Albani.
Brother, and then beyond the Seas, must be wrought by his own Letter, and (at
his free desire) to confirm by Oath these former 11 restrictions Claus. An. 49
H. 3.
of Regal power, which when he had performed, yet would the Lords suffer
neither the one nor the other to enter Dover Castle (the Key of the Kingdom)
which they had furnished, (as likewise most of the other Forts of strength in
the Realm) with Guardians of their own, sworn respectively to the Common State
and them, taking the like assurance for the good behavior of many toward
their Cause by strict Commission upon Oath to gain opinion in show among the
Vulgar who groaned Will. Rishanger.
under their late Extortions, whereas their design was truly (as it after
appeared) by displacing the most faithful Servants of the King, to make the way
easy for their own Dependants.

This change of sole Power from the nature and right of the ancient Government
into the hands of a seeming Democrasie set up by popular Election, made the
Kingdom believe (or rather imagine) that by this form of limited Policy, they
had utterly suppressed the hopes or expectation of any one man, for ever
aspiring to, or dreaming more upon the imaginary humors of licentious
Sovereignty: But it fell out nothing so, for every man began to estimate his
own worth now, and to humor his brain on every design which might increase his
power and command.

The great men (as being first in Rot. Scotii.
strength) begin now to rend their Masters Coat, and most arbitrarily to
oppress their Neighbors, by seizing the King and his Subjects Seigniories,
upon none other pretense then because they lay convenient for, and bordered on
their Seats; And enforce the Tenants, (as the Record says) Ad sectas indebitas
and servitutes intolerabiles subditos regis compulerunt. Thus they unjustly
acquired great Manors to support their greater intended Honors, and by
misguiding the Royal Justice, make themselves of so many Subjects (whilst they
lived within the bounds of their Allegiance) so many Tyrants (as the Book of S.
Albans says) when they had renounced their Loyalty, Magnas induxerunt magnates
regni Rot. Scotii.
super subditos Regis servitutes and oppressiones, which they bear with the
greatest patience; for excess of misery finding no ease but on the shoulders of
Custom, made men satisfied with their hardest servitude by the length of
Sufferance, which found neither ease nor end, until the calm of this Kings
Reign: For in all changes it is the peoples miseries that first happen, and are
last redressed; and yet the peoples destruction is the surest perspective
through which the Prince may have the nearest viewing of his own approaching
ruin, the calamities of both being so individually concomitant, that they ever
observe this order in their progress, (viz.) That the Sovereign brings up the
Rear of his Subjects missortunes, and leads the Van of his own and their
prosperities.

Mountfort, Gloucester, and Spencer, Jo. de Wallingford.
the Heads of this rebellious design, having by the late provisions drawn to
the hands of their Twenty four Tribunes the sole management of the Royal
Authority, yet finding this power too much dispersed to accomplish the end of
their purposes, force again the King at London to call a Parliament, where they
purchase and procure the power of the Twenty four to be delivered unto
themselves, and create a Triumvirate Non constituendae reipub, causa as they
pretended, but that they might the better facilitate the means to effect their
own private ends. One of them is made (which proved fatal to him) Dictator
perpetuus, Ambition is never so high, but she thinks ever to mount that Station
which seemed lately the top, is but a step to her now, and what before was
great in desire seems little when it is in power.

These three elect Nine Counselors, and appoint Quodtres ad minus alternatim
semper in Curia sint, to appoint Governors for his Majesty's Forts and
Castles, Et de aliis omnibus regni negotiis, of the chief Justice, Chancellor,
and Treasurer, with all Officers both great and small, the choice of which they
reserve to themselves, and bind the King to this hard Bargain upon such strong
Security, that he is constrained to confirm it under the Great Seal; and for
his stricter observance thereof to bind himself by an Oath, which was in
effect, to remit to them the ties of their Allegiance and bounden duty,
whenever he assumed the exercise of his Royal Dignity; insomuch that Liceat
omnes de regno nostro contra Cart. Orig. sub Sigilio.
nos resurgere, and ad gravamen nostrum opem and operam dare, ac si nobis in
nullo tenerentur.

Hence we may see, that Riches are the firmest and most steady bottom whereon
to build the safety as well as glory of a happy Monarchy, whose report
terrifies our Enemies beyond the roaring of the greatest Cannons: It Is
therefore the prudence of every Prince not to be lavish of his Purse, since the
basis of Government (the glory of the Prince) is quite overwhelmed in the gulf
of an empty Fortune: And it is not enough for a man in Authority to have a
Power that may awe the judgment of the wise to subjection, unless he have a
pomp or purse to, that may dazzle the eyes of the Vulgar into veneration. This
Prince, this Prodigy of Fortune whom she had affronted with the most pitiful
and insolent Examples of her inconstancy, finding no part of his Sovereignty
left, but the naked Title (which he enjoyed neither but by the permission of
the rebellious Lords) beggeth succor from Urban the Fourth against his
disloyal Subjects; The Pope by his Bull cancelleth his Oath and Contract, and
armed him with Excommunication against all such as returned not with speed to
their due and old obedience. The Lords at this grow encouraged, and resolve,
since promises made by men (that cannot say they are at Chro. Lei^^^ field.
Will. Rishander, Chron. de Brit.
liberty) are light, and Oaths of so a little moment, to be contented now with
no gain but what they should rake out of the ashes of that Monarchy they meant
to destroy: They make head now against their Sovereign, and the better to
confront him call in to their assistance the French Forces: Thus the
Commonwealth turned her Sword into her own bowels, and invited her ancient
Enemy to the funerals of her liberty; So that it was a wonder she did not at
this time undergo the rigorous severities of an arbitrary foreign Servitude.

And although these men were more truly sensible of their own disgrace than
others miseries, yet found they no better cloak to cover their unjust Designs,
than that of asserting the public good; and Chro. Dunstable. Will. Rishanger.
therefore at the beginning of this unhappy War, they cried out, Liberty!
Liberty! although when they had finished it, they threw off that cloak of the
Public Good, and made that very Liberty they so much cried up, give place to
their own private interest and lust.

Those that have the extremest Tyranny in projection, will be the greatest
Pretenders of the Public good, and the most importunate and implacable
Assertors of the Peoples Rights and Liberties; And it is the most compendious
way of imposing slavery, to raise in the multitude too passionate and eager
desires of Liberty: And when success attends the Tyrants Euterprizes, it is not
the indulgence of Heaven to him, but the indignation thereof toward the people.

At Lewis the Armies met, where the King endeavors a reconciliation, but to no
purpose, for persuasions are ever unprofitable, when Justice is inferior to
force; The Lords resolve to decide the difference by Battle, the fatal
consequence of which was the captivity of the King and his two eldest Sons, and
so Mountfort and Gloucester trampling on the Misfortunes of their Prince
mounted with the more facility into the place (though not the Throne) of Regal
Power, (the effect of their long-laboured and wished for ends.) Thus all
Authority being devolved into the hands of these two, from whose ambition the
King could neither expect safety or liberty, unless the emulous competition of
Grandeur (which now began to break out between these mighty Rivals) might
produce it, by verifying the old Proverb, That when Thieves fall out, the
honest man comes to his right; For Leicester meaning to engross from his
Partner to himself, the Kings person, and to his Followers, the best part of
the Spoil, and so reap more Fruit from the Advantage when divided, than he
conceived was possible to be produced, so long as he was coupled in fellowship
with Gloucester, where, fore he dissolved all former Obligations of Amity and
Friendship betwixt them: Thus equal Authority with the same Power is always
fatal in great Enterprises, for to fit minds to so even a temper, that both
should round the same circle, and never out-look the Horizon of their
reciprocal Interest, is a work altogether impossible.

Mountfort having now broken all Faith with his Confederate, and renounced his
Allegiance to his Sovereign, forsook the paths of integrity and moderation to
come to the King by those of pride and distruct; to whom he feigneth, that he
never assumed Arms for, and his ambition and desires never had any other
object, but the settlement of the Weal-publick, and ease of his Majesty's
Subjects: That he did not in this carry his affection against duty, but knew
well how to limit his desires to his just power, and so no less to the Kings
content, if his Majesty would be ruled and guided by his Counsels, which was to
summon and command all the Forts and Castles of his Competitor Gloucester and
the rest, into the custody of himself, and to be disposed of as he should
direct and advise. The Discontent and Insurrections of the Multitude is always
grounded on the evil actions of some great Minister, or Court-Minion: But if
great men rebel, it is not so much for that they dislike the Government, but
because they would be Governors themselves: To yield to their Demands is to
resign the Sovereignty, seeing such will not be satisfied till they obtain it;
which is visible in the Fortunes and behavior of this man: He has now climbed
the Summit of Regal Power, and sits at the Helm of State to govern and direct
Affairs according as he pleases; and still thought to dissemble his purposes
with the King, but thought of nothing less than the performance of his
promises: Such was his insatiable lust after Superiority, that it became a
matter almost impossible for him to be honest, he was so completely stuffed
with improbity, that he had no room left for honesty; and his own base Interest
so pricked him forward, that he trampled on the miseries of his Prince without
the least pity or remorse; and resolves (as it were) from the heart of Monarchy
to spin out the long thread of his endless ambition, and make no other use of a
King, than to lead him as the Stalking-horse to the deprivation of his Crown
and Dignity. But his purposes are shortly prevented in his own fatal overthrow;
for God gave the King better Counsels: Nevertheless Majesty as yet is forced to
truckle under Inferiority, and the necessities of the time (which in Sovereign
Affairs does often force away all Formalities) compels the King to embrace his
Proposals, and much against his own thoughts to look upon him as his Friend:
And therefore this poor Prince who (now at the Victors discretion) seemed to
have been only raised to show the inconstancy of Fortune, and vanity of man,
suited himself nevertheless with incomparable humility and wisdom to the
emergency of his misfortunes: Neither did that humility at this time wrong the
Splendors of Majesty, since there were none other means left to subdue Spirits
that were so insolent, but dissimulation: His Majesty therefore in his own
person summoned the Forces of his fastest Friends to yield to his greatest
Enemy. Thus Leicester became the Darling of the common Rout, who easily change
to every new Master, and whose Favors are so inconstant that they are never to
be fixed; so that he could not sail long amidst the tenebrous Designs of his
Enemies, by the light and splendor of his new acquired Glory: For as the
ascent of Usurped Royalty is slippery, so that the top is tottering, and the
fall fearful; Altius evexit quam te fortuna, ruinam
Majorem timeas --
Juven.

To hold this man then completely happy at the entrance of his false felicity,
was but to give the name of the Image to the Metal, which was not yet molten;
For by this the Imprisoned Prince had broke his Fetters, and makes his first
resort to Gloucester, who covered any, but more especially this ^^portunity of
the King's pres^^^^ to revenge the injuries and affronts that Leicester had
before done to his Interest and Honor, and having formed another out of the
torn remains of the loyal Army, by a speedy march they arrived, unlooked for,
at Evesham, where the un armed troops of the secure Rebels then lay, whom they
instantly assail, for it was no fit season to give time, when no time could
assure so much as expedition did promise: De Spencer, and other Lords of that
faction came toward their Prince with the best speed, for mercy, but could not
break out being hurried along with the scorn of the giddy multitude. Public
Motions depend on the conduct of Fortune, private in our own carriage; we must
be wary therefore of running down steep hills with mighty bodies, they once in
motion, Sua feruntur pondere, stops are not then voluntary: But Mountfort, at
that time with the King and out of the Tempest, might have escaped, if his
timerity and hope had not made him more resolute by misfortune, so that he
could neither desert his Followers, nor relinquish his Ambition. Thus fell this
Usurper by making Adversity the exercise of his Virtue, or rather desperate in
the loss of his hopes, is resolved not to survive their funerals, but to die
with his designs, accounting it more glorious to be killed in desence of his
Power than than by submission tamely to renounce himself (his ambitious nature)
and live within the bounds of his allegiance. Private contemplations may be
satisfied with more or less of Fortune, but aspiring thoughts we see once
raised to the height of Rule are no longer in our own power, having no mean to
step upon between the highest of all and the precipitation.

Thus the King by these happy occurrences of Providence being delivered from
the severities of his former miseries, and his Royal Authority returned into
its Channel by the Reduction of his people to their due and wonted obedience,
he began to be more careful, and to make a stricter scrutiny into the grounds
and causes of his former Misery, and why that Virtue which had both settled and
upheld the Glory of the Empire so long under his Ancestors had cast her self
off in his time, and conspired with her Enemies to her most ruin, as if the
Genius of the State had utterly renounced her. Here he finds his Bounty had
been too profuse in too liberally bealstowing W. Rishang. Rot. Pat. 53 Hen. 3.
what was his own, and his Subjects Fortunes: the griping Avarice of his civil
Ministers, and lawless Liberty of his Followers: The neglect of Grace, and
breach of his word, to have lost his Nobility at home, and necessity his
Reputation abroad by making merchandise of Peace and War, as his last refuge;
so leaving his old Allies became himself enforced to betake himself to persons
ambiguous or injurious, and that by giving over himself to sensual Security,
and referring the conduct of all affairs to base, greedy, and unworthy
Ministers, whose Counsels were allways more subtle than substantial; so that
now perfectly perceiving by these misguidances and evil Counsels he had thrown
down those two main Pillars of Sovereignty and Safety, Reputation Jo. de
T^^etor. Monac. de Bury.
abroad, and Obedience at home. He now therefore moderateth the first entrance
of his restored Sovereignty with Sweetness and Clemency, he passes an Act of
Oblivion on the misprisions of most of the late Rebels, others he forgave that
they might live to acknowledge his goodness, always deeming that the fewer he
destroyed the more remained to adorn his Trophy. Tyrants shed blood for
pleasure and revenge, Kings for necessity, the latter delighting as little in
the death of a Subject, as God himself (the universal Monarch) does in that of
a Sinner, whose Glory is always most conspicuous in the benign attribute of
his Mercy; where as his Justice is not always to be exercised, unless it be to
exert the terrors of his offended Majesty in the destruction of an unrelenting
and implacable Sinner. Even so this Prince, least his Justice and Power might
too much suffer by his acts of Grace, some few he punished by small Fines, and
others by Banishment, as the two guiltless yet unpitied Sons of the
Arch-Traitor: For Treason is Claus. 53 H. 3.
a Crime that draws Posterity under the odium of the Ancestor; and what would
be but a bare suspicion in others, is a positive guilt in them; and that Crime
merits the highest resentment which in its consequence is most pernicious to
the Supreamest Power. The Spawn of a Traitor ought as little to be nourished
(in the Garden of a Commonwealth by the hand of Policy) as the discrete
Gardener does that weed which he roots up and destroys, because in its own
nature it is destructive to the growth of those Herbs, which are of a more
excellent quality: And he that first preached that Doctrine to Princes of
grafting their Enemies in those places due only to the merit (and only proper
for the care) of their Friends, is certainly he who designed to suppress the
growth of Friends and increase that of Enemies; for he took no regard to that
common Orthology, Quo semel est imbuta recens servabit odorem
Testa diu --
which the State has often experienced, and which is too visible in the
actions of a great many, even in these very times. And if this impolicy be
persisted in, and the King's Enemies must still be produced from the sufferings
of his Friends, and this increase be watered by the Dew of his Majesty's own
bounty on the greatest Malignants to his Government, where will be the Friends
in time of need? All ought, but those that are most willing cannot, and those
that have been most obliged will not. And you may gild a Traitor with your
Gold, and make him seem another thing in show, but if you cast the Good old
Cause before him, he will be like the transformed Cat in the Fable, or rather
(to adapt the Simile) like the Curr that will return to his Vomit. Unto the
constant followers of his broken fortune he gives (but with a more wary hand)
the forfeitures of his Enemies, having found profuse Bounty but a weak means to
procure affection, for it lost more in the gathering than it gained in the
giving; for that liberality which is bestowed without respect, is taken without
grace; it discredits the Receiver, detracts from the Judgment of the Giver, and
blunts the appetites of such as carry their hopes by their Virtue and Service;
Thus at last he learned that Reward and Reprehension do balance Government,
and that it much imports a Prince The hand be equal that holds the Scale.
In himself he reformed his natural errors, for Princes Manners have more of
life and vigor in their Example, and become a Law sooner observed and obeyed
Chron. de Dunstable.
than those of Letters: and although he did sometimes touch upon the verge of
Vice, he forbore ever after to enter the Circle. And his Court, wherein at this
time the faults of great men did not only by approbation but imitation also
receive encouragement and authority, he purged severely, since from thence
proceeds either the regular or disorderly condition of the State. Expense of
house he measured by the just rule of his proper Revenue, and was heard
frequently to say, that his excess of wast had caused the greatest issue of his
Subjects blood. The insolence of the Soldiers (made lawless by the late
liberty of Civil Arms) he spends in Foreign Expeditions, having seen that the
most temperate Spirits bore the rigor of all the former miseries, and that the
other never were satisfied but in the Calamities of the Innocent, and knowing
that if he did not find an Enemy for them abroad, they would procure one to
themselves at home. The rigours and corruptions of Civil and Judicial Anno 53.
Hen. 3.
Officers he examineth and redresseth by strict Commission, for the sense of
their Severity became the murmur of his own cruelty. The Seats of Judgment and
Counsels Chron. de Trailbaston.
he filled up with men nobly descended, for such attract with less offense the
generous Spirit, to respect and reverence; Their ability he measures not by
favor, nor by private information (as before) but by general voice; for every
one in particular may deceive and be deceived, but no one can all, nor all
deceive one. Now therefore to discover his own Capacity, that so he might know
what part to bear hereafter in all deliberate enterprises, he daily sits in
Council, and in his own person manageth all affairs of the greatest weight and
moment; for Counselors be they never so wise are but accessaries in the
guidance of the Commonwealth; their Office must be subjection, not fellowship,
in Consultations, and to have ability to vise, not authority to resolve; for as
the natural Body cannot subsist unagitated by the Soul, no more can the
politic part or grandeur of a Prince always support it self without sometimes
giving a Sic Volo, Sic Jubeo, for unless he be positive in some things to the
manifestation of his Power, he is unfit to be obeyed in any thing, to the
prostration of his Prerogative; For it offends as well the Minister of merit
as the People, to be obedient to one incapable of his own Greatness and
unworthy of his Fortune.

This wonderful change to the Kingdom in general, lately destitute of all hopes
or expectations to recover their ancient Rights and former Liberty, that they
wished and sought for nothing but the mildest Servitude, did bring them back
(without the least Commotion) miraculously to their Duty, and their Allegiance
lovingly embraced their new recovered and restored Rights and Liberties. He
that will lay (we see) the foundation of Greatness upon popular esteem must
give his Subjects ease and justice, for they measure the Bond of their
obedience by the Good always they receive.

This calm serenity ever after blessed his old age, and attended his person to
the period of his days. And now he ransacks the various calamities and changes
of his own Reign, purposing to prepare his Successor with the best rules (from
Principles which himself had drawn from experience) for the settling of an
happy Government, and with the best remedies against evil times. The negligence
and intemperance of youth, which experience and old age had both amended and
worn out in himself, he advises his Son to avoid, as the greatest stimulations
to all the incommodities of trouble and infelicity. And the better to instruct
and enable him, he made him partner both of his Experience and Authority; and
farther advised him as the most approved Antidote against the Venom of every
passion, and as the surest Compass to steer himself by amidst all occurring
anxieties and dangers; to learn in Prosperity to be silent and not transported;
in Adversity, to be patient and not dejected: In neither to be discontented or
dissatisfied: but in both to be discreetly and Philosophically affected. In
fine, all the Actions of his future Reign were exact grounds of Discipline and
Policy, (the best patterns for his Successor's imitation.)

And, as he was the first that settled the Law, and State, deserving to wear
the style of England's Justinian, and the Great and Glorious Title, To have
delivered the Crown from the Subjection and Wardship of the Nobility, showing
himself in all his Actions after capable to command not the Realm only, but the
whole World.

Thus frequently does the wrongs and malice of our Enemies, beyond the conduct
of our own prudence, make us sometime both Wise and Fortunate. And as no Man
was ever truly Miserable but by his own miscarriage, so none can ever be
truly Happy without putting a Ne plus ultra to the career of his unruly
Passions, and exorbitant Lusts: The first of which is truly visible in the
Fortunes and Fate of Mountfort the King's Minion, and the latter conspicuous in
the bad and good Fortune of this King himself.

That man who becomes the subject of his Princes delight and favors, must have
in him a correspondent worth as well of Wisdom and Obedience, as of Sincerity
and Truth, which makes none other use of this so great a blessing but to his
Sovereigns Honor and his own Credit; and not to advantage himself by the
oppression of others. Sudorem ferro abstergere tetrum facinus; says Pythagoras.

To curvet and dance on the top of a Pinnacle is the readiest way to tumble, and
it is as dangerous for a man to walk on the Summit of Honor, which is so
glaciated and slippery by the over-tumid passions and temptations (the constant
companions of a Supreme Fortune) without the indispensable support of
moderation.

Let the Favorite always taste the Kings bounty, but not devour it; let him
enjoy his Masters Ear, but not engross it; let him participate his Love, but
not enchant it. If he must be a Moat in the Eye of the Commonwealth, let him
not be a Monster.

And Lastly, if he must hold the Reigns of the Government, let him not ride it
with the Spurs of Ambition: It Is that alone makes a subject sally beyond the
bounds of his Duty, and at one instant to become both a Casar and Pompey, to
endure neither Equal nor Superior; the dismal consequences of which is too
frequently an irretrievable misery both to his Prince and Country. Let the
Kings Actions be as pure and immaculate as Truth and Innocence, yet if his
affection either blind or transport him to become the Asylum of his Servants
insolences and evil actions, then Majesty it self becomes guilty, and must
expect to share both in the grievance and hatred of the poor distressed Subject.

The general Cry seeing the Stream polluted ascribe it to the Fountain head,
where is the Spring and Power that may reform and cleanse it. He that will read
the History of our own, or those of Foreign Nations, shall find (that by this
one particular error of protection) a number of memorable Examples which have
produced Deposition of Kings, Ruin of Kingdoms, the effusion of Christan
Blood, and the general distractions of that part of the World, all grounded on
this occasion.

Princes should put limits to their own affections, and the Power Majestic is
or ought to be bounded, and the obedience due to the King should reciprocally
correspond with the equal Right and Justice due to the subject, by which they
claim a property in his actions. If either of these prove defective by wilful
Error, the State is in imminent danger of a following mischief. The Balance
therefore must be kept even betwixt the Princes Power and the Peoples Liberty,
which is the firm Basis of a quiet Government.

Let the People abstain from Faction and Discontent (the Dams that at length
bring forth Consusion and Rebellion) and no doubt the Prince will from Tyranny
and Oppression. It is the Interest as well as Duty of every Subject to pay an
entire obedience to the Government under which he lives, and that without
murmur or grumbling; for his obedience is a Condition annexed to that Security
which he has of his Life and Liberty; for no Prince is obliged to protect his
Subjects any longer than they continue in their Obedience to him, since
Rebellion and faction cannot be nourished, but as a Viper in the Bosom of
Government. And a prospect of danger does often necessitate a Prince to become
a Tyrant in his own defense; and it was a wise saying of Ptolomy King of Egypt,
That good Subjects might easily of a bad make a good Prince, but he could never
of bad Subjects make good.

The King in his Throne is like the Sun in the Firmament whose influence
animates all sublunary beings. So the Authority of a Prince gives life and
vigor to every particular Member of the Body politic; and he is not only
Caput but also Anima Reipublicae, and no member ought to move from his proper
station, or against that Soul which is the life of its being, or presume to
accede too near this resplendent Head (by intermedling with the scorching
influences of the State Arcana, but leave them to their own orderly course and
natural guidance) least the brightness thereof should dazzle the Adventurers
into Blindness and Faction, and the heat thereof scorch them into Rebellion and
Destruction.

But suppose a Magistrate really Tyrannical; it is no contemptible question,
Whether the evils of the Redress may not be equivolent to the mischiefs? I
remember Livy's Nec morbum far possumus nec remedium. And Tacitus, Ferenda
Regum ingenia, neque usui esse crebras mutationes: vitia erunt donec homines,
sed neque haec continua, and meliorum interventu pensantur; and Seneca,
Infaeliciter aegrotat, cui plus periculi a Medico quam Morbo. Poise the
Miseries of a Civil War with the Grievances of an unjust Magistrate, and the
Balance seems to me so unequal, that if my Christianity fail, the apprehension
of the inevitable miseries by the Sword is sufficient to deterr from such a
practice; for though the fury of incensed Tyranny may fall heavy upon many
particulars, yet the bloody consequences of an intestine Sword are more
epidemical and lasting: And Tacitus commends to Subjects rather Scutum than
Gladium, the Shield of Patience and Toleration to be more excellent than the
Sword. But if there be such distempers in a State, as shall necessarily require
amendment, let it be left to the course of Providence, and not (against the
disposition of Heaven) be attempted by the Sword of Violence, for I never read
that Illegal, or Tumultuous, or Rebellious were fit Epithets for Reformation:
And it is fit Christians should forbear the use of such surly Physic till they
have levied a Fine in the Court of Heaven, and cut off the entail of the
seventh Beatitude.

It is manifest that we are fallen into the dregs of time, we live in the rust
of the Iron age, and must accordingly expect to feel Ultima senescentis mundi
deliria, the dotages of a decrepit World, and the many miseries that attend an
hardened and dissenting people; wherefore I will conclude with the saying of the
Philosopher:

Novi ego hoc Saeculum quibus moribus sit; Malus bonum, malum esse vult, ut sit
sui similis; turbant, miscent mores mali; Rapax, Avarus, Invidus, sacrum
profanum, publicum privatum habebit; Hiulca gens, etc.

FINIS.

