The Foundation OF THE UNIVERSITIE OF CAMBRIDGE, With a Catalogue of the
principal Founders and special Benefactors of all the Colleges, and total
number of Students, Magistrates and Officers therein being. And how the
Revenews thereof are and have been increased from time to time, and by whom,
with Buildings, Books and Revenues as no Universitie in the world can in all
points parallel: These are the Nurseries of Religion, and Seminaries of good
Literature.

Ito and fac similiter.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Thomas Ienner, and are to be sold at his Shop, at
the South-entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1651.

THe learned in Antiquities have diversely written about the time of the
foundation of the University of Cambridge: some affirming that it was founded
by Cantaber a Prince of Spain, brother to Partholinus King of Ireland, son in
Law to Gurguntius King of Great Britain, many years before the Incarnation of
our Savior Christ; of whose name, (according to the Spanish language) it was
first called Cantabriga, after of his son Grantinus (who is said to have walled
it about) Grantbriga, and Grantbrige. Others say, that Cassivil^nus Prince of
the Troynobantes, King Octavius, Arthur King of Great Britain, and Ethelbert
King of Kent, were each of them founders and restorers of the same. But the
chiefest conclude and agree that Sigebe^t King of the East Angles was the
principal Founder thereof, about the years 630 and 636, who assigned diverse
Hostles and Houses for students to inhabit in, giving them large privileges
and charters, whereof some are yet extant; procuring also great immunities from
Pope Honorius the first, which Sergius the first confirmed. Since which time by
reason of many incursions, and continual wars between the Britains, Romans,
Saxons, the Kings of this Heptarchie, Danes and Normans, the light and glory of
this Academy was not only of old much eclipsed; but even since the Conquest
(in the Barons wars) also obscured and defaced: and it is most certain, as the
destructions were many, so the restaurations thereof shortly ensued by one
Prince or other; so that at length recovering it self, it is most worthily
reputed one of the most famous Universities in the world. Much honor this
place has received by the sons and Nephews of Kings, in being Earls thereof,
viz. William brother to Ranulph Earl of Chester, John Earl of Henault Uncle to
Philip le Beau King of France, whose daughter Isabel was wife to King Edward
the second, and Mother to King Edward the third: William Marquess of Juliars,
Edmund of Langley Duke of York, Edward Duke of York, Richard Earl of
Cambridge, Richard Duke of York, James Marquess Hamelton Earl of Arren, baron
Hamelton of Chattelrault, etc. James Marquess Hamelton Earl of Arren, etc.
And howsoever the Hostles, Hals, Innes, Schools, and religious Houses, whereof
the University before and since the conquest did consist, which now are wholly
defaced, or in part converted into some of the present Colleges, were for
their number and number of Students in them, much above all that are now
extant, many of them being formerly known by these names, Frater de
Poenitentia Jesu Christi, S. Johannis Zacharii, S. Botolphi, Divi Gerhardi, St.
Edvardi, S. Ed mundi, S. Augustini, Divi Thomae, Beatae Mariae, S. Clementis,
Hovingi Diversorium, Divi Gregorii, S. Margaretae, S. Katherinae, Hospitium
Phiswici, T^gularii Hospitium, Harlstoni Diversorium, S. Trinitatis Domus Dei,
Ruddi Hospitium, Michaelis Domus Aulae Regiae, S. Pauli Diversorium, Burdeni
Hospitium, with many others; yet at this present it consists of sixteen goodly
Colleges and Hals, erected and maintained with the lands and Revenus of their
several Founders (one of the Chapels thereof, founded by the holy King Henry
the Sixth, and the College of the Holy and individed Trinity founded by King
Henry the Eight, no University in the world can in all points parallel.) These
are the nurseries of Gods true Religion, and seminaries of good literature.

I. St. Peter's College or House, founded, 1280.
HVgo de Balsham, Suprior, and after Bishop of Ely, began the foundation of
this College about anno 1257, in the place where the two Hostles of students
were (purchased the one for the Friars de poenitentia Jesus Christi; the other
for the Friars Hospitalis S. Iohannis) and near to the Church of Saint Peter's
extra Trumpington gates. He settled not the endowment till anno 1284. at which
time upon suit of both parties, translating the Seculars unto this place, he
established one Master, and fourteen Fellows, and died before all things were
finished. After, Simon de Montucute, Simon Langham, and John Fordam Bishops of
Ely, added to their means. In this while Saint Peter's Church fell to the
ground, and Ecclesia beatae Mariae de gratia was built where now it stands,
from whence the College also came to be commonly styled for an hundred years
together, Col. B. Mariae de gratia, which after in process of time, by the
liberality of John Holbrook Doctor of Divinity, Chancellor of this University,
Master Thomas Lane, Thomas Deynman, John Warkworth, William Burgony, Henry
Hornbie, John Edmunds, Andrew Perue Deane of Ely, All Masters of this House it
was much increased. Since, William Martin, Robert Shorton, Edmund Handson,
Robert Gilbert, Master Skeleton, Mistress Elizabeth Wolf, John Whitgift
Archbishop of Canterbury, Edward Lord North, Master Robert Smith, Master Henry
Wilshaw, the Lady Mary Ramsey, Master Robert Warden, Master Thomas Warren,
Mistress Margaret Dean, Master William Herne, Master Robert Slade, and John
Blithe late Fellow, have been all good benefactors. To these must be added the
late religious Founders of the new Chapp^l (dedicated March 17. 1632.) whose
names are in a Catalogue there affixed, that have already contributed 1000
pounds toward the same; and the present Master and Fellows have not only
finished the said. Chapel, with the expense of 1200 pounds; But also by the
help of Mistress Frances Matthew widow, etc. who gave 200 pounds Doctor
Richerdson late Master, Doctor Hawkins late of this College, who gave each of
them a hundred pounds, have builded a new Court; with a fair front and gate
next the street. This College being the f^rst of all that now are standing in
this University, has at this time in it a Master, 19. Fol. 29 Bible-Clarks, 8
poor scholars, besides other students, with officers and common servants, being
in all 106.

II. University House or Hall, now Clare Hal, founded, 1326.
RIchard Badew Chancellor (and the University then being) founded this Coll. or
Hall, by the n^me of the University house or hal, in a street called Milnstreet
near S. John Zacharies Church; wherein the first 16 years the students lived at
the University charges. Afterward Walter Thaxted Master of the same, with the
consent of Ric. Ling then Chancellor, and the University resigned the first
foundation into the hands of Elizabeth Countess of Clare, widow, sometimes
wife of John de Burgo, Earl of Vlster; which Elizabeth had formerly given the
perpetual patronage of Litlington, and b^stowed many other favors upon this
College. She then (under license of King Edward the third) altered the first
name, and called it after her own name, Collegium, sive Aula de Clare. In
which College by the gift of this honorable Foundresse, and of Thomas Stoyle,
and Edm. Naturesse Masters thereof, John Thaxton, Edith Green, William Ducket,
William VVorleigh, William Marshall, Ralph Scrivener, Thomas Cave, Doctor
Leeds late Master, Thomas Cecil late Earl of Excester, and the Lady Dorothie
his wife, who gave a hundred and eight pounds per annum; William Butler
sometimes Fellow and President of this House, the famous Physician, who gave
one challice of pure gold, with other plate and books, etc. to the value of
five hundred pounds, John Freeman Esquire. who gave two thousand pounds, Doctor
Scot Deane of Rochester, etc. late Master, who gave in money, plate, and books
the sum of three hundred pounds, Master George Ruggle late Fellow, who gave
in money, plate and books, above four hundred pounds, Sir Robert Heath Attorney
General, etc. Master Thomas Bing, Master Humfrey Hide, Robert Johnson of
Luffenham Esquire, Master Erasmus Farrer, Master William Briden, Master Thomas
Cropley, and diverse other benefactors; there is at this present in the same, a
Master, eighteen Fellows, thirty six Scholars, twenty poor Scholars, besides
officers and servants of the foundation, with other students, the whole number
being 106.

III. Pembroke Hall, founded, 1343.
MAry de S. Paul, Countess of Pembroke, Baroness of Veisser and Mountenac^
daughter to Guido Chastillion Earl of St. Paul in France, and of Marie
Britannia his wife, after the death of Audomarus de Valentia Earl of Pembroke,
etc. whose third wife she was (but for one day as it is thought) betook her
self wholly to devotion, bestowing the greatest part of her estate on
Churches, religious houses, the poor, and her servants, having built Dennie
Abbey, and procured license from King Edward the third, to found this house by
the name of the College of Mary Valence, after called Pembroke Hall, (within
the compass whereof, as now it stands, are the ancient Hostles of the
Universitie and S. Thomas Knaptons, B^ultons, and Cousing places, with part of
the Chauntry-House of little S. Mary's) endowing the same with div^rs
Patronages, Impropriations, lands, rents, plate, jewels and other ornaments,
and established therein one Master, six Fellows, and two Scholars. It has been
since enlarged by the gift of holy King Henry the sixth, Edward Story Bishop
of Chichester, Gerard, and Nicholas Skipwith, Doctor Atkinson, Sir William
Hussy Knight, Charles Booth Bishop of Hereford, Sir Roger Strange Knight,
Doctor Watts, William Marshall, William Smart and Alice his wife, afterward
married to Ralph Scrivener, Jane Cox widow; all these besides John Langhton
Bishop of St. David's, Lawrance Booth, and Thomas Scot, alias Rotheram, both
Archbishops of York, Ricard Fox Bishop of Winchester, Doctor Shorton Dean of
Stoake, Edmund Grindall, and John Whitgift Archbishops of Canterbury, William
Fulke Doctor of Divinity, which were all Masters of this House, and have by
gifts of lands, money, plate, books, etc. augmented the same; and Lancelot
Andrews Doctor of Divinity, late Master and Bishop of Winchester has given
1000 pounds, and the perpetual patronage of Rawreth in Essex, with 374 folio
books well bound. Wherein there is at this present a Master, 19 Fellows, one
tanquam, 33 Scholars of the House, besides officers and servants of the
foundation, with other students, the whole number being 100.

IV. Corpus Christi College, founded, 1351.
HEnry of Monmoth, surnamed Torio Collo (son and Heir of Henry of Lanchaster,
L. of Monmouth and Pomfret, Earl of Lancaster, Leicester and Darbie, and high
Steward of England) succeeded his father in all these honors, and was by King
Edward the third created Earl of Lincoln, and Knight of the most honorable
order of the Garter, Duke of Lancaster, and Lord high Steward of England, etc.
Of the fraternity or Guild of Corpus Christi, and blessed Mary the Virgin,
near unto Luthborne lane, and the Hostle of St. Bernard in the East, (whereof
himself was then Alderman) ordained this College in the year 1351, and among
other things appropriated unto the same, the perpetual Patronage of S.
Benedicts Church, adjoining to this College. Which College since has been
much beautified with buildings and increased in revenews, by the liberalities
of the Lady Margaret Brotherton Duchess of Norfolk, etc. Thomas Cambridge
Esquire, S. John Cambridge Knight (who gave a place called Stonehouse or
Stonehall, toward the augmentation of the same) John Meers Esquire Bedle,
Matthew Parker Fellow and Master of this House, Doctor of Divinity, Archbishop
of Canterbury, S. Nic Bacon Kni. Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England,
Roger Mann^rs late Earl of Rutland, Lord Roos of Hamlake, Belvoir and Trousbut,
etc. Mast. Roger Manors his great Uncle, M. Will. Benedict, and Mast. Leonard
Cawson (who gave 18 pounds, thirteen shillings four pence for the maintenance
of three Scholarships) besides diverse other benefactors: So as there is at this
present in the same, a Master, 12 Fellows, 37 Scholars, besides officers and
servants of the foundation, with other students, the whole number being 126.

V. Trinity Hall, founded, 1353.
William Bateman borne in the City of Norwich, Doct. of the Civil Law,
Archdeacon of Norwich, after the 18. Bishop of that See, for exchange of
certain Parsonages, obtained an ancient Hostle, near adjoining to the
University House or Hall, butting upon Milnstreet, and St. John Zacharies
Church East, where in former times students lived at their own charge^, which
one John de Crawden Prior of Ely had purchased for the Monks of that Priory to
inhabit and reside in, and made thereof a College or Hall for the students of
the Law, dedicating the same to the honor of the holy and blessed Trinity in
the City of Norwich, endowing the same with lands and possessions. To this
Hostle (before it was by him purchased) Richard Ling Doctor of Divinity,
Chancellor of this University, Archibald of Norwich, Simon de Rekenhal, and
Wal. Elvedon gave 4 tenements, Rob. Stratton, John Trunch, Walter Baketon,
Walter de Aldersey, and Peter de Bittering gave two messuages, and seven
pieces of ground, one of the messuages being called Drakes entry. This
College has since by the bounty of M. Simon Dalling, and Walter Huke,
Masters thereof, Robert Goodnap, John Maptid, Gab. Dun, Richard Nix Bishop of
Norwich, Step. Gardener Doct. of Law, Master of this House, Bishop of
Winchester, Lord Chancellor of England, and Chancellor of this University,
Matthew Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, Doct. Mowse, Doct. Harvey, M. Busbie,
M. Hare Esquire. Doct. Cowel late Master, Doct. of Law, and Kings Professor, S.
Gerrge Newman Knight, and other benefactors, been much enlarged: So as there is
at this present a Master, 12 Fellows, 14 Scholars, besides officers and
servants of the foundation, with other students, the whole number being 60.

VI. Gone. and Cai. College, founded, 1353.
EDmund Gonvil Rector of Terrington and Rushworth in Norfolk, obtained license
of King Edward the third to erect this College; the first foundation whereof
he laid anno 1348. where the orchyard of Corpus Christi College is now
situate; which he dedicated to the honor of the Anunciation of blessed Mary
the Virgin, wherein he established a Master, and 4 Fellows, whom, while he
lived, with his own money he maintained: but he died untimely, anno 1353,
giving by will a great sum of money in trust to Will. Bateman Bishop of
Norwich, to perfect this his College or Hall, and to endow it with competent
possessions, who in anno 1353 procured the said Master and Fellows to remove to
a place near unto his own College then in building, called Trinity Hall,
anciently called Hen^y, in the Parish of Saint Michael, where he purchased by
exchange diverse messuages and tenements, on which he erected the same, by the
name of Gonvil Hall. Afterward John Caius D. of Physic, a learned antiquary
in an. 1557, was made a Co-founder by Letters patents, who caused it to be
called Gonvil and Caius College: he added to the former Court being four
square, his fair building of freestone, increased the treasury with new
revenews, enriching it with large possessions for the maintenance of three
Fellows, twenty scholars, and a Porter. Since the Ladies Mary Pakenhams and
Anne Scroop, Elizabeth Clear, D. ^alie, Ste. Smith, Rich. Willison, Tho.
Atkins, Pet. Hewit, VVil Gale, Thomas Willows, Will. Sigo, D. Knight, John
Whittacre, Mat. Parker Archbishop of Canterbury, Robert Traps and Ione his
wife, Joyce Franklin their daughter, D. Windy, Doct. Bishby, D. Harvey, S.
VVil. Paston Kn. Will. Cutting, Dr. Leg, D. Branthwait, and D. Gostlin late
Masters of this house, Doct. Perse, and D. Wels, late Fellows of this House,
and many other good benefactors, have increased the number of Fellows and
Scholars, books and buildings, etc. of this College; so as there is at this
present in the same a Master, 25 Fellows, one Chaplain, 69 Scholars, besides
officers and servants of the foundation, with other students, the whole number
being two hunded and nine.

VII. Kings College, founded, 1441.
HEnry the sixth, called Henry of Windsor, King of England and France (son and
heir of King Henry 5th. and of Katherine daughter of Charles the 6 K. of
France) began this royal foundation, dedicating the same to the honor of Saint
Nicholas, consisting then of one Master, and 12 scholars, in or about the
places where the Churches of S. Nicholas, and S. John Zachary, St. Augustines
Hostle, and Gods House had formerly been situated: But within 2 years after, he
enlarged the first foundation dedicating the same to the honor of our blessed
Lady Mary the Virgin and S. Nicholas. In which College at this present is
standing one of the fairest Chapels in the world, conformable whereunto he
intended to have made this his College, which by his untimely death he left
only begun and unperfected, for some of his royal Successors to finish.
Afterward King Henry 7 finished the stone-work (in part) of the said Chapel,
and King Henry the 8 caused the same to be glased; seated, paved, and
perfected. To this College the Founder under his great Seal by act of
Parliament confirmed this coat of arms, which here in the margin they bear,
placing in chief a flower of France, and a Lion of England, that it may
appear to be the work of a King. Since Roger Goad D. of Divinity, late Fellow
and Provost, Adam Robins, Richard Day, and D. Cowell, late Fellows, D. Smith
late Fellow and Provost, William Henshaw late Fellow, also Thomas Weaver late
Fellow, (now Fellow and late Vice-Provost of Eton) has wainscotted the back of
the Fellows and Scholars seats on both sides of the said Chapel, in a decent
and comely manner, and diverse other benefactors, with books and other
ornaments have much enriched the same. In which College at this present is a
Provost, 70 Fellows and Scholars, 3 Chaplains, 1 Master of the Choristers, 6
Clarks, 16 Choristers, 16 College officers of the foundation, besides 12
servitors to the seniour Fellows, 6 poor Scholars, with other students, the
whole number being 140.

VIII. Queens College founded, 1448.
MArgaret Andegavensis, daughter of Reyner Duke of Aniou (titularie King of
Sicilie, Naples, and Jerusalem) Consort of King Henry the 6. obtained license
of the same King; to build this College upon part of the ground belonging to
the Carmelites or White Friars, butting on Milnsteet in the Parish of S.
Botolphs, and to purchase land of the value of 200 pounds for the endowment
thereof, dedicating the same to S. Margaret and S. Bernard: but she died and
left it unperfect. Afterward Q. Elizabeth, wife to K. Edw. the 4, obtained
license to finish the same, which she accomplished. This College since by the
liberality of the Ladies Margaret Roos, Jane Inglethorpe, and Jane Borough,
George Duke of Clarence, Ciciley, Duchess of York, Richard Duke of
Gloucester, the Lady Anne his wife, Edward E. of Salisbury, Maud Countess of
Oxford, Marm. Lomley Bishop of Lincoln Chancellor of this University, Andrew
Ducket Rector of S. Botolphs, sometimes Principal of S. Bernards Hostle, and
the first President of this College (who had formerly been a Friar, and
gathered of well disposed persons much money, and procured the Kings mandat,
that the Mayor, Bailiffs, and Burgesses, of the Town of Cambridge should sell
him a parcel of ground called Goose-Green, in the Parish aforesaid, which is
now an Island lying between the College, and the Green called Youngs green or
bank) Hugh Trotter D. of Divinity, John Drewel, and Will Weld, Canons of S.
Paul's, S. Tho. Smith Fellow of this College, principal Secretary to Queen
Elizabeth, Henry Wilshaw 13 President of this College, D. Stokeys, John
Chetham, Henry Hastings E. of Huntington, John Ioslin, George Mountague late
Archbishop of York, together with many other noble and well disposed persons,
benefactors, it is so increased as at this present there is in the same a
President, 19 Fellows, 23 Scholars, 8 Bible-Clarks, and three Lecturers of
Hebrew, Arithm. and Geomet. besides other officers and servants of the
foundation, with other students, the whole number being a hundred and ninety.

IX. Katherine Hall, founded, 1475.
RObert Woodlarke, borne at Wakerley in Northumberland, D. of Divinity, the
last Fellow that King Henry 6 placed in Kings College, third Provost of the
same, Chancellor of this University, founded this College or Hall in a place
called the Milnstreet, over against Queens College Orchard, formerly known by
the name of the Carmelite Friars; of four Tenements which were purchased for
that purpose: he dedicating the same to the honor of S. Katherine the Vingin
and Martyr, obtained of King Edword 4 a license of mortmain for the endowment
thereof; which was confirmed to him and his Successors for ever. Wherein he
established a Master, and three Fellows. Since it has been enlarged by the
liberaty of Isabel Canterbury widow, William Tailor, Katherine Miles, Robert
Simpton, Hugh Penmerton; the Lady Elizabeth Bernardiston, John Leach, Richard
Nealson, Robert Shorton D. of Divinity, Mr. of St. John's College in this
University, Dean of Stoack, etc. after Mr. of Pembroke Hall; Hugh Garret, John
Chester, Thomas Green D. of Divinity, Mr. of this House, D. Thymblebie, Dr.
Middleton, Rosamond Pain widow. John Cholmley, John Duke, Sir John Claypool
Knight, John Gostlyn Dr. of Physic, late Fellow and Master of Gonvil and Caius
College, Vicechancellor 1618 who died Vicechancellor October. 21. 1626. a large
and bountiful benefactor: Thomas Buck late Fellow of this House, Senior Esquire.
Bedle, Mr. Christopher Shirland, Mrs. Stafford, Mr. Tho. Hobs, master Peter
Phesant, Anne Lady Cocket widow, mistress Iurdayn widow, Anne Lady Bernardiston,
Will. Gouge D. of Divinity, Mr. Coulson, Mr. Skerne Esquire. Mr. Alured, Master
Cradock Citizen and Merchant of London, the worthy company of the Mercers in
the City of London, and many other benefactors: So as there is now in the same
a Master, 6 Fellows, 10 Scholars, 9 Exhibitioners, besides officers and
Servants of the foundation, with other students, being in all 150.

X. Jesus College, founded, 1496.
John Alcock born at Beverley in Yorkshire, Dr. of the Civil Law, etc. being
Bishop of Ely, and Lord Chancellor of England, procured license of King Henry
7. to convert into a Coll. an Ancient Nunnery (the Nuns whereof all but 2. were
dead and dispersed, and the house much wasted) formerly consecrated to S.
Radegund, and endowed by sundry benefactors, whereof Malcolme 4 King of
Scotland, and the whole race of the Earls of Hunt. with their families, were
the chiefest who gave the ground whereon it stands, and 10 acres of land
adjoining, as also the Manor house and lands, with the Rhadegund tithes, with
the appurtenances, etc. In the time of the Prioresse and Nuns, John Portois,
Hervens, the son of Thurstace, John Triplow, Rector of Hardwick with his sister
Dionis, Nicholas Morris, Hugo Filius Absolonis, and others, were liberal
benefactors. He also obtained license under the great seal of England, that all
the lands belonging to the said Nunnery, should be appropriated to this his
College, dedicating the same to the honor of the blessed Virgin Mary, S. John
the Evangelist, and the glorious Virgin S. Rhadegund, commonly called Jesus
College, wherein he established one Master, 6 Fellows, and 6 Scholars: Since
by the liberality of the Lady Willoughby, and the Lady Bray, who builded the
side from the Cloister Court to the Garden, James Stanley and Thomas Thirlby,
Bishops of Ely, John Beauchamp Knight, Sir Rob. Read Kn. Lord chief Jnstice of
the Common Pleas, John Andrews, D. Royston, D. Fuller Masters of the same, John
Batemanson, Thom. Roberts, Roger Thorney, Rich. Pigot, Godf. Fuliam, Will.
Marshal, Jane Woods, Tho. Sutton Esquire., and other benefactors, it is so
increased, that there is at this present in the same, a Master, 16 Fellows, 24
Scholars, besides officers and servants of the Foundation, with other Students,
being in all 110.

XI. Christ College, founded, 1505.
MArgaret Countess of Richmond and Darbie, daughter and sole heir of John
Beauford, Duke of Sommerset, widow of Edmund of Hadham Earl of Richmond (son
of Owen ap-Tuder of Wales, Kn. and Q. Katherine his wife, Doawger of King Hen.
5. half brother to K. Henry 6. etc.) Mother to K. Henry the 7; in testimony of
her love to learning obtained license of the same King to erect a College
without Barnewell-gate, in Preachers-street, of four Mes^uages and gardens
belonging to the Abbot of Tiltie, and Prioresse of Dennie (where K. Henry 6 had
founded a house called Gods house, in lieu of that which had been formerly
builded by William Bingham Rector of S. John Zacharies Church in the City of
London, which was pulled down by the same King when he founded Kings College)
dedicating the same to the Honor of our Savior Christ, which he endowed with
lands and revenews for the maintenance of a Master, 12 Fellows, 47 Scholars,
besides officers and servants, The number of which has been since increased by
the liberality of John Fisher President of Queens College, Bishop of Rochester
and Cardinal, etc. K. Edward 6, Tho. Tompson, and Ed. Hawford Doctors of
Divinity Masters of the same, S. Wall. Mildmay Knight. Chancellor and Treasurer of
the Exchequer, Ric. Risley, D. Patison, Philip Rawlins, M. Iennings, Nic.
Colverwell, Tho. Laughton, M. Wentworth. Rob. Isham, Ric. Bunting, Ric. Car,
benefactors; and the revenews for other purposes augmented: So as there is at
this present in the same a Master, 13 Fellows, 60 Scholars, besides officers
and servants of the foundation, with other students; the whole number being 166.

XII. St. John's College founded, 1508.
THe abovesaid Margaret Countess of Richmond and Derbie, Mother of K. Henry 7,
etc. obtained license of her nephew K. Henry 8, to convert an Hospital or
house of Regular Canons (founded by Nigellus the second By. of Ely, in the
year, 1134, afterward translated to a Priory, and dedicated to S. John the
Evangelist in the Jury, by Hugo de Balsham 10 By. of Ely) into a College by
the ancient name of S. John the Evangelist: the perfecting whereof she left to
her executors, Ri Fox By. of Winchester, John Fisher By. of Rochester, Chas
Sommerset L. Herbert, and others; who did most justly perform the trust she
reposed in them. This College has been since enlarged by the liberality of
Ioh. Morton Arch Bp. of Cant. and Cardinal, the Lady Anne Rooksby, D. Fell, D.
Keyton, Hugh Ashton, D. Lupton, D. Thymblebly, D. Downham, John Constable, Rob.
Simpson, Rob. Ducket, Tho. Lane, John Griggeson, James Berisford, Rob.
Holi^reeholm, John Replingham, Dr. Linacre, John Baily, D. Tompson, Walt.
Sawkins, Kath. Duchess of Suffolk, John Thurlston, Ste. Cardinal, S. Ambrose
Cave K, Tho. Cunny, D. Goodman, Will. Cecil, L. Burleigh, the L. Mildred
Burleigh, Sir Hen. Billingsley Knight. D. Gwyn, the La. Iermin, Henry Heblethwait,
W. Spalding and W. Spalding brothers, Rob. Booth, Hen. Albey, John Walton, John
Waller, Mary Countess of Shrewsby, Geo. Paylon Will. L. Maynard Baron of
Wicklow, etc, Rob, Jews, John Knewstubbs, M^s. Cutler, John Hooper, John
Williams L. Keeper of the great Seal, Bp. of Lincoln, S. Ralph Hare K. of the
Bath, Rob. Johnson of Luffenham other good benefactors; So as there is as this
present in the same, a Master, 54. Fellows, 84 scholars, besides officers and
servants of the foundation, with many other students, being in all 282.

XIII. Magdalene college founded, 1519.
EDward Stafford, last D. of Buckingham, E. of Stafford, Hereford, and
Northampton (son and heir of Hen. Stafford, second D. of Buckingham, and
Constable of England, founded this College by the name of Buckingham College,
in a place where the Priory of S. Gyles had formerly been situated; it was
after an Hostle or Hall, inhabited by diverse Monks of several Monasteries, to
reside and study in, and therefore of old called Monks College; (the backsides
whereof at this present retain the name of Monks corner.) Afterward in the
year 1542. Tho. Audley Baron of Walden L. Chancellor of England, obtained
license of K. Henry 8. to alter the former name, and call it S. Mary Magdalene
College, in the fair University of Cambridge, unto which he gave both lands
and revenews, The right Honorable Theoph. Howard, E. of Suffolk, K. of the
Garter, being now (by inheritance) Patron thereof, which College by the gift
of K. Henry 8. the Founder and Patron, S. Chr. Wrey L. chief Justice of the K.
Bence, Ion. Spenliffe of Lincollnsh. Edm, Grindal Arch-Bp. of Cant. Thom.
Parkinson Rector of Wivelingham, Will. Roberts of Norfolk, John Hughes, Tho.
Sutton of Balsham Esquire and also the hon. Lady Frances, Countess Dowager of
Warwick, wife of Rob. Rich first Earl of Warwick, who gave maintenance for 1
Fellow 2 scholars, and others who have been benefactors, is much increased: so
as at this present there is a Mast. 11 Fellows, and 22 scholars, besides
officers and servants of the foundation, with other students, being in all 140.

XIV. Trinity College, founded, 1546.
HEnry 8 K. of England, France and Ireland, defender of the Faith, etc. after
the suppression 1546. united Kings Hall, founded by K. Edward 3. Michael house,
founded by Hervicus de Stanton, Chancellor of the Exchequer to K. Edward 2. and
Phiswick Hostle founded by John Phiswick, one of the Esquire. B^dl^s, into a
College by the name of the holy and undivided Trinity, which he endowed with
1640 pounds per an. in or about the places where formerly (besides these 3
houses) were anciently situated S. Gregory's Hostle, S. Katherines Hostle,
Margaret Hostle, S. Gerhards Hostle, Tyl^rs Hostle, and Owens Inn. Since Q.
Mary augmented the College by a third part in Fellows and scholars, besides
the whole foundation of the Quire: As also Thom. Allen Clark gave 2
Fellowships, and lands to other uses: S. Ed Stanhop K. founded a Library
Keeper, and a servant under him: the L. Anne Bromley gave five Scholarships,
Geo. Palyn Girdler, the L. Ann Weld widow, Roger Iesson Haberdasher, Mrs. Eli.
Elwis widow of Ief. Elwis Alderman, have each of them given several pensions,
D. Bill, D. Beaumont, Job. Whitgift Arch Bp. of Canterb. all Masters of this
house, D. Cousins, D. Barrow, D. Skeffington, Will. Cooper Esquire. Peter Shaw, S.
VVil. Sidley K. and Bar. S. Thoms Lake K. S. Ioh Sucklin K. Th. Nevil D. of
Div. late Master who expended the sum of 3000l. in building the back court,
Rob. Banckworth D. of Divin. late Fellow, S. Ralph Hare K. Mr Silvius Elwis,
now of this College, and K. Iam. besides diverse other noble and generous
benefactors, have so increased the same with buildings, books, and revenews, as
at this present it is one of the most goodly and uniforme Colleges in Europe,
wherein is a Master, 60 Fellows, 67 scholars, 4 Conducts, 3 public
professors, 13 poor Scholars, a Mast. of the Choristers, 6 Clarks, 10
Choristers, 20 Almsmen, besides officers and servants of the foundation, with
many other students, being in all 440.

XV. Emanuel College, founded, 1584.
SIr Walter Mildmay K. Chancellor and Treasurer of the Exchequer, Privy
Councellor to our late Sovereign L. Q. Elizabeth, obtained license of the said
Q. to found and erect this College for the maintenance of a Master, 30 Fellows
and scholars ( nomine plurium) as the revenews should be ever able to maintain,
in the place where in times past inhabited the Black-fryars, otherwise called
Fratres Praedicantes, in the street (of them) called Preachers street, and
therein established a Master, 3 Fellows, and 4 scholars; for increase of which
foundation, the said Q. Eliz. gave 16l. 13s. 4d. per annum out of the
Exchequor: Since it has been much augmented by the liberality of Henry E. of
Huntington, S. Fran. Hastings his brother, S. Rob. Iermyn, S. Fran. Walsingham,
S. Hen. Killegrew, S. VVolstan Dixy, S. John Heart, S. Sam. Leonard, and S. Tho.
Skinner K. Alex. Noel D. of Divin. Dean of S. Paul's in London, D. Leeds, D.
Harvey, D. Branthwait, Rob. Tailor, Customer Smith, Nich. Fuller, Rog. Snegg,
Fran. Chamberlain, M. Ellis, John Spenliff, VVil. Neal, and Edm. English Esquire.
Alderman Radcliff, John Morley, Rich. Culverwel, Rob. Johnson Esquire. John Bernes,
the L Mary Dixy, Martha Iermin, Alice Owen, Voice Franckland and Elizabeth
Waters widows, D. Richerson late Fellow, Mast. of Trinity College, S. Hen
Mildmay of Graces in Essex K. Mast. Rich. Knightly of Preston in Northamptonsh.
Esquire. and diverse other benefactors; which College is now enlarged with a fair
new building of 4 stories high, containing 140 foot. There is at this present
in the same a Master, 14 Fellows, 50 Scholars, 10 poor scholars, besides
officers and servants of the foundation, with other students the whole number
being 310.

XVI. Sidney Sussex College, founded, 1598.
FRances Sidney Countess of Sussex (Sister to S. Hen. Sidney Knight. L. Deputy of
Ireland, and President of Wales, Aunt to the renowned Sir Phil. Sidney) widow
of Tho Radcliffe, 3 Earl of Sussex, founded this College by the name of the
College of the the L. Fran. Sidney Sussex, in a place called the Gray friars,
which Friary builded by King Henry 1. suppressed Anno 1546. by K. Hen. 8. and
given to Trinity College in Cambridge, was since from it by Act of Parliament
conevyed to the Executors of the said Countess, Hen. Gray 5 Earl of Kent, and
John L. Harrington of Exton, in fee-farm: for the building and perfecting of
this her College, she gave by her last will and Testament (besides her goods
unbequeathed) 5000 pounds, wherewith her executors aforenamed built and endowed
it with lands and revenews, for the maintenance of a Master, 10 Fellows, and ^^
scholars, which being increased by the accessory foundation of S. John Heart Knight.
Leo. Smith, Citizen of London, Peter Blundel of Tiverton Clothier, John
Freeston Esquire. Edw. L. Montague of Boughton, etc. has in present a Master, 12
Fellow, 33 scholars, and for the further enlarging thereof, S. Frances Clarke
K. has lately built 20 Chambers for the students, founded 4 Fellowships, with
8 scholarships more, and augmented the scholarships of the foundation.
Benefactors to the same College have been the forementioned executors, John L.
Harrington the younger, the L. Lucie Countess of Bedford his sister, the L
Anne Harrington his mother, the aforenamed Lord Mountague, James Mountague his
brother, D. of Divinity, Bishop of Winchester, the first Master, George L
Goring, S. John Breerton K. one of the first scholars of this house, a most
bountiful benefactor, John Young D. of Divinity, Dean of Winchester, Fellow
of this College, S. VVil. Wilmore the first Pensioner in it, Rob. Johnson of
Luffenham Archdeacon of Leicester, John Harrinton, Godf. Fuljambe, Edw. Wrey,
and Robert Hudson Esquires. the whole number of students at this present with
officers and servants of the foundation are 210.

THe total number of Students of all Degrees in this University, that had
names in every particular College, with the Magistrates and daily Officers
thereunto belonging, besides diverse young Scholars that were relieved herein,
which had no names in any of the Colleges aforesaid, was in Anno 1622. 3050.
And by reason of the visitation of sickness in the year 1629. many were then
dispersed to Oxford, and other places, and no supply came the year following,
by which means there is now in the same but 2848.

FINIS.

