Honor rediviuus or An analysis of Hono and Armory by MATT: CARTER Esquire

London printed for Henry Herringman 1660

And Are to be Sold by Henry Herringman at the Ancker on the lowest side of
the New-Exchange

ANDREW COLTEE DUCAREL L.L.D. Doctor's Commons.


A POSSE AD ESSE.


TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE. WILLIAML d. Marquess AND Earl of HERTFORD, Baron
SEYMOUR AND BEAUCHAMP.
MY LORD.
THat I have preferred so slender a Volume to Your Honorable Patronage, is no
more than the Subject of it (which is Honor) erects; as Your Lordship is known
of the first and greatest of those that challenge a concernment therein; yet
not more eminent by that of Your blood, then of the inward Nobleness of Your
Virtues, whereof the World has received unmatchable testimonies. These reasons
as they oblige me to this presentment; so I cannot but hope will also plead
pardon for the trouble it brings a long with it; and (that once obtained) I am
assured of the preservation of this imperfect Essay, under the powerful
Protection of your Lordships name: Of the infinite Honorers whereof, none is
more ambitious to be known such, than

My LORD, Your Honors most humbly devoted Matt. Carter.

TO THE READER.
READER,
THe unhappy Causes of the present neglect of this most noble knowledge, are of
so high nature, as will not endure to be named: the ill consequents (in the
imminent degenerateness of this Age) so manifest, that they need not. In this
declining condition of Honor, nothing is more requisite then the means of its
preservation; amongst which this being one, and that not inconsiderable, gave
me occasion of busying my self in this design.

Such books as have been already published, by persons eminent in this kind,
are of large bulk, and some of them too tedious to the most ingenious Student.
The more they comprehend, the less apt for memory: especially when enlarged
with tedious impertinencies, and doubtless more difficult for the apprehension
of every Reader; to which, Method that is most discernable in brevity is the
most excellent help. That which I have herein followed, is to treat first of
the degrees of Honor, and then of Armory; and that although concisely, yet I
hope so clearly, and fully, that any person of ordinary capacity may hereby be
able to blazon a Coat of the greatest difficulty; the only care being in
observing the terms given to things born, and the manner of posture, and
position. Some errors have escaped both the Press, and theGraver, which the
Reader may at his leisure rectify by the Errata at the end; so let him peruse
seriously, and censure modestly; and then I shall wish him Farewell.

Of HONOR in General, and of its Particular Divisions.
THe Heralds of former ages have, many of them, not only divided the nobler
sort of men into several degrees, but distinguished likewise the inferior
rank into four forms: But (as in some other things) in that also I shall
forbear to follow their method, as not altogether so pertinent to the
intentions of this compilement. It is but an easy caution in me, when I know
not how few I shall (...) by my best demerits, not to stumble into the hazard
of disgusting many, by a rash enterprise in a weak endeavor; considering
especially the present temper of the world.

The great and wise Disposer of all Entities has contrived every thing into
such a Method, as in every particle of the Creation is discovered a most
excellent harmony, in which that of the degrees and honorary distinctions is as
admirable as any; and this is the intended scope of this (...). Some he (...)
created to honor, and some to dishonor; (...) a difference and variety in all
things, that by a rule of contraries they might the better display themselves.
Some men he has richly adorned with Excellency, and elevated them with the
sublimary glories of Honor, Nobility, and Greatness; and others again (in the
same light they shine) has he obscured with contraries of Meanness,
Ignobility, and Indigency. Of the latter I shall only say, that for them to
Spurn at the more honorable, because themselves are debased to an inferiority,
is to kick dirt in the face of that infinitely just and wise God of our
Creation. The first being the intended concernment, I forbear any farther
discourse of the latter.

Nobility (says Sir John Fern) is thus defined, Fern. Glo. Genesis p. 4.
Vir Nobilis idem est, quod notus ac per omnium or a vulgatus; A Gentleman or
Nobleman is he which is known, and through the Heroical virtues of his life
talked of in every man's mouth. In short, amongst all men it is defined, A
certain eminence of some above the rest.

This is by the same Author distinguished into three Species, Nobility
supernatural, Nobility natural, and Nobility civil or political.
Supernatural, as in the heavenly Hierarchies, or sacred Principalities: And
that there are orders Seg. Hon. mil. and civ. l. 4. c. 5.
and degrees amongst them, we must believe, or renounce our Christianity; but I
leave the further discovery thereof (as too sublime) to more mature and
deliberate contemplations.

The second is Nobilitas physica, or natural Nobility; consisting in the great
variety of natural creatures, obvious to our human senses. As for example,
Among the Planets, the Sun is the most noble; among the Elements, Fire; among
the Plants, the Cedar; among Flowers, the Rose; of Metalls, Gold; of Jems, the
Diamond; of Fish, the Dolphin; of Birds, the Eagle; of Beasts, the Lion; and
amongst Men, the King.

The last is Nobility civil or political, which only relates to Mankind; and
though some have distinguished the generality of a Commonwealth into two
divisions only, the Noble and Ignoble, the Gentry and Commonalty; yet either
part are again subdivided, according to the policy of civil Government, as
well as the providence of divine Ordination.

When first this distinction came amongst us, is by some thought uncertain; but
for my part, not. For doubtless it has been continued from the first increase
of Mankind in the world; for if there were Kings and Governors, certainly other
distinctions, (virtue being still admired, and honored, and some signal put
Bartol. de Dig. l. 12.
upon it); and, Dignitas and Nobilitas idem sunt, dignity or preferment to
power is that which makes a man noble.

And that there were Kings long before the Flood, as Mr. Seldom (that excellent
Master of Antiquity) is of opinion, is evident by those words he inserts, which
signify, that Adam, after the propagation of Mankind, was esteemed Seld.
(...). of Hon. c. (...) p. 4.
nor only the Father, but Governor, in a kind of Royal or Monarchical power,
during his life; and Seth his son succeeded him in the like.

The Jews called such as were in the state of Nobiles among them, Ben Ish, or
Filii viri, or Drus. observat. lib. 3. cap. 19.
the sons of great men; And the sons of men of common rank, they termed, Sons
of men, by filiihominis.

And the Scripture in many places distinguishes men thus, as in that of the
Psalm: as Psalm. 49. 2.
well the sons of great men, as of men of common rank, both rich and poor
together. And this distinction of men has descended to us with so much
severity, that our Savior himself gave example in his Practice and Rule, in
the charge he left us for it, in these words, Speak not evil of Dignities, and
many other the like. And the Civil Law has formerly been so severe in the
preserving this distinction, that Gentle or Noble were prohibited the marrying.
Fern. l. genesis p. 9.
with the Ungentle or Ignoble; as the Ignoble were debarred from any honor or
dignity, to hinder the evil of introducing mongrell and mechanic dispositions
in the Commonwealth, and consequently such impostumated humors as is commonly
the Offspring thereof, even among the greatest Nobility.

The Law commanded, that in case a Guardian, being a Person of honor, having
the tuition of a Child under age, and should marry him to the daughter of an
ignoble person, it was an injury done to the whole Family, and a penalty should
be inflicted upon the Guardian; the reason, for though the Husband cannot be
ennobled by the Wife, yet the Issue of that Male is debased and a Mongrel; and
primogenitus est totius geniturae quasi splendour and gloria; and the glory of
children are their parents. Pro. 17. 6.


Civil Nobility is an excellency of dignity, and fame, placed in any Nation,
People, or Blood, through the virtues there showed forth, to the profit of that
Commonwealth, as Sir John Fern defines it. Fern p. 13


This he divides into three so ts: of N tions, Cities, and Families.

These last are by the Greeks termed (...), in Latin Nobiles, Ingenui, and
Generosi, in Fern. Seldom p. 856
French Nobles, in the Empire (...), among the Spaniards Hiidalgo, and
Gentilhome, or Gentilhombre; and in the old Saxon, Ardel.

Aristotle makes four kinds of civil Nobility, Aristot. l. 4. de pol.
viz. Divitiarum, Generis, Virtutis, and Disciplinae.

Cicero attributes the Crown of Generosity to the virtuous, and therefore is
understood to allow of no other Nobility; and Diogenes was so Fern. p. 14
cynicall, as to term nobleness of blood a vail of lewdness, a cloak of sloth,
and a vizard of cowardice: And what would he have said had he lived in our age?

But to lay by these and many other divisions, the Philosophy of latter times
have refined Civil Nobility into a triple division.

The first by Blood, the second by Merit, the third by Blood and Merit; which
last, without doubt, must receive the estimation of the most Segar. l 4. p. 226.
honorable. See Sir Johu Fern and Mr. Segar in his Honor Military and Civil.
And also by place in the Commonwealth. And Bartholus, In the Court: his words
are, Omnes (...) Bart. l. 1. cap. de dig. 12.
Principi (...), and ideo Nobiles; cum (...) and nobilitas idem sunt.

Nobility of Blood, says Sir John Fern, is a Nobility drawn from the first
House, and continued through the virtues of those succeeding; which the Laws
and Customs of Nations have permitted the progeny and kindred to challenge as
their Inheritance, though for no excellency in themselves that enjoy it. And
this is the Nobility which Boethius takes notice of, Seg. p. (...)
when he says, Nobilitas est quaedam laus proveniens de (...) parentum.

Now as Nobility by Blood and Merit is justly esteemed the most honorable, so
certainly this the least; the glory they shine in, being but the reflection of
their Ancestors, and not their own proper rays.

Neither are dignities and discents of blood Ibid.
enough to ennoble us, for whatsoever is not within us cannot justly be called
ours, but rather the graces and goods of fortune. Genus and proavos, and quae
non fecimus ipsi, Vix (...) nostra vaco.

And certainly the Honor achieved by an Ancestor, livs in his Family as his,
and to the memory of his virtues, and example of theirs; which ought doubly to
oblige them to care, first, in keeping that tenderly, which their Ancestors
purchased so difficulty; and to show themselves the true heirs of such noble
spirits, in their due imitations of those renowned virtues.

Therefore it is but vain for a man to boast, that he can derive the foundation
of his honor from the renowned catalogue of worthy Ancestors, and himself
degenerate from their heroical virtues; for at the best they blaze but
another's honor, and their own shame; and may quickly be answered as Hermodius
was by Iphierates, (who upbraided him with the stain of so base a parent) My
House takes beginning in me, but thine takes end in thy Fern p. 1.
self.

And our Nation has produced too many that deserve the saying of Lycurgus,
whose Soldiers bragged much of the Nobility of Hercules being derived to them;
he told them, Hercules's nobility would avail them nothing, except they did
those things whereby Hercules became Noble.

The second is, Nobleness of proper Virtue, Noble by Merit.
achieved by Merit; which is certainly to be esteemed above the other: for a
Country's safety depends upon (...), counsel, and courage of the virtuous;
when the (...) boastings of an authentic Stock, where virtues fail, do add
nothing to the relief of a Commonwealth in time of need.

The Romans attired their Knights with a Ring for faithfulness, a Buckle for
stedfastness, and a Bracelet for industry, as signs of virtue; not of sloth,
the appropriated privilege of succeeding Nobility.

And in all Nobility, Author and (...) a quo primum (...) in signia profecta
sunt, and homo novus fuit: The first atchiever in any stock whatever, was a new
man ennobled for some demerit; Sir John Fern. And all men will judge him that
was the original of a family more honorable, than him that succeeded him two
or three descents, not adding to that honor by any merit of his own.

Now these two qualities meeting in one man, is it that makes the perfect
Gentleman; and such a man ought to be preferred before all Nobility mixed, Sir
J. Fern.
others in the receiving of Dignity, Office, or Rule, in the Commonwealth.

Wherefore by the Laws of Arms anciently, these seven circumstances were
regarded in the chioce of a Captain or Leader; his Age, his Virtues, his Faith
or Allegiance, his Knowledge in Martial Discipline, his Authority, his good
Fortune; and lastly, his Blood and Gentry.

And anciently none were admitted into the Inns of Court, but who were
Gentlemen of Blood, be their Merits what ever; as the Foundations of some of
(...) do yet show.

Therefore it is the best Patrimony a Father can leave his Son, to bequeathe
him the glory of his merits, with the state of Gentility; And the best honor
the Son can do to the deceased Parent, is, to continue his name in that estate
which his Ancestors left him, and by imitating the virtues that obtained it, to
preserve it without a stain.

Which consideration has been the occasion to stir up many generous spirits to
a noble contention, and commendable emulation, to exalt the worthiness of their
Familie's fame.

What those virtues are that must thus ennoble men, Sir John (...) has taken
too much care, I think, in demonstrating; for whose sake I shall take as
little: First, he tells you of all the Cardinal virtues, and then what they
are; which I am so confident as to believe, every man understands, that knows
any thing: But I shall take up this conclusion, as that from them, as a true
Fountain, these Rivers must flow; for there is such a connection and chain of
affinity in these virtues, that none may be severed from the rest, and that man
may be truly said to be virtuous; though, Like as the body is conserved by the
nourishment of the four Elements or Complexions, so that the extinguishment of
any one of them is destruction to the body; yet the constitution of that body
is generally termed from the predominancy of some one of them that is most
erninent in him: So, the virtues of a man may be esteemed from the paticular
discovery of someone more eminent. But if we will make any difference in the
merits of Atchievment, it may be best done in short, by taking notice only of
Prudence and Fortitude, from whence that general opinion of the world, that
Merit was only by the Pike or Pen, is derived.

And though it has ever been a dispute, to which of these the precedence should
be allowed; yet, I think, a little reason will decide it, For though there has
been so much of Honor allowed in all Ages to Prudence, yet we ever found the
first succession of Honor was from the atchievments of Fortitude, as in the
example of the Roman Statues; and at this day the public example of the
Shield, whereon all, both Civil and Military, do illustrate their
atchievments, which should be enough to end that controversy; though some have
been very violent in a dispute to prefer the Doctor to be before the Knight.

To obtain estate of Gentility by learning, and discovering the secrets of
Heaven, is very honorable certainly; but to atchieve it by service in his
Sovereign's Wars, the defense of the Church, King, and Country, is of all most
excellent and worthy. In which case, War is permitted by the Law of God, taught
us by the Law of Nature, and commanded by the Laws of all Nations.

Sir William Segar, when he speaks of the Segar l. 4 c. 15.
Nobility allowed to Prudence, disposes it in the second Place: And Sir John
Fern, speaking of learning, gives it the same; only of all under that genus,
when the degree of the Doctor of Divinity differenceth; he says, It excels
all other degrees in Learning in four respects; first, the excellency of the
subject it treats of; secondly, for the dignity of the matter, treating of
things beyond reason of Philosophy, or the reach of Human Wisdom: thirdly, the
excellency of the end whereunto it is ordained: lastly, the worthiness of the
Author's authority, receiving it not from mortal men, as all other Sciences,
but from the Spirit of God.

Now a man may be ennobled by Leters Patent Seld. Tit. of Hon. c. 8 p. 853. p.
832.
from his Prince, though he have not the Superior Titles added; as by the
example of Jo. de King ston, who was by Patent from K. Richard the second
received into the state of a Gentleman, as you may see at large in Mr. Selden's
Titles of Honor.

As also in another example of Hen. 6. (...) Rot. Vasco. 24 Hen. 6. M. 7. N. 3.
by the word Nobilitamus, creates Bernard Angeuin, a Burdelois, a Gentleman:
and a latter of K. James to a Hollander.

Which examples makes him divide Honor into Nativa and Dativa.

There were Codicilli (...) in the Empire, by which men were entitled to the
Honors of Nobles.

And there have been Edicts made in France Sell. p. 870.
for the like ennobling of Centry, the form whereof Mr. Selden's Book sets
forth at large.

There is a whole Title, De honorariis condicilliis C. Theod. l. 6. (...). 21.
l. 1.
in Theodosius his Code, and some Laws concerning them, as ancient as
Constantine.

There is another kind of Nobility, and that Sir J. (...)
is called Nobilitas adoptiva, a Gentility arising from adoption; when a
Gentleman of Blood, and Coat Armor, for some special affection (though
neither allied to his Blood, or a Gentleman otherways) adopteth a stranger to
be his son, and constituteth him to succeed, as well in his Estate of Gentry,
as to his Name and Possessions.

An example of the like, also of great Antiquity, Form. l. 3. p. 382. Edit.
Romans 1621.
in Salustius Tiberius, a (...) his formulari, where the greatest part of a
Gentle Family assembling, do by consent adopt a stranger that has well
deserved of them to be of their Family, as if he were descended of a Male from
among them, creating him a Gentleman, to be reputed De domo and agnatione
ipsorum; and granted him also their Arms, and limited the whole honor to him,
and the Heirs of his body.

But this creation cannot make him a Gentleman by birth, as it is in Spain a
proverb, The King cannot make an Hidal go: he may be Nobilis, but not
Generosus; which Mr. Seldom defines to be qui, bono genere ortus, non
degenerat, which the Dutch have the word (...) for, which is well-born in
English.

But this word Generosus has been in use amongst Seld. Tit. of Hon. c. (...)
f. 858.
us but since the time of Hen. 8. since when it has bin constantly used for a
Gentleman of what sort soever, if he had no title above it: the word Gentleman
being before generally used in the like nature in Writs, Pleadings, and the
like, though they were Latin.

This word Gentleman, did first rise from the word Gens or Gentes, which the
Christians in the Primitive times used for all such as were neither Jews nor
Christians; which our English Translators turn Gentiles; as the French, Payens
for Pagans; the Dutch, Heyden, or Heydenen, for Heathen.

So afterward, the same word and Gentiles was used in the Empire, for all such
as were not Cives Romani, or Provincials.

But it is more reasonably resolved, that the word Gentleman is derived from
this origination.

That the Northern Nations, framing their words out of Latin to make up their
Provincial or Roman Tongues, so esteemed the word Gentilis, by which they found
themselves styled Seld. Tit. of Hon. page 862. page 864.
in the Latin, that they now made it in those Tongues a distinction or note of
Honor, for such of them as were of more eminent quality; ambitious, it seems,
to be honored with that very name, with which the Romans had before in scorn
expressed them. By which means Gentil-hommes became generally a word amongst
the Provincialls for Nobiles.

So that from the word Gentil homme, (...) Ibid. p. 865.
Gentilhombre, (which we received from the French, for till the Normans we had
it not) we made out this word Gentleman, which was before called AEdel.

This Nobilis or Gentleman (as before we find) is a general denomination for
all that come under the notions of Honor, (for indeed it is our vulgar genus,
for those also that are distinguished by higher Titles) but to those that are
not more properly, the Species whereof I shall a little further look into.

Of the Doctor of Divinity, I spoke before; the next is the Doctor of Law,
which has also held a dispute of precedence with the Knight, but to less
purpose than the other; the same reason that held in the major, must of
necessity in the minor. Besides, admit the great benefit and necessity of Laws
in a Commonweal for the preserving of peace; yet we must acknowledge, that the
peace which produced those Laws was the effect of the Sword; and neither is
Peace able to protect those Daws, nor those Laws Peace, without the assistance
of Military Authority.

And so necessary is the profession of Arms, Sir John (...), p. 37
that no Commonwealth, no City, no public Society, can subsist without it.

Aristotle, when he speaks of the constitution of a well-governed City, in
the first place calls Soldiers the true Citizens; And at the same time faith,
Ea Respublica tyrannidem (...), quae fortes and saptentes minime honorat.

Plato, in the institution of his Commonwealth, appoints one sort of men (far
more excellent then the rest) whose office should be the taking up of Arms for
the defense of the other Citizens, to which he allowed many privileges; and
that they should be more honorable than any other state of people. Sir John
Fern determines thus, In artibus militaribus, vel in actu indiffer enti, data
paritate Militum Ibid. p. 36.
and Doctorum, etc. semper praefertur (...) Miles Doctori, and sic de singulis,
de gradu in gradum.

And the same Author understands this rule to extend also to the Sergeant at
Law, as to the Doctor at Law.

Neither can I any way derogate in other respects from the honor due to a
Doctor at Law; for they are to be preferred in the second place below a Knight,
that is, next the Doctor of Divinity, out of the respect due to the Law it
self; And what respect has always bin given to it, you may see by these of the
Fathers, Quid enim Aug. de Civ. Dei. lib. 4. cap. 4
sunt regna, nisi latrocinia, remota (...) quae est legum effectus?

And again, Justitia regentis est utilior, (...) Cypr. lib. de 12. Abusionibus.
fertilitas (...), solatium pauperum, haereditas filiorum, and sibimetipsi spes
futurae beatitudinis. This Doctor, as well as the Doctor of Divinity, has for
his honor many Ceremonies and Tokens of Honor appropriated to his Creation or
Commencement.

As first, a Book, in token of his Learning. Sir John Fern.
Secondly, a Habit, which is called Biretrum, (...) bis rectum. Thirdly, a
Ring, to show how he is espoused to Philosophy and Science. Fourthly, in token
he is a Doctor he must sit in a Chair, which has been thus described: It ought
to be apiece; in the forepart should be painted a Young Man of great
strength, noting labor and love, to work and to finish; on the hinder part two
Virgins, called Care and Vigilance; on the right side a Young Man well girded,
carrying in his arms things of small value, to signify the mean estate of
wealth; and on the left, a man running away, to show that the study of Science
requires a volunary exile from all relations. The fifth Ensign is a Girdle
about his loins, with these words, Take this Girdle, and gird thy loins with a
bond of Faith, so that thy body may be adorned with all virtues, that thou
may seem before God and man perfect in thy degree.

Lastly, a Kiss, with these words, Take the Ibid.
Kiss of Peace, in token thou shall ever seek to preserve the bonds of Concord
in thy Faculty.

The next place amongst these honors is due to the Doctor of Physic, which
being the very perfection of natural Philosophy; and from the necessity of it
in a Commonwealth, is allowed the name of Liberal, and not Mechanical
Science.

To this Profession also is admitted the bearing of Arms; but in that case the
Herald ought always to be careful, to have regard in the designment to the
(...).

Which bearing of Arms is the (...) badge of all Honor, as in its due place
shall be set forth.

Neither are the rest of the Liberal Sciences debarred from the like
privileges, according to the excellency of the Professors. To which is
adjoined Poetry, which among Ancients Poetry.
has been honored with the style of Sacred; and Poets called Prophets by the
title of Vates.

St. Austine give them this character, Poetae Ibid.
Theologi dicti fuerunt, cum de diis immortalibus multa scriberent, quales
Orpheus, Musaeus, and Linus.

How they have been honored of Princes is evident in every Chronology;
amongst which, that of Alexander is most (...): With Homer will I sleep, with
Honor will I wake; Homer is a fit companion for Alexander. The Ensign usually
given to a Poet Laureat is the Swan, signifying pureness of style, the Bird of
Venus, and consecrated to the Muses; and sometimes a Pegasus, as to Michael
Drayton: See his tomb in Westminster.

To this I must join, and indeed should give the precedence to that sister-Art
of Painting, than Painting.
which none has received more honor in the World, though too Mechanically
slighted amongst us; which has been the reason we have not arrived to that
excellency that some other Kingdoms have done in it: For, (...) is the true
spur to perfection.

This has been for its sublimity reckoned with much honor among the liberal
Sciences, by many Princes; nay, Pliny calls it plainly, a liberal art, whose
reasons not his own only, Vid. Paul Lomazzo p. 14.
but modern times have approved: and much reason there is to give it that
honor, since its performance is by the exact engagement of Geometry,
Arithmetic, Perspective, and indeed all points and species of natural
Philosophy; besides the remembrance of the great estimation it was in amongst
the Grecians, whose Kings (many of them) were proud in professing the Art.

And then the law amongst the Romans, that no man should undertake it but such
as were Gentlemen; because the brain of a clown must be too durty, and muddy to
arrive at excellency in it. They were also to be of estate; that the laboring
for a livelihood, might not take them off from industrious study for
perfection.

Other examples, that Princes have given of their delight in it, is declared in
the Ingenuity of Francis and Emanuel, Kings of France; and many Germane Princes
since. Under which genus I wish the Ingenuity of our Nations, like as others,
would also comprize that species of Graving, an art too noble to be so much
slighted as it is amongst ingenuous men. History also being History.
esteemed a witness of time, a light of truth, a mistress of life, and a
messenger of antiquity, deserves from its Country the grateful return and
reward of its merits.

In general; if any person be advanced by Sir John (...) Fern.
lawful commission of his Prince to any office, dignity, or public
administration, be it either ecclesiastical, military, or civil; so that the
said Office comprehends in it, dignitatem, vel dignitatis titulum, he ought to
be matriculated into the rank of Gentility.

In the State Ecclesiastical are, Patriarchs, Primates, Archbishops, and
Bishops; all which by custom of the Realm, and Royal grants of (...) Princes,
are invested Barons, and admitted to the high Court of Parliament: But more of
that in its due place.

Also are admitted to the state of Gentility, Vicars Generals, Guardians of
Spiritualties; Deans of Cathedralls, Archdeacons (called (...) Episcopi,)
Chancellours, Treasurers, and Chauntors in every Episcopal Sea, so Sir John
Fern; as also Doctors, Provosts, Deans, and Governors of all Collegiate
Assemblies.

In the Military or Marshall Government, the high Constable,
Lievtenant-General, Marshall, Admiral, Major General, Quartermaster-General,
Treasurer of the Army, Guardians of Frontiers, Ibid.
the Master of the Horsemen, or grand Essquire, the Master of Artillery, the
Colonel, Serjeant-Major, Captain and Provost; and indeed all that receive
Commission from their Prince.

In the Civil or Political estate; the Chancellor, President, Treasurer,
Judges, Justices, Chief-officers of the Pallace-Royall, Secretaries of State,
Mayors, Provosts, and Baylifs of Incorporate Cities and Towns.

And since from the seat of Royalty and Majesty, all honors do flow, it is no
reason this Fountain should by any restriction be limited, neither is it; for
as before in the discourse of Gentility, by Patent it is signified, so there is
another sort of Gentility, made by the Prince, which as it is by Patent, ought
to have taken place there; but being by purchase only, and not of merit, is
esteemed of all the most inferior, and therefore to be set in the lowest degree.

The King, says Sir John Fern, may also create a Gentleman, and give him
Coat Armor to Sir John Fern. p. 61.
bear, although he be unworthy of the same, but, says he again, est haec
quaedam fucata Nobilitas and non ver a nec essentialis, it is but a counterfeit
Nobility, so that this Gentility brings the purchaser little more then the
shadow of Honor, to shroud him from the name of Plebeian, and these Gentlemen
by the strictness of the Laws of Honor, are excluded from the privileges
Ibid.
of Gentility.

Then, says Sir Will. Segar, a simple subject being (...) a Gentleman, by the
Prince's grant, and does not exercise the qualities beseeming that dignity,
ought to be deprived of his Title.

This consideration made Sigismond the Emperor, answer one soliciting for such
honor; I can, said he, make thee rich, or exempted with privileges; But,
without virtue or noble desert, it lies not in Caesar's power to make a
Gentleman.

And the retort of a Gentleman to a Knight, (which my self knew) was not
amiss, being to the same purpose, who said, It was more honor to be a
Gentleman and no Knight, then to be a Knight and no Centleman, the Knight being
then a Knight merely by purchase, without any desert at all in him: too many
whereof are (...) in our Nation.

Privileges due to Gentility.
NOw since others, as Sir Jo. Fern, and Sir Will. Segar, have been so punctual
in discoursing the privileges due to Gentility, I cannot but touch upon it a
little, before I pass to the next degree of Nobleness, which is the Esquire.

The privileges, as they have laid them down, are these.

1. Pro honor sustinendo, if a Churl, alias Pesant do detract from the Honor
of a Gentleman, he has a remedy in law, action injuriarum; but if by one
Gentleman to another, anciently, combat was allowed.

2. In crimes of equal constitution, a (...) shall be punished with more
favor then a common person; provided the (...) be not Heresy, Treason, or
excessive Contumacy.

3. The many observances and ceremonious respects, that a Gentleman is, and
ought to be Honored with by the ungentle.

4. In giving evidence, a Gentleman's attestestation Bart. in l. (...).
is to precede a Clown's.

5. In election of Magistrates, and Officers by vote; the suffrage of a
Gentleman shall take place of an ignoble person.

6. A Gentleman ought to be excused from base services, impositions, and
duties, both real and personal.

7. A Gentleman condemned to death, ought Ibid. li. de capitu.
not to be hanged but beheaded, and his examination taken without torture.

8. To take down the Coat-Armor of any Gentleman, deface his monument, or offer
violence to (...) Ensign of the deceased Noble, is as to lay buffits on the
face of him alive; and punishment is due accordingly.

9. The Clown may not challenge a Gentleman to Combat, quia condition impares.

Many others there are, but it would be too Fern p. 86. (...). of (...)
tedious to insert them, I referr the Reader to Sir John Fern, his Glory of
Generosity.

For the protection and defense also of this civil dignity, they have
discovered three Laws provided: the first, Jus Agnitionis, the right, or Laws
of Descent for the kindred of the Father's side: the second, Jus Stirpis; for
the whole Family: the third, Jus Gentilitatis, a Law for the descents in Noble
Families. Which Tully esteemed the most excllent, of which Law a Gentleman of
blood and Coat-Armor perfect possessing virtue was only privileged.

To the making of which Gentleman perfect, in his blood, was required, a
lineall descent on the part of his Fathers side, from Atavus, Abavus, Proavus,
Avus, and Pater; and as much on his Mothers line: then is he not only a
Gentleman of blood perfect, but of ancestors too. The obscurity and neglect of
which Laws has introduced other sorts of Gentlemen amongst us, which are men
taking the style of Gentleman being neither of blood nor Coat-Armor; which
style only serves to hurry them to an unruly pride, when indeed it is but rude
and false Honor, and is by Sir John Fern termed apocryphate, and debarred of
all privileges of Gentility. These Gentlemen, nomine, non re, he calls such of
the Students of the Law, Grooms of the Sovereign Palace, sons of Churls made
Priests or Cannons, etc. and such as have received degrees in the Schools, or
born office in the City; so that by that they are styled by the title of
Master, yet have no right to Coat-Armor.

As to the Student of the Law, Sir John Fern allows him the best assurance of
his Title of Gentleman, of all these irregular and untriall Gentlemen, (as he
terms them;) for so much as in some Acts of Parliament he is named with the
Title of Gentleman, yet he says, that he is also debarred from all honor and
privilege of the Law of Arms.

But those Students were anciently by customs of the Inns of Court, (as I
showed before) to be weeded out of the Societies, if by chance any were crept
in; and none to be admitted but Gentlemen of Coat Armor; Vid. Fortescue de
laud. Ang. cap. 49.
by which excellent Rule the younger sonns of Gentlemen would have the
privileges and benefit of that study, to maintain and support them, as it is
in the Empire of Russia, and many other Nations; when as now every Clown, that
can but pick up so much money at the plough tail, as shall fit his son up for
that study, receives the benefit, and the Gentry of the Nation frustrated of
that support; which causes so much decay amongst them, that younger sons of
Gentlemen, (being thus destitute of employment) are commonly the objects of
much pity, either for the suffering, or doing much evil; and the Commonwealth
in general, much prejudiced by the insultancy of such mungrell spirits, in
eminent preferments; which they too often come to, more by insinuated favor,
than real desert: And indeed not in that case only, but in Church preferments
also; and by this means is it, that so much corruption and abuse is the daily
leprosy both of the Civil and Ecclesiastical State.

The Romans were so careful of the preservation Sir John Feine, p. 95.
of Honor, that they had a custom by which the children of noble Persons
unprovided for should be maintained out of the common treasury: which custom,
though all ages have most infinitely applauded, our Nation has so absolutely
exploded, that the Gentry are in all cases hindered as much as may be of all
preferments that should give it them, without burden to the Commonwealth: But
it is to be hoped, succeeding times will produce better manners.

Of the Esquire.
THe division of these Dignities of Honor, was anciently but into twelve
parts; but the addition of Knight Baronet has made them thirteen: The six
first only Noble, as, the Gentleman, Esquire, Knight Bacheler, Knight Banneret,
Knight Baronet, and Baron: The other seven Princely, and are allowed Crowns and
Coronets; as the Viscount, Earl, Marquess, Duke, Prince, King, and Emperor.
Sir John Fern places the Viscount in the first division, but I think
improperly, in regard of his Coronet.

Of the lowest of these enough is said, the next is the Esquire, according to
my intended method.

The Esquire, or Escuyer, is called in Latin Armiger, but more anciently
Scutiger, from the office of bearing a Shield as an attendant upon a Knight,
and were ( militaris ordinis) candidati in the field, because they served not
as Knights Bachelors, nor Bachelors, which was M. Seld. Tit. of Ho. p. 555.
then a distinction. The etymology of the word will something signify as much,
being from Scutum in Latin, and (...) in the Greek, which is a Shield, from the
ancient way of making it in leather. Armiger nuncupatus est qui Domini sui
(...) bajulat, ipsisque (...) cingit, says Sir Henry Spelman in his
Glossarium, p. 50. Neither came this title in Came. fol. 176.
honorary amongst us till the reign of Richard the second: though the Title as
to office was much antienter amongst us, yet the antientest mention of it is in
lib. 4. p. 507.
Order Vitalis, speaking of William Fitz-Osberne Earl of Hereford, and Odo Earl
of Kent in the time of the Conqueror. Nam Armigeros suos immodicas praedas,
etc. facientes.

Dr. Argentre, President of the Parliament of Ad (...). Brit. Art. 88.
Rhemes, speaks thus of them: Esquires are, Qui scutums Ducibus aut Patronis
praeferebant, posterius et Strateres, qui Dominos in equos tolleren, and equos
regerent. Is qui primus inter coeteros gradus Nobilitatis. And Verstegen tells
us, the Teutonick word was Scyld-knapae, which is a Verst. p. 322. Sir Tho.
Smith de Rep. Aug.
Shield-serviture; but some have since gotten another distinction for the
title, which is, that they are Gentlemen, bearing Arms and Armories, in
testimony of Nobility, or race from whence they are come.

Sir Edward Cook p. 667. (...)
in his Exposition upon the Statute of 1 Hen. 3. chap. 5. (of Additions) says,
that the word Esquire, Armiger, or Scutiger, in legal understanding is derived
ab armis quae clypeis gentilitiis honoris insignia gestant. In which sense, as
a name of estate and degree it was used in diverse Acts of Parliament before the
making of that Statute, and after also.

But by this the Honor of the title is lost, and every Gentleman of Coat-Armor
shall have as great a share in it as themselves; which in truth has not been
since the dividing the Gentility into these two divisions; when this title of
Esquire was made a legal and appropriated addition.

Of these, there are four sorts: By Creation, Sir John Fern. p. 100.
by Birth, by Dignity, and by Office.

Esquires by Creation are sometimes made by Patent, as one Jo. de Kingston was
by King Richard, as I mentioned before, being received into the state of a
Gentleman, and made an Esquire, Camb. de Ordin. p. 117. and de reliquiis p. 23.
Spel. Glos. p. 51.
and sometimes by the giving of a collar of SS. by the King, as an ensign of
the title. Eumve (says Sir Henry Spelman) argentatis calcaribus donaverit.
Which silver Spurs were given by the King, as the Gold was to the Knight, to
difference the Honor; from whence they are called White-spurs.

There is commonly given to him also an addition to his paternall Coat, or a
new Coat, if he owned none before, which is due to the descendents only of his
body, not related to any of his line besides; and the eldest son of that Segar
p. 224. ibid.
Coat-Armor is ever an Esquire.

Esquires by birth, are the eldest sons of Knights, and their eldest sons
successively.

Sir John Fern, and Sir Henry Spelman call all Esquires, that being the sons
of Lords, are not allowed the title of Lords: but Sir Henry Spelman Spelm. p.
10. c. 2. ibid.
again, Proprie natalitio jure Armigeri dicuntur, Equitum auratorum filii
primogeniti; and ex ipsis haeredes inperpetuum masculi.

Those by Office, are such as bearing high Offices in the Commonwealth or Kings
Palace, have not the augmentation of Knighthood or Lordship. Such are the
Sergeants at Law, Segar. Fern.
Sheriffs, Escheators, the Sergeant of every Office in the Court. But these are
only the possessors of that dignity; it dying with them: And not only so, but
if he lose his Office, that is a Gentleman by Office; he lo seth his Gentility
also.

And this ennobling by Office was also among the Saxons, and has so continued
among them, says Mr. Lambert, If a Churl so thrived, that he had fully five
Hides of Land of his own, a Church, and a Kitchen, a Bell-house, and a Gate, a
Seat, a several Office in the Kings Hall, then was he the Theynes right
worthy. Amongst which sort of Esquire those four of the Kings body are the
principal, which (he says) are to be esteemed above the elder sons of
Knights. And indeed in all processions of State, Spel. p. 51. Segar. l. 4. p.
246.
they go before the Master of the Jewell-house, all Judges or Sergeants at the
Law.

Of Knighthood in general, and of the Knight Bacheler.
OF the distinctions by Knighthood there are many in other parts of the World;
but in England only these, Knights Batchelers, Knights of the Bath, Knights
Bannerets, and Knights Baronets, and Knights of the Garter.

The word Knight, as Mr. Seldom says, coming from the Saxon (...), which
signified puer, or servus, as Dienaknecht is yet among the Dutch, for a
manservant. So Tenants by Knights service were called Milites, or Chivalers,
Seld. Tit. Ho. p. 769. Camb. Brit. p. 170.
because their service was military. Knights (says Mr. Cambden) who of our
English Lawyers are termed also in Latin Milites, and in all Nations almost
besides, took their name of Horses. The Italians call them Cavalari, the French
Chevaliers, the Germans Kutters, and our Britans in Wales, Margagh, all of
Riding. Englishmen only term them Knights, by a word, that in old
English-language, as also of the German, signifies indifferently a Servitour,
or Minister, and a lusty young man. Hereupon it comes, that in the old written
Gospels translated into the Saxon, we read, for Christ's disciples, Christ's
leorning knights. And elsewhere for Client or Vassal (...). And Bracton (our
ancient civil Lawyer) makes mention of Rad Cnyhts, that is Serving-men, who
had their Lands with this condition, that they should serve their Lords on
Horseback, and so by cuting off a piece of the name, (as our delight is to
speak short) this name of Knight remained with us. But whence it came that our
Countrymen should, in penning the Laws, and all Writings since the Norman
Conquest's time, term those Knights in Latin Milites, that is, Soldiers, was
transferred unto those that conversing near about the Princes person bare any
of the great Offices in the Prince's Court or Train.

But with us, I conceive, those were first so called, who held any Lands or
Inheritances in Fee, by this Tenure, To serve in the War, for those Lands were
termed Knights Fees: and those that elsewhere they named Feuditary, that is,
Tenants in Fee, were hete called Milites, that is, Knights; as for example,
Milites Regis; Milites Archiepiscopi Cantuar. Milites Comitis Rogerii; Comitis
Hugonis, etc. for that they received those Lands or Manors of them, with this
condition, to serve them in the Wars, and to yield them fealty and homage;
whereas others, who served for pay, were simply called Solidarii (from whence
the word Soldier) and Servientes.

This Title coming to be a reward or degree Segar. chapter 1 p. 51.
of Honor, is thought to be in imitation of the Equestris Order in Rome, to
which men were only advanced for extraordinary virtue, and notable merit: who
only were admitted to beautify the Caparizons of their Horses and their Armor
with Gold, from whence they were called Equites aurati.

In which time, all sorts of men were distinguished in their degrees by some
garb or habit; as some by their clothes, some by cutting their hair, etc.

The Roman Knights also were allowed to wear a Chain of Gold, and therefore
called Torquati, from Manlius Torquatus, who wore the first, obtained by him in
a victory in France, which is by us yet imitated in the collar of S S. by which
it is easily collected, that the true institution of it was a reward of Honor
and Valor, not Sloth and Riches. And therefore all men thus ennobled, ought
either to be deserving by action before, or by endeavor and good service
after; and to be else esteemed unlawful possessors of that Honor, at what rate
soever purchased.

The first account of Ceremonies (that we Will. of Malmsb. de gest. Reg. l.
(...). c. 6. Seld. (...). of Hon. p. 773. p. 778;
have) at the creating a Knight, is in the example of King Alfred, Knighting
his grandson Athelstan; and after the continuance of them (it seems) grew more
precise and customary, by Feasts, giving of Robes, Arms, Spurs, and sometimes
Horse and Arms; until our later times produced the new, yet usual Ceremony,
of a stroke over the shoulder with a Sword, with these words, Sois Chivaler au
nom de Dieu, by the King, or some by his Commission, though the Spur has
lately been observed also.

Another manner of Creation there has been also among the Saxons before the
Conquest, which was by sacred Ceremonies, showed by one Ibid. p. 779
Ingulphus, that lived in the time of the Conquest, by a solemn Confession, a
Vigil in the Church, receiving of the Sacrament after an offering of the Sword
on the Altar, and redemption of it; then the Bishop, Abbot, or Priest putting
it on him, made him a Knight, with many prayers, called Benedictiones Ensis.

To this Order or degree of Honor, an Infant may be admitted, though he be a
Ward, and Bract. (...) 36. Cook 5. Jacobi part. 6.
then (till a late Act of Parliament ordained otherwise) his Wardship was free,
both of person and estate; but now their lands are not. And there were feudall
Laws for, and at, the making the eldest son of a Lord a Knight, as there was
also for the marrying of the eldest daughter, as in the Charter of King John,
which was money raised on the Tenant. But any man in the order of Priesthood is
debarred the Honor of Knighthood of the Sword, Cum eorum militia sit (...)
mundum, carnem, and diabolum. So Sir John Fern.

Though I find, that anciently they have been allowed it, but not without first
laying aside their Spiritual Cures, and applying themselves to a Secular life.
So Matthew Paris, Dei natalis Johannem de Gatesden Clericum, and multis ditatum
(...), (sed omnibus ante expectatum resignatis, quia sic oportuit) Baltheo
cinxit militari. And then the persons that gave this Honor were sometimes
subjects (without any superior authority granted to them) as well as
Sovereigns, though long since it has been an appropriated privilege of the
Crown. Landfrank Seldom. p. 772.
Archbishop of Canterbury made William the second a Knight in his Fathers
lifetime. But the name of Bacheler added to it seems not to Mat. Patis
have been till the 33 of (...) the third.

Sir John Fern also tells of Ensigns that anciently were marks of Knighthood,
as a Ring on the thumb, a Chain of Gold, and gilt Spurrs. All which tokens of
his Honor he was as carefully to preserve, as a Captain his Banner, which
(according to the rules of Arms then) if he once lost basely in the field, he
was (...) of flying any more again, till he had regained the same or another
from the Enemy.

To which end it was carefully to be provided, Sir 10. Fern Glo. of Genere.
that such men as were endowed with this Honor, should have these
Accomplishments, He ought to be faithful and religious, just in his
engagements, valiant in his enterprises, obedient to his Superiors, expert in
Military affairs, watchful and temperate, charitable to the poor, free from
debauchery, not a boaster with his tongue, ready to help and defend Ladies,
especially Widows and Orphans: and he ought to be ever in a readiness, with
Horse and Arms, and to attend the command of his Sovereign in all Wars, both
Civil and Foreign; the neglect where of is a crime as great, as to fight
against him, and merits at the least a shameful degrading And formerly when
the King has been to make a Knight, he sat gloriously in his State, arrayed
in cloth of Gold of Came. Brit. p. 74.
the most precious and costly bodkin-work, and crowned with his Crown of Gold:
and to every Knight he allowed or gave a hundred shillings for his
Harnessements, etc.

And Knights in this manner dubbed made page 175.
this esteem thereof, that in it consisted the guerdon of their Virtue and
Valor, the praise of their House and Family, the memorial of their Stock and
Lineage; and lastly, the glory of their Name.

There are many privileges belonging to that Dignity; and Mr. Seldom speaks of
a Law, that a man was to be punished with the loss of a hand, that should
strike a Knight; yet he says, he remembers no example of the practice of it,
which I think is the greater honor to the Dignity, as being a shame, that any
such Law should be the guard of a man so honored with Arms, and appropriated to
the Sword.

Against a Knight in the War, runs no prescription.

The Office of a Coroner in former times being honorable, none were capable of
it but a Knight.

By ancient Custom, none were admitted to Vid. Stat. de An. 23. H. 6. c. 15.
the House of Parliament, but who were Milites gladiis accincti.

Many other privileges there were appropriated to them, according to the rules
of Honor, and custom of the Nation, as well as requisites in them; which more
at large may be understood in Sir Will. Segar's Honor Military Seg. lib. 2.
lin. 2.
and Civil.

Where is to be found the severity in degrading them. When if any Knight at any
time had been corrupted with money by his Prince's Enemy; or committed any other
notable fact against Loyalty and Honor; he was apprehended, and caused to be
armed from head to foot, and on a high Scaffold in the Church he was Vid. Mills
fol. S (...). 4 Ed 4. 20
placed; and after the Priests had sung some funeral Psalm, as though he had
been dead; first, they took off his Helmet, to show his face, and so by degrees
his whole Armor: and then the Heralds crying out, This is a disloyal
Miscreant; with many other ignoble Ceremonies, he was thrown down the Stage
with a rope. This he mentions to have been about the time of King Arthur. We
have many examples of latter times also of degrading Knights, for dishonorably
absenting from the service of the King, and other treasons; with which seizing
on all that he had (except one Horse; ne, qui dignitate factus est Eques,
cogatur pedes incedere: for in all Countries, the Title is related to a Horse,
from serving on Horseback;) and also by See Stow in Anal. p. 693. and 694.
edit. vet. in 4.
the cutting off their Spurrs from their heels, taking away his Sword,
reversing his Coat-Arms, and the like; as in the degrading of Sir Ralph Gray.
See more at large Sir William Segar, Mr. Seldom, and Sir John Fern.

The Creation Robe of a Knight of ye Garter


IT is ever to be observed, that when the word Knight is found without any
addition of distinction, it is meant by the Knight Batcheler. Of the Order of
the Bath, the first that are taken notice of is in (...), who gives an account
of 46 made by Henry the Fourth: But Mr. Seldom is of an opinion, they were long
before.

Mr. Upton (in a Manuscript which Mr. Bish (a Gentleman much deserving of Honor
from our English Gentry) has since very (...) illustrated and published) takes
notice of this Order in these words, Creantur (...) modis, etc. Creantur in
alio modo Milites per Balneum, qui modus multum observatur in Anglia, and in
(...) Regnis. He lived in the time of Henry the sixth.

The Honor is invested with a great deal of noble Ceremony, as is seen by the
example of Henry the seventh, when he sent Writs to diverse Lords and Gentlemen,
to come up to the making Henry his second son Knight of the Bath, Ad ordinem
Militia (...) suscipiendum, Dor. Cl. (...) 20 Hen 7. 20 Sep.
juxta antiquam consuetudinem in creatione usitatam.

When one is to be made a Knight of the Bath, he coming up to the Court, is
very nobly received by the Officers and Nobles of the Court; where he has two
Esquires appointed to wait on him, who convey him to a Chamber, where is to be
Music before he comes to the Tubbs; then they uncloath him, and put him
naked into the Bath, where, if For K. of the Bath, see Far. f. 65. 5 Book.
there be any other Knights of the Order in the Court, they come in their Order
and salute him, and after discourse concerning the Order, they sprinkle some of
the water on his shoulder, and so depart. Then the Esquires convey him to a
bed, where he is dried, and then he putting on his clothes, they put over them
a long gray coat like a Hermit's weed, with long sleeves, and a hood; then the
Knights return to him again, and lead him to the Chapel, where he receives a
cup of spiced Wine, and with that salutes the Knights, who after leave him
there, only with his Esquires and Priest, where he performs a Vigill till
almost day, with Prayers and Offerings. After this, and some repose in his
Chamber, the next morning, where are Robes provided for him; the Knights wait
on him again, and do service to him in his making ready; one giving him his
doublet, another his breeches, another combs his head, etc. Then with Music
he is brought to the Hall in the Court on Horsback, accompanied with those
Knights and Esquires, where the Marshall meets him. Then the King coming to
the Hall, commands a Lord to put on his right Spur, and making a cross upon
his knee, rises up and kisses him, and so another the left. Then the King puts
the Sword about him himself, and smiting him on the shoulder, says, Be a good
Knight, and kisses him. Then with the Music he is conducted again to the
Chapel, where he goes to the Altar, and performs some Ceremonies, makes
protestation for the performance of the Orders of Knighthood. Then the King's
Cook comes to him with a knife in his hand, to demand his fee; and tells him,
That if he do any thing against the Orders of Chivalry, he will cut his (...)
off from his heels. Then he is habited in a blew Gown with Maunches open, like
a Priest, and so led again to the Hall.

The particular manner is more at large set down by Sir William Segar, in his
Honor Military and Civil, and Cambden's Britannia. They are distinguished
ordinarily by the wearing of a red Ribbon cross the left shoulder, as Knights
of the Garter by the blew. And have this privilege above all Knights, their
sons are free from Wardship: as in the example of the Heir of Sir Thomas Wise
of Essex, which was a Cause in Chancery, and the Heir Victor.

Of Bannerets.
THis was anciently an Order in France, and (excert that in England they are
not created by Parent, not the Title Hereditary,) the same: The creation is
almost the same with theirs, by the solemn delivery of a Banner, Mr. Seld. fol.
790.
charged with the Arms of him that is to be created, and cutting or tearing off
the end of Camd. Brit. p. 171
a Pennon or Streamers, to make it square into the shape of a Banner, are
called by some Equites vexillarii.

Sir William Segar relates the Ceremony thus; He is led between two other
Knights into the presence of the King or General, with his Pennon of Arms in
his hand, and there the Heralds Seg. f. 69.
declare his merit, for which he deserves to be made a Knight Banneret, and
thenceforth to display a Banner in the field. Then the King, or General,
causes the point of his Pennon to be rent off; and the new made Knight returns
to his Tent, the Trumpets sounding before him.

A Banneret thus made may bear his Banner displayed, if he be a Captain, and
set his Arms thereon, as other Degrees above him.

And although the Knight Baronet be an honor given by Patent, and made
hereditary; yet, by Decree of King fames it is established, Rot. pat. 10. Jacob
par. 10. membr. 8.
that all such Bannerets, as shall be made by the Kings Majesty, his heirs and
successors, under their Standard, displayed in an Army Royal in open War, the
King personally present; for the term of the lives of such Bannerets, shall
for ever take place and precedence as well before all other Bannerets, as the
younger sons of Viscounts, and Barons, as also before all Baronets; but not
otherwise.

And this Order was of so great estimation, Seld. p. (...)
that diverse Knights Bachelors and Esquires served under them; which Title, it
seems, in many ancient Writs, has been mis-writ Barronets, as in a Patent to
Sir Ralph Fane, a Knight Banneret under Edward the sixth, he is called
Barronettus for Bannerettus; which Title of Baronet was not amongst us till
King James.

Of Baronet.
THe Title of Baronet was erected by King James, in the ninth year of his
Reign: He made diverse on the 22 day of May, whose Patents were all of one
form, without any difference at all; the (...) or Argument being for the
propagating a Plantation in Ulster Pat. 9. Jac. part 48.
in Ireland, to which the aid of these Knights was ordained; the words run
thus, (...), ex certa scientia and mero (...) nostris, Ordinavimus, ereximus,
constituimus and creavimus quendam statum, gradum, dignitatem, nomen and
titulum Baronetti (Anglice of a Baronet) infra hoc Regnum nostrum Angliae
perpetuis temporibus duraturum. Their aid was the maintenance of thirty
Soldiers in that Province for three years. Their Titles were to descend to the
heirs male of their body, and to take place before all Knights Bachelors,
Knights of the Bath, and Knights Bannerets, (the other Degree before specified,
being afterward made) and that the name of Baronet in all Writs, Commissions,
and Style, should be added to his Surname; and that the addition of Sir should
precede in all mentionings of his name (as the Title of Lady and Madam to the
Wives of them) and their Successors; and that they should take place according
to the priority of the date of their Patents inter se, and so to their
successors. In which Patents also, the King did engage for himself and
successors, that there should be but two hundred of them made; and that there
should be never any degree of Honor established, that should take place between
the Baronet and Baron; and if for want of heirs male, the Title in any should
fall, there should never be any created in their room, but that the Title
should diminish, to the honor of them remaining, and be by that means reduced
to a (...) number.

And afterward a Commission was ordained Sell. f. 827.
under the great Seal, for filling up the number, who had instructions also
enacted; among which, they that desired to be admitted into the dignity of
Baronets, must maintain the number of thirty Foot-Soldiers in Ireland for three
years, after the rate of eight-pence sterling a day; and a years pay to be paid
in (at the passing of the Patent) to the Exchequer.

And again, That they must be of good reputation, and descended of a
Grandfather, at least, by the father's side, that bare Arms; and have also a
certain yearly revenue of one thousand pounds de claro.

They were to take bond also for the true payment of that maintenance, and to
appoint one particular Treasurer for it, that it might not come into the King's
Exchequer.

After this, many being made, it was also ordained Pat. 10. Ja. par. 10. n. 18.
by the King, That they and their descendents, being of full age, should be
Knighted; and that they should in a Canton or Inescutcheon, as they pleased,
bear the Arms of Ulster, which is Argent, a sinister hand, and Gules.

There are many other Orders of Knighthood, almost in every Nation; some
appropriated to the Country, and some of more excellency, as is that of the
Garter, whereof in another place I shall speak with the rest; but these Titles
have an estimated honor due to them, greater or less, according to Segar. l.
2. c. 3. p. 53.
the quality of the creator: for the Knight made by the King, shall be
preferred before a Knight made by a Prince of meaner title. So all Emperors,
Kings, and Princes, acknowledging no lawful Superior, may make Knights; as
also some Commonwealths, as the State of Venice and Genoa: The Popes also
sometimes do make Knights, calling them after their own names, as, Chevaleri de
San Pedro, San Paulo, (...), etc. And so much for Knights may serve in this
place.

Of Barons.
THis word Baron is very variously interpreted, Albert. Rosu dicti.
as first, that it comes from the word Baria in Greek, which signifies
Authoritas gravis. Bracton interprets it, Robur belli. Again, says Sir Henry
Spelman, the word Baro is the same in Latin with Vir, whose derivation is from
Vi, Force; and from thence, Sunt and alii potentes sub rege qui dicuntur
Barons, id Gloss. p. 79. Bract. lib. 1 cap. 8.
est, robur belli.

And taking of it in that sense we now understand it, Sir Henry Spelman calls
him, Cliens Gloss. p. 79.
feodalis; and Vassallus capitalis. Hujusmodi sunt (says he) qui Pagos, Urbes,
Castra, vel eximiam ruris portionem, cum jurisdictione acceperunt a Rege.

The Creation Robe of a Baron


This word is a general notion in England to all Lords of the Great Council of
Parliament, as it is in Naples and Lumbardy, where all those Lords that are
called Titulati, are in general styled Barons; thus dignitas Baronalis stat ut
genus. This word was used by the Lamb. fol. 336.
Danes in the stead of Thane, which was among the Saxons a Title of Honor, and
being next the King, he was called the King's Thane.

And in the Laws of William the first, instead Seld. f. 87.
of the Earl, King's Thane, and middle Thane, of the Saxons times; the title of
Count or Earl, of Baron, and of Valvasor are used.

By which we understand it to have been, though not in the same name, yet
notion, a Feodall honor of great antiquity; Sir Henry Spelman says, they were
such as had not only Castles, Towns, or great parts of Countries in their
jurisdiction, but they had their Valvasores, ( Minores, I conceive; for there
were then Valvasores, Majores, and Minores; Milites, and libere tenentes.)
Which should signify an honor of command in the Commonwealth.

In France, Germany, and Italy, Baronem Spel. Gloss. fol. 79.
vocant, qui merum mistumque Imperium habet in aliquo Castro, ex concessione
(...).

And it has been a common opinion, that every Earldom in times past had under
it ten Barons, and every Barony ten Knights Fees holden of him: But those
Knights Fees, say other Authors, were uncertain for number.

However, we find many Barons created in the times after the coming in of the
Normans that held both of Knights service, and of the Crown in chief; which
were either Spiritual or Temporal; and it is certain, that all honorary Barons
from the Conquest, till the latter time of King John, were only Barons by
tenure.

These Spiritual Barons were distinguished from the Temporal Thane, in the
time of the Saxons, by holding their lands free from all secular service;
excepting trinoda necessitas, (as it was called) which was, assistance in War,
in building of Bridges, and Castles. Which continued till the fourth year of
William the first, who then made the Bishoprics and Abbeys, Mr. Seld. Title of
Hon. chapter 5. f. 699, 704
subject to Knights service in chief, by creation of new tenures; and so first
turned their possessions into Baronies, and thereby made them Barons of the
Kingdom by tenure. That all Bishops, Abbots, Priors, and the like, that held in
chief of the King, had their possessions as Baronies, and were accordingly to
do services, and to sit in judgment with the rest of the Barons in all cases,
but cases of Blood, from which they are prohibited by the Canon Law.

This Honor of Baronady is of three kinds; Seg. lib. 4. fol. 223.
by Tenure, by Creation, and by Writ.

Barons by Tenure are the Barons Spiritual, as I said before, which are
reputed Peers of the Realm, and were ever first in nomination, and take place
on the Prince's right hand in Parliament, and have been capable of temporal
(...), and some of them are accounted Count Palatines in their Jurisdictions.

And by tenure Temporal, which are such as hold their Honor, Castle, or
Manor, as the head of their Barony, per Baroniam, which is Grand Serjanty. By
which tenure, they ought Coke par. 2. page 5.
to be summoned to Parliament. See Bracton, lib. 5. fol. 351. and 357. But he
is no Lord of the Parliament, until he be called by Writ to the Parliament.

These Barons by renure in the time of the Conqueror, and after, were very
numerous; and (...) his time, as I conceive, distinguished into Majores and
Minores, and summoned accordingly to Parliament: the Majores by immediate Writ
from the King, the others by general Writ from the high Sheriff at the King's
command.

But these had also another distinction, which was; the first, were called
only Barons by tenure then, and the last Tenants in chief, which were after
quite excluded the Parliament, as Mr. Cambden says, in the reign of Henry
Camden. fol. 122.
the third, by a Law made, that none of the Barons should assemble in
Parliament, but such as were summoned by special Writ from the Sell. f. 712.
King.

And that King Edward the first summoned always those of ancient Families, that
were most wise; but omitted their sons after their death, if they were not
answerable to their parents in understanding.

But Mr. (...) opinion is, that not long after the Grand Charter of King John,
the Law for excluding all Tenants in chief was made.

From whence came that other dignity of Barons by Writ, the King summoning whom
he pleased, though he were but a private Gentleman or Knight, as many Seculars,
Priors, Abbots, and Deacons also; all which have been fince omitted, that held
nothing of the King in chief, or Grand Tenure.

This title of Baron by Writ is by some esteemed only temporary, pro termino
Parliamenti; but that cannot be, for the ceremony of his admittance signifies
more than a titular or temporary Honor, which is this; He is first brought by
the Garter-King at Arms in his Sovereign Coat, to the Lord Chancellor, between
two of the youngest Barons, who bear the Robe of a Baron; there he shows his
Prescript, which the Chancellor reads, then congratulates him as a Baron, and
invests him with those Robes, and sends him to take his place. Then the Writ is
delivered to the Clerk of the Parliament, and he by the Garter showed to the
Barons, and placed in the House; and from thence is this title allowed him as
hereditary.

Since these two sorts of Barons in the time of Richard the second, has
another been established, which is Barons by Patent, and indeed more usual in
our latter times than those by Writ. He first created John de Beauchamp Steward
of the household, Baron of Kiderminster to him and his heirs males of his body.

And this coming afterward to be the only See Mr. Sol. f. 748.
way of creation, they had commonly creationmony granted them, as Sir Ralph
Botiller, who had one hundred marks granted him annuity out of the County of
Lincoln.

Some of those Minores have yet remained to our memories, as the Barons of the
Cinque Ports, Barons of the Exchequer, etc. and some others, which are called
Barons, yet have not the honor; such are those that were created by Count
Palatines, as the Baron of Kinderton, and some few others.

As concerning the descent of this Honor, and the extension of it, it many
times descends to heirs female, as when there is no special entail on the
heirs male; yet then no husband of that heir female shall enjoy the style and
honor in right of his wife, unless he have issue by her, as it was decreed by
Henry the eighth, in the case of Mr. Wimbry, for the style of the Lord Talboyes.

Neither shall any honor of Barony by Tenure be conveyed with the (...) of any
place from whence the title is derived, without license immediate from the
King; but all such as shall without, is absolutely forfeited and stopped, and
returns again into that great Fount ain Cook 2. part. 80. b.
of Honor the Crown.

Now though this dignity be not allowed the Princely distinction of a Coronet,
yet is he as a Lord of the Parliament reckoned among the Peers of the Realm,
and privileged amongst them in all these things, as first, in all (...) pleas.
del. Coron. lib. 3. chapter 1.
trialls of criminal causes, he is not tried by a Jury, but a Bench of Peers.

If for Treason he be indicted, and shall stand mute, he shall be convicted,
but not pressed; but if it be for Felony, his standing silent shall not (...) Dir
205. and 300
convict him.

Upon any trial of Peers, the Lords that are to give Verdict, are not, like a
Jury, put upon their Oaths, but upon their Honor.

A Peer of the Realm is not to be Empannelled Fitz. not. br. 165.
in any Jury, but what concerns the King's Enquiry.

Neither are they to be arrested by any Warrant Lamb. Just. l. 2. c. 1. fol. 17
of Justice of Peace, either for the peace or good behavior.

Neither is he to be put upon his Oath, upon any appearance he shall make in
Court; but his Honor to be esteemed as binding.

And whereas all Burgesses of the Commons Dier. 315.
House are sworn to Supremacy, the Barons of the Upper-House of Parliament are
not; with 5 Eliz. c. 1
many other privileges.

But it is to be noted, that by these are only meant, to Lords of the
Parliament, not to the sons of Dukes, Marquesses, or Earls, during the life of
their fathers. Nor to any Baron of another Kingdom in this, though under the
same allegiance, who are not triable out of their own Kingdom, unless they
enjoy some honor in this.

The form of creating a Baron is in this manner. The King sitting in state in
the Presence Chamber; First, the Hetalds by two and two, and their Garter
Principal King alone proceed, bearing in his hand the Patent of creation; next
to him a Baron bearing the Robes; and then the Person to be created follows
betwixt two other Barons. Being entered the Chamber of Presence, they make their
obeisance to the King three times. Garter then delivers the Patent to the
Lord Chamberlain of the household, and he to the King, and the King to one of
his Principal Secretaries of State, who reads it, and at the word
Investimus, the King puts on him the Baron's robe; so soon as the Patent is
read, it is to be delivered to the King, who gives it him that is created. Then
he returning thanks for his great honor, withdraws in the same manner he came
in, the Trumpers sounding, and so he goes to dinner. Where, after the second
service is gone up, the Garter with the rest of the Heralds comes near the
Table, where first pronouncing Largess, with a loud voice he declares the
King's style in Latin, French, and English; and then standing somewhat further
off, pronounces Largess again, with the style of him that is newly created.

In which form was William Cecill created Mills de Nob. pol. vel live p. 58.
Lord Burghley, 15. of Febr. 13. Elizab.

Of the Viscount.
THis word in Latin is Vice-comes, which is interpreted from the office of the
person who was one, cui Dominus ( hoc est, Comes) committit vices suas, sive
gubernationem castri, says Sir John Fern.

The Title is derived from the same Order in France: which there were only
first substitutes to Earls, till, getting themselves first in power, got also
to have the title honorary and hereditary, between the Earl and Baron, it being
the same word which signifies our Sheriff, and began not with us, till about
the 18. year Pat. 18. H. 6. par. 2. m. 21.
of Henry the sixth, who then created John Lord Beaumont Viscount Beaumont, by
Letters patent.

Though Sir John Fern tells us of it in the time of Henry the first, and King
Stephen; and though the Elder sons of Dukes are styled Earls during their
fathers life time, (so the Eldest sons of Marquesses are styled by their
Fathers Vicounties and Baronies, and called Lords, and the younger sons saluted
with Lord) yet it is by (...) only.

To this degree, is allowed a Surcoat, Mantle, Rat. pet. 4. (...) par. 1.
Hood, and a Circulet, without either flowers, or points, as in the discourse
of Armory shall Sir Will. Segar. f. 821.
be seen, and is created with the same ceremony, those above him are.

Of the Count or Earl.
THe next precedence is an Earl, called in Latin, Comes: and thence is an
English word Count, which word Comes we have from the example of the Romans;
amongst whom Segar. fol. 220.
they used it for the title of sundry offices.

Coke defines them thus, Dicuntur Comites, Instit. par. 2. fol. 5.
quia a Comitatu, five a societate nomen sumpserunt; qui etiam dici possunt
Consules a Consulendo, etc. But John of Salisbury, who writ in the time of
Henry the second, says thus, Comites dici a (...) participatione.

And the word Earl we had from the Saxons, from whence, till we borrowed the
word Honor, we used the word Earl for gentle or noble, and Ethel, which was
sometimes abridged to el, so that of Ear-ethel, it was Ear-el, and by
abbreviation Earl, which the Dutch called Eorle. (...) fol. 315.
Amongst the Germans, they have the word Grave for it, as Palsgrave, Landgrave,
Reingrave, etc. from the word Gerefa, by abbreviation Gereve, and Grave, as
also Reve, from whence our Shierreve, or Shirriffe, as some do Ib. f 325.
abbreviate it. Which word in the Teutonick, signifies a Disposer or Director.

Others have, That the word with the Saxons, was Erlig, and Ethling, and used
for the same office of Ealderman was before; and the Came. rem. 6. 15.
word Ealderman, which now is writ Alderman, was transferred to a lower degree;
who used the word also Thegon or Thaine for Baron, as I said before. But the
word Ealderman, and Ethling, it seems, did only signify them according to
Civil power, and the word Heretoga, from whence Hertshog, for their Military
power; the former word being no more then Seld. fol. 605.
Senior, or Senator.

This title of Ealdermen continued, for Duces, Principes, and Comites, until
Canutus reign, when Ibid fol. 609.
the word Earl was brought in, and the other lost, as to that Honor.

What the Jurisdiction of the Ealderman in those times was, and how absolute,
or large, is to me yet uncertain: though large it was, doubtless, because of
the several Offices that were under them; but as it has remained since the
Conquest, we find more reasonable satisfaction. Their possessions were
sometimes the whole Territories they derived their Title from, and sometimes
not; but some particular (...), or place in it. We find also, that both it, and
Thane were honorary, and feudall Titles.

Upon the coming in of the Normans, this word was turned into Comes, or Count,
since when it has remained. And this word in the Empire, was given to Quotquot
e Comitatu Principis Spelman, (...) fol. (...).
erant, to all that were admitted to society of the Prince. So the (...) styled
them in War, Commilitones, in the Court Comites.

The dignity is of diverse kinds, for an Earl Ib. f. 109.
acknowledging no Superior, is equal to a Prince.

This Title, as it continues since the Conquest, is either local, or
personal. Local, as from the denomination of some County, or other Territory;
and Personal, that has its being in some great Office, as Earl-Marshal, and
the like.

Those local are also simplices, and Palatine: Seldom. fol. 639.
which last retain the same constitution, the Saxons time allowed them; which
is Juraeregalia, or merum, and mixtum Imperium, and could make Barons under
them, as those of Chester, Lancaster, the Bishoprics of Durham and Ely.

Hugh Lupus, had the County Palatine of See Sir Jo. (...).
Chester, given him by the Conqueror, Ita libere ad Gladium, (...) ipse Rex
tenebat Angliam ad Coronam. Who governed the County forty years, he created
eight Barons, and built the Abbey of Chester.

Lancaster was made a Palatinate, by Edward the third, as says Sir William
Segar, and had Hon. Mil. and live. fol. 641.
Barons, Chancery, and Seal; and so had the Bishoprics of Durham and Ely. The
office of those Barons, being to sit in Council, and Judgment, with the Earl.

To the County Palatine of Chester, (...) been Chamberlains, who supplied the
place of Chancellor, Justices, before whom the causes that should else belong
to the King's Bench, and Common Pleas, are triable; a Baron Seld. title of
Honor, chapter 5. f. 641.
of the Exchequer, a Sheriff, and other offices proportionably to those of the
Crown at Westminster, which being since reserved in the Crown, is given to the
Prince of Wales, when he is created. This County had this honor, I conceive,
out of regard to the great trust, was reposed in the first Earl, which was to
subdue, and keep in order the British, or Welsh after the Conquest.

Of those that are not Palatine, we find their Creation also as ancient as the
Conquest, William theConqueror, made Alan Fergent thenDuke Ib. fol. 646 and
Camd. Brit f. 591.
of Brittaign, Earl of Richmond, by a Patent.

Queen Maud, created Geoffry of Mandevile, Earl of Essex; Aubrey de Vere (Earl
of Oxford) she made Earl of Cambridge, on condition, that if he could not enjoy
it, to choose Oxford, Barkshire, Wiltshire, or Dorsetshire; and others of King
Stephen, who is said to have wasted the Crown, by the many of them that he
created. The manner of their ancient Patents, may be seen in Mr. Seldom at
large in his Titles of honor: the Modern Patents may be also seen there, and in
Sir William Segar's Honors Military and Civil. Where we find, that many times
in their Patents, they had Rents annual granted them, and sometimes lands for
the supportation of the Title. To this Degree, belongs a Surcoat, Mantle,
Hood, and Coronet of gold with points, not flowers, (called The Creation Robe
of a Marquess
circulus aureus) a Sword and Cap of Honor. Which has continued ever since
Edward the sixth, being only before but per cincturam gladii. Which law was
first also used by King John, to William de Ferrers Earl of Derby. That
personal, in England, is only Earl-Marshall of England. The first of these,
that we find is Thomas of Mowbray, Earl of Notingham, made Earl Marshall, or
Marescallus Angliae for life, and after to him and his Heirs Males of his body,
by Richard the second. But since the 14. of Q. Elizabeth, the office has been
only for life again, to whom belongs as an Ensign of his authority, a Rod, or
Staff of Gold, enamelled at each end with black.

Of the Marquess.
THis word Marquess at the first was used to all Earls and Barons, that were
Lords Marchers, or Lords of Frontires; and came afterward into a Title of
special dignity, between that of Duke and Earl: beginning in the time of
Richard the second, who created Robert de Vere (Earl of Oxford) Marquess of
Dublin, Per gladii cincturam, and circuli aurei suo capiti positionem; The form
of the Patent was then, and many ages since very various, but it is now
regulated to one method; which is the same in a manner with that of Earl, only
the word Marchio is put in the place of Comes: the ceremony of Creation much at
one, and the title hereditary; the annuity Seldens title of Honor, page 761.
money in their Patent is forty marks.

And here, by the way, I cannot but observe one note of Mr. Seldens; that John
Beaufort Earl of Somerset, modestly refused to be made Marquess of Dorset, by
Henry the fourth, because the title was then so strange, and new in the
Kingdom.

The Marquess is honored with a Coronet of gold flurred, the points and
flowers of equal height; whereas of the Earls, the pearled points are much
longer then the flowers. His Mantle also doubled Ermine, as is the Earls also;
but the Earls is but of four, and the Marquesses is of five: the doubling of
the Viscount, is to be understood, to be but of Miniver, or plain white Fur, so
is the Barons; the Barons of two, the Vice-counts of three doublings. Segar.
fol. title of Honor, pars Latina.


Of the Duke.
THis word, says Sir Henry Spelman, was nomen officiale, a title of office,
afterward Honorary, and since feudall and Hereditary. He is said to be called
Duke, a ducendo, from Segar. fol. 218.
his leading an Army Imperial; whom the Saxons called Hertshog; but they are
since only Dignities, given by Kings and Princes to The Creation Robe of a Duke
men of great blood, or excellent merit: This title has been of ancienter
standing in the Empire, and other Countries: but the first, that we find in
England, is of the black Prince, created Duke of Cornwall, by Edward the third,
Sir Henry Spel. (...). (...). 237.
his father. By which creation, according to the Tenure of his Patent, the
firstborn sons of the Kings of England, are Dukes of Cornwall; neither is
there any creation required for this honor, though there is for Prince of (...).

Where, by the way, one note is proper to be understood, that as he was here
created without any Ceremony, except the girding with a Sword, so in all other
degrees of honor, where a lesser degree is conferred on a person of a greater,
there needs nothing but mere Patent, without any ceremony of creation.

But John, son to Edward the third, being created Duke of Lancaster, had a Cap
of furre added to the ceremony, and succeeding times have had the Sword,
Crownet, and Verge of Gold, a Surcoat, Mantle and Hood, and a Ducal cap doubled
Ermin, but not indented, and is honored with the style of, Gracious and
Excellent.

These if they be of Royal line, are reputed (...). fol. 219.
as Archdukes. It is also allowed, that a Duke tantum, shall take place before
any Lord, that is both Marquess and Earl; but a Duke, that is Marquess, or
Earl besides, shall precede him.

The Duke, Marquess, and Earl at their creation have a sword put over their
shoulders, which the Vice-count and Baron have not.

Of the Archduke.
THis title is of near relation to the other, Segar. fol. 214.
but not found in any place, save in the house of Austria, the addition of
which word Arch, is from the Greek word Archos, which is as much as Princeps in
Latin. So he takes place of all other Dukes; and he is allowed a Surcoat, a
Mantle, and a Hood of Crimson Velvet, at his Creation: He has also a Chapeau,
or Ducal Cap doubled Ermin indented; with a Coronet about the same, and an arch
of Gold, with an Orb, and Verge of Gold.

Of these titles, the Duke, Marquess, and Sir John Fern. fol. 138.
Earl are esteemed Princely; especially the two last: These also are allowed to
bear their Crests with Helmets, the Beaver directly forward, whereas a
Gentleman, Knight, and Baron, bare them with half the Beaver seen.

The Creation Robe of the Prince of Wales
The Prince.
THe next, and first, immediately subordinate to the Crown, amongst these
radiant Stars is, The Prince, who in England only is the Prince of Wales, the
firstborn of the King.

These in the Saxons time were called Clitons, and clitunculi, from (...), that
is, Illustrious.

But, since it has been a title of creation for honor to the rising sun, there
were none created in the Nation, but the King's eldest son; who are in all
Nations honored above all other subjects, and amongst some, as in Spain, have
been called King's during the life of their Fathers, Ludovic. de Molina de
Hisp. primogen. lib. 3. c. 6.
because of his so near a relation to the Crown, that if the Father dye, he is
ipso (...) Rex, there being no interregnum, though he be not crowned.

In a Statute of the second, of Henry the fourth, it is provided, that the
Prince may give his honorable Liveries of signs, to the Lords, or to his
meniall Gentry; and that the said Lords, may wear the same, as they wear the
Kings Livery; and that the Menials of the Prince, may wear the same as the
King's menials; but this has been since abridged.

So likewise by a Statute of the 25. of Edward the third, chap. 2. it is
declared, that to compass, or imagine the death of the Kings eldest son, and
heir, is, Crimen laesae Majestatis, high Treason, as also to violate the wife
of the King's eldest son.

And again, see Coke, 8. part. 28. The Prince shines with the beams of his
Father, and is holden to be one person with him.

Yet does he acknowledge a reverence, not only as to a Father, but Sovereign,
and to that Lamb. per. Kent, fol. 364.
purpose continues that Motto, which the Black Prince took up, ( Ick dien) I
serve.

He is called Princeps, quia principalis in strenuitate post regem, says Sir
William Segar.

The first, that we read of in England, was Edward, eldest son of Henry the
third, and after him, the eldest son of the King has been ever by Patent, and
Ceremonies of Instalment, created Prince of Wales, Earl of Chester, and Flint,
being born Duke of Cornwall.

The Prince, or first born of the King in France, is called the Dauphin; in
Spain, l' Infanta.

There are, in other Countries, Princes by Creation, as the Prince of Piemont,
the Prince of Orange, and many others, but these are also now become
hereditary, and in some Countries, all the Royal line are styled Princes.

When he is created, he is presented before the King in Princely Robes, who
puts about his neck a Sword bend-wise, a Cap and Coronet over his head, a
Ring on his middle finger, a Verge of gold in his hand, and his Letters Patents
after they are read.

His Mantle is once more doubled then the Dukes, and his Coronet of Crosses,
and Flowers de Luce, and his Cap of State doubled indented.

The King.
THe King is the next, and in our Nations the highest, being subordinate to no
sublunary power, as those of Spain, Portugal, (...) (...). 97.
and other Kingdoms of Europe, and other parts of the world, are. He is the
true Fountain from whence all these Rivulets and swelling Streams of Honor
spring.

He is called Rex, (from whence the word Rego came) and King amongst us, from
the Saxon word Koning, and Kuning. To say any thing of the Original of the
Government here, were in vain, for it is unknown; only I may say, that none
can produce any thing to assure any Government before it; and what I spoke in
the beginning concerning the first Fetn Glory of Generosity.
institution of it universally, is sufficient: Besides, these times have said
enough to that purpose.

He has ever bin of great reverence amongst Segar. (...). Mil. and Civil.
these Kingdoms of Europe, the very Title carrying Divinity in it, being of
Heavenly institution, ordained by God himself; the Bond of Peace, and the Sword
of Justice.

He is God's Vicegerent, and to be obeyed accordingly, both in Church and
State: If good, he is a blessing; if bad, a judgment.

He is styled Pater Patriae, and Caput Reipub: and for that the protection of
his Subjects lies in his breast, the Militia is annexed to his Crown, and the
Sword as well as Scepter put into his hand.

He has power of pardoning where the Law Coke 3. fol. 238.
condemns, even Parliament-Attainder.

The things that belongs to Justice and Peace are annexed to the Crown, nor can
they be separated.

The Parliament, in the behalf of Henry the Bracton: de acqui. rerum. Dom. l.
24. in 1. 7. 11.
eighth, writ thus to the Pope: His Royal Majesty is the Head, and the very
Soul of us all; his Royal Majesty's cause is the cause of us all, derived
from the Head upon the Members; his griefs and injuries are ours, we all suffer
equally with him.

Mr. Camden speaks thus of him, The King Camd. Brit f. 105
is the most excellent part of the Commonwealth; next unto God, he is under no
vassallage; See Bract. also, lib. 1. chap. 8.
he takes his investiture from no man, he acknowledges no Superior but God.

In England, France, Spain, Denmark, and Seld fol. 123.
other Kingdoms, they are styled Kings, Dei gratia, by the grace of God.

Which has been an ancient custom in these Nations, in the same or the like
words, as in the style of King Ethelbald: Ethelbaldus divina Ingul. hist fol.
484. ib.
dispensatione Rex Merciorum ( An. 716.)

Kenulphus, Dei misericordia, Rex Merciorum.

Beoredus, largiente Dei gratia, Rex Merciorum.

Ego Edwardus Dei gratia Rex Anglorum. Ib. f. 510.


Ego Wilielmus Dei beneficio Rex Anglorum.

And the Kings of England since, by a Bull 26 Hen. (...) chap. 1.
from Rome, in the time of our obedience to the Pope, have been styled,
Defenders of the Faith; and by Act of Parliament, of Henry the eighth, (to whom
that Bull was sent) had the title of Supreme Head of the Church of England
annexed.

As the King of France is styled, Rex Francorum Christianissimus; the King of
Spain, Rex Catholicus, or Catholica Majestad, Catholic Majesty; and the
Emperor, Defender of the Church.

It is the manner of Kings also to write in Sold. Title of Honor. chap. 7.
the plural number, which is God's own style, as Mandamus, Volumus, Facimus,
etc. And indeed, in the Scripture we often find them called gods, and in that
sense may be styled Divi, or Dii, quia Dei vicarii, and Dei voce judicant.
Ibid. f. 44.
Mr. Seldom speaks thus upon this subject: Man, as a civil creature, was
directed to this form of subjection; As if the sole observation of Ibid. fol. 4.
Nature had necessarily led the affections of men to this kind of state.
Whence it is also, that while others of the most curious in Philosophy tells us
of Angels, and the Supreme Her. Trismegist.
Heavens being immediately Governed by the Maker of all things; of the Planets
and other Stars being ruled by the Sun; and the separated Souls, and the Air,
being subject to the Moon; they add together, that upon Earth, Kings are in
like sort of Government; as if natural reason had first ordained them on
earth, by an unavoidable imitation of the Creator's providence, used in that
institution of Government in the Air, Stars, and Heaven. Neither do the
antientest Gentiles speak of those elder times, than with clear supposition of
Monarchy, even in the Infancy of the world. And though diverse of the chiefest
States of the old Grecians were in their most flourishing times Democracies, or
Optimacies; yet the more ancient States there, were in every place Monarchies,
as is expressly noted Paus. in Boeoticis. Seld. f. 11.
by Pausanias. They are honored in all salutations, not only with kissing the
hand, but bowing the knee also, in acknowledgment of their superiority to all.

Some are of opinion, that this kind of Salutation came first to Rome, from the
old customs of the Asiatick Kingdoms. For when the Persians meet, you may know
whether they be equal or not, for in salutation they kiss each other; but if
one be somewhat inferior, they kiss only the cheek; but if one be more
ignoble, he falls down adoring the other, and passing by one another he turns
his back, as unworthy to look him in the face, that is so much above him in
honor.

The Ceremonies at his Coronation are many, and in England more than any other
Countries, As the annoynting with Oil, the sacred Consecration (which is to no
other Kings but France, Sicily, and Jerusalem); and his Crown fell on his head
with many Religious Ceremonies, which Spain, Portugal, Aragon, and Navar, etc.
have not; besides the Ensigns of Regality, which are, a Ring to signify his
faithfulness, a Bracelet for good works, a Scepter for Justice, a Sword for
vengeance, Purple (...) to attract reverence, and a Diadem triumphant to blazon
his glory.

The Ceremony of Anointing, every one almost understands to have been an.
Institution as old as the Law of God almost; for though we find no special
command in the Law delivered for it, yet we find examples of it in a continued
succession from God's own people, and that with the holy Oil, with which none,
by the command in the Law, were to be anointed, but the Priest; which Oil never
wasted.

And that this has been no Innovation Seld. c. 8. fol. 149.
among us, is proved by Mr. Seldom, who makes it appear to be of above a
thousand years standing, before it was either in the Empire or France.

Though they have had it in France a long time, and they say by divine
Institution. (...) upon us for their authority, the Miracle of a Dove, that
brought a Vial of holy Oil from Heaven, to anoint King Clovis the Chopni de
Dominio. lib 3. tit. 8.
first, about five hundred years since Christ; which Oil, they say, has never
wasted.

It was the saying of Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, Inunguntur Reges
in Capite, etiam Pectore, and Brachiis; quod (...) ficat gloriam, sanctitatem,
and fortitudinem. Kings are anointed on the Head, to signify their glory; on
the Breast, to (...) their sanctity; on their Arms, to (...) their power.

He is Crowned with an Imperial Crown, the Crown set on his head by the
Archbishop of Canterbury, a Prerogative to that See, as it is in Spain to
Toledo, in France to Rheims, and in Swethen to Upsalia.

But this Imperial Crown has not been long in use among us, though our Kings
have have had Imperial Commands, as over Scotland, Ireland, Man, and other
(...): yet of Ireland they were but Lords, until the 33 year of Henry the
eighth, he being notwithstanding as absolute a Monarch over it when he was but
Coke 7. par. Seld. fol. par. 1. c. 8.
Lord of Ireland, as when he was styled King.

The Crowns formerly were but the same in a manner with that of an Earl now.

Neither is it to be found, that any such thing as a Diadem was in use at all,
till the time of Constantine (...) Great, the distinction before being some
kind of Chaplet, or, which is most certain, a white silk Fillet about the
brows, which was an ordinary way to distinguish them, as I have my self seen
Statues of the Emperor, with such a kind of Fillet about the head.

From whence is that which we read, that Alexander the Great took off his white
Diadem, to cure the madness of Seleucus.

The first that was Crowned with this kind of Imperial Crown, floryed and
arched, was Henry the third, say some; but others, Henry the first: and indeed
it is left disputable to me, so by me to others.

However, it is very probable and plain, that the antientest Ensign of Regal
Authority was the Scepter; which is every where spoken of, both in the
Scriptures and profane Stories.

There is another Ensign of their Authority, which is a Globe with a Cross, in
use amongst us ever since Edward the Confessor, which is placed in the left
hand, as is seen in most of their Coyns; the Cross denoting his Faith, and the
Globe his Empire both by Sea and Ibid. cap 8.
Land, as it is said of Justinian, who was the first Emperor that ever had it.

At the Coronation of the Emperor, it is carried by the Count Palatine of the
Rhine, where they call it Pomum Imperiale.

This power, dignity, and state, has been enjoyed by the Female sex, as heirs
descending by the common right of Inheritance, and not only in our parts, but
many others, as at this day in Swethen, when there is not the least punctilio
of a diminution in respect of the Sex. Besides, for an addition to the honor of
a King, there is the same state allowed to a Queen, during the life of her
husband, as to a Queen absolute almost, and is allowed a Crown. She is called
Queen from the Saxon word Cuningine, as King from Cuning, only by variation of
the gender, as it was their manner in such cases.

She is permitted to sit in State at the King's Seg. Hon. Mil. and Civ. lib. 4.
cap. 6.
right hand, and to keep a Court distinct from the King, although she be but
the daughter of an Earl. But this was in the time of King Edgbert prohibited,
and so for a long time continued, by reason of Eadburgh, who poisoned her
husband King Brithick of the West Saxons. And if she be the daughter of a King
Superior to her husband, she may retain the Jac. Rebust. de dig. lib. 12.
dignity of her father's daughter, and in this case the daughter has preceded
the mother.

And although in these latter times, our Monarchy has been reduced under the
circumference of one Crown Imperial, no others having any other substitute
Governors crowned: Yet formerly, both Scotland and Ireland had King's distinct,
whilst they acknowledged homage to the Crown of England; as also the isles of
Man and Wight.

The Kings of Man were first subject to the Kings of Norway, then to the Crown
of England, and after to the Kings of Scotland, and since again to the Kings of
England. Dominus Th. Walsingham 17 Rich. 2
hujus Insulae Rex vocatur, cui fas est Corona aurea coronari. The Lord of the
Isle is called King, and it is lawful for him to be crowned with a Crown of
gold.

Henry the second allowed with the same honor Seld. c. 3. par. 1.
Roderig of Conaght to be King, paying a homagery Tribute.

The Lord Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, under Henry the sixth, was in the like
manner crowned King of the Isle of Wight.

Which is enough in this place as to the Dignity of a King.

Of the Emperor.
THe original of this Title, as it was long amongst the Romans, denoted only
a General of an Army; and not till the time of Julius Caesar translated to an
honorary Title, who being made perpetual Dictator, took also that of Imperator
into his Title; which has continued in his Successors until this day, and
became Superior to the Title of King, that before was but substitute under it;
(being Seg. fol. 214.
yearly created in January, and ended in September.) Which great change happened
upon the Victory of Caesar against Pompey, at the Battle of Pharsalia.

This Title was only taken up to supply that of King, which had not long
before been See (...). de divin. lib. 2.
thrown out by Brutus, and was supposed by the Usurper to be yet fresh in their
memories, and odious amongst them; and it was long after, before they used the
Title of King, though their power were as much, and the Ceremonies and Ensigns
of Regality the same; and the Emperor's Throne at Rome was (...). ad Spartian.
called Sedile regni. But at last it grew to be as one, and then the Emperor of
Rome having subjected under his Jurisdiction many Kingdoms, thought it however
a title of more eminence, and so retained it. And though the title has not been
so generally appropriated Stat. Hyb. 24 H. 8. cap. 12. and 25.
to our Crown, yet our Kings have been styled Emperors, and this Realm of
England called an Empire. So have the Kings of Spain and France.

But it is more peculiarly allowed or assumed by the Emperors of Germany, who
suppose, that they have a right to the government of the whole world.

This Empire, after it was divided to Constantinople and Rome; and then again,
that Constantinople had lost it to the Turks; it was removed to Germany, and in
the reign of Otho the third, the Election granted to seven Princes of Germany,
the Archbishops of Mentz, Trevers, and Cullen; the Count Palatine of Rhine, the
Duke of Segar l. 4. cap. 4.
Saxony, the Marquess Brandenburgh, and the King of Bohemia, then called Duke
of Bohemia.

He has had also the Superiority allowed him by all Secular Princes; and
whereas other Princes of Regal Authority are crowned with but one Crown, he is
with three; the first of Iron, which he receives of the Bishop of Cullen at
Aquisgrane; the second of Silver, which he receives at Modena from the Bishop
of Millan; the third is of Gold, wherewith he is crowned at Rome by the Pope.

And in latter Ages, the title of King of the Romans is given to the Heir, or
him that is made, or chosen Heir of the Empire; and he is crowned, and Jura
Regalia given him, though not so absolute, as not to have a dependence on the
Empire. See Mr. Seldom, part 2. chap, 1.

The Ensigns of his Imperial Dignity are a Cross, a Lance, and a Sword; a
Scepter, a Mond, and a Crown; and he is styled (...).

The Emperor of Russia is not Crowned, but is adorned with a rich Cap of
Purple; neither is the Greek Sultan, but vested with a mighty rich Tulipant.
But there, though Leunclavius supplement, annal. Turc. Ann. Chr. 1566.
the Emperor have no Diadem, yet the Sultanesse is adorned with a Rich Crown or
Diadem.

Thus have I run through all the degrees of Honor, and with as much brevity as
so copious a Theme would allow of; and for matter of precedence, I think the
method I have taken will save me the labor, and I am unwilling to trouble the
brains of the Ingenuous Reader with an unnecessary prolixity; only as to
Offices of State, because I have omitted them altogether, I shall set down
their places as in Princely Solemnities they are to be disposed. In which,
those of the Crown are to precede all other of the Nobility that are not,
except the Blood Royal.

As the
Lord Chancellor. Lord Treasurer. Lord President of the Privy Council. Lord
Privy Seal.
These six also are placed next the Lord Privy Seal thus, according to their
state of dignity; that is, If he be a Baron, to sit above all Barons; if an
Earl, above all Earls.

Lord Great Chamberlain of England. Lord High Constable of England. Lord
Marshall of England. Lord Admiral of England. Lord Great Master, or Steward of
the King's House. Lord Chamberlain of the King's House.
So the King's principal Secretary being a Baron of the Parliament, has place
above all Barons; and if he be of a higher degree, according to the former rule.

The Spiritual Nobility are thus placed.

The Archbishop of Canterbury. The Archbishop of York.
Bishop of London. Bishop of Durham. Bishop of Winchester.
The two first are placed according to ancient dignity, and the three last by
act of Parliament, and the rest of the Bishops to take their places according
to the seniority of Consecration. Segar. lib. 4. cap. 24. By an Act of
Parliament, An. 31. Hen. 8. See the Act in Mr. Selden's Titles of Honor.

So all men serving near unto the Prince's Person, either Civil or Military,
are allowed a precedence in pari dignitate, and themselves according to his
seniority of place. As to their precedence otherwise, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls,
Viscounts, and Barons, are to take their places according to the antiquity of
their Title, and their Ancestor's creation; and their Wives accordingly.

A Duke's eldest son takes place as a Marquesle, but beneath him; and his Wife
beneath a Marchioness: and if she be the daughter and heir of a Duke, she
shall go before all Duke's eldest sons wives; and however are equal to a
Marchioness, but to go beneath them; and the younger sons of Dukes are in
equal degree with an Earl, but to go beneath him; and Marquesles eldest sons,
and their Ladies, to take place accordingly.

So the eldest son of a Marquess as an Earl, and the younger as Viscounts; and
their Ladies and sisters to take place accordingly, as before.

An Earl's eldest son takes place as a youngest Viscount, and the younger as
Barons, their wives and sisters accordingly: Viscounts eldest sons as Barons,
and their youngest sons to take place with Barons eldest sons, above Seld. fol.
906.
Knights Baronets, (by an Act of King James) and above all Bannerets, but those
made by the King himself under the Stander; and all Knights Batchelers.

Of Women.
NOw lest I should be thought malicious to a Sex I owe much honor to, before I
conclude, I shall take some short observations more then already I have. And
first, that although they are not allowed to sit in Parliament, yet do they
enjoy almost all privileges Coke 8. part. 53.
due to the other Sex.

The honorable Feminine Dignities are, Princess, Duchess, Marchioness,
Countess, Vicountesse, and Baroness. Which are either by Creation, by
Descent, or by Marriage.

This honor by Creation, as it is rare amongst us, so it is more rarely taken
notice of, though Cart. 21. Rich. 2. mem. 12. number. 18.
many examples have been; as Richard the second created Margaret Countess of
Norfolk, into the title of Duchess of Norfolk, See the Charter in Mr. Seldom.
Anne Bullen was created Marchioness of Pembrook by Hen. 8. limited to her, and
the heirs males of her body to be Pat. 24. Hen. 8. par. 1.
begotten, with creation-mony of twenty five pounds per annum, and the ceremony
of Mantle and Coronet.

The Lady Finch was by King James created Vicountesse of Maidston, to her and
her heirs of her body; with special clause, that her heirs male should have a
voice in Parliament; and afterward she was likewise made Countess of
Winchester, etc.

Of these Titles thus conferred, Sir John Pat. 21. Jac. part. 8 number. 4.
Fern takes no notice, though else he discourses largely enough.

By Descent, we have continual examples: When any daughter of an Earl or
Vicount shall continue a Virgin, or marry an Esquire, she shall retain that
honor that springs from her father's blood, take place according; and be
saluted by the Title of Lady.

Which word Lady came from Hleafdian, or Leafdian, by contraction in the
Teutonick, and so Lafdy, and thence Lady, as from Laford, Lord. The word Laf
signifying bread, Versteg. fol. 413.
and Dian serve. It seems, from that they called those persons, that for their
quality could entertain others, and distribute corn and bread to their
neighbors, by that Title.

And of old, though in the Empire, and here, the word Dominus was used in
general for salutation amongst men of all sorts, yet Domina only to persons
of honor amongst Bract. l. 3. de Coron. 116.
women; as the widows of all Tenants in chief, and daughters and heirs of all
Knights, etc.

The heirs females of any Count or Baron, Ib. de acq. rer. Dom. lib. 2. c. 34.
shall enjoy both the Estate divided, and Titles too, if they be to be divided;
and they shall be enjoyed by their husbands, if they marry, in the right of
their wives.

So that if there be two, or three, or more sisters, to share the estate, and
the honors and dignities inherent be enough, they shall enjoy every one, one;
as in the case of the Earldom of Pembrooke in the time of Edward the third, and
now the Lord Darcy of the North, by the same right enjoys the title of the Lord
Conyers.

But this holds not; when the title is held by Jus gladii, or Knight's service;
or if the Honor be in any Castle or place only, it cannot be divided, but
falls and dissolves in the Crown, or left to the disposing of the King. And
again, if the estate of honor and dignity be not descending to the heirs
general, but entailed to the heirs male, it cannot be the inheritance of a
daughter, as many times it is.

But we may understand this the better by that more eminent demonstration of
high Offices of the Kingdom, which descending by inheritance on the heirs
general, have been challenged by the husbands of heirs female, in right of
their wives, the Descent-male failing; as in the case of the Duke of
Buckingham, in the time of Henry the eighth, challenging the Dier's Reports.
283. b.
Office of High-Constableship of England.

The Office of Lord Steward descended to Blaunch, daughter of Hen. Earl of
Lancaster, in whose right Joh. of Gaunt her husband enjoyed it.

So the Office of Earl Marshall descended to the house of Norfolk, by an heir
female; afterward being forfeited by treason, was conferred to the Lords
Howards of Arundell.

And in this and all such Descents, where there are not dignities enough to
allow a partition to all the Sisters, but the Honor shall be undividable; it
shall descend to the eldest, or be disposed by the King to which he please.

And for ennobling by birth, these rules are observed: That if a Gentleman,
Knight, or Baron, do marry a wife of ignoble parents, she shall enjoy the
title, name, and dignity of her husband: For, says Sir John Fern, let the wife
Glory of Generosity. fol. 62.
be shining and glorious with the dignities of her husband: Whereas, on the
contrary, if a Gentlewoman of blood and Coat-Armor shall marry a Francklin,
Yeoman, or the like, that Ibid.
is ignoble, having no Coat-Armor, his condition is no whit advanced by
marriage in point of honor; Although let him be inferior to her Coke 4. part.
118. b. 6. part. 53. b. ibid.
whom she shall marry, yet she shall retain the honor, state, and dignity she
was born to.

But there is this Law for them to walk by too, that is, Si mulier nobilis
nupserit ignobili, desinit esse nobilis; that is, If a Noble-woman marry with
an ignoble, her nobility is extinguished; for she is under the power of her
husband, and ought not to be in a condition above him: For example whereof, a
case is cited of one Ralph Hayward Esquire, and the Lady Anne Dyer. 79.
Powes, widow of the Lord Powes.

But I am of opinion, that (being only an acception in Court by the Adversary
of the Party) this is not to be understood, but in case the person such a
Noble:woman shall marry, be no Gentleman, and that she has received the Honor
she enjoyed before, from the right of a former husband, and not by descent of
Ancestors; for the words of Judge Coke par. 1. fol. 16.
Coke run thus: Si mulier nobilis nupserit ignobili, desinit esse nobilis; and
eodem modo, quo quidem constituitur, dissolvitur: That is, If a Noble-woman
shall marry an ignoble husband, she ceases to be Noble, and in the same manner
her honor was constituted it is dissolved.

So as by the Laws of the Nation, an Adulteress forfeiteth her Dower, so also
her honor of Nobility, if she commit adultery, either as a wife or widow; or
else having received honor from her deceased husband, and shall so put him out
of her mind, as to subject her self to another, by which act she wipeth both
the name and memory of the former from her, she has the sentence of forfeiture
against her. So Sir John Fern, in his Glory of Generosity, fol. 62. Yet the Law
is thus curious in preserving the memory of Virtue in the honor of its reward,
that if a woman of noble blood do marry a Churl or Clown, and have issue by
him, she being an heir, that issue shall have liberty of bearing her
Coat-Armor. But Sir John Fern says, only for life, and that on a Lozenge
Shield, (which is the feminine bearing) with the difference of a Cinque-foile.

One note more I think proper in this place, which is, If a French, Spanish, or
German woman be married to any Peer of this Realm, or other Gentleman, and be
not denizoned; by 32 of Ed. 3. 35. in the case of Gilb. Humfrevill
the Laws of the Nation, she cannot claim the privileges or titles of her
husband, nor have Dower or Joynter from him.

And thus much I think sufficient in this place as to the honor of Women; and
if I have said too little, I wish I could have said more; if too much, I beg
their pardons, but refer my self to the Law.

In the next place, I should proceed to the display of Armory, by which the
infinite number of persons are distinguished, by an innumerable variety of
different Ensigns, that do illustrate and appropriate their dignity and honor:
But, by the way, I have stumbled on another Theme, which though it be not so
much concerned in honor, yet the Kingdom is much concerned in it, as a Power;
and though I need not say much, yet I cannot pass by it and say nothing.

Of a Parliament.
SOme not altogether knowing of that true constitution of a Parliament, may be
apt to think, that its Authority is only Supreme in this Nation. But let such
understand, that from this Argument, if there were none other, it is disproved;
That nothing can be made greater or more excellent than the thing that makes
it, Propter quod unumquodque tale est, illud majus tale. And such creatures as
shall aim at a Superiority to their Creator, are to be esteemed like those
Angels, that (by the same spirit) attempting the same pride, precipitated
themselves from everlasting liberty to eternal chains.

This great Council did arise from the ancient custom of, not only the Saxons,
but all Nations in the world almost, who have had examples of their King's
summoning the chief Peers and Nobles to consult in weighty affairs. Which
Council among the Saxons was called (...), which was a Seld. Tit. of Honor,
fol. 632.
meeting of the chief Prelates and Peers, to deliberate about, and to consent
to, what laws the King should enact: and advising in matters of State, giving
Judgment upon suits or Complaints in the same Court, as is understood of the
time of King Ine, (of West sex) about 711. years after Christ.

And again, of King Ethelbert, his ordaining, Bed. Hist. Eccl. lib. 2. cap. 5.
Decreta Judiciorum juxta exempla Romanorum cum consilio sapientum. And when
Edwin King of Northumberland, was persuaded to be a Christian, he consulted,
cum Principibus and Ibid. lib. 2. cap. 15.
Consulariis suis. He called to Council his Princes, or Ealdermen, and
Counselors.

And again, King Eldred, An. 948. In festo Nativitatis Beatae Mariae, all the
Nobility of the Kingdom, were summoned by an Edict from the King, as well
Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots, as all of the rest of the Lords and Chief
Counselors, Thanes and Ealdormen, to come to London, to a (...), or great
Council, to consult about affairs of the whole Kingdom: As Ingulphus his words
are.

And again, in the time of Edward the Confessor, (...). p. 77.
the Parliament sat at London, Rex and omnes (...) Magnates; In which
Parliament, the King attaches Earl Godwin, for that he had killed his Brother
Alfred, and upon his pleading, and submission, the King refers him to the
Judgment of the Court: who a long while debating it, to no purpose: at last,
Leofricus Consul Cestriae, probus homo quoad Deum, and Seculum, (says the
Author) spoke thus; Earl Godwin, is a gallant Person, and a man next the King,
of the best birth in the Land; and it cannot be denied, but by his Counsel or
Design, Alfred was slain; therefore my opinion is, that he with his son, and
all we twelve Earls, that are his friends and kindred, do present our selves
humbly before the King, laden with as much Gold and Silver, as every man can
carry betwixt his arms, to offer it up with supplication, for an expiation of
the crime. Which being consented unto, and done; the King considering the
reference he had made to the Court, ratified their act, and his pardon.

By which, we see their meetings was at the Kings summons; their power only
deliberative in giving legal force, by consenting to what he should think fit
to make a Law; and to advise de arduis Reipub: not that this force given by
them, is to be understood otherwise, than that, because, it was enacted by
their consent, it was the more binding over them: their consent otherwise,
being no whit binding over the Sovereign's will, in the enaction; for it was
his Volumus that made it; and let their Consultations rise to never so
powerful votes, and results; be the thing what it would, his Nolumus buried it
in oblivion, which custom (...) ever continued, as a true Prerogative of the
Crown. Nay, avisera le Roy, which is but, The King will consider of it, was
enough to throw a Bill out of the House. Nothing enacted by them, though by a
general consent of both Houses of Lords and Commons, being of any force, and
that not only before, but after the Commons were brought in; which I find to be
about the time of Edw. 1. his third year of Inauguration, See the Statute of
the year, 1273. Seld. p. 117
an. Dom. 1273. Who in the 23. year of his reign, confirmed the Magna Charta,
made by Henry the third, though Mr. Seldom is of opinion, The first summoning
of the Commons, was in the 49. year of Henry the third.

The style of the Statutes, running after this manner, The King has Ordained
and Established these Acts underwritten, etc. First, The King wills, and
commands that, etc. Signifying, the power of enacting to force, and penalty,
was derived from the Volumus of the King, not the Vote of the Lords and
Commons; their consent only making it of more vigor against themselves.

If it were an Act of Indulgence, or relief to Anno 18. 1. Edw. 1290.
the Commonwealth, it run thus; Our Lord the King, of his special Grace, and
for the affection that he bears unto his Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and
others of his Realm, has granted that, etc. And sometimes, Our Sovereign Stat.
de (...): An. Reg. Ed. 20.
Lord the King has granted, and commanded at the Instance of the Nobles of
this Realm, etc. No mention at all, being made of the consent of the Lords and
Commons.

Then afterward, thus they run, Our Lord the King, by the Counsel of his
Prelates, Earls, and Barons, and other great men and Nobles of his Kingdom, in
his Parliament has Ordained and (...), etc. An. 33. Edward the first, 1307.
and so along in other Statutes, the Commons not at all mentioned in the
enacting any Statute; but as thus, in the beginning of Edward the third, At the
request of the Commons of this Realm by their Petition made before him, and his
Council in the Parliament, by the assent of the Prelates, Earls, and Barons,
etc. Until the 23. of this Kings reign, in a Statute of Laborers, I find the
Commons not mentioned, and then the power of Ordination given to the Statute,
still by the King, as thus, It is ordered by our Lord the King, by the assent
of the Prelates, Farls, Barons, and other great men, and all the Commons of the
Realm, summoned to this Parliament, etc.

And in one Act of the same King, the style runs thus, The King of his own
will, without motion of the Great men or Commons, has granted and Ordained in
ease of his people, etc.

And then to signify the Constitution of the An. 36. Ed. 1.
Commons in Parliament, See the 37. of Edward the third, where the Statute runs
thus; The King at his Parliament, etc. at the request of An. 37 Ed. 1. and an
7. Rich. 2. Hen. 3. Ed. 4. Rich. 3.
the Commons, and by the assent of the Prelates, Dukes, Earls, and Barons, and
other Great men there assembled, has Ordained, etc. and at the prayer of the
Commons, etc. In which style, most of the Statutes run until Henry the eight.

And for provision of the choice of the Commons, in a Statute of the 23. of
Hen. 6. is set down the form of Writ, by which they are summoned, where it is
also enacted, That the Knights of the Shires for Parliament, hereafter to be
chosen, shall be natural Knights, or otherwise Vide Plow. den f. 121.
such natural Esquires, or Gentlemen of the same County, as shall be (...) to
be Knights.

And every Knight that is elected, ought to be a resident of the place, for
which he is elected: and every man that is an Elector, ought to have forty
shillings of freehold, within the said County; and for the security of it, the
Sheriff has power to put them to an Oath, Statute 8. of Hen. 6. cap. 15.
upon the Evangelist, and the Election ought to be betwixt the hours of eight
and nine in the Forenoon, and so of Burgesses.

The form of the Writ, is this; Rex Vic' etc. Salutem, Quia nostri (...) pro
quibusdam arduis and ur gentibus negotiis nos statum and defensionem regni
nostri Angliae and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernent' quoddam Parliamentum
nostrum Westminster. 12. die November. proxim' futur' teneri Ordinavimus, and ibidem
(...) Magnatibus Proceribus domus regni nostri colloquium habere and tractare,
Tibi praecipimus firmiter injungentes, quod, facta Proclamatione in proximo tuo
post receptionem hujus literis nostris tenend' die and loco predicto duos
milites gladiis cinctis magis idoneos, and discret' Com' praedict' etc. and
electionem illam in distinct Crompt. Courts 16. vid Sta. de An (...) H. 6. cap
(...).
and aperte sigillo tuo, and sub sigillis eorum qui electioni illi (...), (...)
bis in Cancellaria nostra and locum certisices (...). And still, before they
came up to the House, they signed Indentures to be true and faithful to their
King and Country, and the service thereof, upon a penalty, even to the last
long Parliament of eternal infamy.

And in the third, of Queen Elizabeth, it was enacted in full Parliament, for
the safety of the Queen's Majesty, her Heirs, and Successors, and the dignity
of the Imperial Crown of England, for the avoiding both of such hurts,
perils, dishonor, and inconveniences, as have before time befallen; that not
only all persons should take the Oath of Supremacy, upon diverse penalties in
that Act specified; But also every Knight, Citizen, and Burgess of the
Parliament, should take the said Oath before he entered into the said House, or
had any voice there; else he should be deemed no Knight, Citizen, or Burgess
for that Parliament, nor have any voice; but shall be to all intents,
constructions, and purposes, as if he had never been Returned, nor Elected for
that Parliament, and shall suffer all pains, and penalties, as if he had
presumed to sit in the same without Election, Return, or Authority. And by King
James, the Oath of Allegiance was added. Yet, notwithstanding all this
limitation upon the Commonalty, Parliaments in England were ever esteemed,
since Magna Charta, the greatest liberty of the Subject, none else indeed being
dreamt of.

And as it is as great a flower of the Crown to summon Parliaments, as foedera,
and bellum indicere, to make War and Leagues; which is so absolute, that it is
resolved by all the Judges of 21 of Ric. 2. cap. 12.
the Land, that the King may, before he is Crowned, (if by descent the Crown be
his right) summon a Parliament, or within age; as was seen in King Henry the
sixth, who summoned diverse Parliaments in his 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. years of his
reign, yet was not Crowned till the eighth. He being then essentially King,
Plowd. 221. 6.
without any Ceremony or Act, ex post facto; and Coronation, but a Royal
Ornament.

So the privileges of Parliament, and of the Commonwealth by Parliament, are
as great: for though we thus see the great Prerogative of a King, yet many
things there are, which a King in his own Kingdom cannot do without a
Parliament by the Laws, by which he has Bract. initio libri.
bound himself; as the making any man hereditable, or the altering the Common
Law, or Customs of the Realm, though by his absolute Brooks prerog. 13. c. 73.
and Stamff 72.
authority, he may commit any man to Prison, during his pleasure.

Therefore, every Parliament Man, during the time of the Parliament, is
privileged from Dyer 60. Cromptons Courts. fol. 11.
all disturbance of arrest for debt, or the like, and the servants of any
Parliament man, as much as the Kings are.

And to this Parliament, for the further security of the good of the
Commonwealth, were ever admitted certain Judges of the Land, (though they had
no Vote, which sat on Woolsacks) that as the Clergy in Spiritualties, so the
Judges of the Law, in things of the Law, were to advise and determine, when any
difficulty did arise. That what Laws should be Enacted, might be answerable to
the Will of God, and not repugnable to the Customs of the Land.

And in our latter times, all Acts of Parliament, though made by the King, have
this style; By the consent of Lords and Commons; notwithstanding the Civil
Law, says, Quod Principi placuit, Legis habet vigorem, The will of the King,
is the power of the Law.

The End of Honor.
The Analysis of Armory.
I Have, with as much brevity, as so copious a Theme would admit, run through
all the distinctions of Honor. In the next place, I shall with as great a
contraction, lay down the emblems of those distinctions, and achievements due
to Nobility, and the reward of virtue, in the methodicall rules of Armory.
Bearing of Arms at this time, being the only external distinction of degrees
and qualities, amongst all civil Societies and Commonwealths.

From whence we received this custom, is uncertain, if especially, we look to
the producing of it into rule and form: As it is from imitation, Sir John Fern
is of opinion, that we did borrow it from the Egyptians; meaning from their
Hieroglyphics.

Others will have, that the first institution of these honorable differences,
was amongst the Israelites; but however, it is not much material to this
discourse, to be too inquisitive of the original in that kind, since
succession of time has converted it into another custom; which may be, for
ought I know, in imitation of the Romans: who were accustomed upon triumphs or
festivalls, to produce the Statues of their Ancestors, as the pedigree of their
Generous race.

Which Statues were not, (as some may imagine) erected from the voluntary
fancy of the parties represented, as is the leaving our Pictures behind us
when we dye, to our progeny; (so might every phlegmatic, mechanic do:) but
they were such, as were, for some Heroic act, allowed as a public reward of
virtue, which was customary amongst them.

And truly, although every good Subject ought to be always prepared alike, to
offer his body and mind unto the service of the Commonwealth, without hope or
expectation of mercenary reward, honor, or glory; yet is honor a necessary
perquisite to a Crown and Commonwealth, being in it self a true spur to
generosity.

Out of which respect, the Romans joined the two Temples of Honor, and Virtue,
in such a manner, that no man could enter into that of Honor, without, first
passing through the other of Virtue.

Sir John Ferns opinion is, that the first that employed these Ensigns in this
nature, was Alexander the Great; so to distinguish those that had done any
memorable Acts, that they might urge an emulation in their fellow Soldiers.

It is said of Epaminondas, and Othraydes, that being ready to dye, they wrote
their glorious exployts upon their shields themselves; to give (...) to others,
to follow their (...) when they were dead.

(...) believes, that Charles the Great was the first that put them into this
methodicall order; which doubtless, could not be, if, as Sir John Fern says
also, that Julius Caesar constituted an office of Feciales.

But I find it in another Author, to be instituted by Numa, when he made war
upon the Fidenates, a people of Latium.

However, it is a general opinion amongst our most judicious Heralds, that the
bearing of Arms, as a badge of honor amongst us, was not till about the time of
Henry the third, although many coats have been (...) in some Writers, of much
longer standing; as that of Hugh Lupus, Earl of Chester, in the time of the
Conqueror, a Woolfs head errased: of Gilbert de Gaunt, Earl of Kime, long
before, Barry of 6. Or and Az. over all a bend Gule. Which are (...) of by Sir
John Fern: But how authentic his Authority might have been to him, to cause
his insertion; or his to others, I know, not; but I shall be bold to insert
one, which may chance carry some weight with it, which I shall raise from a
Noble Family in the North; the family of the Hiltons, (whose antiquity, (not
only by an ancient pedigree, which I have seen taken out of the Office; but by
the Records of the Tower) does produce the noblest descent that I know any
Family in England;) the pedigree is too large, to be inserted in this place,
else I would do it; however shall extract some notes from it, that may signify
as much.

The first, that I find recorded of the Family, was Sir William Hilton, Knight,
who marrying the daughter of Sir John Grisly, Knight, (a Family long since I
think extinct) had issue Adam Hilton: Which Adam living in the time of King
Athelstan, gave to the Monastery of Hartlepool, a Pix or Crucifix, which was in
weight twenty five ounces of Silver, and caused his Arms to be engraven on it;
Arg. two bars Azure, which are yet seen upon the Gate of Hilton Castle, in
the Bishopr. of Dur. where they lived, with a Moses head for Creast; the Gate
and the Chapel, (which is very stately for its structure and bigness) are the
only parts remaining of the ancient building. He gave unto the same Monastery,
a Cope and Vestment with the Stole; and the like gift unto the two Monasteries,
of Whitby and Gisbrough, with fifty seven ounces of silver to make Censors.
They were five descents before the Conquest; and has now the nine and
twentieth descent surviving. In which line were twenty four Knights, eighteen
whereof were in a continued succession.

But I leave this nicety to more critical judgments to determine the thing,
having for authority custom sufficient to make it a law within it self, without
the derivation of any original institution. Former ages having esteemed the
Laws of Heraldry with as great a veneration as any in the Nation; as indeed it
ought still to be, and more especially in these, and all such times as ours,
the Court of Heraldry being not only the Lawgiver to Honor, but the best
record of Families and Inheritances, (though the Gentry of this Land are too
dull to know it) since Coat-Armor has been hereditary, as it has ever since
the time of Lewis Le-grosse (according to the account of Sir John Fern and
Guillim:) As by one instance I shall declare; If a man being an Orphan, and, by
such times as ours have been, the Records of what Estate did rightly belong to
him, and from his Ancestors, may be burnt, plundered, or otherwise embeselled,
and by such spirits, as such times do plentifully afford, have been obtruded
from his right, and has nothing to plead for it, this Office being the just
Record of his Pedigree, would produce an Evidence sufficient, though from many
generations his misfortunes have descended: More particularly of the Office in
another place.

As for the progress of Armory, I have pitched upon the most methodicall course
I could, disposing it into several divisions and to every division adding its
varieties, as in the succeeding Scutcheons will appear; that I have crowded
many severals into one Scutcheon, is to contract the general into lesser bulk.

The form of placing the devices of Arms on Escutcheons, is from the ancient
Shields; and therefore called an Escutcheon from the word Scutum.

They are also called Coats of Arms from the custom of the Ancients,
embroidering their Devises on the Coats they wore over their Arms.

For the form, or rules, for the shape of Shields, there can be none; for, any
form that a Shield may be devised into, may be taken for the shape of an
Escutcheon.

And next, for the rules of Blazoning, there are not many, but every thing to
be called according to their denomination; excepting such as by antiquity have
continued other names then our vulgar Language does now give. And again,
observing a method from their several postures and positions in the Shield,
which gives a several term, and must be very carefully regarded; for the
adding or diminishing the least punctilio, makes the Coat so much another
thing, that should another man own it, he could not be questioned for it.

And although Sir John Fern gives this definition of it: Blazonia est
recitatio, vel commemoratio alicujus virtutis; and quempiam, sub quibusdam
(...) abunde, and vere laudare, aut decorum dicere: Yet our latter times have
prescribed a rule of avoiding, in any case of Blazoning, as much as may be,
multiplicity of words, especially such as are impertinent: This is also Rules
in Blazon.
called Martialling a Coat, though that is a word by some esteemed only to be
used when many Coats are disposed or quartered in one Shield.

Iterations of words are also to be avoided; and in Blazoning a Coat, the Field
must ever be first expressed, and then the Charge; and in that what possesses
the greatest part, or nearest the center of the Shield, first.

As for the diversity of kinds of Blazon, though by no greater authority than
custom of some men, there is three made, By Colors Sir John Fern makes (...).
and Metals, precious Stones, and Planets; the manner of blazoning thereby,
making a distinction betwixt private Gentlemen, Persons ennobled with dignity,
and Royal Families.

Or Topaz Sol Arg. Pearl Luna Sab. Diamond Saturn Gul Rubie Mars Azure Saphir
Jupiter Ver Emrald Venus Purpur (...) Mercury Fenne Jacynth Dragon's head
Sanguin Sardonix Dragon's tail

But this is only a fantastic humor of our Nation, and for my part I shall
avoid it as ridiculous, being no where in the world used but here; and not here
by any judicious Herald. That I insert it, it is to leave it to those humors
that will make use of it.

For the order, according to the ancient rule I have first begun with Metalls,
and Colors, to which I have adjoined the (...) the parts of the Escutcheon;
distinction of Families, Bordures, and crooked Lines; because from them the
honorable Ordinaries receive a various form and nomination.

Then I have set down in one Escutcheon all the Ordinaries, which are afterward
in an order, (beginning with one particular) followed in their varieties.

Then all dead things in their order, living and verdent, according to their
position and posture; also those that are composed of some kind of Celestial
things, as the Sun, Moon, and Stars; all kind of Martial things, or Mechanic;
or the most part of what is usually born in our English Armory.

In the (...) of Arms, there is by all observed a different value; as first,
that the Metalls are allowed a precedence to Colors; so also is there by some
understood to be more of worth in one Color then another: Yet, for Colors.
my part, I am of opinion, that it is so little, as not (...) the taking notice
of; only for other men's opinions sake, I will touch at it.

First, of the Metals; Every judgment will be ready without any argument to
give Gold the pre-eminence.



As for the colors; I think they are thus to be esteemed in point of priority,
Sables, Gules, Azure, Verd, Purpure; and some do introduce Ten, but it being
a bastard color, is exempted, especially amongst English Armory, only
reserved for abatement of honor, except in one or two examples of things.

Thus I have placed the colors, though contrary to the rules of some, as
Guillim places yellow in the third place, and green in the fourth.

Sir John Fern allows Gules the third honor, and places Sable in the fifth.

Mr. Guillim brings in also another color, called Murrey or Sanguin, but I
never saw it used in an English Coat; only this and Ten are appropriated to
the abatements of honor, therefore to be set apart from the rest, I think,
properly.

The next in order is Furrs, which may be of one color alone, or more than
one, which Furrs are supposed to have been the doublings of Mantles.



The first of these may seem to go all under the name of Ermins, but they are
distinguished by various names, according to their colors; as if as the first
it be white powdered with black, it is Ermin; if black with white Ermines; if
yellow with black as the Erminoys: if as the fourth black with yellow Pean: if
white with black, and one red hair, Erminites. By which it is understood, how
precise a man ought to be in the Blazon, or tricking a Coat, when so small a
difference, as the color of one hair, shall make a Coat another thing.

The next is called Vayre or Verry, this being of Argent and Azure, is termed
Vaire only; but if any other colors, then must it be blazoned Verry of such
colors; as for example, Ermin and Gules by the name of Gressey of Darbyshire.

The next is Potent Counter-potent, by some Varry-Copy.

The colors whereof must be Blazoned.

The last is but of two Counters, if called Countercomponed; but if more, then
checky.

If any of which be in a Bordure, you must say, A Border purflew of such a
furre; blazoning the furre and the colors.

Now by the way, Mr. Guillim does hint one rule in Blazon concerning the Field
(which is the surface of the Shield) which ought to be well observed for
propriety of speaking; which is not to say, He bears a field Or, or Arg. etc.
but the field is Or, or Arg. etc. (...) else he bears Or, or Arg. Gules, or
the like, etc.

These Furs are often born in Bordures also, which are in the next place to
be treated of.

And here in one Escutcheon have I placed the Bordures; and in the several
quarters the differences of brethren.



Of Bordures, if it be plain, you must say, A Bordure Gules, or the like.

If it be charged with Beasts, then it is blazoned, A Bordure Enurney of such
Beasts; if of Birds, Enaluran of such Birds; if of Flowers, Verdoy; if of dead
things, Entoyre, as of Bezanti, Mullets, or the like.

The plain or simple Bordures have also their varieties, according to all their
crooked lines. Which I shall show shortly after.

For the charged Bordures, here is exemplified nine distinct.

In the first is a Bordure counter-compounded Or and Gules; the second, a
Bordure Purflew of Vayre, the third, quarterly composed of Ermin and Checky,
Or, and Azure; the fourth, Gobbonated, Or, and Sables; the fifth, Sables
Entoyre of eight Bezants; the sixth, Or, a Bordure Gules, charged with three
Bendlets Sables; the seventh, Azure, Enaleuron of eight Martlets Or; the
eighth, quarterly, the first Gules Enurney of three Lyoncels passant guardant,
Or, the second Azure Verdoy of as many Flowerdelis: the third as the second,
the fourth as the first: which, with a Field Argent, was the Coat-Armor of
Henry Courtney Earl of Devonshire, Marquess of Exon. This may be blazoned
short, by England and France. The ninth is a Bordure Gules, Diapred, Entoyre,
Enurney, Enaleuron, and Verdoy.

This kind of Bordure may be of any two or other set number of these also.

Now to the intent that Coat-Armor might descend to the Posterity with safety,
and free from dissension of strife, Distinctions were invented, which I have
here set down, to the number Nine.

By which differences the Bearer is understood of what degree or line of
Consanguinity he is; if he be of the second, third, or fourth House, and what
brother of that House, by charging his Coat with the difference appertaining;
and if a younger brother of a younger House, then by charging the difference of
the House with difference of Line, of Fraternity: There being so much care
taken for the preserving the honor of the entire Coats, that the eldest son of
the first House during the life of his father (so of the rest) cannot bear it
without his distinction, and, for this reason, has Segar, Fern, Guillim.
the Nephew of the first (the father being dead) been always preferred before
the Uncle of the second, etc. and takes place before him.

By the way also, we are to take notice, that if all the brethren die without
issue, and leave sisters behind, as they are co-inheritors of the Lands and
Estare, so shall they be of the Coat-Armor also, without any distinction at
all, to either of them; because by them the name of the House cannot be
preserved, they being all reckoned but as one Heir.

Again, if they be not heirs, they are not admitted to the bearing of the
Coat-Armor; for, says Sir John Fern, Arma non transeunt ad agnatos and
affines. Yet their husbands are admitted to adjoyn the Arms of their wives
families in the sinister side of their Escutcheons, with their own; but if they
have none of their own, then not at all.

Now there is none of those signs, but are sometimes born in Arms, as Charges
of the Coat; but when they are distinctions, it is easily known by their
singularity, either of place, position, or diminutive proportion.

There is a care to be observed concerning the parts of the Escutcheon, as to
the pre-eminence of location for all charges, which are here marked thus, A,
The Dexter chief. B, The precise middle chief. C, The Sinister chief. D, The
Honor point. E, The Fesse point. F, TheNombril point. G, The Dexter Base. H,
The precise middle Base. I, The Sinister Base.




There are several crooked lines to be observed also, wherewith all the
Ordinaries are many times made different and various, which are these: 1,
Invecked. 2, Ingrayled. 3, Wavy. 4, Nebule. 5, Embattaild or Crenelle 6,
Indented 7, Dancette




Of these lines, the two first differ only in this, that the points of the
ingrailed line are turned into the field, and the other contrary into the
ordinary, that those lines do make. The two last are both one secundum quale,
only differing secundum quantum; the one being only wider and deeper then the
other.

And when any of these Ordinaries are drawn withthese lines, the Blazoner is to
say, A Bend, Chief, Pale, or what it is; Invecked, Ingrayled, Wavy, or the
like: But if plain, then only to name the Ordinary with its colors, according
to the following examples.



1, A Cross. 2, A Chief, 3, A Pale. 4, A Bend. 5, a Fesse. 6, An Inescutcheon.
7, A Cheveron. 8, A Saltyr. 9, A Bar.

The last of which Ordinaries may easily be mistaken for the same, or at least
a diminutive of the fifth; but it is not: and they are distinguished by the
space they possess in the field, and also by this difference, the Bar has
liberty all over the field with its diminutions; the Fesse only one proper
place.

These Ordinaries according to Leigh do possess these proportions of the field.

Cross, contains uncharged the fifth part, but charged the third; the Chief,
the third part, the Pale, the third part, the Bend, the fifth uncharged, but
charged the third; the Fesse, the third part, the Innescut. the fifth part, the
Chever, the fifth part, the Saltyr, the fifth uncharged, but charged the third;
the Bar, the fifth part.

Of these Ordinaries, some have their diminutives, as the Bar a Closset, a
Barralet; the Bend both Dexter and Sinister, the Dexter has a Bendlet, Garter,
single and double Cottises, and a Ribbon; the Sinister Bend, a Scarp, and a
(...); a Cheveron has its Cheveronels.

And here now I shall desire to be excused for digressing from the method of
other men, especially Mr. Guillim; and first to take notice of some other forms
near relating to the Ordinaries for their shape and proportion, on which are
oftentimes rewards and additions of Honor placed in Coats; as also the
abatements of Honor for misdemeanor, and dishonorable actions, that afterward
I may not have any thing to interrupt a methodicall proceeding in the rest.

The first of which are those, on which most commonly additions are given,
which are these.



The first is a Bordure, spoken of before.

The second, a Quarter.

The third, a Canton.

The fourth, a Gyron.

The fifth, a Pile.

The sixth, two Flasques.

The seventh, two Flanches.

The eighth, two Voyders; which, says Leigh, is the way of bearing a reward
given to a Woman.

The ninth is Ernoin, an Inescutcheon Gules, named also a Scutcheon of Pretense.

On any of these may an addition of Honor be placed, according to the pleasure
of the Prince, or the fancy of the Herald, that is left to the designing. Which
reward remains to the posterity of the Atchiever, and none of the descendants
of his family, but his own line may bear it. In which manner I have seen the
Arms of a Kingdom given to a private Subject, nay, and sometimes to a Stranger,
as in the example of Sir Henry St. George Norroy King of Arms, who upon an
Embassy into Sweden, was honored by the King of the Swethes with the addition
of the Arms of Swethen in a Canton.

The Marquess of Exeter gave the Arms of England in a Bordure, as in the
Escutcheon of Bordures is seen in the eighth quarter, being given him by Henry
the eighth.

Now the Laws of honor having by a continued succession of time maintained and
refined these rules of Nobility, for the encouragement of brave and generous
spirits: So, foreseeing the pronenesse of all men, being apter to fall and
decline from the virtues and bravenesse of their Ancestors, and to bury the
honor of the deceased Purchasers in the dust, than to improve the Talent of
Renown Time has entrusted them with; as a correction to such dunghill-spirits,
there is provided a method of degrading them from, or giving diminutions of
disgrace to the Arms of such: As the example of the succeeding Escutcheon
demonstrates.



The first, according to Mr. Guillim's rules, is a Delph Ten, due to him that
revoketh a Challenge.

The second is an Inescutcheon reversed Sanguin, for deflowring a Maid or Widow.

The third is a point Dexter, for too much boasting his Martial acts.

The fourth, a point in point, Sanguin, due to a Coward.

The fifth, a point Champion Ten, to him that kills his prisoner.

The sixth, two Gussets Sanguine for Adultery.

The seventh, a gore sinister Ten, for him that flies from his Colors.

The eighth, a point plain Sanguine, for telling lies to a Sovereign or
General.

The ninth, the whole Coat of Arms reversed, and proper only to a Traitor.

But there is another stricter punishment also for Treason, as Sir John Fern,
Sir William Segar, and the Civil Laws relate, which is, that though he have
many sons then living, his Arms are for ever taken away, unless by some
extraordinary service his successors do regain the honor of them, and wipe
away the stain; for, Eorum memoria destrui debet, says the Law.

And in the same manner are those other stains of abatement so rivetted to
their Shield; when once by the Sovereign authority placed there, that neither
the immediate possessors, nor succeeding owners, with their greatest force, or
the all-corroding teeth of time are able to tear it away; but by virtuous
demeanor to ingratiate the same hand, that put it on, to wipe it off.

Pity it is those Rules have not been exactly observed in our latter Ages;
such a severity would doubtless be a means to affrighten many, that are
inclined to these abominable enormities, to apply themselves ingenuously to a
gentle obedience, and plausible demeanor: For, if not for Loyalty, Honor, or
the Punishment of other Laws; yet, rather then leave so great a proclamation of
their (...), to be both a plague upon their fames, and a leprosy on their
posterity, they would cautiously fly from such senseless carelessenesse.

Now having thus laid down the (...) as well as the additions of Honor, I am
brought by my Method to the main body of this general work of Armory, which is
the variety of bearing the Ordinaries, and after the accidents more common; as
of Birds, Beasts, Fishes, Plants, Mechanical things, etc.

And for the first (as in my estimation very reasonably) the most honorable, I
begin with the Cross, and its various kinds of bearings, being more numerous
by much than any of the other Ordinaries. This has its position in the
greatest and most eminent parts of the Shield; and therefore it is much to me,
that Mr Guillim, and others, should place it last of all the Ordinaries.

The Cross, if uncharged, possesses the fifth part of the Field; but, if
charged, the third. The varieties I have placed in two Shields, as first in
this.



In the first quarter is Azure, a plain Cross Or, the Coat of the Sheltons of
Norfolk.

The second is Gules, a Cross crossed upon three Grees Or, by the name of
Jones in Denbyshire.

The third, Or, a (...) pattec Sables, fimbriated Gules.

The fourth Arg. a Cross Wavy voided Sable, by the name of Duckenfield in
Devonshire.

The fifth, (...), a Cross Moline pierced Lozenge, Or, which was the
Coat Armor of Molaneux of (...).

This piercing a Cross, is always known from a charge on it, by the color of
it; for if it be the same with the Field, then it is supposed the appearance of
the field through it; and is sometimes square, sometimes round, and sometimes
Lozenge-ways; but if it be not the color of the Field, then it is a Charge,
and receives another Blazon, as hereafter will appear.

The sixth example is Azure, a Cross patonce Or, which Leigh says, was the
Arms of King Edgbert: this differs but little from the Cross Flory, Flurry,
or Fleury; as by the next you see.

The seventh is Arg. a Cross Flurry Gules.

The eighth Gules, a Cross Avelane Or.

The ninth Azure, a Cross potten fitched Or, the Coat Armor of Ethelbert,
King of the West Saxons, as says Guillim.

The second Escut cheon represents, as many as I have expressed in the first, and
those as strange.



The first is a Cross formy flory.

The second is a Cross bottony.

The third a Cross couped Or, charged with a pellet in the fesse point or
center.

And by these next examples is seen, that the Cross is many times divided into
more then two parts, and sometimes all over the Field, as in this fourth, which
is Or, a Cross triparted flurry Gules.

The fifth Azure, a Cross double-parted Arg.

The sixth is quarterly, Gules and Vert, four Pheons Arg. in Cross, their
points meeting in fesse. By which example may be seen, that many times,
several things are born formed into this, or any other Ordinary.

The seventh is Azure, a Cross resarcelled Or. Which, says Sir John Fern, is
as it were sewed together again, after a voiding.

The eighth is Gules, a Cross crossed Or: pierced all over the Field, which is
the Arms of the Earl of Tholouz.

The last is Argent, a Cross voided Couped Sables, by the name of Woodnoth.

Sometimes one Cross is charged with another, which differs from a Cross
Fimbriated, thus: The sise of the Frimbria, is much narrower then that
appearance of the Cross, that is surmounted of another, (as Mr. Guillim
says;) but Sir John Fern says, it is not a Cross fimbriated, (...) when the
uppermost is also charged.

The next of these Ordinaries to be exemplified, is the Chief, which is
variously born (...) thus.



The first Gule, a chief Argent by the name of Worksley.

The second Ten, a chief Shapernette Ermine.

The third Vert, a chief crenelle Argent, charged with a file Azure.

The fourth Gules, a chief Argent, surmounted of another, Or: which, says Sir
John Fern, is a double addition of Honor.

The fifth Gules, or a chief Azure, filleted in the nether part Argent: Now,
sometimes this Ordinary is Honored with an augmentation, which, very rarely,
are any of the rest; as in the next example.

The sixth is Or, two bars Azure, a chief quarterly Azure and Gules, on the
first two Flowerdelys Or, on the second, one Lion Passant guardant of the last;
the third as the second, the fourth as the first, which is the Coat Armor of
the Earls of Rutland.

And this is also sometimes charged with other Ordinaries, as in this seventh
example, which is Barry of six per pale; in a chief paly of six per fesse, all
counter-changed, Or and Azure, between two Cantons gyronny of the first and
second; an Inescutcheon Argent joining to the chief.

The eighth is Sables, a bend, and chief Or.

The last is Gules, two bars and a chief indented Or; by which is seen that
this Ordinary is sometimes also formed of the crooked lines; as all the rest
are.

The pale does not only vary its form, as the rest with crooked lines, but has
its diminutives too; as in this example.



The first is Gules a pale Or; the Coat Armor of the Lord Hinkley.

The second Azure a pallet Argent, which possesses the half part of a pale.

The third is Or, an endorse Gules, which is the fourth part of a pale.

The fourth is Argent, three pallets Wavy (...).

The fifth Azure a pale radiant rayone Or.

The sixth Argent, three pallet Gules, in a chief Azure, a barrulet dancettee
Or.

The seventh is Argent, on a pale Sable, three cross pattees Or, within a
bordure engrayled of the second, by the name of Crowch.

The eighth paly of six Argent and Azure, fretted with a barrulet in fesse
Gules a chief and base of the same.

The ninth Argent on a pallet Sable a fesse Gules, and two barrulets of the
second, quarterly pierced of the first.

The bend is an Ordinary drawn of two lines from the dexter to the sinister
base; and sometimes from the sinister chief to the dexter base; and have both
their diminutions, and are varied as the rest, as often as the variety of crooked
lines can do it.



The first is Argent, a bend engrayled Sables, by the Lord Fitzwater, Earl of
Sussex.

The second is Argent, a bendlet Gules, which possesses half the bend, and
according to the rule of some, should begin its upper line in the precise
corner of the dexter chief, whereas the bend begins above it, as much as below
it.

The third is Or, a garter Gules, which ought to contain but the third part of
the bend, and derive its lines as the bend does.

The fourth is Gules, a Cost, or cottis Or; which contains the fourth part of
a bend.

The fifth is Or, a ribbon Gules; this contains but the eighth part of a
bend, and is couped at the ends.

The sixth is Argent, a bend sinister Vert, this bend meeting in the same field
with the dexter bend, seems to make a Saltyre; but they do not: and care must
be taken in the blazon of it, to begin first with that which lies next the
(...), and then to say, The one surmounted of (...) other.

The divisions of this, are first a Scrape, as in the seventh, which is Argent
a Scarpe Azure.

The eighth is Or, a battune Gules, which is most commonly couped at each end
as the Ribbon is, which is commonly the stain of a (...), when he is admitted
the bearing the (...) Armor of his Father's line: but it is not to (...) then
in mettle, but by Bastards of (...).

(...) last, (which for its variety, I have inserted as rare) is Azure a bend
double dancette Argent, by the name of Lorks.

If there be more then one of these Ordinaries in a Coat, they are to be
blazoned thus; if two bendlets, if more, bendy of so many as it is; and
sometimes (...) a bend with its diminutives meet in one field, as in this of
Sir Edmund Boyers of Camberwel in Surrey, which is Or, a bend vayre between two
Cottizes Gules.



And sometimes these Cottizes are born without any bend between them, as in the
example empald of John Marsham of Hornsplace in the County of Kent Esquire,
which is Or, a Lion passant in bend Gules betwixt two bendlets Azure.

And this manner of empaling, is a way that a man joins his Wife's coat with
his; and I wish these Coats might so come together.

Now I proceed to the Fesse, according to my promised method. And first in its
place and genuine nature, as in the first quarter here, which is Verry of Or,
and Vert, a fesse Gules by the name of Duffield.



The fecond is Or, a fesse dancette Sables, the proper Coat of Sir Thomas
Vavasor.

The third Argent, a Fesse and Canton Gules, by the name of Woodvile.

The fourth Or, a fesse between two Cheverons Sables, by the name of Lisle.

The fifth, by the name of Blyton, is Gules, a fesse Sable and Argent indented,
par fesse point in point, between three Owls head errased of the third.

The sixth is Vert, on a fesse Argent, a bar Sable charged with four
Cheverons between three Spades of the second.

The seventh Sable a fesse Wavy Argent, between two Stars of the second, given
to that honorable Person Sir Francis Duke, by Queen Elizabeth, for his service
at Sea.

The eighth is Sables, a fesse (...) at each end Or, which (...) I have very
rarely seen.

The ninth Or, a fesse Nebule betwixt three trefoyls slipped Gules.

Thus you see a variety of bearing this Ordinary: yet it shows not any
diminutives, (...) changes its place in the field; which two only properties
belong to the bar, and it only so differs from this in specie.

As for the Escutcheon born as an Ordinary, I find very little variety, only
sometimes it is called an Inescutcheon, which is when thus born, which is Ermin
an Inescutcheon Gules, by the name of Hulgrave.



And sometimes an Escutcheon, as when more then one is in the field, as thus in
the second which is Argent, three Escutcheons Sable, by Sir John Loudham of
Suffolk.

Sometimes these are charged only with augmentations of honor, and sometimes
the field is charged with other Ordinaries promiscuously with these as in the
third, which is Or, a barruler between two bars gemels, Gules, three
Escutcheons vayre, by the name of Gamolle.

And sometimes these Escutcheons are charged also as in the last, which is Or,
three Escutcheons barry of six vayre and Gules.

The Cheveron contains the fifth part of the field, and is not so confined to
one place, but may be born in another, and also more then one in a field, but
if above two, they are called Cheveronels: Guillim.



The first example is (...), a Cheveron Gules, belonging to the Lord's
Staffords.

The second is Or, a Cheveron in chief Azure.

There are diverse other accidents, incident to this Ordinary, as transposition,
coupings, voidings, and reversing, besides it has its diminutives, for
example, the third is Ermin, a Cheveron cooped Sable, by the name of Jones.

The fourth is Azure, a Cheveron engrayled, voided Or, by the name of Dudley.

The fifth Argent, a Cheveronel Vert: of which there can be but three in a
field.

The sixth is Vert, a couple close Argent, which contains the fourth part of
a Cheveron, and is not born but by payres, except a Cheveron be between.

The seventh is Sables, a Cheveron Rompe Or, betwixt three Mullets by the name
of Sault.

The eighth is Azure, three Cheveronels brased in the base of the Escutcheon,
and a chief Or, by the name of Fitzhugh.

The ninth is Gules, three Cheveronels reversed Or.

The Saltyre, is an Ordinary formed of a fourfold line, two from the dexter
chief, extending toward the sinister base, and two toward the dexter base
from the sinister chief, meeting in fesse by couples in acute angles; in the
nature of that which we usually call, a Saint Andrews Cross.



The first is Argent, a Saltyre Gules, by the ancient and Noble Family of the
Gerrards of Lancashire.

The second is Azure, a Saltyre quarterly quartered Or, and Argent, the Arms of
the Episcopal Sea of Bath and Wells.

The third is Gules, a Saltyre Or, surmounted of another Vert, by the name of
Andrews.

The fourth is Sables, a Saltyre Argent, in the fesse point an Inescutcheon Or,
charged with a Cross Gules; and this, though we should allow color upon
color, and metal upon metal, to be false Herauldry, yet is good: the last
being the charge of a distinct Scutcheon, it being of pretense, and of another
family.

The last of these Ordinaries is the Bar, which though it is allowed the
Honor of a particular Ordinary, yet in my opinion, is but a diminutive of the
Fesse, however differs only in this, that it has the liberty of the field, and
takes place any where which the Fesse cannot: this also has its diminutives,
being subdivided into a closette and barrulet.



First of the bar, as in the first quarter of this Scutcheon, Azure three
bars Wavy (...) by the name of (...).

The second Argent, three Bars and a Canton Gules, by the name of Fuller.

The third Gules, two Bars and a Chief indented, O, by the name of Hare.

The fourth is Or, a closset Sanguine; this is the one (...) of the bar.

The fifth is Sables, a Barrulet Argent; this contains the one fourth part of
the Bar.

The sixth bears Gules on a Cheveron Arg. three Bars gemmels Sables; these
are called Gemmells when they are placed in couples at a near distance, and
more than two in the field in even number.

The seventh is Ermin, three Bars couped Gules, charged with six Escollups
shells, or three in the first, two in the second, and one in the last; by the
name of Sabridge Court.

The eighth is barry of ten Or, and Azure in a Canton Gules, a Chaplet Argent,
by the name of Holms of (...).

The ninth is Barry of six on a Chief, between two (...) party per bend, dexter
and sinister two pallets, Or and Azure, over all an Inescutcheon Arg. which was
the (...) of Mortimer Earl of March.

Thus have I run through all the Ordinaries, with their varieties of Barring in
their due order, according to their usual terms of proper Blazonry.

In the next I shall show some other forms of Charges, framed of such like
lines in the Escutcheons; and then proceed to show (...) all the partings and
counterchanges.



First then, as in this shield there is Or, an Orle Azure, by the name of
Bartram Lord of Bothall.

The second is Or, an Orle of three pieces (...).

The third Argent, an Orle engrayled on the inner side Gules.

The fourth is Or, a double Tressure Flory, (...).

The fifth is Sables a Fret Or: by the Lord Mautravers, now quartered by the
Earl of Arundel.

The sixth Vert, (...) Or, this with the distinction of a second Brother in a
third House, is the Coat-Armor of Sir George Whitmore, late Lord Mayor of
London.

In the three last are a (...), a Lozenge, and a Mascle.

The Pile is an honorable bearing, though not to be reckoned among the
Ordinaries, as some would have it: this has diverse ways of bearing, and is
free to any place of the field; but its property is to issue from the middle
chief, and extend with an acute angle almost to the middle base, and then is
termed plainly a Pile: but if otherwise, you are to distinguish, as this (...)
quarterings will demonstrate.



The first, Argent, a pile Gules; this belonged to Sir John Candoys in the time
of Edward the third.

The second is Or, three piles meeting near in the base of the Escutcheon
Azure, by Sir George Brian.

The third is Argent, three piles, one issuing out of the chief between two
other transposed Sables, by the name of Huls.

The fourth is Argent, a triple pile flory on the tops, issuing out of the
sinister base in bend, Sables, by the name of Wroton.

The fifth is Argent, a pile in bend, issuing out of the dexter chief in pale
Sables, Cottised engrayled Argent.

And here in the same Scutcheon, for their nearness of form, have I inserted
the Gyron with its varieties.

As in the sixth Gules, a Gyron issuing out of the dexter point Or.

The seventh is Argent; two Gyrons Gules. These do always meet in (...) with
their points; and therefore (...) is needless to name the place, only naming
their number and color.

The eighth is Gyrony of eight pieces, Or, and Azure, a Canton Ermin by the
name of Octon.

The last is Gyrony of twelve Argent and Sables, and so are they always to be
blazoned, Gyrony of so many, if they be more then two. These, I must confess,
should properly have been placed among the counter-changes. But my digression
is excusable, since it is so near concerned, as the single Gyron belonging
properly to that place; and then that the counter-changes are so near in a
concordancy, as the next discourse must bring them in; which is, to describe
the partitions and counter-changes, according to the disposition of every
Ordinary; and first of the partitions, as in the first next example.



The first in this example is party per Cross, Arg. and Gules, by Sir Henry
Cock of Hertfordshire; and here is to be noted, that though the mettle be more
honorable, yet if the color possess the dexter part, or chiefest part of the
Field, that is first to be named.

And, by the way, I must here observe, that some will have this to be blazoned
quarterly; but certainly improperly, unless the quarters were charged; for why
should this Ordinary above all the rest be denied the privilege of partition,
which all have, but the chief, that in its propriety is formed but of one line?

The second quarter bears party per pale, a bend counter-changed Argent and
Gules, by Sir Geofry Chaucer.

The third party per bend, Or, and Vert, by the name of Hawly.

The fourth party per Cheveron, Sables, and Argent, by the name of Aston.

The fifth party per Fesse, Or, and Azure.

The sixth party per Pile, in point Or, and Sables. Now the difference betwixt
this and the Pile alone, is, that the lines meet at the very base of the
Escutcheon, and others short; and sometimes this is changed by a Reverse, as in
the next example, which is

The seventh party per pile reversed, Or, Gules, and Sables, which is very rare
for the distinction of the field into three colors, as the last is also.

The eighth is party per Saltyre Ermine and Gules.

The ninth is party per pale and base, Gules, Argent, and Sable.

The counter-changes are thus, first, party per pale Or, and Gules, three
roundalls counterchanged.



The second is party per Cheveron unde, three Panthers bends erased,
counter-changed Sab. and Or; by the name of Smith of Norfolk.

The third is pally of six, a bend-pally, as many all counter-changed, Argent
and Gules; which is a quartering of that honorable Gentleman the Lord Strafford.

The fourth is barry of six party per pale indented, Argent and Gules
counter-changed.

The fifth is barry pily of eight pieces Gules, and Or, by the name of Holland.

The sixth is paly-bendy, Or and Sables.

The seventh is paly of six Argent, and Gules on a chief as the field as many
crescents all counter-changed.

The eighth is barry of six, Argent and Sables, indented one in the other.

The ninth is barry bendy, Arg. and Sables.

Thus I have run through all the bearings of the Ordinaries, both plain, and in
their variety, together with the partitions and counter-changes; I shall now as
concisely lay down all the Ordinary bearings, as well of Natural and Celestial
things, as all Sublunaries of Beasts, Birds, Fishes, Vegetables, and
Artificials, in the best method I can, according to the Blazon of Leigh, (...),
Guillim, and others, the best I could consult in this study.

Of Celestialls.
As for Celestialls, I shall skip over some of them, as Angels, Cherubims, and
the like, because they are obvious enough to every man's judgment, when ever
they are met with; as some of these examples are also.



The first of these quarterings shows the example of Gules an Increscent Or, by
the name of Descus.

The second Azure, the Sun in its full glory, by the name of St. Clear.

The third is Azure the Moon decrescent proper, where the difference from the
first is, from the contrary position of them, which is the same in the
Firmament: And by this rule, any man at the first sight may know in what state
the Moon is, though he never saw an Almanac.

The fourth is Azure, a Moon in her complement proper.

The fifth Or, the Sun eclipsed Sables.

The sixth is Argent, the Moon in her Eclipse Sables.

The seventh Azure, a Ray of the Sun issuing out of the dexter corner of the
Escutcheon bend-wayes proper; by the name of Aldham.

The eighth is Gules a chief Argent, at the lower part thereof, the Rays of
the Sun issuing out of a Clowd proper; by the name of Lesone of
Northamptonshire.

The ninth is Azure a Comet Or, streaming proper.

And unto these I have added one more Escutcheon of the like bearings, because
of the rareness of them.



The first is Azure, Jupiters Thunderbolt in Pale Or, enflamed at both ends
proper, shafted Saltyre-wayes, and winged Fesse-wayes, Argent.

The second Argent, a Rain-bowe proper, issuing out of two peteet clouds in
fesse Azure.

The third Gules a chief Argent, over all an Escarbuncle of eight
staves-pommette and Florette Or; which, says Guillim, was the Coat-Armor of
the Earls of Anjou, of whom was Geoffry Plantagenet.

The fourth is Or, six firebrarnds, enflamed proper.

The fifth Sables, a bend Or between six Fountains proper, by the Lord Sturton.

The sixth Argent, a Cheveron Sables, between three flames of fire proper.

The seventh is Sables, a Star of eight points Or, between two Flanches Ermin,
and a Canton of Ulster; by Sir John Hubbart of Norfolk.

The eighth party per bend Crenelle, pointed the one in the other Argent and
Azure, four Crescents, by couples enterlaced, counterchanged.

The ninth Ermin on a chief Sab. three Crescents, arg.

Of Beasts.
NExt of Beafts, as, in my opinion, the most proper to order, as the more noble
creatures; though, I confess, it is contrary to Mr. Guillims Method. And of
those, in the first place Lions, as the principal of them; which are diversely
born, and from their several postures receive a several character of
blazoning, which is cautiously to be observed, as well as in other things; and
it is not difficult for any indifferent genius, without much discourse; which
would but make up a tedious prolixity to little or no purpose; when Verbum
sapienti sat est, is a Proverb in every man's mouth.



The first example is of Azure, a Lion Rampant, Argent, being the Coat-Armor of
Roger de Montealto, who was a Benefactor to Westminster-Abbey.

The second is Or, a Lion Sayliant Gules.

The third is Gules a Lion passant Guardant Or, which being the Coat-Armor of
the Dukes of Aquitane, was joined with the Coat of the Kings of England, by the
(...) of Henry the second, being before two Lions, the posture and colors one;
then indeed called Leopards, as they are most properly so called, (where they
are not of Royal bearing) if they be more then one in a field, and Guardant,
as (...) would have it: This same single Lion passant guardant, only the
colors contrary, as Or, a Lion passant guardant, Gules, says the Welsh
petegree, was the Coat-Armor of Roderick the great Prince of Wales, in the year
843. By which account, Coat-Armor has gained a great Antiquity.

The fourth example is of Lions passant, and not guardant, which is Gules, two
bars Ermin in chief, a Lion passant party per pal Or, and Argent, by the name
of Hill of Norfolk.

The fifth is Gules, a Lion Seiant Argent.

The sixth is Or, a Lion Couchant. Gul.

The seventh is Azure, a Lion Dormant, Or.

The eighth is Or, a Lion Rampant regarding Coward, Sables.

The last is Gules, a tri-corporated Lion issuing out of three corners of the
field, and meeting under one head in fesse Or; which was the Coat-Armor of
Edward Crouchback Earl of Lancaster. Lions are sometimes with the tail elevated
over the head, sometimes with the tail forked, and sometimes you shall meet
with Demy-Lions, which is half Lions passant and Rampant, and sometimes heads,
erased or couped; but if Cabossed, then they are ever (...) Leopards heads, as
in these examples.



The first Azure on a chief Or, a Demy-Lion Rampant issuant out Gules, languid
and armed of the first, by the name of Markham.

The second is Azure, three Demy-Lions passant guardant, Or, languid, and armed
Gules, by the name of Hammon of Acris in Kent.

Now the French are so severe, that they will not allow the terms of Lion to
any, either Whole or Demi, that are guardant; but, I think, without reason.

The third is Or, out of the midst of a Fesse, Sable, a Demy-Lion Rampant
Naissant Gules languid and armed, Azure.

Where it is proper to take notice, that if it be armed or languid by any other
color than the body, unless Gules, it is a blemish to it; but Gules,
signifying blood, adds to it. So it is an abatement if it be without tongue,
teeth, or claws.

The fourth is Verry, Argent and Azure, on a pale Gules, three Leopards heads
Or, by the name of Ockould.

The fifth is Azure, three Leopards heads cooped Or. This Coat is in the Walk
under Lincolns Inn Chapel, and I think is very rare.

The sixth is Azure a Cheveron, betwixt three Lions he ids erased Ermin,
crowned Or; the Coat-Armor of (...) worthy Benefactor of Paul's, Sir Paul Pindar.

The seventh is Sables, three Lions tails erased Argent, by the name of Cork.

The eighth is Gules, a Cheveron betwixt three Lions paws erected and erased
within a bordure Argent, in a chief of the second, an Eagle displayed Sables,
by the name of Brown.

The ninth is Sables, two Lions paws, one issuing out of the Dexter, the other
out of the Sinister point of the Escutcheon in Cheveron, Arg. armed Gules, by
the name of Frampton.

There is one rule more that has been by some, both ancient and modern
Heralds, observed, concerning the blazoning of Lions; which is, That if above
one Lion be in a field, they must be termed Lyoncels, that is, young-Lyons;
because the spirit of a Lion is full of Majesty, and admits no co-partnership
in one Territory. But they make two exceptions to this general rule, that is,
When any Ordinary parts them; and, When it is the Coat of a Monarch; to which
last I must concede, from his argument which is propter Regiae Maejestatis
dignitatem. But for the former, it cannot always hold according to their own
argument, without an absurd contradiction. As for example; Mr. Guillim blazons
a Coat thus, A fesse Wavy betwixt three Lions passant, whereof three is but one
barred from the other. But I must be forced to beg pardon, and to accuse him
again, and by it lay down one exception more; in the Coat of Wickombe he
blazons thus, Two Lyoncels rampant combant. When as in ordinary reason,
according to his own argument too, being in a fighting posture, they deserve
the name of Lions. As I should be bold to blazon my own Coat, being the same,
only the colors contrarily disposed, as Azure, two Lions Combatant Or, languid
and armed Gules.

I confess, where I find them indorsed, as in that which he believes to have
been the Arms of Achilles at the siege of Troy, I think it much reason to
blazon them Lyoncels.

For other examples of beasts, I shall only add one more, which is,

First Argent, (...) a Mount proper a Stagge lodged Gules, by the name of
Hart-hill.



The second Arg. a Stagge tripping armed and unguled Or, by the name of Holms.

The third is Vert a Stagge stripping proper Or, by the name of Gilsland.

The fourth is Argent, an Unicorn seiant Sab. armed and unguled Or, by the name
of Harling.

The fifth Azure, a Stagge at gaze Gules.

The sixth is Vert, a fesse between three Bucks, in full course Or, by the name
of Robertson.

The seventh is Argent a Lions head erased Gules, by the name of Gowis: this is
the most honorable bearing of the heads or limbs, because it is said to be torn
off from the body.

The eight is Gules, three Unicorns heads couped, Argent.

The last is Gules, a Cheveron betwixt three Bulls heads Cabossed Argent, armed
Or; by the name of Baynham.

Of Birds.
THe second sort of the most Noble sensitives are Fowls of the Air: all which
I shall comprise in a very short example. Only, by the way, this note is to be
observed; that as I have disposed them all into an order; so are they in
degrees of excellency in Armory. And again when any quick things are born, it
is most commendable when born in the most generous and noble action, or the
most proper to its nature.



Of these the first is Sables a Swan with her wings expansed Arg. membred Or,
within a bordure engrayled of the same, by the name of Moore.

The second is Ermin an Eagle displayed, Gules, armed Or.

The third is Sables, a Goshawke, Arg. perching upon a stock fixed in the base
point of the shield, of the second, armed Jessed, and belled Or.

The fourth is Gules, a Pelican in her nest with wings displayed feeding her
young Or, vulned proper, by the name of Carn of Wenny in Glamor ganshlre.

The fifth is arg. three Peacoks in their pride proper, by the name of Pawn.

The sixth is arg. a Heron volant in fesse, azure, membred, Or, between three
Escoliops shells, Sables.

The seventh is Gules, three Cocks argent, Armed, Crested, and Jellopped Or.
This was the Coat Armor of that reverend Dr. Cocks, Bishop of Ely, in Queen
Mary's, and Queen Elizabeth's times.

The eighth is Gules, two wings inverted and conjoined Or.

The last is Or, on a bend Sables, three Estridge feathers, passing through as
many escrowls of the first.

Many other Birds, as well as Beasts, are used in the infinite variety of Coat
Armor, but by the observance of these examples they will be all understood.

Of Fishes.
MR. Leigh observes this general rule in blazoning of Fishes, That all Fishes
that are born feeding should be (...) in blazon Vorant, or devouring: because
they swallow without chewing; and that what they devour should be named,

These are, as Beasts, born in diverse postures; as Nayant, which is swimming
upright, embowed, extended, endorsed, trianguled, and fretted, etc. As in this
following demonstration.



The first is Argent three Eeles Nayant in pale Sables, by the name of Ellis.

The second is Sables, three Salmons hauriant Argent, by the name of Salmon.

The third is Azure, a Dolphin Nayant, embowed, Argent, by the name of
Fitz-James.

The fourth Argent, two Barbels Hauriant, respecting each other by the name of
(...).

The fifth Gules, two Pikes hauria ntendorsed, Or.

The sixth three Trouts fretted in triangle Arg. by the name of Troutback.

The seventh is Arg. two Lobsters claws in Saltyre, the dexter surmounted of
the sinister Gules, by the name Tregarthick.

The eighth is Arg. a Cheveron engrayled, (...), betwixt three Crevices, Gules.

The ninth is Sables, a fesse engrayled betwixt three Welkes, Or, by the name
of shelly.

Thus are all manner of Shell-fishes as well as others. And some times,
Reptibles, and Insects, all manner of Flies and Grasshoppers; But their blazon
is obvious enough to every man's judgment, that can distinguish one from
another when he sees them, therefore it would be but an unnecessary intrusion
in this place.

Vegetables.
I Shall not need here, I hope, to run over all parts of Philosophy, and
Diviniry, and to tell what Trees are, and their Natures; For as they are not
discourses pertinent to this place; so Mr Guillim, as well as my self might
have (...) every ingenious man as knowing as himself in it; or at least (...):
And to none other do I submit my endeavors. I shall only trouble the Reader
with their various bearing, in the examples of some few, which will direct to
all others,



And herein the first is Argent, on a mount in base a Pine Tree fructed proper,
by the name of Pine.

The second is Gules, the trunck of a tree in pale eradicated and cooped,
Sprouting out two branches Arg. by the name of Stockden of Leicestershire.

The third is Arg. three sterved branches slipped Sables, by the name of
Black-stock.

The fourth is Arg. a Cheveron Gules, between three garbs of the second, by the
Lord Sheffield Earl of Mougrave.

The fifth is Sables, three Lillies slipped Arg. the Coat-Armor of Winchester
College.

The sixth is Arg. a Cheveron Sables, between three Columbines proper; by the
name of Hall of Coventry.

The seventh is Arg. a fesse Nebule between three trefoyls slipped Gules, by the
name of Thorpe of Glocestershire.

The eight Arg. (...) Holly leaves pendant proper, by the name of Inwine.

The ninth, a fesse Arg. three Apples transposed in base Or, by the name of
Harwine of Devon.

Of Monsters:
ANd here before I proceed to dead and artificial things, I think it proper to
take observation of some Monsters in nature, which are often born in Arms.



And the first of these is Arg. a Griffen rampant with wings displayed Sables,
by the name of Morgan.

The second is Arg. a Wiverne, his wings displayed, and tail nowed Gules, by
the name of Drake.

The third is Sables, a Cockatrice displayed Arg. membred and Jolloped Gules,
by the name of Buggine.

The fourth is Arg. a Rearmouse displayed Sables, by the name of Backster.

The fifth is Arg. on a bend Gules, three men's heads horned Or, by the name of
Wittall, or Witwell in Yorkshire.

The sixth is Azure, a Harpy displayed, crined, crowned and armed, Or.

The seventh is Arg. a Mermayd Gules, crined Or, holding a Mirror in the right
hand, and in the cleft a Comb, by the name of Ellis.

The eight is Gules, a bend engrayled Arg. between three Leopards heads Jessant
Flowerde-luce, of the second, by the name of Dennys.

The ninth is Gules, three Leopards heads vorant, as many Flower-de-luce Or,
which, says Guillim, belongs to the Sea of Hereford.

Of the parts of Man's Body.
THere are sometimes whole figures of man's body, born in Coat Armor, as for
example, the arms of Sevil in Spain, which is Or, a King enthronized on his
Seat Royal Azure, Crowned and Sceptred, and invested of the first the doublings
of his Robe Ermine.

The Arms proper to the Episcopal See of Salisbury, is Az. the Virgin Mary with
her Son in her right arm, and a Scepter in her left hand, all Or.

But the like of these are very seldom seen, only the legs, arms, hands, and
other desected members are often met with, as in these following examples I
have demonstrated.



The first is Gules a Saracen's head erased Arg. environed about the Temples
with a wreath of the second and Sables, by Mergith of Wales.

The second is Arg. a Fesse Gules, betwixt three Hearts vulned, distilling
drops of blood, on the sinister side proper.

The third is Gules, a Heart betwixt two wings displayed Or.

The fourth is Gules, three dexter arms conjoined at the shoulders and flexed
in triangle, Or, with the fist clinched Arg. by the name of Tremain of
Devonshire.

The fifth Arg. a man's leg erased at the thigh, Sables, by the name of Prime.

The sixth is barry of six, Or and Sab. over all a pale Gules, charged with a
Woman's Dug, distilling drops of milk proper, by the name of Dodge.

The seventh is Arg. a Cheveron Sab. between three Blackmores heads couped at
the shoulders proper, by the name of Ives.

The eighth is Arg. a Cheveron Gules, betwixt three Periwigs Sab.

The ninth is Barry nebule of six pieces, Az. and Arg. as one chief of the
second, three eyes, Gul. by Delahay.

If those drops are charged distinctly in any field, as sometimes they are, and
sometimes the field all over, you are to blazon them differently according to
the color, as, if Sanguine, then Gutte de Sang. which is, drops of blood. If
Arg. then Gutte de l' aue, drops of water.

Or, Gutte de Or, drops of Gold.

Az. Gutte de Lermes, drops of Tears. Guillim.


Vert, Gutte de Vert, drops of Oyl-Olive.

Of Artificial things.
HAving thus cursorily run through these examples, yet I hope sufficiently
enough, for the satisfaction of an Ingenuous Reader; I now come to the
artificial varieties, of bearing in Coat Armor. Which since they are as
numerous almost as the conceits of ingenuity: I must be excused from inserting
the infinite examples of them, yet I shall propose some, and let the eye of the
observing Student make up the defects of the rest, as it may well do.



The first is Arg. a Cheveron Gules, betwixt three Ducall Caps, Azure doubled
indented Ermin.

The second is Arg. a Mantle of estate, Gules, and doubled Ermin, ouched or
garnished with strings tassals of the same.

The third, the Arms of the Archbishop of Canterbury, which is Azure, a staff
in pale Sol, and thereupon a cross Patree Arg. surmounted of a Pall of the
last, charged with four other cross pattees fetched Sables, edged and fringed
as the second.

The fourth is Arg. on a bend Vert, betwixt six cross crosselets fitched
Gules, three Crosier staffs, by the name of Pear.

The fifth is Arg. three Chaplets Vert, by the name of Richardson of Shropshire.

The sixth Azure, a Maunch, Or, by the name of Conyers.

The seventh is Gules, three Garters buckled and nowed Arg. by the name of
Sydemer.

The eighth is Gules, six Annulets, three, two, and one, Or, this is quartered
by the Earls of Cumberland.

The ninth is Gules, three tassals Or, by the name of Wooler.

Of Military things.
IN the next, are those that represent examples of Military things born in
Armor, both of Land and Sea.



As first Arg. a Tower triple towered, Sab. chained transverse the port Or, by
the name of Oldcastle.

The second Or, a Castle (...) towred Gules, the port displayed of the field
leaved, Arg.

And here is to be noted, that it is never blazoned a Castle, but when it
extends it self cross the whole field, and sometimes you shall find a single
Tower not turretted, as the first, in the Coat of Sir Richard Mansfield.

The third is Gules, three single arches Arg. their capitals and pedestals by
the name of Arches.

The fourth Or, a bridge of three arches in fesse Gules, masoned Sables, the
(...) proper, on it a fane Arg. by the (...) of Trowbridge of Trowbridge.

The fifth Sables, a Cheveron between three tents Arg. by the name of Tenton.

The sixth Arg. a sweep Azure, charged with a stone, or by the name of Magnal.

The seventh Or, a pillar Sables, enwrapped with an Adder Arg. by the name of
(...).

The eighth is Arg. three battering (...) barwayes proper, headed, Az. armed
and (...) Or, by Robert (...) Earl of Lyndsey.

The ninth Azure, three murdering chainshots Or, this is quartered by the Earl
of Cumberland.

There are many other things born; as tiltspears, sometimes with penoncels, and
sometimes without; Drums, Fifes, Trumpets, Cannons, Bows, Arrows, and the like:
but their blazon is easy to every eye, that knows any thing of Armory.

Of Maritine things.
OF things belonging to the Sea, I have these examples.

The first Gules, three pieces of Masts cooped with their tops Arg. by the name
of Cromer.



The second Gules, three Sayls Arg. by the name of Cavil.

The third Azure, a Rudder of a ship Arg.

The fourth Gules, an Anchor in pale Arg. the cros-piece Or, by the name of
Goodred.

The fifth Or, a Lighter-(...) in fesse Gul.

The sixth Gules, the hull of a Ship, having only a main Mast, and a top,
without tackling Or. This, says Guillim, is the Coat-Armor of the Duke of
Alasco in Polonia.

The seventh is Arg. a ship with three masts a sail furld and hoysted to the
main top shrouded Sables, by the name of Mercers.

The eigth his Azure, a Galley passing under sail, Or.

The ninth is Arg. a Cheveron Gules, between three Murriours Azure, by the Lord
Brudenell.

Of Mechanical things.
THe last example, that I shall insert, is of other more ordinary Mechanical
things.



The first is Arg. a Cheveron between three Palmers scrips Sables, the tassels
and buckles Or, by Sir Henry Palmer of Kent.

The second is Gules, a Cheveron between three Irish Broges, Or.

The third is Sables, three Pickaxes Argent, by the name of Pigot.

The fourth is Arg. a fesse between three pheans Sables, by the name of Rowdon
of Yorkshire.

The sixth is Sables, three bells Arg. by the name of Porter.

The sixth is Azure, three Howboys between as many cross crosselets Or, by the
name of Bourden.

The seventh is Or, on a bend Az. three Katherine Wheels Arg. by the name of
Rudhall.

The eighth Az. three levels with their plumets, Or, by the name of (...).

The ninth is Arg. three bezants, on a chief (...), by the name of (...).

And here we are to take notice, that if these roundals are charged in
counter-changes as before, then they are only called Roundals: but if any other
(...), as in this example, they are of a various blazon according to their
colors, as thus.

If they are Or, then they are called Bezants, Argent, Plates, Sables, Pellets,
Gules, Vorteuxes, Ligh-tblew, Hurts. Vert, Pomeyes, Purpure, Golps, Teune,
Oranges, Sanguine, Gules.

And thus much I think sufficient to be said of the examples of Charges in
Coat-Armor. In the next place, I am to show the differences of Helms, which
distingnish in some part the honor of the bearer in his degree. The Crowns and
(...), differing more particularly the highest degrees of Nobility, I shall
also exemplify in the conclusion of this discourse; and I hope shall raise, in
some measure, a relation to the old proverb, Finis coronat opus.

Of Helmets.
THe differences of Helms is always expressed, when the Crest is given: and by
this difference a Gentleman is known in his degree by his hatchment, as much as
these following examples (...).

These Helmets are sometimes called cask and timbers; by the French, Helenum;
by the Romans, Cassidem; by the Greeks, Galeam, a Covering for the head in time
of war; and our manner of bearing crests on them is from their ancient fancy of
adorning their Helmets with some kind of monstrous Device: as the Head or mouth
of a Lion, the paws or horns of certain beasts; to appear more terrible. And
that which we call Mantle, is not, as some do ridiculously suppose, the
Vestment which they usually had to wear over their atms in War; or, as some
would have it, to secure their shield from weather; but from this original,
that Princes and chief Commanders used to adorn their Helmets (according to
their qualities) with rich buckles, studs, and circlets of gold, garnished with
rich and costly stones, and on the top or crests of them, wreaths of corded
Favin p. 1. ca. 3. fol. 24
(...); being the Liveries of their Ladies and Mistrisses, as also some curled
(...) of hair, and those Cordons (like waving scarfs) dangled down behind them
on the Cruppers of their Horses, the ends being fairly tasselled and enriched,
many times with Pearls and precious Stones: and thus especially they rid upon
days of Triumph.

But in Germany and many other places where the laws of Honor and Armory are
severely obsetved, a mean Gentleman or new Atchiever is Ib. p. 25.
not permitted to bear Helm, Mantle, or Crest, but by special favor.



The first differs from the 2. in that it is a side standing helmet with the
Beaver close, which is for all Esquires and Gentlemen.

The second, is the common fashion of Knights, which is a helmet standing
direct forward with the (...) open without guards.

The third, is a side-helmet open-faced guardevisure, which is proper for all
persons of the Nobility, beneath a Duke and above a Knight.

The fourth is the Helmet of Persons executing Sovereign Authority, which is a
Helmet which is full forward open-faced, guarde-visure: which belongs also to
Princes and Dukes.

In this manner are all Degrees obviously differenced to every man's judgment
in all hatchments. And, if they be above the degree of a Knight, that these do
not distinguish to particulars; then they are also understood by their (...)
and Crowns.

Of Crowns and Coronets.


The first whereof is the Crown of the Empire of Germany, which is but little
different from that of England in the second, which is Emperial too.

The third is that Coronet of the Prince which is the same with the Kings, only
the arches, mound, and cross, wanting.

The fourth is the Crownet of an Archduke, which is the same with a Duke, the
Arch only added.

The fifth is a Crownet floral, only proper to a Duke.

The sixth is the Crownet of a Marquess, which differs thus, It is of leaves
and points, the leaves or flowers above the points.

The seventh is proper to an Earl, which has points and flowers; but the
points are above the flowers.

The eighth is due to a Viscount, which is a Circulet or Coronet pearled, and
neither flowers nor points.

The last is the form of that Crown, which is found to be in fashion in the
time of William the Conqueror. Which I have inserted to show the difference
betwixt the Crown Imperial of England then, and now.

As to the antiquity of these Crowns or Diadems, as notes of Regality: I find
not any where a just authority to assure me of their Origination: but, that
there were Crowns, long before Tragedies were in use, is to me very evident;
though Sir William Segar is of opinion, the use of them came from thence. Hon.
Mil. and Civ. p. 213.
Yet, that the use of them in these parts of the World, might come from the
giving of Crowns in Triumph, and Laurels or Wreaths for Virtue, is very
probable, which was a thing very frequent, and of very great antiquity among
the Romans; and has continued, and been exercised in the Empire since the
translation to Germany, and that with much Ceremony, as in the example of
Joannes Crusius, his receiving the Laurel as Stratsburgh an. 1616. See Mr.
Seldom his Titles of Honor, where it is at large, fol. 402.

Which custom has since been in these parts, and indeed long before that time
were Crowns given to Poets here; as, witness the example in St. Mary Overies
Church, where one John Gower a Poet in Richard the seconds time has a Statue
crowned with Ivy mixed with Roses; but since it is more commonly used of
Laurel. Though the Crown of Laurel or Bays was first appropriated to him that
triumphed for victory in the field. At which time, distinctions of Crowns were
observed according to the variety of merit. As Corona Muralis, this was due to
him that was first seen upon the Wall of the Enemy. Corona Castrensis, for him
that made a breach in the Castle of the Enemy; the first a Crown embattail'd,
or made with battailment being of Gold, the other of Towers; And then they had
Corona Navalis, garnished with Fore-castles for service at Sea, made of Gold
too.

Then Corona Ovalis of Myrtle; for victory, gotten with little hazard: Corona
Obsidialis, which was made of grass for him that had preserved an Army besiged.
Corona Civica, for him that saved a Citizen from the Enemy, made of Oaken
boughs: Corona Olivaris of Olive leaves, for victory in the Olympic games: And
Corona Populea, for young men that were found industrious and studious in the
exercises of virtues. But I find that amongst these rewards of honor, the Crown
made of Ivy, called Corona Hederalis was only appropriated to the Poets; and
here we see the great encouragement given to Virtue, which was an age
doubtless, when it was much exercised in all its species. When virtuous
moderation received an estimation in the minds of young Nobility, before (...)
voluptuousness. And Honor more aimed at by steps of Virtue, than the
engrossing parsimoniousnesse, or expending profuseness of the (...) and
unsatisfying uncertainty of riches; (...) doubtless a most Noble Age. And why
should any man make himself so (...) concerned in the true honor of his
creation, as to set himself so little before the irrational (...), as the
Examples of ou idle and (...) Age do too often demonstrate, whilst all men
naturally are ambitious of honor? And why should not any man blush to be seen
reaching at it (that is only the recompense of virtue) till by some virtuous
testimony he has declared his desert? Certain I am, no generous and noble
spirit ever breathed in any age, that did not present some opportunities of
exercising virtue in one degree or other; and the reward in some measure is
ever a concomitant to Heroic and Ingenious merit. Or should it, in some case,
fail the truly generous soul, though it miss its reward, yet it thinks it
honor to have deserved Honor, and satisfies it self with that encouragement.

Thus I have given a succinct account of all manner of Bearings. Some will here
expect, that I should now lay down rules to discover the worth of the
Atchiever, by the nature of the Atchivement; as Guillim, and others have (...).
It may be conjectured, how far a Coat-Armor is more or less honorable, by
(...) of worth in the thing born; but (...) farther, from thence to a (...) of
the quality of the merit, for which that (...) was a reward, is altogether
uncertain. Therefore; for conclusion, I shall instance one Escutcheon of
Examples more, which I think (though not difficult to blazon) not easily
reducible to any such judgment, yet the Families well known of noble and (...)
Descent.

The first is Sab. a Cross engrailed Or, in the dexter Cant on a mullet Arg.
an Inescutcheon of Ulstre, the addition of a Knight Baronet, being the
Coat-Armor of Sir, Tho. Peyton of Knolton in East-Kent, Knight and (...).

The second is Ermin on a chief Azure, three Lyoncels Rampant Or. The
atchivement of Sir Anthony Aucher of Little-bourn in East-Kent.

The third is barry of twelve Or, and Sable, by Sir James and Sir Thomas Thynne
of Long leak in Wiltshire.

The fourth is Arg. on a Cheveron Sab. three Escollop-shels Or, between three
peelets, charged with as many Martlets of the first; all within a border Vert,
by Anthony Hammon of St. Albons in East-Kent Esquire.



The fifth is Arg. on a bend Az. three (...) heads cabossed Or. On an
Escutcheon of pretense, Arg. a Cheveron Sab. betwixt three Ravens, by Thomas
Stanley of Cumberlow in Hertfordshire Esquire the paternal coat his right by
descent, (with the distinstion of the third house) of the Earls of Derby, the
Escutcheon of pretense as by match with the daughter and heir of Sir James
Enyon of Flower in Northamptonshire.

Where observe, that although a man marry the daughter and heir of a
Coat-Armor, yet he has not the power of quartering it, but only to empale it,
or bear it thus in an (...) of pretense; the liberty of quartering, being in
the heir, who enjoyes both their Coats by right of blood. Observe also, that if
any thing be thus hid by an addition either Canton or Escutcheon of pretense,
it is notwithstanding to be nominated, That no detriment be to the Coat.

The sixth is Gules, three barbed arrows Arg. headed Or, by Edward Hales of
Tunstal in Kent, Esquire

The seventh is Arg. a Cheveron between three Milrines, Sab. by Roger James, of
Rigale in Surrey, Esquire.

The eighth within a bordure bezanty Sab. Arg. an Imperial Eagle, by the Family
of the Killigrews, in Cornwall.

The ninth Arg. a fesse Ermines between six Mullets, Sab. by Steven Penckhurst
of Buxsted in Sussex, Esquire.

And now I hope I have not passed by any one thing that can be called pertinent
to this discourse without some touch: perhaps, satisfactory enough to any
indifferent contemplation.

The End of Armory.
The Orders of Knighthood in most places of Christendom, and in particular
first of the Order of St. George in England.
The Creation Robe of a Knight of ye Garter


AS to Knighthood in general, enough has been already discoursed in the first
part of this Treatise. I come now, to speak of the several Otders, and
especially those that are called Sovereign: amongst which I must needs esteem
that of the Garter, or St. George in England to be as Noble as any in the
World; not from that epidemick humor of most Writers, because it is of my own
Nation; but for the excellency of it self: especially, in that according to the
Articles of its foundation, none are to be admitted to the Honor, but such as
are Peers of the Realm.

For the first occasion of the erecting these Sovereign Orders of Knighthood,
above the more common, was, that as all Honors were instituted for the reward
and encouragement of deserving persons, so these for persons of more eminence,
or more excellent merit, to receive a character that might in a higher nature
than ordinary blazon their merit to the world.

And that Order or fraternity must needs be esteemed of greatest honor, where
the King shall submit himself to the badge of it.

This Order of the Garter we find to be instituted by Edward the third, after a
return from the Wars against the French and Scots, with eminent victories. The
occasion Sir William Segar says was but slight; alluding as I conceive to the
story of the King's taking up the Countess of Salisburies Garter; Which he
wearing on his own leg, caused a jealousy in the Queen. And from thence
received the motto life, Honey soit qui mal y pens, Evil to him that evil
imagines.

But I am of opinion that this humor arose from the French stories only, who
would be apt enough to endeavor an abatement of the honor of it, lest its
glory should appear too illustrious in the eye of the World; and outshine or
eclipse their then blazing Star.

And that we may a little examine the truth, let us observe the ridiculousnesse
of the coherence of these merry scandalizers. First they differ in their time,
as shall appear anon; then concerning the Lady, they take notice of to make up
the pretty Romance, the mistake is very great and plain; for in some places
they say it was the Queen's Garter, and if so, what needed then the Motto? But
most commonly they say, it was the Countess of Salisburies'; whom they name
sometimes Alice, and sometimes Joan; when her name was Katherine, and Mistress,
and after wife to the Black Prince Heylyn. fol. 325. and 326.
Son of the said King, as is well observed in Heylyn's History of St. George.

By which, Froysart's error must appear very perspicuous, who was the first and
most eminent Author of this mighty fable.

Mounsier Favin in his Theater of Honor, quotes Froysart, and Polydore Virgil,
for the like account. But I am apt to collect another reason from Mr. Selden's
discourse (an authority that I think needs no Apology) and to think Edward the
third, being to engage a field, Seld c. 5. fol. 792.
gave St. George for the word, (long time before, the Patron-Saint of England)
in which battle he gained a great victory; which was about the year 1349. and
at his return in the year one thousand three hundred and fifty, established
thisOrder to the honor of St George, which agrees with the black Book of
Windsor that Chronologizes it on the three and twentyeth day of April in the
year one thousand three hundred and fifty, being the three and twentyeth of
that King's Reign.

And I understand not, but that the addition of the Gartet might be after added
to the Ensigns of the Order: for the firstEnsign together with the Robes was
the Cross of Saint George, yet in use amongst them.

And some do add that the Garter was from a Martial rise also, as that a
leather-garter upon the left leg was a mark given to some of the eminent
Commanders with promise of enriching it on those that performed honorably in
the charge.

For the account of the time according to other Authors, it is left disputable.
Mr. Seldom takes notice of some of the French Authors, that affirm it to be
erected in Anno 1344. yet after his victories; as in the relations of the same
Froysart, and Thomas of Walsingam: And Polydore Virgil, (to whom Favin
subscribes) Fav. fol. 68. and 70.
will have it in An. 1347. Yet in another place he sets it down in the year one
thousand three hundred and forty four. Oportet mendacem memorem esse.

And one other observation I collect from some of these Authors; that the Order
was established before either of these passages; only as a Seminary to draw
other Knights of the world into these parts; which caused the French King to do
the like the same year of another Order by way of prevention; this is averred
by some. Which is, I conceive by other circumstances, a mistake upon a Just or
Turnment proclaimed by the said King Edward (about the year one thousand three
hundred forty and four) in all places beyond the Seas, to be held at Windsor;
about which time he caused to be built a very large round table for the
entertaining of such Princes and Persons of great quality, as should repair
thither; when the Earl of Salisbury was so bruised at the Justing, that he
dyed. At the news of which meeting; the French King suddenly after did the
like, to obstruct the concourse of great soldiers and honorable Personages that
this would have produced.

The patron of this order is St. George; who suffered Martyrdom at Nicomedia,
and was Heylyn. Hist. de St. Geo. cap. 1. fol. 142.
buried at Lydda in Capadocia according to Dr. Heylin: but Mr. Seldom says, he
suffered at Lydda, under Diocletian, about the (...) of Christ one hundred and
ninty. Whose fame was so great in the world, that many Temples were built to
his name, as that of Justinian in Armenia; and in Venice the chief Church for
the Grecians; Jo. Eucaitensis built a Monastery Cedton. page 650.
to the honor of St. George in the time of Constantine. Into which the Emperors
after were wont to make a solemn procession every Saint Georges day. In
Carinthia, there is an Order of Knighthood of St. George, in very much esteem.
And Eusebius speaks also of another De vit. Constable. l 1. l. 32.
Order of St. George among the Greeks whose Ensign is a red Cross with this
Motto Sub hec signo vinces, begun by Constantiue the Great.

When first it came into this Nation, is by the best Antiquaries left disputed;
but that he has been long honored as Patron-Protector of England, is proved by
all, and by Mr. Seldom, before the Conquest; The three and twentyeth day of
April, being constantly celebrated to his memory.

And it is no marvail (says the same Author) that so warlike a Nation should
choose to themselves the name of such a soldier Saint, known by the particular
name of Tropheophorus, and of greater eminence in both the Eastern and Western
Churches then any other Souldier-Saint.

The Sovereign of this order is the King of England; the number of the
Fellowship is twenty six, besides the Sovereign; of which when any of them dye,
the place is to be supplied by another elected by the Sovereign, with the
consent of the Fraternity, as it was anciently; chosen and estalled at Windsor:
but since it is referred to the entire disposing of the King.

They have many Articles confirmed, to which all that are enstalled subscribe;
and have an oath to which they swear that, to their power, during the time they
shall be fellows of the Order, they will defend the honor, quarrels, rights and
Lordships of the Sovereign, and that they will endeavor to preserve the honor
of the said Order, and all the Statutes of it without fraud or covin. Quinam
perjurati?

The Officers of the Order are a Prelate, which is always the Bishop of
Winchester; a Chancellor Register, a King of Arms called Garter; and an Usher
called the Black Rod, added by Henry the eighth.

Their habit is a Cassock of Crimson Velvet, and a Mantle of Purple Velvet
lined with white Sarcenet, on the left shoulder whereof is an Escutcheon of S.
George embroydered within a Garter with the Motto: the Escutcheon is Argent, a
plain Cross Gules.

Above all, about the neck they wear a collar of the Order weighing thirty
ounces of Gold Troy weight, composed of Garters and Knots enameled, and with
Roses red and white; and since the coming in of King James, there has been an
intermixture of Thistles. At this collar hangs the Image of St. George on
horseback, enriched with precious stones.

And about the left leg they wear a Garter enamelled and enriched with gold,
pearl, and stones of great value with the same Motto of Honey soit qui mal y
pens.

For their ordinary Ensign they wear a blew ribbon over their left shoulder;
and another on their left leg; and a Star of silver embroy dery on the same
side of their cloak with the Scutcheon of St. George in the Center of it. And
sometimes at their Ribbon a George also, and then they wear it about their
necks.

Their feast is yearly at Windsor Castle on St. Georges day. In which place
upon the foundation of it was a Church erected with Dean and Prebends; as also
thirteen poor aged Gentlemen, established to be maintained with stipends by the
name of Knights of Windsor: who had appointed to them robes of cloth according
to the manner of the Order, which were to pray for the Order.

Of the Knights of the Round Table in England.
IT is said by many writers, that the Order of the (...) was inftituted in
imitation (...) the Round Table: but I can give no great assurance of it; only
I believe it probable enough; the beginning of them both agreeing also in some
kind of Analogy. This of the Round Table, (for so much as is remaining in
History) appears to me to have been the most noble in the world, either before
or since, for ought yet I can understand. And pity it were the memory of it
should perish, as it is almost; being buried in the metamorphosis of ridiculous
fables; and by that means only (...), with the shadowie reputation of a
Romance, in the minds of many, and indeed most men.

It was erected by King Arthur, who reigned in the year of our Redemption 490.
and conquered Norway, Scotland, and so much of France that he was crowned King
of Paris: as both ours and the French annals testify. Of this King many
fabulous things have been writ; but we may collect so much from the more
serious, as may assute us that without doubt many noble and (beyond ordinary)
heroic acts were performed by this generous Prince. Which caused the society
of this Order to shine with so much the more splendour than the ordinary stars
of this sublunary world: insomuch that it is recorded in some Chronologies,
that at one time summoning them to a meeting at a place in Wales, called
Carlion, or Carlignion, there resorted to him ten Kings, thirteen Earls, and
many Barons, and other persons of great quality that were of the Fraternity.

This I have also in Sir William Segar; and in Seg. f. 155.
a very ancient Chronicle which I have seen my self in Manuscript in that
Country; which was much the same with the relations I have since met with, of
this Order.

And that these Kings were not petty Kings must be understood, since there was
at that time no Heptarchy, or Provincial Kings, but all Monarchies, much in the
same nature as they have been in our ages.

This King is generally reported by Chronologers (and some of them solid too)
to be taken alive from the earth; or at least miraculously disposed of,
invisibly: but this is a riddle too great for me to unfold. Many of them (...)
this fable I conjecture from an Epitaph that Merlin writ on him, Hic jacet
Arturus, Rex quondam, Rexque futurus. Which very thing to my Judgment must
make clear that he was buried; which is their argument that he was not.

The Order or Fraternity however, was certainly in very great repute in the
world, and being only a banquet of Honor could not but whet the emulations of
all generous spirits; for none were admitted to it but such as had showed their
merit by some eminent exploit.

Their place of convention was Winchester; where they had their Round Table,
and at the Feast of Pentecost they always met and feasted. So says Sir
William Segar, (in whose Orders of Knighthood the articles of this Order are
set down): but others are of another opinion, and tell us that Windsor Castle
was the most peculiar place, where a Round Table was erected Heyly n-Hist. de
St. Georg. fol. 318.
for their meeting, being a Castle built by the same King; and the Records of
the place show us as much, though Winchester may sometimes have been the place,
according as the time of Geof. of Munmouth.
the Kings being in progress or keeping his Court accidentally there; as
sometimes it was at Carleon; and sometimes in the North.

Knights of St. Andrew in Scotland.
THe Scots ever since the reign of Hungus Aubertus Maereus, fol. 145.
the Pict have received St. Andrew for their Tutelar-Saint. Who, as it is
reported in their Histories making war on the English, saw in the sky a bright
Cross of St. Andrew; which is in the Shape of the Saltire, and in that battle
after gained a very great victory. From which time ever since they fly that
Cross in their Banners. And from thence erected the Order of St. Andrew. But I
find nothing in Favin, Aubertus, Mereus, or the Scotch Writer (...), that can
satisfy me in what time it began. Only it was refined by James the fifth. Who
being honored with the Garter from England, the Toyzon d'or from the Emperor,
and St, Michael from France, celebrated the Festivals of them all; and setting
up their several Lesleus, (...) 9. pa. 193.
arms with their orders about them, over the gate of (...), erected his own
also with the order of Saint Andrew in the midst: which Order is ensigned with
a Collar of Rue, and Thistles, with a Medal of St. Andrew hanging at it; and
this Motto, Nemo me impune (...).

Of the Golden Fleece in the Empire.
THis Order of the Toyzon d'Or was instituted by Philip Duke of Burgundy, an.
1429. upon his expedition to the Holy Land, in memory of Gideon, who with three
hundred men fought against, and overthrew, a mighty Army Favin. l. 4. fol. 14.
of the Midianites, as Favin is of opinion. Which perchance may be true: he
marching upon a great enterprise with a small Army, might do it to raise courage
and emulation in his Commanders.

The Patron is St. Andrew, the Sovereign Segar.
the Dukes of Burgundy: the number twenty four, besides the Sovereign, all of
Noble blood. Their habit is a Cassock of Crimson Velvet, and over it a Mantle
of the same, lined with white; which opens on the right fide, and is turned
upon the left over the shoulder, embroydered round about with a bordure of
flames, fusils, and fleeces; and a Hood of Crimson Velvet on their heads.

The Collar of the Order is of gold, wrought with flames, fusils, and fleeces;
which they are bound to wear always, upon a penalty. The power of making new
is in the Sovereign only.

And who ever enters into it renounces all other orders of Knighthood, unless
the Sovereigns be Emperors, Kings, or free Princes.

To the order belongs a Chancellor, a Treasurer, Register, and a King of Arms
called Toyzon Dor.

At the Collar hangs a golden Fleece. And formerly there was an Impresse
peculiar to it; which was an instrument to strike fire, with his Motto, Ante
ferit, quam flamma micet.

The Emperor Charles the fifth, being afterward Sovereign as Duke of Burgundy,
did much increase the Order.

The several Orders of Knighthood in France.
Knights of the Star.
THis order I find of very great eminence Seld. Title of Honor ca. (...) p. 55.
in France, called the Star of the Sea; and sometimes also of the Virgin Mary.
It was instituted by King Robert, an. (...). And himself, and succeding Kings
were of the Fraternity. Their Ensign was a Star; which they wore was their
Hoods, or Caps. But this Order in time grew so common, and distributed so
immeritorioufly, Bodin. de rep. lib. 5. cap. 4.
that Charles the seventh (as (...) at it) commanded every Yeoman of his Guard
to wear a Star in like manner; which the Knights seeing, presently left it off,
and so the Order fell.

Knights of St. Michael.
JN the stead of the Knighthood of the Star the same King Charles erected the
order of of St. Michael as some suppose: but more truly Lewis the eleventh at
Amboys an. 1469. upon the occasion of a Vision (as their Historians relate) of
the Archangel's appearance on Orleans Bridge as their Tutelar against the
English. Seld. pars: sec. cap 3. fol. 552.
At which time the famous Amazon, Joan of France, lived, who did many Heroic
exployts, leading an Army her self in the field against the English. For which
the English after having vanquished her (much to our disparagement I think) in
revenge caused her to be burnt for a Witch in the Marketplace of Orleans: in
which place is since a Conduit erected to her memory.

This order of Monsieur St. Michael Archangel is of thirty six Knights, and a
Sovereign, which is the King. The Cognizance of the Order is a Collar of gold
made of cockle-shels Favin l. 3. page 372.
and knots, with the Image of St. Michael pendant at it, which Collar ought to
weigh two hundred Crowns in gold, and not above nor under.

For the wearing of this Collar there was a very strict article; as that, Every
man that did not wear it every day was to cause a mass to be said, and to pay
seven shillings six pence Turnoys of forfeiture: except in Arms, and then they
were permitted to wear only the Image of the Angel on a chain or ribbon: the
Motto of the order is, Immensi tremor Oceani.

To this order is established a Herald called Mon. St. Michael, a Treasurer, a
Chancellor, and a Register. Their habit according to the constitution of Henry
the second of France was, his doublet, hose, shoes, scabbard, hat-band, and
feather, all white; a Surcoat with sleeves, of cloth of silver; over it a
Mantle of the same turned up over the left shoulder, and tied over the right,
embroydered with a bordure like the Collar. Over his shoulder lay a hood of
cloth of silver spreading over his back, the tippet hanging down before, and
over all the Collar.

Knights of the Holy Ghost, or St. Esprit.
TO this order of St. Michael did Henry the third, in honor of Whit-Sunday, (on
which day he was chosen King of Poland) institute the order of Chivaleir du
benoist sante Esprit: Joining both this and the other into one, an. 1578. as
they continue to this day.

In this discourse of this order by Monsieur Favin, is set down the Oaths,
Ceremonies, Pensions, Accounts, and all the duties: all which should I insert
would be too (...) for my intention. The manner of their procession to Hon.
Mil. and Civ. lib. 2. p. 87 88, 89.
Court, and many other particulars, is set down concerning them in Sir William
Segar.

Their robe is like that of St. Michael; only of black Velvet embroydered all
about with gold and silver of Flowers-de-lysse, and knots of gold between
sundry ciphers of silver, and flames of gold, seamed: garnished also with a
Mantle of green cloth of silver, wrought over with the same manner of
embroydery with the Mantle both lined with Orange colored Satin. The great
Mantle they wear turned up over the left shoulder, and open on the right: their
hose and doublet white, and black bonnets with white plumes; the Collar over
all, wrought in the same manner as the embroydery. They have a cross hanging
at it, with a Dove in the Center of it, as in another place shall be described.

Of the Order of the Gennet.
THis by the Annals of France is reckoned the first Order that ever was
instituted in that Country. But I have not given it the first place, because it
is now extinguished, and its essence only remaining in the Chronology of Fame.
It was ordained by Charles called Fav. lib. 3. fol. 312. and Aubert. Meraeus.
page 62.
the Tyrant, before his usurpation called Charles Martell Seneschall, or High
Steward of France. Who in a battle against the Moors, gaining a Victory, had,
amongst many other spoils, a great number of Genets skins, and some of the
beasts; In memory of which victory he instituted this Order, about the year of
our Lord 726. The number was 16. to whom he gave Collars of gold made of a
triple chain interwoven with enameld red Roses, at the end whereof hung a
Gennet of gold enamelled black and red, upon a Terrasse or bank of flowers
fairly enameled: This continued till King Robert, and then the Star of the Sea
eclipsed it. Fol. 63.


These Knights says Aubertus Meraeus, had other Ensigns appropriated also, as
a Ring after the manner of the Romans; and certain habits for the body.

About which time, or not long after, Charlemain created another Order called
of the Crown Royal: but that was not so much in esteem, being only for a
reward of service in Friezland, the Governor of the Country having the power
of creating the Knights.

Knights of the Broomeflower; And also of the Ship.
LEwis the ninth in his time instituted two Orders of Knighthood; one called of
the Broomeflower in the Cod, and the other of the Ship, called also of the
Crescent, or half Moon.

The first he instituted at his Coronation, and it continued till the end of
the reign of Charles the fifth, and extinguished with his life. The collar of
the Order was composed of Cods of Broomeflowers intermixed with Lozanges
enamelled with flowers-de-lysse; and at it, hung a Cross formy flory, with
this Motto; Exaltat humiles.

The other of the Ship he erected upon the occasion of the second voyage into
Egypt, to encourage the Nobility that went with him. The collar of the Order
was enterlaced with double Scallops, and double Crescents interwoven with a
meddal hanging at it, with a Ship enamelled under sail.

This King Lewis returning from his voyage Knights of St. Lazarus.
against the Turks, an. 1554 brought home with him a Troop of Knights, called
of St. Lazarus, to whom he gave large possessions: But afterward, this Order
fell again, and their revenues were given to the Knights of Malta: until the
time of Henry the fourth who instituted that of Mount-Carmel, and revived
Knights of Mount Carmel.
that of St. Lazarus.

There are many other ancient Knighthoods recorded in France, but as they were
of less esteem, so are they also out of date; and I shall only name them, most
of which were more private Orders, and had subjects for their Sovereigns: There
was of the Porcupine: Of Porcupine. Thistle. Croissant. Ermin. Cock and dog.
Seld. page 554, 555.
the Thistle of Bourbon: of the Croissant of Anjou: of the Ermin of Britagne.
Of which examine Monsieur Favin his Theater of Honor.

There was also an order of the Dog and Cock, appropriated to the family of
Monmorency, and another of de la dame blanke al' escue verd; or the order of
the Fair Lady of the green Field; instituted by Jean de Boucicaut Marshal of
France under Charles the sixth, who were sworn unto diverse Articles, as that
they should assist all Ladies, and Gentlewomen wronged in their honors or
fortunes, answer challenges of Arms, supply one another necessary absence,
that if any Lady or Gentlewoman, required aid of any of them, and after any
Knight or Esquire should challenge him, he should first right the Lady; and
then perform the (...) or if a challenge preceded such other accident, it was at
their pleasure which to undertake first; and many more such, which would be too
tedious for this place. They are at large in Mauchaut Sieur de Roman ville his
history of Boucicat.

Of Military Orders in Spain.
Of the Order of the Lilly.
THis Order was erected in (...) by Garcia the sixth, of the name surnamed
Naiera, in honor of the Virgin Mary; and upon a miracle so great as might make
this Lilly one of the primest flowers in her little garden. A Book of devotion
full of improbable (...) licencedby the Church of Rome.
The substance of it this: The King having been very sick; in the extremity of
his disease sent to St. Savior de Leyra, and other places of devotion, that
prayers and interercessions might be made for his recovery; In which time was
discovered in the City of Naiera, (where ordinarily he kept Court) the Image of
the Virgin Mary issuing out of a Lilly, holding her Son berwixt her arms. And
suddenly after the discovery of this, the King recovered his health; and many
other miracles were done on diseased people in that place, as supposed by
virtue of the Virgin Mother; whom Fau. l. 6. fol. 11.
they termed the Lilly of the Vallyes. In honor whereof the said King erected
this Order, and made himself Sovereign of it, and his Sucessors after him.
These Knights did wear on their breasts a Lilly embroydered in silver; and on
festival days a double chain of gold interlaced with letters M, after the
manner of the Gotish letter; with an Oval meddal hanging at it with a Lilly
enamelled.

Knights of San Jago, or St. James.
THis was erected by the resolution of Gentlemen, being either Barons, or men
of Segar.
great quality, that (jupon the conquering of their Country by the Arabians)
retired into the Mountains of Asturia; and residing there made an engagement of
War against the Moors; agreeing upon religious Rules of Knighthood, yet
reserving to themselves liberty of marriage: but this Order Favin speaks to be
erected by Alphonso the ninth, an. 1158. Favin. l. 6. fol. 138.
and that it was confirmed in 1175, by Pope Alexander the third,

Their Governor is called great Master, their feast is on All Saints day; when
they meet in very great magnificence, having very great revenues: their Ensign
a red Cross shaped like a Sword, with an Escollop's shell on it, in imitation
Ibid. f. 137
of the badge of the Pilgrims that go to Jerusalem, and to the Sepulcher of St.
James the Apostle.

Now the great Master of this Order has always near him thirteen Knights
where ever he goes for his aid, and Council; and so all the other Orders in
Spain.

Of the Order of Calatrava.
THis was begun an. 1158. in imitation of Aub Mae. foi. 99.
that of St. Jago, by Don Sanctio the third, King of Toledo, and it takes it
name from the place of its establishment: their habit is a black garment, and
on the breast thereof a red Cross; they have many great privileges, and
possessions in Spain, the form of their Cross is set down in the end of this
discourse; which if we will believe Monsieur Favin, and Aubertus Maereus, is
quite another then that which Sir William Segar describes.

Knights of Alcantara.
THese also derive their denomination from the place of their institution, and
Segar.
living under the same orders with those of Calatrava, do wear the same
fashioned Cross, only the Color is green

They have a very glorious Church at Alcantara in Castiglia upon the river
Tago, endowed with rich possessions, where their great meetings are.

These were first of the order of St. Julian, Favin. l. 6. fol. 142.
called the order of the Pear Tree, Ferainando the second King of (...), and
Gallicia, being the first great Master. 1176.

Knights of the Band.
SIR William Segar attributes the original of this Ordsr to Alphonso King of
Spain, an. 1268. But Favin sets it down in an. 1330. Ibid. fol. 163, 164.
from the testimony of Don Antonio de Guevara, Bishop of Mondognedo; But by the
same person Alphonso the eleventh, of which Order (that it might receive the
more reputation) he enrolled himself and his Son. And yet (as Favin says)
None were to be admitted but younger brothers, and mean Gentlemen of poor and
slender sufficiency, who must have been ten years followers of the Court; or at
the least had fought three times against the Moors.

They wear a red Scarf or Ribon, cross the left shoulder, like our Knights of
the Bath, the breadth of three inches. Their articles are too many to be
inserted here. Sir William Segar and Favin have them at large.

D' Avis in Portugal.
THere was an Order in Portugal, erected in the year 1147. called D' Avis, by
Alphonso Aub. Maer. fol. 119.
the first, who were seatrd in the City Ebora, and so called from the Virgin
Mary, being Patroness of the City. They had a great Master, and were called
Fratres, and the place of their convention was called Frieria. Their Ensign is
the same Cross with Calatrava vert, and in the center of it a Pear Tree.

Of the Order of Jesus Christ.
SInce, in the year 1320. was erected another Order of more esteem amongst the
Portugals called of Jesus Christ, by Dionysius King of that Country, and nephew
to Alphonso the tenth of Castile; to which Order was given much of the revenue
of the Knights Templars, that lay in that Country, the Kings of Portugal are
ever the Sovereigns of the Order to this day: The Ensign of the Order is a red
cross surmounted or intersected with another white, on a black vestment; and
they have many privileges, and Articles amongst them.

Of this order was Don Pantaleon, (Brother to the Portugal Ambassador) who was
beheaded at Tower Hill, July 10. 1654.

Knights of Montesia.
THis order was much about the time of those of Calatrava and received their
Seg.
name from the place of their residence in Valentia, and do wear for their
Ensign a plain cross Gules.

This order was established in the year 1317. Aub. (...).
and had much of the revenue of the Knights Templars also, settled on them.

Knights of Redemption:
THese Knights called of Redemption, were erected by James King of Aragon, upon
the conquering the Islands of Majorica, in the year 1212. Their Articles are
many, but the chief is, they are to redeem prisoners; from whence their title
is derived: their habit is a white garment, with a black cross; and their
Governor is always resident at Barcco, na.

D'Espuella D' Orada, or, Of the Goldeu Spnr.
THere is another Order in Spain, of far more honor called (...) D' Espuella D'
Orada. Which was created with much ceremony; as bathing (like our Knights of
the Bath), then being laid on a rich bed, after brought to the Chapel or
Church, where he performs his Vigils, confesses, and supplicates for power to
observe the duty belonging to the order; then his gold spurs are put on, and a
Mr. Seld. Title of Honor, fol. 576.
sword girt about him, and the sword being drawn, is delivered into his right
hand; in which posture standing, he takes an Oath, never to refuse to dye in
defense of his Law, King, and Country. And then receiving a kiss from all the
rest of the order, in testimony of the amity betwixt them, he is complete.

Other orders there are there, as that of Cavaleri Armadi, Cavaleri (...)
Alarde, and some more ancient; as the Order os the Dove or Holy Ghost in
Castile; of St. Savior of Mont Real in Aragon; but these are either out of
date, or of low reputation.

Knights of the Annuntiation.
THis Order, says Sir William Segar, was erected about the same time with that
of St. Michael, but how I shall engage my faith to this article I know not; for
I find much uncertainty in the relation, the institution of St. Michael being
in an. 1469. according to his own account; and of the Annuntiation, an. 1434.
Besides, there is a greater error yet, in computation; for Monsieur Favin, (who
has some reason in this case to be understood, and has been esteemed
authentic) affirms it to be by Amedis the fifth, called also the Green, or
Verd: whom he Chronologizes to live in an. 1355. which makes a vast difference:
and again Aubertus Maereus, in his Symbola Equest. Ordinum gives the honor of
its birth to Amedis the sixth, Earl of (...): by which I must confess so great
an uncertainty appears, as affrights me from any conclusion; but that by their
general (...), defacto, I am assured such an Order was. And that in memory of
Amedis the fifth, who most courageously defended Rhodes against the Turks,
where he took the bearing of Gules a plain cross Argent, which the Dukes of
Savoy have continued till this day.

This order was first called of the snares of favin. l. 8. (...). 310.
love, from the receiving from his Lady the favor of a bracelet made of her
hair into love-knots, and it was constantly celebrated on St. Maurices day, who
is Patron-Saint of Savoy.

He composed it to consist of fifteen Knights, comprehending himself a chief
Master.

The place of their celebration is the Church of Pietra, in the Castle of
Bellies; unto which at the institution of this Order was given certain lands
for the maintenance of fifteen Chaplains: and continually every Knight at his
death gives to the Church an hundred Florins.

And one other Article was, that at the funeral of every Knight ceremoniously
performed at the Castle of Pietra, every Knight of the order should wear black;
(whereas their mourning was a white Gown) and leave off the Collar for certain
days: and that at the enterment of the Sovereign, every Knight according to
Segar. fol. 66.
their seniority in order should offer up his Collar.

Every Knight was sworn to wear this order daily, and to accept of no other.

And that no person stained with reproach or dishonor should be admitted: or if
found so after, to be degraded.

Of these past Knighthoods, these four, of the Garter in England; the Toyzon in
Burgndy; St. Michael, and of St. Esprit in France; and this of the (...) in
Savoy, are the most honorable, and yet in being.

Of the Knights Templars.
THis Order as it has been most famous in the world (though now extinct) I
think ought to be preserved with an honorable memory. It was erected in a pious
design, perpetrated with a glorious fame; though extinguished in an ignoble and
injust stratagem, of the Devil, the Pope, and the King of France.

Its first rise was from an accident of certain Vid. Aub. Maer. f. 77. and 78.
Gentlemen meeting in the Holy Land, (some say nine) an. 1117. Who hearing of
the great disturbance of the Country by the incursion of Turks and swarmings of
Pickaroons, engaged a confederacy, with the hazard of their lives to suppress
them. Which resolution being known was so approved of by the Patriarch, that he
commanded accommodation for them in the Temple near the Sepulcher. And the King
of Jerusalem appointed them all appertinencies for so religious an enterprise.
From whence they received the name of Knights-Templars. And thus going on with
much resolution and courage; many Christians came in to thrir assistance, and
many brave exploits were performed by them: Insomuch that in nine years time
they had erected such a structure of honor, as set all the world at gaze, and
established their Country in a happy peace. For a reward whereof, Pope
Honorius, at the suit of the Patriarchof Jerusalem, prescribed unto them a
peculiar Order of life; and distinguished their order by wearing a white
Garment, and Pope Eugenius added a red Cross; after which prosperity they
elected a Head whom they called Great Master.

Yet not long after this, Jerusalem and a great part of the Country was lost
for want of supply from other parts of Christendom. However they still made
war upon the Turks for 120. years, and added new breath to the Trump of Fame,
purchasing large revenues to the Order in most Kingdoms of Europe, being the
exercise of love in all Christian Princes, and of emulation in every Heroic
spirit: Insomuch that Vitriacus gives this character of them: they were, says
he, Leones in bello, agni mansueti Hist. orient. cap. 65. and 66.
in domo, in expeditione milites asperi, in Ecclesia vel ut Eremitae and
Monachi; inimicis Christi duri and feroces, Christianis autem benigni and
mites, etc.

But this great glory could not shine for ever, without an eclipse; nor such
favorites of fortune live without envy, as well as emulation; and their fall
was so much the more sudden and violent, by how much their fame was higher. For
in England, France, and almost all parts of Christendom, was it at an instant
(as it were) and in one very day, by sentence of Pope Clement the first, (to
satisfy the the base avarice of Philip de Beau the Roy of France) totally
disolved and suppressed.

The pretense was upon certain Articles exhibited against them; which have been
by all the world, almost not only adjudged false, but (...). fol. 92.
ridiculous. As that they used Pagan ceremonies in the election of their great
Master: that they lost the Holy Land, (when they alone endeavored to preserve
it): that they held some Heretical opinions: that they worshipped an Image
apparelled in a man's skin: and that they drunk man's blood to confirm their oath
of Confederacy.

When indeed itwas most certain, that the crime for which they suffered was
their vast wealth; and their fidelity to the Patriarch, whom they owned before
the Pope: cause sufficient to set the one to solicit, and the other to grant,
a monstrous doom, which they suffered under; for what will not pride and
avarice do?

The Great Master himself and sixty others of the Order were committed to the
mercy of fire in Paris at one time, and the rest persecuted, if not executed,
in most places; all of them dying without any acknowledgement of any one
allegation, and with the same Christian and heroic spirits they had lived in,
and by the account of Favin (a French writer and one I think in this not too
impartial) there was, at twice after, one hundred or above burned to death in
Paris, all dying with innocence in their mouths; and in the same place many
after.

But as such notorious evils are ever the Ushers of God's infinite judgments,
it was not far off here: for the two Knights employed in the accusation, were
one hanged, and the other slain, in a short time after.

How the Revenues prospered in the hands of the new possessors, I know not; or
the possessors in the enjoyment of them; but I believe like those of Church
lands in this Nation: And the account of stories and traditions I have seen and
heard in particular of it, makes me with confidence say, Very unfortunately.

Many of their Territories and Castles in some places were given to an order of
Knighthood called the Joannites, Knights of Saint John of Jerusalem, and
particularly in England, who were after Knights of Rhodes, and lastly of Malta,
being conferred by Act of 7 of Ed. 2.
Parliament, (how taken from them I cannot say), and in Vienna by order of a
great Council.

Of the Order of St. John of Jerusalem, Rhodes, and Malta.
SOme have been of opinion that this Order was originally from the time of the
Holy War, an. 1099. When, by the conduct Segar. fol. 66, 67.
of one called Peter the Hermit, Robert Duke of Normandy, Son to William the
Conqueror, Godfrey Duke of Lorrain, and some other Noble persons, Jerusalem was
(...) from the Saracens; being called Knights of St. John Baptist and of
Jerusalem. But it is more certainly related, that certain (...) Christians
going to visit the Holy Sepulcher, obtained leave of the Caliph of Egypt, to
build a little Cottage to live in by it: paying a due tribute for their liberty
as for their own residence, and for the entertaining such as should adventure
to join with them in their devout life; which, Monsieur Favin relates to be
Neopolitans. After this, their number so increased that they built another to
entertain women, more large and stately; and enlarged their Oratory; and
another for men in the nature of a College or Hospital, where they established
a Rector or Master, and from the great charity among them, their religious
life, and good deeds to Pilgrims, they were called brethren Hospitallers of St.
John Baptist of Jerusalem.

And upon the Conquest of the Ciry, they had great Franchises granted them, and
large revenues, with liberty to manage arms, Favin. l. 9. fol. 388.
and were instituted to be Knights of St. John, An. 1164. And for their
distinction they wore a black garment, with a white ankerd Cross, with eight
points; but in War they wore a red Coat of Arms with the same white Cross See
the example of the Crosses at the end of this discourse.

After their success in the Holy War grew very famous, and that they had done
very great exploits, almost over all Palestine; in the year 1308, they won
the City of Rhodes from the Turks. And as valiantly maintained it against them
afterward, who four times (...) it in vain; and the fifth time also was O
taman himself repulsed, with the loss of 40000 Mahometans. But being
constantly oppressed, and not encouraged with any relief from the Christians
of other parts, after three months siege they lost it, and ever since have
remained in Malta.

Into this Order no man was admitted but he was first to approve himself a
Gentleman before the Rector. The Son of a Moore was not to be admitted, nor of
a Jew or Mohammedan, though the Son of a Prince, and a Christian himself: and
they were sworn to fight for the Christian faith, to do Justice, defend the
oppressed, relieve the poor, persecute the Mahometans, live virtuously, and
protect Widows and Orphans.

Of Knights Teutonicks.
THis order of the Teutonici was founded by an Almain, who remaining in
Jerusalem, after the taking of it, gave great and liberal entertainment to all
Christians that came to him, and in a short time had drawn such a resort; that
from thence arose a Fraternity that bound themselves under certain Articles,
and elected a great Master or Governor; every man of that association,
apparelling himself in white with a black cross pattee voyded with a cross
patonce. Which Fraternity afterward grew a very great Order; and purchased a
noble fame: But Jerufalem being taken by the Turks again, they removed, and
pitched their settlement in Ptolemaida; and that being also taken by the
Saracens, they retired to Germany; and engaging a War against the Prusians,
they got great victories, and having the Emperors Grant for enjoying what by
the sword they won, with expense of some blood, they purchased great revenues
in Prusia: and built many illustrious (...), with Churches, and some
Cathedrals, establishing Bishops to them, whom they enjoined to wear the habit
of the Order: this was about the year 1220. Frederick the second, being then
Emperor.

The chief Church appropriate to this Order (...). l. 2. ol. 105.
is Marcenburg. The Knights besides their large possessions are Lords of
Livonia, and they have a Governor, which they still call the Great Master.

Knights of St. Sepulcher.
THis was anciently an honorable Knighthood, but it is since extinguished, and
nothing but the memory of it remaining, and that inclusively in those of Malta.
The Ensign Ibid fol. 106.
of the Order is yet extant amongst them, as a relic of antiquity; which is a
double Cross, (...), as it were, two conjoined Gules, as (...) (...) Segar
relates: But Favin speaks (...), as that their Cross was a Cross (...), in
each Canton of the same a small Cross plain; being the same as the arms of
the Kings of Jerusalem: and from this original that Godfrey of Bullein gave
great goods to (...), especially in his last Will and Testament; by which also
he ordained that himself, and the successors Kings of Jerusalem, should be
buried in their Cathedral Church, which was joining to the Sepulcher; that
their Patriarch should have the Prerogative of crowning them. And Baldwin his
immediate successor established them an Order of Knighthood, (being before put
regular Chanons) appointing Favin lib. fol. 381.
the Patriarch of Jerusalem their Great Master: Thus Favin relates.

Knights of St. Mary.
THese were a religious Order, erected by Seg fol. 107.
certain Gentlemen of (...), and Madona; for which they obtained a license of
Pope Urban, but with money only, calling themselves Knights of St. Mary, but
were commonly called Cavaleri de Madona; and indeed properly enough, for
whereas they professed to fight against Infidels, they lived always at home
in peace, plenty, and ease, for which they gained the heroic character of
Fratres gaudenti, or good fellow Brethren.

Their habit was very rich, and on it they wore a Cross, like that of St. John
of Jerusalem.

Knights of St. Lazaro.
THe Knights of St. Lazaro challenge a great antiquity, so high as St. Basil;
They had great possessions, and honorable reputation; but, like the Knights
Templars, were suddenly eclipsed, and had as absolutely been smothered in the
Funeral crowd of obscured honor, had not Pope Pius Quartus a little revived
them.

This Order does own obedience to a great Master also, and are engaged to the
observance of many Articles; especially they are to be of lawful birth, and
Gentlemen by double descent, and of Christian parents; to wear a green Cross
in the manner of a Cross Pattee fimbriated, as Sir William Segar describes;
but Aubertus Maereus otherwise, as is exemplified hereafter.

Of the Knights of the Bear, called also of St. Gall.
IN the year 1213. the Emperor Frederick Favin. l 7. fol. 273.
the second, going in Pilgrimage to the Abbey of St. Gall, gave great
privileges in acknowledgment of their assistance in pulling down the Emperor
(...), and establishing him. Whereupon also he established an Order of
Knighthood, called of the Bear; which Knights were yearly to meet at the Abbey
of St. Gall, on the 16. of October; where all new Knights were to receive the
order from the Abbot. Aub Maer. lib. 2. f. 79


This Order he called of the Bear in honor of St. Ursus that was martyred at
Soleure. Unto this Order he gave a collar and (...) of gold, at which hung a
figure of a Bear enamelled Sable.

Of the Order of the Elephant.
IN Denmark is a Military order, called of the Elephant, and also of the
blessed Virgin Mary: who have for their Collar a chain of gold interwoven with
Elephants and Spurs, and at it hangs a meddal of the Virgin Ibid. sol. 150.
Mary, encompassed about with Rays of the Sun; at the nether part whereof
hangs another circle enclosing three nails, which (...) term Symbola omnia
Christianae (...). Who was the Founder is left (...): the Elephants are figured
with Castles on these backs, which some do suppose to be the (...) or
designment of Christernus. 4.

Of the Order of Mantua.
JN Mantua, some Friars do report to be some of the blood of our Savior kept,
with a piece of the Sponge in which he received the Vinegar and Gall. Which
Relics they say, do daily work extraordinary miracles. Favin. fol. 392.
In honor of which blood Vincentio de Gonzaga, fourth Duke of Mantua, did
institute an Order of Knighthood, calling them Knights of the blood, of our
Savior Jesus Christ, making himself the Great Master of the Order; which was
confirmed by Pope Paul the fifth.

The original of it was about the year 1608. when he created fifteen Knights,
giving them collars composed of Ovals of Gold, some the length one way, others
another; in one of which were these words, Domine probasti; and in the other,
flames of fire, flashing about a crucible or melting-pot full of sticks of
Gold; and at the same hangs before another large Oval, wherein are designed
two Angels standing upright, holding a Chalice, and pix, crowned; on the table
of it, are seen enamelled (...) drops of blood; And about this Oval is this
Inscription, Nihil I sto triste recepto.

Knights of St. Stephano.
THis Order was erected in the year 1561. by Cosmo Duke of Florence; ordaining
amongst them such articles almost as those of the Order of Malta: their
residence is Pisa; where the said Duke erected a Church to the honor of the
Order, and is himself the Great Master.

Other Orders of Knighthood there are, and have been in the Holy Land, and
other parts: As of St Thomas Apostle; St. Katherine of Mount Sinai: Of the
white Eagle in Polonia: Of the Swan in Cleveland: The Brethren Sword-bearers in
Livonia: Of St. Blase in Armenia: Of St. John of Acres, and of St. Gerian,
which was instituted by Frederick (...), to which order none were admitted but
German Gentlemen. But these are all, or most of them, out of date, and not so
considerable as to trouble an ingenious brain with, in this place. Favin and
others have discoursed enough of them, to which (if the reader be desirous of
further knowledge) I refer him. There is also another Order called of the white
Dragon in Germany, erected by the Emperor Sigismond, upon a resolution of
extirpating heresy and schism throughout all his Dominions, who had for their
Ensign a white Dragon: and in Swethen another, which is called of the
Seraphins: who had at their institution appointed them collars of Seraphins
heads, intermixed with Crosses. And now, if I have not been too tedious in this
discourse of Knighthood, I have I hope said enough, and conclude with the
description of the several forms of their Crosses before mentioned.



The first is of St. Esprit, the second, of St. Michael, the third of
Calatrava, the fourth of St. John of Jerusalem, the fifth of St. Lazarus the
sixth of the Teutonicks, the seventh of St. Andrew, the eighth of the
Sepulcher, the ninth of Christus d' Avis.

And so I take leave of Knighthood: and in the next place only cursorily run
through the antiquity of Heralds, and the Inns of Court and Chancery with their
foundations; for which last (though not very pertinent to my business,) yet I
may expect an excuse, since it has nor yet been any way done.

The End of Knighthood.
OF HERALDS.
THe word Herald (says Verstegan) Verst. (...). 321.
is derived from the Saxon (...), and by abbreviation (...); and Herald which
in that language signifies the Champian of an Army: and growing to be a name of
Office, it was given to him that in the Army had the (...) charge of
challenging to battle or combat.

Sir Henry Spelman calls him Nuncius sacer, and speaking of the signification of
the word, Gloss. f. 336.
says, quidam enim Herault (...), some do write Herault, that is, Dominus
celsus, an eminent Lord, some Herold, which is an old Lord; and some Heral, hoc
est, says he, ministrum (...), an Officer of an Army, which last he supposes
the most proper.

These are Officers of great antiquity (says Dune mensis) who writes that they
are as ancien as Kings, and were termed of the Romans, (...), and
Caduceatores. And doubtless thee ection of our Heralds was in imitation of
them; though their authority be not so great with us, as it seems theirs was;
whose Office was established by Numa Pompilius and a Vid. Pomp. (...). de
magist. Romans p. 5.
college or hostell erected of twenty wise and reverend men; per quos fiebat,
ut Justum indiceretur Bellum, and ut Foedere, fides pacis constitueretur:
ordering that it was and should be unlawful to take arms against an enemy
without their consent and appointment.

Which Fecialians, when the popular Estate was changed into a Monarchy again,
wore the Coats of Arms of Purple and Scarlet, fringed with gold, and an Eagle
of the same embroydered thereon, and the Emperors name then reigning: and they
had one Principal which was called by the people Pater patratus, whom they
ever reverenced as sacred, and it was a rule or law among them, that Fecialium
sacra violare, nefas erat.

Since when, as the Office now is, they have been esteemed as Ambassadors, and
sometimes have been made so; however, are the Messengers of Princes and great
Monarchs, and what Favin. l. 4. cap. 4.
ever their message have been, privileged in the same degree with Ambassadors,
and not only in our parts, but all over the world have been in being (though
not as now in regular Office) ever since there have been Kings.

In every City of Greece (as says Ulpian the Interpreter of Demosthenes) they
were called Ceryces, and had in much honor of all men, and maintained out of
the Public Treasury.

In Rome, and most other places they carried as Ensigns of their Office (...)
Rods in imitation of the Poetical fiction of Mercury, Ibid.
who is styled the Herald of the Gods: those of Rome wreathed with two
Serpents; and the ancient Druides of wreaths of Vervine, imitating the same.

In France, (where a long time this office has been in much honor) not only
(...) Ibid.
St. Dennis the principal King of Arms; but the other Heralds, and Pursevants
are to be of noble (...); and Mountjoy to be of three descents, as well of his
Fathers as of his Mothers side, of Noble lineage, and Coat-Armor.

Their Office or College is in the Church of St. Anthony the less in Paris.
And they are allowed the privilege of entrance into any Prince's Court; and an
injury offered to them is a public injury in all parts of the world. But I do
not find they were in this (...) and establishment, till the time of Favin. l.
(...). c. 4 f. 36.
Philip de Valloys. The revenues of them in France was very great, as to
Mountjoy in particular 2000. l. Lands in free tenure, and 1000 pound per annum
stipend, as Favin relates. And the others 1000 pound per annum stipend,
besides, other profits (and they are many): besides their privileges are very
great, which in the same Author are at large set down: in which Author I cannot
but observe the ridiculousnesse of their humor in the christening of their
Pursevants (for they call it christening, and the Ceremony is performed with
the pouring a pot of Wine on their heads); they name them at their own
pleasure, and some they call Plain-way, Jolly-heart, No-lyar, Telltroth,
Cheerfulness, Fair-seeming, Loftyfoot, and the like.

But to come nearer to our own concernment, I think to proceed with the same
Office in our own Nation, where they are now in less esteem, I confess, then
they have been in former ages; yet have ever been honored with messages between
Potentates for matter of Honor and Arms. Ceremoniarum Ministri, as in the
Coronation of Kings and Queens, enstalment of Princes, and creation of Noble
dignities of honor, in Triumphs, Justs, Combats, Marriages, Christenings,
Interments; and to attend all solemn Assemblies of State and honor, and by some
of them ought the proclamations of all great matters of State to be promulged,
causes of Chivalry, and Gentility are referred to their care, as in the right
of bearing of Arms, in Shields, Scutcheons, Targets, Banners, Penons, Coats,
and such like; correcting of Arms in visitations: and observing descents and
pedigrees of Noblemen and Gentlemen.

They are the Protonotaries, Griffiers, and Registers of all acts, and
proceedings in the Court of the High (...) and Lord Marshall of Engiand, or of
such as have their authority; and in their books and Records they are to
preserve to perpetual memory all facts and memorable designments of honor and
Arms. They have been long established in England; but I find not that they were
incorporated into a Collegiate Society till Richard the third's time; when they
were incorporated by Charter, and placed at Coleharbor, from whence they often
removed, until they became settled, where now at this time they are placed, by
the honorable endeavor of that Illustrious family of the Howards, formerly
Dukes of Norfolk, and Earls Marshals of England; the house being before called
Darby house. Which was established to them in the time of King Philip and Queen
Mary, and in these terms incorporated; by the names of Garter King of Arms of
England; Clarenceux King of Arms of the South parts, and the Heralds and
Pursevants for ever; and to have and use a common Seal to purchase Lands to sue
and be sued by.

Edward the sixth in his third year granted them many privileges, viz. In
these words: Forasmuch as sundry records and testimonies of great antiquity,
and of no less credit have now lately reduced to our perfect knowledge the
Kings of Arms, Heralds, and (...) of Arms elected as persons virtuous, and for
their good qualites, knowledge, and experience to serve in the affairs of the
Commonwealth, have been always heretofore by Emperors, Kings, and Princes of
Christian Realms upon most worthy and just considerations not only maintained
and supported, as well with yearly stipends and pensions, as daily profits,
advantages, and commodities, sufficient to the necessity of the decent and
convenient living of them and theirs in honest state. (Which daily profits,
advantages, and commodities are now lately much decayed, to their hindrance,
especially in this our Realm) but also have been by the said Emperors, Kings,
and Princes, enriched and adorned, time out of man's memory, with diverse kinds
of privileges, liberties, and franchises; as, among others, that they and
every of them be free, exempt, quite, and discharged not only from subsidies,
dismes, fifths, tenths, reliefs, contributions, taxes, profits, grants,
benevolences, and generally from all other manner of charges, as well in time
of War as Peace, in all such Realms and Dominions, wherein they made their
demour; but also in all Market Towns, and all other places, from Tolls, Fines,
Customs, Impositions, and Demands; and as well from Watch and Ward in all
Cities, Towns, and Castles, Borroughs, and Villages; and from the election or
appointment to any Office, of Mayor, Sheriff, Bayliffe, Constable, Scavenger,
Churchwarden, or any other public Office in Cities, Towns, Castles, (...),
and Villages whatsoever. And forasmuch also as we understand all Kings of Arms,
Heralds, etc. have always heretofore from the beginning of the Office of Arms
enjoyed, and do presently enjoy, all and singular the privileges, liberties,
and franchises aforesaid, with many other, in all Christian Realms, without any
disturbance, (...), or molestation; We therefore considering the same, and
earnestly minding as well the advancement of the said Office of Arms, as the
quiet and honest supportance of our Servants, and Ministers thereof; do, of our
special Grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, by the advice and consent
of our most dearly beloved Uncle Edward Duke of Somerset, and our Protector of
our Realms and Dominions and Subjects, and of the rest of our Council, by these
(...), not only confess and generally approve, give, grant, and confirm to the
said Kings Heralds, etc. and to every of them and their successors for ever,
for us and our Successors, all and singular the premises before recited,
although here not recited, as have been of honorable antiquity upon just (...)
to them granted, by Emperors, Kings, and (...) right famous memory heretofore:
But (...) especially by these presents, pardon, (...), (...) utterly for us and
our heirs, release the said Kings of Arms, Heralds, etc. as well all (...),
sums of money and demands whatsoever (...), assessed, etc.

The Officers are thus distinguished.
Kings of Arms Garter General and indefinite. Of the south p. of Eng. Beyond
Trent northw. (...) Norroy Heralds York sometimes styled Dukes of Arms. (...)
Windsor Lancaste. Richmond Chester Pursevants Portcullis Blewmantle Raugh
dragon (...) croixe.

And there are commonly two Pursevants extraordinary; whose names, I find to
have varved, therefore I name them not.

The Office of Garter was first instituted by Henry the fifth, and though the
other received Ordination long before, yet is honored with the precedence; and,
has the prehemimency in all Charters and Assemblies, Creations of Nobility,
and honorable processions, especially all concernments of the order of the
Garter either in Elections, or Funerals.

The other of Clarenceux and Norroy by (...) have power, Clarenceux over all
England on this side (...), Norry beyond; to enter into all Churches, Castles,
Houses, and any other places to survey and review all Arms, Recognizances, and
Crests; to make visitations, and to register the pedegrees and marriages of the
Nobility and Gentry: and at their (...) or upon suit in their Office to punish
with disgrace and (...) all such as shall intrude so much upon Honor, as to
usurp other men's Achievements, or fancy to themselves new, against the law
of Arms; to reverse and (...) them, and to make infamous by (...) at (...) or
Sessions all such as (...) unduly take upon them the title of Esquire or
Gentleman, and such as shall use, or wear mourning Apparel, as Gown, Hoods,
etc. contrary to the Order limited in the time of Henry the seventh, and to
(...) all (...) and other Artificers in the setting (...) of Arms.

In the execution of which commission they have power to command all Justices,
Sheriffs, Mayors, Baliffs, and other officers and subjects to be aiding and
assisting to them. And if upon summons any Knight, Esquire, or Gentleman do
refuse to come and appear before him, and give an account of their Arms and
Gentility, they have power in their respective Provinces, to summon them by a
Suppaena of what penalty they think sit, before the Earl Marshal of England for
their (...) therein.

And they have the ordering of all Funerals of the Gentry within their
respective Province, from a Baron downwards, taking other Heralds in their
courses with them.

As also the ordering of all Combats, Lists, and Triumphs with the Fees
belonging to them: And they have for stipend out of the Exchequer 100 marks a
piece annuity.

The six Heralds are all in equal degree, only preceding according to the
seniority of their creation; their Patents, being under the (...) Seal of
England, and their annual stipend is forty marks, besides theirs profits and
Fees,

The (...) have their Patents in like (...), a stipend of twenty pound per
annum, out of the Exchequer; but those extraordinary have neither Patent nor
Fee. The Arms of the Office is Arg. a Cross (...) between four (...), Azure.

The whole Company are subordinate unto the High Constable or Earl Marshall of
England, and by him every of them is at his first entry commended to the King,
by a Bill signed with his hand. Which done, the King signs the same, and so it
passes the Privy Seal and broad Seal; and, that once obtained, they are to be
(...) and created by the King himself, or the Earl Martial, in (...) following

A King of Arms is brought into the King (...) Lord Marshall, led between a
King and a Herald, or two Heralds, in their Coats; the other Heralds (...)
Pursevants going before in their Coats carrying the several necessary
instruments to (...) used: on (...) the Coat of Arms wherewith (...) new King
is to be invested, another (...) Crown; another the Patent; another he (...);
another the Book and Sword: another the Book where his Oath is received; all
making several (...), and then he kneels down with those two that led him; one
of which holds the Book and (...) whereon he swears, the other speaks his Oath;
then his Patent is read; and at the word Creamus, and Investimus, his Coat is
put on; and at non violante nomine, etc. the the water is poured on his head,
and then he is perfect.

There is belonging to this Office a Register, Marshal, and other officers and
servants; and, amongst those Painters called Heralds-Painters, every King of
Arms has power to Commission one whom he pleases, as appropriate to his
business: and so much for Heralds.

And thus much for Heraldry.
The Names of the several Houses and Innes of Court, Chancery, and other
Hostels in and about the City of LONDON.
Two called Sergeants Inn
1. In (...). 2. In Chancery lane.
The two Temples
Inner Temple. Middle Temple.
Lyncolns Inn. Grays Inn.
Innes of Chancery
Davies Inn. Furnivals Inn. Bernards Inn. Staple Inn. Cliffords Inn.
Clements Inn. New Inn. Lions Inn.
Chesters, or Strond Inn.
The six Clerks Office or Inn. Cursiters Inn. The Rolls, Doctors Commons.
Gresham College. The Exhequer Office: Osbournes Office. St. Kather. by the
Tower.
The Inns of Court and Chancery in their order.
FIrst it is to be understood the four Colleges or Innes of Court, may be
termed Collegia Jurisconsultorum, that is, Colleges of Lawyers.

The Romans did call such houses Diversoria, ordained to entertain strangers,
which in our English are called Inns: and have been acknowledged with us in
England, to be the residing houses of the Noblest Peers, viz. Oxford Inn,
Warwick Inn, Ely Inn; and now called Oxford house, Warwick house, and Ely
house: Somewhat according to the French, whose houses of Nobility (in Paris)
are called Hostels, (in Latin Hospitium) in English, Inns.

In London and thereabouts, there are fourteen, two Sergeants Innes, four Innes
of Court, and eight Innes of Chancery.

The most ancient Inn of Court, and wherein Sergeants of Law had their first
residence, was sometimes over against Saint Andrews Church in Holborn, and was
known by the name of Sergeants Inn: which afterward came to be the Scroop's,
who then were, and have since continued Barons of this land, and it was called
Scroops June; which is called by another name, the possession being likewise
altered out of that Family.

And although the Innes of the Sergeants be somewhat ancient for time, as also
of modern age too: yet it must be granted, that in respect of some others they
must be respected but of a noval foundation. Yet forasmuch as they are
receptacles and lodging places of the most reverend Judges, and grave Barons of
the Exchequer, and other Judge, in Office, and Sergeants at Law; they are by
way of decency to be reckoned in the first rank.

That Hostel or Inn which now is commonly called Sergeants Inn in
Fleetstreet, was sometime a Message appertaining unto the Dean and Prebends of
York. And afterward purchased by the Judges, and Sergeants at Law that lived
in the Reign of King Henry the eighth, for a place of residence for them in
Term time.

And that other called Sergeants Inn in Chancery lane, was sometimes a Mesluage
belonging unto the Bishops of See of Ely; as appears by Records.

In these said Houses or Innes of Court, commonly called Sergeants Inn, the
reverend Judges of this land, and the Sergeants at Law have for many years
lived; and have been lodged within the same; Being (in very deed) although
several by distance of place, yet held to be but one entire Society, or
Confraternity by the name of Brethren.

The Arms of these two Innes of Judges and Sergeants.

First Gules two Garbs in Saltyre Or, bands Azure.

The Second Or, an Ibis proper, which is a bird near the color of a Jay.

Next to the two Sergeants Innes in order are the four Innes of Court, that is
to say,

Inner Temple. Middle Temple. Lyncolns Inn. Grayes Innne.
And first of the two houses, or Societies, which are called by the name of
Temples or the Templars Inn,

The Middle Temple bears for distinction. Argent on a plain cross Gules, the
holy Lamb (...).

The said two Temples or the Templars Inn, are of any other of the Innes of
Court the the most renowned and famous for antiquity: They were at the prime
and in their original but one entire foundationand body.

But in process of time became divided; at first founded by a religious and
devout Order of Soldiers, called Templarii that is, to say Templars.

Which Knights within the Kingdom of England purchased to themselves certain
Lands in Fleetstreet, bordering upon the shore of the River Thames, and thereon
(wit hin a short time) built a large Edifice, and withal a round Synagogue,
like unto a Chapel or Temple, as it is now standing; and was by Heraclius,
Patriarch of Jerusalem, Anno Dom. 1185. dedicated to the service of God; In
which place these Templars by the space of one hundred years lived in great
honor and opulency, enjoying large possessions, and those situate in the best
places of the Realm; the like they had in other places; the Prelate of which
Order, was ever a Baron of England.

Now after the suppression of these Knights Templars, their College or Hostel
came to the hands of Thomas Plantagenet Earl of Lancaster, who being attainted
for Disloyalty and Treason, the same became invested to the Crown. And
afterward the Earls Hugo le Dispencer Earl of Chester obtained the possession
of the same house; who for the like transgression was justly attained also, and
then it came to Damare de Valence Earl of Pembrook, the Lusignian family in
France: who lodged therein but for a small season, so that in the reign of
Edward the third, the Sages and worthy professors of the Common Laws of this
Realm obtained a long lease of this house for 10. l. per annum. A third part
whereof, called the outward Temple, one Doctor Stapleton, Bishop of Exeter, in
the days of King Edward the second, procured for a residing Mansion to him and
his successors, Bishops of that See; and it was called Exeter Inn: And so
continued until the days of Queen Mary, when the Lord Paget, her principal
Secretary of State, and obtained the said third part called Exeter house, to
him, and his heirs, and did re-edifie the same. After whom the said house, or
the third part of the said Templars house, came to Thomas late Duke of Norfolk,
and was by him conveyed to Sir Robert Dudley Knight, al. Sutton, Earl of
Lieoester, who bequeathed the same to Sir Robert Dudley Knight, his Son; and
lately came by purchase to Robert Devoreux late Earl of Essex, that dyed in the
reign of the late Queen Elizabeth; and it is called to this day, Essex house.

And not to omit what is written touching the antiquity of the Coat of Arms
belonging to this house; it is warranted by the same, was, and yet is, to be
seen purtraicted in an old Manuscript, written many years since, concerning the
foundation of that Order, and which Manuscript now is, or of late was in the
custody of the Right Honorable Lord William Howard a lover of Nobility and
honorable Arms.

It is to be understood that before the Order of Knight Templars assumed to
themselves the said Coat Armor they now wear, that they did embrace as to them
appropriate this Ensign, A Horse galloping with two Men on his back.

The which Ensign was usually engraven on their Signet or Common Seal: It has
been conjectured that the significancy thereof was, that the Original of this
Order began in poverty and want: So that when they were to undertake any
expedition of Christian service, they were enforced for want of ability, to
ride two of them upon one horse: But it is more truly conceited that the same
was rather an (...) of Love, and Charity, and was a true Hieroglyphick of an
ingenious disposition, and of a (...) kindness, used amongst noble and
freehearted Soldiers; whereof none were of greater note then this Order. Who
being professed (...) and honorable spirits when they should come to the rescue
of a Christian Soldier, who might happen to be wounded, or sick, and
comfortless in the field, they would relieve him, and set him behind one of
them upon his own horse, and by that means conveigh him to some place of
safety; where they should likewise take some speedy course for his relief.
Neither was this work of Chariy, only practiced by the Christian Knights in
those ages; but it was used by the very Infidels, and Pagans, who also usually
were exercised in the same works of Charity, as may be observed, and read, out
of the famous and renowned Poet Ariosto; who relates, that Reginaldo and
Fernand, two Knights Charlemaine did fight together, and each of them was
mortally wounded, and therefore, they agreed to adjourne the Combat till
another day. And that, during the space of the Parley Reginaldo's Palfrey
strayed away, and could not be found; whereupon Fer nand proffered Reginaldo a
part of his horse to ride upon, and willed him to mount up behind him, with
assurance he would convey him safe to the place he desired, which Reginaldo
accepted, and Fernand performed: This History is writ by Ariosto in the Italian
language, and not unworthy observation to this intent.

The Knights Templars took their original about the year of Grace, (...). and
upon this occasion many Noble men, who were religiously bent, obliged
themselves by special vows to serve Christ as regular Cannons in Chastity, and
Obedience; and to renounce their own proper will for ever.

The first of that Order was Hugo Paganus, and Godfrido de Sancto Hadomaro.

Their habit was prescribed by Pope Honorius to be a white habit; and after, by
order from Pope Eugenio, these Knights had their first habitation appointed
them by Baldwin King of Jerusalem, near unto the holy Temple; there they were
ever after saluted by the names of Knights Templars.

This Order in process of time did grow so universally great, that many great
(...) and Towns of Christendom received their Order of the Knights Templars,
as well in this our Nation, as in other parts, where they enjoyed fair
revenewes and large possessions; for in England this University, called the
Temple, was the feat and habitation of diverse Knights of that Order. But it
has of late by the Princely donation of King James our late Sovereign been
confirmed to the professors of the Common Law, under the great Seal of England.

The Society of said the Inner Temple has lately assumed to themselves a
Pegasus, whereof in particular I spare to relate any more; for the same is
vulgarly known to all.

To the Inner House was also appropriated diverse learned Legists from time to
time, which in number, continuance, and gifts of Nature, did exceed every other
of the said Innes of Court: And therefore was anciently termed Inner Temple
Boun Pleader. Which continues to this very day; and it is withal much
esteemed of, beautified, and graced with a special Garden plot, famous for its
situation, neatness and nearness of the River.

The Ensign is Azure, a Pegasus Argent.

Lincolns Inn.
This House, owning a right to the Arms as well as name of the Lacyes Earls of
Lincoln, have set up over the Gate the Lion Rampant purpure; committing a
great mistake in that, if Sir John Fern's account of that Family of the Lacyes
be true, (which has passed for authentic): for he tells us that Or, a Lion
Rampant purpure was his right; but it was only a quartering, and not the
paternall Coat: for his first and principal bearing was party per Cross,
Gules and (...) a bend Sables, over all a file or three Labels Arg. and this
was the proper Coat of those Lacyes, the other was the Coat of the Lord Nigeld
or Neal, Baron of Halton.

This Society of Lincolnes Inn, the next for antiquity, and ancient Ally to
the Middle Tenple, is situate in a Street or Lane known formerly by the name of
New-street, and now Chancery lane being once the Mansionhouse of a Gentleman
called William de Havershall, Treasurer to King Henry the third, who for
disloyalty to his Sovereign, was by the said King attainted of Treason, so that
thereby his house and lands became annexed to the Crown. And thereupon the King
gave this house to Ralph de Nova villa, vulgo Nevill, Chancellor of England, as
appears by an ancient Record: Who also was Bishop of Chichester, and kept his
habitation or place of abode in that place.

This House came afterward to the hands of Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, by
reason whereof it was called Lincolns Inn and keeps the style to this day.
This Earl Henry deceased in that house about the year of our Lord 1310.
Nevertheless this house did afterward continue to the Bishops of Chichester
until the (...) of King Henry the eighth, and the interest thereof came by
conveyance to Justice Gullyard and other Feoffees, who during his life, and
after him his posterity, held it until the reign of the late Queen Elizabeth,
and then Sir Edw. Gullyard Knight, (to whom the same did successively descend
by Inheritance) sold the same with the Inheritance thereof to the Benchers and
Society thereof.

There is no memory of any flourishing Estates of the Students and professors of
the Common Laws resident in this College, until the reign of King Henry the
sixth, when it appears by the Rolls and remembrances of that house, that the
same became somewhat to be famous. But now of late time this house has been
much enlarged and beautified, with ranks of goodly Edifices, and also with a
fair and goodly Chapel. The first of the chiefest buildings thereof was begun
at the cost of Sir Thomas Lovell Knight, then or before a fellow of that
Society, who erected that fair Gate House into Chancery lane, of brick and free
stone, whereupon is engraven the Arms of Lacy Earl of Lincoln, together with
his own.

The said Chancery lane is so called, for that King Edward the third, in the
fifteenth year of his reign annexed the house of Covents by Patent to the
Office of Chancery, now called the Rolls.

Grays Inn
Bears Sables a Griffin Rampant, Or.

This house was sometimes the abiding Mansion of the Noble Family of Gray, from
whence the name of the house is deduced. It is situate within the Manor
Poorpoole, a Prebendary anciently belonging to the Cathedral Church of St.
Paul, London. In the reign of King Edward the third, the Gentlemen Students of
that Society (as is confidently affirmed) took a Grant of this house from the
said Baron Gray who lived in those days. And it is held probable that the
Grayes Arms have been anciently by this fellowship maintained; and are still
taken up, and kept as the proper and peculiar Ensign of that College or
house, and thus the same is found portraited.

Barry of six Arg. and Azure, a bordure quarterly Or, and of the second.

But now of late years this honorable Society have assumed for their proper
Coat Armor, or Ensign of honor, A Griffin Or, in a field Sables.

Thavies Inn
Bears Azure, two Garbes, Or, on a bend Gules. On a Chief Sable, a letter T.
Arg.

Hereafter ensue the inferior Hostels ordained for Students that profess the
practice of the Common Law of this Realm, to the end they may the better obtain
unto themselves the understanding of the Principles and grounds of the same
Laws; and be thereby the better prepared for to manage the causes of the
Subjects in the several Courts of Justice within the Dominions, whether at
Westminster, or elsewhere: and also by their labor, and Industry to become
graduates and be the better enabled to be entered into the Innes of Court. These
inferior Courts being Nurseries: and are entitled Inns of Chancery.

And first for this Thavies Inn, It is probable that the house by all
conjecture is the most ancient of all others of that nature, and it does in
that regard challenge the precedence in this rank.

This house was in the reign of King Edward the third, (as is by (...) to be
found) the dwelling, and mansion house of one John Thavye Citizen and Armourer
of London; and was by the then Apprentices of the Law held of him at a certain
Rent annual, as by a Record yet to be seen in the Husting Courts of London,
does appear and may be verified for antiquity: But since that time the House
has been purchased by the Benchers or the Ancients of Lincolns Inn, which
about the reign of King Henry the seventh, to the end that there might be
entertained in that place a Society of Students, practisers, and Professors of
the Common Laws of this Realm. And this house still retains the name of the
said Thavies, who was the first owner of it, as is before mentioned.

Furnivals Inn
Bears Arg. a bend betwixt six Martlets within a bordure Azure.

This house was sometime the Mansion of Sir William Furnivall in the reign of
King Richard the second, as by Record appears.

He was afterward Lord Furnival; his heir general married to Sir John Talbot,
created Earl of Shrewsbury by King Henry the sixth, by reason whereof this
Mansion house came to the family of the (...), Earls of Salop: and afterward
of later years, in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, the same house was by the
Benchers or the Ancients of Lincolns Inn purchased for the serting into the
same a Society of Students of the Common Laws, from George Lord Talbot Earl of
Salop; as by sundry deeds in the possession of the late right honorable Gilbert
Earl of Shrewbury does appear.

Bernards Inn
Bears party per pale indented Ermin and Sab. a Cheveron Gul. fretty.

This house was in the thirteenth year of the reign of King Henry the sixth, a
message belonging to one John Mackworth then Dean of the Cathedral Church of
Lincoln; and in that time in the holding of one Lyonel Bernard, who next before
the conversion thereof into an Inn of Chancery, dwelt there. And it has ever
since retained the name of Bernards Inn, or Bernards house.

Staple Inn:
Port de vert un packet de doyne Arg.

This House was sometimes belonging to the English Merchants of the Staple, as
it has been by ancient Tradition held. It is of late adorned with a convenient
large Garden-plot to walk in, and is at this day rightly esteemed for the most
ample and beautiful Inn of Chancery, within this Academy.

Clifford's Inn
Reareth Checky Or and Azure, of fesse Gul. within a bordure of the third,
charged with a Bezanet.

This House albeit it follows in an after rank from the former, yet it is
worthy to be reputed amongst the formest, as being in reputation with the best,
both for convenience and quiet situation thereof, as for worth and good
government; It was also sometime the dwelling house of Maccoln de Hersey, and
came to the King for debts, and was after sometimes the house of the Lord
Clifford, as by Inquisition, which was taken that year, and remaining on
Record, does appear, which has these words, Isabella quae fuit Roberti
Clifford, (...) cum pertinent. quod Robertus habuit in parochia Sancti Dunstani
West' in suburb. Londini etc. tenuit, and illud demisit post mortem dicti
Roberti, (...) de Bancho pro (...) l. per annum, etc. ut pat. per
Inquisitionem, cap. 18. Edwardi 3. post mortem dict. Roberti Clifford.

This House at this day is the Inheritance of that ancient and right honorable
family of Cliffords Earls of Cumberland, for which there is an annual Rent
still rendered to the Earls of Cumberland for the time being.

Clements Inn
Bears Argent, Anchor without a stock in pale proper, entertaining a C. for
Clement into the body thereof.

This House sometimes was a message belonging to the Parish Church of St.
Clement Danes, from whence it took its denomination; near to this house is that
Fountain which is called Clements Well.

This Anchor is engraven in stone over the gate of the first entrance into the
house, and is an Hieroglyphick, figuring thereby that Pope Clement, as he was
Pope, was reputed Caput Ecclesiae Romanae, for the Roman Priesthood, or
Anchorage of Christendom, figured by the Anchor, and by the text C. the
Sacerdotal dignity.

Some hold that the device of the Anchor was rather invented upon this reason;
of the Martyrdom of Pope Clement, as Jacobus de Voragia writes, that he
received his Martyrdom being bound to a great Anchor, and cast into the Sea by
the command of the Emperor Trajane.

New Inn
Bears Vert, a Flower-pot Arg. maintaining Jully flowers, Gules.

This house is so called by reason of its then late or new Creation, being in
the reign of King Henry the seventh; therefore the same is not of late a
foundation, as some imagine, which is, that the late dissolution of Strond
Inn, being by the Duke of Somerset Uncle to King Edward the sixth, this house
in lieu thereof was instituted for the dispersed Gentlemen Professors and
Students of the Common Laws of this Realm. It is certain that Sir Thomas Moor
Knight, Lord Chancellor of England, in the reign of King Henry the seventh was
a fellow student of this Society; and in the reign of King Henry the eighth,
removed his study into that of Lincolns Inn.

This house was sometimes called by the name of our Ladies Inn, for that the
Picture of our Lady was pourtraicted at the door thereof. And in the reign of
King Edward the fourth was (...) by Sir John Fyncaullxe, Knight, Chief Justice
of England, or of the Kings Bench, or 6. l. per annum, wherein he placed
Students, and practisers of the Common Laws; who before that time had a house
in the (...) Bailey called St. Georges Inn: the passage thereunto was over
against St. Sepulchers Church, and by some is reputed to be the first and most
ancient of all other Innes of Chancery: but the same house at this day is
converted into several Tenements and Garden plots.

Lions Inn
Bears Checkie Or, and Arg, a Lion Saliant, Sab. langued and armed Gules.

This house received its foundation of modern time; and lately before the
acquiring thereof, it was a dwelling house, known by the name of the Black
Lion; and in the reign of King Henry the seventh, was purchased by diverse
Gentlemen, Students, and Professors of the common Laws: The first Treasurer of
this Society was one John Bidwell. The greatest number of this Society are the
natives of the West parts, viz Devonshire and Cornwall; but for the most part
Devonshire Gentlemen.

Chesters Inn, or Strond Inn
Bears Azure within a bordure Gules, three garbes, Or, in a bend of the
second.

In the reign of King Henry the eighth, this house (for that Sir Bevis St.
Marrour Knight Duke of Somerset kept there his Court) was an Inn of Chancery
called Strond Inn, and before that time belonged to the Bishop of Chester,
after to the Bishop of Worcester, and unto the Bishop of Landaffe, with the
Parochial Church of St. Mary's adjoining thereunto; All which were swallowed
up in An Dom. 1549. for to build an ample and spacious Edifice to the use of
the said Duke, the maternall Uncle to King Edward the sixth.

The Six Clerks Office, otherwise called Riderminster's Inn
Bears Azure, two Cheveronels, Or, between three Bezants Arg. charged with.
eight pellets.

This House though it be not saluted by the name of an Inn of Chancery, as the
others are, which are of like name and nature, yet is the same more properly to
be called an Inn of Chancery then any of the rest; for that the Chancery
Officers do there reside, namely Attourneys, commonly called the Six Clerks of
the Chancery, and are to this day a society of Gentlemen well learned in the
Laws: These were at the first Sacerdotall, and therefore called Clerks. And in
those days when the Institution of them was first established, they were all of
them Churchmen.

This house was acquired and gotten for the society by one John Riderminster
Esquire, a member thereof; who in his time was a very skillful and well Learned
man, and both faithful and just, as well to his Client as to his friend. It
was anciently the Inn, or the Mansion of the Abbot of Norton in Lincolnshire,
and since that time it has been the dwelling house of one Andrew Hersfleet,
and is most proper to be called an Inn of Chancery, for the Officers of
Chancery only reside there: the House is situate in Chancery lane, where the
causes appertaining to Chancery are only handled and discust.

Cursitors Inn:
Bears Gules on a chief Arg. two Mullets Sables, within a bordure Compone Or
and Azure.

This Edifice was, in (...) days of Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, built by
the Right Honorable and Grave Counselor of State Sir Nicholas Bacon Knight,
Lord keeper of the Great Seal of England, for the benefit and decency of a new
contrived Office, now called Cursitors, therein to lodge and to keep their
several Offices; These Cursitors have the making of all Original Writs;
(according to the Register) which are sued out, and taken forth in causes
commenced by the Students at the common Law. In times past the chief Officer
of the Court of Chancery was ever a Bishop, and termed Cancellarius, because he
sat in Cancellis, that is to say, in Chancels, or places letticed after the
manner of Chancels in Churches, as Petrus (...) a learned writer has left to
posterity.

The Masters of this Court were for the most part Doctors of Divinity, and had
Prebendaries in Churches, and other dignities and promotions.

The Cursitors, or rather the Choristers, as it befitteth a Chorus, there being
no honorable Cathedral or Collegiate Church la Esglise which can be well
without them. And in former days both ancient and modern, the Ghostly Fathers
or Confessors were examiners in Chancery, as men held most conscionable, and
thereupon fittest for that function. But fince in those days all the former
Ecclesiastical persons, are become merely laymen, and yet no doubt held to be
as Godly, Conscionable, and Honest, as any; provided ever that they be men of
skill, persons who are of great Integrity, and able of understanding.

Nam ad pietatem requiritur Scientia.

The College called Doctors Commons
Bears Gules on a bend Argent, three treefoils; within a bordure Vert.

The Professors of the Civil Law, or the Imperial, being also in some sort
Canonists and professors of the Laws (...), have their Hostels or residing
place upon St. Bennets hill, near Paul's Chain.

This house was by the industry and cost of Mr. Henry Harvey Doctor of the
Civil or Canon Law, and at that time Master (...) Trinity (...) in Cambridge,
and Dean of the Arches, instituted for the Company and Society of the said
Doctors, professors of the same study.

Gresham College
Bears Argent a (...) Erminoys between three Mullets Sables.

This famous work, and most worthy College situate in Bishopsgate street, had
its foundation laid by that worthy Merchant Sir Thomas Gresham Knight, about
the year of our Lord 1579. who ordained therein seven Lectures of seven
several Arts to be there publicly read, (...). Divinity, Civil Law, Phyfick,
Rhetoric, Astronomy, Geometry, Music. And this to be performed by seven
several persons, learned professors thereof; only in the time of the Terms at
Westminster.

The annual stipendary to every Lecturer is 50. l. by annual pay, and each of
the Lecturers has a convenient lodging provided for his use there in the same
College.

The Office of the Remembrancers of the Exchequer at Westminster
Bears, Or, a Cheveron Gules, and a Canton Ermin in a bordure Compony, Argent
and Azure.

This house wherein now the Kings Remembrancer keeps his Office was sometimes
anciently the Inn belonging to the Barons of Stafford, and was in former time
called Staffords Inn, which said house, and that other in Ivielane, where Mr.
Osborn the King's Remembrancer keeps his Office, or rather the Lord
Treasurers Remembrancer, and the house called Hospitium Johannis de (...)
Laurentio, wherein (...) Brainthwait Sergeant at the Law, (...) his abode and
dwelling in Amen-Corner, the Bishop of Elyes house, now Stationers' Hall; the
Three Tuns Tavern, the Bull-head Tavern, the Chamber belonging to Diana, the
next house to Doctors Commons called the old Camera (...), were of ancient
times the lodging for the Residents, and Canons, and Prebends of St. Paul's, who
belonged unto that famous Cathedral Church of St. Paul.

St. Katherine's Hospital
Bears party per fesse, Gules and Azure: in (...) a Sword bar-wise Argent,
pomelled and hilt Or: in point a demi Catharine wheel of the fourth.

By the License of the Prior of the Covent, and the Society of holy Trinity in
London, the said Hospital called St. Katherines was founded by Queen Matilda
wife to King Stephen.

The ground whereon this Hospital is (...), was then the proper inheritance of
the said Prior and Covent, and the said Hospital was after enlarged by Queen
Elianor Wife to Edward the first, and after Philippa Wife to Edward the third,
founded there a Chancery, and it has been of late a free Chapel or Hospital
for poor sisters.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page. 41. l. 4. a mistake in the last quarter of the cut. p. 52. a mistake in
the cut, the eighth quarter should have been the last.


