THE PERFECTION, AUTHORITY, And CREDIBILITY Of the Holy SCRIPTVRES. Discoursed
in a SERMON before the University of CAMBRIDGE, At the Commencement, July 4.
1658.

By NATHANAEL INGELO D. D. and Fellow of Eton Coll.

The Second Edition.

In his scriptis veritas non coacescit, sed statim de prelo purissimae
commendata testae suum saporem servat. Hieron. Praef. in lib Salom. (...).
Iambl. in vit. Pyth. cap 28. London, Printed by E.T. for Luke Fawn, at the Sign
of the Parrot in Paul's Church yard, 1659.

TO THE Right Worshipful Doctor, JOHN WORTHINGTON Vice Chancellor, And the
rest of the Heads, Together With the Fellows, of the several Colleges in the
University of CAMBRIDGE.
Right Worshipful and Reverend,
I Have made bold to prefixe your Names to this short Discourse, since you were
pleased to honor it with your courteous acceptance, I cannot but pay it down
as your own by grateful acknowledgment. The Benignity of which I have had
experience, makes me confident the second time: your Candor takes off those
fears, which otherwise I should justly entertain, upon the thoughts of your
Judgment. I have here represented to your eyes what you heard, with a small
addition of some things which could not conveniently be spoken for want of
time, which was then more then ordinarily, but very justly, shortened by the
Commemoration.

My design in the choice of this Argument was not to inform you; (...) (...);
But, as it is one of the great Truths taught by our learned and pious Mother;
of whom I received it, and confirmed with the testimony of all Protestant
Churches, so when I weighed the Importance of it, I thought there was scarce
any thing, that could be known, more necessary, and considering some things,
which I shall by and by set down, I judged it not unseasonable,

I was satisfied as to the Importance of it, since it includes the Fundamental
concernements of Christian Religion, and the opening of it discovers the strong
Pillars upon which it leanes, and shows written upon them clear testimonies,
that it came from God; by the consideration of which, well-meaning Christians
will strengthen a rational belief in God, and easily perceive that Unbelievers,
of what sort soever, are not such, because the Christian Religion does not give
proof of its Truth, but because they have either by some sad mis-hap, lost the
faculty of believing most necessary Truths, or because something or other does
hinder them from considering that which is more then sufficiently credible.

Not that I presume to comprehend all those things which belong to the full
explication of so great a matter, much less to comprise them in this small
Treatise (for that I may with Alexander Aphrod. (...) (...)) but however it
will briefly exhibit several things toward the vindication of divine Truth
from Atheistical unbelievers, for the justification of our profession against
Romish aspersions, some of which are foul enough; and take off that which is
said against the perfection of the Scriptures by dreaming Enthusiasts; and so
may possibly contribute something to undeceive some which are in error, or
rescue from temptation an endangered soul.

Indeed the comprehensive sense of this Truth, That the holy Scripture does
perfectly contain, and plainly discover all things necessary to salvation, does
include the Defense of our Saviors honor, the Demonstration of the Grace and
Wisdom of the divine Providence, and the Churches security in point of
salvation.

As for the honor of our Lord and Savior, how shall that be safe, if it can
be proved, that when he came to declare Gods mind to us, he went home again,
having done but half his errand? if being to write an Epistle from God to us,
he left some of the main concernments of it, to be supplied in a Postscript, to
be written by any that would take up his Pen? and being about to make his own
will, he was so forgetful of that which is to be done in such a matter; that he
left out many principal things, to be inserted in unattested posthumous
Codicills?

But it was quite otherwise; for Christ in the close of his Sermons declares
plainly, that he had perfected the Revelation of necessary Doctrine, saying a
little before his Death, Go and preach what I have taught you, and those which
believe, shall be saved.

And for the Grace and Wisdom of divine Providence, how can they but suffer,
if God, pretending a great love to the happiness of Mankind, has either not
appointed sufficient means for their salvation, or not let them know what and
where it is? If the Scriptures be not plain, what wisdom, was it to write our
highest concernments in such words as we cannot understand? If they be not
perfect, how is his good will real? for having given us but an imperfect
notice of our way there, he does not mention any power to make the supply, nor
say whom he would entrust with it.

From both of these, the insecurity of our salvation is a necessary
consequence. For how shall we attain so great an end, with uncertain and
insufficient means? But as our Master, that would have all men to be saved,
and come to the knowledge of the Truth, taught all that Truth before he left
this world, so the Evangelist Luke, in his Preface to the History of the Acts
of the Apostles, affirms, that what Christ taught before his death, and till
the Ascension was written by himself, not long after.

The Truth of these things does so distress those that endeavor to believe
against it, that they are fain to summon their wits to find evasions from the
mighty power of it. Exomologesis. Cap. 32.
To salve the Honor of our Master, one whom Cressy selects as the incomparable
assertor of Roman opinions, and therefore chooses him for the chief guide of
his Apostasy from the Protestant Church (having rejected Cassander, Padre
Paulo and Picherellus, for their moderation, and forgotten that, Cap. 22.
ten Chapters before, he professed to choose such as had expressed themselves
most moderately, and allowing the greatest latitude, viz. Stapleton says,
Praef. Relect. princip. fidei doctrinalium.

Printed a year after Doctor Whittakers death.


That, what they add to the Scriptures, is not aliud a Christo (quod esset ab
illo recedere) sed a Scripturis, A pretty Sophisme! As if the subjects of a
lawful Prince, making such additions as they please to his Laws, could defend
themselves by saying they added not aliud a Rege, sed a Legibus, ( i.e.) a
subject does not derogate from the Kings Honor, though he accuse his
Government of Imperfection, and his Laws of Insufficiency.

To avoid this Imputation, he says, as his Partners do, that Christ made
Delegates, and gave them authority to teach other things besides the
Scriptures, Ibid.
(praeter illas multa docere.) But as this power is very great (for he says of
it, Tantum sane ac tale est eorum ministerium, ut eorum vox, doctrina,
testimonium fundamenti vice nobis esset, non secus atque ipsius vox, doctrina,
testimonium fundamentum veritatis fuit, (i.e.) That their word, doctrine, and
testimony, is no less a foundation to us, then the Word, Doctrine, and
Testimony of Christ, is the foundation of Truth:) So being well aware, that
whosoever should lay claim to it, either those fifty bold mercenaries at Trent,
who called themselves an Ecumenical Counsel, any other Assembly of Papists,
the Pope in his chair, or the Romish Church under any capacity, if perchance
they shall ever agree, as they have not yet, upon any, that they jointly
pronounce Infallible, would be questioned concerning the Rightfulnesse of the
Title, he endeavors therefore to frame them a Commission out of several
Scriptures; by which, as he does acknowledge the Sovereign Authority of the
Scriptures, so with what poor success he endeavors to get countenance from
them for his boldness, will easily appear, if one do but repeat the
Scriptures, which he alleges, and join with them their true and plain
Interpretations: which I do more willingly endeavor, though I fear to be
tedious, for two reasons.

1. First. because they are such considerable quotations in the esteem of his
followers, that for want of better, (which they have sought in vain) though
they be sufficiently impertinent, they are fain to make use of them still. 2.
Secondly, because their Interpretations which are our Answers to them, may
enable some that are weak to defend themselves against disputers, who shall
endeavor to discompose the quietness of their true belief from acknowledged
grounds of faith misinterpreted.
His first place is, Luke 10.16.
He that hears you hears me, etc. May they therefore say what they will?
these words were spoken to the Apostles, whom Christ commanded to preach, and
told them what they should say; and the Church now, speaking as it ought,
declares nothing but what Christ said before, for necessaries, and whatsoever
it does according to his sayings, is warranted by his authority, and so he that
hears them, hears Christ. But what proof is here for saying any thing else
besides that which is written?

Mat. 5. 14.
The second is; You are the light of the world, etc. Yes, so they were; for
Christ shined upon them, and they enlightened others, but it was by the
reflexiou of his beams, (i. e.) the Truths that he taught them, and their
writings are like Lanthorns of transparent glass, in which that divine light
is preserved, and through which it shines. But those Popish Traditions are like
new thick horn, through which we cannot discern the old Apostolical Truth, only
it glimmers through those holes which are necessarily left open, because their
odd stuff was irreconcileably unfit to be close and handsomely joined in one
entire body with the verities of the written Word.

The third is, You shall be my witnesses in Jerusalem, in Judaea, in Samaria,
and to the ends of the earth. It Is true, the Apostles were Christ's witnesses,
for they testified his Life and Doctrine, and wrote them for memorials to
succeding ages, but they would have been strange witnesses of his doctrine, if
they should have told other tales of their own invention, and ridiculous
assertours of his Institutions, if they should have changed them at their
pleasure; as for Example, If after he had given the bread and wine to his
Disciples in his last Supper, they should upon the first repetition of that
Sacrament have given only the bread to the Communicants, and so have
contradicted Christ's order with pretense of Tradition.

To prove that the Rock in the 16 of Matthew. is the Pope, whom he calls the
supreme Vicar of this Ministry, he quotes with it a place of Scripture, that
overthrowes his interpretation. Other foundation can no man lay, 1 Cor. 3. 11.
then that which is laid; which is, Jesus Christ. Which place, as it tells us
plainly, who was meant by the Rock, so it is as strong a witness against his
assertion as any thing that I have the ability to imagine, yet as if it were
not full enough, he adds confirmation unto it, though contrary to his
intention, by citing with it that famous testimony of Ephesians. 2. where Christ is
called the great corner stone, and the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles.
(i.e.) the foundation upon which they were built themselves, and preached as
such to others.

In the close of that paragraph to prove a little better, that the Church has
power to teach that which the Scripture does not, John 16. 13.
he quotes two places, I will send you the Spirit of Truth, which shall lead
you into all Truth; Mat. 28. 20.
and, I am with you unto the end of the world. And after this, triumphs as if
nothing could be desired further.

But for all that, what this should be to his purpose, I am not able to guess.
For what can be inferred from these places, but to the benefit of our
assertion? for if Christ promised the spirit to lead them into all Truth, did
he not teach them it perfectly? and if he promised to be with them unto the
end, did he fail to assist them in their work, which was to publish the Truth
by writing as well as preaching? as we learn from S. John, Chapt. 20. v. 31
These things are written that ye might believe, etc. where he adds also, that
this was done so perfectly, that whosoever should read and believe through
their writing, might have eternal life. And as it appears from the 20. ver. of
the 28. of Mat. read all together, all the assistance that the Church for
future times could expect from this promise, is only while she does teach
others to observe what Christ commanded, unless we will break that sacred
connection, which all true Christians know to be between the precepts and
promises of God. But to what precepts, except those which we find upon divine
Record the promises should be annexed, we understand not, nor why they should
not invent new promises, as well as pretend to other precepts. Neither do we
trouble our selves at all with those big words, which, to amuse ignorant
people, they speak concerning the imperfection of the Scriptures, to be
supplied by the dictates of a pretended infallible Church, since we could never
yet hear of any one Truth necessary to salvation, but we found it in Scripture,
nor had any certain news of one Tradition that is universal, and of Primitive
derivation, and so of good use in the Church of God, but we receive it
willingly.

I have judged this Discourse the more seasonable, because the adversaries of
our Church make account that we are in such a strong tendency to the Romish
belief, which contradicts what is here asserted, that one of their late
Proselytes, with high approbation of his Fellows, does not fear to publish to
the world their swelling hopes, Cressy his Exomologesis. Cap. 21.
That the fields are even white unto the harvest; and thereupon with other of
his companions does thrust in his sickle, which he sharpens with such
assertions as these; viz. That the Scriptures contain only such necessaries, as
may serve in some desperate cases, Cap. 10. Rushworth dial. 2 sect. 4.
that they were penned only for some particular persons or congregations, that
it is impossible but that the text of the Scripture is corrupted, That the
Protestants do but guiltily defend the universal sufficiency of the Scriptures,
etc. I know not why he delights so much in that word, guilty, for he uses it
more then once, in the forementioned application; unless he was an Hypocrite
when he was of our Religion, but I am sure he does it not without gross
impudence. For he knew well enough with what hearty courage, such arguments of
Truth as he thought unanswerable, and all other testimonies of a good
conscience, the learned Protestants have discharged themselves in that point.

Having disparaged the Scriptures. He and Rushworth in his Dialogues reprinted
with Whites enlargements, endeavor to lodge amongst us again, as if they had
never been rejected before with deserved scorn, a sorry company of their
beggarly Innovations, great strangers to the Word of God, and the Primitive
Church, Exomolog. Sect. 3. Cap. 2.
as Transubstantiation of the bread and wine into the body and blood of Christ,
Invocation of Saints, Veneration of Images, Prayers for the dead, and
Purgatory, Indulgences and public services in Latin, nay, Rush. dial. 1. sect.
8,9, 10,11.
the generality of Romish Ceremonies, and that we must believe there to be
necessary forsooth, and that they were ever used in the Church of Christ.

Now this is but to revive the old trick, by which they still endevour'd our
revolt to their Religion, viz. by making us disbelieve the perfection of the
Scripture, and that we must for a supply receive their Traditions, as that
unworthy Faction of Trent says, Sessio 4.

Decret. 1.


Pari pietatis affectu and reverentia, with the same holy regard which we give
to the Scriptures, concluding absurdly, that because some silly people, and
others disaffected to our profession, by the trouble of worldly temptations,
that have happened of late among us, are unwarily inclined toward them upon
shallow or perverse grounds, therefore few or none of us understand the Truth
of our own Principles, or the impertinency and danger of their bold additions;
or, as if because they had no mind to remember, it being to their grief, that
therefore we have forgot that Bishop Jewel did long since show them, that for
six hundred years after Christ, the Church taught not many of those things,
which Rome did in his time; and as if Doctor Featly had not put the Jesuits to
a loss, to prove, that for the first five hundred years, there was any City or
Parish, in which there was any visible Assembly that taught the Articles of the
Council of Trent. As if we did not know by their writings, that the Fathers
acknowledged the Perfection of the Scriptures, that we were at last by some
strange Accident grown so foolish, as to take their corrupt present party for
the Catholic Church, or that they could make us tamely believe that we differ
from the ancient primitive institution, if we reject their Innovations, or as
if we did not understand their horrid uncharitableness, which denies salvation
to those multitudes of Christian Churches and Nations in the world, that
receive not their new doctrines, and also as absolutely necessary, though they
have no testimony of antiquity, and are contrary to Scripture, and therefore
for our selves, were as much afraid of their Excommunications and sentences of
damnation, as we should be in danger of burning or hanging, if they had the
same power over us now, which they cruelly executed in Queen Mary's days. But
I will insist no further upon this discourse.

Some attempt the disgrace of the Scriptures another way, making the pretense
of the spirit an argument of the imperfection of holy Writ: and of such I think
it is no offense to affirm, that they do not consider what they say. What good
man ever denied the necessity of the help and guidance of the divine Spirit? We
stand not in so much need of fire and water, as of Gods Grace and Spirit; but
what wise man ever made this an argument of the Scriptures imperfection? but
such a proof as this serves the inconsiderate, God helps us to understand the
Scriptures, and therefore they are an imperfect Revelation of his will.

And if the Spirit be pretended further then so, i.e. to teach us other
neeessaries to salvation, besides the Gospel of Christ. I answer, that this is
such a spirit, as was not promised to the Primitive Church, no nor the
Apostles, for the spirit was to lead them into all Truth, John 14.26.
but by bringing to their remembrance what Christ taught them, and that was
enough. As Christ had received a commandment from the Father what he should
say. Joh. 12.49. so he gave the words to them, which he had received. Joh. 17.
8. all of them. Joh. 15.15. all things that I heard of my Father, I have made
known to you. So that those which pretend the assistance of the spirit for
divine teaching, and neglect these incomparable directions, do not well know
what those words, The assistance of the spirit, do signify, and so slight that,
which they pretend to desire. For the Scriptures given by inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, and written by his instinct for our instruction, are a great part
of his assistance, and are therefore most truly called by the Italian Poet.
Dantes.
-- La larga ploia
Dello spirito sancto, ch'e diffusa
In su le vecchie' en su le nuove coia.
i.e. a great shower of the holy spirit powered down through both the
Testaments, for the refreshment of Gods Church.

These few things designed to do honor to the H. Scriptures, I humbly devote
unto you. That approbation which you have bestowed upon them already, shall be
to me a sufficient defense against any petty froward dislike. I hope they will
be more acceptable to good men, and that, the business to which they are
destined, will be more effectually promoted by your recommendation. I have only
further to pray that God would continue your prosperity, and this I do, not
referring only to your particular capacity, though that well deserves my best
wishes, but also to your public; looking upon you, if I may use the Emperors
words, (...) Your private welfare is a great public good. May those which wish
you ill, repent, and instead of doing you harm, may they receive that benefit,
which you are never unwilling to administer, as any opportunity presents it
self to you. Julian and some others used to despise the Galileans (so they
termed the Christians) for fools, and to make them more such, they interdicted
their children the use of Schools, intending by, this means to deprive them of
that wisdom and divine accomplishment which arises from true learning. It were
a shameful thing if Christians should grow so silly now, as to choose that for
a privilege, which he forced upon them, and they resented as a grievous
affliction. God of his Grace preserve both the Universities, till education be
no necessity, and the want of learning no imperfection; which is and shall be
the daily prayer of

Eton Coll. Aug. 16. 1650.

Your most affectionate and faithful Servant, NATHANAEL INGELO

LUKE 16. 29. Abraham says unto him, They have Moses and the Prophets, let
them hear them.
PArables are vocal Hieroglyphics, lively images of useful Truths, fitted
for instruction. Like Pictures; (...), they are drawn in the proportions of
some real thing; and they do, as the Epistle to the Hebrews says of Moses
his shadows (...) Cap. 8.5.
(...), by way of type and resemblance they do minister to the knowledge of
heavenly matters; a way of teaching very much used by the great Bishop of our
souls; who did, by this kind of discourse, appositely set forth divine things,
making fescues of known earthly resemblances to point to spiritual and heavenly
doctrines, Joh. 3.12.
If I have told you earthly things and you believe not, how will you believe,
if I tell you of heavenly things? Many of these were so plain, that they had no
veyle, but their plainness; by reason of which, many that pretended to be
great enquirers into profound mysteries, could not perceive any wisdom in
them, that is, they could not see wood for trees, nor discern truth, unless it
were hid a little more under Philosophical shadows: as if Christ came not to
save sinners, but to teach Philosophy to those, who had more already then they
made use of, to the right end

It is true; some of them were more obscure; and good reason; both to hide the
truth from such who had more then once shut their eyes against it: (and why
should not God punish malicious winking with just darkness?) and to make good
men inquisitive; and to them they were never useless, both because Christ was
pleased, for the most part, to add the interpretation, and the lovers of truth
were always more incited to enquire: that so they might see the Picture, which
hung behind the Curtain.

(...)
(...).
It slugs the affectious of lovers, if their desire may be obtained with a
slight endeavor: as the learned Deacon said of old, who, speaking of the rich
sense treasured up in the Scriptures, requiring the search of most careful
meditation, breaks forth into these expressions.

(...),
(...)
(...).
O Abyss of rich notions, inviting all that are willing to draw as much truth
as their vessels will hold, though not as much as thy Sea contains. Were the
secrets of Philosophy hid in Figures, or locked up in such Labyrinths of
Discourse, that none could come at them without a clue; that one might say of
them as Aristotle of his books, (...), they were, and they were not divulged.
Nay, must the mystical rites of superstitious and idolatrous worships, have
their maskes, lest they should be prostituted to vulgar contempt by naked
representations? which there was great reason to fear, if they had not hid
their baseness with thick curtains; Now, though Christ's doctrines need no
veyle for such respects, for they blush not before the Sun; yet, why only
should the pearls of incomparable price be exposed to unworthy swine? No,
Christ justly hid the mysteries of his kingdom f^on the malicious, and wisely
put the plain-hearted upon the study of their own concernments, for, though he
has laid plain before them, whatsoever is necessary, yet, by seeking, they
find more of that, which is next to necessary (i.e.) very profitable, and so
perfect their understandings with abundance of Truth, and more firmly establish
their Faith, by the consideration of it; and either of these payments, is a
sufficient price of their labor: so much of Parables in general.

Now, though this paragraph (beginning verse the 19. to the end of the Chapter)
be not expressly called a Parable, as many others, which are unquestionably
such, are also set down without the name; yet, I cannot understand it
otherwise. For, what tongue could Dives have, whose body was in the Grave? Or,
what fingers should Lazarus dip in water, who was unbodied? Do flames of
material fire burn souls, or singe our thoughts as they pass through them? The
great Gulf denotes a hinderance of converse between blessed and damned spirits.
What comfort can the just, made perfect, give to those, who are, not only
condemned, but executed? To upbraid the miserable is a thing unspeakably below
the temper of the blessed, who are so because they were forgiven; and now their
tranquillity is freed from the groans and cries of the damned, as a most
unacceptable disturbance. It is unlikely that those which are in Hell make
prayers to the Saints in Heaven; so that, what is set down as spoken, signifies
only what was fit to be said, if any words were to be made of such matters. Our
expectation therefore from this Scripture must lie upon that, which is indeed
the main of all Parables, The scope to which it was directed: and here Christ
teaches two things.

1. That a poor man whose soul is rich in goodness, though he be distressed
in this world, shall one day be carried into the Regions of Repose and Bliss:
and the luxurious unmercifull rich shall suffer ineffable torments.

2. That observance of the directions of the holy Scriptures, is the right way
to escape those torments, and to be made partakers of rest in Abraham's bosom;
that is, true happiness.

My design is upon the latter, which lies fair in the verses read. For, our
Savior, representing man's foolish after-wit by Dives his request, that Lazarus
might rise from the dead; and, with relations of strange things in the other
world fright his brethren from their sins, does also show the true way to the
Living in Abraham's answer, They have Moses and the Prophets, the sufficient
guidance of the Scriptures; and if they will not follow that, there is no
reason one shonld be sent from the dead, to preach to them, neither if one did
come, would they heed him.

Now, lest any should stumble at the threshold of my discourse, before I go any
further, I will remove a scruple or two, which may possibly lie in the way.
Once is, Why do you say, Object. 1.
the guidance of the holy Scriptures? so the New Testament is included, whereas
it is said here, only Moses and the Prophets, that is, the Old Testament?

I say the New Testament also because Moses and the Prophets direct so, Answ.
and that is a good warrant: to observe the direction of the New Testament, is
a great piece of the guidance of the Old. As for Moses, he wrote so much of
Christ, that, when he himself disputed with the Jews, he thence convinced them
of malicious unbelief. Joh. 5. 46.
Had you believed Moses sayings, you would have believed me, for he wrote of
me. What did he write? you may read in his book called Deuteronomy these words,
Chapt. 18. 15.
God will raise up unto thee a Prophet like unto me, of thy brethren, according
to thy desire, and I will put my words into his mouth, and whosoever will not
hearken unto the words which he shall speak in my Name, I will require it of
him. The single-hearted Jews, aware of the divine truth of this Prophesy, were
guided, as the Magi, by a star, to Christ. So Philip and Nathanael, true
Israelites, embraced him, saying with joy, Joh. 1. 45.
We have found him of whom Moses wrote in the Law. Whom when the degenerate
Jews rejected, the wise Apostles reproved them from the same Moses, quoting
the forecited words; as we see, Acts 3. 22. therefore well might our Savior
say, Had you believed Moses? that is, Had you been, as you pretend, true
children of Abraham and genuine disciples of Moses, you would not have disowned
me, whom Moses acknowledged for his Master, and esteemed so worthy of honor,
that he counted the sufferings of Christ greater riches then the treasures of
Egypt. For, as Abraham saw my day afar off, and rejoiced, so, Moses knew the
liquid Rock, which followed them in the Desert was, (i.e.) did signify, Christ.

The Prophets also told the same tale, Mal. 4.
and Malachi that brought up the rear, and claspt the Old Testament, bad the
Jews expect the Sun of Righteousness, which was to rise and spread his
wholesome rays like wings of salvation over the world. This was written in the
close of that Economy: since therefore Moses and the Prophets told us the
desire of all Nations, whom they had long waited for, was coming; and bad the
people to prepare his way, by fitting their wicked hearts for so great a
comfort, whofoever does not receive Christ's Gospel, does not hear Moses and the
Prophets: Neither do they consider the great reasons which they afford to
convince us of this matter. For they taught that Christ was to be the light of
the Gentiles, and the Glory of Israel, and this in a sense so raised, that the
former glory stood valuable by it in no degree of comparison. He was to fulfill
the Prophesies, which had been but glorious vanities, if he had not made them
good. He was to chase away shadows, and what is the day to night? To heighten
their motives with better promises, and take off the false Comments, which had
crept upon the Law by the iniquity of the times, viz. the carelessness of the
people, and the wickedness of the Pharisees; so that the New Testament must
not be left out.

But then one may say (and some have been as foolish as to say it; Object. 2.
) We do not care for Moses and the Prophets, we have no need of the Old
Testament.

This is to run upon the other Answ.
post of the door. He that is no better advised, is just like a man, who
having a great cause depending, is resolved, let it go right or wrong, he will
use but one witness; he can have more, but he cares not for them. We do not
use to burn the Records of our Ancestors, nor to cut in pieces the evidences of
our lands, nor the Counter-parts of deeds. He which values the possession of
truth, will not easily part with one of its best witnesses. The Scripture says
as much as one can well desire in this point. Moses and Elias appeared in the
transfiguration of Christ, and were witnesses of his glory, The Gospel is his
spiritual transfiguration, and unto that Glory they bear a full and well
agreeing witness. This spirit might murmur thus, Why could not one Cherubin
have served to cover the Mercy-seat? God put two, whose faces were toward each
other, and their wings did meet. So do both the Testaments spread their golden
wings over our Throne of Grace, Christ Jesus.

What is thus said of the Old Testament, we easily learn of Christ and his
Apostles, who acknowledged the usefulness of its divine Truth, whilst they
proved their assertions by it; nay, they declared nothing but what the Prophets
foretold, and longed to have seen; by which it appears, that God has so put
them together, that it is devilish to attempt a divorce. The Apostle Paul did
not only advise Timothy to read them, 2 Timothy 3.15.
but told him that they were able to make him wise to salvation; (i.e.) were
full of divine instructions, and as fit for the Jews to walk by toward heaven,
as the morning light is for a traveller to begin his journey, and as to
himself, he professed that he had great consolation and hope through the
knowledge of the rare instances of the Old Testament, Romans 15.4.
in which he saw his hopes verified. Who would destroy such famous memorials of
Truth? and, writing to the Ephesians concerning the Church under the New
Testament, which is an habitation of God through the spirit, he says it is
built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Christ being the great
Cornerstone. Ephesians. 2. 20.
When wise men pull stones out of the foundations of their houses, then good
Christians may reject the writings of Moses, and the Prophets. So having
reconciled two that were never at odds (only some weak, or ill-minded people
seek occasion to put difference amongst near friends) and having proved that
neither are to be refused as superfluous, it remains to show, (for some doubt
it) that both are enough, and of that we have this fourfold assurance.

1. As they are Perfect Counsels of excellent wisdom, concerning the way to
happiness. 2. As they are strict injunctions of Divine Authority concerning
our Duties. 3. As they contain the strongest Proofs of our Obligation to
these Duties, and such as are no where else, and so are the best persuasions to
our Wills. 4. As they are a Proposal of all these Truths to our understandings,
in a way of most fair and full credibility.
1 Arg.
They are perfect Counsels of excellent wisdom concerning the way to
Happiness. They are a full advice, and a most exact Method of attaining
Bliss, prescribed by him who is the Way, the Truth, and the Life, or the true
way to Life, What lay scattered in many places, and must have been gathered
with much care, and many collections, difficult to our short apprehensions,
often tired, and so missing, it may be, what was not much further then we had
gone, is here comprised to our hands in a perfect summary. Truths, otherwhere
hid under much Rubbish, and mixed with many mistakes, are here pure and clear
in the spring, not mudded with careless or beastly feet. What is obscured in
others by natural weakness or affected style, is here plain enough through
the superintendency of the Divine spirit. So that good men may here expect
whatsoever is true, wise, necessary or useful. There is no plant of
Righteousness, no wholesome herb in the world, but it was carried out of
Christ's garden (who planted them in Paradise?) and therefore he might well put
them in his Gospel, they were his own, and when they were scattered, he
gathered them together again: as God showed his regard to the Decalogue, by
writing it the second time, after Moses had rashly broken the first Tables.

After God had spoken by several parcels, and after diverse manners by the
Prophets, at last he sent his Son to perfect the book, write it full, and seal
it up: and this is so well done, that whosoever shall add any thing, instead
of mending the work, and doing the world a courtesy, he shall but bring a curse
upon himself: for Christ has made it (...), (i.e.) a perfect Canon.

Now that appears thus. Mat. 17. 5.
God has declared Christ to be our Prophet, Joh, 12. 49.
commanded us to hear him, Colos. 1. 19.
told him all his mind concerning us, laid up in him all the treasures of
divine wisdom. Joh. 15. 15.
He told his Disciples, all that he heard of his Father, Mat. 28. 20.
bad them go and preach it, Mar. 16. 15,16.
and promised salvation to all that should believe it. Acts 20. 27.
Paul professed that he had declared the whole Council of God in his
preaching, Gal, ^ 8.
and pronounced a curse upon any Angel, that should bring another Gospel. The
Evangelist Luke wrote all that Christ taught till his Ascension, Acts. 1. 1,2.
Joh. 20. 31.
and Saint John added as much concerning the miracles of Christ, as was enough
for motive to faith.

From all which we argue, Christ was in the bosom of the Father, and knew all;
he came from thence and told all, his Scholars at his command preached; and,
for the benefit of future times, wrote all. We acknowledge they did, received
their books, and are satisfied; only the Papists and some other Heretics, that
they might have the honor and profit to make the supply, say they did not; but
who will believe them? when Christ says, Go and preach what I have taught you,
and promises salvation to those which believe that and no more. They will make
pretty work, that after this appoint other necessaries to be believed, (i e.)
such necessaries to salvation, as one may be saved, and not believe them.

Now whereas it is objected, Object.
That Christ no doubt taught his Disciples all things necessary, and it may be
they wrote them, but they are lost; however they were trusted with the Church,
and that is to supply the defects of Scripture with unwritten Traditions.

Those which say this would deserve less blame for their boldness, Answ.
if either they truly honored the Church, as they pretend, or we read not the
Scriptures, or if, reading the Scriptures, they told us their own imperfection,
and gave notice of a Church entrusted with a power to supply their defect. But
they honor the Church just as Haman did Mordecai; he would never have said so
much should have been done to him whom the King would honor, but that he
thought himself to be the man.

And if we did not read the Scriptures, their lie might be more easily
swallowed. For they declare a perfection as to all necessaries, and so these
men peradventure speak worse then they thought at first, for they make the
Scriptures, not only imperfect, but Liars.

But, as it should have been difficult to say such things (for men ought to
speak the truth) so, it is harder to prove them, for the holy Scriptures, and
the all-wise Providence are not so easily slandered. Not the Providence of God:
for, as he was careful to give us sufficient means of salvation, and has
preserved many things which are not necessary, but because they were written,
would he not preserve what was necessary to be written and preserved?

And, if he had meant to send us to the Church upon this Errand, he would
certainly have told us where she dwelt. It were as bad as no direction, to say
there is a certain advice for you locked up in a chest, kept in terra incognita,
(i. e.) no body knows where. Abraham had given, if not misadvice, yet but
imperfect direction, when he said, Hear Moses and the Prophets, if this were
the business.

The Scripture says enough to vindicate it self, and to give satisfaction to
all considering men. That very place which they would suborn, to speak against
it self, resolves against them. Joh. 20. 30,31.
There are many more miracles which Jesus did, but these are written, that you
might believe. If one question what they were which are not written, that doubt
must remain, as to the particulars, for it says nothing of them. But it can
never be proved, that these which Rome would obtrude upon us are they; much
less that they are necessary; for the place asserts those which are recorded
to be enough. The spirit of Truth does often leave men to their wilful
mistakes; the Text speaks of miracles, and they quote it for Doctrines.

But that the Scripture has no defect in this point, a man may soon see; for,
let any body compare the Provisions which are in the Scripture with his own
necessities, and if he be not supplied there, we may safely say, he has some
want, that is beyond the case of men that need nothing but salvation. As to
salvation, we need instruction only in three points, and there we have it.

1. As to God; and for that the (...) has suffiently declared to us his Nature
and his Will, what he is, and what he would have us do, and what we may expect,
How he will be worshipped; How we may partake of his love, continue in it, and
be happy in him.

2. As we relate to others, he has taught us how to behave our selves to them
in his most perfect Rules, Love thy neighbor as thy self, Do what thou would
have done to thee, and what thou would not have done to thee, do not to
another.

These he has explained in special precepts, so filled with all necessary
instances of Duty, Justice, and Charity, that well may a wronged man complain
of his Brothers injury, but not of Christ, because he did not forbid him to do
it. The murmuring poor may complain of their hard-hearted neighbor, but not
of Christ for neglecting to command Charity. He has bid us imitate the Father
with Charity as large as the Sunbeams, to forgive love, and help our enemies,
and overcome all evil with good.

3. As to the Government of our selves, how discreet and prudent would that be,
if we followed Christ's directions?

He, if any, taught the (...), the right estimations of soul and body, that we
are, what we are, most upon the account of soul, whole nature and duration he
has declared and taught to provide for immortality. He has also chalked out
the proportions of worldly cares, the measures of our passions. Both the roots
of Passion are secure, if we keep his rules for Desire and Anger. One may say
to all other Physicians, not only, How imperfect are your cures in comparison
of Christ's, but how short your prescriptions? what soberness of mind? What
Temperance, Meekness, and Peace, are the products of his precepts? He which
reads Christ's words duly, is perfectly instructed to every good work. He that
has lodged these provisions in his soul, may bring out of his treasures new
and old, like a Scribe thoroughly instructed to the Kingdom of God.

So that if the Grace which Christ has brought to light in the Gospel, has
taught us Godliness, Righteousness, and Sobriety, we may say with Tertullian;
Lib. de praescrip. adversus Haeret.
Nobis curiositate opus non est post Christum Iesum, nec inquisitione post
Evangelium. Hoc enim prius credimus, non esse quod ultra credere debemus. The
Scripture is so far from defect in this kind, that it is redundant; we have
many things, very profitable added, besides the necessary, and both these more
then once, or in one book. See a strange appetite! when men have more then they
will do, though it be necessary, yet they would have more to do, though it be
not necessary; nor it may be at all profitable. What folly is this? This is a
design not to be keepers, but makers of Commandments, praeceptorum
emendatores, as Hilary calls them; not to do Gods will, but serve their own!
Our Saviors words do easily accommodate themselves to such people, You teach
for doctrines the Commands of men, and make the word of God of no effect by
your Traditions.

Arg. 2.
But at what peril any can add to Gods word, the second Argument will show.
which is, That the Scriptures are also strict injunctions of Divine Authority
concerning our duties. The reason of our faith and obedience to the Scriptures,
is resolved into their divine Authority, which as it is the greatest of all; so
upon less we may not depend. Of his Authority we may truly say that it is
(...). Pind.



God is infallible in his understanding, faithful in his declarations, and so
highly deserves our Assent. He is Almighty and most true, and therefore we
believe and hope in the promises of his word. As God, he has a Right to
command, and we as creatures are obliged to obey, and so we receive his
commands. Gods authority only could justly make us believe, obey, and fear,
what is there declared, promised, commanded, and threatened.

There is a place of Scripture which the Papists do impertinently allege for
the obscurity, (i. e.) the dishonor of Gods word; which as it is nothing to
their purpose, so it does most excellently serve to prove what we have in hand.
2 Pet. 1. 20,21.
(...) Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the Scripture is of any private
interpretation. The design of the Apostle was the same with mine, to exhort
Christians to give heed to the Scriptures, as such Oracles which would not
deceive them. He affirms the prophetic word surer then a private revelation,
which he, James and John had in the Mount, and commends the diligent heed they
gave to it, till the day star should arise, peradventure till the truth of the
prophesies of Christ shined forth in their accomplishment. But the stresse of
all this hope in the Scriptures, lies upon this, that none of them were (...)
of pri(...) impulse; meaning, as Saint ^aul says in other words, (...), 2 Timothy
3. 16.
All Scripture is divinely inspired. And this appears by the verse that
follows: Verse. 21.
For the prophecy came not in old time by the will of man: but holy men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost. So that (...) signifies they are
not of men's private will, but from the divine spirit. The Prophets did not go
on their own head, as we say, but on Gods errand. When God reproved those that
went without his bidding, he says thus, (...) I sent them not, Jer. 23. 21.
and yet they ran: So that the sense will be, those holy men who delivered the
Scriptures, upon which you rely, w(...)ot what came into their minds as from
themselves, but they set down Gods will.

The other sense of (...) for solution or explication, in which some worthy
persons do take it, and in which sense it is used in good authors (for so
Iamblicus in the 21 Chapter of his Protrepticks, being about to expound
Pythagoras his short precepts, says, (...) I will give the exposition of every
precept:) is so far from disagreeing with the former, that it is a necessary
consequence from it, as the best ground: for if the Prophets delivered not
their own will, but Gods mind, we must not resolve them into our sense, but
take his. The Scriptures were given to express Gods meaning, not to have ours
impressed upon them. So that take the word in any possible sense, this place is
pitifully urged against the plainness of the Scriptures, unless we imagine
that the Apostle should urge good men to trust the Scriptures, because they
could not tell what they meant; which as it is most absurd to his purpose, so
all that it does afford for argument to prove the obscurity of the Scriptures
is but this, Because a man will not let me put what sense I please upon his
words, therefore I cannot tell what he says,

But as we see what little reason there is for that triumph in which the
Papists bring this particular Scripture to accuse the whole of obscurity (for
it neither speaks of their obscurity nor plainness) so we see by it, how great
reason we have to believe the Scriptures, since their authority is from God. It
is a plain consequence, since the holy perimen neither invented them by their
wit, nor writ them of their own will, but delivered Gods sense at his
appointment, that we ought to give them all possible credit and observance.

But what should I speak of men's authority, or of believeing Moses, the
Prophets or Apostles upon their own account? Moses was but a servant, and once
so disobedient, that for it he was kept out of Canaan, and if his design had
been to have had credit for his own authority, he would never have lessened it
with that story. The Prophets were subject to like passions with our selves
(i.e.) they were men. The Apostles were weak in themselves, and so far from
being the New Wine of the Gospel, that till Christ had strengthened them with
new principles, they were like old torn bottles, they could not receive it. But
this hinders not their acceptance, their authority is from God. He took the
stammering Moses; and made him a God, (i.e.) a divine teacher to the Church.
Moses was conscious of his own inability, and loath to stir, but at Gods command
he took up his bundle of ceremonies, and carried an Vmbrella to the Sun of
Righteousness. The Prophets, as was said just now, spoke not of private
impulse, but God spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets ever since the world
began. The Apostles were commanded to stay till they were clothed with power
from on high, and when they had that divine accomplishment, they preached, and
Christ whom they preached, was believed on in the world: So that it is great
reason we should believe their writings, for they are the word of God.

If any ask, How does that appear? I answer, By three divine Seals annexed to
them, and a peculiar signature or mark of divine authority, which I do not find
in any other book.

1. The spirit of Prophecy, which foretold such things as are beyond the skill
of nature, and art to foresee. 2. The power of miracles which performed such
things as are above the power of nature, and art, to do. 3. The resurrection
of the great Preacher of the Gospel, Christ Jesus, after he had been dead aad
buried three days.
1. The spirit of Prophecy which foretold such things as are beyond the skill
of nature, and art to foresee: I call the first Seal. All the world has
acknowledged divinity in such praescience. The Latins made known their sense
of it to be such in the name by which they called it, that is, Divinatio, and
they and the Greeks both confirmed, this opinion, by offering sacrifice when
they consulted their Oracles concerning things to come. Men can foresee what
is visible in the causes, and curious eyes will discern that which is hid from
common sight: but to foretell future contingents, as we call them, is a thing
not to be done but by extraordinary communion with God. Isaiah by this divine
prerogative, put the heathen Idols to a Nonplus, Declare things to come, that
we may know you are Gods.

Nebuchadnezzars Magi would have been as much to seek for the true
interpretation, if he had told them his prophetical dream, as they were for the
dream it self, when he had lost it, which a penman of the holy Scripture found
out and interpreted; and they confessed the Truth, that it was only by the
power of the immortal God.

Of this testimony the Scripture has abundance of instances, and though they
be not so common in the New Testament, there is good reason for that, because
then was the time of accomplishing predictions; and therefore it says, This is
the acceptable time, behold the Lamb of God, etc. To foresee now was to
overlook, yet this spirit also appears manifestly in the Gospel, both in Christ
and his Apostles. Who has not read the twenty fourth of Matthew? where the
whole progress of the Gospel is foretold, to wit, that it should be preached to
all nations by the Apostles, that they should be questioned before Rulers and
Judges about it, that Jerusalem should be destroyed for disobedience to it; and
since the prophesies which concerned Christ the Messiah, were concredited to
the Jews, Christ did let them see the Justice of their destruction, because
they knew not the day of their visitation, though all the marks of prophecy
concerning it were visible, Christ himself often holding them before their eyes;
A deplorable sign of a ruinous state, a fatal blindness.

Hesiod.
(...)
(...)
Miserable wretches! how can they escape destruction? they neither see what is
good for them, though it be laid before their eyes, nor give heed to those who
for a long time warned them of their danger.

That the Apostles of Christ had this spirit also, is manifest by their
respective writings.

2. The second seal is the power of miracles, that is, such things as are
above the power of nature, and art to do. Miracles are demonstrations of the
divine presence in a way extraordinary: Nothing can produce an effect above the
power of its causality. Those things which Christ performed, transcend all
ordinary power, A privatione ad habitum non datur regressus naturalis. But he
raised the dead, Lazarus also was buried four days. As he spoke as never man
spoke, so to make his works parallel with his words, he did as never man did,
It was never so seen in Israel. Nicodemus inferred right, he did such things as
no man can do, unless God be with him; meaning, above ordinary concourse; and
therefore added rationally, We know thou art a Doctor sent from God. It was a
double argument of the Messiah, which Christ sent to John by his disciples in
his Symbolicall answer, The blind receive their sight, the lame walk, the deaf
hear, etc. (i. e.) such things as were not only for^told, but miraculous.

It is true, Mountebanks may play tricks, and cunning men put cheats upon easy
people, so the Thessalians, knowing the time of Eclipses, made their ignorant
neighbors believe, that they pulled down the Moon with their verses; but by
which of their Devices, nay, by which of Hippocrates Aphorisms may one learn
to cure a lame man with ones shadow, or a fever with a handkerchief?

What is further to be said in confirmation of this proof, I shall bring in by
and by to discredit the mock-miracles of some heathen pretenders quoted in
opposition to Christ; only here I may add these two things concerning such
Devices.

1. That they are not only a testimony of the worlds opinion concerning the
Divinity of miracles, but also a tacit confession that Christ did them; As
counterfeit coin speaks the use of true money. If there had not been such a way
of proof, why did they ape it?

2. That they were foretold by Christ and his Apostles, and so people were not
only forewarned of a danger, but confirmed in the belief of the Truth, when
they saw the predictions written concerning Impostors exactly fulfilled. For as
the predictions and prefigurations of Christ by the Prophets, made way for his
reception, when he came as the true Messia, so the predictions and
predescriptions of Antichrist, written by Christ and his Apostles, gave
argument against them, when they came accordingly to be Impostors.

3. The third Seal is the Resurrection of the great Doctor of divine Truths,
after he had bin dead and buried three days, And here behold the incomparable
wisdom of divine Providence, which brings day out of darkness, and turns the
shadow of death into the morning, the death of Christ (a great piece of the
mystery of Redemption, for his blood was shed for the Remission of our sins)
put a doubt upon his doctrine, and staggered his Disciples. But this cloud made
only way for a more illustrious appearance of his Truth, for the Resurrection
took off all doubts arising from his death, and his Gospel gained confirmation,
as a Truth does from a clear answer, to a strong objection. Indeed it was to be
feared, that the doctrines of Christ would have lien in the dust, if he had not
brought it forth with his own Resurrection: and therefore Saint Paul does well
say, that he was strongly declared to be the Son of God, Romans 1. 4.
by the Resurrection from the dead.

Indeed his murderers persuaded the soldiers with money, to affirm that his
Disciples stole him from the grave, but how came they to steal his soul into
him, and to steal a power from his life to work miracles in his name? It is
possible to make a lie, but impossible to hide it in so great a matter. Why did
none of the Antichrists rise out of their graves, and confront those which
adhered to Christ, and after forty days converse with worthy persons by a
glorious ascension before competent witnesses endeavor to get belief in the
world? No, no, God will not be a witness of falsehood.

Besides these, there is also a peculiar kind of signature or mark of divine
authority upon these writings; one may think that Gods character, which men
never usurped (i.e.) Dreadful threatenings pronounced against such as should
disobey this Revelation. What Philosopher ever used the mode of such Authority?
for the things menaced; what Tyrant ever mentioned them? or if he had, the
Majesty had been ridiculous. Eternal punishments! poor men! when they are so
ill minded they can kill the body, but that is all they can do; God says, fear
me who can cast soul and body into Hell. What man ever stamp't that Image upon
his book!

There are most becoming the divine Majesty, for they are not only Authority,
but full of wisdom and love; for since fear was a tool meet for Gods work, he
made fit matter for it, and in the use of these threatenings, the great Father
of the world threatens his children, that so by a wise fear they may escape
the feeling of his Rod.

(...).
And as the same Poet says excellently in another place, (...)
(...),
(...).
He punishes in love, and his threatenings are in their natural tendency
wholesome, since God has among many other things formed them for our
preservation. Threatenings are prudence and love clothed with Majesty. Since men
are not sufficiently frighted with being sinners, and think it not enough to
see how ugly sin is in it self, God sets also before them its miserable
Attendants, Pale Death, Wan Fear, Grim Terrors, and these Eternal. Who but
God commanded his servants and threatened them Hell, if they obeyed not? Fear ye
not me who set bounds to the Sea, and when it swells, makes its own waves roll
it in again, as a stubborn slave is pulled back by his own hair? Fear thou
not me, in whose hand is thy life, thy breath and all thy ways? who will come
in flaming fire, and render vengeance to all that wilfully know me not, and
disobey my Gospel? So much for the consideration of the divine authority of the
Scripture.

Arg. 3.
The Scriptures contain the strongest proofs of our obligation to our duties,
and such as are no where else, and so are the best perswasives to our wills. I
shall number only four, and those briefly.

1. The Incarnation of the Son of God, the word was made flesh; A wonderful
grace to our nature, and denied to Angels. That we might not doubt but we may
go up to God, behold; he comes down to us, his Tabernacle is pitched in flesh,
I, now he is Emmanuel. God comes into our Nature to call us home to himself.
What will make us like unto God, if he do not, when he is made so like unto us?
Who can unfold the mercies lapp't up in this Mystery? In this good Angels find
wonder and joy, Devils horror and envy, but all good men the greatest
occasion of love and obedience imaginable; especially if it be joined with the
second consideration.

2. And that is the wonderful death of the Son of God, so made man. He offered
up himself by the Eternal Spirit, and shed his blood for the pardon of our
sins. He took our Bond and nailed it to his Cross, and there cancelled it with
his blood. Look up sinner and behold the guilt of thy Trespasses falling off,
like the wax of a broken Seal. That we the enemies of God, might learn the
goodness of Reconciliation, God does act it first, who was not engaged to it,
but by the goodness of his own Nature. The Father loves, the Son dies; we are
loved and pardoned, that we might see how base a thing it is to sin, be
impenitent, and hate. He slew the enmity upon the Cross, in his own death he
killed our hate, or in himself, I, in himself, where else should he break the
flint, but upon the Cushion, our hard hearts, upon his own most soft and loving
bosom?

3. We have here the most excellent example of Christ, which does secure our
direction, and perfect our encouragements. Men think themselves in a good safe
road, where they have ever and anon a Mercurial Statue pointing to their way,
but what perfection would be added to their guidance if it went along with
them? Christ does not only show us, where we should go, as in a Map, but goes
before us as a sure guide, and a comfortable companion. Si quis unquam fuerit,
ille comes in via pro vehiculo est. I, may we say, now we know what we should
be, and do in these bodies, for the word made flesh has shown us. This is
great encouragement to all that are of the right brood of Travelers; for in
the worse way Christ goes before, breaks the Ice, and when we go up hill, lends
us his hand. But why do I point any longer unto this Sun, which from the
Scriptures shines so comfortably upon all good men?

4. He has engaged our obedience with most incomparable promises; such as he
only could make, such as he only could perform. What the Pharisees said of
one sort, we may say of the rest, Who can forgive sins but God? It is
impossible to serve God for nothing. For he pays all his servants before hand,
but he is not so content, for he will add such wages, as none can give their
servants; Not Earth or Tin, or poor matters in the power of Kings, but things
worthy of God, Eternal Life, and Bliss. If these were as truly believed, as
they are plainly revealed, we should find our selves sufficiently obliged to
obedience, and it concerns all that desire to be saved to look to it: but
because they are so plainly revealed, I shall speak no further of them.

Now if any say that these things are enough, Arg. 4.
if they can be proved to be true, I hasten to the fourth particular head;
(i.e.) That the Scriptures are a proposal of all these Truths to our
understandings in a way of most fair and full credibility, and that appears in
these three things.

1. The way of proposal is most credible. 2. The things propounded, are in
themselves evidently true. 3. The expressions in which they are laid down, are
plain, and fairly intelligible.
No man can say, but when things are propounded so, he is fairly dealt withal.

1. First, The way of proposal is most credible, That whatsoever God says is
true, is the ground upon which this assertion sets its foot, and that is such a
great Truth, that it is above the necessity of proof. He which believes there
is a God, believes his Veracity, and he which believes not that there is a God,
has no reason to believe any thing. He has no reason to believe any thing, if
there be not Truth. And if there be not a God, there is nothing, and so no
truth.

But as that foundation is firm and unquestionable, What God says is true, I
must build two things upon it, and on them the credibility of the first
particular is founded. viz.

1. That since, what God says is true, we ought to receive whatsoever, we have
abundant reason to believe that God did say it. 2. Whatsoever comes to us as
Gods word, we ought by no means to reject it, without most weighty reasons to
make us think that God did not say it.
1. As to the first, Scripture is the way of proposal, (i. e.) God has written
his mind to us; now we have two great reasons to make us believe this writing
to be his word.

1. Because writing was the fittest way to communicate his will to us. 2.
Because since all writings need witness, that we might not doubt this to be
his, he has sent it attested by the witness of all those that were worthy to
be believed, (i. e.) the good men of all ages.
1. Because writing was the fittest way to communicate the Gospel or his will
to us, that appears thus; All the Nations and ages of the world, could not be
present at the birth of Christ, nor be eyewitnesses of his miracles, see him
rise out of grave, and ascend into heaven, put their fingers into his side,
etc. what then? will they not believe unless they do? shall Christ be
crucified afresh in every age, that we may see him rise from the dead? but
because Christ was not to remain always below, nor come again in that manner,
and it concerned the world to know the Gospel, God committed it to writing, and
has made the holy Scriptures the safe Repositories of his Truth, that is,
excellent preservatives against weakness of memory, and the rust of malicious
designs, Orig. in diverse. Hom. 2.
Monumentum Christi est divina Scriptura, in qua divinitatis and humanitatis
ejus mysteria densitate literae veluti quadam muniuntur Petra.

How much God was in love with this way appeared of old, for though he was
pleased to converse familiarly with his plain friends the Patriarchs, yet lest
his counsels should slip out of the frail minds of men, he commanded Moses to
write them. Litera scripta manet. The Jews nice care of the letters was well
made use of by God; for it became Septum Legis, whilst they looked to the
words, God secured the sense: and how unsure all other ways are, we may
perceive in that the Church has not preserved the remembrance of Christ's
miracles, which were unwritten. Language is the Garb of Truth, it comes not
abroad till it be clothed in words; and since Christ was not to stay here to
preach always, he enabled those whom he deputed to declare his will in several
languages, that it might be understood by diverse Nations, when it was spoken
and heard, and because the Apostles were to die too, he commanded them to write
it, and has enabled his Church to translate it into the several languages of
the world, and so they understand it being written and read.

And herein God showed his care of the Unlearned, who are the greater part of
the world; for though they cannot read the Original; yet having a Translation,
which, in that it is a Translation, agrees with the Original, they receive the
same mind of God that the Learned do. Why should any man be unsatisfied with
this way of delivery, whereas Princes and States, in matters which they esteem
the greatest, receive the Proposals of Ambassadors by an Interpreter? If to
read, or hear these read, be not sufficient to direct us, what shall become of
the blind, who can neither read Original nor Translation? And if any think that
they say a great matter against Translations, when they affirm, That we know
not the signification of Hebrew and Greek words, but by the report of men. They
may as well say so of our Mother Tongue; for we know not that this word Book
signifies, that which men commonly understand when they hear that word
pronounced, but that we are told so; shall an Englishman for this fine reason
doubt, whether he can speak true English or no? or shall any child neglect his
Duty to his Parents, whom he can know but by Report? Behold how many ways can
the divine Providence use one thing? The first division of Tongues broke a
foolish attempt of scaling the skies; This second furthered a Noble Design of
lifting us up the right way to Heaven. By the courtesy of so many Translations,
the Holy Ghost appears again in cloven Tongues. Those men which would make us
believe the written word, is no fit Rule, because every body skills not the
Hebrew and Greek, do not only say that they are not a rule to us, but that
they were not to the Jews or Grecians. For it is probable some Jews, and more
then probable, that many Greeks could no more read Greek or Hebrew, then many
now can read English: and how did they do? If we may be deceived by those which
interpret, so might they by those which read. But if they say, as they would
fain have it, that the Jews had an infallible spirit, then it is lawful to ask
where he lay asleep, whilst the Jews, being wickedly misled, rejected the
Messiah?

2. As the Scripture was the best way, and therefore most likely to be made use
of by the wise God, so that we might believe that he did, We have the testimony
of all that were worthy to be believed, (i. e.) good men in all ages. The first
age saw things, writ the truth, and so witnessed to it. The next age received,
believed, and obeyed the truth, and expressed as great effects of the power of
it, as the first, and so on. So that we may say as Saint Paul to Timothy, We
will mind the Scriptures, knowing of whom we have received them. Those who
could not be willing to deceive themselves (for they ventured this and the
other world on it) and they which did so, what design could they have upon us?

2. The second assertion abovementioned is, that whatsoever comes to us as
Gods word, we ought not to reject it without weighty reasons, to make us think
he did not say it, Against the Scriptures, we can imagine but two things
objectable in this point.

1. Invalidity in the evidence given for them. 2. Sufficient Counter-witnesse
against them.
1. As to the first, what can invalidate the evidence? Insufficiency can be
imputed but upon two accounts, either they know not the things they wrote, or
they did not write the truth they knew, as some Heretics said in Tertullians
time. Libr. Contra Haeret.
Solent dicere non omnia Apostolos scisse, eadem agitati dementia, qua rursus,
convertunt, omnia quidem Apostolos scisse, sed non omnia omnibus tradidisse, in
utroque Christum reprehensioni subjicientes, qui aut minus instructos aut parum
simplices Apostolos miserit. They use to say that the Apostles knew not all
things, and being acted by the same madness, they confess that the Apostles
might know all things, but that they did not deliver them; in both reproaching
Christ, as one that sent messengers, which either knew not their errand, or
were not so honest as to deliver it. What did they not know? how could they but
know? they were the Disciples of Christ, or such as conversed with them. Quis
integrae mentis credere potest eos aliquid ignorasse, quos Dominus individuos
habuit in comitatu, in discipulatu, in convictu? etc. They were such as walked
with Christ, eat with him, or were scarce ever out of his company, or such as
wrote from the mouths of these, and therefore they knew: and that they should
not relate truly what they knew, what can make any wise man think? What, would
they lose their present fortunes, and capacity to all worldly advantages, and
expose themselves to all contempt and cruelty for what they knew to be a lie?
and this too only to please themselves in writing Christian Religion, which of
all things does abominate a lie?

2. There is no sufficient Counter-witnesse against them, none ought to be
esteemed such but the first age, and that affords none, for they saw the things
done, and many wrote them, and their pens did but bear witness with their
eyes; and the rest saw them or might see them. (...); Luke 24. 18.
Art thou only that one of all that sojourne in Jerusalem, that know not
these things? or though thou do but sojourn there, how can thou be ignorant
of them? for they were not done in a corner, as Saint Paul said to Agrippa.
They were of a public cognizance, and notoriously known, which had almost
persuaded him to become a Christian, which how was it possible, if they had not
been perfectly void of all suspicion of falsehood?

For the next age, who can imagine, but they would have hissed them off the
Stage, if they had acted any thing but true stories? Could the second age,
which saw not the things themselves, be seduced to believe them, when they were
against their worldly interest, and such things, as they which related them;
could not prove to be true in an ordinary way, but that they had good assurance
that they came from God? So that what any rail afterward, is of too late a
date, to signify any thing to wise and good men. Who ever of any credit; nay
who at all wrote against Christ, as the Apostles wrote for him? What they saw
with their eyes, or heard with their ears, as Saint John, Joh. 1.1.
or (...) as Saint Luke. Luke 1.
Even as they delivered them unto us, which from the beginning were
eyewitnesses, and Ministers, of the word. Christ had three famous Ranks of
enemies, and they gave their testimony for him, Jews, Devils, and Heathen
Philosophers.

1. The Jews were his sworn enemies, and when they brought Christ or his
followers before Magistrates, they accused them of civil sedition, or for
speaking that which they then owned, but not for forgery, as we read in the
accusation of Christ at Jerusalem by the High Priest, and by Tertullus Oration
before Festus. The Magistrates, though most of them had a mind to please the
Jews, and were few of them such as they should be, yet they only commanded
them to preach no more in that name, but not reproved them for lying, which to
have done, would have been as vain an attempt, as the former proved. For they
were no sooner gone forth, but they preached Christ, and confirmed the truth
with miracles, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles.

Besides this, the Jews in their books say so much for him, that they are a
proof against themselves of falsehood, in what they spoke against Christ. They
confess him to have been a great Prophet, and to have wrought miracles, (i.e.)
in their opinion, he had Gods witness: Joseph. apud Eusebius. de demonst. Evang.
lib. 3.
((...)) And what can any man unless malice has made him mad, say against
him, in whose behalf he confesses, that God has borne Testimony? But see
whither malice will carry one! A man will fall rather then be supported by one
whom he causelessly hates. If there be not a New Testament, what will become of
the Old? Christian Religion and the Verity thereof is the only proof, that
Moses and the rest were true Prophets.

2. The Devils were notorious enemies, and pretended that Christ tormented
them before their time with his appearance, and spoiled their Devilish sport.
(...) yet they confessed him to be the Son of God, though he slighted their
witness, if their witness was worth any thing, he had it; if they thought to
lessen him by their testimony, the malice of their design was a confirmation of
his goodness. But why should he own their testimony whom he knew to be liars
from the beginning? so the Lacedaemonians would not have a good saying sullied
with a wicked mouth.

But as the Devils durst not but give Christ his due, so the heathen world had
reason to believe their testimony, for they took the Devils sayings for divine
Oracles, and as they saw them silenced, Iuven.
Delphis oracula cessant, so the Oracle told them who did it, as it was
breathing some of its last gasps.

(...),
(...).
The Hebrew child commands me to hold my tongue and be gone. Porphyrie the
enemy of Christ does not only confess the former. (...),
(...)
O me! my Tripodes are over-thrown,
The true Sun puts out the false one;
Buth does also plainly confess who that Sun was; (...). Since Christ was
worshipped, Eusebius. de prepar. Evang. lib. 5. cap. 1.
we lost the public benefit of the Gods. The Oracle which Julian also
consulted could not speak, being choked with the bones of a Christian Martyr
Babylas, who was buried hard by. Lib. de def. orac.
Had Plutarch but minded this, it would have saved him a great deal of labor,
which he spent in vain, to assign to many foolish causes of the defect of
Oracles. Neither would he have so perverted the story, which he reports
concerning the hovvling of the Devils upon Thamus his proclaiming, (...) The
news of great Pan's death; as he failed by the Palodes, it was but a
contradiction to himself to think any great Devil was dead, and that the rest
hovvl'd for him, for the esteemed them immortal spirits. But if by that great
Pan the God of Shepherds, was fignified Christ, the Shepherd of the Sheep,
Heb. 13. 20.
(...), great in his death, as the Author to the Hebrews calls him, (though
our Translation perverts the sense of the place) who died about this time: They
had great reason to howl, for by death he destroyed him that had (...), the
Kingdom or Dominion of death, (i. e.) the Devil. for so (...),
(...).
He killed death, tormented Hell, and slew the murderer. For as Christ had
before told us that he would, so now he did bind the strong man, the Devil,
and spoiled his goods, those Tripodes, Images, and the rest of the Idolatrous
Luggage, were his chief household stuff, which he took up and went his way, as
Plutarch witnesses. (...)

3. The Heathen Philosophers bore witness to him, many of which being
convinced with the demonstration of his truth became Christians. Dionysius the
Areopagite, Polycarp, Justin, Irenaeus, Athenagoras, etc. They were
acknowledged Philosophers, and whether they were true converts or no, they
showed, for diverse of them became Martyrs, I may add to those named before
Origin, who when the deluge of Idolatry had overspread the learned world, was
that holy Ark in which Philosophy was preserved for the service of Christian
Religion; a sufficient proof of this he gave in the confutation of that railer
Celsus; for he took off the danger of his blafphemies, and chastised the bold
wit of his lying pen, and spoiled the heathenish hopes by undoing that foolish
objection, to wit, that none but the rude multitude became disciples of Christ,
they saw it was not want of learning that made them Christians, for Origin had
so much, that the most learned Plotinus seeing him amongst his Auditors blushed,
and after a few words abruptly brake off his Lecture.

But why should I go about to reckon those stars, which gave light to this
truth? and whereas it is said, that there were many others; which darkened all
those that misled Converts could say, we may easily make answer to this.

Amongst these Celsus must have the disgrace to be named first, for he was the
first that wrote against Christian Religion. He denied not the miracles of
Christ, but would needs persuade the world that they were Magical. But as he
might learn this of the Jews, for he read the New Testament, though to a most
hellish end, so there he might have learned an answer. When Christ cast out
Devils, they said it was by Beelzebub a Prince among them, but Christ does
convince them of folly for thinking that a Prince would assist to destroy his
own kingdom, and condemns them by their own Disciples, whom they acknowledged
to do it by divine power; by which means they were convinced of saying nothing
to the purpose, or else more then they wist against themselves. Celsus his
design was not only overthrown in words by Origin, as appears in his most
excellent books, but whilst he disputed against motion, Origin walked up and
down, (i.e.) whilst one cavil'd at Christ's miracles, the other and his
contemporaries did them by his Name and Prayers. So the Disciples of Christ
long before by special Miracles, ((...)) coverted the (...), those which used
Magical Arts, and they burnt their Conjuring books. Acts 19. 19.
It Is most unreasonable to think that the Devils had a finger in this work: for
the Gospel which these miracles confirmed, was their extirpapation wherever
it came.

So Origin having in word and deed, made a just vindication of our Saviors
honor, to cut off all further objections at one blow (in the second of his
books against Celsus) sets him this impossible task. (...) (i.e.) Let him show
us not many but a few, nay but one, such as Christ was, who with the divine
glory of his Miracles and powerful wisdom of his holy doctrine did so much good
unto mankind, mended the world which lay in wickedness, and of the worst of
men, made so many thousands good.

Arnobius seeing them gravel'd with this, Disput. cont. Gent. lib. 1.
made them a great abatement, and put the challenge with this variation.
Potestis aliquem nobis monstrare ex omnibus illis magis, qui unquam fuere per
secula, consimile aliquid Christo millesima ex part qui fecerit! qui sine ulla
vi carminum, etc. (i.e.) Can you show us any of the Magicians in any age, which
performed but the thousand part of what Christ did? who without any
enchantments, juices of herbs, observations of sacrifices, or times, did such
things by the power of his great Name? Nothing hurtful, nothing destructive,
but things worthy of God, full of goodness, and help to men, etc.

Unto these demands Porphyry could give no satisfaction; though he took up the
Cudgells which were beaten out of the hands of Celsus, moved probably with
indignation, to see the blood of one of his own party run down so fresh,
whose head was justly not long before broken by Origin. But he resolved to
express his hatred of the Christian Religion, thongh he had nothing to stuff
his books withal, but such railing as Celsus had before him used, as Hierom
witnesses in his preface to his Commentaries upon the Epistle to the
Galatians. A little after, Hierocles thinking the matter but imperfectly done,
tried once more to mend it, and he went so far in the way of the former, that
as Eusebius reports, he wrote again the very selfsame things which they had
wrote before him. (...). He stole impudently out of their writings not only the
sense, but the very words and syllables, only he attempted to answer the
question of Origin by naming Apollonius Tyanaeus whom he would needs put as a
great Antichrist in comparison of our Savior as equalled and excelled by his
works. But the answer to him is not hard, for as the things which he opposes
are no way comparable, so the evidence of of them is very insufficient, viz.
the book of one single Fabler. The things were slight; for though he tells
strange stories, they go far short of his purpose, being some grossly wicked,
sundry of them Magical devices, many pitifully insignificant, and ridiculous,
all of them of contemptible quotation to frame a comparison against Christ.

Some are grossly wicked, Lib. 4. Cap. 4.
as his offering sacrifice to appease the Ghost of Palamedes, and his making
prayers to him to lay aside his anger against the Greeks, which it seems
remained still with him in the other world, and that he would give leave, that
many of them might grow wise and good; and yet he himself durst not teach
Antisthenes, who desired to learn of him, because the Ghost of Achilles forbad
him, Ibid.
Antisthenes being forsooth one that used to speak well of his enemy, Hector.
Also at the command of this envious soul, he went an Ambassodor to the
Thessalians, to persuade them to renew their sacrifices at the grave of
Achilles, Lib. 4. Cap. 7.
which at his Mediation they did. A good man indeed, that could find in his
heart to offer sacrifice to pacify the wicked souls of men that kept anger
and revenge, after they had departed this life?

Lib. 3. Cap. 13.
Among his Magical devices I reckon his seven rings, which he called after the
names of the seven Planets, which he wrote each day differently according to
the name of the Planet, which the day bore. These he received of the Indians,
whom Philostratus confesses Magicians, and tells many pretty stories of them,
as of their Tables, Lib. 3. Cap. 6.
which moved of themselves, and brought in dinner of bread, fruits and herbs,
which put themselves in order, better then any Cook could do. As also of their
Cisterns, two of wine, and two of water; one hot, one cold, which came into the
Dining Room of themselves, and of little pages of black brass, which mingled
the wine with water, Lib. 3. Cap. 3.
and powered it forth, also of two Hogs-heads, one filled with water, another
with wind, from which they supplied the Country, with showers, if it was dry,
or as occasion required, with fresh air, not much unlike to Homers, or the
Laplanders bottles. These things Apollonius approved, and makes great hope
concerning himself, that he should prove somebody, being one that had drunk of
the Cup of Tantalus, Lib. 3. Cap. 15.
that is, communicated with them in their secret mysteries, as we read in his
letter to Iarchas, and what he practiced according to these principles,
Philostratus sets down at large.

Other things were extremely ridiculous, as that in his journey to India, Lib.
1. Cap. 16.
finding a dead Lioness that had eight young ones in her belly. he foretold
that his stay in that country should be a year and eight months, the Lioness
signifying a year forsooth, and the young whelps, months. How ridiculous also
is that converse, which he pretended to have with the Ghost of Achilles? Lib.
4. Cap. 5.
he only asked him a few slight questions concerning Homers fabulous stories;
as whether Achilles was buried according to the relation of the Poets, whether
the Muses wept for him, whether Polixena was killed for his sake, whether Helen
was ever at Troy, and how Greece was able to send so many gallant men against
it, and lastly, whether Homer knew Palamedes, or if he did, why he did not set
down his discourses? These were the five great questions which he asked
Achilles, the resolution of such queries did as much good to the world, as a
man got with going into Jupiters Temple in Arcadia; for when he came forth,
they said his body did cast no shadow; for which was he better or worse? These
things thus storied of Apollonius, are so far from proving him equal to
Christ, that they leave him a great way short of a good man. Did our Savior
seek glory by such things? did the Apostles lean upon such reeds? Or if it be
said that he performed some things of better note, and particularly some great
cures; I answer, so did, and so do many Physicians, that desire not to be
adored for it. And if he taught some good things, so did many excellent
Philosophers, Heathenish and Christian, which one should foolishly compare with
Christ. So that though Celsus bragged that many might easily appear like unto
Christ, (but named none) and Hierocles would needs take this for one, yet we
see with what little reason he did it; as to the things reported.

And as they are not to be named in the same day with Christ's most glorious
undertaking, and performances; so their testimony for what they are, is
contemptible, one single Philostratus, Lib. 1. Cap. 3.
and he confesses that what one Damis an Assyrian whom Apollonius took up in
his way to India, had not very hansomely written concerning his travels; and
what Maximus a Cilician added concerning what Apollonius did in the City AEgae:
he gathered together at the request of Queen Iulia, and so patched up his
story. Alas, what is this to the testimony of thousands, and ten thousands of
wise and good men, that lived in the confession of Christ, and died for the
Confirmation of his Gospel. Apollonius his name for all those stories outlives
his honor, neither could that writing support any great regard of him in the
world; and indeed all it comes to is only a doubtful remembrance of such things
as most of the world never heard of, and the wisest, of those that do, deride.
Photius in his forty fourth book, as also in the twenty fourth, has marked
them with these black coals. (...). (i.e.) Philostratus gathered together a
company of absurd and incredible things, full of madness, mere fables,
invented to please Apollonius, which none of any sense or reason would believe.
And therefore Eusebius in his book entitled against Hierocles, but written
chiefly against Philostratus, did justly tax Hierocles, who was otherwise a
grave Philosopher, for the unreasonable credulity, which he gave to such odd
relations, so insufficiently witnessed, and let him see that Christians are not
such fools as he would make them, for believing in Christ Jesus,
notwithstanding all that Hierocles could gather out of that book.

Lest any should make objection against what I have said, as if the Honor of
Apollonius depended not upon the single testimony of Philostratus, I shall add
a few words. It Is true, In Divo Aureliano.
there is also a short story related by Flavius Vopiscus concerning the
apparition of Apollonius many years after his death to Aurelian the Emperor,
a little before the taking of Tyana, and that he charged the Emperor to show
mercy to the Inhabitants, Aureliane, si vis vincere, nihil est quod de civium
meorum nece cogites, etc. whereupon, he says, that Aurelian, though he had
vowed, upon their shutting the gates against him, not to leave so much as a dog
alive in the Town, intending the utter ruin of the place, yet he only killed
the Dogs, but spared all the people, except Heraclammon, by whose treachery he
gained the place; and promised a Temple and Statues to Apollonius.

If we grant this apparition to have been true, it is not such great matter. It
was not the first time, that the Devil appeared in a Prophets mantle. But we
may well suspect the Truth of it, both because it is not mentioned in Aurelians
letter to Mallius Chilo, wherein he gives him an account of the taking of
Tyana, and why he killed Heraclammon, though he spared the rest, where it seems
utterly improbable, that he would have concealed that apparition, had it been
the reason of his clemency. Besides, Vopiscus, though he says, he had this
Tale from grave men, and read it written in linen in the Vlpian Library, yet
grants that he believed it, the rather because of the greatness of Apollonius,
which he understood from Greek books, that is, those of Philostratus, which are
discredited already. And confesses in the beginning of his story, that Iunius
Tiberianus, at whose request he wrote it, in honor of Aurelian, of whom he
claimed kindred, bad him fill it up with lies or any thing, Scribe nt libet:
securus, quod velis, dicas, habiturus mendaciorum comites, quos historicae
eloquentiae miramur autores) and to take off his scruples if he had any, which
he makes no show that he had concerning Truth, he told him, that he should not
be the first that wrote lies among true things, many other Historians having
done the same.

I have made no mention of Julian called the Apostate, because I suppose his
dying confession witnessed to the Truth, that he contradicted before, if that
be true, which Theodoret relates, Lib. 3. Cap. 20.
(i.e.) that he flung his blood in the air, not with a (...), Here Cyclops,
drink thy wine, buth with the discontent of a conquered enemy, making a
murmuring acknowledgement of victory, (...), Galilaean thou have overcome. Poor
Julian! (...): Is thy tongue regenerated, and do thou thus join with the
Churches of the Galilaeans? which words he used by way of scorn, in one of his
Epistles to Iamblicus.

This I have said in part, to answer what is objected by the Heathen
Philosophers, but if we look a little further, we shall find others of their
own, more deserving faith, that blurred all the forementioned contradictions
with sufficient reproach; by reporting much more against their own Religion, in
which there is nothing of worthy mention, but they witnessed against it, (i.
e.) their Gods, their Worshippers, their Worship, and the Motives of it, which
were fained miracles.

Of their Gods, what says the learned Satyrist deriding the AEgytians for
worshipping Onions and Leeks.

O Sanctas Gentes, Iuven. Sat. 15.^
quibus haec nascuntur in hortis Numina!

O heavenly people! their Gods grow in their gardens. And Poliaenus in
Petronius having killed a Goofe which was consecrated to the obscene Idol of
Lampsacum, when the Priestesse, or rather Witch scolded at him, Peace says he.
Ecce duos aureos pono, unde possitis and Deos and Anseres emere, here is money
for thee to buy both Gods and Geese.

The forementioned Satyrist speaking of the Roman worshippers having described
their vile manners, by which they were loathsome to all good men, adds.

Iuven.
En animam and mentem, cum queis dii nocte loquantur!

These are souls meet for divine communion, which are indeed fitter to be
transported into swine, then to know divine Ecstasies.

As for their worship, the obscure Poet who it may be wrote as plain as he
durst, says that their oblations wanting that which is the spirit and
excellency of true worship; Compositum jus fasque animi, Sat. 2. Pers.
sanctosque recessus
Mentis, and incoctum generoso pectus honesto.
(i.e.) Holiness of souls deeply tinctured with virtue, were to as slight
purpose as could be.

Nempe hoc quod veneri donatae a virgin puppae, (i. e.) as much as the Virgins
received help toward their fruitfulness by offering their babies and puppets
to Venus at their marriage.

But this is not all, for the worship of their Gods and Goddesses were full of
such villainies, that modest persons were ashamed to be present at them, and
their consecrated places were filthy sinks of all fleshly lust, as they
confess themselves.

Iuven. Sat. 6. Sat. 9.
Nota bo^nae secreta Deae --
-- Nam quo non prostat faemina templo?
These things the Christians did not forget to object to them, Arnobius in his
fifth book told them home of them. Quis est enim qui credat honestatis aliquid
in ea re esse, quam ineant viles galli, etc. (i. e.) their religious rites were
so base, that to name them was against modesty (...) full of shame, that they
were only to be reproved with silence, and shut eyes.

And for their Miracles, Polybius libr. 16. in that Paragraph which is
inscribed (...), does not only confess that they were invented (...). (i. e.)
to uphold the superstition of the vulgar; but he says also, that those who
wrote such things for true History, were (...), such as wanted common sense,
and adds further, (...), let them be rejected. This Testimony is not more full
then the Relator was faith-worthy, for he was so great a lover of Truth, that
in writing a story, he regarded not Country or friends, and for that omongst
other Excellencies was admired by Cicero, Strabo, and Plutarch, as Causabon
has recorded to his praise, in the Preface which he has written to his noble
History.

So that the Adversaries proofs being disturbed and discredited by themselves,
they have no better success in their evidence against the doctrine of Christ,
then they had in the condemnation of his person, (whom the heathen judge
condemned by compulsion, and absolved according to his conscience) for after
they had packed and shuffled the matter, when all was done, the witnesses did
not agree among themselves.

2. As the way of proposal appears very credible by what has been said, so
secondly, the things so propounded, are in themselves for the most part
evidently true. Great Truths have an innate proof by which they are apt to
prevail upon men's minds to vanquish unbelief, and chase away error. The words
of the forementioned Historian, Praef. ad Polyb.
as they are recited by Causabon in his Epistle to the King of France, are most
full to this purpose. Existimo equidem naturam humano generi veritatem
constituisse Numen Maximum maximamque vim illi attribuisse. Nam cum ab omnibus
oppugnetur, atque adeo omnes nonnunquam verisimiles conjecturae a mendacio
stent, ipsa per se nescio quo modo in animos hominum sese insinuat, and modo
repent suam illam vim exerit modo e tenebris longo tempore obiecta ad extremum
suapte vi ipsa vincit obtinetque and de mendacio triumphat. How fitly did the
Historian praise the Truth which he loved?

The Truths of the Scripture like the Sunbeams, are their own Discovery, but
one may contract them into these two glasses, wherein we may have a clear view
of them, and perceive a warm influence from thence, falling upon our minds and
hearts.

1. The first is this. They are such things as are most worthy of the
Goodness, Truth, and Wisdom of God. What is more becoming the Maker of the
world, then its Reparation, considering his Goodness, which all the world does
acknowledge to be infinite? What more pertinent means then Repentance and
Remission of sins? What more can be done but to forgive our Ill, and make us
Good again? what way to take off our sins, but his Grace, since we could never
make him amends? And for the way in which he does it, (i.e.) Christ Jesus, why
should we make scruples, when he has revealed it? Did the Heathen hope from
the Nature of God (a good ground) and shall not we much more trust in that and
his Declarations, which are indeed the measure of our expectations? For his
Precepts they are all such as become the holy and just God, full of benignity,
like the Father of the World. It Is most worthy of him to teach love, that shows
so much, and it becomes a Savior to command his Disciples to forgive.

If any thing might be cavill'd at, as contrary to reason, because it seems so
to ours, it is assured, because he that made right reason, asserts it: or if
some great thing seem hard to us, who know not the true compass of created
power, yet they are made credible enough, since they are said by God, who is
Almighty in his works, and true in all his words, and so we are secured from
the error of misbelief, knowing the Scriptures and the Power of God.

2. They are such things as agree with Goodness, Truth, and Wisdom in us, so
far as there is any in us. Since the testimony of most known witnesses is the
best, we have here the most proper witness, the correspondency of revealed
Truth with the in-dwelling Truth of our own souls. What has God propounded,
but it does enable our minds, enlarge our capacities, direct our choice, secure
us in the use of means? his commands are such, as if we do, we live in them,
(i.e.) find great reward in obeying them. observance of them makes us happy, in
all our considerations, and terminates in a Calm of soul, a true peace of
Conscience, (i e.) settles us in the fairest possession of this life, and by
all prepares us for an immortal state of Bliss, and wise heathens preferred
this before all the world. Ennead. 1. lib. 6.
So Plotinus (...), etc. (i.e.) This is the greatest and last strife of souls,
in which we are to spare no labor, lest we should lose our part of that best
vision; for which we ought to despise all the Kingdoms of the world. How does
this consent to the Scripture, whose main design is to fit us for that
Immortality, which Christ has by them brought to light.

I could wish that Hierocles had written always after that sashion, which he
does in the end of his Commentaries upon the doctrine of the Pythagoreans, a
noble Sect, as Origin, that well knew them, calls them, his words are these.
(...). This is the end of the Pithagorean Discipline, that we may be made all
wing for the pursuit of divine things, and that when the time of death shall
approach, all those that have been exercised in the strifes of virtue, leaving
the Mortal body upon the ground, and putting off this lower nature, may be
prepared for their heavenly journey.

How much these things correspond with the Design of revealed Truth, every one
knows, and therefore I need not report further.

Thirdly, the Expressions in which God has delivered his mind are plain, and
fairly intelligible; his Truths are perspicuously laid down before the eyes of
men: but here we must distinguish of Truths, some are necessarily to be known
to salvation, some are not. Some things being written ad necessitatem salutis,
and some ad ubertatem cognitionis. All thing in the Scripture are not plain; woe
ever said that they were? Neither are all plain things necessary, but nothing
which is necessary, is obscure. There are many things in Scripture of which
there is use, though they be not in themselves necessary, that are plain, and
some of these are obscure, but whatever our salvation requires us necessarily
to know, we may know; for there it is plainly revealed. Such is Faith and
Piety, by which we worship God; Charity, and Righteousness which we owe to our
neighbor, (i e.) to all men; Prudence and Sobriety, by which we are taught to
govern our selves according to true reason, and are directed to the attainment
of our last end, which is happiness in God. And as long as these things are
made plain in which we are so concerned, we may well give thanks to God in the
Philosophers words. (...) Thanks be unto the blessed God, that has made all
necessary things easy, but things more difficult, not necessary.

These necessary Truths are laid down plainly in two respects.

1. Simply, and freed from all deceitful Amphibologies. There is no covering of
a double mind under dark words. The Oracles of old were infamous for juggling in
speeches equally capable of contrary interpretations. Those which lie and fear
discovery, as all liars do, had need speak as doubtfully as they can; but God
who has told us nothing but Truth has done as it became Truth with
plainness. The Devils being forced sometimes to give acceptable answers, of
whose Truth they doubted themselves, hid a contrary sense under the vain show
of a promise, and put the b^ey side outward, that so their Clients might carry
away a present comfort, and when the event answered not the expectation, the
Oracle had still a reserve. The poor men, besides the undoing of their hopes,
suffering also the abuse of their understanding.

They were deluded as much with the uncertainty of Directions: they could have
no better then the Devil knew how to give, and so when the Enquirer had
received his advice, he knew not what to do, because his Counselor, when he
gave it, knew not what to say.

Secondly, Gods will is plainly revealed, (i. e.) the meaning of his words is
so intelligibly offered to all sorts of capacities, that it requires not strong
parts, or great learning, to find it out. The Lamb may wade into it securely;
if any willing soul seek there for what he is necessarily to believe and do,
he will find the matters of his Faith and Practice clearly laid down in direct
expressions and familiar consequences, which flow as naturally from the
express words, as sweet drops do from an honey comb, not to be wrung out with
captious syllogismes, and strained with subtle art, which do only resolve our
faith into far fetch consequences. Here the learned and unlearned may read
and easily understand how they are to be saved. Their Ignorance is their sin,
that do not read, or that read they care not how. And it is no wonder, that
such as live wickedly, bring such a disgust upon their souls, against the
things here written, that at last they neither care to read nor understand
them, and by Gods just permission being blinded, let the Print be never so
fair, it will not be legible to them, so neither can a blind man see the Sun.

That these necessary Truths are so plainly revealed appears.

1. From the positive affirmation of holy writ. 2. By arguments, which are the
just consequents of sundry places of Scripture.
Deuteronomy. 30. 11, 12,13.
1. For the first sort of proofs we may take notice of that famous place of
Moses. For this Commandment, which I command thee this day, is not hidden from
thee, neither is it far off. It is not in heaven, that thou should say, who
shall go up for us to heaven and bring it unto us, that we may hear it and do
it? Neither is it beyond the Sea that thou should say, who shall go over the
Sea for us, and bring it unto us that we may hear it and do it? But the word is
very nigh unto thee in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that tbou may do it.

These words Saint Paul applies to the New Testament, Romans 10. 6,7,8. and it
may well be so applied in regard of the perspicuity of the Gospel. Epist. 2.
cap. 3.
For as he says in his Epistle to the Corinthians, we all with open face
behold as in a glass the glory of the Lord (i.e.) the doctrine of the Gospel,
and are changed into the same Image, etc. With open face, for the veil that
was upon Moses, is pulled off. The New Testament is a Counterpart of the Old,
written in fairer letters. To this Truth, the rest of the Disciples bear
witness. When our Savior preached, he made such plain revelations of Truth,
that they saw with their eyes, 1 John 1.1,2,3.
and looked upon the word of life. And that which was spoken, is as easily
understood, being written; which any body will grant, unless he be so absurd
as to say, that we know not what our friend means, when he writes to us that
which we could have understood, if he had delivered it by word of mouth.

Of those many Arguments to prove this Truth, which are necessary consequents
from diverse places of Scripture, I shall content my self with these three.

Arg. 1.
The first is taken from the Reality of that love and regard, which God
professes to man's happiness in the bestowing of his Gospel upon the world;
and that is expressed thus: He would have all men to be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the Truth. 1 Timothy 2.4.
The Apostle in the beginning of the Chapter exhorts to a great Charity, which
he would have expressed in prayers for the good of all men, and says, this is
acceptable to God, who himself has a Love to their salvation and to that end
would have them come to the knowledge of the truth; so that in these words, God
gives us to understand that he does not envy us eternal happiness, but does
extremely desire it, and has appointed means for the attainment of it.
Therefore left we should accuse the divine Love for want of sincerity, we must
conclude that these means are revealed understandably. Would God have us saved
by the knowledge or acknowledgment of his Truth, and will he not make the Truth
knowable? but how shall we know it, if it be muffled up in dark expressions?
The Truth which is here meant, is the Gospel, and that he has written in such
great Capital Letters, that he which runs may read the way to salvation. Why
should God speak to us in an unknown tongue? that which Paul says concerning
the use of intelligible speech, ((...)) in discoursing of heavenly things, is
very applicable here. 1 Cor. 14.7,11.
And even things without life giving sound, whether pipe or harp, except they
give a distinction in the sounds, how shall it be known what is piped or
harped? for if the trumpet give an uncertain sound, who shall prepare himself
to the battle? so likewise you, except you utter by the tongue words easy to be
understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye shall speak into the
air, therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall be unto him
that speaks a Barbarian, and he that speaks, shall be a Barbarian unto me.
Does not God know this, and does he not speak accordingly?

But how shall God please this vain world? some are not satisfied, because the
Scripture is so plain, they would have had it composed in more artificial
guise. There is not art enough used, and is there too much too? Lactantius in
his sixth book de Vero Cultu, whilst he reproves their impertinent folly, who
are not pleased with the decent plainness of the Scripture, gives the sum of
this argument for a reason of that plainness. Number igitur Deus and mentis, and
vocis, and linguae artifex diserte loqui non potest? imo vero summa
providentia, carere fuco voluit ea quae divina sunt, ut omnes intelligerent
quae ipse omnibus loquebatur. (i.e.) What? cannot God speak elegantly, who made
the mind and all instruments of speech? Yes, but wisdom took care, that those
divine things which he spoke to all, should not be covered with such paint and
art, as might make them less understandable to all, especially being such
things as concern Eternal Happiness.

The second argument is taken from the pocesse of divine Justice, Arg. 2.
which is expressed after this manner, 1 These. 1. 8,9.
the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming
fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ. We must take heed how we reason with God about his
judgments, but he has given leave long since to one to ask this question,
Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right? If God set a law by which he
will condemn us to unsufferable torments, if we be disobedient, does not
righteousness require that the law should be made known to us, or knowable by
us? How shall a man be condemned for ignorance, if wilfulness be not added to
make it affected? will not that ignorance excuse, which was invincible without
his fault? what justice can punish a man for not doing that which he could not
know? The condemnation must needs be hard, when the offendour could not
understand that the Law was given, or what it meant.

He which does not the will of God shall be beaten, says our Savior. The
sinner replies, I could not know it; what says our Savior against that? Thou
child of darkness, thou hatedst the light. He which would not obey, will not
know; that truth which God has graciously revealed, he does detain in an
unrighteous will. The plain notice of Gods law will cut off all excuses from
those which shall be condemned for disobedience.

Men may dispute, but when they are upon their knees, to deprecate the
punishment of sin, dare they object to God, that they could not know his will?
So men sometimes cavil at God for not giving them grace, and pretend to leave
the matter so; but in prayer do they make this plea: Forgive me O Lord, though
I did sin, I could not help it? It is one thing what people may talk carelessly
or upon design, it is another, what is whispered by a still voice from an
awakened conscience.

Arg. 3.
Upon the plainness of Gods revelation, depends the certainty of Christian
Religion. This Pillar had need be firm, for the best thing in the world rests
upon it. What is acceptable to Christ, and what he will do for us, is to be
known by the revelation which he has made of his mind to us; but if that
revelation conceal his sense; it does not deserve its name, nor benefit us. For
notwithstanding the assistance we receive from it, we are left to acknowledge
him with blind conceptions, to worship him with uncertain expresses, and depend
upon him with a very infirm expectation.

But; O blessed Savior, we have no reason to think our selves at a loss! thou
have told us plainly of the Father, thou have explained the two great
Commandments, and in them the substance of the Law and the Prophets. Thy
Gospel holds forth to us all particular duties both of Faith and Love, and
Righteousness and Mercy. Thou have shown us what kind of worship and
worshippers thou do regard, having commanded us to worship God in Spirit and
in Truth, with all true apprehensions and worthy affections, to serve God in
all good conscience, and with purity of heart, and have rejected the vanities
of superstition, though they be never so gay or costly, all exterior shows,
which want the correspondencie of inward goodness; so that now we may well
say, thou have showed us men what is good, and what the Lord our God requires
of us, even to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with God. Thou have
taught us, how in all our religious addresses we may come acceptably before the
Lord, and what Mediator we are to use, we need no longer ask, for thou have
showed us the one Mediator between God and man, and told us for whom he will
intercede, even all that come to God by him, and make themselves like unto him.
Thou have shown us how thou did converse with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the
Prophets and Apostles, and that we also upon the same terms may become the
friends of God by Christ Jesus, who is the same yesterday, and to day, and for
ever, so that all good Christians may say, and conclude they are certain of
their way to God, the Scripture having revealed it as clearly as with
Sunbeams. The Scripture given by inspiration is so profitable for doctrine,
reproof, correction, and instruction in righteousness, that the man of God, 2 Timothy 3.16.
(teacher or learner) is perfectly furnished with direction to all good works.

Now if any shall say the force of these arguments may be avoyed, though the
Scriptures be not plain, if we have an infallible Interpreter to resolve their
doubtfulnesse, and clear their obscurity. I answer. There is no question of
that; But where is that Interpreter? it is harder to find him, then the sense
of the most difficult Scripture. What will be answered, if we ask these few
questions concerning him? What is his name? what Countryman is he? where does
he dwell? If his Commission be not in the Scripture, how came he by it? if it
be, in what words is it set down?

We read but of one infallilible Interpreter of Gods mind, Christ Jesus, and he
has required of all his servants, that they presume not to take any Mastership
in this point. Mat. 23. 9,10.
And call no man your Father upon the earth, for one is your Father, which is
in heaven; Neither be ye called Masters, for one is your Master, even Christ.
These words are justly interpreted by most learned men as a command of Christ,
directed against men's usurpation of authority to impose upon others, what they
are to believe. The chief Master in the Shoole of the Jewish Prophets, had such
authority, that no man might contradict what he said, and in this sense we are
to call no man Father, but God who has taught us by him, whom he appointed to
be our only Master, (i.e.) Christ Jesus.

How much those are deceiveed, that assume to themselves to be infallible
guides, and indeed Dictators to Gods Church, has been shown abundantly by
themselves, and many learned men have forced them to take notice of their
errors, and therefore I will insist no further upon this point.

And now we see with what reason our Savior closed his discourse, saying, If
they believe not Moses and the Prophets, neither will they be persuaded, though
one rose from the dead. With which I shall also close the doctrinall part of
this discourse.

Those which are not satisfied with Gods truth so fairly propounded in the
Scriptures, may pray to Abraham to send one from the dead to preach to them, if
their ears itch for such teachers, but when he comes, would they believe him?
No, they would rather accost him thus. Art thou come out of thy Grave to fright
us? Where is thy Certificate that thou wast in the other world? Wed do not know
that ever thou wast dead; or if thou art a Ghost, we know not whether thou
came from heaven or hell, whether thy design be to teach, or to disturb us.
They say, good spirits do not walk. What? thou have hid some money somewhere.
If thou come to discover any murder, tell us. People talk of Goblins to
fright children and fools, but do thou think that we will leave our profits
or pleasures for a shade? That this is too true, we have an instance in the
Jews, to whom our Savior preached this point. For they had Lazarus (whether
Christ alluded to his name or no) raised from the grave, and he discoursed with
the Pharisees; but as soon as he asserted a truth, that crossed their humor,
they would have killed him, and sent him to the other world again, a messenger
of their unbelief. When men have no mind to do their duty, they will quarrel
with the Messenger, and ask for another; not that they will then obey, but to
gain a truce for disobedience, (...), and in the mean time they will seek for
that which no doubt they will find, (i.e.) something to make themselves
believe, that the next will not be so sent neither, but that they shall be able
to except against him.

Application.
1. Upon the consideration of the things premised: first, Let us be thankeful
to the Grace of God, and the care of his divine Providence, for transmitting to
us the Holy Scriptures; great Testimonies may one call them, or high Courtesies
of that Providence? High Courtesies they are, being the streams of that River
of Truth, which refreshed the City of God, (i.e.) his Church so long agone. But
they are also great Testimonies of Gods Providence, when so many with busy
eagerness sought to damme them up, that they might not come at all, or to
poison them, that they might arrive as Ministers of error and death. Gods
goodness permitted not the mischief, his care hindered it. This is that
Alpheus, that runs under the earth, dives under the Sea, not mixing with its
brackish waters, but rises up sweet and clear in the beloved Arethusa, unto
which God sends it. When this holy Writ seemed to be sunk in one place, (as
Ovid speaks of Lycus.)

Sic ubi terreno Lycus est epotus hiatu;
Existit procul hinc, alioque renascitur ore.
It rises in another, and brings up and lands safe the Truths which were
committed unto it, as Historians report of the aforesaid river. If Moses
applauded the Jews happiness, when he had finished his Pentateuch, saying,
What nation is so happy, whose Statutes are so righteous? etc. how happy are
we, did we but know it, when God has finished the Revelation of his will,
filled it with all necessary truths, plainly set down; and given us the Bible
for the Pandects of them? He has drawn down his love from generation to
generation, and has made this great instance of it to teach us also. That
which is made for great necessities, is kept with equal care. The Sun is not so
appointed, that it can be blown out with bellows, or that the light of it can
be infected with noysom vapors.

2. Secondly, Let us be content with the Scriptures, (i.e.) let us be satisfied
with what God has not only esteemed enough, but also proportioned to us as a
very bountiful allowance. These are perfect and plain, we need no more; and
those which pretend a further want, are not only fantastical, or deceivers,
but they must needs be also injurious unto God, as to say that he has
neglected to tell us, what or where it is. Let all sober minds repose here as
in their safe conduct, and not suffer themselves to be led out of the way
either by men's usurped authority, or pretended revelations, (i.e.) by other
men's or our own private spirits.

By men's usurped authority, either as dictating new things, or putting
themselves for Infallible Interpreters of the sense of these writings. All
Usurpers in this kind finding it impossible to make a new Scripture, attempt to
make the sense, which is the Scripture in the most effectual name. They would
have but the interpretation; why, that is too much of all conscience. But do
they think so to get the Soveraignety over our souls, and make that an
obligation to believing, which was never in any man's power to appoint?
Chrysostom told them otherwise in his twentieth Homily upon the seventh of
Matthew (if that work be his) Omnis doctor est servus legis, Opus imperf.
quia neque supra legem addere potest aliquid de suo sensu, nec subtrahere
aliquid secundum proprium intellectum, sed hoc tantummodo praedicat, quod
habetur in lege: (i. e.) Every Doctor is a servant of the Law; because he can
neither add any thing to it, of his own sense, nor take away any thing from it
according to his private understanding, but only deliver that which he finds
there. Those which conform not to this truth by him worthily asserted may
pretend that whilst they go to God, they permit him to sit in his Throne, but
when others come to them, I am sure, they sit down in it themselves. If any man
tell us what is the plain sense of the Scripture, we are bound to believe it,
not because he tells us, but because it is the plain will of God. But if any
man says, this is the word of God, this sense is plain to me, I do interpret
it right, and you must, and shall believe it, this is to make his own will to
us, what he pretends Gods is to him (i.e.) a Law.

Contra Crescon. Lib. 2. Cap. 32.
When one had fitted such a yoke, to Augustines neck in a letter of Cyprian, he
thrust it by thus; Ego hujus Epistolae authoritate non teneor, quia literas
Cypriani, non ut Canonicas habeo, sed eas ex Canonicis considero, and quod in
iis divinarum scripturarum authoritati congruit, cum laud ejus accipio, quod
autem non congruit, cum pace ejus respuo, (i. e.) I am not obliged by the
authority of this Epistle, because I take not Cyprians letters for Canonical,
but I consider them by those that are Canonical; and whatsoever I find in his
that agrees with the authorty of the Holy Scriptures, I receive it with his
praise, but that which agrees not, by his good leave, I refuse.

See the improvement of cruel pride? The eager Tyrant cried for another world
to plunder; but these men are not content with another of the same sort, they
invade the intelligible world, commit rapine upon Souls, and make havoc of
the Church, to which Angels refer but as ministering Spirits, and Lord it over
Gods heritage, which the Apostles besought to be reconciled to God; never
commanded any thing in their own name, and only those things, for which they
showed unquestionable Commission.

These Considerations made Tertullian say, Lib. contra haeret.
Nobis nihil licet ex nostro arbitrio indulgere, sed nec eligere quod aliquis
de arbitrio suo induxerit. Apostolos Domini habemus authors, qui nec ipsi
quicquam de suo arbitrio quod inducerent, eligerunt, sed acceptam a Christo
disciplinam fideliter nationibus assignarunt, (i. e.) We may not indulge our
own will, nor choose that which others bring in at their pleasure: Herein
following the example of the Apostles of our Lord, who neither appointed any
thing of their own choice, but faithfully delivered to the world, that which
they had received of Christ.

There is a Church which calls her self by a fine name, The Mistress of our
Faith, but it is too imperious for Christ's Spouse; for she is, and we know who
taught her, and commanded her to be, meek, but usurpation needs cunning, and
cannot stay in moderate bounds; and therefore the Romanists deny the people
leave to read the Scriptures, which is but a needful artifice, for if that
Screen were not put up, they would see them usurp their power, and understand
how groundless it is, and besides, beholding there the naked lovely face of
Gods Church, they would soon perceive how unlike their ugly vizard is to it.

But we are secure if we keep here, and if any body talk of something that is
not in these two Testaments, every good Christian may answer with Origin, Si
quid autem superfuerit quod divina scriptura non decernat, nullam aliam tertiam
Scripturam debere ad authoritatem scientiae suscipi, id Deo reservemus. (i. e.)
That which is not declared in these two Testaments, we permit not to be
supplied by a third; we leave it to God, who has made these two, Canistrum
perfectionis, (as the same Origin calls them) a fair large basket, perfectly
containing all that heavenly bread which we need for our sonles; and therefore
we may justly say further with him, Servemus eas mensuras quas nobis per
legislatorem Lex spiritualis enunciat. Let us be content with that which God
has thought enough for us to know, and keep those measures, which the Lawgiver
has appointed in his spiritual Law, (i.e.) the Scriptures. Let us take heed
also of Enthusiasmes. What would vain man have? he cares not for these poor
Scriptures; he would have a Revelation, (i.e.) he slights the greatest
Revelation that ever was. Such men make the same use of the Scripture, as those
do, who having received a command to pray for divine assistances, will not pray
till they be so assisted, as that they cannot well choose, and yet will not pray
then neither. They will have divine Revelation, and when they have, they
neither know it, nor are content with it. They would have some body sail beyond
the Sea to fetch that which is on this side already. They are not pleased with
what they have on earth, till some body go to Heaven to fetch it. Alas! Such
need not much trouble themselves for a Revelation, as long as a private impulse
will serve. But let us hearken only to these faithful directions sealed by
God for our security; these cannot deceive us in things necessary, for they are
plain, nor can obscurer places hurt us, unless we be either rash, and resolve
that shall be the true sense, which we fancy, or else sordid, and suffer others
to put their sense upon us; for so indeed we may build ill things, not upon the
most holy word of God, but upon our own careless mistakes.

3. To prevent this, and because the Scriptures are not so much the words, as
the sense, let us endeavor to get the meaning of Gods word; which to do, is
both our great Duty, and our true Right: For none will be condemned for us, if
we believe wrong. It was a noble ingenuity in the Bereans that they would not
believe Paul, but upon search of the Scriptures; and as it would have been a
strange thing in Paul to have offered at the command of their faith, denying
them liberty to search, so it is an ignoble pride in the Papists, or any that
follow so unworthy an example, to require our faith upon their search of the
Scriptures, and not our own; unless that we should be saved by the faith of
others, or that those which make us believe wrong, would be punished for us, or
be content to have that which they are to believe imposed upon them by others.

Ambrose speaks pertinently to this point, Coeli mysterium doceat me Deus ipse
qui condidit, non homo qui seipsum ignoravit; cui magis de Deo quam Deo credam?
(i. e.) let God himself teach me the mysteries of heaven who made it, not man
who does not know himself, whose report concerning God should we credit so much
as his own?

Now we must endeavor to obtain the true meaning of the Holy Scriptures by
daily reading, serious meditation, and the fervent prayers of an humble spirit.
We should read with a desire of that heavenly knowledge, and meditate so, as
that we discover not a negligence, which is contradictory to true desire, and
pray that the divine spirit which indicted them, may teach us so to understand
them, that by the assistance of his excellent illuminations, the wisdom of Gods
word may dwell plentifully in us.

It is requisite also that we should abandon all prejudice, and preconceived
opinions, and bring candid and disingaged spirits, to the reading of this Holy
Book. Hilary speaks excellently to this point, Optimus est lector qui dictorum
intelligentiam expectet a dictis potius quam imponat, Lib. 1. de Trinit.
and retulerit magis quam attulerit, neque cogat id videri dictis contineri;
quod ante lectionem praesumpserit intelligendum. (i- e.) he is the best Reader
that expects the understanding of the words from the words themselves, rather
then puts it upon them, and takes it of them, rather then brings it to them;
nor compells the words to seem to contain that which before reading, he
resolved to have understood by them. Those which contradict this method, may
well go away without Gods meaning, for they came not for it.

There is another thing also that does extremely facilitate our proficiency in
the knowledge of divine mysteries, and that is sincere obedience, and humble
entertainment of the heavenly light. It is a sure rule that will never be
antiquated, Joh. 7. ^7.
If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it be of
God. Whilst eager disputers lose the sense of the Scriptures, and their souls
withal, the humble practiser of Gods will secures the sense, and his salvation
too. He will teach the humble his ways. The secret of the Lord is with those
that fear him. Psalm 25. 9.14.
Whilst we show our selves faithfully obsequious to this true guidance we
shall not only be led into all necessary Truths, but as we do improve in
goodness, our knowledge will be enlarged. The humble and obedient have
advantage of all other men in this point, for though they may stand upon the
lower ground in regard of natural or acquired abilities, God does so love good
souls, that they shall not miscarry for want of such helps. It were an extreme
vanity to think that none shall be saved, except such as can make Syllogismes,
or that the Bible was given only for great Scholars to dispute on. How deep a
sympathy the meek Lamb of God had with the fair equity of this dispensation, is
excellently signified by the affectionate Apostrophe, which he made to his
Father, upon the consideration of it, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven
and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and
have revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father, for so it seemed good in thy
sight. How passionately does the dear Son of God please himself in the embraces
of the Divine will in this matter? and with greatest reason, for that will
pleases it self only in such a way as is fully correspondent to the divine
wisdom and goodness. And all true followers of Christ are likewise possessed
with vast satisfactions and full complacence, ever accompanied with joyful
thanksgiving, when they are admitted to behold the rare proportions of Gods
works, the most admirable reasonableness of his proceedings. Whilst men vainly
puffed up with conceits of their knowledge, neglect this most necessary and
greatest wisdom, God slights their presumption, and passes them by with
disregard, and gives such grace to the Humble, as makes them wise to
Salvation; so that This Temper is not only secured by Gods promise, but is
indeed in it self the most disposed and qualified for divine illuminations. A
good and honest heart is like a soil fit and prepared for the immortal seed,
as our Savior has taught us. And this is so known a Truth, that all wise men
have propounded purification of heart as a rare method of attaining true
knowledge, and pronounced that the light of God shines brightest in those souls
that are purified with the flames of divine love. Blessed are the pure in
spirit, for they shall see God. Fogges of lust darken the Intellect, a soul
possessed with sin is low, and incapable. Dishonorable affections cherisht by
a wicked life, bring on a sottishness of mind, and dullness of fancy.

But I have spoken of this Temper of soul, not only because it does highly
capacitate us to the knowledge of God, but because the perfection of it is the
true improvement of the Scriptures, words, and sense, and in the happy product
of it, all excellent knowledge ought to terminate. All speculation separate
from this is contemptible, and leaves a man miserable in the midst of his
contemplations, let the subject of them be what it will, even the revelations
of the divine will, for not the Reader, or knower, but the Doer shall be
blessed, therefore let us take heed, lest for any fair show we lose this true
substance, and instead of seeming profound in knowledge, great in
controversies, Masters of an opinion, or any such poor contemptible matter, let
us become true lovers, and sincere practisers of those divine Truths, which are
here declared by God; First, indeed that they might pass into our
understandings, but with this principal intention, that our hearts by that
means might be engaged to a true obedience of them.

This we shall more easily perform, if we endeavor, as we ought, to overcome
two great hindrances (for the things are not grievous in themselves.)

1. If we strive Christianly against our indispositions; this is requisite, for
otherwise we shall ever and anon pretend impossibilities in our duty, and then
we shall not only grudge at the performance of it, but also quarrel with
Divine Equity, Justice, and Goodness, which has appointed us fit duties, such
things as in the matter are best for us, and whereof it has given plain
declarations that we may know them, and does continue merciful assistances,
that we may do them. Now if we indulge our own sloth, we shall seek grounds
of complaint, where we ought most to be satisfied, and at last fall into
desperate murmurings, as the disobedient Jews did, We pine away in our
iniquities, and thou regardest not our damnation. Nay, if our Fathers have
eaten sour grapes, our teeth must be set on edge for it.

2. If we strive manfully against Temptations, which if we do not, we shall
make allurements to sin of encouragements to Duty, Gods mercies: or we shall
seek a vain refuge for sin in that, which is put for the proof of our fidelity;
as every state of suffering is, and in both preposterously frame the reason of
not sinning into a Childish excuse of Disobedience. So Adam began, Genesis 3.
The woman that thou gave to be with me, offered me some, and I did eat. The
woman that thou gave me? See, how he crooks the Rib again! was it better to
have been without her? it was ill to be alone before thou had company, and is
it good now, when thou have made an ill use of it? The woman, that he speaks of
after this fashion, was given him for a meet help; and must the divine
goodness be upbraided with his own gift, because he had perverted the use of
it? It was the worst instance of excuse alleged in the unfittest time, for the
gift was become an aggravation of the sin, and the ingratitude should have been
confessed. Must all that God gives to careless men become of no better use then
a great estate left to a young and foolish heir? must not God be good, lest we
be bad? Because men abuse Gods gifts, will they therefore with that they had
never received them? they will, Quam vellent sceptris nunquam fulsisse superbis!
But what is that to God? they show only that his mercies were too good for
them; for they have abused them.

And if any condition be afflictive, we are to look upon the difficulties of
duty, as spurs to virtue, trials of our Ingenuity set to enhaunce the reward,
and we are to esteem them always conquerable to good men; for God has
promised that we shall not be tempted above what we are able to bear; and
therefore we should make that use of them, that the Apostle does; 1 Cor. 10.13.
Let us be steadfast in a well-grounded Religion, and unmovable from the
obedience of it, 1 Cor. 15.58.
since we know our labor is not in vain, and that the reward is no less then
Eternal life.

To conclude briefly, since God has magnified the word of his Wisdom and Grace
which he has given to us in the Scriptures, above any other Name or Notice of
his Mind or Love to us, let us take heed. For as the Heathens knowing God, and
not glorifying him as God, were justly condemned to great absurdities against
their Natural light, for they detained it in unrighteousness, and God did but
make that unserviceable to them which they had, not without great wrong, made
unusefull to him. And as the Jews not regarding the end of the Law, lost the
benefit of Law and Gospel, the Messiah and Palestine: So those Christians
which refuse him that speaks from Heaven, who has brought the last Revelation
of Gods will, which he meant should abide, Heb. 12. 28.
and calls it (...); must needs be deprived of the Great salvation which his
Gospel offers, that is, Eternal life.

Omnia ad salutem necessaria perspicue traduntur in sacra Scriptura.
SIc insolenti nempe diligentia,
Male curiosa turba, Philosophi solent,
Audace freti (cui quid invium?) Tubo,
In ipsa Solis adyta rimari viam;
Secum unde varias, si placet Dis, auferunt
Maculasque faculasque, quas perenniter
Natare puro in font Luminis crepant.
Sic ille quondam sapere visus est sibi
Belle and venuste, dum Sophista futilis
Argutiarum machina adstruit levi
Atram esse (quidquid sensus obstrepat) nivem.
Scilicet, ita est aetatis infortunium
Pudorque nostrae, quae nec intactum sinit
Istud, quod unum est lumine omni clarius;
Istud, quod unum est vel nive omni purius;
Istud, quod unum est omni odore suavius.
Summique Codex Imperatoris Dei,
Quo pacta coeli, quo supremae Curiae
Decreta habentur, and statuta coelitus
Delapsa, quo vel summa stat nostrae rei,
Impune non effugit ingratas manus.
Infensa Coelo turba! cui nil est prius
Antiquiusve, quam ut malae caliginis
Squallore veritatis incestent Jubar;
Amabilemque nubibus rapiant diem.
Adeon' videntnr illa plena mystici
Effata sensus, sensa plena Numinis,
Obscura vobis, tortuosa, nubila:
Cortina quale fudit olim Oraculum
Dubium involutum Pythii ore Daemonis?
Nec esse cautum generis humani satis
Beatitati, nec saluti Civium
Urbis supernae, nisi praeterea novo,
Nisi peregrino Jure servilem in modum
Premantur, atque liberum subdant caput?
Ergone quidvis sic licenter fingere, and
Fabricare centum Fabularum schemata,
Censetis esse fas piumque; dein rudi
Populo dare venum; mucidamque Cabbalam
Sic addidisse Legibus scriptis juvat?
Conchyliatis si quis ac Tapetibus
Putrem inficetus adsuat laciniam:
Apage indecentes, apage, nugas has procul.
Benignus ille Conditor rerum ac Parens,
Hominumque solus qui gubernat omnia,
Jugique fotu mulcet impensissime,
Nobis regundis Jura non alia tulit,
Voluit nee alios far, nec certe est opus.
Excutite, siqua forte scintilla est bonae
Mentis relicta, hoc in Theatro cernite,
(Virtutibusque Gratiisque quod sacrum est:)
(Gestit doceri) qualis ad coelum patet
Sublimis aditus, qualis ad stellas via
Acclive surgit igneo tractu micans.
Animus sui contemptor, and quem sepius
Vindexque culpae lacryma and creber rigat
Pio imbre fletus, advolutus qui Deo
Frequens solensque gratiam offensae rogat:
Quem spe beata fulcit immortalitas
Sequentis aevi, teque praeeuntem viam
Sequitur, anhelus licet and impari gradu.
Te, Jesu! itineris auspicem ac ducem ardui:
Quem nec cupido gloriae, nec ambitus,
Aulaeve pompa; quem nec aspera minax
Fortuna tempestate transversum rapit:
Quem mentis haud fucata simplicitas juvat;
Quaeque generoso pectore niveum enitet
Augusta virtus; quem fides circumvolat
Casta, atque pura labis innocentia;
Quique irretorto vertice ac oculo videt
Calcatque fastum seculi: sola haec docet,
Haec sola monstrat sacra Pagina; has Rosas,
Liliaque, solus iste Paradisus dabit.
Ubi quaeque sacro rore gemmat vocula;
Ubi Rosa Sharon, mill mill floreos
Halans odores, fundit Ambrosio e sinu.
O Chara salve Pagina! unice tibi
Debetur Istud, si quid uspiam fiet
Nostri beatum, si quid astris additum.
Iterumque adeo salve? Ipsa and immensum es Mare
Quo tota, (quanta, quanta sit) mergi queat
Sophia; and reductus sinus es ipsa, quo Fides
Adhuc adolescens and pusilla luserit.
Fluitans es ipsa Delos and portatiles
Delphi, (sed hic Apollo non est, Loxias)
Ubi quisque Mystes sanctus est, unde and sibi
Orac'la quisque prompserit pro re sua
Orac'la cunctis evoluta ambagibus.
Te, sive Lucem praedicemus; Fulgida es:
Scatebramve nostrae te salutis; Limpida es:
Viamve sursum, quae una ducit; Lactea es.
W. C.
FINIS.

