William Laud Arch-B: of Canterbury Prymat of England was beheaded on
Tower:hill Ian:10th 1644 W.AL. Sculp:


The Life and Death OF WILLIAM LAWD, late Archbishop of CANTERBURY: Beheaded
on Tower Hill, Friday the 10. of January.

1644.

I. Here is a brief Narration of his Doings all his life long faithfully
given-out, First, That his sayings at his Death may not be a snare to the
perdition of souls.

II. His Doings and Sayings being compared and weighed together, his Sayings
are found infinitely too light; Yet of weight sufficient to press every man to
make a Threefold use from All, of infinite concernment to his eternal soul.

By E.W. who was acquainted with his Proceedings in Oxford; was an eye and ear
witness of his Doings and Sayings in his Courts here at London; and other
places under his dominion.

REVEL. 9. 20, 21. Yet they repented not of the works of their hands: neither
of their murders,nor of their sorceries, nor of their fornication, nor of
their Thefts.

PROVERBS 28. 15. As a roaring Lion, and a ranging Bear; So is a wicked Ruler
over the poor people.

Audacia est stuper quidam sensus cum malitia voluntatis. Verul. Non saepius
Phebotomiae necessariae sunt in curationibus quam caedes in Civilibus. Ibid.
LONDON: Printed for John Hancock; dwelling in Pope's Head Ally. 1645.

To the Reader.
IT is the manner to adresse a few words to thee at the entrance to a
Discourse, which are these; I was an eye witness of this man's Doings in his
life; an (...) ear-witnesse of his sayings at his Death: yet had I not a
thought (for I thought it needless) to tell the world what his Doings were [no
not then when I saw his (...) boldly published to the world, to make gain of
money thereby, though with the hazard of souls] till the (...) fornight after
he suffered Death for the (...): On that Day, a worthy Minister, my dear
friend, came to me, told me that they who were thought the fittest men for the
work, had no purpose to do it, (there was a mistake, for the fittest of Many
has done it,) then moved me about it by such arguments as might have commanded
me, and so did though not at that time, yet some hours after. Then I girded my
self to the service. To give a Breviate of his Doings first (The Reader could
exp ct no other in such scantnesse of time and room, different from that is
extant, as I thought also the time and place did require) Of his saying after,
that his Doings and sayings being laid together, the one may interpret and
explain the other; And the scriptures of God may warrant the Reader to be
judge of both.

I have made have here, as I was desired to do; and as a man hasteneth to take
an Anti-dote to expel the poison he has unadvisedly drunk down. Yet this
(...) is not of that Nature as to cause Repentance. But er ours it may have
caused not a few, which the Author and the Printer, may lovingly divide (...)
them, and be at no loss: For the Reader must take all in good part for these
reasons.

(1) Because he may make a great gain by this to his (...). He may learn by
this how to live, and order all his doings all his life long. How? As the
righteous, Gods faithful servants do; and then he may be sure his (...) shall
be like theirs, and the comfort of his sayings then answerable to his doings;
I have through (...) Grace strengthening me, done all Thy wills, Lord, I have
kept Thy word: Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly, I commend my soul unto Thee; For
thou have (...) it, (...) God of Truth.

2. The Reader may be informed hereby touching the Religion, we, without
mental Reservations, call (...), That it is not like our garments still (...)
after the fashion of the Times: nor like the (...) neither, now (...), and then
waining, as she (...) to us: But Religion is as the Sun, a perpetual and
(...) Ordinance in heaven.

3. Touching the war about Religion; who they are, who so venture far and
freely in this war: who fight indeed the Battles of the Lamb? Truly Reader,
The old Serpent the Devil, speaking through a Dying man, as audibly in the
ears of a great People, as once he spoke in the ears of our Grandmother Eve,
would have beguiled all the Christian world, touching this matter. It was my
great Care to undeceive thee at this great Point, to Discover that Grand. (...)
to thee; which I have done, but not indeed so fully as I would (...) could: but
yet faithfully, not daring for my life, to do otherwise, in a matter, which
did so highly concern The High God, His Christ, His Church, and His
Parliament, now fighting the Lords Battles against the (...), and His Angels.
Indeed the Scripture calls the Adversary and enemy row, not the Dragon; but the
Beast; And he would seem the tamest of Beasts, a Lamb; and make the world
believe he would, That (...) fights the Lords Battles venters as far and as
freely for the Religion and Faith of Christ, as any in all the world.

Now what see we? For we may behold now as Rev. (...).
(...) John did in a vision; A Beast like a Lamb: But how (...) he? he spoke as
a Dragon.

How (...) he? As a Dragon we may be sure. And it is as (...) before our
eyes, by his (...) and Sayings; That, though he be a (...) in show, he is a
Dragon indeed; for Dragons (...) are never (...) then are his words.

And hence, Reader; Thou art taught a great Lesson; Not To trust the Dragon
though in (...) like a Lamb; and may speak like a Lamb. So he (...) speak for
advantage, that he may Act anon (...) a Dragon. (...) as all the faithful
servants in the world (...) now; They send their Ambassador to heaven, their
prayers thither, through the Mediation of (...) and only Friend, to make peace;
that is the peace they breath-after, Peace and Holiness, Peace and
Righteousness, Truth and Peace; They hearken not what the Dragon says, nor
what the Beast says, nor what the Lamb says, which is but like a Lamb; they
Psalm.
hearken what their Lord says for He speaks Peace. A Peace of their Friends
making, and their Gods giving. Surely their expectation, is from God, a peace
of his speaking and giving. And in the world they expect trouble, and with the
Dragon War, while he and the Saints are together in the world. These things the
Lord has spoken, That (which makes amends for all the Dragon can do or say)
in Me ye might have Peace; In the world ye shall have Tribulation: But be of
good cheer, I have overcome the world. So says the faithful (...) 16. (...).
and true witness, The

Amen.
The Life and Death of William Lawd, late Archbishop of Canterbury; Briefly
related.
I Will begin in order, with his Life first, and his Death after: I Will set down
faithfully, and as narrowly as I can, his Doings all his life long, and his
Sayings at his death. And this I shall do for two reasons. (1) That every man,
who will, may see, That his Deeds and his Words, do stand at an eternal
Distance; and can possibly be reconciled no more than Life and Death can. (2)
That he who has read his Death, his Funeral Sermon there (A mere mockery of
God, and good men; the Religion of God, and Reformation of men, a mere scorn to
all these:) And finds it a snare to his Perdition; for he blesses the man,
and His farewell to the world; May also read his life, and consider well on
it, lest rising early and blessing his friend, because of some light
expressions which fell from his mouth at his Death, it proves a snare to his
soul now, and it be counted a curse Prove. 23.
unto him hereafter.

I know I shall be envied for this, I know not of how many. Of none but
Malignants sure, whose envy I would rather have than their favor.

Some good men may blame me too.

I cannot believe that; They will blame them rather, who were so bold; To tell
all the world, what he said at the point of his departure out of the World,
thereby to argue his piety toward God, and his Righteousness toward men: And
hold the world in ignorance of all he did all his life long, which argued him a
mighty sinner, before the Lord, as was the unjust Judge, who neither feared God
nor reverenced man.

I, but I shall be judged very uncharitable now, and censorious of a dying man's
words.

A short Apology for this:

1 I appeal to God, that, I think, I looked with as pitiful an eye upon his
departing soul, as the best friend he had upon the Scaffold.

2 That I shall not judge him, or his dying words; No, I would have the Reader
to leave that to God; I would help the Reader, well to understand, what he said
at his death, by what he did all his life long.

3 To undeceive the ignorant at this high point, That they may not think to
live as he did, and so to die, without making any confession at all; or the
least show of Repentance, so giving Glory to God; and yet die in the Lord, the
death of the Righteous: For these Reasons I have written the History of his
Life, which I shall pen-up into the narrowest compass, for two reasons also.

1 That the common Reader may be at as little cost of time and purse, in
reading the History of his Life, as he he was at, for reading his Death.

2 Because all the proceedings throughout his whole Arraignment, and in
Reference to that Crime he pleaded, even to his last, not Guilty, shall be
clearly and fully set down, to the fullest satisfaction of all the world, even
those, that are the most prejudiced Readers.

The History of his Life begins from that time 1608. whereof I can write what
my eyes saw, and what my ears heard concerning him, five years after he was
Proctor of the University in Oxford, which was in the same year King James came
to the Crown of England, 1603. Quickly after, and to make the more haste; he
went out Doctor of the Civil Law, and was chosen President over the College
called Saint John's; I may mistake somewhat in the Account of this time; because
I was then young, and careless to remember it; and came my self in that year
unto the same University, and to the College, at that time, next adjoining to
his College; I shall note here as an eye, and an ear witness: First,

1. That he, Doctor Lawd then, Archbishop at last, and Doctor Howson,
afterward Bishop of Durham, did, as their turns were to preach in Saint Mary's
Church, and Christ-Church, there scatter the seeds of evil Doctrines; for the
suppression whereof, and keeping them from taking root, Doctor Abbots both, and
other eminent Divines bestirred themselves, and appeared the very next Lords
day in opposition to those Doctrines, whereunto they would not give place for
an hour. He went on, and declared to all the Christian world:

1. His zeal to Forms of Religion, and envy to the Power.

2. His love and liking to the Shadows; and hatred to the Substance;

3. His approbation of Pictures and Images, even that abomination, the picture
of God the Father; and furious rage against the Image of God, stamped upon, and
framed in His holy-ones.

4. His zeal to build and beautify dead Temples made with hands: and even
mad with rage, against the Temples of the Holy Ghost, to deface, spoil, and
destroy those living temples.

5. His zeal seething hot, against the Lord, and His Zeontes.
Day, His pure worship and worshippers, His zeal against all these: and for
all detestable things, Crosses, Crucifixes, Ezech.
and Altars, all which the soul of the Lord does hate; and yet we know his
zeal for all these was notorious all over the Christian world;

II. All men, that know him, and observed his manner will witness with me, that
he labourd to be accepted of greatmen, (...) Cor. 9 5
able to lift-him-up in the world, as earnestly, as Paul labored to be
accepted of the Lord; and Paul's labor was, as his and other his Bishops was,
to ascend unto the highest Pinnacle of honor: O with what earnestness did he
embrace the world; And what havoc he made of faith and a good conscience all
the world knows. But you will say; this might not be so; he might serve his
own ends, and as he said, at his death, Serve God too; seek himself first,
and Gods glory at last. No, not possible; No man can serve two Masters;
Cardinal Wolsey speaks sadly to this; O that I had served God, as I served my
King, then God had not left me, as now he has, said the Cardinal when he was
departing the world. This serving the creature more Rom 2.
than the Creator; If it might be charged upon any man in the world, it might
be charged upon this Man. And this also, Minding earthly things; Honor from
men, and Glory Psalm 3.19.
from the world. We cannot mind earthly things heartily, and heavenly things
too, no more then we can give forth the Male of our flock, the strength of our
affections to two masters: Nor can we believe when we receive honor one of
another, and seek not the honor that comes from God only. Ioh. 5 (...).
These Scriptures well thought on would stop us in our eager pursuit after the
World; or tell our selves what we are. The Male of our flock, the first borne,
or strength of our Affections can be given but to one Master. Love of the
present world, argues an heart, forsaking the Communion of Saints, and
careless of future Glory: I proceed, His labor was to be accepted of man, and
of man he was accepted, and advanced (after some length of time, which I must
step over, his rising by degrees from one (...) to another) till, at length, he
had Clambered up to the pinnacle he aspired unto, and there sat down in his
Throne, as one of his flatterers calls it, Arch Bishop of Canterbury. Then he
was supreme Judge in the High Commission Court, and, next to the Supreme in
the Star Chamber. I speak now as an eye and ear witness: But what am I or my
witness?

God, Angels, and men, I know not how many thousands, to whom he directed his
dying words, will witness with me: That now, having the power in his hand, he
did execute it to the largest extent thereof, turning judgment into wormwood,
and Righteousness into gall; grinding the faces of the Righteous; perverting
the wholesome laws of the Kingdom; forcing the Judges (they should rather
have suffered the extremest injuries from Great men, that to be so injurious
to mean men, as to suffer themselves to do as he commanded, and would have
done) to pervert Judgment, and Justice, which, being kept-unto, and executed
according to Gods commands, sets the crown fast upon the Kings head, and
establishes the Throne (in Righteousness) Indeed now he was strong, his
heart was lifted up, and his mind hardened in pride, whom he would he slew,
and whom he would he kept alive, whom he would, he set up; and whom he would he
put down: His will stood for a Law; and his will was to break through the
Laws of God, and man; and such power he had, he could do it, as easily as
through a spiders Web: So he brake through the Laws of God; The law of his
worship, The Law of His (...), there he began, with the House of God, profaning
that House: Then with His Worship, defiling that; Then with his day, setting
his foot thereon: It is not utterable how he marred the Lords Day more than any
day. In brief, He offered violence to the Law, and Gospel, and was mad with
rage, against those, that used the Law (...); and preached the Gospel, as the
Gospel of Christ, etc. For I forbear, in matters, so notoriously known, how
he oppressed the Gospellers, ( i.e.) The true worshippers of God. Indeed had
he had an Arm like God (he thought he had) he had not left one Faithful
Minister in in all three Kingdoms. But the Lord had him, as he has the Devil,
in Chains. Thus he dealt with the Laws and ordinances of God; and those that
were zealous for them. I need not say how Imperiously he dealt with the Laws
of men, yet since I have undertaken to tell what his doings were, I must
proceed with the same brevity, saying this only, and conncluding all in it,
That his will was Law; What he had a Will to do, he did, if God restrained him
not. (Oh) how favorable was he to evil men! How fierce against the Good!
These men, good men I mean (The evil men, the Blasphemers, who had pierced and
torn the Name of God by execrable Oaths: And vile Treacherous Priests, who,
by their lewdness made the Sacrifices of the Lord to be abhored, these men I
have seen tried before his Court, and quitted: But) the good and precious,
these were delivered, as their Lord and Master was, to their Will: So these, To
his Will; not to the Justice Luke 23.25
of the Law, but to the (...), and Rigor of his Will: And how his will was to
deal with them, is notorious through all the Christian World: For ask from
one end of his Courts to the other, of all the Standers-by there, whether he
has suffered any Sentence to pass, which crossed his Will, though never so
agreeable to Gods Will, man's Law, and right Reason. Time would fail me, to
tell what he did and spoke, against the souls of the Righteous: to whom he
said, Bow down, that we may go over: And, by the Power in his hand, he bowed
down the Esaias. 51. 23.
Bodies, of the Saints, and laid them as the ground, and as the street to them
them that went over. All this, and much more, his hand and tongue have made so
legible, That he who runs may read it, what havoc he made in the Churches of
God; how he breathed-forth threatenings; reached-forth the hand of Violence,
against those, who protested against his mateing of Gods Worship, with his
Follies, setting up Ad hibendo traditones suas ad praecepta mea. Trem. Eze. 43.8
his Thresholds by the Lords Threshold, as the Lord himself is pleased to
express that horrible impiety, of joining man's Traditions with His Worship,
whereby the place of My Throne, (says the Lord) and the soles of my feet,
where I will dwell in the midst of my people for ever; and My Name have been
Defiled: And, Because of which abominations, I have consumed my people in my
Anger as it is at this Day. To summe-up all in two words; he set his foot upon
the Laws of God, and Man's Laws; These were in his hand like (...) knots, fast
or loose at his pleasure; He exalted and magnified himself above every god:
and according to his Will, so things must be. And he thought, he might
adventure upon the Holy laws too, for he spoke mavelous things against the
God of gods, magnifying himself above all, and prospering till the time of
indignation was (almost) accomplished: He polluted the Sanctuary of strenghth;
and, almost took away, that which was called the daily Sacrifice, we call
Praying and preaching; And in the place thereof, he placed the Abomination,
that makes Desolate. These were his Actings, or Doings, in the Kingdoms of
God, against the Gospel of God; The Name of God; The House and Household of
God; The Laws of God there, and all the known Laws of all three Kingdoms.

How he walked in his own House, how cross to his Rule after the manner of
Bishops, but most unlike a Bishop indeed, and to their course, whose praise is
in the Gospel: All this had been fully declared unto him (by one, who in
former time lived in the house with him) two days before his Death: But that
servant of the Lord, with two more, who, in a dear affection to his departing
soul, went to visit him, could not be admitted; Dr. Heywood, Dr. Martin, and
Dr. Stern, were the men, with whom he craved leave to advise: For they would
absolve him after their manner, and like to like, he would admit of no other.
But had the three, the faithful of the Lord, been admitted to his presence, he
had been then told in meekness of spirit, how he starved his household,
commanded prayers for the Dead, had the picture of God the Father, in his
House. Indeed his horrible impieties, iniquities, blasphemies, might have been
in part sweetly opened before him, by those, who thirsted after his Repentings
but he would not be troubled. And indeed it seemed to be a trouble in vain, for
he had gone against his light so long, that now he was as a man in a Dungeon:
And he had forced his conscience so often, that surely now he had no conscience
at all: Or if any in his sense, then seared, and past feeling in ours. All this
appeared at the hour of his suffering for his horrible sins; which he should
have confessed there before all the people, so giving Glory to God, and taking
shame to himself: But he did contrary, he took Glory to himself, even of
Martyrdom (which turned to his greater shame:) and rising now, when he was
falling into the pit, himself had dug, to the height of arrogancy,
impudency, etc: He laid the shame upon the Worthies of the Lord, whom he
calls, the people, that he might call them Egyptians, and might be believed,
That the people hurried him into the Red Sea of blood, as once the Egiptians
did, the Israel of God. But I prevent my self; I have concluded too briefly,
the History of his Life, what his Doings were all along.

Now I come to his sayings at the hour of his Death, which every man has
heard, or read; and some are (...) by it to the perdition of their soul:
Simple men indeed and very ignorant, who can be taken with such sayings, which
argue nothing but impudency and arrogancy, with eyes, and ears, and an heart
shut-up, and a conscience scared; all which will appear presently, through-out
his whole Speech, when we have pondered it in our own hearts. But I must tell
you, as my ears told me, what the simple and ignorant people said, at the
hearing of his words; and satisfy them, if I can; They say,

A. (1) They will believe a Dying man, addressing himself to give-up his
Account to God; He will be serious now; and lay-open his conscience before the
world, which he must open presently before the Lord God Almighty.

B. (1) Probable so, and but probable; for certain it is, some men, not
serious, have died, as he died, with an horrible lie on his tongue; It is a
serious thing to die; for then the soul lancheth forth into the Ocean of
Eternity; and, if the thread of life be cut off in wrath, life runs forth
into an everlasting bottom, there to abide under Wrath for ever: And yet all
men are not serious at the point of death; Nor could this man be so, who all
his life long, was serious in this, how he might cast dishonors upon God and
good men: And secondly,

(2) For his conscience, we heard what that was, pastfeeling. But let this be
remembered too. (1) That it is the manner of a stout and proud sinner, (such was
he) so to tender his honor with men, and his name (that it may not Rot, and be
left to posterity for a curse) as to justify himself to the death; that men
may not say he died as a fool dies: Though now so they will say indeed, And so
I could retort his own words he spoke to another purpose veniunt Romani, for
that, which he feared, and would have prevented, is come upon him. (2) That it
is the glory of the Devil, to hold fast and full possession of a man, to the
last period of his time, and render his faithful servant, as he can himself,
a seeming Angel of light at his Death; Such like proud sinners were Becket an
Archbishop, or rather, as this was, an Arch-Traitor; And Garnet, an
Arch-Traitor too, against God and His King, for he was a Jesuit.

A. (2) It is said; The man is fallen now to his own Master; let the Dead alone,
and his words die with him.

B. It were more than injustice so to do, it were impiety; To let such words
die, which fret and corrupt like a Gangrene. Besides, it is impossible; for as
our doings, are as seeds cast into the ground, which dye not there, but to live
again, and we must look upon them, and these look us in the face in after time:
So our Actions or doings, and so our words or sayings also, these cannot dye;
specially not the words of a Dying man; his Death gives them life, so as they
have the quickest touch upon the Ear, and the more quickening power in the
heart, because, he that now speaks, shall speak no more for ever.

And this the Dying man knew very well, and, accordingly, had prepared himself,
probably more at that time to preach, after his manner, than to die. I was an
ear witness how effectually, That dying man's Sermon, as we call it, wrought
upon the hearers; who counted themselves Discreet men: But sure I am, in such a
concourse of people, the greatest number are not so discreet: And for their
sakes, as I have set down his Doings, so shall I his sayings, that the Reader,
with me, may ponder them together, and may not be deceived in a matter of so
high concernment, relating to an eternal condition, either of happiness, or
woe forever. I know some looked upon upon him, as the saddest object that ever
they beheld. And truly, I think, my self was one; And some loo ked him, as an
humble penitent, for no other reason, but because he said so; and so they were
infinitely mistaken, as will appear by and by.

These things premised, I come to his speech, which some mis-call, a sermon;
Call it so if they will, a Bishops sermon, Such as I have ordinarily heard at
the Court, not a word to the Text, but after the old manner turning head upon
the Scriptures of God. This strikes terror to the hearts of Court-Parasites,
Preachers I must not call them, whose manner is to choose a Text, and then abuse
it fearfully, as this Archbishop did at Court, I know not how often. But
look upon his Text, (now it is his Text) Sed male cum recitas incipit
essetuus. Mart. Amos.
and his Pulpit, and the Preacher too, and with all these, Remember, O thou
Amaziah, thou living man, who have taught thy mouth to flatter, and Blaspheme:
so did this Archbishop at the Court. And so he did upon the Scaffold, taking
this Text of Scripture. Heb. 12. 1, 2. And making it a Parallel that the
standers-by might believe, that he had the same ground of comfort, his
Lord-Christ had, in enduring the Cross, and might, as his Lord did, despise
the shame, for the joy was set before him. An horrible presuption! The like
cannot be paraleld in any story. Proceeded to the context: Jesus despised the
shame for me: p. 7. l. 7.
God forbid but I should despise the shame for Him: For him! Read his life, he
was put to that open shame, and yet not shame enough for his horrible sins,
impieties, and iniquities, and Blasphemies, against God, and good men.
Notwithstanding read his confidence, My God whom I serve. It p. 8. l. 8. Act.
27.23
was Paul's confidence upon the great waters, that the mighty flood should not
hurt him. It was this man's confidence also in appearance, That he should be
delivered from this sea of blood, (whrerinto he hurried himself) for God is
his God, and Him he served, says he. Reader, that you may not be mistaken,
read his life now, and how he served God: Then enquire of every man you meet,
whether he can tell you any piece of good service, which he did to God or his
Church, all his life time? What discervices he did every man can tell. Reader,
though I passeon, p. 20. l. 12.
yet stay thou upon these words, My God, whom I serve. These will be thy Stay
and thy Staff, when thou art falling into thy grave, and addressing thy self
to make thy appearance before the judge of all the world; These words will bear
up thy Fainting spirit then, as upon the wings of an Eagle: else nothing can do
it. But then thou must look to this, as thou do regard thine imortall soul,
That thou do speake-out these words, heartily, entirely, and indeed; when
thou say, My God, then thou can say, Whom I serve, If that follows not,
no comfort follows. But if thou can say, Whom I serve indeed, then may
thou say, My God indeed; else not; My God, and My service to him, must go
together. He tells us in the next place, of the Imaginations, which the people
line 16.
are setting up. Then the people do as he and such blind guides taught them
the way, to worship God after the imaginations of their own hearts. Then he
tells us of following line. 18.
the Bleating of Jeroboams Calves. An horrible Blasphemy: But a very fit
Parallel: for of no Archbishop, it may be said so truly as of him, That he,
as Jeroboam, set up a Calvish worship, and made all Israel to sin. In the same
page he acknowledges himsele a grievous sinner line. 24.
many ways; and this he does, in all humility.

All humility! There is no humlity at all. Where are the Actings of an humble
spirit? Where are the Breakings of his heart, with sorrow? Where is he
condemning, judging, loathing himself, for all his abominations? Where are his
thirstings after God! Reader, believe the Word of God and what His Faithful
servants have said touching this, which he calls, all humility; where all
humility is, there is all this forementioned; where there is none of this,
there is no humility, none at all. No, he made an acknowledgment of his sins
in all the pride of his heart, not as a poor penitent, as he calls himself,
but as a proud impenitent person, who had an heart that could not, nay would
not repent. Reader, I speak this for thy profit, therefore before I pass on I
must bespeak thee again, and I do charge thee before the living God, and as
thou do tender thine immortal Soul, read over those words again, which I
have said, rather the mouth of God says in Reference to his acknowledgement in
all humility; And add thereunto; That where humility is, there all known sins
are Confessed, distinctly humbled for, and repented of bitterly, bitterly;
Where there is all humility, sin will be as bitter herbs indeed, bitter in
the mouth, and bitter in the soul; A man all humbled, tastes sin now, as the
Gall of Aspes, which was before as sugar under the tongue; and whereas he
gloried in his shame before, now he loathes himlelfe for that shame. What
thiukest thou now of the Bishops aknowledgment of his sin, in all humility?
Consider well on it, and make answer here as before God, and as thou regardest
thine immortal Soul. Now proceed, and hear what he says; I have upon this
sad occasion, ransackt p. 8. bottom, and top of p 9
every Corner of mine heart, and yet, I thank God, I hawe not found any sins
there, deserving Death by any known laws of this Kingdom.

These Laws are not so well known to us: But this we know, understanding in
our Measure the Law of our God, That this man was put to death, by as known
Laaw, as all Judah put Mattan, Baals Priest to death, who was the Queens
Favorite, in all probability (...) to her Counsels, and had his hands and his
head acting and contriving all her Murders, and several Practices against the
Peers and Princes of Judah; and 2 Chronicles 23.17.
complotting with her Her, at that time, how to divolve the Crown of Judah to
Israel, that the Light of Judah might be quite extinct; All this is more than
probable, But certain it was, This Priest was, heart and Hand, for Ahab had
his house, and the cursed ways thereof, and he had scattered his ways, His
horrible Idolatreis, as he could, from Corner to Corner: By the same known Law,
that this Mattan was put to Death, this Archbishop, was put to Death. And the
Law we read Full out, Deuteronomy. 13. As for the known Laws of the Kingdom, we
leave it to them, that know them better than we do; and are preparing to give
the World a full and ample Satisfaction: It is abundantly sufficiently for us
to know the Law of our God toughing that matter. Read on, in the same Page,
where he says; though the Sentence lies heavy upon me, p. 9. l. 9.
yet I am as quiet within, as I ever was in my life.

I did not believe him, though yet it might be so; For his heart was as Nabals
was, a Stone; And the Devil, like a Strong-man, held his Habitation there till
the last: and there we read all things are at peace, but it is a cursed peace.
If he had lifted up his voice; and cried for the Spirit of Christ to come-in
unto him, to convince him of his finnes, to set them in order before his eyes
(in a way of mercy) then there had been trouble, and a blessed trouble, though
no rest had been to his flesh, nor quiet to his spirit because of his sins.
Certian it is, when Christ, by His Spirit, comes into the Soul, Trouble will
be there, as was, when he was born King of the Jews, then (...) was trubled
and all Jerusalem with him. The point is, The spirit of God conuinceth of fin
first and so causes trouble, before He convinces of Righteousness, so
causing Quiet, Rest, and Peace. I see my papers fill apace, I will hasten, yet
we will examine his comfort in the next words. An empty one God knows, That
other Bishops were (hanged, and) beheaded (too) before him; That is true
enough; and yet not half so many suffered that most shameful death, as
deserved the same; We hope his Brethren in iniquity, shall have their
deservings anon. But he did almost as presumptuoufly, as he had done in the
choice of his Text, to make (...) the Baptist, and Saint Page 9.
Cyprian (no Archbishop) and the first Martyr Saint Stephen, Saint James too,
Saint Paul also, all these paralels now, comparing them with himself. That he
does not, he says and God forbid he should, so he says also; he will raise P.
10. l. 1
a comfort to himself from those great Saints, and servants of God, who were
laid-up in their several times, as he must be; that is his comfort. But now
let the living man know, for the time is passed with him; That, if he look for
comfort from these men's sufferings at his death, then he must suffer for the
same cause ( the cause makes the Martyr:) and his life must be as theirs was,
and that is matter of comfort indeed: for they were all for God, His House, and
His Household, and the Laws thereof: This man was full set, and his hand, and
heart full bent against all these, God, and Gods House, and Household, and Laws
there.

In the same Page we may read his mutterings against the Honorable Assemblies
in Parliament now; That they will bring-in the Romans (i. e.) Romish Religion,
by the same p 10. l 20
means they seek to root it out.

Well; I like the proceedings so much the better, because such a man as he, the
worst of a thousand, has scandalized the proceedings thereof, casting such
shame thereupon: They go a clean cross way to him, I hope, Blessed be God for
that, As he to root-in Popery; so they to root-it-out. And veniant Romani, let
all the Papists in the world, join hearts and hands, as now they do, to set up
Popery again; they shall not prevail; so long as all the Assemblies do go, as
we hope they do, clean cross to this man's way, all his life long: For that is
to go strait and level, to the Glory of God; and advancing His Truths, and
Ordinances in their purity.

I must not pass over that, which he deferred till afterward; I but; perhaps,
a great clamor there is, that I would p. 10 l 8.
have brought-in Popery. Perhaps! It was as sure, as he came-upon the (...) to
be cut a sunder; And yet says he, ye know, that the Pharisees said against
Christ himself, If ye let him alone the Romans will come, etc. And so he makes
application, as was pointed at before: So as indeed, every word there is
pointed with a blasphemy. But for that, which he said was clamoured against
him, that he would have brought in Popery, hereto, he said, I shall answer more
fully by and by. He should have answered to that, at that point of time, he
should have cleared himself of that Crime before he spoke so largely of the
King, That, upon his conseience he is as free from laboring to bring in
Popery as any man living: And as sound a Protestant he held him to be, p. 11.
l 4.5
as (...) man in his Kingdom: and would venture his life as far and as
freely for (the) Religion, (he calls Protestant.)

Thus dishonourably he spoke of his Lord and Master; I say again,
dishonourably; It is a mighty dishonor to his Master for 3. Reasons. (1)
Because, as it is an honor indeed to be honored by a person, that is
honorable indeed: So is it a dishonor indeed, to be honored by a person
infamous indeed. (2) Because it will be so judged by all men, That he who
justifies himself and his own wicked way, will not condemn another, (...) on
in the same way; but commend it rather. (3) And this will argue, That he has
spoken dishonourably indeed, Because hitherto all (the miscarriages or
misgovernments in the Kingdom, have been charged upon the Kings Counselors,
not upon the King: God forbid it. He that rules over men must be just, ruling
in the fear of God. They are his 2. Sam. 23.2.
Counselors, who have counseled the King to do wickedly, to his own
destruction, To bring in Popery; To fight against the Holy City: The
Counselors have persuaded all this; and what is done against the very mind
and end wherefore God made him King, they have done it; And so we blessed our
selves, and our King, a good King, but his Counselors are all naught; But now,
the chief of his Counselors quits himself here before God, Angels, and men,
and affirms (so may all his other Counselors as truly, even the worst of
them all) under the ear and eye of heaven, That he had never a thought or Will
to bring in (...): and then he would never persuade the King unto it. What
shall we say to this? As sure as the Daughter of a strange god, is brought into
the Land: so sure Popery is brought-in. As sure, as the Irish are brought into
the Land: so sure Popery is brought-in. As sure, as Romish Priests are in
Oxford: so sure Popery is there. As sure as the Lord Christ is in Heaven: so
sure, the Cannons-mouth is levelled against the very place, where His Heart
dwells on earth; and the sword is pointed against the very Apple of His eye, and
yet the King is as sound a Protestant as any p. 11. l. 6.
in the Kingdom, and will venture his life for Christ and His Cause, as far
and as freely, as any man whosoever. Well, I wish heartily, That any man but an
Arch-Traitour, or Rebel, like himself, had spoken this. But since, an
Archbishop has spoken thus, putting all off from himself, the Kings chief
Counselor; and freeing the King also upon (...) conscience, of which he was
going to give God a present p. 11. l. 1.
Account; and this heavy Charge must be charged somewhere; either upon the
King, or his Counselor; For Popery is brought-in, that is certain. And there
is a generation of men Risen-up in the Sun light, who fight with God now, as if
they had an Arm like Him; This is clear also, as the Sun when it shines in his
strength. But the Kings Counselor clears himself and the King his Master of
all this: And we have none else to charge but the Pope; who is all one with all
the Papists in the world, which join themselves with the Kings council now:
And though they may differ in many things, yet they are faithful to the
Devil, and made friends amongst themselves in the main; the carying-on the
design against the Lord Christ, and His Holy ones.

But do we well consider what a piece of Scripture we have read here from the
mouth or pen of this dying man? Surely the Debths and Wiles, the Devices of
Satan were in this man, and vented themselves at his tongues end; Now his
Memory serves him very well, to do by the help of the Devil, such a piece of
service for his Side and Party, as a greater has not been done, since the
War began; nor is it Imaginable how a greater service Can be done, to
encourage the contrary party in their Cursed way: and to advance their Cursed
work. For Gods sake and his Churches cause observe what he says;

1. Popery is brought into the Land: so we say, and, God Angels and men will
witness to what we say. But what says he? That neither the King nor his
Counsel, have ever endeavored, the bringing in of Popery.

2 The Religion of God, which we, without any mental reservations, Call
Protestant, is protested against, and persecuted with fire and sword in both
hands, as God knows, and all His most faithful servants see, and feel: And
yet the King and his Counselors, are all, every one, as Sound Protestants as
any men in the Kingdom.

3. The Bullet and the Spear are pointed now against the very Appel of Christ's
eye, as every man sees, that will see. And yet, The King and his Counselors
do bear so (...) affection to Religion by Law established; that they will
venture their lives as far, and as freely for it, as any men in all three
Kingdoms. Where then shall these impieties and horrible iniquities be charged?
There is no remedy, upon the parliament sure; (1.) That they have brought in
Popery. [By throwing down Jdolatrie, and (...) out those Idol services, which
the Bishops had brought-in; and so have given the Pope fair hopes, of an
harvest in England shortly.] (2.) That they are unsound Protestants. [Why Truly
I cannot tell, unless, because they have avouched the Lord this Day to be
their God; and to walk in His ways: and to hear his voice: And the Lord
has: avouched them to be His peculiar people; therefore, unsound protestants
they, and there is all the reason that I can give, or the adversary either.]
(3.) They will not venture their lives so far and so freely for Gods Cause, as
the King and his Counselors will. [Now the Lord God of gods be judge here,
and show whether of these two parties, He has chosen to fight his Battels]
Amen. But these words shall not pass so; Though I may not handle them as I
would, I will handle them as I may; after this manner; Since the Counselor has
discharged the King in all the three particulars fore mentioned, I will charge
the Counselor with them all three. And because the chief among them is gone to
his own place, the burden of the Charge shall lie still upon those, of the
same Conspiracy with him (who will say as much for them-selves as he did)
against the peace of their King, and the Lords Kingd omes; The first charge is,
That, this late Archbishop sought, by all means to bring in Popery; And brougt
it in (what was not in before). Our Allegations and prooss, are upon
everlasting record; there let them remain; I will allege only, that which
was in every man's eye; He has thrust at those, and thrustthem-out of their
places and out of the Kingdom, who set themselves against the bringing in of
(...); Therefore, thrusting-out these (...) of the Lord, he en-deauoured to
bring-Poperie-in: Nay he did not only endeavor but brought in Popery, A
strang-worship into the Church, Therefore plain popery in (...). He brought
altars into the church, plain Popery. That also: He bended and cringed before
Wood and stone, The grosest Popery that; And yet he said, perhaps men have
clamoured against me, That I would have brought in Popery, They do not clamor,
they will affirm it till they dye; And, which must needs follow. (2.) That he
was not so sound a Protestant as any man living: for some protestants there
are, who are Sound indeed, and understand the word, as it is generally
understood without any mental reservations, as, we think he did not: And have
better evidence for their Religion, than that they were borne and baptized in
the Church of England, which was all the evidence the man brought, that he was
a Protestant, in his sense: and so he might be, a papist in ours: A sound!
What? Truly I cannot tell; Not Protestant sure, not as the Lutherans understand
protestant; much less as we understand the word; but as unsound according to
the Religion by (Gods) Law established as any man in this Kingdom; I do not
except any now of the Kings Council now, the stink of whose (...) they are
engaged in a war against the Lord (...) is come up even to their own
Nostrils: and has (...) a filthy savor over all the Churches of God, spread
over the face of the whole Earth. Sound Protestants they! No; sound Athiests,
and Papists they, enemies and Adversaries to all Righteousness. It will be
manifest thorowoat the next particular of the charge.

3. Doubtless he would make the world believe that he also would venture his
Life as far and as freely for the Protestant Religion as the King would do.
We may believe him with some Reservation,) what they were I guess, and may in
part examine anon) who (...) the King into a war against the Kingdoms of
Christ, that he might sheath his sword in his Subjects bowels. He and and his
fellow Counselors venture their lives as far and as freely for Religion! It is
for the Pagan or Popish Religion, then, an Abominable Religion: for under the
heavens of God never were there found such enemies, such fighters against God,
and Religion by (Gods) Law established as these Counselors are who have
adventured far and freely indeed their honors their Estates, their lives,
their souls; I, and the life of their lives, their God, His favor, His
protection; they venture far and freely indeed, their God and all, for a
Religion by (their own) law established. And yet says he, he and his fellows
will venture as far and as freely for Religion (he would make us believe) by
Gods Law established, as any men in this Kingdom. So he says, And so they
do: And so the Devil and his Angels will say, and do too: and so they did,
just as they do now, the Dragon and his Angels fought with Michael and His
Angels, Revelation: 12. So far and as freely these Counselors venture
themselves. Here is now the third particuliar of the charge, charged, as indeed
it ought to be, upon the wicked Counselors who are at this Day to the King
their Master, as Athaliah, and the house of Ahab were to that unhappy King
Ahaziah; she his Counselor to do wickedly: They his Counselors to 2. Chro.
22 3. ver 4
his destruction. And yet let my soul abhor to deal unfaithfully with God, and
His King, against the good word and mind of God; and the knowledge He has
been pleased to communicate unto His poor servant, therein, which is this,
That the Lord God charge all the Bloodshed in a Kingdom (that which is openly
shed, and with both hands, or with an high Hand before all Israel and before
the Sun, all this the Lord charge) upon the King, He has set over that
Kingdom: So does he all Abominable Idolatries committed before the eyes of His
Holiness, Ahab did but hearken to his Queen, granted her his seal, so she
murdered Naboth. But says the Lord to Ahab thou have killed, and where Dogs
licked the blood of Naboth, the Dogs shall lick thy blood even thine 1. Kings
21.19.
and under the look of the King; all these, that Bloodshed, and these
Idolatries, The Lord of lords, and God of gods charge upon the King, though
wicked men were his Counselors, to do wickedly against God, and His poor
People.

Now I proceed in the same Page, and to Page following, where first we read his
blessing upon this great and Populous City, God bless it said he. Amen; And
blessed be His name He does Bless it, in all the Peoples sight; And His
Blessings are the more conspicuously visible upon the City, the more Audible,
the Adversaries curses are against the Prosperity of the same: For indeed all
that this Bishop did in the time of his reign, and all his fellow Counselors
do now, was and is to bring down a curse upon the City: certainly their zeal is
so fiery against the prosperity of it, that they do call down for firer from
from Heaven to consume it as Sodom was consumed. O how gracious a God is our
God! our fins call for a curse; our enemies call for a curse: Free Grace with
holds it, it shall not come: while the City keeps close to God and to his
cause; and cannot bear them, which are evil; and for Christ, and His
Names-sake, and His Churches sake, has labored and has not fainted. The
adversary and Enemy to all Righteousness, calls for a curse upon the City, day
and night, and had he an Arm like God, he would raine-downe fire and Brimstone
upon it; God will not suffer it so to be. He has blessed it, and it must be
blessed, Blessed be his Name; Bless it still, Lord, bless it, still; even
because thy adversaries do curse, bless Thou; and let thy Friends see an
increase of thy Blessings, in an answerablenesse to tky adversaries Curses.
Amen.

J recall my self now, and the dying man's Blessing, God bless the City; then
he minds them very well, of that, which will bring a Curse, the shedding of
innocent blood; (so will the sparing of the Nocent, the wicked parson) and bids
them beware of it; the people have been (said he) very forward that way stirred
up against him, as once against Saint Stephen; And Herod (in his construction
(I verily think) the Parliament) went before the people the self same way,
when he had killed Saint James (interpreted, beheadded the Lord Strafford) And
now they see-how well it pleases the people (indeed it pleases them verry
well, every man in the City except Malignants there) they will venture upon
Saint William too; I have ploughed with his hayfer, and read his Riddle, and
made it plain Scripture. He spoke again to the City, take heed says he of
having your hands full of blood, in the first of Isaiah; God is now on foot
making inquisition for blood (indeed He is) And now God remembers the complaint
of the poor, (indeed he does so, and forgetts not) but what poor? Those poor,
says he, and puts himself in the number, whose blood is shed by such kind of
means, (as his must be) It was his manner at Court to prevaricat with God and
men; and to pervert the good word of God, to a clean contrary sense, and now
he could not do otherwise at his death. Then He warns the city the third
time, take heed of this, It is a fearful thing (at any time) to fall into the
hands of the Living God in the 12. of the Hebrews: but it is fearful indeed,
then especially, When God is making His Inquisition for blood, A man could not
speak more Terror to his own heart then these words hold forth, if he had had
an heart to consider-one them, and Ponder them, well (viz) God is one foot now
to make inquisition for blood: and at that present time, hearing the complaints
of the poor, and answering the Desires and sighings of his prisoners and His
needy oppressed ones; The Lord was Risen now, and had taken the matter Into His
own hands, whereinto this man was now fallen, and at that instant of time
undressing himself for the block, thence to rise to judgment, to give an
account of his sayings, and doings, the Rage of his wrath against Gods
hidden-ones. O fearful thing indeed! and Terrible words; yet came they from
him, as from a Truke; his heart was quite past feeling, as that he was not
sensible of any word he spoke, so far as the standers-by could discern; which
words well thought one, would make the car tingle, and an heart of (...) melt
away to nothing. I must pass over these words also, and stay a little upon the
following: for we must not forger how he remembers the City of (...) Words and
Case, and makes all, as well as he can, paralele with his own case. But oh how
different is the Case, and how unparalele with Ieremiahs words: Jeremiah sought
the peace of Jerusalem, spoke all he spoke from the mouth of the Lord: for this
his faithful dealing, the Nobles, (to whom the King could deny nothing:) would
have Jeremiah put to death: take him, says the King, he is in your hands:
(Gods hand over ruled there) do to him as you pleas: Then said Jeremiah, take
heed what you do; if you put me to death, God will require ^
it, when He makes Inquisition for blood: and you shall bring Jnnocent blood
upon your selves and the City. Innocent blood, the blood of him, who stood-up
night, and day speaking for the good of the City. This man did clean contrary,
as all the City knows very well, so do all the Christian World. And not to
have him put to death, had been to bring innocent blood upon the City; the
blood of souls too, which he had destroyed by his evil Doctrins, and
Practices all throughout the City. Therefore he must be destroyed; Rebellion
against God, Treason against His Christ must be punished with cruelty, A cruel
messenger must be sent against a son of Rebellion, (...) 17. 11.
to take off that head, which plotted the ruin of Christ's Kingdom. Mercy to
such a man had been cruelty to good men: To spare the evil, vile and
treacherous persons, is to destroy and make havocke of the Righteous. It is
notable, which the Noble Scholar says; Plebotomie (i.e.) blood letting by
cutting a vain, is so necessary sometimes for our bodies, that, unless we let
out our corrupt blood, we must let out our souls: So (Caedes) chopping off ^
heads, or hanging them-up before the sun, cutting down the whicked, as in
Queen Hesters days, ( days of slaughter) when the wicked were mowed down as
the grass or corn before the Reapers, This is necessary for the civil or
politic body. And when this justice, and (...) of the Lord is executed, then
it is a good day with the City, and the memorial thereof must not perish from
their seed; for the (...) must rejoice when they see the vengeance; because
Psalm. 58.
then they see clearly, That there is a reward for them; And their God judges
the earth.

His following words seem pointed with tears; He seems to weep over the City
as Ishmael over the bodies, he (...). 41.
himself had slain: so he bemoaneth the Church of England pa. 12. l. 17.
now in a storm her self; and God knows whether or how it shall get-out.
Well, let that pass, The Church has a promise for that, she shall weather-out
the storm, and be brought to safe harbor: And now the Lord steeres her
course, the most direct way thither-ward, through these mighty floods of great
waters, which shall serve but to make the Churches harbor or promised Land,
more fair, and desirable now, and more joyful at the last. But yet we cannot
forget, That this man, who so bemoaned the Church, helped mightily to raise the
storm. And that which is yet worse, (and so to retort his own words) he
helped to cause devisions amongst us, and to cleave Kingdoms and Churches to
shivers as with wedges, that thereby Profaneness and Irreligion might creep in
( said he) might rush-in like a Mighty wind, or flow-in like a mighty flood,
which leaves no food, say I, and so will every man say, that observed his
Doings and Sayings, all the time of his reign: for what could he have done to
bring in these abominations, which he has not done? Indeed to use his own
words, and to explain them, The Church is p. 12. or last line.
fallen into a great deal of danger by her own ( i. e.) lesuits, Arch Bishops
and Bishops, a great deal of danger by her own: for these Bishops, he the
chief Bishop, and all the other of the same order, Bishops or Priests, did all
of them contrary to what they should have done, and (...) the good Priest did
do; he made a covenant between God and the King, and the people, that they
should be the Lords people: 2. Chron. 23.16.
But he and they did quite contrary by their abominable Doctrines, and
practices, they divided the King from his God, and the people from God and
their King, that they should be no more the Lords People, And now the great
house of the Kingdom was cleft, as with wedges to shivers: for where there is
a dividing from God, there will be divisions among men. And where sin is,
especially the sin of Idolatry, there will be a storm, and profaneness, ^
and irreligion will come-in like a flood. And so has the Church of England
been dealt with by her own ( i.e) Archbishops and Bishops, pandars for their
own lusts, procters for their own Rome; subtle Brokers for their Babylon: And
yet see, the impudency of these Archbishops and Bishops! Though they are all
cast forth as dung, out of two Kingdoms; and one of them hanged-up for his
villainies in Ireland; And their Archbishop (...)
is cut-asunder here, because he did cleave Kingdoms to shivers as with
wedges: yet they will be Arch Bishops and Bishops still, That they will,
though God tells them they shall not: He has troubled their seas, and He will
trouble them; their sea shall work so high that they shall not be able to
weather out the storm which lies upon them; Yet they are as Ambitious to rise
again to their throne, as their Archbishop was unwillingly to fall upon a
Scaffold: but thus an hardened heart will do, rise-up against the Lord God, not
observing The Lords sword is in His Hand, to ease himself of such Adversaries;
To destroy their Lordships utterly, and to take away that blasphemous name,
Archbishop, from un der the heavens of God, that it may not be once named any
more in the Churches of God.

The last particular is (for now he said he was hastening out of this miserable
world, and my trembling pen p. 13.
hastens after) he bespeaks the peoples good opinion of him, whom even now, he
called calves and persecutors, all by his own name; notwithstanding he would
have them conceive well of him, and take knowledge, that however he lived, yet
he was borne and died a sound Protestant: a lover of that Religion from his
youth up, and stood firm and fast thereunto till his Death, and now would die
in it. And this is the sum of his full answer, to that he said, perhaps was
(...) against him, that he would have brought in Popery: If you would have
replied here, that he brought false worship into the Church, Crucifixes,
Crosses, Altars in thither; he would have answered you fully, that so indeed he
did, but that was to l. 14.
keep an uniformity in the external service of God. And if you (...) have
asked him, as indeed I was about to do, to explain the word Protestant:
because Athiests and Papists use ths same words in their sense too; so also,
what he meant by Religion established by law, because there may be a great
ambiguity in that word, there being a Religion established in England by law,
which ws downright Popery: And this word Law is ambiguous too: for there is a
law in our members, which fights against God; and there is a Law of (...)
ordinances, which stands opposite to Gods Law also; If, I say, he had been
asked to explain himself, I know not what he could have said more than he
said, I was borne and Baptized in the bosom of the Church of England (So were
Arch-Rebels, and Arch-Traitors also there) as it stands yet established by Law.
I cannot understand him there: He should have said, I profes that Religion, and
in that I come now to die, which stands established by the Word of God, And had
he said so, I had not believed him; For though Saul before he was Paul, I mean
before he was converted, would have said almost as much, that if he had died
at that time, he had died in the Religion of his Fathers, but he would not have
said, in the Religion and Faith of Christ, for Him ignorantly he persecuted,
though he would not have thought himself a Persecutor, as he calls himsefe
afterward, But not till after his conversion. I confess I stood at amaze here;
If any other stand so now, reading this his following Protestation, let us take
the thread of his life, and so go through all his Doings and sayings all his
life long: and then we cannot be so credulous as to believe his Protestation at
his death, which was: That he never endeavored to altar the Laws of the
Church or State: never endeavored the subversion of the Laws of the Realms
nor change of Religion. Never endeavored! He ever endeavored it, witness
High Commission and Star Chamber Courts. God, Angels, and men are all
witnesses there, That he more than endeavored it, he affected it; he subverted
the Laws, and changed the everlasting Ordinances, as he could. And we are
confident, that though the light which was in him was darkness, and great was
that Darkness, yet he could not but have so much light remaining, as to clear
unto himself his falacy about this word, Protestant, and those words also
Religion established by Law, wherewith he would deceive the people: and his
impudency also, denying that he ever endeavored the subversion of the
Kingdom: For could he do as he did to the pure worship of God, and His
Worshippers; To the day of his Wrship? could he keep in the Popery, which he
found, a great (...) in Chapels and cathedrals, could he keep all this-in?
And could he bring in, by maine force, into our Churches what he found not
there, Pictures, and Jmages, and set-up Altars in all churches, his hand could
reach-unto, and yet no endeavor to Altar Religion? could he set his foot so
(...) upon the laws of the Realm, and never endeavor the subversion of those
laws! This is as incredible as for a Friar (So the old tale goes) to have the
Liver of a Goose, and the heart of a Pig, and yet to have nothig killed for
him. Surely, as he went cross to the light of God all his life long: So did he
to his own light, at the hour of his death; Truly I cannot think otherwise:
For the light of nature cannot be quite extinct in this world; I have told but
my conceit here, but me thinks it is more than a conceit, That his Protest for
his innocence, hightens his crimes, makes him more detestable, and the man
more nocent.

In the last place; That he was no enemy to Parliaments. Page 14.
Believe him we may with his reservation; So long as they appeared for
Episcopacy: and were fast friends to Gods enemies, Archbishops and Bishops.
But one Parliament there was, and blesssed be God there is, he said two, and
these indeed he disliked, for some misgovernment there, Says he. We understood
him very well; This Parliament are enemies to that misgovernment by Arch
Bishops and Bishops. All Sober men in the world, like the Parliament for this,
and bless them day and night, and God for them; And for all the good He has
wrought by them. Oh Blessed be God, who has given wisdom, and discerning unto
men to see unto this misgovernment, and has made them resolve upon this
question, That this misgovernment in and over the churches of God shall be no
more, no more Archbishops and Lord Bishops: For God is above them, who would
hold-up that Misgovernment still. Blessed be God for this for ever and ever:
That this Misgovernment, clean opposite to the Government of Christ, is taken
away; Salvation and Glory and Dominion be ascribed to our God for this, Amen.

He has almost done, so have I, He has one Desire to put up to the Throne of
Grace, and that is a great one, It is, That God would forgive him. I humbly
desire to be forgiven, first of God, and then of every man, page 14.
a great desire indeed to be for given of God: If that Desire be granted, then
come life, come Death, nothing comes amiss; All that comes whether fire or
sword all is welcome. Oh this desire must be well thoughton, managed, and
ordered every day, early and late there, that it may be heard and answered, at
the last, when we are breathing it-forth last of all, and with it our soul. God
knows, who knows the heart, That I joined with him as I could. But to speak
the Truth, Though my soul went forth affectionably toward him; yet my spirit
could not go out with one word in his Petition.

(1) His desire; I could not close with that, because the Lord has said, The
Desire of the wicked shall perish.

(2) To be forgiven; I could not heartily close with that neither: for I
remembered what we read, Esa. 2.9.
The great man humbled himself (before Wood and Stone) therefore forgive him
not. Oh terrible words! Forgive them not!

Many a man, you will say, has done so, and God has forgiven him for so doing.
Yes, for nothing is so free as Grace; And nothing, not sin it self, can be so
multiplied, as Gods pardons are to poor humble sinners. We must not limit Gods
infinite Mercy. No, we do not. But we must take all together; Great sinners *
have been forgiven, the very Argument Manasseh a great sinner, but greatly
humbled.
that David uses, Forgive my sin, for it is great. The most (...) Idolaters,
these have been forgiven; But they have been indeed poor penitent, greatly
humbled before the Lord; for humbling themselves before the crature, the works
of their hands, or imaginations of their hearts. We cannot tell where to read
this man, a poor penitent indeed.

We read him indeed, (...) forgiveness of sin, but no where do we read or
observe him, humbly confessing his sin. But the contrary we (...): And
therefore so (...) as God has communicated His mind to His servants, touching
this man's (...), and his prayer at the foot of his Sermon: So far they may
declare it, That this man's desire, and his prayer both, the one and the other,
was an abomination to the Lord. Secret things belong unto the Lord our God:
But things revealed unto us and to our children.

His prayer at the foot of his Sermon, takes with a world of people, as his
sermon did. Indeed, we are very prone to make an Idol of our last prayer; we
hope we may fly unto it, when we are slaying, as Ioab did unto his Sanctuary:
God will hear our last words, think we, though we regarded not to hear His
(...) King. 2. 28.29.
words all our life long. This is but a conceit, a false hope, and will deceive
us as it did Ioab, and as it has deceived all the wicked in the world, Who
cried, but there was none to help; even to the Lord, but He answered (...).
18.41.
not: And when this great confidence in this last prayer was rejected then will
follow, as then, a treading down, and a casting forth for ever. This gives fair
warnings.

1 That we do not dare to turn away our ear from hearing Gods Law: For then,
when we would turn to God (as at the point of Death certainly we would) then
will He turn from us: And our prayer then will be, as for ought we can know
this man's prayer was, an abomination.

2 Beware of such a prayer, which thine hand has formed, and thine eye only
prompts unto thee, so teaching thee to pray. I dare not censure that, which
learned men do approve: But I am persuaded, That the soul shall find as little
comfort in the time of need, from his prayer so formed, and so suggested unto
him, as his palate finds relish now in the white of an Egg.

3 Beware of having an hand, or voice in restraining prayer, or binding it to
Forms. Thou art no more able to do this, then thou can restrain the sweet
influences Job. 38. 31.
of Pleiades, or bind the Sun beams: But beware of having a mind, or purpose
in thy heart to do it, as this late Archbishop had, and these Lords of the
World have at this day; Remember how it fared with this man, how pent-up and
restrained his spirit was at his Death. He was putting-up a Prayer then, which
he hoped would pierce the heavens, and reach the bosom of his Father there. A
miserable Deceit; he had no help to form his prayer but his hand; nor to
suggest, or promp, or teach him how to pray, but his eye; Ah Lord! A prayer so
formed, so taught, and suggested, can no more reach heaven, than you can the
highest star, with the shortest finger. And yet the Adversary and Enemy will
have his Service Book brought into the Churches again; God shall be served
after their manner, with forms, the hand has framed; and with prayers the eye
has taught. Well, we shall see whose Word shall prevail, Man's or Gods; and how
the Lord will recompense these proud men.

I have done with the Sermon and the Prayer. (...) draw to a conclusion.

This man is fallen, and the lower, the higher his pinnacle was; The Lord (...)
this our Brothers fall unto us, that it may be for our (...), and looking well
to our standing when we are up. There is matter of infinite Use in all, that we
have read hitherto. It shall be threefold: For here is matter (1) of great
fear. (2) Of bitter lamentation. And yet (3) of exceeding joy; with that we
will end sure: But in order, and very briefly, giving but the hints of things,
three words to these three uses.

(1) Here is matter of great fear to thee, and to me, (we are lost in
generals) is there a lust in us, and bearing rule there, which is not
mortified, nor by our will shall it be? Here is matter of great fear, That
this lust whether of the flesh; or of the eye; or of life, 1. (...) 2. 16.
will undo us, will put us to open shame here; or, which is worse, seal us
under wrath for ever; It is the manner, for an unmortified lust so to do,
especially where there is no care at all taken about it, to mortify the same:
I do abound with terrible examples out of Gods Book, and the Churches book of
days, all commanding our speedy care, and zeal for the mortifying of every
lust; But this man, we have spoken of, is sufficient alone to press us to this
Christian duty. Pride of life was notorous in him; and he was so far from
showing any care to mortify that lust, that he did all to give life and (...)
unto it, And see how that lust served him; It was a means to put him to open
shame; and what wrath may lie under to all eternity, I have not a tongue to
express; only the thought of the misery, an unmortified lust (whereof we
commonly say, is not a little one,) may bring upon us, a matter of great fear,
and should engage us to the work of mortification, and to speed that work. And
surely this, which has been said, is of the same use to me and to thee, Reader
as it is to him, or them, in whom the pride of life is so predominant, that
they will, whether God will or no, be Archbishops and Lord Bishops still,
minding their throne, and forgetting the Scaffold. But fear we every
unmortified lust in us, and use we, in the fear of the Lord, all means to
mortify the same; for mighty men have fallen (and shall fall) thereby, they
that made the earth to tremble, and did shake Kingdoms. We must lead our lust
captive; throw it down, from its dominion, casting it-out of our hearts from
having place there, in our affections, else it will throw us down, and expose
us to a throwing-out like unsavourie salt: Fear we an unmortified lust, we
little know how far it may carry-us, nor to what shame it may expose us to.

(2) Here is matter of bitter mourning, and lamentation, certainly if good
Bradford had been alive, and had (...) what our eyes saw, he would have
mourned bitterly over the hardness of his heart; and then he would have come
home to his own heart, my heart, said he, as hard as a stone: But it was not
so, for his (...) was felt and bitterly mourned over. Indeed this hardness,
this rockinesse of heart, is matter of bitter mourning; The heart is as a
stone, when it first comes into the world, and that is a natural hardness:
There is an hardness, which man, by several acts, can contract to render his
heart like a rock, or nether (...), or (...). And, O what a judgment is this,
(...) all (...) of Egypt, for a rocky heart, was one of them, and the greatest
amongst them all. A Rocky heart! Nothing makes any more impression upon it,
than our hand does upon a rock. Mercies may be shewred-down upon this heart;
they run-off again as waters off a stone. Judgments may be pow ed down upon
this rocky heart; The fury of Gods anger, and the strength of battle; the Lord
sets this man on fire round about. And what then? yet he knows it not; It
burned him, yet he laid it not to heart ( i.e) Though the (...) of Gods (...)
42 25
wrath was very scorching upon him, yet his heart melted not, for it is a rock.
The innocent blood, that he has shed is found-out; God at present is requiring
it; The sights and groans of His poor, God has now heard, and He is now a
foot to avenge his poor servants: And this murderer has received the sentence
of Death, and yet so rocky is his heart, he says i will eat and drink to morrow
I shall die. Ah Lord! has the man a rocky heart? He has. Then he will set his
face like a flint, and drive-on furiously against the Lord, and His
hidden-ones, and upon the Drawn Sword in His way, more blind than the Beast he
rides upon: And while he breaths-forth threatenings against the Lord, and is mad
with rage aginst those, the Lord has set His heart upon, he may think that
all this while, he does the Lord good service. A rocky heart! All the incomes
of pleasures, and profits, out of all those sweets, the world affords, he
draws poison. To be brief in so clear a case; Has the man a rocky heart! Then
he will workeout his destruction with both hands, by all means, all ways,
both by his Graces, and sins; He does clean contrary to that, a man of a
soft and melting heart does do: for he does work out his Salvation by all
means all ways: An heart like a rock! A man had better be possessed of a
Legion of Devils, than to have such an heart within him, It renders him,
Spiritually, dumb and deaf; It throws a man into the fire, and into the
water, and yet he knew it not; It dasheth him upon this Rock, and that, and
yet he feels himself nor hurt by it; he is as a man asleep upon the top of a
Mast, the seas work, and waters roar round about him, but he hears not. What
shall I say? But a word more. A rocky heart! It renders a man, even his graces,
shall I say useless? (...), Destructive to himself and others: Of all this,
this man, late Arch Bishop, was a very great example, Therefore I said, as sad
an object he was as ever was looked upon: For his heart was a rock, and that
is matter of bitter mourning.

3 It is matter of rejoicing too, even to the whole city of God: For when it
goes ill with the wicked, it goes well with the Righteous, and then the city
rejoices. Prove 11. 10.
That there may be no mistakes, I will briefly propose two Questions, and
answer them as briefly.

1. What is the force and emphasis of this word, Rej yceth? It is the
lifting-up, or rather a leaping of the heart for joy.

2. Why is this leaping for Joy? Not because the blood of a man is spilt; not
because a man made in Gods Image and beautified with graces (where of he had
great store; but wanted the chief Grace which teaches to make use of all,) is
taken away; not for this; The city rejoceth at no man's (...), or misery: It is
a matter of sorrovv to the City to see a person, which God has made, or the
graces, which God has given, all destroyed in a moment of time; This is matter
of sorrovv; But this of joy, of leaping for joy, that that head is chopped off,
which plotted and contrived the (...) of Christ's Kingdom. That those lights are
both put out in darkness, that would have put out the light of Israel. That
that tongue is Silent in darkness, which silenced or would so have done, all
the faithful ministers in all three Kingdoms. Cause of leaping for joy; That
his day is past and his night come, who darkened the Lords Day more than any
day; and would have it profaned by a law. Cause to leap for joy, that we saw
his head drunk in his own blood, who burned against Jacob (the Church of God)
like a flame, which devoureth round about: and powered out his fury like fire
upon three Kingdoms, that they might burn together in the fire of their own
rage, and wallow in their own blood. Cause to leap sor joy that we saw this
man's head lie drunk in his own blood, and himself consumed in the fire he
had kindled. It goes well with the Righteous the City rejoices. I know there
are many more Adversaries, Archones; And great Adversaries there are in the
hearts of Gods own people, which only hinder, and set back the work of
Reformation mightily: But yet in the good of the City we must rejoice; and in
the fall ^
of this great Adversary, at he was an Adversary to God, we may leap for joy.
We hope we shall see the house of our God profaned no more with lying
vanities; Nor the worship of our God defiled any more Nor the worshipers of God
thrust into (...) any more Nor our Lords day blasphemed any more. Nor our
privileges taken from us any more. Nor the Royalities of our Lords Kingdom
trod under by the food of pride any more: for we are confident and have full
assurance, that we shall have Archbishops and Lord-Bishops no more. It goes
well with the righteous, The City must (...), must be exceeding glad. For when
the wicked perish there is shouting ( i. e) There is a skipping like lambs for
joy because Gods enemy, and the Churches Adversary is taken away; An enemy to
all Righteousness, to the Righteonsnesse of faith by an opinion of a
Rightcousnesse by works; An enemy to the pure worship, and worshippers; and to
the Lord and His Day; An enemy to the Church, and State, endeavoring and
effecting the subversion of the Laws, and change of Religion. When the wicked
are taken away there is shouting: For it is with them as it was with Judah,
when Athaliah and Mattan her Priest, were flain, their House and Altars and
Images brake in pieces, for then all the people of the Land rejoiced: and 2
Chro. 23
the City was quiet. It is so now with the Righteous, therefore are their
mouths wide open to sing the high praises of their God: For He that did lead
into Captivity, was lead into Captivity: and he, that has killed with the
sword, was killed with the sword, here is the Patience and the Faith of the
Saints. They must wait a little while in full assurance that as they have
seen, so it shall be to all their Adversaries, Archbishops, and Lord Bishops,
and to all the enemies of God, who seek the ruin of Christ's Kingdom; they
whom they see to day, they shall see no more for ever. And then seeing the
salvations of their God, they shall say, Great and mervailous are thy works
Lord God Almighty: lust and true are thy ways O King of Saints: For thy
Judgments are made manifest. Amen.

FINIS.
Published according to Order.

