Yperephaniaz uzerion OR, Machiavil Redivivus. BEING An exact Discovery or
Narrative OF THE Principles and Politics OF Our Bejesuited Modern Phanaticks.

(...). Menander. Idem facere, quod plurimi alii, quibus Res timida aut Turbida
est, Pergunt turbare usque, ut ne quid possit conquiescere. Plautus. Quod non
praevalet Sacerdos efficere per Doctrinae Sermonem, Potestas hoc imperet, per
Disciplinae terrorem. Isid. By J. YALDEN Esquire;

LONDON: Printed for Will. Cademan, at the Popes head in the New Exchange. 1681.

TO The Right Honorable Thomas Earl of Ardglas, Viscount Lecale, And Baron of
Okeham.
MY LORD,
HAD I no other grounds whereon to warrant this Intrusion into your Lordship's
Patronage, no other pretense to court your Protection, than barely by
Prescription from your Lordship's accustomed Favors, (which are the common
effects of your universal Goodness) I should not have presumed, especially in
this When e^^^ one t^^t int^^^^ ^^s C^^^try's (...), is eit^er ^ate^ or
m^^d^^^^.
Crisis, to offer this Dedication: But it is from and under Principles, and
those most eminent and invincible. (like refulgent Attributes) your Lordship's
Loyalty and Courage, that I presume to crave shelter: And the world knows the
exuberous current of your inexhausted Virtues cannot be oppugn'd, even by the
strength of the greatest malice; nor can the strongest Venom either hurt or
prejudice amidst the glowing Beams or Sunshine of your Lordships Excellence,
but must, like the unwholesome Foggs, yield and fly before the vigor of the
rising Sun.

Though (my Lord) I could plead my Innocence, and both justify and cry out,
Qui nihil injuste agit nulla opus habet lege, in bar to all the malice I must
expect to meet with; yet that alone is not of force sufficient, but I must have
Recourse to your Lordship for Succor and Defense. And I find by common
Experience from the Methods of Fanaticism, that by how much the greater my
Innocence is, by so much the greater is the Danger I am to encounter; and that
not so much from the knowledge I have of my own weakness, but much rather from
the strength of Malice and Revenge, which are of the Leaven of Popery and
Presbytery. However, Sir Edmund-bur. Godfrey. The Archb. of St. Andrews.
I shall not fear under the defense and conduct of so good a Patron, being
fortified with Truth and good Design. The damnable practices of some men
nowadays, and the accursed cruelties of former times, are but Emblems of
those insupportable Miseries which these Kingdoms (divided into Schisms and
P^^^ies) have too evident grounds to ^^pect and dread from the devouring jaws
of Ambition, Self-interest, and Faction.

I have endeavored in the Sequel of this, to represent unto your Lordship and
all good men, the arcana Ambitionis, by giving you the picture of a person
over-covetous of Glory. The Piece is coarse, but yet ad vivum pictus; it is the
vera Effigies or Expression of that which was the life of our late abortive
Troubles and disastrous Miseries. But here I meet with the mighty Objection of
that Party which were either active in the late Rebellion, or are now about to
act over again and revive that bloody Tragedy, (viz.) The Act of Oblivion,
which is strongly pleaded in bar to all discourses of this kind; and is so
strangely wrested by some men of these times, even to anticipate our Oblivion
to what they are now about to act. Qutre.
But I would fain know, whether it be an offense against the Clemency of his
Majesty and that Parliament, so to remember the old Rebellion, An. 1641.
as a caution to prevent the multiplied Oppressions and Miseries that must
necessarily happen upon a new; when (alas!) it is too evident, that men act
nowadays upon the same principles with those of Forty One; and it can never
be intended, but that this Act ought to bury both the Tot Fac^ions of t^^^e
times t^^d t^ a Rebellion.
Offenses with the punishments due to the demerits and guilt of the Offenders.

It Is true (my Lord) that transcendent Act of Mercy, the Act of Oblivion, did
for some while rake up the Ruins of our Late Times; and we rested quiet, till
some of wretched and restless principles (who are always busy for the sake of
Strife and Contention) did first begin to spread abroad those Embers, to search
for old matters to work new Mischiefs: But I hope the all-discerning Providence
of Heaven will surprise them in their own Snares, and so direct the prudence of
our Governors, that by their wise Counsels they may timely crush the
Cockatrice in its shell.

Shepherds of People had need know the Kalendars of Tempests in State; Bacon's
Essays, Tit. Seditions.
for as there are certain hollow blasts of wind, and secret swellings of Seas,
as the certain signs of a following Tempest; so are there in Kingdoms and
Commonwealths.

-- Ille etiam caecos instare Tumultus Saepe monet, Fraudesque and operta
tumescere Bella. Libels and licentious Discourses against the State, when they
are frequent and open; and in like sort false News, often running up and down
to the disadvantage of the Government (and hastily embraced) are amongst the
signs of Trouble. Virgil giving the Pedigree of Fame, says, She was Sister to
the Giants.

Illam Terra Parens ira irritata Deorum,
Extremam (ut prohibent) Caeo Enceladoque sororem
Progenuit. --
As if Fames were the relics of Seditions past; but they are indeed no less
than the Preludes of Seditions to come: However, he notes it right, that
says, Seditious Tumults, and seditious Fames, differ no more but as Brother
and Sister, Masculine and Feminine, especially if it once come to this, That
the best actions of a State, and the most plausible, and which ought to give
the greatest contentment, are taken in an ill sense, and traduced; for that
shows the envy great, as Tacitus says, Conflata magna invidia, sen been, sen
male, gesta premunt.

Private Cabals.
There is no Kingdom but has a Race of men, that are ingenious at the peril of
the Public, that are busy and at work always to undermine that Government
that is uppermost; such whose shoulders are so gauled, as they cannot endure
the least touch of Obedience: So that as one said of Galba (in respect of his
withered crooked body) Ingenium Galbae male habitat; so may I say of these, in
regard of their crooked use, That Wit could not have chosen a worse Mansion
than where it is vitiated, and made a Pander to Wickedness. There is, I say, a
Generation of men that are born to be the plague and disquiet, and scourge of
the Age they live in; that gladly sacrifice the public Peace to private
Interest; who when they see all fired, with joy warm their hands at those
unhappy flames which themselves kindled; tuning their merry Harps, when others
are weeping over a Kingdoms Funeral.

Your Lordship is of another stock, so that whosoever contemplates your
Actions, must conclude, that Nobilitas est sola atque unica virtus: Your Family
has stood against the Waves and Weathers of Time, immovable, fixed, and always
loyal. Je feray mon devoir, is the Motto of your Lordships Coat; which I cannot
better understand than in allusion to that excellent Axiom of the Roman
Orator, Omnis laus virtutis in action consistit. And now, my Lord, I humbly
beg that your Lordship will be pleased to own me for such, as I am obliged in
all Gratitude to render my self,

Oct. 5. 1680. Your Lordships most devoted humble Servant, J. Yalden.

THE PREFACE.
HOw horrendous are the Times? And how monstrom, and to be bewailed and hated,
are the Principles of s^^e men, whose greatest aims and constant practices seem
to endeavor at the very roots of Piety and Christianity; and to turn moral
Honesty topsie-turvis, taking the antipodes of every Virtue for their Paths, as
the nearest abode to the bottom of their endless Ambition? It Is that alone is
the abyst of man's perpetual tortures, The dismal effect of ambition.
the wrack of his mind, and the wings of his restless desires: Sometimes it is
dark and envious, and cannot endare the luminous irradiations of another peace
and happiness, and is always ready for destruction. In fine, it is that door of
Hell which opens to all the disastrous miseries of mankind; it is that hand
which directed and plunged the Knife of Cain into the throat of his Brother
Abel; it nearly resembles those Birds of blood and prey, which live in the
unfortunate Islands near the North Pole, and devour one another even in their
Nests. Ambition carries continually in its hand Glasses of a thousand Faces,
and colored with as many Passions; which causes Fire frequently to be taken
for Smoke, Black for White, and all Beauties for Deformities or Deceits.

Let us look about us, and see it aptly decypher'd in the present State of
Europe, which has sufficiently felt the dismal consequences thereof, in the
miserable effects of unnatural and bloody Wars: Which most influencing and
malignant Plan^^ of the Passions, will be always Regent, until Kingdoms and
Commonwealths are steered by honest and good Councils; until Princes make
Justice the Herald of their Demands, and make no other use of Wars, The true
use of Wars.
than as the last Appeals to Heaven, when Wrongs cannot be removed on Earth.

There is certainly now no Heaven upon Earth; the Devil is broke loose, and
that Master of Mis-rule has set the World together by the ears; his Engines are
now abroad, his Politics only practiced, his Machiavil is now become
Redivivus, and his Disciples preach the ensuing Doctrines. Nothing that is
Sacred, can bind Mankind to its good behavior, the Decalogue, and all sacred
Ordinances, are but weak Restrictions where Ambition holds the Plow, and
Faction or Self-interest drives it. Hence spring the general Calamities of all
Nations; and the two great Enemies that now seem principally to threaten
Europe, are, either Ambition abroad, or Faction at home. Foreign Ambition, and
domestic Faction.


As for the first; Do we not see how frivolous are the Pretensions of France?
With what violence he has carried on a War, and with what injustice; how all
Europe burns and consumes by the Flames he kindled and begun? Can we not see
that his Ambition has out-stretcht a greater distance than betwixt Dover and
Calice? Or do we imagine our Strength and See the Character of the French in
Heylyn's description of Italy, parag. 38. sol. 57.
Courage to be greater and more formidable than the Emperor and Confederate
Princes? Or have we so mean thoughts, as to think his Majesty's Dominions not
worth his pains? Or is the French King's love so great (and that entailed on
the Crown he wears) that he will not hurt us? Can we be secure in Fools
Paradise? Safety lies not in Imagination, but in Judgment: And the tyranny of
that Prince is such (prompted by his Ambition) as will admit of no Counsels
that shall be safe either for us or others. His Ambition is that Soil on which
nothing can grow, to advance the interest of another: He hates all Superiors
or Equals; and with restless pains and Labor covets and pursues universal
Monarchy.

Then secondly, Faction.
Let the State beware of that Bufie-body, Faction at home; an enemy of a more
horrendous shape than Ambition; the intter being but as the Stirrup by which
the former mounts into the Saddle of Rebellion.

Virgil 1. Aen^id.
Ac veluti in populo cum saepe coorta est Seditio, saevitque animis ignobile
vulgus, Jamque faces and arma volant, furor arma ministrat.

It Is that Vulture which gnaws out the very howels of Government; it begins
with Order (the more immediate Tie of smaller, but the fir^^st obligation of
greater Communities) by setting Particulars together by the cars; and
afterward proceeds to greater mischiefs, by engaging Parties and dangerous
Cabals; and rarely ends but in the ruin of the Commonwealth: Ambition is its
Fathe; Policy its Mother, Ignorance is its Nurse, and Rebellion is its Brother,
What cursed Fiend engendered so foul a Monster! What Bowels of Hell enwombed
thee! What Darkness gave consent to thy fi^^t conception! O more than
Spider-like Malignity! Dire Serpents Veneme, that turns all Honey into Poison!
It pretends Religion, but shuns the Practice: It is a Devils in an Angels
plight; most artificially it insinuates the evil of all its actions in show for
the public Good. It exclaims against Popery as the Whore of Babylon, when it
aims only to suppress Episcopacy; and if Monarchy stands in the way, the Diadem
shall be destroyed with the Mitre. In fine, it makes the deepest impressions on
popular easiness; and by sounding in the ears of the unwary people the pleasing
clangors of Liberty! Liberty! hurries them into at state of the most abject
Slavery.

But (alas!) when I have been told that the The Jesuit and Fanatic.
Clergy have been in the highest degrees accessory to the Civil Distempers,
Animosities, and Contentions that have every where shaked the foundations of
Church and State, I grieved. I then searched Evangelical Records, wh^re I found
nothing but mild and soft Doctrines; I enquired into the breathings of the
Spirit, and they were pacificatory; I wondered from what Presidents and
Scripture-encouragements these men deduced their practices, and at last was
forced to conclude, that they were only pretended Chaplains to the Prince of
Peace: Those Tor^bes that should have been for saving Light, were degenerated
into Firebrands; those Trumpets that should have sounded Retreats to popular
Furies, knew no other Music but Martial All-arms.

My design in this is only to detect the Politics of wicked men, to expose
their Principles to every man's view: This is that Key that must open and at
once expose the cancered breasts of evil Ministers: It Is this that will dilate
the close designs of Tyrants; and if duly observed, both opens to the view of
all, and for ever shuts the back-doors and by-ways to Grandeur: This is for
bringing all above-board, and playing fair: This will instruct us how to
prevent the dangerous consequences of Ambition abroad, and Faction at home:
This will put us on our guard against the designs, and prevent the Surprizals
of France: This will reminde ^s of Forty One, and if well understood, will
undeceive many true Protestants, whose judgment now as well as then have been
hood-winked and perverted (much against their own dispositions and Loyalty) by
the false News and Impostures of the Jesuits and Faraticks, into evil conceits,
destructive in their consequence both to themselves and lawful Governors, in
the ruin of their Lives, Religion, and Liberty. And I dare appeal to many
sober Gentlemen, If they have not too lately found themselves by such means
deceived? I need not mention such who have been too lately drawn in by the
Faction, and have since prot^sted against all sorts of tumultuary proceedings.

And to let you see that our Fanatics, even of these times, are of the same
Stamp with those of Forty One, read but the two Speeches of John King and John
Kid, Ministers; Executed at Edinburgh, Aug. 14.1679.
where, in the very hour of death, they both bear testimony to the Solemn
League and Covenant, and against Antichristian Prelacy, as a thing that calls
for divine Vengeance; and in their judgments declare, They thought their Rising
in Scotland to be no Rebellion, because they endeavored to support the Cause.
How many hundred instances are there to be offered, wherein they have openly
expressed their implacable Malice and Hatred to the present establishe and
Liberty. And I dare appeal to many sober Religion and Government?

But before we proceed, it will not be impertinent to overruled the
Presbyterian's Plea of Innocence in all matters of Blood and Cruelty: The Lord
knows (says he) who is the searcher of hearts, King's Sp. p. 4.
that neither my design nor practice was against his Majesty's Person and just
Government, but always studied to be loyal to They count no Authority lawful in
the Lord, but what allows them Libertty.
lawful Authority in the Lord. Which are the very dying-words of Mr. King,
having in the words immediately foregoing, justified the Rebellion as necessary
for the suppart of his poor afflicted Brethren: Therefore it was, said he, that
I joined with that poor Handful, meaning the Rebels.

The Presbyterians were not concerned in the Murder of our late martyred
Sovereign! No, not they! But let us see what the Independent tells them (who
was jointly concerned in that Rebellion with them) going about to convince them
of the danger of this King's Restoration. Consider (says our Author) the
animosity naturally inherent in the Royal Party and their Head against you;
Fol. 12, 13.
they will never leave buzzing in his ears, that the interest of your Party was
in its infancy founded in Scotland upon the ruin of his great Grandmother,
continued and improved by the perpetual vexation of his Grandfather, and at
length prosecuted to the Decapitating of his Father. Be not so weak as to so^th
your selves, that you shall fare better than others, because you never opposed
this young Gentleman's person; it is ground sufficient for his hatred, that you
bandied against his Father, and the Prerogative to which be conceives himself
Heir. It is the common sense of the Cavaliers, that you prepared his Father for
the Block, and are incensed at others, because they took from you the honor of
the Execution. And in a Fast-Sermon preached upon the news of his death, before
his Son then at the Hague, Dr. Creighton told him, That the Presbyterians
pulled his Father down and held him by the hair, while the Independents cut off
his head. And after him, it was more elegantly expressed by Salmasius in his
Defensio Regia; Presbyteriani Sacrificium ligarunt, Independentes jugularmt.
Nor will be count your Part any whit the less guilty for your hypocritical
protesting against the death of his Father, seeing in Sermans printed several
years before, you declared him over and over to be a man of Blood. The Scottish
Ministers printed it, That he had shed more in these three Nations, than was
shed in the Ten Christian Persecutions: And upon the same account Mr. Love
proclaimed in the Pulpit at Uxbridge-Treaty, That no Peace ought to be bad with
him. In short, you brought him (as it were) to the foot of the Scaffold,
whoever led him up. And now try the Cavaliers courtesy, if you please, you
that have both fought and preached against him; but remember this (though I
trust ye shall never have occasion) that when time s^r^es, the Philosophers
Maxim will prove good Logic at Court, Qui vult media ad finem, vult etiam and
ipsum sinem: Ergo (will the Courtiers say) seeing the Presbyterians did put
such Courses in practice as tended to the Kings ruin, they certainly intended
it, and are as deep in it as others. I wish (says our Author) you may
understand rather than feel, what Conclusions will be drawn by them against
you, from that Act of Justice, in outting off the King.

Here is a Charge fairly drawn up by one of their Fellow Laborers, who because
they joined in the Murder of King Charles the First, does from thence endeavor
to persuade them to keep out King Charles the Second, lest they should be
brought to Justice. That they have acted heretofore even in this very manner,
they cannot deny; but I hope they will have more grace or less power for the
future, and let their Loyalty and Allegiance be as e^^inent for the time to
come, as their Insurrections and Rebellions have been notorious in times past:
But I must suspend my Faith in these matters, and cannot believe they are come
to this pass, till I hear of no tumultuous Petitions or Associations, till I
meet with no A damnable Libel against the Government.
Appeals, and other seditious Pamphlets and Libels. To rebearse even these
matters, may seem somewhat harsh; but to see them repeated by that Party, would
be much more terrible. I know the old Rule, which says, That Truth is not to
be spoken at all times, does not deny but that there is a time for mourning as
well as laughing, and seems to intimate, that the severest Truths may be told
at proper seasons. That we may tell his present Majesty what his Royal Father
suffered, when the same Engines are at work for his destruction, is surely no
Crime, but an act of Loyalty, a seasonable Memorial, and a Duty incumbent upon
every Subject.

This Treatise designs not to derogate from the true esteem and dignity of any
sober, honest, and judicious Politician: Wholesome and good Policy is not to be
exposed to irreverence, by prostitution to every vulgar judgment; that Science
is ever built upon Piety and Prudence: On these foundations the wise and honest
Statesman makes it his endeavors to raise the glorious Superstructure of a
well-establisht government in a Prince, which will effect the most willing
Obedience in the People; by which the interests of both are so mutually
interwoven, that the good or bad fortune of the one, cannot occur without the
necessary consent or means of both together: That the Prerogatives of the Crown
may shine forth and be preserved in their due luster, and the Subjects
Liberties rest without Injury or Violation.

That Statesman is not unaptly styled the Atlas of the sinking State, which
has Remedies against every Malady, heals it when sick, eases it when
oppressed, and meets it in its several pressures with suitable reliefs. Such was
Philip de Comines, of whom one said it was a measuring cast, Whether Lewis was
the wiser King, or Philip the wiser Counselor. Such was Butleigh to our late
Queen Elizabeth, whose Counsels most effectually produced, or contributed to
the prosperity of that Queens Reign, which was so eminent, as I believe few
Ages can parallel; and Posterity shall read her happy Annals like Xenophon's
Remarks on his Cyrus, Non ad historiae fidem, sed ad exemplum justi imperii.

Facticus and ambitious Spirits (that always take their measures of what is
just and right, by the probability only, and not by the honesty of the means)
have too frequently sullied the Glory of this noble Science by impious Glosses
(like the common Blasphemers of the most divine Oracles) and by wresting the
true designs thereof to contrary and wicked ends, have made it truckle under
the Slavery of their hellish actions, according to the emergency of their own
occasions; like the Laws that were made in Causinus his Babel, to be ruled by
Manners, and not Manners by Laws. These are the men that can vex true Policy by
traductions and false glossing; they erect in their hearts Diana's of
Hypocrisy, which they always adore and worship in the subtilty of their
actions.

The following Principles, there are few so silly as to make them the Articles
of their Creed, though too many nowadays so wicked as to practice, and not only
so but by a daring impudence, to persuade and justify the wickedness of their
actions by the goodness and necessity of these Principles. These men raise the
billows of the Commonwealth; these turn all calm Serenities into blustering
Storms and Tempests: Where these Monsters come, there is nothing but lamentable
Outcries, occasioned by Rapes, Robberies, and Murders. From which,

Good Lord deliver us.
ERRATA.
PAge 53. line 15. read justified. p. 54. l. 24. r. they had. p. 61. l. 10. r.
those Rebels.

MACHIAVIL REDIVIVUS.
PRINCIPLE I. Religion is the best Cloak for our Politician; he must have it in
show and pretense, but* not in Conscience and Practice.
ASqueamish stomach is not fit for sour sauce; but he that has an Appetite to
every Relish, and is not offended at an evil Object, is Madam Natures best
friend, and determines the indifference of the Aphorism, in being the
Physician, and not the Fool. As in Physic, so in Politics, a man must not
stick at any means to compass his ends; and in both, there is no Superstition
more dangerous and to be avoided, than to stand too much upon Niceties and
Scruples: A desperate Disease must have a desperate Remedy.

He that will dig for Gold, must resolve to go through the Dirt; and he that
aims to set up the Idol of his own ambition, (and resolves to worship that
alone, till he finds it established on the summit of Grandeur) must dive as
deep as Hell to fix the foundation, lest the elevated and endless height
thereof render it liable to tumble for want of a profound fixation. True Piety
exercised in obedience to the commands of true Religion, is most obvious to the
aims of a subtle Politician; but if he makes a right use thereof, and has it
only in show and pretense, and not in practice, it is the most necessary Tool
he can work with: and therefore Machiavil split an Hair, when he determined not
absolutely and openly to renounce Conscience, but to insinuate an opinion of
his regard thereto by the plausible methods of his close designs. He notes it
from Papirias in Livy, who slighted the Pullarii handsomely, and was rewarded;
whereas Appius Pulchre did it grossly, and was punished.

Nothing can so fairly gild and cover the deformity of Rebellion and
Innovation, as the beauty of pretended Holiness and Religion. It Is an excellent
art to make the people Saint us even in the most hellish Enterprises, by
managing them with a dissimulate Piety, when we act most vigorously against it.
Herod would feign Worship, when he means to worry.

-- Ipso seeleris molimine, Tereus
Creditur esse pius.
And Oliver Cromwell seemed most fervent in Prayer, when his Zeal tended only
to win time of the General (by the prolixity of his Devotion) for his wretched
Accomplices to finish the great work of murdering the late King.

This is that which leads the credulous Rabble by the nose; for the common
people (which are the (...)) never see behind the Curtain; an hand some Gloss
is with them as good as the Text: They are many times so easily caught, that
although they perceive the Snare, they will greedily swallow the Bait; their
affections (being always transported with the gilded delusions) are the
strongest line by which our Politician draws them on to their ruin, and his
purpose; and new Projects are the dish on which he feeds their wavering
appetites, without the least danger of a relacting surfeit.

Pliny was not much mistaken, when he called a Deity a jolly invention, Plin.
l. 1. c. 7.
Irridendum agere curam rerum human arum, quicquid est summum sed eredi (...)
usu vitae est. Let Religion be my friend in helping me to the Blessings (the
pleasures and advantages) of this life, and let others expect from, or use her
as they please in the next; let me but use her as a Cloak for my practices
here, and let others expect from it a Crown hereafter. I like the humor of the
Samseans in Epiphanius, that were neither Jews, nor Gentiles, nor Christians;
preserving to themselves a commodious correspondence with all. As the
Mountebank personates the Physician, so our Politician does the Christian;
whatsoever he acts in reference to Heaven, is merely theatrical, and done in
subordination to some other interest. Let me be a superficial, let others be
fundamental Christians; like the River in Athenaeus, Cujus profiuens aqua
dulcissima, quae vero in imo salsa. Lycurgus could never have ingratiated his
Laws so effectually, had he not pretended a conference with his Goddess. No
more could that grand Impostor Mahomet have infected so great parts of the
world with the venom of his Blasphemy, without the help of his Pigeon. Nor
could the Faction of our late times have carried on their own designs for
their peculiar benefit, without the specious pretext of a thorough Reformation.

It Is to me indifferent (says our Politician) what the doctrine and principles
of my Religion be, whether true or false, so it be but Popular; and if the
people I mean to juggle with, err fundamentally, or prove obstinate
Schismatics, I can by no better means wed them to my interest, than by
suitable compliances with their obstinacy and delusions: and when I have drawn
them by slye insinuations into a credulous faith of my worth and abilities to
maintain their Cause, there remains then nothing to further my projections, but
to convince them of the necessity to arm in the defense of themselves and their
righteous Cause; which is done in a trice: for men are ever ready to support
that which they would be glad to set uppermost; and therefore I commonly lead
the Van, and appear in the head of the Faction. I sanctify their proceedings
with the old charm of Jure Divino, though I never found them registered but
amongst Hells blackest Canons, signed with the dismal paw of Legend.

He that can privately act his Villainies, and neatly hocus his worst
Impostures, is a man of parts; by which means he shall appear as pure and
innocent as the most exact Christian. It is of excellent use, for our
Politician to hallow his designs, by saying Grace before his impious actions,
and to thank heaven for the Event, be it never so foul and bloody. How
comfortably the Pope and Cardinal conferred notes, -- Quantum nobis lucri
peperit illa Fa^ula de Chr^sto! O the rich Income and glorious Results of a
well-managed Hypocrisy! This! this! our subtle Pharisce must with all
diligence study, and thoroughly practice.

Horace.
-- Da justum sarctum ^ue videri,
Noctem peceatis, and fraudibus obj^^ce rathem.
There is no greater hinderance to generous Actions, than a coy and squeamish
Conscience; which, as some tell as, vents its greatest force, surdo verbere,
which can never be heard amidst the noise and bustle of a clamorous world. The
Judgments of the Almighty threatened in Holy Writ, and what else may seem to
terrify the exact Christian, must not at all affright our politic Heree; nor
ought he to distinguish betwixt good and evil, but by the bala^^^ of
Self-interest. Had Alexander boggled at invading other Princes Dominions, he
had never wept for the scarcity of worlds. Had your mighty Conquerors listened
to, and guided their Actions by the Rules of a righteous Conscience, their
Feign had never been so felly great and they had died and been forgot like
other men. But I Will live, and be great by any means.

Flectere si neque^ Superes, Acheronta m^^^^^.

The ALLAY.
Beware, beware, fond Man! methinks I hear a Vae vobis pronounced against thy
Hypocrisy: Remember, that although thou may deceive thy fellow creature by
thy crafty and subtle dissimulations, thou can never be able to juggle with
thy Omniscient Creator. It Is but in vain to put Ironies on the Almighty; for
his terrible vengeance will certainly meet with thee in the end of thy
projects. Be not deceived, God is not mocked. Put away this cloak of Religion,
and clothe thee in Sackcloth and Ashes, these Garments of Humility will better
become thee in the sight of Heaven and good men than all the pompous Vanities
this world can afford thee. Thou may possibly feast thy exorbitant Lust and
Ambition here, but thou will never be able to satisfy or quench the least
draught thereof hereafter. Though thy Hypocrifie may help thee to walk in
masquerade, and contribute much to the service of thy impious designs, yet
there is nothing that God's pure and undeluded Eye looks on with greater hatred
and abhorrency; and a counterfeit Religion shall be sure to find a real Hell.

Over and besides the horrid wickedness of the Impostor, how grievous is it in
the sight of Heaven and all good men, to behold the most divine Oracles, and
sacred Ordinances, enforced even to obstetricate to the most impious and
irregular designs? Cur tu non desinis, virtutis stragula pudefacere? quoth the
Cynick to the coward in Arms* which may be as aptly applied to thee, who do
at the same time both use and abuse the whole Armor of a Christian to contrary
and wicked ends. Base wretch! thou truckle^t under the servility of every Sin,
and wadest through the filthy mire of the most loathsome Jakes, to gratify thy
lustful Appetite with that which, after all thy pains and travel, may prove but
gilded Poison, or at best but silly Trash. God created thee for other ends, and
made thee a Creature after this own Image: He designed thee for glory, greater
than that of Angels; but thou have rendered thy self fit for shame and
confusion, beyond that of Devils: He made thee capable of eternal Happiness,
but thou have chosen everlasting Misery. Yet know, cursed Caitiff, Heaven shall
be glorified, though in thy damnation; for the most desperate sinners by their
greatest crimes, can but change the attribute they should bring honor to, and
but oppose the glorifying of the Almighty's goodness, to occasion that of his
Justice.

See to what a pass Religion was brought by our Pretended Reformers of the late
times, as it was delivered in a Speech in the House of Commons, by a worthy
Lawyer. Mr. Speaker, I would not be mistaken, June 23. 1647.
I say not my own words, but I speck what the Malignants say of us, and my Lord
Say: A thorough Reformation.
They say that we have in our Religion an outward Garment or Cloak of any
color; which none do wear amongst us, but Secrataries, Fools, Knaves, and
Rebels; the said Cloak being, with often turning, worn as threadbare as our
public Faith, full of Wrinkles, Spots, and Stains; neither brushed, spunged,
nor made clean; with as many Patches as Beggars coats. And (they also say) that
our Preaching or Prattling is kept by Cobblers, Tinkers, Tailors, Weavers,
Wyredrawers, and Hostlers; so that all Order and Decency is thrust out of the
Church* all laudible Ornaments and indifferent bes^eming Ceremonies, are cried
down, trampled under foot, and banished, under the false and scandalous terms
of Popery; and in the place thereof, is most nasty, filthy, loathsome, and
slo^enly Beastliness or Doctrine, being vented in long and tedious Sermons, to
move and stir up the people to Rebellion, and traitorous Contributions; to
exhort them to Murder, Rapine, Robbery, Disloyalty, and all manner of Mischief,
to the confusion of their Souls and Bodies. All these damnable Villainies our
Adversaries say are the accursed fruits which our new-m^ulded Linsey-wo^lsey
Religion has produced: for they say our Doctrine, is neither derived from the
Old or New Testament; that all the Fathers, and Testant Doctors, and Martyrs,
never heard of it; that Christ and his Apostles never knew it.

He that has, by an inveterate wickedness, subdued the aversation which the
Almighty did once seat in his heart against the ugliness of sin, may possibly
be said to consult well for his present advantage and greatness; but to have
utterly suppressed the thoughts, as well as hop^s, of any future comfort. No man
in his right senses did ever yet combine with his Enemy, or wilfully go about
to murder himself; but too many have been so nonsensically wicked, as to
confederate with the Devil in their own destruction, and have yielded those
points which otherwise he c^uld never have gained upon them.

Some there are who hate downright Honesty and true Religion; who, by being
Disciples of the Prince of the Air, and inspired with his Spirit of Darkness,
have at length gained of the Devil himself, and outdone their h^llish Master
in the mystery of Deceitfulness. Such are the Devil's choicest Engines, and are
able to do him the greatest service in the accursed methods of g^lling their
f^llow-creature, by how many degrees they stand nearer in relation to Mankind.

PRINCIPLE II. The deformity of all his Actions he must cover, and that in
pretense for Liberty, Religion, etc. and otherwise endear himself to the People
by Adulation, and the most slye Insinuations imaginable.
THe Multitude must be cultivated with perpetual Soothings and Encouragements,
^ntil they grow immeasurably luxuriant in our Politicians gilded Delusions, and
as absolutely believe he designs their good, as be most certainly does his
own. He must transport them so far, even to the credulous faith of all he says
and does, to be as sacred toward them, as their Persons and Estates, Religion
and Laws are to themselves; or rather as much esteemed by him, as they are
useful to the furtherance of his designs. He must always accommodate himself
to the matter he has to work upon; he must have his R^medium in omne morbum.
The simpler sort of people he must busy with his horrid Plots and false
Alarms; amuse the timorous with Tumults and foreign Invasions; and deceive the
factious by Covenants and Associations: In fine, his Party must be the Refuge
and Receptacle for all sorts of Libertines and Malcontents.

Thus qualified, let him first possess the Rabble that the Government is become
a Monster, and has already devoured a great part of their Liberties; and make
the hideous Outcry throughout the Kingdom, of Breach of Privilege, Privilege
of Parliament, Magna Charta, etc. for our Politician well knows, that Corruption
optimi est perniciocissima Pesti^.

Then secondly, strike at Religion, worry her with the name of Heresy;
re-establish and issue forth Writs De Haeretico comburendo; build Piles in
Smithfield; commit Massacres; murder a King at his own door: And it you cannot
abolish the Principles, be sure to sacrifice the persons of such as stand most
eminently engaged in opinion opposite to those of the Faction. Serve up a John
Baptist's or a Bishops head in blood, that certainly will be grateful to the
longing appetite of a Godly Sister, when perhaps her sq^eamish stomach (being
lately surfeited) cannot so easily digest the coarser Diet of the common
Shambles. Cry out against Popery with the thundering voice of Forty One. It Is
the best way to destroy the Church of England, if your can handsomely insinuate
her to be leaning that way, under the notion of Arminianism. And let all this
and ten times more be done, our Politician knows he may warrant his Actions
from The late Times.
approved Presidents, especially if he act by the specious pretext of a tender
Conscience, and get the Undertaking once to be christened God's Cause.

His Coat must be of diverse colors, and his Shape as alterable as that of
Proteus; he must look through the eyes of Argus, miss no opportunity, fit all
seasons, and neglect no means: for it is most certain, that the prosperity of
Innovation depends upon the right knack of kindling and fomenting Jealousies
and Dislikes in the people, and craftily wielding those Grudges to the favor
and advantage of private ends; for the various humors of the Rabble are like
the different Tools of the Mechanic, necessary to produce one and the same
effect.

And if our Politician aims either to alter the Government, or to ingross the
Supremacy, he must first assault the people with false Alarms of imminent
dangers, invent horrid News, and ply them with such fictitious perils, as may
make them believe Religion and Liberty and all are at stake, and that they are
the Geese which must save the Capitol. And when by these methods he has cajoled
them into Fears and Jealousies, they begin then to be ^it Instruments for the
boldest and most unwarrantable Undertakings, and so soon as they are once
touched in the Noddle with these Conceits, it is but sadling their Noses with a
pair of State-spectacles, and you may persuade them upon Newmarket-heath, that
they are tumbling down Dover-cliff. After all this, it will not be difficult
for our Politician to conjure them into Petitions, Tumults, Associations,
Oaths, and Covenants for the common Safety; and when by such means he has made
them stark mad, he need not doubt of being chosen Governor of the Bedlam.

Secondly, he must compose his very garb and gesture: It Is an excellent gift,
to tell a lie with a boon grace. And if Religion be in vogue, he must pretend
mightily to the gift of the Spirit, and call his Followers the people of God.
He must be well skilled in the impressing art of Canting and Whining, and must
deliver his Tales and Stories with Ardour and strong Affection, and zealously
knock his breast, call Heaven to witness, and invoke all manner of Imprecations
on himself, it he fails to do that which he never intends, or so much as thinks
on, with the least inclination to performance.

Thirdly, he gives them good words and bad actions: he ravishes them with the
apprehensions of Liberty, into the strongest chains of Oppression and Slavery:
Nomina rerum perdidimus, and licentia militaris Libertas vocatur, says the
Roman Orator: And Plautus in Truculento, sings excellently well to the same
purpose:

In melle sunt linguae sitae ve^rae, atque orationes,
Lacteque corda fell sunt sua, atque acerbo aceto.
E Linguis dicta dulcia datis, at cord amare facitis.
Fourthly, he observes that they swallow Probabilities, wisely offered, with
greater greediness than naked Truths. Our subtle Crafts-master is therefore
very curious in gilding his Impostures, and never reveals his designs, but at
fit seasons and convenient opportunities; and that by piecemeal too: for the
prodigious view of his monstrous Projects (entirely delivered) would greatly
amaze and look big, even beyond all hope or possibility of digestion: whereas
the same thing delivered by parcess, and at proper seasons is swallowed with
greater ease, and will produce the same effects.

But further, S. M. p. 12.
to give you a more concise touch of our Polititian's principles, we cannot
better do it, than by setting forth the admirable harmony and consort that
appeared (in the Rebellion of our late Times) betwixt the Lay-Cabal and the
Ecclesiastic; both agreeing in the same method, in the same steps, in the same
cause, and in the same opinion: Only that which was matter of Policy in
private, was made matter of Conscience and Religion in public. First, They
find out Corruptions in the Government, as matters of Grievance, which they
expose to the people. Secondly, They petition for Redress of those Grievances,
still asking more and more, till something is denied them. And then, Thirdly,
They take the Power into their own hands of relieving* themselves; but with
Oaths and Protestations, that they act only as Trustees for the common good of
King and Kingdom. From the pretense of Defending the Government, they proceed
to the Reforming of it: which Reformation proves in the end to be a final
Dissolution both of Church and State. Then! then our State-Chymist has brought
the Elixir of his Machinations to perfection: He may now apply his strongest
Remedies to the feeble State, and work upon the peoples weakness what projects
he please; but must always take heed that the recovery of their strength does
not outrun the growth of his power.

It Is ^^^idst the Divisions of the people, our Politician wrests the Sword into
his own hand; and it is through the floodgates of their Disser^tions, he rusheth
to the summit of Grandeur. The Power once obtained, the Scene begins to change;
and he that of late made the most servile compliance with the humors of the
Rabble, begins to sing, Tempora n^^tamur! -- and resolves both to awe and force
them into a state of Bondage. He that courted them before, with all the
adulatory terms that Ambition could invent, or they receive; as if he had been
vowed their Martyr, and ready to sacrifice his dearest enjoyments upon the
Altar of public Liberty and Freedom; as if his veins know no other blood, but
such as he would be proud to spend in their service; having now served himself
of them, he forgets the bosom that warmed him: They hear from him now in a
Palinode; he curles up his smooth Complements into brief Laconicks, and
changes his Courtship for Command. He is now at liberty, and repeats all his
Villainies in open view: He had long since purchased an habit of doing ill, and
has now acquired a daring impudence to maintain it; which in a politic wisdom
makes all things good and lawful. Having so unlimited a Power, his passions are
now become indomitable, his Will's the Law, and his Hand the Executioner of all
his Arbitrary Determinations; according to that of Grotius, Jus dicitur esse id
quod Validiori placuit, De Jure Belli. l. 2. c. 6.
ut intelligamus fine suo carere jus, nisi vires ministras habeat. And our
Politician sees now that (to justify his greatest Tyranny) he may impose the
greatest hardships on his conquered Vassals, as just and legal; since that
only which it pleases the stronger Party to ordain, is said to be Law; since
nothing can accomplish the end of a Law, except it be attended by force and
power to constrain Obedience.

The ALLAY.
Flattery is indeed a collective accumulative Baseness, it being in its
elements a compound of the most sordid hateful qualities incident to Mankind,
(to wit) Lying, Servility, and Treachery; each of which, being most detestably
deformed in their own natures, must certainly in conjunction make up a
loathsome monstrous guilt. And first, we may take Lying for the very
cornerstone of the Fabric; for without that, the mighty projects of our
accursed Politician cannot subsist; and unless he deceive the people by his
horrid falsehoods, into a resolved hatred of the Government he intends to
destroy, it is utterly impossible for him to work his ends; because, though the
Rabble affect change, yet every Individual loves to be quiet, if he can be
secure. It is therefore the practice of our devilish Impostor to worry the
Government by his Hellhounds of Scandal and Calumny; whereby to insinuate
pannick fears, and groundless jealousies of imminent dangers, into the minds of
the ignorant and unwary Commons: and all this to be done in pity and devotion
to the public good, accompanied with the most artificial blandishments, and
subtly dissembled piety in all his actions to every particular Member of the
Community. But to the more Ingenious* these tricks and impostures are the less
dangerous: so that our Merchant is constrained to trade with the more ignorant
Chapmen, the Plebeans; for with them his counterfeit Wares are most easily put
off. Our most eminent Practitioners (in these sort of Politics) of the Late
Times, The methods of the Late Times to destroy the Government.
did not fall point blank upon the Government it self, but began first with the
Redress of Grievances, both in Church and State; amusing the people, that
Popery and Arbitrary power were breaking in upon them; and that unless evil
Ministers, etc. were removed from about the Kings person, his sacred Life,
together with their Lives, Religion, and Liberties, must all perish and be
destroyed; which they had vowed themselves always ready to support and
maintain, according to the Remonstrance of December 15. 1641. wherein, The
Parliaments Remonstrance, December. 15. 1641.
after many protestations for the good of the Kingdom in general, they further
declare and protest to this Nation, and to the whole world, in the presence of
Almighty God, for the satisfaction of their Consciences, and the discharge of
that great Trust which lies upon them, That no private passion or respect, no
evil intention to his Majesty's person, no design to the prejudice of his just
honor and authority, engaged them to raise Forces, etc. Of the damnable
falsehood of all which, fatal experience has convinced the world, in the bloody
consequences of their after-actions, to the scandal of mankind in general; but
more particularly, to the eternal infamy of the English Nation, who to this day
continually bear the reproach thereof from other Nations in their Travels
abroad. And we have too much grounds to believe, that from hence it is, Turks
and Infidels refuse to give Faith to Christians, since they can trifle with the
greatest bonds of Religion, and so solemnly protest before God and the World,
what they never intend to perform. And all this for God's Cause, for the sake
of Presbyterianism.
Religion; to purge her from Popish Ceremonies, to root out Antichristian
Prelacy, and to complete a Thorough Reformation.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum! Such is his Servility too, (and that
implicitly involved in Lying) that he must not only truckle under the basest
and most wicked designs, but even yield himself up a slave to the vilest
humor of the worst of men: And accordingly the nobler Heathens accounted Lying
the vice of Slaves and Vassals, below the Liberty of a Freeman. It was once
the Character given to Christians, (even by their Enemies) Behold how they love
one another! But God knows we may now be pointed out by a very different mark,
Behold how they deceive and delude one another! And we shall one day find,
that the Violation we herein offer to our Religion, will not one jot allay (but
much rather mightily aggravate) the impious baseness of our Double-dealings.

Lastly, to complete our State-Sycophant, Treachery.
Treachery comes in; a crime so odious and ugly to the view, that it has been
held all one, to name and implead it: Of this there are such crowds of Examples
in Story, that it would be impertinent to single out any; especially in an Age
that is fitter to furnish presidents for the future, than to borrow of the past
times. But yet further to discover him amidst all his Cheats and Impostures, we
may be assured that there is no greater Index of Ambition, than an affectation
of Popularity; which appears in meek Addresses to the people, wooing and
familiar condescentions, bemoaning and bewailing their Sufferings, and
commending a more vigorous sense of their present, and a necessity of resisting
their future Calamities: And all this covered with the specious pretense of the
Common Good.

It Is Friendship that is the Cement, Friendship.
which only really and effectually combines Mankind; all other natural or
civil Ties, take their greatest force from this: And therefore we may observe,
that God, reckoning up other Relations, illustrates them by several notes of
Endearment; but when he comes to that of Friendship, Deuteronomy. 13.6.
it is the friend who is as thine own soul: Nothing below the highest instance,
was deemed expressive enough of that Union. What a Legion of Fiends then (says
a modern Author) possesses men, that can break these Chains, nay, that can
forge them into Daggers, and shape their Friendship into the unnatural Engines
of Ruin and Destruction? This is certainly the blackest color wherein we can
view a Parasite. As the Ape has a peculiar deformity above other Brutes, by
that awkward and ungraceful resemblance he has to a man: so surely our
State-prodigie is infinitely the more hateful, for being the ugly counterfeit of
a Friend; and that aggravated too by being abused not only against
particulars, but also in the destruction of Kingdoms and Commonwealths: In
fine, that which should (...) the Balm, our damned Impostor turns to the bane
of all Mankind.

PRINCIPLE III. He that aims at Sovereignty, must be sure to beat down the
Bulwark of Government (the Prince's Credit) by the powerful force of
irresistible Calumny.
THis part was most curiously played by our subtle Gamesters of Forty One; and
from the Chronicles of that time, our Politician may furnish himself with the
most effective Instances and Examples; and (besides that which is requisite for
his purpose) he may leave enough for the greatest Tyrants, both to imitate and
admire, even to the worlds end. First they fell upon the Kings Reputation, So
they begin now-adays. Witness the false News, Libels, etc.
then they invaded his Authority, after that they assaulted his Person, then
seized his Revenue, and in conclusion, most impiously usurped the Supreme
Power, by taking away his sacred Life.

It cannot easily be imagined of what singular importance the aspersing and
blotting of a Prince is, to boil up popular Discontent and Faction to that
height, which is requisite for a Rebellion: And therefore in our late times of
Apostasy, our then Reforming Bigots having extremely discomposed the people,
upon the apprehensions of Popery and Arbitrary power, and shaken them in their
Allegiance upon a belief of a strong Design in the Government it self to
introduce it, well knew how to build upon this foundation. And first they
inveigle the people into strange and unreasonable Petitions, Popular Petitions.
(which are the most compendious method of attempting a Commotion, being the
gentlest of political inventions for feeling the pulse of the people)
Protestations, Associations, and Covenants, for the common defense of
themselves, for the safety and preservation of their Lives, Religion, and
Liberties; and into a favorable entertainment of any plausible pretext, even
to the justification of Violence it self; especially the Sedition coming once
to be baptized God's Cause, and supported by the Doctrine of Necessity, and the
unsearchable instinct and equity of the Law of Nature: And all this recommended
to them by the men of the whole world, Private Pastors.
upon whose integrity and conduct they would venture their very Souls, Bodies,
and Estates.

How to make a Traitor lie a Martyr.
Our Politician must further remember, by art and eloquence to extenuate the
crimes of such that have suffered by the stroke of Justice for the Cause, and
so cry out upon their hard measures, and bewail their loss with an abundance of
sighs and tears; that by such tricks old Traitors may be propounded for new
Martyrs. This has been the ordinary methods of Ambition, as you may find it
noted by a great Scholar in these words: Barclay contra monarch. 30.
Fuit haec omnibus Saeculis, and adhuc est ad occupandum Tyrannidem,
expeditissima via; Dum summo se amore, ac pietate in patriam esse simulant;
Principum vitia, and Populi miscriam; apud suos primum, deinde palam
quaeribunda voce lamentantur: Non quo Plebem (cujus solius commodis inservire
videri volunt) ab illo Servitutis jugo asserant in libertatem; sed quo populari
aura subnixi, additum sibi and januam ad eam ipsam dignitatem, nequiora
aliquando ausuri patefaciant. And therefore if the Prince be severe, he gives
him Nero's brand, a man kneaded up of Dirt and Blood; if he be of Parts and
Contrivance, he calls it pernicious Ingenuity; if he urge Uniformity and
Decency in Divine Service, he then rails at his Superstition and Idolatry: And
because there is no such equilibrious Virtue but has some flexure to one of
the Extremes, he is very careful to publish the Extreme alone, and to silence
the Virtue; and his words are full of embittered Sarcasms.

Methods to be used against Loyalty.
And if after all this, he cannot utterly crush the power of his Prince's
Reputation, being too firmly rooted in the hearts of his Loyal Subjects, he has
a Remedy for this too; either by Bribery with ready Money, or promises of great
Rewards and Preferment; or else by subtle Insinuations expressed in a most
seemingly sensible Zeal for their infatuations, and want of sense to apprehend
the danger, and so most affectedly he seems to lament and bewail their
senceless stupidity. And if these means prove ineffectual to trepan them into
the Faction, he has yet others left which more powerfully does the work; which
is, to draw the whole Party on their backs, by putting on a Saint-like
Indignation, and giving them sharp and open reproofs for their wilful
blindness. And if after all this, they prove inflexible, he must then be sure
to cry out against them as Enemies to God's Cause, and haters of the common
Good, to combine in the horrid Conspiracy; and so render them to be meet
partakers in the same destruction which he has before determined to bring upon
the Government.

It Is a figure in Politics, to make every infirmity a fault, and every fault a
crime. And because there have been Plots in France, henceforward no Ambassador
shall go, without making the people believe that his business is to contrive
their ruin, and bring upon them everlasting Slavery. And if you can by any
means (though never so wicked) dress up a King, and represent him in the odious
habit of a cruel Tyrant, and transport the people into passionate desires of
Liberty and Self-preservation; it will become a matter then very easy to
dispose them either to murder or depose him: Which sort of practice is both
warranted and commended by the excellent Orator -- Graecos Deorum bon^res
tribuisse iis, Pro Mil.
qui Tyrannos necaverunt. And by the Tragedian,

Hercules furiens.
Victima haud ulla amplior potest,
Magisve optima mactari Joci,
Quam Rex iniquus.
And Buchanan complains that there are not some glorious rewards appointed for
Tyrannicides.

And the better to render these plagues of Government epidemical, our subtle
Politician must be sure not to suffer his Doctrines to be immured within the
single compass of the Metropolis, (whose bowels were only fit for its first
conception) but to transmit them into the Country, where the innocent and
unwary Rustic (who because he contrives, expects no harm) being bewitched by
the beauty of its outward figure, and partly for the sake of its novelty, will
be dotingly fond, and cherish this Viper, till he be thoroughly infected with
its venom. And thus (like the Bear in the Fable, which for the sake of
imaginary Honey, was seduced by the crafty Fox to his own destruction) are the
credulous Rabble, by the delicious baits of our State-Impostor, sweetened into
their own Ruin, and hurried (by the stimulations of groundless jealousies) in
the ^ager pursuit of an imaginary Liberty, until, like the Dog in the Fable,
they catch at the shadow and lose the substance.

And notwithstanding our Politician aims at Sovereignty, he must not think to
persuade the people to put that Crown on his head which they were sick to see
upon another; but must compass his ends some other way: And to draw them the
better to his Lure, he must be sure to cry out against the sinking State, and
pot stick to devolve the personal faults of each Minister upon the Monarchy it
self. He must strongly urge with Machiavil, Upon Livy, p. 22.
That they are the most suitable Guardians of any thing, who are least desirous
to usurp it, and must seem himself to be that modest man. He must now play the
Hypocrite, dissemble Piety, and cover his Ambition with the greatest Humility,
that so the Rabble (whilst he is the most scrupulous and careful in finding out
a fit person) may pitch upon him to be their Protector.

The ALLAY.
It is a general conclusion, that no man loves to be deceived; and I think (if
possible) fewer to be undeceived. It has been a Task extremely difficult (even
next to an impossibility) to convince some men of the iniquity of our Late
Times; insomuch that when I have urged the horrid impiety of murdering the late
King, (and the wickedness of those that usurped the Government after him,
expressed in the most arbitrary Cruelties on the persons and estates of his
Majesty's Friends and Adherents) they have so far allowed that cursed Fact, and
concluded with the Regicides, as to charge the Royal Martyr with being guilty
of some faults; or else have past those matters over wholly in silence: and
such memoirs have served them only to revive their ancient malice against the
present Government; and instead of a sincere Repentance to avert the heavy
Judgments of the Almighty for those crying sins, they have usually replied,
That truly they do not know whether Oliver were a Rogue or not; but this they
were sure of, that they had much better times then than now; Drunkenness was
not so much encouraged, and Whoredom was out of fashion; Trading was much
better, and they did not pay so many Taxes, etc. And if all this were true
(which we cannot allow, because we know the contrary) will it one jot extenuate
the guilt of such who shall go about, either directly or indirectly, to approve
and justify the prodigious Villainies of those cruel Usurpers? No; let such men
know, that an Act of Mercy and prudent Oblivion in the State, will rather
aggravate than obliterate their monstrous Crimes in the Court of Heaven. I have
urged this so plain, because the dangers are now so great, when the smallest
Errors of the Minister are cast, as the greatest Crimes, in the very face of
Majesty; and people seem to tread in the very same footsteps now, as, then.

What admirable methods the restless spirits of some men find out to delude
the people! I wonder who gave him authority to print that Address, which w^^
never presented to the King: but I know whither (...) tends, even to Sedition
^^d Rebellion.
how they come with Honey in their mouths, and never miss of having Stings in
their tails! See a late Libel entitled, The Nations Aggrievance; which begins
with a God be praised for his Majesty's deliverance from the late horrid Popish
Plot: And yet I dare be bold to say, the principles of that Libeller are as
dangerous to the Government, as those of the rankest Jesuit. That as a Free
People (says he) we request in all duty and submission to your Majesty's Royal
Command, we may have our free Votes in the Election and Choice of a free
Parliament, for our Representatives; What ^t th^^ but to charge (...) Majesty
with over-awing loyal Subjects, to please (...) enemies? and that be has not
se^ce enough to know the out from the other.
and that those your most Loyal Subjects shall be no ways overawed, threatened,
or bribed, to pleasure the wills and humors of such whose interest (though it
be to complement and flatter your Majesty) runs counter to all true service to
their King and Country; and it being contrary to the constitution of the
Government under which we live, and the Privileges that a Free People may
expect to enjoy, under so noble a Prince, to have any thing u^equal or unjust,
^^d violently imposed or forced on them, etc. What is this but to infect the
people with a belief of his Majesty's Misgovernment, and to stander his Actions
and Counsels? to render the best of Princes mean and contemptible, and so
(under the pretense of Reformation) to work his and his Kingdoms ruin? But the
best on it is, we know whence he is; the Devil was a Liar from the beginning,
and so is our Author: He calls his Libel, The Nations Agrievance, by way of
Address to the King: It was none of my The whole matter of it is a demnable Lie
ti^ding to crate Distrust, and to set (...) to either by the ters.
Agrievance, nor did he ever confer with me (and many thousands more) about any
such matters. So that which was but just now The Nations Agrievance, is now
become an impudent Lie; and I dare say the Address too is another: for it is a
Rule in Law, That the King cannot be unjust. And our Friend had certainly met
with some notable Reward, either one way or other, if his Majesty had ever
seen him. But whereas he calls his Libel The Nations Agrievance, I verily
believe he had spoken more truth, if he had named it a Whelp of the Good Old
Cause, or a Spawn of out late Green-Ribbon-Club. R^bellion in expross terms.
Another puts a Quere, Whether it be not high time for all the Protestants in
England to resolve as One man, that they will stand by and maintain the Power
and Privileges of Parliament? 'Twould be endless to tell you how many Monsters
of this hue (like those of Forty One) daily creep abroad, even in these times:
And these seem to be like Night-Ravens to the health of the Government, whose
ugly Screetchings always foreboad approaching death and destruction.

And as to the charging the faults of a Governor upon the Government, it is
certainly a grand Delusion; nor can there be a more gross abuse, than (...).
And Grotius, Isocrates.
in his Book de Jure Belli and Pacis, says, That the faults of the Minister
must not be cast in the face of Majesty: Omnis facultas gubernandi quae est in
Magistratibus, summae Potestati ita subjicitur, ut quicquid contra voluntatem
summi Imperantis faciant, id defectam sit ea facultate, ac proinde pro actu
privato habendum: Which will be the more pat to our purpose, if we compare it
with that of Bracton, Rex Angliae hic solum non potest facere, quod non potest
injuste agere.

However, this I presume, That the most exact Puritan can in no wise boast of
such an absolute Saintship, Was heretofore an exact Rebel.
but that there will now and then some actions fall from him, which must
confess Humanum est errare, and require Candor. There are some Leaves in the
volume of the fairest Life, that are legenda cum venia: Princes Frailties.
If this be a common frailty, why do we fix such rigid Censures upon the
Miscarriages of Princes? Or rather, why do we deny to give them the same grains
of allowance which we use when we commiserate the Infirmities of other men?
It Is yet much more dis-ingenuous, to revive and pore upon a few bad actions,
which it is possible have been long ago attoned and recompensed with many good.
Take this from no mean Statist, Iniqua in omni re occusanda praetermissis bonis
malorum enumeratio, vit iorumque Selectio; nam ne villus quidem isto modo
Magistratus vituperabilis non crit. As Greatness gives a luster to the Virtues
of a Prince, so it ought to mitigate his Vices: for if we look upon him as
circled with Honor and all outward Enjoyments, and consider that men are most
easily corrupted in the supreamest fortunes, where Lusts may have the advantage
of being armed with Power; we may easily believe the violence of his
temptations to be so much the stronger, by how much he is greater than
Subjects; having no other shield or weapon to resist their force, than his mere
Virtue. We are sometimes defended from a sin by our very Impotency, Impotency a
defense from sin.
(or else I fear our streets had long e're this, been filled with Mourning and
Lamentations, by the bloody Swords of the Spirits of Popery and Fanaticism;) it
may be above our sphere, or out of our reach; we do not, because we cannot. How
frequently do we transgress, even to the most horrid guilt, in our Wills and
Affections, when our hands remain innocent? We are checked from without, and
rendered good by the bonds of Necessity, because unable to be otherwise; but
Princes have no other means to oppose their immoderate desires, but what
proceeds purely from themselves: for who can say to his Soveveraign, Eccles.
8.2, 3, 4, 5.
What do thou? This is that which enhances the goodness of a Prince, and
sets an extraordinary luster upon his person, according to the eminence of his
extraordinary Virtues.

It has been the constant practice of Usurpers, to delude the people by the
false luster of their subtle Impostures, even into a concatenation for the
drawing on of their wicked ends: Such an one even loads the people with the
bare notion of imaginary Liberty, till he breaks their backs with the most
intolerable tyranny and slavery: and when Success atttends the Tyrant's
Enterprises, it is not the indulgence of Heaven to the Usurper, but much rather
the indignation thereof, on the people for their folly.

It is no lessening of this execrable Popish Plot, to say, L'Estrang.
Narrative, fol. 11, 12.
That subjects ought dutifully to acquiesce in the Resolutions of their
Superiors; and that all clamorous Appeals from the Magistrate to the
Multitude, are only so far pardonable, as the abundance of Good will may help
to excuse the want of Moderation and Discretion: So that a great part of those
fierce and unmannerly Transports that have been employed upon this unhappy
Occasion, and without any regard either to Quality or Sex, or, in truth, to the
very foundations of Christian Charity, might have been much better let alone;
since they serve only to inflame the Vulgar, without any sort of avail to the
Cause in question. It is no better than either a translating of the Judicature
from the King and his Courts of Justice, to the Rabble; or else a Complaint to
the people, brought in with a Side-winde against the Government; which are two
dangerous points, striking at his Majesty's Sovereignty the one way, and at his
Reputation the other: And yet all this is tolerable, if it goes off so, and
without blowing up a Passion into a Design. But alas! it is the practice of
wicked and ambitious men, to translate a Popular Odium from the Papists to the
Government, and so they mount by degrees from a Zeal against Popery, to a
Sedition against the State.

And whither all this tends, we may well conclude, if we do but consider the
miserable consequences that inevitably followed the prodigious Impostures and
Delusions imposed on the people of our late Times: Poor England was then
frighted out of a dream of Dangers, into Cutting of Throats in earnest; out of
a fear of Popery, into a prostitution even of Christianity; and out of an
apprehension of Tyranny, into a most despicable state of Slavery.

PRINCIPLE IV. To render the Contagion epidemical, our Politian must always
have some dissenting Pastors, or mercenary Jesuits, to justify and appland his
Designs and Actions in the Separate Congregations.
NOthing more abundant in Examples! nothing more notorious in History! than
this, That there has been no Innovation so gross! no Rebellion so hideous! but
has had some Ecclesrastical Fomenters! for such as want Worth enough of their
own to reach Preferment in a regular way, are most apt to envy the just
Honors and Promotions of other men; and despairing to obtain their ends by
Learning and Piety, they aspire to it by the crooked means of Faction and
Schism. These men mainly support the pretended Piety of our Polititian's
Designs; they never fail to carry him through the greatest Dangers, and are
able to retort the most pernicious Events: for the keenest Sword in our
Polititian's Army* cannot vie services with a subtle Quill. Aristoph.
Concutiunt Populos, vexant Regna, Sollicitant Bella, Diruunt Ecclesias. Dr.
Oates's Narrative printed by authority of Parl. p. 63.67. proves that the
Jesuits herd amongst the Dissenters: And how shall we discover them, but ^y
their Fruit, their Doctrines?
You may see his business in the Comic,(...).

The Jesuit accounts it in the number of his Merits, if he can by any sinister
means ruffle and disorder Heretical Kingdoms, encourage weak and unstable
minds to slight the Magistracy, irritate Divisions, Tumults, Rebellions,
absolve from Oaths and all sacred Ties: so that it is hard to find any
tragical Scene, or bloody Theater, into which the Jesuit has not intruded, and
been as busy as Davus in the Comedy; contributing in a very high measure to
every Fanatic Outrage, whose actions daily approve the old Lemma of Lojola's
picture* Cavete vobis Principes. And so we find Father Faircloth, in his
Sermon on Josh. 7.25. preaching Rebellion; To you of the honorable House of
Commons, Up, for the matter belongs to you; We, even all the godly Ministers of
the Country, will be with you. And likewise Father Call, in his Speech at
Guild Hall, October. 6.1643. quoth he, Here is an extraordinary appearance of so
many Ministers to encourage you in this Cause, that you may see how real the
Godly Ministry in England is unto this Cause: And if I had as many lives as
hairs on my head, I would be willing to sacrifice all those lives for this
Cause. And you shall read, Numb. 10. that there were two silver Trumpets; and
as there were Priests appointed for the convocation of their Assemblies, so
there were Priests to sound the silver Trumpets to proclaim the War. And Deuteronomy.
20. when the children of Israel would go out to war, the Sons of Levi, one of
the Priests, was to make a Speech to encourage them. But hearken to what the
Provincial says, Baxter 's holy Commonwealth, p. 72.459, 460.
The real Sovereignty here in England, was in King, Lords, and Commons: and
those that conclude, That the Parliament being Subjects, may not take up Arms
against the King, and that it is Rebellion to resist him; their Grounds are
sandy, and their Superstructure false. And the same worthy Author, in his Cases
of Conscience, Theses 137 181.
An. 1659. casuistically resolves (upon the point of his Majesty's
Restoration, then in hope and prospect,) That the King himself could not (in
that state of things) justify the resuming of his Government, nor his People
the submitting to it. Jenkins 's Sermon before the Commons, Sept. 25.1656. p. 23
Worthy Patriots (says another of the same Order) you that are our Rulers in
this Parliament! It Is often said, we live in times wherein we may be as good as
we please; praised be God for this, even that God who has delivered us from
the imposition of Prelatical Innovations, Altar-genuflections, and Cringings,
with Crosses, and all that Popish Trash and Trumpery. And truly I speak no
more than I have often thought and said, The King's murder justified.
The removal of these insupportable Burdens, countervails for all the Blood
and Treasure shed and spent in these Distractions. Nor did I as yet ever hear
of any Godly men that ever desired (were it possible) to purchase their Friends
or Money again, at so dear a rate as (with the return of them) to have those
Soul-burthening Antichristian Yokes reimposed upon them; and if any such there
be, I am sure that Desire is no part of their Godliness; and I profess my self
in that to be none of the number. Good God! says a modern Author, that any
thing in humane shape, that glories in the murder of his Sovereign, should make
a face at a Ceremony! And Father Cockayne, in his notable Sermon before the
Commons, The King's murder persuaded.
November 29. 1648. both urges and persuades the murder of that Royal Martyr,
by comparing him to Benhadad King of Assyria, whose life Ahab King of Israel
had spared, against the Will of the Lord. And Mr. Baxter says as much (viz.)
That having often searched in his heart, Holy Commonwealth, p. 486.
whether he did lawfully engage in the War, and encourage so many thousands to
it, he tells us, That he dares not repent of it, nor forbear doing the same, if
it were to do again in the same state of things. The Scottish Ministers printed
it, That our late martyred Sovereign had shed more Blood in these three
Nations, than was shed in the ten Christian Persecutions. And upon the same
account, Mr. Love proclaimed in the Pulpit at Vxbridge-Treaty, That no Peace
ought to be had with him. And Father Calamy says, Calamy 's Sermon, Dec.
25.1644. p. 18
Those that made their peace with the King at Oxford, were Judasses of England;
and it were just with God to give them their portions with Judas.

These are the methods of murdering a Prince with a tender Conscience; and
these are the men that can act the basest Villainies under the shadow of
Religion; nothing can resist the force of their holy Violence: These are
Sampson's Foxes, that have always Firebrarnds in their tails; the Forge and
Bellows of Sedition, infernal Emissaries, the Pests of the Age: These are the
men, who by their Life and Doctrines prove, that In nomine Jesu incipit omne
malum.

There was never yet any Kingdom or Country without some turbulent Spirits of
its own, False Prophets.
the dishonor of the Gown and Pulpit, the shame and sometimes the ruin of the
Commonwealth. You would think they had their Text much rather from a Gazette,
or Domestic Intelligence, than from the Holy Scriptures, their whole Discourse
being but a continued Narrative of invective Fables against the Government.

Nevertheless, to render these wholly fit for our Polititian's purpose, they
must be thoroughly skilled in these requisite Qualifications. First, They must
be well verst in that most excellent gift of wresting the Divine Oracles, by
vexing and urging the holy Text, and constraining it to patronize the most
barbarous and bloody Design. The great Apostle expresses this in three very
emphatical terms: (...).
First, Cogging the Dye, making the Word speak what they list. Secondly, Crafty
Applications and Expositions of it. Thirdly, All the methods and arts of
Cousenage, (...), gilding and vamishing rotten Doctrines. And this must be
done, First, In public vomiting out Flames and Sulphur from that sacred Pegma,
where should be delivered mild and soft, none but Divine and Evangelical
Embassies. Secondly, In private, at Parlour-Sermons and Meeting Houses, where
he is listened to as an Oracle; and here commonly he is more Enthusiast than
Scripturist, and his Auditors believe his Dreams to be as canonical and
infallibly sacred as the Revelations; like those Melancthton speaks of,
Quicquid somniant, volunt esse Spiritum Sanctum; or those that the Father
chides, when he tells them that every Whimsey is not Prophecy, (...). Thirdly,
He ought to be of some abilities in Dispute; and what he wants in Logic, he
must supply with Impudence and Garrulity: for whatsoever he affirms, the
interest he has in his seduced Hearers, improves into a Syllogism. If you ask
after his Topics, S. Hierom.
Ex officina Carnificium argumenta petit; if after his weapons, Strada.
Armat se ad latrocinium per Christi nomen: and the Wound he makes is Faction:
Which is so putrified with occurring variety of malignant Qualities, that
Nature her self cannot afford a Cataplasm to work its Cure; and in spite of
the most skilful Artists, it will fester into Rebellion; which admits no other
Remedy but what is extracted from it self, by the dismal effects of a fatal and
long Experience.

The ALLAY.
How lamentable it is, to see Urania, divine Urania, enrolled in Blood! The
Stars and Luminaries of the Church, to shed nothing but black and malignant
Influences, in lieu of pious Documents! And instead of the Gospel of Peace, and
Doctrine of Charity, to hear none but furious Incentives!

Papirius.
Ite alacres tantaeq, precor confidite Causae. The Cause they serve, is the
Doctrine and the Use, the Egg, the Apple, the Head and Foot of all their
Discourses. See a piece of their Sermon in Barclay, to this effect: Cont.
Monarch. p. 23
Se Evangelii libertatem praedicare, nullam Christianis animis vim infer,
suam cuique conscientiam liberam relinquere, verbo ducere, non vi quenquam
adigere: Eam esse Evangelii Doctrinam, ut omnes Conscientiae fruantur
liberate; sibique ut id liceat votis omnibus postulare.

Christ the Son of God, our blessed Redeemer, reproved St. Peter for drawing
his Sword, though in the defense of his Lord and Master: And we nowhere read
that we should offend even our most malicious Enemies; but on the contrary, we
are enjoined to forgive, and pray for them; by which blessed means we shall be
able to heap coals of fire on their heads, not to burn and consume them, but
much rather (to thaw and disperse those frozen qualities which both damp and
benum their Brotherly Love and Charity) to enkindle their affection. We are not
to arm our selves Cap-a-pe (and preach Rebellion) to assail a lawful
Magistrate, but much rather to put on the whole Armor of God, that we may be
able to resist such fiery assaults of the Devil. We are to struggle and fight
with all sorts of Temptations, but not to plunder, sequester, or murder our
Neighbor. We are commanded to be obedient to our Superiors, for the Lords
sake, and yet (under the Mask of Religion) we have murdered a Prince for God's
sake. We are commanded to preach Peace in the Name of Jesus to all Nations; and
in the same Name we have raised and fomented Rebellions, Massacres, and Murders
in our own native Country: Aug.
And thus Ecclesiae nomine armamini, and contra Ecclesiam dimicatis. Thus under
the pretense of a Tender Conscience, we cannot bow toward the Altar; but for
the sake of God's Cause, we will cut the throats of the Bishops, to root out
Antichristian Prelacy.

Diagoras first set up for an Atheist, because the Gods did not immediately
strike a perjured person dead, as he desired. And Cato, when he saw the Roman
State decay under Pompey (whom he esteemed a Patriot of his Country,) and
beheld Caesar prospering in his Tyranny, he professed that he saw a fallacious
Instability in the Government of the Gods. And what shall we think? shall not
the ignorance of these Heathens (who erred barely in opinion for the sake of
Virtue, and yet nevertheless lived up to the Rules of Morality) arise up in
judgment to condemn these Dregs of Humanity! these mouths of Hell? Yes, the
very innocence of a Devil shall rise in judgment against these Wretches: for in
all that he does, he acts but his Devilship's part; but these do more: He can
but tempt, not compel; these do both, and the former with more subtilty: The
Voice of God can make the Devils believe and tremble, but the Word of God has
not power enough to convince these Apostates; yet they have impudence
sufficient to give the Lie to the Almighty, by wresting the sense of his Holy
Word, to obstetricate to the service of their impious ends. Good God! bless us,
good God! What is Religion, if this be Religion? and what is Religion good for,
if these be the fruits? If these be the Mysteries of their Religion, let every
good man say (as Jacob of his bloody sons) Oh, my soul, come not th^^ into
their secrets: unto their assembly, mine honor, Genesis 49.6, 7.
be not thou united; Instruments of Cruelty are in their habitations. Cursed be
their anger, for it was fierce; and their wrath, for it was cruel.

These are the men that invert the design of our blessed Savior, and abuse
his holy Gospel, by pretending his favor to unwarrantable and impious actions:
And thus is the Prince abused by alienating the affections and allegiance of
his Subjects; the Church abused by shattering it into Rents and Schisms;
wounding it with a feather from its own wing, and snatching a coal from the
Altar, to fire both Church and State. But alas! that which justly heightens our
grief, is the sense of our own folly, which wholly brought these Calamities on
us: for such is the easmess and credulity of the Vulgar, such the subtilty and
dissembled Sanctity of the Impostor, that he commonly meets with as great a
proness in the people to be cousened, as he brings willingness and abilities to
deceive them.

How they deal with the Devil, and conjure, I cannot tell; but I am sure they
had very lately poisoned a great many of his Majestics good Subjects, and by
their tricks and devices, had wrought them into Suspicions and Jealousies. It Is
true, there has been of late an horrid, hellish, Popish Plot discovered; The
Popish Plot.
and I hope (by the hand of Providence, and wisdom of the Government) the same
is now in a great measure prevented, and will ere long be fully discovered, and
the wicked Confederates brought to condign punishment: Yet at first (by the
affrighting terrors of which, subtly managed by some ill-affected Brethren)
people were so strangely amazed and stupefied into the old Spirit of Faction,
that the whole frame of Government (in the judgment of many sober men) stood in
very great, if not in equal jeopardy, from the mischiefs likely to arise from
the hatred of Fanaticism, as from the malice of Popery it self: And it was come
to this pass, that no man could undertake to defend the Government from
Reproach and Calumny; nay, every man that would not side with the Faction, and
do as they did, was sure to be branded with Popery, or at best with being
Popishly affected. To lay more stress upon the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy, than the solemn League and Covenant; to advance the King above the
two Houses; to deny the Sovereignty of People; to speak reverently of the
Bishops and Orthodox Clergy, the Ministers of State and Justice, the
Service Book, the Rites and Appointments of the Church, in opposition to the
Assemblies Directory, with the practice of their slovenly Conventicles; All
this is to be Popishly affected. A cursed Invention, to suppress the hellish
Popish Plot and ruin the Church of England
And thus the Faction, by a Metamorphosis of the late Popish Plot from the
Papists, into a Popishly affected Plot against the Friends of our Government,
have endeavored to insinuate on the one hand, that the Bishops and English
Clergy are leaning toward Popery, and have a strong design to bring it in;
and that Arbitrary Power must necessarily follow, to support and maintain it.

Nevertheless, we may possibly discover the juggling of these Religious Cheats,
or Pious Frauds, and preserve our selves from the venom of their Doctrines, if
we rightly observe these following Directions and Cautions.

First, We ought to distinguish betwixt Divinity and humane Policy. I should
suspect a Clerical Statist; I mean, such an one as in the dispensation of
sacred Oracles, tampers with Secular Affairs, unless it be in case of high
concernment to his Auditors Souls; and that in preaching down, rather than
exciting a Rebellion, by rendering Tribute to whom Tribute, Honor to whom
Honor, etc.

Secondly, I should believe him a Juggler that sprinkles his Sermons with
Murmurs against the lawful Magistrate, whether Ecclesiastical or Civil, unless
he has some better grounds for his dislike, than barely a thwarting his
opinion or humor in things merely controversial and adiaphorous.

Thirdly, I should more than doubt his knavery, that should wrest or suborn the
holy Scriptures, to attest or incite to illegal actions, as standing nearest in
relation to that which Salvian calls Religiosum Scelus.

Fourthly, (...).
I may safely conclude, that all news in Religion, whether in Doctrine or
Discipline, is the common Skreen of private design; Apud Dion. Cass.
Let Maecenas tell it, (...), which is noted by the great Causabon in his
Epistle before his Baronian Exercitations, thus: Cupiditas novandi haec secum
mala semper trahit, Christi inconsutilem tunicam lacerat, Sectas novas parit,
and statim multiplicat, Ecclesiam and Populum concutit, etc.

Lastly, We ought to distinguish betwixt Reason and Clamor, Truth and Calumny;
betwixt the Acts of Authority, and the License of Tumults; betwixt the just and
temperate Deliberatio^s and Resolutions of Government, and the violent Heats
and Partialities of the Common People. Nor is it any lessening of this
Execrable Popish Plot, but much rather a ready way to a full discovery, to say,
That Subjects ought dutifully to acquiesce in the Resolutions of their
Superiors: And that all clamorous Appeass from the Magistrate to the
Multitude, (for those are the Tribunal of the Faction) are only so far
pardonable as the abundance of good will may help to excuse the want of
Moderation and Discretion.

PRINCIPLE V. Our Politician must urge every prosperous Event, as sufficient to
prove the Justice of his Cause.
THis is the Doctrine of all Impostors, by which they must charm the common
people into a credulous belief of all they say, and a sure approvement of every
thing they do. So cunningly were the projects of our late Usurpers carried on
from time to time, and with that success, as it became a matter extremely
difficult to distinguish the iniquity from the prosperity of all their actions,
especially for such who either affect novelty or change. And as the surest
means of rendering their delusions palliable, the Faction were well aware of
that excellent use of hallowing their Designs, The use of public Fasts by the
Faction.
by appointing days of Humiliation and Fasts, immediately to precede the birth
of any notable Enterprise; as likewise public Thanksgivings for every Event,
whether luckie or unfortunate: for such was their Cunning, that the people
should be sure to hear nothing of ill, neither understand or perceive any
thing, but by reflection from the imaginary Brightness of the Cause.

There is no Argument more popular, than to urge and persuade the Justice of
the Attempt, as a most certain conclusion from the goodness of the Event: for
the Bulk of Mankind is not able to distinguish the Permission of the divine
Goodness from his Approbation: And yet notwithstanding the pernicious subtilty
of this Argument is both perceived and understood by some, yet the
insupportable miseries of the Conquered, deny them the opportunity to dispute
the Justice of their Sufferings; and that which they might possibly have
prevented by a prudent foresight, serves only now to strengthen and increase
the Fetters of their woeful Captivity; and the most sacred and usual pleas of
Liberty or Magna Charta, can now neither resist or one jot allay the rigours of
their greatest slavery: They shall now learn to know that Inter arma silent
leges; they must now look upon the Conqueror with the greatest reverence, and
behold him in glory; they must yield themselves Vassals to his usurped
Arbritary Power, who but of late courted them with the most servile
compliances, and seemed to be a slave to their interest. (...). Philo.
The Soldiers in Plutarch wondered any man would be so impertinent as to
preach Laws and Moral Reasons to men with Swords by their sides; In Pomp.
(...); as if Arms knew how to descend to rational Enquiries, and are not enough
junified by an odd kind of necessity of their own creation; like those in
Livy, In armis jus far, and omnia fortium virorum esse: Such are now the
proceedings of France; and I fear, whenever time serves to give them
opportunity to play their pranks, French proceedings.
and us occasion to examine the justice of their Doings, they will give us
only pretensions for the just necessity thereof, and convince us of the rest
(as our Neighbors have felt by sad experience) with knocking Arguments.
Numberless Examples likewise of this kind, our Politician may meet with from
the History of our late Rebellion, sufficient to direct him in the most
desperate Exploits, without further search into foreign Presidents.

Why Tyrants pretend to public Justifications.
I have often considered with my self, what should move Traitors and Tyrants to
offer public Justifications of themselves even in the most barbarous Acts and
Cruelties (which I conceive never made any understanding man a Convert, or ever
met with a cordial reception in any) unless the abuse of some few ignorant and
shallow Believers, be esteemed a triumph worth their pains: I have sometimes
thought they do by such Manifesto's please themselves in their abilities to
delude; and so gratify their Tyranny over the noblest part of man, by
surprising the liberty of the Thought, and subduing the powers of the Soul to
an implicit coherence with their own Magisterial opinions. These were the
methods that were daily practiced throughout the continuance of our late
unnatural Broils, Remonstrance and Declaration, and Declaration and
Remonstrance continually followed one another at the heels, till at length (by
the prosperous success of all their projects) they have gained the advantage of
Power to enforce the compliance of such who wanted faith enough to digest their
impostures. Men of Parts deluded by the Doctrine of Success.
Yet notwithstandding these Baits have sometimes proved so successful, that
many, even of Parts and Prudence, have been deluded and surprised by them: Some
question whether Diagoras merited the brand of Atheism (considering the wild
conceits they then had of their Gods) or differed from the common Creed, crying
out, O how the Gods favor Sacrilege! when he had a merry gale after a
sacrilegious attempt. The best of the Roman Historians calls the Victory, the
Impartial Arbitress of the Justice of the Cause, Eventus Belli velut aequus
Judex, unde jus stat, ei victoriam dabit. So hard it is to detect this
falsehood, and convince mere Reason, that the most accursed Vice (being too
frequently clad in the glistering Robes of a prosperous success) has set her
self upon the Throne of Virtue, and been adored for a Deity. He was no small
Poet, that argued himself out of his Gods, by seeing Wickedness honored, and
Worth slighted; which he thus expresses:

Marmoreo Licinus tumulo jacet, at Cato parvo,
Pompeius nullo; quis putet esse Deos?
In English thus:

Licinus does in Marble sleep,
A common Vrn does Cato keep;
Pompey 's Ashes may catch cold:
That there are Gods, let Dotards hold.
There may be some use made of that in Seneca, Honesta quaed^m Scelera,
successus facit; Hipp.
prosperous, Mischiefs are cardinal Virtues in the worlds Ethics; and
therefore the Tragedian repeats it, Herc. fur.
Prosperum ac foelix scelus virtus vocatur, the prosperity and glory of the
Event, is an excellent subterfuge for the unwarrantableness of the Action: We
often praise the Macedonian Conquest, but never regard or mention their
unlimited and endless Ambition.

The proceedings and period of a factious People.
When (by any means) a People are drawn in to abet a Faction, they seldom square
their actions by what is just or equal, and never so much as once consider the
dangerous effects that must naturally flow from their headstrong proceedings;
they become immediately conjured into a Circle for the service of By-ends; and
what they seem to pursue (their Liberty) is always furthest off when popular
Fury is seen to follow it: But that is the Jewel which they prize, that is the
Game they aim at; he that once names that to hit their humor, may work them as
he please; the basest Villainies shall then pass for Acts of Grace, and the most
unspotted and firm basis of Government, can never stand up in defiance of the
peoples hatred. In fine, they matter not what they undertake; if Success
attends their doings, they then believe Heaven allows that Blessing to the
justice of their Cause. When our Politician has brought them to this pass, he
need not much doubt (by so strong an interest) to remove the greatest
difficulties, to finish his designs in the complement of his Grandeur; which
is nevertheless so strangely brought about, that his interest which stood at
first upon the same bottom with that of the people, and could never be wrought
without their help, must now subsist in their defeat and destruction: And thus
that licentious freedom which they have used in all their actions to the plague
of their fellow subjects, is now justly retorted on themselves in the greatest
Servitude and Oppression.

This follows too upon that Doctrine of Success, as the strongest Argument to
support our Polititian's power, This was urged to keep the King out, and to
reconcile the Royalist to the Rump. And may serve now to secure this
Government, if that Party will du^ly observe this Doctrine.
That if a Government be altered, and another Power in possession of it, all
are bound, as private men, to submit to the present Powers, because ordained of
God; (for such the Apostle has declared all Powers in being, whatsoever, to
be;) and that the former Government ceasing, which was the Object of Obedience,
the Obligation thereunto must of necessity cease likewise: for no man can be
concerned in any respect or relation to that which is not; and so when a thing
cannot be done, the Obligation to it***** must needs be void, ex
impossibilitate facti. And may we not infer from hence, that the prosperity of
the Success denominates every action either good or evil? (...). Did.


The ALLAY.
Hearken what the wise man says; Eccles. 9.1, 2, 3.
All things are come alike to all, there is one event to the righteous and to
the wicked, etc. And it is written in the Prophet Malachi, They that work
wickedness are set up; Mal. 3.13, 14, 15, to the end. And cap. 4.1, 2, 3.
yea, they that tempt God are even delivered. But those that fear me, shall be
mine, says the Lord of hosts, in that day when I make up my jewels, I will
spare them as a man spares his own son that served him. Then shall ye discern
between the righteous and the wicked; between him that serves God, and him
that serves him not. Hence we may know, that the Wicked have as little reason
to exult and glory in a present prosperity, as the Righteous have to despair
because they suffer in the nonfruition of the same things. We are nevertheless
so short sighted, that we cannot see beyond Time; we value things and men by
their temporal felicities; whereas if we put Eternity into the other Scale, it
will much out-poise that worldly lusty that so much cheats our Eyes, and
abuses our Understandings. The smoothest Waters are for the most part deep and
dangerous; and the goodliest Blossoms nipt by an unkindly Frost, either perish,
or produce their Fruit sour or unwholesome; which may properly imply, That the
visible Calendar is not always the true character of inward perfection. I
nowhere find in Holy Writ, that God has inseparably annexed Goodness and
Greatness, Justice and Victory: The divine Goodness has secured his servants
of the felicities of a better life, but does not always defend them from the
calamities of this. Christ's Kingdom was not, our Happiness is not, of this
world. And St. Paul says, he were of all men most miserable, if his
expectations were in this life. Nor indeed does my Bible show me any warrant
for appeal to Heaven, for the decision of this or that intricacy, by bestowing
Success upon this Party or that Cause, according to its righteousness. The
grand Seignior may justly exult and magnify himself in discourses of this
nature, if they once come to be admitted and owned by Christians; and I will
then receive his Alcoran for Gospel, When to receive the Alchoran for Gospel.
when I shall be convinced that temporal Happiness and Triumph are a true Index
of divine Favor; I am sure our Religion has something more to invite our
closure with it; it proposes a convenience on Earth, but the Garlands and
Crowns are reserved for Heaven: And yet how strangely opposite to the truth and
purity of this excellent Doctrine of our blessed Savior (even to the scandal
of the Gospel of Christ, and to the glory of Mahomet and his Alcoran) did our
divine Rebels of the Late Times thunder out from their Pulpits (with greater
horror to all good men, than the roaring of their Parties Canon) this damnable
Doctrine of proving the Divinity of their Cause, from the imaginary glory of
their constant Success?

So strange and prodigious was the daring impudence of our late Usurpers, The
Motto of the Rebels Coy^.
that at the Close of their many dreadful and bloody Tragedics, they usually
cried out, God with us. And after their many Villainies repeated to accomplish
the horrid Murder of the best of Kings here on Earth, they raise their
Gigantick sins to the very Throne of Heaven, and there openly affront the
Majesty of the King of kings, by wresting the attribute of his Goodness to
favor their hellish actions; and so in abuse to the most holy and sacred
Trinity, as the Motto of their Coin, they stamp these three words: God with us.
But Heaven knows 'twas the justice of his Cause which so severely scourged us
for our sins; the Almighty did only permit those Rebels to plague us, as the
Executioners of his provoked Vengeance: It was not the Indulgence of Heaven to
the Cause of our Usurpers, that gave them success, but it was our Rebellions
against his divine Goodness that produced those heavy Judgments as the effects
of his just indignation upon us. The Cause of these Rebels was indeed no Cause,
but much rather an effect of punishment on us for our Iniquities; they had no
just power to warrant their pretended Reformation of the established Religion;
God used them only for the reformation of men's manners, by bringing his people
to Repentance.

And I wish the miseries of those men to be no greater than their folly, Wilful
Slaves.
who look beyond their own freedom and liberties, and shall make it their
endeavors to bring themselves into the severest bondage and slavery; that they
may feel, I say, as well as their fellow creatures, the insupportable burden
of the Spanish Inquisition, the Fanatic Sequestration, Imprisonments, and the
like-dismal effects of an usurped, licentious, arbitrary Power: that such, and
such only, may be convined of their Errors by fatal experience, who will not
so remember as to resist and avoid the miscrable Desolations, Bondage, Tyranny,
and Oppressions of our Late Times, under which these Nations groaned for so
many years together. And that we may know from whence those monstrous
Deviations came, observe the Comparison which a late reverend Divine makes
betwixt the Spirit of Popery and the Spirit of Foppery; C. Meroz. fol. 29.
I know not, says our Author, which is worst, they are both bloody and
dangerous; the former by plotting, (but blessed be God their Plots come to
nothing) the latter by plotting and acting too: God knows; though the Papists
might plot Rebellion and Treason, yet the Fanatics have not only plotted, but
twice been up in Arms (which the Papists never were;) twice, I say, in Arms,
and open Field-fights in Scotland, where our miseries were first brooded, and
begun their rise; but blessed be God, as soon defeated, which was God's
goodness more than our deserts; no thanks though to the Conventiclers and
Field-meeters, they showed their good Will, and their good Religion, and their
tender Consciences in the interim; O true Church-Militant here upon Earth!

The Money-god in Aristophanes pretends a command from Jupiter to distribute as
great a largess to the Wicked as to the Good, (...)
because if Virtue should once appropriate Riches, that fair Goddess would be
more wooed for her Dowry, than for her native Excellence and Beauty: Even so if
Religion were accompanied and attended with those outward Allurements which
most please the Senses, we should be apt to follow Christ for the Loaves, and
overlook the spiritual Charms and more noble ends of Christianity.

There are many Vices which have their operation common with Virtue, being
distinguished only by the intent; which because it cannot be seen, is very
difficult to be judged; and Opinions of men are not always without Passion, it
seldom happens that they judge without Error. The Heathen could say, Faelix
praedo mundo exemplum inutile, Happy Pyracy is a thing of unhappy presidency;
fortunate sins may prove dangerous temptations: But to say, that the Almighty
does signally own and attest the actions of such a Person, or the justice of
such a Cause, by suffering it to thrive and prosper in the world, is such a
deceitful falsehood as deserves our serious abhorrency. I leave it with Ovid's
Wish,

-- Careat Successibus opto,
Quisquis ab eventu facta notanda putat.
PRINCIPLE VI. Our Politician must be sure to turn with the Tide, and change
with the Times.
It Is the boast of a Dutchman, That he can sail with all manner of winds: Our
Politician must never sing Tempora mutantur, without a Nos mutamur in illis; he
must never fail to observe that quarter of the Compass whence the fairest and
most propitious Gales of his interest and preferment blow, and be sure to
entertain them in the spreading Sails of his endless Ambition.

Nor indeed can the Compass breathe more variety of changes, than the dexterous
soul of our Politician has correspondent and suitable compliances: He is most
excellently well skilled, even to perfection, in those methods which Varro
calls Versatile Ingenium, a voluble Wit, like the Changeling derided by
Plautus, as more turning than a Potters Wheel, Rota figulari versatilier. He is
as the Heliotrope to the radiant beams of the glorious Sun of Honor, and can
endure no Shades: He has long since abjured his God, Religion, Conscience, and
all that should either interpose or skreen him from those beams that may ripen
his Wishes and Aims into fruition: And Satan-like, if his projects be
discovered under the bright appearance of an Angel of Light, he can presently
transform himself, and appear in another shape, and yet retain the same black,
hellish, and devilish design, seeking whom he may devour. And again, he can
assume whiteness; for I often find him wearing the Vail of Innocence to cover
the horrid deformity and blackness of all his actions. If Religion be in vogue,
you can scarce distinguish him from a Saint; he does not only respect and
reverence the holy Ministers, but if occasion serve, he can preach himself; and
if he fail in Method, he can nevertheless (never heeding Blasphemy) persuade
the Rabble that his Whining Cant and Babbling is truly Spiritual and Holy, as
proceeding immediately by Inspiration from the Holy Ghost. If Cunctation
prevails, he acts Fabius; if the Buckler must be changed for a Sword, he
personates Marcellus; if Lenity and Meekness be useful, Soderini of Venice was
not more a Lamb than he; if Severities are requisite, the Butcheries of Oliver
and Nero are acts of Grace and Mercy, if compared with his. What the Orator
esteems his Masterpieces in Rhetorical Harangues, (happily to apply to the
various humors and genius of all sorts of men, qualifying his Address with
what he knows will most charn the person he treats) that our Politician does
not only perform most exactly with his Lip and Tongue, but also most
artificially with his Life and Actions. And like the English Marquess, Nanton
's Regalia.
being asked by what means he preserved his Fortunes, amidst the various
difficulties of so many Changes he had run through (having successfully served
four Princes, and still in the same station of favor) he replied, That he was
made ex Salice, non ex Quercu, of the pliant Willow, not sturdy Oak; that he
was always of the prevailing Religion, and a zealous Professor. This is notable
for our Politician; and such an easiness of Flexibility is indispensibly
requisite in the prudent conduct of his Affairs: for those violent methods
which are necessary either to resist or abate the force of opposing Interests,
are improperly applied to a composed and quiet Government; and so on the
contrary. Even as Alcibiades in Plutarch shifted his disposition as he altered
place (being jovial and voluptuous in Ion^a, frugal and retired in Lacedaemon)
so must our subtle Politician proportion and ^pply himself to Times and
Seasons, Places, Persons, and Religions, with suitable addresses to the humors
of that Faction or Opinion which most prevails; as if he had been born to no
other ends, but for the service of that alone. He may so court the Rising
Party, as to enamour them with his Zeal and Abilities; and though he seem to
espouse their Cause, he must not so thoroughly engage, but that the departure of
their strength and power (which is the life of every Faction) may justify the
separation of his interest; yet because the greatest power will somewhere
reside, he must be sure to follow her, and both cry up and applaud the
Pretensions of that Party, where he meets it next, as he once used to extol the
former. Thus like a subtle Proteus, he assumes that shape which is most in
grace and favor, which by consequence is of most profitable conducement to his
ends and purposes; In eo stant Consilia, quod sibi conducere putat.

Sometimes our Politician must dive into the very gulf of Hell, and both
favor and maintain any Opinion, be it never so prodigious, bloody, or
extravagant, (as a late Author has it;) I have read, says he, C. M. 34.
of a Sect called Cainites, because they praised Cain in murdering his brother
Abel; others that have commended Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, as stout
Independants and Libertines, that would not be comptrouled by never a Moses or
Aaron of them all: Nay, I have read of one Bruno, that writ an Oration in
applause of the Devil and his Luciferian pride. Nor will it be impertinent for
our Politician to observe what the same Author says, speaking of the Spirit of
Antichrist's continually shifting up and down, sometimes working in the Spirit
of Popery, and at other times in the Spirit of Fanaticism; but still with the
same mischievous design. The hellish Popish Plot was swom by Dr. Oats and
others, to be a design carried on by the Papists, for the destruction of our
Lives, Religion, and Government; but that project at this day seems in a great
measure quashed: The principal Contrivers of that Machination are now removed,
the Jesuits hanged, the Lords in the Tower, and the Great men, secured from
action: Yet nevertheless the same bloody Tragedy is still acting, The Popish
Plot carried on by the Schismatic, or rather by the Jesuit in Masquerade.
and the cursed Design carried on, by the Popes other Engines; and the Spirit
of Antichrist is shisted from the Conclave to the Conventicle. The grand
Design, at first, was carried on by the Jesuits for the destruction of the
Church of England, to introduce Popery; and as matters are now managed by the
Schismatic, the same Church must be traduced as Popishly affected, and
strongly charged as A strange Paradox!
Parties to the Popish Conspiracy against it self, for bringing about the same
ends. This they know is the readiest way to rid the Church of England; and this
follows, That what before was a design in the Papists for the ruin of that
Church, is now a project amongst the Fanatics to the same purpose, but to
different ends; for as one endeavors to bring in Popery, so the other strives
to make way for the Schism.

Our Politician must practice in these Disorders, and be sure to cast his Baits
when the People swallow any thing; and when he has wrought them into a
Disorder, he may from thence date the rise of his Power, (...), Arist. Ethick.
l. 8. c. 12.
Regni quidem defectio tyrannis est: And that Power once acquired (being
obtained by fraud) must be imposed with the strongest violence, that so the
people may not be able to rise up under the weight of their oppressions. He
must court some, and correct others; he must always remember to practice his
part of the Philosophers distinction, (...). Ibidem.
Tyrannus quidem suam utilitatem spectat, Rex subditorum.

The ALLAY.
So detestable were the thoughts of 0233 0844 V 2 change, Change in Religion.
especially in Religion, amongst the Heathens themselves, that Cicero condemns
him for an Heretic, who shall either differ or dissent from the Religion of
his Country: And the King of Morocco answered the Ambassadors of King John of
England with a protestation (requesting to know how his Majesty liked St.
Paul's Epistles, which he had lately read,) That, were he to choose a Religion,
he would be a Christian; but he held it abominable not to live and die in that
Religion which he had received from his Forefathers and his Country. These
Heathens make Religion their Interests, and not their Interests Religion; these
cannot seem one thing, and act another; they are really what they pretend, and
will not shift their religious Principles to wrong purposes.

A Parallel betwixt the Pope and Presbyter.
The Jesuit (under the pretense of Religion) exalts the Mitre above the Crown,
and the Crosier above the Scepter: The Fanatic plumes himself in his Almighty
Pulpit, whilst the Magistrate truckles under him upon the Stool of Repentance:
Both of them oppose and exalt themselves above all that is called God: Both of
them will, without scruple, do Evil, that Good may come thereof; equivocate,
lie, plunder, sequester, and behead, for God's sake, and the Cause's sake: Both
of them agree in that Jesuitical Tenet, That Dominion is founded in Grace: Both
of them plot and contrive mischief, where and when they have sway; but always
mischief, as much as in them lies: Both of them have for many years been the
great Disturbers of the Peace of all Christendom, as well as of the Peace of
England: And tell me but of any Massacre, or bloody Wars and Stratagems against
the Magistrate, any Treasons and Rebellions, but what was carried on, either by
Papists and Jesuits, or by Presbyterians and Fanatics, in the memory of man;
and I Will be content to abide the bloody Inquisition of the one, and undergo the
same fate of the Archbishops and Metropolitans of Canterbury and St. Andrews,
murdered by the other.

That Alterations and Revolutions in Kingdoms, are the Rods with which God
scourges miscarrying Princes, is resolved by my Lord of Argenton: Comines. 170.
To which may be added out of Aristotle, in the fifth book of his Politics,
Per frandem and dolum regu^ evertuntur. But let these Instruments of Darkness
work as they please, it is nevertheless the part of a righteous Statesman, A
good Statesman
to remain and be inviolably constant to his principles of Virtue and religious
Prudence; his ends are noble, and the means he uses innocent; he has a single
eye on the public good; and if the Ship of the Commonwealth miscarry, he had
rather perish in the wreck, than preserve himself upon the plank of an
inglorious Subterfuge: His Worth has led him to the Helm; the Rudder he uses,
is an honest and vigorous Wisdom; The Star he looks to for direction, is in
Heaven; and the Port he aims at, is the joint Welfare of Prince and People.
This firm Constancy, is that solid Rock upon which the wise Venetian has built
its long-lived Republic; so that it is not improbable the Maiden Queen has
borrowed her Motto of Semper eadem, from this Maiden Commonwealth.

It Is nevertheless true, that something is to be allowed and conceded to the
Place, and Time, and Person; and I grant, that there are many innocent
Compliances; Virgil's Obliquare sinus is observable: There may be a Bending
without a Crookedness; we may circumire, and yet non aberrare. Paul became a
Jew, that he might gain the Jew; but he did not become a sinner, that he might
gain sinners: He was made all things to all men, but he was not made sin to
any; that is, his condescentions were such as did well consist with his
Christian Integrity. Hence we may see the detestable wickedness of our
Chronopantists, the monstrous Impieties and horrid Blasphemies of those Beasts
of Prey; hence, as in a Mirror, we may view the Cruelties and Impostures of
our late Usurpers, and perceive their Snares, though never so cunningly laid:
Now we may return Religion its stolen Cloak; and having thus disrobed our
State-Sycophant, we may at once both view and abhor all his loathsome tricks
and devices.

Greatness, and Honor, and Riches, and Scepters, those glorious temptations
that so much inamour the doting world, are too poor Shrines for such a
Sacrifice as Conscience, which our Politician has so much abused by an
inveterate neglect, that it is become menstruous and ephemeral. Such was the
miserable condition of the Church heretofore, that (to use the words of Bishop
Gauden in his Sighs of the Church, p. 202.) the Dilemma and distressed choice
of Religion was then, God preserve the Church of England now established, from
such a damned Dilemma.
says he, reduced to this, That peaceable and well-minded Christians, wise,
etc. -- so long harrassed and wearied with novel Factions, and pretended
Reformations, would rather choose their Posterity should return to the Roman
Party, which have something among them settled, orderly, and uniform, becoming
Religion, than to have them ever turning and towering upon Ixion's Wheel,
catching in vain at fanciful Reformations, as Tantalus at the deceitful waters;
rolling the Reformed Religion, like Sysiphus his Stone, sometimes asserting it
by Law and Power, otherwise exposing it to popular Liberty and Looseness; than
to have them tossed to and fro with every wind of Doctrine, with the Foedities,
Blasphemies, Animosities, Anarchies, Dangers, and Confusions attending Fanatic
Fancies, and Quotidian Reformations; which, like Botches and Boyls from
surfeited and unwholesome Bodies, so daily break out among those Christians; who
have made none other rule of Religion, but their own Humor; and no bounds of
Reformation, but their own Interest: The first makes them ridiculous, the
second pernicious to all sober Christians; Rather than to be everlastingly
exposed to the profane Bablings, endless Janglings, miserable Wranglings,
childish Confusions, atheistical Indifferencies, and sacrilegious Furies of
some latter Spirits, which are equally greedy and giddy, making both a Play and
a Prey of Religion. And Calvin himself (on the first of Hosea and the ninth of
Amos) says, Quam multi sunt in Papatu, qui Regibus accumulant quicquid possint
Juris and Potestatis? Whence King James, in his Basilicon Doron, Epistle to the
Reader, says, Puritans had put out many Libels against all Christian Princes,
and that no body answered them but the Papists. And our late Protestant Martyr
King Charles the first, in his excellent book of Meditations, says, I am sorry
Papists should have a greater sense of their Allegiance than many Protestants.
And I dare say, that all good Christians grieve at this very day for, and
Posterity will read with detestation, horror, and amazement, to the worlds
end, the barbarous Villainies, inhumane Cruelties, and impious Actions of those
Protestants the good King intends; yet if those Princes had lived in these
times, they must (as all the world now do) have cried out with horror and
amazement at the horrible hellish Plots and Contrivances of the Papists.

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum! PRINCIPLE VII. If Oaths are requisite
in the conduct of Affairs, let them be of such ambiguity, as may furnish with a
sense obliging to the Design, and yet so soft as the People may not perceive
the Snare.
TO compose the wavering minds of the Multitude, and to oblige them to the
service of our Polititian's most impious ends, there is nothing so binding as
Oaths of all sorts and sizes, according to the necessity of Affairs; as solemn
Leagues, Covenants, etc. And though the practices leading to the end propounded
be never so barbarous and bloody, yet the strength of a solemn Oath does so
firmly bind them to the seeming Justice of their undertaken Cause, that no
Divinity or Precepts (though never so just and holy) shall ever interpose
betwixt them and their propounded ends; but what is urged against the Cause,
shall be taken to proceed from the wicked, and be deemed as Malice and
Imposture.

Finge Deum (Belial!) quoties vis fallere Plebem. Did ever man read of more
bloody Massacres, A pretty Couple.
than under the conduct of the Papists, covenanted together in France by the
name of the Holy League? Did ever any thing parallel it, except those hellish
Contrivances and bloody Butcheries in this Island, under the favor and
influence of the Solemn League and Covenant? 1 Timothy 4.1, 2.
These are your men of seared Consciences; and none but such as these are fit
for our Polititian's purpose, that can swallow Oath upon Oath, kill and rob,
plunder and steal, sequester and behead, and still their Consciences blunt no
more than a piece of brass. Hear what a noble Lord said in the House of Peers,
December 19. 1642. A Dispersation for Perjury.
They (says he) who think that humane Laws can bind the Conscience, and will
examine the Oaths they have taken according to the interpretations of men, will
in time fall from us; but such who religiously consider that such moral
Precepts are fitter for Heathens than Christians, will never faint in their
Duty. And in another place of the same Speech, he says, They cheerfully
undertook to serve against that Army wherein they knew their own Fathers were;
Dutiful Sons.
and on my conscience (I speak it to their honor) had they met them alone,
they would have sacrificed them to the Commands of both Houses.

And that our Politician may see how some even of the Tribe of Levi, have stood
up for and maintained these delusions, let him but read the two Speeches of
John King and John Kid, Ministers, lately executed at Edenburg for the trifling
sin of Rebellion; Aug. 14. 1679.
and he may there see how, in the very hour of death, they both bear witness to
the solemn League and Covenant: And the words of Mr. Kid are very remarkable
(says he) That if ever Christ had a People or Party wherein his soul took
pleasure, His Speech, p. 27.
I am bold to say, these Meetings (blasphemously nicknamed Conventicles) were
a great part of them. Oh, that Scotland were a mourning Land, and that
Reformation were our practice, according as we are sworn in the Covenant!

The advantage is great which that man has in a credulous world, that can
casily say and swear to any thing, and yet withal so subtly palliate his
falsehoods and perjuries, as to conceal them from the conusance of most: Our
Politician must never want an handsome Subterfuge to cover the natural
deformity of his otherwise-ugly actions, and must be able on all occasions to
cure all Miscarriages.

Mankind are too prone, even in affairs of the greatest importance, to advise
rather with corrupt and pemicious Ingenuity, than with soundness of Judgment or
Conscience. Hence it is (upon that cursed Doctrine of mental Reservation) that
the prosperity of flourishing Kingdoms, has often been transposed into most
lamentable Scenes, perspicuous in the various calamities of every Individual;
but more terrible and notorious in the accumulative Miseries and Disasters of
the whole. Our Politician is never without such means; he has still new
Inventions; and amongst all his pack of Delusions, Salvo's to avoid Perjury.
he will be sure to apply Salvo's to the tender Conscience.

First, We are ready to interpret the words of an Oath, and all other sacred
Ties, too kindly, especially if they be ambiguous; and it is hard to find
Terms or Expressions so clear and positive in themselves, but that they may be
cluded indeed, or at least seem to us to be so, if we be disposed.

Secondly, There are some, who being frighted into these Bonds by threats or
losses, or other temporal concernments, please themselves that they swear by
Duress, and so conceive and fancy that they are ipso facto disengaged.

Thirdly, There are some who have learned from the Civilians, Gr^t. de Jure
Bell^, 245.
that though we swear to a thing not materially unlawful, yet if it impede a
greater moral Good, it thereby becomes void.

Fourthly, Some take the liberty to swear, because they judge the person to
whom they swear, incapable of imposing an Oath. So Cicero defends the breach of
an Oath to a Thief, from the imputation of Perjury: And Brutus, to a Tyrant, as
it is in Appian,(...).

The first sort of these is most fit for our Politicians purposes, though he
may make use of the others as occasion serves; and being thoroughly skilled in
this sort of Metaphysics, it will not be difficult for him to model his
Proposals into such soft and glib Expressions, as will easily down with most;
yea, with many that would otherwise condemn and disavow the same thing in a
rougher Language. Let him but observe the Protestation of May 1641. (the world
knows what success that met with, by woeful Experience;) I A. B. do in the
presence of Almighty God, The Protestation of May 1641.
promise, vow, and protest, to maintain and defend [ as far as lawfully I may]
with my Life, Power, and Estate, the true Reformed Protestant Religion
expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of England, against all Popery and
Popish Innovations within this Realm, contrary to the same Doctrine, and
according to the duty of my Allegiance to his Majesty's Royal Person, Honor,
and Estate; as also the Power and Privileges of Parliament, the lawful Rights
and Liberties of the Subject, etc. Now, says a late Author, As the whole
Pretext was plausible, L'Estrang.
so the Saving Clause in it [ as far as lawfully I may] made it go down without
much scruple. Which Oath was of subtle policy, contrived for the service of
by-ends: for take it as it runs with the aforesaid qualifying Clause, and there
is nothing more in it than what every man is obliged to do without it; so that
without some mystery in the bottom, the thing appears in it self to be wholly
idle and impertinent, and not answerable to the solemnity of making it a
National Duty. Was ever any thing in appearance more harmless, loyal, or
conscientious, than this Protestation? And if the fellow of it were now in
agitation, how would the Town ring of any Church of England-man, for a
disguised Papist, that would refuse to take it? And yet what ensued upon the
peoples joining in this officious piece of misguided Zeal? when they were once
in, there was no longer any regard had to the Grammar or literal construction
thereof, but to the List of those that took it, as the discriminating Test of
the Party; and every man was bound, upon the forfeiture of his Life, Liberty
and Estate, to observe it in their sense.

But let us see what became of this so solemn a Protestation, after it had been
swallowed by the Multitude: Why, it made way for an Oath of a larger size, the
Solemn League and Covenant; The Covenant, An. 1643.
which had the same Salvo with the Protestation, and the very same specious
pretenses for the Protestant Religion, the Honor of the King* the Privileges
of Parliament, and the Liberty of the Subject: only enlarged to the setting up
of the Scottish Discipline and Government, the extirpation of Episcopacy and
Popery, and the bringing of Delinquents to punishment. So that from the
maintaining of the Government which they swore in the Protestation, they are
now come to the dissolution thereof in the Covenant; and what is this, but to
do like the Jesuit, J^r^, Per^^ra, Secret^m prodere nol^?

Usurpation has only these two Pillars, its own Arms, and public
acknowledgement* And it is most certain, there is no other Tie of that strength
and security, as this of Oaths, and it is scarce worth the Q -- Whether when
the gross of a Nation is thus bound, the Oath be not as valid, and the
Conference as much concerned, as if it had been sworn to a lawful Sovereign. As
for the solemn Oaths, Promises, and other Engagements of our Politician, he
puts them into the same bottomless bag which the Poets-feign Jupiter made for
Lovers Asseverations. His word is as good as his Oath; for they are neither to
be regarded, but for the service of his Interest; and are both Trifles, as it
is in Plautus, Pac^um non pactum est, non pactum pactum est, cum illis lubet.
'Twas he that first invented that useful distinction of a Lip-Oath and an
Heart-Oath; you find him in Euripides, Jurata lingua est, me^^e juravi nihil.
He makes good use of that in Plutarch,(...), That Children are to be cousened
with Rattles; and Men with Oaths.

It cannot reasonably be supposed that a usurped Power can have the same
confidence in the love of the people, which a just and lawful Power has:
Therefore if our Politician get uppermost, he must never trust to those
ingenuous Guards, His own Goodness, and the Love of others; his best defense is
Awe and Fear; and if that will not do, he must apply Fire and Sword, Scaffold
and Gibbet: for he that has no moderate means left to gain a voluntary
subjection from the people, must use his utmost Rigours to compel their
compliance, N^c quisquam Imperium, Tacitus.
malis artibus qu^stum, been administravit. The same with G^^^zo, where one
objecting the Vices of Princes, receives this Answer: De Civil. Converse, l.
2.2. p. 13
Perch non eran^ Prencipi per natura, ma per violenza, and era^^ piu temuti
che amati.

The ALLAY.
Common Swearing.
Like our common Debauchees, who stick not to provoke Heaven it self a thousand
times to damn them in one hour, and every moment vainly utter (unless it be to
procure their eternal misery) those Coeli Sacra which should only serve to
confirm the most sacred Truths, in abuse and defiance of God himself; and all
this to verify the most palpable falsehoods in deceit of their fellow creature,
to acquire or preserve the most trivial interest or meanest pittance to
themselves: Oatbs of Policy.
Even so will every Tyrant and Impostor either insinuate or impose Oaths and
Protestations and hundred thousand times over and over, upon so many
particulars; and value not though he damn the whole world, if he can thereby
but carry on the work of his wicked designs, or satisfy the smallest atome of
his endless ambition: So that in proportion to that, how many worlds shall we
imagine such an one would destroy before he left? It is even beyond all
imagination! T^^ rise of common Swearing.
Nor shall I be mistaken, if I assert, That these grand abuses (by such as our
State-Impostor) were the original and productive Examples of those first
mentioned very great, but much lesser Profanations.

What a^ Oath is, and the true use of it.
Yet nevertheless an Oath is in it self pure and holy, a religious Affirmation,
a Promise with God's Seal; and therefore it highly concerns Christians to be
cautelous before swearing, to swear liquidly, and to observe conscionably. Will
it not rise up in the last day to our condemnation, that such slender Evasions
should satisfy us, as have been scomed by Heathens? We are bound says one of
them, to the sense of the Imposer, or else we do (...); we are bound to the
performance of what we have thus sworn, or else we do (...). It Is much that a
moral Conscience should more check them, than a clearer Light can a we us; as
if they more honored the genius of a Caesar, than we revere the presence of
God; or else we should never engage in new Associations, Protestations, and
Covenants, that do interfere, yea, and sometimes positively quarrel with the
old. Concerning our Loyalty and Obedience to the King, Perjury laid against the
Faction, in a Speech in the Commons h^^st, 1647.
it is manifest we have all taken the Oath of Allegiance to his Majesty; and
that we have also taken Oaths and Covenants to make War against him. Our
Enemies would fain know who had power to dispense with, or free us from those
Oaths; and likewise by what Authority the latter Covenant and Oaths were
imposed upon the Consciences of men: And it is reported by them, That if we had
kept our first Oaths religiously, and not taken the second most perjuriously,
and performed them so impiously, then we had never so rebelliously offended so
gracious a Majesty, whose words are these: Confederations, by way of solemn
Leagues and Govenants, EI^. BA.
are the common Road used in all Factions and powerful Perturbations either of
Church or State.

Over and above the iniquity of these Oaths, how ridiculous is it for every
paltry fellow to swear to the doing he knows not what, and the maintaining of
the Privileges of Parliament, which he does in no wise understand! But the
Multitude were brought to it by these following train of Thoughts, and drawn in
by Oaths and Protestations, even to the commission of the foulest sins, which
in the end brought them into a most miserable state of slavery. The Lord bless
us (say they) we are all running into the French Government, The Delusions of
the Late Times
and Popery; the Courtiers and the Bishops will be the undoing of us all: The
King is a good man enough of himself, if he had but good people about him; but
be i^ so damnably led away by Popish Counsels! I would to God he would but call
a Parliament, and hearken to their advice: But why should we not press him to
it, and ferret out all these Caterpillars from about him? It Is true, the King
can do no wrong, but his Ministers may; and yet the King is ^^^^nd by the Law
as well as we. Had we not better g^t together and join to stand by one another
as one man, for the preservation of our Liberties and Religion, than stand
gaping with our fingers in our mouth till All Is lost? These Crotchets make the
people mad; Plebs aut humiliter servit, aut super^e dominatur.
they get together in Tumults, and like the tumbling of great Bodies into a
precipice, suo feruntur pondere, they break through all Order, and put
themselves out of protection in the rash pursuit of their mistaken Liberty:
They run a gadding after Religion, regardless either of moral Honesty, or
Christianity. In fine, when men are thus bewitched, they become brute and
barbarous; they then act the most inhumane Villainies, and run into all manner
of mischief and misery; they then neither think of Heaven or Hell; God forsakes
them, and the Devil takes them.

Though we are now sufficiently aware of the drift of out late Usurpers, in
imposing Oaths contrary to Law, yet we may look back and view their Impostures,
that we may the more detest and shun them for the future. It Is their own
opinion of the Covenant, The Walls of Jerico have fallen flat before it; Case
on the Covenant, p. 65.
the D^gon of the Bishops Service Book brake its neck before this Ark of the
Covenant; Prelacy and Prerogative have bowed down, and given up the ghost at
its feet. And again, Caryl's Sermon at the taking of the Covenant, October. 6.
1643.
Take the Covenant, and you take Babylon; and her seven hills shall move. -- It
is the Shiboleth to distinguish Ephraimites from Gileadites, page 27. Not only
is that Covenant which God has made with us, founded upon the blood of Christ,
but that also which we make with God, page 33. We may now see with horror and
amazement, to what a fine purpose they imposed their Oaths; Prelacy and
Prerogative, that is to say, Church and State, have bowed down and given up the
ghost at its feet! The miserable effects of the Cov.
By this Covenant, these Kingdoms were made an universal Golgotha, a
Purple-gore, an Aceldema, a bloody Field, a Gehenna, a den of Devils or
infernal Furies; and finally, an Hell upon Earth, were it not for these
differences, That here the best men are punished, and in Hell the worst only
are plagued; here no good man escapes torment, nor any wicked man is troubled.

How the Heathens punish Perjury.
The Heathens had their (...), their Perjury-revenging Gods, to whose vindictive
powers they referred their Offenders. They punished such as swore falsely by
their Prince, with Fustigation; but such as abused their Gods, they left to the
dispose of their injured Deities, as if they were at a loss how to find a
punishment equal to the sin. Hear how soberly Plato mentions it (out of the
noble Commentator upon Philostratus) En tantes manieres sa este un fort belle
ordinance and institution, de n' user point du no^^ des Dieux Legerement, de
peur de Les contaminer; car le Majeste des Dieux ne se doit imployer, qu' en un
sancte and venerable purete. See what real honor they gave to their
counterfeit Gods: Let us have a care that we ascribe not counterfeit honor to
the true God. C^^^^bon' s Exercitat. fol. ^02.
Our God hates every false Oath: It appears in his severity to Zedekiah for
breaking Covenant with the Babylonian Monarch, though a Tyrant of the first
magnitude. And were all Christian Subjects duly sollicitous about the weight
of this Bond, we should be less prone to take, and more studious to observe
every Oath. I remember the Scholiast upon Aristophanes, Page 848.
derives (...). It hedges in and shuts up a man, and ties his hands behind
him. I know not how some Conquerors may abscind this Knot with the Sword, or
how some Sampsons may shake off these Cords, or what gaps the Licentious may
make in this Hedge; but such as value God, or Heaven, or Prince, or Peace, can
discover it no way better than in a sincere use of so divine an Ordinance.

There can be no certain rule given when to believe, and when not, what such as
are, or would be great, please to inculcate to us: and it is no Heresy to
affirm, That many have been saved by their Infidelity, since so many Wrecks are
daily cast ashore, that have been split upon the Rock of Credulity, commanding
at once both our pity and admiration. I commend that of Epicharmas,(...).

PRINCIPLE VIII. Necessity of State is a very competent Apology for the worst
of Actions.
OUr late Usurpers never wanted a pretense to justify their most hellish
Enterprises, and it has been observed, that in all Innovations and Rebellions
(which ordinarily have their rise from pretenses of Religion, or Reformation,
or both) the breach and neglect of Laws, has been constantly allowed and
authorized by that great patroness of illegal actions, Necessity. Hence those
of the Late Times metamorphosed the Common Law of the Land, into the Lands
common Calamity; that instead of the common benefit which the Laws in community
should yield to all; we have now perverted the same to the private interest of
some few.

Our Politician is never without his (...) Sava Necessitas, either to insinuate
or enforce his ends and designs: He cares not to determine, whether the
necessity be of his own creating, or from whence it grows; but for the most
part it proceeds from himself, being indeed nothing else but an Appendix to the
wrong he undertakes; and signifies no more than that (by the necessity of such
mediums to compass his ends) he is compelled to heap Injury on Injury, and so
to cover his past wrongs with renewed acts of Injustice and Oppression; as if
the committing a second sin, were enough to warrant or justify the iniquity of
the former. Thus a worthy Patriot (speaking under an Allegory) urging the
doleful miseries of our late martyred Sovereign, as they were by degrees, both
impiously and severely laid upon him; Mr. Speaker (says he) Our Adversaries do
allege, Speech in the Commons House 1647.
That our obedience to his Majesty is apparently manifest many strange ways: We
have disburthened him of his large Revennes; we have eased him of the charge of
Royal Housekeeping; we have cleared him from repairing of or repairing to his
stately Palaces, magnificent Mansions, and defensive Castles and Garrisons; and
we have put him out of care of repairing his Armouries, Arms, Ammunition, and
Artillery; we have been at the charge of keeping his Children and most trusty
Servants for or from him; we have taken order and given Ordinances, that he
shall not be troubled either with much Money or Meat, and that his Queen and
lawful Wife, shall not so much as darken his Doors; and we have striven by open
Rebellion to release him of troublesome life and reign, by hunting him like a
Partridge over the Mountains, and by shooting Bullets at his Person, for his
Majesty's preservation, on purpose to make him glorious in another world; we
have also eased him of a great number of his Friends, Subjects, and Servants,
by either charitable Famishing, brotherly Banishing, liberal and free
Imprisoning, Parliamental Plundering, friendly Throat-cutting, and unlawful
Beheading and Hanging, or utterly ruinating as many as we could lay hold of,
that either loved, served, or honored him. All this was necessary to be done
for the sake of their Thorough Reformation; and in truth they did a great deal
more, and never left, until they had undone us all.

Massacres encouraged by the Fanatics.
Our Politician may now learn from the Rabbis of Schism and Rebellion, how to
justify the most barbarous Villainies: He may now work on; and though his
actions contradict all Humanity, yet shall he never want Vouchers even for the
most unwarrantable and horrendous Cruelties. See what a pretended Levite (but a
real Priest of Baal) urges, both to encourage and justify such proceedings:
Bridges, on Revelations 4.8.
Whenever (says he) you shall behold the fall of Babylon, say, True, here is
a Babylonish Priest trying out, Alas! alas! my Living! I have Wife and Children
to maintain. Aye, but all this is to perform the Judgment of the Lord; though
as little ones they call for pity, yet as Babylonish they call for justice,
even to Blood. Hear another: In vain (says he) shall you in your Fasts, with
Joshua, Herle, on Psalm. 95.11. p. 31.
lie on your faces, unless you lay your Achans on their backs: In vain are the
high praises of God in your mouths, without a Two-edged Sword in your hands.
Idem, on Genesis 22.5. p. 23.
The blood thas Ahab spared in Benhadad, stuck as deep and as heavily on him as
that which he spilt in Naboth. But what says another? The Lord is pursuing you,
Faircloth. on Josh. 7.25.
if you execute not vengeance on them betimes, p. 48. Why should life be
further granted to them, whose very life brings death to all about them?!! p.
50. And again, Cursed be he that withholds his sword from blood; Case, on
Dan. 11.32. p. 44.
that spares, when God says, Strike, etc. Thus our Politician sees how to
father his most hellish Enterprises on the divine Goodness, and may hence learn
to enforce the most sacred Oracles (God's holy Word) to sing Songs of Triumph,
and plead his justification amidst the most barbarous and impious Cruelties,
Massacres, and Murders.

Our Politician must invert that old charitable advice, Benefacta, benefactis
aliis pertegito ne perpluant, into Vitia vitiis aliis pertegito ne perpluant;
that so heaping one Crime upon another, the latter may defend the former from
the stroke of Justice. He adores that Maxim in Livy, Justum est Bellum quibus
necessarium; and pia arma, quibus in armis spes est. It were very unnatural to
desire that man to leave his Crutch, which cannot walk without it; it is no less
a Soloecism to invite or persuade him to quit his Sword, whose Life and
Fortunes lean entirely upon it.

That design will certainly seem just and reasonable, which the people are
bewitched to believe pious and legal; and the goodness of the end, will at once
both legitimate and commend the otherwise prodigious and unlawful means and
circumstances: Victor. de Jure Belli. nu. 18.39.
That of the Civilians must be remembered, Lioere in Bello, quae ad finem sunt
necessaria: The divine oracles are too tender for Swordmen; and it may be he
had wit in his anger, who affirmed, That Martial Law was as great a Soloecism
as Martial Peace; Inter arma silent leges. So that if our Politician can by his
Subtilties and Impostures convince the Rabble that he as much intends their
good (in the redress of grievances, etc.) ^s his aims are just, they will never
expect that his methods should be retrenched by the strict boundaries of Law;
but where that stands in competition with his ends, and may seem, to oppose the
project, they will give it Club-law, and cry out that summum j^^ est summa
injuria: He manageth that rule very practically, Rem alienam, ex qua mibi
certum periculum eminet, citra culpa alienae consider ationem invadere possum:
Now he can very plausibly make this Peticulum either Certum or Incertion, as
shall best suit with the emergency of his affairs. Hear what the learned
Grotius says, De Jure Belli, 424.
the liberty that he concedes is very broad, Quare si vitam (inquit) aliter
servare non possum, licet mibi vi qualicunque arcere eum, qui eum impelit,
licet peccato vacet; and hoc ex jure quod mibi pro me natura concedit: Match. on
Livy, 627.
When Life, Liberty, and Safety, come in question there ought to be no
consideration had of just or unjust, pitiful or cruel, honorable or other-wise.

When by these Arts our Politician has thus wrought the people into a good
opinion of his worst actions, so that according to his wishes and desires, they
have either outlookt the mischiefs, or otherwise suffered them insensibly to
slip their understandings, and that under the brightness of the delusion; it
will then become a matter not difficult, to set all future proceedings (though
never so bloody) upon the score of Liberty and Religion: and if it so fall out,
that he be constrained to use means grossly unlawful, he has then,
notwithstanding, nothing more to do than to sanctify and make them seem holy
in the application, and all is well: for such are the humors of the unwary
Multitude, that when they have once rushed into a Party implicitly, to
prosecute it as desperately as if they were under demonstrative convictions of
its goodness.

In fine, because no Virtue can be induced to truckle under the service of our
Politicians base designs, he is therefore enforced to make a virtue of
Necessity: she may well favor and smile upon Licentiousness, who will be tied
up to and confined by no Law. An habit of doing ill, and a daring impudence to
maintain it, makes all things in a politic wisdom, lawful.

The ALLAY.
Libels the foundation of our late Wars.
As in our Late Times, when people were strangely agog, and enamoured with
Barbarisms and Cruelty; when every moment produced new scenes of Blood, as if
Mankind in general were transmogrified into Beasts of Prey, and made for no
other ends than to murder and devour one another: which prodigious deviation of
Nature from her usual course, cannot be ascribed to any thing more properly
than to that dismal and destructive poison which daily sprun^^ from the
Invectives and venomous Libels of those times, against the then established
Government: Even so the same danger is now to be feared, for that there is
hardly one day passes without Satyr or Libel against his Majesty's Authority,
Administration, Designs, and solemn Resolutions of State and Council; belying
the condition of his Affairs, and endeavoring to create Distrusts and
Jealousies, both at home and abroad, by false Intelligence; animating and
exciting of turbulent Factions, and anticipating of Consederacies, to involve
us all in Blood.

And indeed we have Sedition preached as well as written amongst us, Dr. Oater
's Nar. 63.67.
and our Conventicles both instructed themselves, and instructing others in the
methods and principles of Rebellion.

The Old Game seems now to be begun again; and the Dissenters will never be
persuaded out of the necessity of a Thorough Reformation, nor otherwise be
convinced (though perhaps they believe the contrary) but that Popery and
Arbitrary power are breaking in upon them, until once more (as heretofore) they
trump up Fanaticism in the room of Episcopacy, and build up their newfangled
accursed Commonwealth, upon the lamentable Ruins of our ancient Monarchy. See
what a stink a late Libeller makes, by raking into the Ashes of that Parliament
which first burnt the Rump: A Letter of Advice concerning Elections.
Our Grandees (quoth he) do now see, that they did out-shoot themselves, and
are full of Repentance for their rash and hasty dissolution of the late odious
overlong Parliament; and are therefore attempting to retrieve the Error, by
tiring out the people with frequent Changes, till they can get another to their
tooth as manageable and inercenary as the former. Who means he by our Grandees?
or who was rash and outshot himself in dissolving that Parliament, but the
King? O impudent Libeller! resolve me but this Quere, Whether all thy seeming
care tends, but to the involving three Kingdoms all in Blood and Gore? But
hold! We may guess what he is, and from whence these Libels spawn abroad, if we
look but a little further, and observe how this Whelp of the Good old Cause
scratches and claws the Church as well as State: I find all persons (says he)
very forward, The Clergy made Traitors.
except the high-flown Ritualists and Ceremony-mongers of the Clergy, who
being in the Conspiracy against the People, lay out to accommodate their
Masters with the veriest Villains that can be picked up in all the Country; that
so we may fall into the hands again of as treacherous and lewd a Parliament, as
the wisdom of God and folly of man have most miraculously freed us from, These
are the common Evulsions of ^^anaticism, and sour Belchings from the
abominable Covenant, which lies stinking in our Author's loathsome guts: This a
man would think might startle that Subject which has but one grain of Grace or
Loyalty left; however this is ugly, yet it cannot be called but a Cub-monster,
when we behold the terrible, prodigious, and ugly deformity of what follows;
nor can it be said (though Monster enough of all conscience) to be worthy note,
in comparison with those hatched and produced out of an universal concourse of
Plagues and Curses; upon which the Devil himself sat in Hells blackest antrum
(fired with malice and envy against our Church and State, and that enflamed by
the vigorous emission of Blasphemy, Murders, Massacres, etc. from the flaming
nostrils of Oliver, Bradshaw, Ireton, Peter's, and the rest, constantly supplied
with Fuel from the Good old Cause Faction, Sedition, and Rebellion, by their
Brethren and Confederates here on Earth) to bring forth those two too
prodigious Monsters; the one called, Two terrible Prodigies!
An Appeal from the Country to the City; the other, An Answer to the Kings
Declaration, concerning his Majesty's Marriage with Mrs. Walter, etc. Those who
ever read these two, will blame my temperance and lenity in their character,
and be concerned that the deepest Hyperboles cannot afford terms expressive
enough of their endless mischief and envy against his Majesty and the present
Government. And all this is done to undeceive and satisfy the people, A
strange Dilusion.
and in pity and devotion to their good. And were I now to define a Thorough
Reformation, I must call it an universal State of Oppression and Slavery,
brought upon us by the malice of our Enemies, with the concurring help of our
own folly.

If once Emergency and Necessity be accounted a sufficient warrant or authority
for a Thief whereon to ground the lawfulness of Stealing, it would soon cut
asunder the strongest ties of the eighth Commandment. But that which our
Politician calls Necessity, is no more than the necessity of convenience, nor
indeed so much, unless we expound that to be Convenience which favors his
by-ends; and so may seem necessary or convenient in the conduct of private
designs, for the help and furtherance of Self-interest. He uses Necessity as
the old Philosophers did an Occult quality, though to a different purpose; that
was their Refuge for Ignorance, this is his Sanctuary for Sin.

Pausanius tells us of a Chapel in Acrocorinth dedicated to Necessity and
Violence: Those Twin-goddesses may be fit Objects for the Worship of Heathens;
yet how great pity is it that Christians should be of the same Communion, and
be guilty of such hateful Idolatry! From hence proceed the most lamentable
Disasters that can befall Mankind, and from hence arise the greatest Scandals to
the very name and profession of Christianity. Let that great and good Rule be
received, That no man can be necessitated to sin; our Divines generally damn an
officious Lie, and the equity binds from any officious Sin.

This fundamental Error most certainly lies in a greedy and unwary
entertainment of those specious pretenses, and seemingly candid propositions,
which are at first made to us, before they have passed those Scrutinies and
severe Enquiries they deserve, or have been duly examined by the Test of God's
holy Word and National Laws: All the rest are but ugly consequences of that
absurdity we first granted; according to the ancient Philosophical Maxim,
(...).

Those Civilians which are most charitable to this Doctrine of Necessity, Less.
l. 11. c. 12. Dub. 12. nu. 70.
allow it nevertheless to be no Plea at all, unless it be absolute and
insuperable; as, by the Platonic Laws, only those persons are allowed to
drink at their Neighbors Well, which before had in vain sought a Spring, by
digging fifty cubits deep in their own ground. We approve of and allow the
disburthening of a Ship, in imminent peril of wreck; but this will not excuse
such who shall, upon a fond or seigned prevision of a State-Tempest,
immediately cast Law and Conscience overboard, discard and quit Rudder and
Steerage, and so assist the danger they pretend to fear.

PRINCIPLE IX. Because our Polititian's Design lies deep, he must plunge to
the bottom, though in an Ocean of Blood, for buoying it up.
WIthout doubt Mr. Kid, the Scotch covenanted Presbyterian Jesuit, told a great
Lie, even in the very hour of death, when he asserts in the 25 page of his
Speech at the Gallows, That a public Spirit in contending for God in his
matters in substance and circumstance, according to our The Covenant.
Vows and Obligations, is much wanting amongst us at this day: And surely he
might have asserted his innocence, since he had forget the matter for which he
came to be hanged: might assert, did I say? He does at the same time both
confess the Fact, and with the self-same breath justify the Rebellion. The
Jesuits did ground their Plea of Innocence upon a peremptory denial of the
Crimes laid to their charge; but this man does proceed upon the merits of his
Cause, and strive to enervate his guilt by a downright justification of the
The Rebellion.
matter of fact. As concerning that for which I am condemned (says he, page
18.) I magnify his Grace, that I never had the least challenge for it; but on
the contrary, I judge it my honor, that ever I was counted worthy to come upon
the Stage upon such a consideration. But because he is dead, I Will rake no
further into his Ashes, but leave his Disciples and Fellow Laborers to exult
and glory in his Martyrdom, as he himself did in his Treasons and Rebellion.
Another of the same Cabal, without doubt he is, and, did time serve, would
prove an excellent Example in our Polititian's present case of blood; but
however, he helps forward and preaches good Doctrine in the interim; which will
in the end do the work (unless Heaven prevent) and make our streets serve but
as so many channels to convey that blood, which he thinks fit to shed for the
satisfaction of that execrable gust which still lives in the prodigious womb of
their accursed Covenant. Observe his Doctrine: When Rehoboam (says he) had
prepared a great Army to reduce the Israelites, he was forbidden by the
Prophet. Thus says the Lord, Ye shall not go up nor fight against your
brethren, for they are from me. Mark (says the Libel) he calls them Brethren,
not Rebels. And farther adds, That passive obedience is therefore simple, and
fit for such that know no better.

Such as study to be great by any means, must by all means forget to be good.
In Apolog.
Ambition knows neither Law nor Limits; nothing so sacred but it violates; the
Gods themselves must bow and yield to it, as Tertullian, Id negotium sine
injuria Deorum non est, eadem strages moenium and Templorum, tot Sacrilegia
Romanorum, quot de Diis, quot de Gentibus Triumphi. And again, Crescit interea
Roma albae ruinis, begins one of the Decads. That the Walls of Rome were
cemented with blood, is both known and commended by Machiavil; although the
superstructure was brave, Upon Livy, l. 2. c. 3. Thebe maritum Timole^m
fratrem, Cassius filitum hoc jure interficere.
yet if we search the foundation, we shall find it laid in the red ruins of
her wasted Neighbors. That the first Founder became a Fratricide upon reason
of State to guard his new Conquest by freedom from a Competitor, is not only
vindicated from cruelty, but otherwise applauded and maintained for a piece of
meritorious policy: Nor did this happen to that City alone in its Structure,
but after in its Reparation, when the Sons of Brutus were sacrificed to the
designs of their Father. So that Rome did not only suck and thrive upon blood
in her Infancy, but likewise at her full growth and maturity she supported her
self and lived upon Magna and Sanguinolenta Latrocinia: So that from this City,
and from the Barbarisms of our Late Times, our Politician cannot be without
most effective Instances and Examples, both to commend and warrant the most
bloody Tragedies that Ambition can invent. He must not so much as wink or
startle, where horror may justly terrify and amaze a tender Conscience, but
must perpetrate all manner of Villainies, and behold the miseries of such as
daily languish under his severest cruelty, as the common objects of his sport
and derision.

He both admires and applauds the generosity of Nero's Mother, who is reported
to have said of her Son, (...): Let my Son be my murderer, so he may thereby
become a Monarch. According to the advice of an high-spirited Fury, Pro Regno,
velim Patriam, Penates, Conjugem flammis dare; Imperia pretio quo^ bet constant
been An Empire cannot be purchased too dear, though it cost the blood of
millions. This Lesson was well learnt and put in practice by some; yet such was
our misery, that we may boldly challenge the world to produce but one instance
of any Tyrant that ever ruined and wasted his People at that bloody rate as we
butchered and destroyed one another.

The imminent dangers of these times.
And again, it is now high-time for our Politician to look about him; he has
gotten his Tools at work, and the Sword of the Spirit of Fanaticism is half
out, looking only for his help to quit the Scabbard: People now again speak
evil of Dignities, both talk and justify themselves in acts of Treason and
Rebellion, and in downright terms disown and disavow the present Government.
The most contemptible Member of the Rabble does nowadays act the part of a
Privy-Counsellor; and the most discreet and sober determinations of Law and
State, are daily censured and traduced by the Vote of the Multitude: No Power
owned but that of the People, and their force seems wholly bent against the
safety both of Church and State. A new Covenant.
Witness to all this, the draught of the new Covenant, which we have very
lately heard of from Scotland, surprised in the possession of Mr. Donald
Cargile a Preacher in the Field-Conventicles, and Mr. Hall (who were both
actually in the late Rebellion there;) by which they swear to advance the
Kingdom of Christ and the true reformed Religion, to extirpate Kingly
Government and Prelacy, etc. This a man would think had been sufficient to
express their meaning; yet they proceed more plainly to remove all doubts of
what they pretend. After a solemn procession and singing of Psalms, they
published and affixed on the Cross at Sanchaer, a certain Paper, wherein they
declare, That for themselves, Presbyterian Declaration, June 22. 1680.
and all that will adhere to them as Representatives of the true Presbyterian
Church and Covenanted Nation of Scotland, They do disown Charles Stuart, who
has been reigning or rather tyrannizing on the Throne of Britain these twenty
years past, as having any right or title to, or interest in the Crown of
Scotland, or Government, as forfeited several years since, by his Perjury, and
breach of Covenant with God and his Church, and usurpation of his Crown and
Royal Prerogatives therein, etc. This is but like Thunder afar off, which ere
long rises up against the orderly course of the Wind, till it break out with
its terror over our heads: The confounded methods of Fanaticism
This fiery Exhalation is from the over-warm Zeal of Fanaticism (the same here
as in Scotland) and the Government is that Cloud which would contain it within
the happy bounds of Peace and Tranquillity; but the connatural fury of that
Zeal being hot and violent beyond all moderation, cannot be contained by a
well-tempered mediocrity, but is still bustling from place to place, and
hurries about, until it break out of all order into horror and confusion.

A mischievous Comet to the heaith of the Government.
But hold! the Clouds gather, and the Storm is already rising; and we may now
guess, since we perceive the disposition of the true Presbyterian-Church of
Scotland, from whence proceeds those terrible Thunderclaps against the Kings
most sacred Majesty, expressed in that Libel which is entitled, An Answer to
the Kings Declaration concerning his Marriage, etc. Which in a most horrendous
impudent manner, gives his Majesty the Lie, and urges the same and such
matters with the Scotch Declaration, in reproach and scandal of his most sacred
Person and Government.

Presbyterian Zeal.
These are terrible! hideous! execrable! prodigious! lamentable! and malicious
Belchings or Evulsions! from the burning Aetna of Presbyterian Zeal!!! These
being incessantly supplied with fuel from the Good old Cause, (constant Libels,
and false News,) will in the end involve us all in blood, and bring us to ruin
and destruction, unless the wisdom of Heaven so direct our Councils, to prevent
their designs by anticipation from the Sword of Justice.

The great Turk rivets himself to the Imperial Chair with the bones of his
murdered Brethren: Aspiring desires are not only insatiate, but admit of the
foulest sins. See Basianus murdering his brother Geta in his mothers arms;
Andronicus strangling his Kinsman Alexins, lest he should have a part in the
Empire, which had a right to all. See Caesar slighting the Oaths by which he
had obliged his obedience to the Roman Senate. But to come nearer home, see how
the Tragedians of our Late Times laid their very first Scene in the The King
signed that Bill to (...) please the people.
blood of my Lord of Strafford; and so they proceeded by degrees, till they had
enveloped three Kingdoms all in purple Gore. On this crimson Torrent did our
late Oliver.
Usurper waft his Ambition, and seat himself on the Throne of our Murdered
Sovereign.

The ALLAY.
Religion! True Religion (says our blessed Savior) like a Tree, is known by
its Fruit. Consult all Histories both ancient and modern, view the present
posture of Affairs, and you will find, that for these last hundred years,
there has been no Rebellion, Massacre. Tumults, or Treasons, Blood, Rapine, and
Murder; but either Papist or Fanatic, or both, had the great hand in it. C.M.
f. 22.
To look no further back (says the Author of Curse ye Meroz) than the reign of
King James: Who dethroned his Mother, and made a slave and property of him in
his Infancy, but that bloody Knox, Buchanan, and the rest of that Paritan
Presbyterian Brood? By woeful experience he tells his Son (our Royal Martyr) in
his (...). That under the pretense of Religion, he should find (alas! alas! he
did find it by sad experience) no such barbarous and bloody Villains in the
world. And had his Majesty taken this course, perhaps he had missed their
fatal Block; Quod non praevalet Sacerdos efficere per Doctrinae Sermonem, Isid.
Sent. l 3. c. 15.
Potestas hoc imperet per Disciplinae terrorem: or done as Constantine the
first Christian Emperor did with the factious Conventicles of his time; he
prohibited them by Edict, he burnt their Books, and proscribed the Authors,
P^stium illarum andacia Ministri Dei, hoc est, nua executione c^ercebitur:
Those bold pestilent fellows, which dare offend in defiance of all Law, I Will
make bold to punish their Insolence by my Authority.

The Popes Discrimimination from J^^k Pres^yter.
These are the men that have most exactly performed their parts in the bloudiest
Tragedies: Nor will it be wholly impertinent if we observe by the way how the
Pope himself discriminates his honesty in comparison with Jack Presbyter: Was
it from any of the Papists books (says a late Author of theirs) you have drawn
these vile Maxims, Advocate of Conscience-liberty p. 124.
viz. That the Authority of the Sovereign Magistrate is of hu^ane right? That
the People are above the King? That the People can give power to the Prince,
and take it away? That Kings are not anointed of the Lord? That if a King fail
in performance of his Coronation Oath, the Subjects are absolved from their
Allegiance? That if Princes fall from the grace of God, the People are loosed
from their Subjection? And again, fol. 128. See the disposition of the French
Clergy, in Heylyn's Cosn^grap. 176, 177.
During the time of the late King of France, there was proposed by an Assembly
of Catholic Divines and Bishops, this Question: If it were supposed the King
of France became a Mohammedan, and by his Power endeavored to force his
Subjects to that Infidelity, whether they might lawfully, according to the
principles of There is a great difference betwixt Popery and Christi^nity. This
might be true, if the Jesuit would leave off plotting, and renounce the Popes
Supremacy.
Christianity, by Arms resist him? To which (says our Author) the unanimous
consent of the Assembly was, That such a resistance would be unlawful, since
Christian Religion allowed no other way of maintaining Faith against lawful
Sovereigns, but by Prayers, Tears, and Sufferings. And fol. 129. When shall we
find such a Result from a Synod of Presbyterians? Compare these Primitive
Doctrines (says he) with the Evangelists, and we shall find them quite
contrary to the Rules of Wicliffians, Waldenses, Paraeus, Knox, Buchanan, the
Jesuits, etc. who teach, that Subjects may not only defend by Arms their
Religion, but offend also. And lately Baxter in Lib. of Rest. p. 258. says, We
may fight against Kings, if it were for cause of Religion, to purge the Church
from Idolatry and Superstition. The Geneva Notes on the Bible, 2 Chronicles. 5.
allow the deposing of Queen Macha.

The Italian Politician seems to intimate a scruple, when he says, Si jus
violandum est, regnandi causa violandum est: His [if] dictates an uncertainty;
and if we appeal to the bar of nature or Divinity, though possibly the entire
assertion may have something of truth, yet we shall find that wicked [if]
absolutely banished.

It Is true, we may more justly pity him that swallows a Bait fair and
beautiful, than such an one who even tempts Temptations to deceive him; because
in the first case a greater reluctance is required, and the Dart may possibly
be so sharp as to pierce through the Armor of a sober Resolution: But all this
will stand him in little stead, who knows it to be a Bait, and has beforehand
designed its external luster to apologize for the foulness of the sin: for in
this case the bulk of the Temptation will not at all extenuate the grossness of
the Crime, no more than he mitigates the guilt of his Robbery, who shall plead
that he stole nothing but Gold and Jewels.

'Twill now stand our Politician in no small avail to look about him, and
remember, that however some false and flattering Sycophants may seen to indulge
his Ambition, and urge the justice of his pretensions from unheard of, false,
and obscure Testimonies, that he knows not but the Imposture may be retorted
upon himself. The world is much mistaken in the value of a Scepter or Crown; we
gaze upon its brightness, and forget its brittleness; we look upon its luster
and glory, and neglect its frailty; we respect its color, and take no notice
of its weight: But if all those gay things which we fondly fancy to our selves,
were really to be found in Greatness, yet still he pays too dear, that pawns
his Heaven for them: He that thus buys a short Bliss, or temporal Felicity,
gives not twenty or one hundred years purchase, but (if Mercy prevents not)
Eternity it self; and will be forced at last to cry out, Omnia vanitas!

The Example of a Roman, Turk, or Christian, will be of little advantage to
warrant the unlawfulness of any action: such presidents may perchance baffle
the easy Vulgar (in whose Creed you may insert what you please) but will prove
very cold and insignificant Answers, when we appear before an Omniscient, Just,
and Omnipotent Judge.

It will now much rather concern us to observe how Ambition claims kindred with
every other Vice, stoops and takes up every sin that lies in its way; and if
upon enquiry we find it to be such a complicated mischief as herein before is
represented, it will then certainly become us (as men and Christians)
studiously to shun it our selves, and seriously to detest it in others.

Let us never forget the tottering and feeble state of such, who when they have
arrived to the very summit of Grandeur, have from thence tumbled into the
dismal Abyss of Miseries and Misfortunes,

Altius evexit quam te Fortuna, Ruinam
Majorem timeas. --
Juven. And now give me leave, The Dangers of Change in Government. Faulkland.
as a caution against changes in Government, to repeat what was long since told
us by an ingenious Lord; That all great mutations are dangerous; even where
what is introduced by that Mutation, is such as would have been very commodious
and profitable upon a primary foundation: And it is none of the least dangers
of change, that all the perils and inconveniences which it brings, cannot be
foreseen; and therefore no wise man will undergo great Dangers, but for great
necessities. And again, my Lord Bacon says, Bacon's Essays, Tit. Innovations.
It is good not to try Experiments in States, except the necessity be urgent,
or the utility be evident; and to be well aware, that it be the Reformation
that draws on the Change, and not the desire of Change that pretends the
Reformation; and that the Novelty, though it be not rejected, yet be held for a
Suspect: And as the Scripture says, That we make a stand upon the ancient way,
and then look about us and discover what is the strait and right way, and so to
walk in it.

How to redress Grievances.
And if it so fall out that there be some Grievances in the State which are
proper for Redress, let it be attempted in a fair and legal manner, and not so
much as once offered at by the Sword of Violence: for I never read that
Illegal, or Tumultuous, or Rebellious, were suitable and proper Epithets for
Reformation.

And now, Reader, let us mix our Prayers, That God would for ever banish this
cursed Policy out of Europe and the whole Christian world; and damn it down to
Hell, from whence originally it came: and let such as delight to abuse others,
think of that self-cousenage with which in the interim they abuse themselves.
Let us also consider, whilst we are busy with politic Stratagems and tortious
Arms to invade the Rights of others, that this is not that violence by which we
may expect to fight our way to Heaven. Let it be a piece of our daily Oraisons,
That the Almighty would guard our Pulpits from such Boutefeus, as, like Aetna
and Vesuvius, daily vomit out nothing but flames and fiery-discourses, using
the holy Scriptures as preposterously and impertinently, as some Pontificians,
who (transported with the vehemence of Hild^brandian Zeal) think the temporal
Monarchy of Popes sufficiently Scriptural, from the saying of our blessed
Savior to St. Peter, -- Pasce Oves. Far be it from us to entitle the Spirit of
God to exorbitant Doctrines; it is easy to distinguish the Vulture from the
Dove. The miscarriage of the Clergy have a deeper stain from the Sacredness of
their Function, as probably he that envenomed the Eucharist ^as the more to
answer for his Triple Crown.

Let Heaven now bless the King with able and faithful Counsels, and bless these
Kingdoms with an happy and lasting Union betwixt him and his People, without
which the dangers seem now to be so great, as beyond removal. Let the horrid
Conspiracies and Machinations of wicked men be brought to nothing; let their
Secrets be discovered, and their Counsels laid open; that so the Subtle may be
caught in their own Snares: And let all true Protestants pray for a full
discovery of the late horrid Popish Plot, and a sure prevention of the Devices
of Forty One. And with the Psalmist, Psalm. 61.6.
That the Almighty will prolong the Kings life: and his years as many
generations. For the King trusts in the Lord, Psalm. 21.7, 8
and that through the mercies of the most high he may not be removed. But that
his hands may find out all his enemies, and his right hand those that hate him.

FINIS.
THE CONTENTS.
PRINCIPLE I. REligion is the best Cloak for our Politician; he must have it in
show and pretense, but not in Conscience and Practice. page 1 PRINCIP. II. The
deformity of all his Actions he must cover, and that in pretense for Liberty,
Religion, etc. and otherwise endear himself to the People by Adulation, and the
most slye Insinuations imaginable. page 11 PRINCIP. III. He that aims at
Sovereignty, must be sure to beat down the Bulwark of Government (the Prince's
Credit) by the powerful force of irresistible Calumny. page 23 PRINCIP. IV. To
render the Contagion epidemical, our Politician must always have some
dissenting Pastors, or mercenary Jesuits, to justify and applaud his Designs
and Actions in the Separate Congregations. page 37 PRINCIP. V. Our Politician
must urge every prosperous Event, as sufficient to prove the Justice of his
Cause. page 51 PRINCIP. VI. Our Politician must be sure to turn with the Tide,
and change with t^^ Times. page 6^ PRINCIP. VII. If Oaths are requisite in the
condu^^ of Affairs, let them be of suc^ ambiguity, as may furnish with (...)
sense obliging to the Design, an^ yet so soft as the People may no^ perceive
the Snare. page 76 PRINCIP. VIII. Necessity of State is a very competent
Apologic for the worst of Actions. page 90 PRINCIP. IX. Because our
Polititian's Design lies deep, he must plunge to the bottom, though in an
Ocean of Blood, for buoying it up. page 102
FINIS.

