A LETTER SENT TO THE HONORABLE GEORGE Lord DIGBY in FLUSHING, From a Worthy
Gentleman in Windsor, January the 24. 1641.

Together, With the true Copy of a Letter sent from Sir JOHN BYRON, Lieutenant
of the Tower, to the House of Commons, concerning diverse matters of great note
and Consequence.

Printed at London for R. J. 1641.

A LETTER Sent to the Honorable George Lord Digby in FLUSHING, from a worthy
Gentleman in WINDSOR, January the 24. 1641.
NOw the world sees by woeful experience in you, that it is end that crowns
the accord, and that the fairest beginnings, sometimes are attended with sad,
if not black issues: let me advise you to reflect upon your self, not only
as Baron, and eldest Son of an Earl, but as a father of diverse sweet
children, and a husband unto a fair Lady; and that your Lordship would not
attempt both causelessely and necessitously to make that noble race on her side
mourn. If true natural affection is so dead and stiff in you, that you have
left us almost no hope to see or hear of you, to be cause of joy unto your
own. Oh, my Lord we have all too just cause to fear, that the Straffordian
leaven has leavened the better part, if not the whole lump: The Lord God
grant that you bleed not inward, and at length prove a dolorous object to the
world, but most of all to none but your self: whose ruin will seem to many
the least condoleable, by how much the more it will prove apparently wilful,
not casual, much less necessary.

My Lord, there are too many eyes open: there is no thought of dazeling them,
all your Lordships not long since saw a gallant star fall, and were pleased
to give forth, that that star wanted not light but grace. Your Lordship was
not for some good time together, either unwilling or backward in the just
persuit of him, with the rest of the Worthies: what caused you to retreat? God
only knows certainly, men by conjecture: but this may be assured of, that if
you or others go his ways, you will after so notorious and remarkable an
example, find harder and more impassable difficulties in the accomplishment of
your designs, and less favorable usage upon your defeat. My Lord, notorious
and wifull errors, if not crimes, after so late and famous exemplary indiction
and infliction of Law, will seem to be his, who is rather possessed then
reduced.

My Lord, your Lordship did very ill to take Sea, and for Flushing, worse to
give occasion, which may seem, first to persuade it, if not to enforce it. But
good my Lord, as you respect God, your Countery, your noble Wife and Father,
your own honor, and that of your ancient family look no further: neither
once think upon France, except with grief and fear, the one for those three
unfortunate, if I may not say unworthy: or unnatural men, who by their
unnatural forwardnes to violate their Country, have utterly as deservedly,
ruinated themselves, and caused diverse of their friends though inno^ent to
savaour ill, if not to stink. My Lord, I beseech you let me not hear of you;
therefore if I should, upon my truth and honor, I shall not only hold and
esteem you, but absolutely pronounce you and vote you for lost, there is hopes
either upon returning or staying, there is some space. There may be hopes that
the Parliament, which seeks no man's overthrow but his reclaiming, may pass by
some things, may forget others, may qualify this, and remit that: so that your
Lordship be found either in State or place, that may not give cause.

This counsel that may do much good can do you no harm, you are heartily
desired to follow from him, who you perfectly know was never guilty of any
thing but of hearty love and fidelity toward you and yours, neither ever
willingly would alter his mind, you still persisting in terms thereof capable.

The true Copy of a Letter sent from the Lieutenant of the Tower ^^r I. Byron.
to the Speaker of the Honorable House of Commons in defense of himself and to
satisfy the world.
Sir,
MY words have already been so misreported, that I am forced to return my
answer in writing, and think my condition at this time very unfortunate, that
according to the warrant of Summons, I received this morning from the
honorable House of Commons, I cannot personally attend there without both the
breach of His Majesty's express command, not to stir out of the Tower
without his leave, and likewise of the oath I took at my coming into this
place, to observe His Majesty's commands. This I hope well considered will
exempt me from the sensure of contumacy, or disobedience to the commands of
that honorable House, whose just Liberties and Privileges, I shall ever be
ready to maintain with my life and fortunes. And I most humbly desire the
honorable House to rest assured, that it is far from my thought (what false
reports soever have been raised to the contrary) to divide my self betwixt the
King and the Parliament, and that my affections are united equally to serve
both, though in the condition I am indifferent from other men) I can perform
only a single personal obedience here (unless His Majesty please to absolve
me from this command) In the mean time, if by the house, it shall be thought
fit to demand any particulars, I am ready with all clearness, and ingenuity to
give satisfaction, and with the like cander and fidelity, to behave my self in
all other actions, as becomes a person entrusted, and one more willing to
deposite his life for the true Protestant Religion, the peace and tranquillity
of this City and Commonwealth, then ambitious to continue Lieutenant of the
Tower. In which resolution, I rest.

Your humbly Servant, I. Byron.
Tower of London, 12. lanuary, 1641.
FINIS.

