A Learned DISCOURSE OF CEREMONIES Retained and used in Christian CHURCHES,
WRITTEN By the Right Reverend Father in God LANCELOT ANDREWS Late Bishop of
Winchester a little before his Death: At the Request of an Eminent Person that
desired satisfaction therein.

Printed by the Original Copy written with his own hand, Ex Pede Hercules.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Adams, and are to be sold at his Shop at the Sign
of the Talbot near St Dunstans Church in Fleet Street, 1653.

LANCELOT ANDREWS Bishop of Winchester.




TO THE CHRISTIAN and Candid Reader.
READER;
I Can testify thus far concerning the Author of this Treatise, that upon
speech between Bishop Andrews and a Gentleman his near neighbor about the
Ceremonies, the Bishop a while after, and a quarter of a year before his death,
delivered this to him as a collection of his own about that subject, which he
had not time (he said) to polish and lick over. Had the Author intended it for
the Press, it would no doubt have been more perfect, but I thought it worthy
in regard of the Author and Argument (which few have so generally handled) to
be published, though I do not thereby avow and justify superstitious and
needless Rites, as if the observation of them was necessary when they are
imposed by Authority, nor every thing else therein contained. If a word be
sometimes deficient, or the sense imperfect, I hope the judicious will impute
it either to the difficulty of supplying such things in another work, or to
the speedy publication of it, there being not sufficient time for viewing the
Authors here quoted, though some things have been amended. That the Bishop was
a very Learned man, his Works abundantly show, Cui viro utinam Ecclesia Dei
plures similes haberet praesules, says Causabone, Epist. 189. I would the
Church of God had more such Bishops. His admirable knowledge in the learned
Tongues (says the Preacher of his Funeral Sermon) Latin, Greek, Hebrew,
Chaldee, Arabic, besides other modern Tongues to the number of fifteen, was so
rare, that he may well be ranked in the first place, to be one of the rarest
Linguists in Christendom. His great volume of XCVI. Sermons, his Conciones ad
Clerum, his Practical Catechism, with his large Exposition of the
Commandments, and his interpretation also of the Lords Prayer, speak his
knowledge in Positive Divinity, his Tortura Torti, Responsio ad Apollogiam
Bellarmini, with his Theological Determinations, show his ability likewise in
Polemicall or Controversall Divinity. I shall recite one acute passage of his
in his Answer to Cardinal Bellarmines Apology. When the Interpreter had turned
it tumulos adornemus, the Cardinal changed adornemus into adoremus, though
some say that adoremus was in the Book falsely printed, and then adds, Quid hic
quaeso Rex dicet, Si Patres veteris Ecclesiae clamant, Sanctorum tumulos
adoremus? The Bishop replies, Dicet abesse vocali literam, Cardinali fidem. He
would be so displeased with Scholars that attempted to speak with him in a
morning, that he would say he doubted they were no true Scholars that came to
speak with him then. That which he says in the third Paragraph of the
superfluous and wicked Ceremonies of the Papists borrowed from the Heathens, is
most true and abundantly confirmed in two Printed Books of that subject, viz.
One by Moresive a Scotchman in his Origo Papatus, where he proves after the
Order of the Alphabet, how the Papists have taken their superstition from the
Heathens, which they have long since intruded upon us for the true worship of
God: The other by Francis de Coy a Frenchman, and translated into English, but
much curtailed and wronged by the Licenser, and entitled, The three
Conformities of the Romish Church with Gentilism; Judaism and ancient Heresy,
a Learned work and long since printed. I shall only mention a few things
wherein the Papists symbolize with the Heathens and Jews. They have framed
their Mass after the Leviticall Morning and Evening Sacrifices, and their
Priests after the manner of those that were established in the ancient Law.
They attribute unto the Golden Hammer wherewith the Pope beats one of the
Gates at Saint Peter's in Rome, called Holy, at the beginning of the Iubilee,
that which appertains to the blood of Christ Jesus, and not to any others,
viz. the remission of sins more then seven hundred years before Christ: the
Idolatrous Romans used Frankincense in their Sacrifices. And those poor people
believed that Janus and Vesta were well pleased to be thus served with Incense
and Wine. The Etymology of the Latin Word thus, which is derived from the
Greek to sacrifice, declares what the use of Frankincense was, viz. the like
to that which on this day is in request in their Massing Sacrifice. The
Egyptians great Idol Serapis had a Cross in his breast, and that sign was one
of their holy Letters, Ruffinus l. 2. c. 29. reports, that many of the
Learned among the Egyptians were the rather contented to embrace Christianity
because they saw the Cross esteemed, which was before a great Ceremony of
theirs. The custom of running about the streets with firebrands in honor of
Proserpina, was turned with Christians into Candlemas daey. The Sacrifice of
Ceres done in the Fields with howling of women and crying of children, was made
a general observance with us on Rogation week. The Images of Mercury set by
the High way sides were afterward converted to Crosses. Whereas there was in
Rome Templum Pantheon, a Temple wherein all the Gods of the world were
honored: The devout Fathers to take away this Idolatry did consecrate a Church
unto Allhallows, that that should now be converted unto all Saints that before
was attributed unto false Gads. The Jesuits are descended from the
Carpocratians ancient Heretics, of whom Irenaeus writes, that they bragged
themselves to be fellows with Jesus, and to bear rule over the Princes of of
the earth: The Capuchins go barefooted; Augustine in his Book of Heresies, ad
quod vult Deum, speaks, De excalceatis, and says, that they grounded
themselves on this, that the Lord had said unto Moses, Put off thy Shoes from
thy Feet, which perhaps is the same place whereupon the Capuchins have grounded
this custom to go barefooted: You cannot be partakers of the Lords Table,
and of the Table of Devils, 1. Cor. 10. 11. The Gentiles when they performed
holy exercises were wont to feast in their very Temples, as the same Apostle
teaches in Chap. 8. 10. when (...) dicitur quasi (...), because when they
offered Sacrifice they did often invite one another; See Tertul. de Idolol^^
The Apostle calls these Feasts after the Sacrifice the Table of Devils, and
opposes the Table of Devils, and opposes the Table of God to them. Some
conceive the Papists are therefore called Gentiles, Rev. 11. 2. because they so
much imitate their worship. I would there was no cause for those complaints. In
New England Heathens turn Christians, in Old England Christians turn Heathens,
and that those unsound Heterodox persons which they have cast out, we have
received. Some Divines think the time of slaying the Witnesses draws near,
others conceive that the Papists shall have a hand in it, and that they shall
yet further prevail rather to persecute then seduce the people of God. I
conclude all as Dr Holland was wont to take leave of his Friends, Commendo vos
amori Dei, and odio Papismi, I commend you to the Love of God and hatred of
Popery.

Your hearty well-wisher, EDWARD LEIGH.

A Discourse Showing that many Paynim Ceremonies were retained in England after
Christianity was received.
SUrely as Darkness was before Light (for the Evening and the Morning says
the Text made the first Day;) And as out of Chaos that Rudis indigestaque moles
were made all the clear Firmaments, even Caelum Crystallinum: So evident it is
that Paganism covered all the face of the world (except the little Land of
Jury) before Christlanity was admitted, and after the admission of Christian
Religion in the Western part of the world by the Christian Emperors, the
Northern people together with the Empires almost every where abolished
Christian Religion: But yet as Augustinus Curio notes, at length every one of
these Northern and Heathen Nations embraced Christian Religion, saving only
the Saracens: My conceit and purpose to show you is, That of the
Ecclesiastical government and policy observed in the British and English
ancient Pagans, as formerly having their Commonwealth in frame, and beautified
with our common Laws, they being converted unto Christianity, many of the
Paganish Ceremonies and Usages, not contrary to the Scripture, were still
retained in their Christian policy; By means whereof tranquillity and peace was
observed, and the alteration in the State less dangerous or sensible; For as
in General Arnobius is true, writing, Nothing was innovated for Christian
Religion in rerum natura; And as the Heathen Oracle of Apollo Pythius
answers, the Athenians asking him what Religion was principally to be
embraced, namely, that which was by descent delivered as a custom of their
Ancestors; So in particular, well writes Dionysius Halycarnasseus, the least
Ceremonial points of the divine worship, a Nation, unless necessity compel
them, will hardly alter; He instanceth it in the Egyptians, the Moors, the
Gauls, the Scythians, the Indians; Nay, Sir Thomas Smith in his Commonwealth,
expresses, that our Ancestors being Heathens, when they agreed to receive
Christian Religion, that which was established before, and concerned external
policy, they held and kept still with that which was brought off new by their
Christian Apostles and Doctors: Because I remember Tullies cognizance, namely,
that it is a badge of a negligent and dissolute person, not to regard what the
most sort of the people may conceive of him: And that conceit is worthily the
most heinous, which may note any to plant by writing, or water by speaking, the
cursed Roots or Seeds of self-springing Paganism.

I will first prove that this kind of birth of our Ceremonies can be no
disgrace to our Ecclesiastical Ceremonies.

Secondly, I will insinuate three observations to be remembered out of the
particular Proposition proved.

Thirdly, I will point at some of the superfluous and wicked Popish Ceremonies
drawn from the Heathens.

Fourthly and Lastly, I will instance in many Ecclesiastical Ceremonies of the
Heathens, which are or may be used in ours or in any other Christian State.

In the first place, allowing much of our Ecclesiastical discipline used in
the time of our Primitive Church, was borrowed from the Heathen: yet that it
can be no disparagement unto it, must needs be granted; for otherwise to
imagine is the direct opinion of the Heretics Manichaei, whose error in this
Point is solemnly refuted by St Austin writing against Faustus, and by St Ierom
writing against Vigilantius: That I may not threaten but persuade, By the
judicial Law of Moses expressed in Deuteronomy. 21. If a strange woman be taken in
battle, if her beauty please thee, her nails and hairs being pared and shaven,
and her garment of captivity being taken away, thou may lawfully take her to
wife: By the moral of this Law, severally write Isidore and Peter Blessensis,
the Ceremonies of the Gentiles, the deformities thereof being taken away may
lawfully be used amongst the Christians, Isidore then expounding, Deuteronomy. 16.
Thou shall not plant Trees near unto the Altar, his meaning is, one must not
imitate the devotion, nor the Ceremonies of the Gentiles: For the Israelites
even by the direction of God made holy Vessels, and placed them in the Temple
of God, of the gold and silver they robbed the Egyptians of: And it is vulgarly
known, that the sayings of the Heathen Poets are used by the holy Ghost in the
New Testament; Again, we may see in Act. 17. how St Paul himself when he was at
Athens (the very Altar of Superstition, which was dedicated unto an Unknown
God, and unto which bloody sacrifices were slain, by as much dexterity and
wisdom as that time would permit) did make use thereof, and seem to transpose
it to the worship of the true God; And which is more, it is expressed by St
Paul, it is lawful for a Christian so it be without scandal, to eat those
things which are consecrated unto Idols; Honestly then writes Mr Hooker, That
which has been ordained impiously at the first, may wear out by tract of time,
as the names of our Heathen Months and Days used throughout all Christendom
without any scandal. And if the Spaniards well may glory of their Alphonsus
King of Arragon, Qui per cloacam ingressus subter Muros, won Naples, and from
thence expelled Renate Duke of Anjou; reasonably then eut out of sormer rags of
the Gentiles, the glorious rious and fair garment of Christianity in times may
be woven. And as Ephraim Syrus a Father that lived in St Bazils time writes:
If the money be taken out of the purse, yet the purse is not to be cast away;
so although the sacrifice and service of the Gentiles be taken away, the
outward Ceremonies may remain; To conclude, this pedigree of our Ceremonies
staineth not our Christian policy; For that all the good Orders of the Heathens
came by Tradition, or reading, or seeing the Ceremonies that God commanded
among the Jews in the Land of Promise; As it appears by Josephus against
Appion, that the Sect of the Pythagorean Philosophers translated much of the
Jews Laws into their own Sect: And as by Eusebius, Austin, Theod^ret, Justin
Martyr, and others, Plato copied much out of Moses writings, For Moses writings
were long before the Empire of the Persians; So verily if it were for this
place, it may be exemplified, that the succeeding Ceremonies of the Heathen
were derived from the Jews Ceremonies: And no man can justly deny but that we
may use the Ceremonies of the Jews, Non ex vised ex Analogia Mosaicae Legis;
And if this point fancy any man, let him read Alcuinus de Officijs Divinis;
Amalarius de Officijs Ecclesiasticis; Gratian de Con. But especially Mutius
Pausa in his Osculum Christianae and Ethnicae Philosophiae: I can commend
Nicholaus Mount-Georgius in his Book De Mosaico jure enucleando, only for his
endeavors: you may observe out of Josephus in the latter time of the Jews
Government, that Herod their first King brought much of the Roman Heathenish
Discipline into their policy, and in this respect that many of our Christian
Ceremonies were formerly Heathen, and before that used in the Commonwealth of
Jury, wherein God was the Law giver: They resemble the seventeen Vessels which
the Heathen King Cyrus gave unto the Jews at the Building of the Temple of
Jerusalem, after the Captivity of Babylon, among which as Esdras writes there
were Vials of Gold 29. of Silver 2410. for these were in the last use sacred,
being formerly Heathen and profane, but most anciently holy and sanctified.

2. The first of the three Observations that I am to insinuate upon, the
particular to be proved is the amplenesse of the Common Law, admitting no
Common Law within their Land, but as parcel and incorporated into the General
Laws and Policies of this Land, seeing most of our Ecclesiastical Law was
before there was any Popish Canon Laws observed by the Inhabitants, as the
Civil Ordinance of the Magistrate in the ages most remote; But of these
hereafter in particular.

Secondly Note, If much of the Christian Policy and Discipline was in practice
when the State of this Land was Heathen, the Lay-Catholiques are much mistaken
in their Petition, where they write, We have all our Feasts and Ceremonies from
Austin the Monk; And let them not play Suffenus part, in delivering there is
not the least Ceremony or circumstance which has been added to the
Solemnization or Majesty of Gods Service, but the year is known when, and the
Pope by whom it was ordained, but these forget what their Father Bellarmine
confesses, that all Christian Ceremonies were not invented by the Pope.

Thirdly, This will sufficiently convict the opinion of them whom Nazianzen
ingeniously calls New Pharisees, to be but ceremonious, that will not conform
themselves to any Ceremonies used in the time of Popery, seeing we must and
ought to obey the Ecclesiastical discipline established by the Laws of the
Land, for coming to Church, for having prayers, or preaching, or music in our
Churches, or such like, although (as shall be proved) these Ceremonies and
Customs were used in the time of Pagans, and at their sacrifices: Genebrard by
by whom it is verified that much Learning and railing may be accidents in one
Subject, writes that in the Year 1560. in England arose a new Sect of Puritans;
so called, because they will not pray in the Churches that were the
Catholics, nor wear a Surplice: Sure I am that many that wear the Liveries of
this name are otherwise minded; And I learn out of Dubrarius, that the
Thaborites of Prague held that the Clergy should not be Doctors of Divinity, or
quote the Fathers in their Sermons, or wear any other then their ordinary
garments; But yet for them all, O quam honesta voluntate miseri errant. It is
confessed, Ceremonies of themselves are things indifferent, as being neither
expressly commanded or forbidden by the Word of God; And although among the Jews
their Kings would not permit Liberties in Ceremonies to the Subjects, Christian
Kings may: But yet when they are enacted in a Christian State, and made the
Laws of the Land, they must be obeyed of necessity as unto a thing not
indifferent: For well write the Canonists, An act indifferent when it is
commanded is a necessary act, otherwise idle is the command: And it appears
by Josephus, that the Athenians made a severe Law against those that spoke
against the outward Ceremonies established by Law or custom: This also may
appear out of Livy, and out of Dion, who knows not that the King, the Caesar
of the Country must obey the Law of the Land? What a presumption is it then
for a private man to exempt and privilege himself from obeying the Laws of the
Land! Truly writes a Learned Common-Lawyer, the Laws of men not contrary to the
Law of God ought to be kept even of the Clergy in the Law of the soul. And
Mutius notes, that Charles the Great in Saxony gave equal authority to his
Magistrates ( Scabinis) to put to death those which contemned and derided the
Ceremonies Ecclesiastical, as those which sacrificed to Heathen gods: For
Lodovicus Sotomajor well writes in his Comment upon the Canticles, Godliness
being as the soul, yet Ceremonies are as the body of Christian Religion.

3. But I am to point at some of the superfluous and wicked Ceremonies of the
Papists borrowed from the Heathen; Of so large and near affinity is the divine
worship of the Heathens, and Papists in the Temples, that Lodovicus Vives
confesses there cannot any difference be shown unless the Papists have
changed the Names and Titles: So that with Chemnitius to the followers of the
Sea of Rome, we may object what Faustus did to the Christians, Ye turn Idols
into Martyrs and Saints, whom ye worship with correspondent vows: And I can
hardly imagine how plentiful the tears of Petrus Chrysologus and Silvanus
would run, if they were alive and viewed the Antichristian Sea: For that in
their times some of the superfluous Heathen Ceremonies began to abound in the
Christian Churches: Whereupon they complained, although the Gentiles Circensia
were celebrated in the honor of Christ: Yet the Church being out of that
cradle, the particular usage of the Gentiles in this kind was not to be
imitated: I commend therefore the intent of that Emperor, who for revence of
the Sign caused (as Sozomenes reports) Furcam to be erected Loco Crucis: And
I reverence the Opinion of the Makers of an ancient Statute in H. 3d. time,
namely, that De Pistoribus which punishes a Butcher that buyeth flesh of Jews
to sell the same to Christians. And generally that the Heathen thought their
Ceremonies would drive away the Christians: Abbas Urspergensis a German, and
Didacus Covarcuvias a Spaniard writ, that Helena a Brittan and Mother of
Constantine the first Christian Emperor born in this Island, going to
Jerusalem, found in the place where Christ was crucified, the Idol of Venus
placed: But to instance; the Popish Purgatory, in scope and being agrees with
the Heathen Purgatory, mentioned in Plato and Virgil: the Papisticall manner of
consecrating Churches and Churchyards, fully imitateth the Ceremonies of the
Pagans when they consecrated their Temples and Temple-Courts or Yards described
by Alexander of Alexandro: In Spain by Gregorius Lopus at the beginning of the
consecration of a Church, they must make three crosses in the last part
thereof: Their sprinkling of holy water is mentioned in the 6. Sat. of Iuvenal:
And Sozomenes calls it a Heathenish Ceremony. In particular, that it was
always used at the sanctifying of the Capitol, appears by Alexander of
Alexandro: Their having of Nuns and Women for Societies or Colleges was used
amongst the Heathen, as I gather out of Plutarch. And that the whole swarm of
Friars or Monks was first fledged amongst the Heathen, at large appears by
Learned Hospinian. The Papists placing of Images in their Temples, and every
image to have his several Priest, their Priests to have shaven Crowns, to be
unmarried, to have Frankincense-offerings, Fasts and Feasts, to have candles in
them, and to carry them up and down in every respect is Heathenish; And to do
no wrong, Chemnitius in particular proves this by variety of Authors; The
placing of Lights in Churches at some time is not altogether an Heathenish
Ceremony, although it appear by Seneca the Gentiles had it. Suidas in the word
(...) thinks they were first used in Athenian Temples: For the ancient
Fathers used a kind of light in the Primitive Church, which made St Austin to
write, They promise to the Churches, one oil, another way to solace themselves
for the night-light. But their burning of Tapers in their Churches at noonday,
is altogether a Pagan custom, as Rhenanus well observes in his Comment upon
Tertullian, And I take it, their burning of Torches at Funerals is merely a
superfluous Ceremony of the Gentiles, as appears by Virgil and his Commenter;
Servius writing upon the Funeral of Pallans, Lucet via longo ordine flammarum,
and late discriminat agros: Hierom writing of the death of Blesilla describes
the Funeral pomp of the Christians; The Papists kissing of their hands as a
kind of worship in their Churches, agrees in intent with the Heathenish
custom, although Prudentius and Optatus make mention of kissing of hands in
the Primitive Church. And this Caelius Rhod. 11. notes out of Pliny and
Apuleius. Lucian calls the worshipping by laying the finger to the mouth to be
the sacrifice of poor men, as having nothing else to offer. The Learned Chief
Justice of France Brissonius, whom one calls Varro Galliae, particularly
writes, why the Papists purposely imitate the Heathens, in turning on the left
hand at their right Sacrifices: M. Perkins notes out of Ruffinus that pro
Thoracibus Serapidis, Constantine caused the Sign of the Cross to be erected in
Pillars and Houses: Sozomenes writes, Constantine pro laboro posuit signum
crucis; and hence he would have this a superfluous Ceremony of this kind; But
unto this I cannot as yet subscribe: Likewise where Julius Pacius wittily
notes, that the whole corpse of the Canon Law or Ecclesiastical Discipline
imitateth the feature and structure of the corpse of the Civil Laws, generally
being Heathen: For the common Law-Book called Decretum answers the Pandects,
the Decretall the Codex: For as in the Codex there are the Imperial, so in the
Decretals there are the Pontificiall constitutions. And as the answers of wise
men, that is, Lawyers, are reported in the Digest, so the sentences of the
Authors are registered in their Decretum; all this I condemn not as an idle
correspondency: But to leave this point of our Divines, I spare to prove out of
Calvin their prayer for the dead as an idle imitation of the Heathen; That
their worshipping the Relics of their Saints and Martyrs is mere Gentilism,
the ancient bait of Satan: And therefore generally to conclude, I conceive the
Jesuits, the golden staves and mattocks of the Sea of Rome, whose name
answers Heraclitus's Greek Name for a Bow, (...): that is, Thy Name, says
Heraclitus, a bow, is life, but thy work is death: In office resemble the
Heathen Priests of the Indians, called Brachmanes, mentioned by Ozorius; He
says, these Heathen Clergy-Priests also study Philosophy, and the
Mathematical Arts; Insomuch that by their learning and counterfeit holiness
they continue all their life time the singular contrivers of all fraud and
villainy: For my warrant I appeal to the Catastrophe of many Houses of Nobility
of this Realm, acted by the Jesuits.

4. Thus according to my main design, I have instanced in many Ecclesiastical
Ceremonies of the Heathen, which are or may be lawfully used in ours or any
other Christian State; For the general, in the Civil Law-Book called Digests,
which contains the writings of the old Lawyers which were Heathens, you may
read many precepts superstitious rather then religious, of their Heathen
Sacrifices and Church Discipline; And yet when the Emperors of Rome began
after to be Christians, you may perceive by the Civill-Law-Books called Codex,
how in many points the Emperors retain them; But further to exemplify this is
a matter fruitless, I stand not hereupon.

But more particularly, the Ceremonies on this behalf to be recited, I shall
refer unto the Heathen Churches, the Heathen Flamines or Ministers, the Heathen
people.

That the Heathens before the Christians had their Temples to resort unto, where
they were to worship their Panism Gods, no man will deny, though Diogenes in
his Cinique Mood held Temples unnecessary by affirming the whole world was the
godly and holy Temple of the gods, where he would pray; and this was also the
opinion of Zenon, and also of our Ancestors the Saxons, as appears by Abbas
Uspergensis; The Scythians by Herodotus erected Temples or Churches to none of
the gods but only unto Mars: But although Clemens Alexandrinus note, that in
the beginning superstition was the parent of all Pagan Temples, they being
formerly (says he) the Sepulchers for men; Yet Isidore well notes out of
Tranquillus, that when the people Heathen began to be civil, their Temples
were built, and altered fairer both within and without; Moreover, the very name
of the Heathen Assemblies among the Athenians, and the Cities of Asia, was
Ecclesia, which retains the name of the Churches among the Christians at this
day: Onuphrius Panvinus writes, the Church ( Ecclesia) signifies a
Congregation; And it is called Basilicon or Temple, after the manner of the
Gentiles; And as we have Bells in our Churches, so had the Pagans in theirs: By
Suetonius the Emperor Octavius Augustus was the first who in the highest place
of the Temple of Jupiter Capitoline hanged Bells; that at the ringing of their
Bells the Heathens were wont to meet at their Assemblies, as at Baths, and
otherwise is plain by Martial, who writes, Read pilam, sonat aes Thermarum,
ludere pergis? But yet you may see by a part of the canon Law called the
Clementines, that the Saracens in their Steeples have no Bells: For the fabric
or structure of the Temples, whether the Christian Temples were square, and the
Heathens all round, with Dr Humphrey, as no diversity, I leave it to be
enquired of the curious; only I note out of Secrates the ancient and
Apostolical Churches of the Christians in Antiochia, in Syria, were built
round, And out of Giraldus, that the Temple of Vesta was like unto a Ball, The
Temple of the Sun and Bacchus is round; And that Stuckius in his Comment upon
Arrianus, notes, the Temple of Mercury was square, and of Cubick-figure: As we
have no Images in our Temples, so likewise was it used of many Heathens: Among
the Romans their holy and ancient King Numa by a Law banished Images or Idols
out of their Temples: Tacitus reports the Germans likewise would not represent
the gods by Images, and Strabo and Herodotus show how the Persians for their
gods neither made Altars nor Images; And Eusebius writes, the people called
Caes by a special Law forbad the worshipping of Images.

To wade a little further, the Gentiles having their Temples and Churches for
their poetical gods, Christianity being received by consent of the Emperors
and Civil Magistrates, it is to be seen whether those Ethnic Churches were
all demolished, and new ones built of the Christians: That many of the Heathen
Churches were utterly ruinated, many Historians and Fathers witness; Among
others, St Ierom writing against Jovinian tells of the destruction of the
famous Temples of Jupiter Capitoline: And in his Comment upon the Galatians,
his words are these, Vacua Idolorum Templa quatiuntur: And in the Theodosian
Codex you may see a particular Rescript made by the Emperor Theodosius the
younger; That the Panism Temples in the East should be plucked down, they being
fit to be the Dens of Devils or unclean spirits: And their subversion of the
Idols Temples is the reason, that by the canon and common Law Ius
aedificationis is a special cause that gives the patronage or advowson of the
Church unto a Lay-Patron; But yet without controversy, when Kingdoms and
States turned from Idolatry or Paganism to Christianity, and that in short time
(so powerful was the holy Ghost) many of the Heathen Temples were not
overthrown: But of necessity after some Ceremonies accomplished, were used for
Christian prayers and Assemblies; By means whereof the alteration in the State
was not so great, the temporal world with Democritus being not to be new made
ex atomis, and men sooner and easilier embraced public Christian Religion;
And this is the reason that by the Common Law of England a man may be said to
be Patron of a Christian Church although he never built it; if he only endow
the Church with Revenues: And as in foreign Countries the Emperor Honorius
about the year 400. made a Law restraining the heat of the Christians against
the Walls and stones of the Gentiles Temples: The words of the Rescript are, As
we forbid their Sacrifices, so we will the ornament of their public works be
kept: And the first Christian Emperor Constantine made a Law against them
which pluck down the Tombs and Monuments of the superstitious Heathens: And
those Laws methinks in foreign Countries gave some warrant for retaining
Heathen Ceremonies; So in our Country of England it is notorious by the
Epistles of Pope Gregory himself (who sent our Austin the Monk) That although
Pope Gregory in his Epistle to the King of England writ, that ancient Pagan
Temples in England might wholly be destroyed, yet afterward the same Pope
better advising, that somewhat was to be yielded unto them that were weak in
faith, as the Apostles did; he writes a peculiar Epistle to Miletus, one of
the first Apostles or Bishops of the Englishmen, and expressly wills that the
Temples of the Idols in England be not destroyed, but that they be hallowed and
sanctified, and turned into Oratories for Christians; And as in general for
other Countries this appears by Theodoret, so now it is a work of some
difficulty to show you in particular what Christian Church at this day
standing, was anciently the Temple of such an Heathen god: In Rome by full
ample authority it is plain, as by Beda in his several Books, by Ado, by
Paulus Diaconus, and others, that Pantheon the Temple in Rome for all the
Heathen gods was given by Phocas the Emperor, about the 5. year of his Reign
unto Pope Boniface the 4. and by the said Pope dedicated to the honor of our
Lady, and of all Martyrs: It is now called the round Church of our Lady: And
the shape and antiquity thereof is pourtraied lively in the first description
of Ianus Outerus his ancient descriptions, whose works may please a man that
delights in this point: Dion writes in the Reign of the Emperor Titus, when
Rome burnt by the space of 3. days, that the Temple Pantheon was burnt, but
Eusebius says, In the 13. year of Trajan, Pantheon was burnt with a
Thunderbolt, howsoever it was reedified by the Heathen Emperors: It is evident
by Beda that we had a Pantheon in England, it stood in a Town in Yorkshire now
called Godmanham, this Temple among our Ancestors the Pagan Saxons, was called
Godmandingham, and was totally burnt by the people of Northumberland, when at
the preaching of Paulinus, King Edwyne of an Idolater became a Christian: Beda
writes, the Heathen person or Flamine Coysi was the first qui injecta lancea
prophanavit and sum omnibus septis suis succendit, burnt the very walls of the
Church yard: Pope Gregory writes in his Dialogues that Pope Benedict
translated the Church of Apollo into the Oratory of S. Martins; And Cardinal
Bellarmine shows that at this day the Church of St Cosme and Damiano in Rome
was the material Heathen Temples of Castor and Pollux: And Ado writes, In the
Year 425. Pope Sixtus turned the Temple of God Bacchus in Rome into the Church
of our Lady; But for England, to omit out of Ziphilin the Abridger, that
anciently the Britains worshipped commonly in the Church of God Victory, as
many Learned men have reason to conjecture, S. Paul's Church in London to have
been the Heathen Temple of Diana: For that the adjacent and skirtbuildings unto
the Church are called the chambers of Diana; As also that in Edw. 1. time (as
our Chroniclers report) in Paul's Churchyard, were dug up an innumerable
number of Oxeheads, which the Learned know were anciently the Sacrifices unto
Diana: So certain I am that S. Peter's Church now called Westminster Abbey, was
anciently the Temple of Apollo; For so it appears by one of the Charters of
King Edgar made to Westminster Abbey, and this is also recited in Sulcardus
Book, an Author that lived near William the Conquerors time; And in the Legier
Book of St Albones, it is written in the life of St Eadmerus the 9. Abbot of St
Albones, who lived in the time of our King Edward the Martyr, that in digging
for a Foundation about Albones Abbey, was found a Book written in the British
Tongue; And that of the first part discoursed of St Albones, the second part
treated of the Idolatry of the Citizens of St Albones, Verulamij, unto the Sun,
and unto Mercury; Hence I conceive probably the ancient Churches of St Albones
were dedicated to the service of the Sun and Mercury their gods.

To proceed, as lawfully the civil and supreme Magistrates gave the Temples of
the Heathens to the Christians, as well St Austin notes in one Epistle, that
the Christian Emperors did pass over to the true Catholics the Churches and
Revenues which were given by Donatists to error and schism; yet before the
Heathen Temples were consecrated and purged, the Christians would not use any
Christian service in them; And this well appears out of Nicephorus lib. 7.
cap. 46. who reports Constantine the Great the first Christian Emperor, that
in the wars he might have a Christian Church to say a Christian service in, he
built him a Church that might be carried up and down after his Camp, (...)
Ecclesiam portabilem, as one calls Ships portatiles domos.

Now how the Christian Bishops did hallow and sanctify the Heathen Churches,
particularly may be seen out of Marihnus Scotus Rhegino and Sigisbert in the
year 607. by Ado, and others; when they speak of the Dedication of Pantheon by
Boniface the fourth. Note at this day Consecration of Churches is only reserved
unto the Bishops, and anciently there was more then one Bishop present at the
consecration of a Church: For Turpinus tells to the consecration of a
Churchyard in Bordeaux there were seven Bishops present, and that our
Yew-trees in Churchyards was the planting of the Heathens, even Verstegan
understands: Volateran reports, that about the Year 484. Pope Felix the third
made a Canon, that Temples should only be consecrated by Bishops, and that this
ceremony of consecrating and hallowing of Churches, and dedicating of them, was
anciently used by the Heathens, both by words and by hand, is plain by Livy,
Ovid, Tibullus, and Cicero: in many places Livy writes, Horatius Pulvillus did
dedicate the Temple of Jupiter Capitoline.

In this second place, I am to produce some of the Ceremonies or policies
observed among the Heathen Flamines or Ministers which are likewise in practice
at this day among the Christian Provinces: That the Heathens had their
Ministers or Priests, nothing is more plain. And the Priests of our Ancestors
the British Heathens and the Goths were the Druides, as at large write Caesar
and Tacitus; And the names of our Bishops, Episcopus and Pontifex were used
among the Heathen, For that he was called Episcopus, that is, overseer of
others, and looked unto the poor, and had care of their diet, is plain by the
words of Arcadius the civil Lawyer in the Digests. And as Onuphrius and others
note by Cicero in his Epistles where he writes [ Pompey would have him to be
Bishop of the Cities of Asia] and it appears by the body of the common Law,
the office of the Primate came from the Heathen. Now for Pontifex it is
confessed by every one that the Christians took that name from the Heathen
Ministers, and so S^zomenes deriveth it: Rhenanus and others note the word
Diocese and the jurisdiction in this kind came from the Heathen. Now as among
the Christian Ministers worthily and of necessity, there are degrees of the
Clergy, and one subordinate to another; So likewise was it when our Ancestors
were Pagans, for they had their Pontifex and Pontifex Maximus, heir Flamines
and Arch-Flamines, as is plain by Gratians Rhapsodie. And as every particular
god had his Flamine, his Minister; so as Gallius notes Flamen dialis, Jupiters
Priest was the chiefest among the rest. Beda writes Coyfy was the chiefest
Heathen Priest in the Kingdom of King Edwyne, some of our Country Chroniclers
that lived almost 400. years ago ( Ptolomeus Lucentius) who wrote the lives of
the Popes of Rome, writes in the life of Pope Eleutherius, how the 3.
Proto-Flamines were converted into so many Arch-Bishopricks, tell you how many
Flamines and Arch- Flamines, there were among the Brittans, and into what
Bishoprics and Arch-Bishopricks they were afterward translated; But no wise
man will believe their particular, seeing they report actions done a thousand
years before their time, having no former author or authority to warrant it.
And the Heathen Priests had some under them which were not Priests, and yet to
serve in the Temples, they were called Camilli, as appears by Plutarch and
Dionysius, and these are in the nature of our Deacons. The correspondent power
of our Clergy to that of the Heathen, would best appear by opening of the
nature of the Heathen Pontifices. To omit Livy, Plutarch, Alciat, Alexander ab
Alexandro, Peter Perkins in his comment upon the rules of the common Law
writes; the Heathens assigned a peculiar jurisdiction to their Pontifices
namely, to look into the public and private cermonies of their Religion, to
defend and interpret their holy mysteries, to deliver with what Altars, to
which gods, with what Sacrifices, upon what days, at which Temples prayers and
offerings should be, to see that every one resorted to Church, and no new
ceremonies to be admitted, that Vows be performed, Funerals decently bestowed,
Oaths and Faith fullfilled, Holy Days proclaimed, the Gods pleased. And
Wolphangus Lazius particularly notes out of Heathen Authors, some the chief
of their Clergy, and Pontifices were to be skillfull, especially in their
common or Ecclesiastical Law; to judge of Marriages, of Sanctuaries, to
consecrate Churches, and places of burial; That our Clergy has in like manner
most of their particulars, every man must acknowledge: But to add unto these
last recited Authors concerning the Holy Days observed by the Christians and
Heathen, Thucydides notes, it is a matter of necessity to have Holy days; That
the Christians begin their day from midnight, says Censorinus, it is common
with the Gentiles: And that our Clergy foretell and declare the Holy days to
the people; The like was done by the Pontifices of Rome, witnesses Plutarch in
Numa, The Heathens call the days which are no Holy days profestidies: yea,
that the Holy days in the Gentiles Calendar lose only their name, having upon
the same days Christian Festivities appointed (for the Apostles made no Laws
concerning Holy days) is known by Theodoret, who writes that the Heathen Holy
days of Jupiter, Mars, and the rest of the Heathen Gods were ordained among
the Christians Holy days for Peter, Paul, and other Saints. Gregorius Nissenus
in the Life of Gregory for his great actions surnamed Thaumaturgus, reports,
that it was this Gregory that first made the particular conversion of the
Heathen into Christian Holy days. And as among the Christians the day of the
Martyrs or Saints death, is the Holy day, Dies martyrij, Dies natalis, so was
it among the Heathens: for by Plutarch in Camillo, the Romans observe Romulas
Death day for his Holy day: Moreover, as among the Christians, before a man can
be admitted into the Ministry, there is enquiry made by the Superior Clergy
of his ability and worthiness, and certain times, and solemnities observed at
the Ordinance of the Minister: So likewise was it amongst the Infidels or
Ancestors; For as some of the recited Authors mention, the Heathen Pontifices
were to be skillfull in their profession and Clergy-discipline: So further it
appears by Alexander ab Alexandro that if a man were a cripple, or lame in
any part of his body, he could not be a Pontifex: Therefore Marcus Sergius being
lame, he was not suffered to be a Pontifex: So Dionysius Halicarnasseus
observes; Metellus being a Priest, and losing his eyes, he was put out of his
Priesthood; So Gellius notes, their Vestals were rejected if they wanted wit or
beauty: The time appointed for their ordination or initiation as Apuleius
writes, was called Dies natalis sacrorum: The Ceremonies that were used when
the Heathen Ministers were made, are in part described by Erasmus in his Book
called Lingua, where he writes their afflatus and exorcismos: Nay as amongst
our Clergy imposition of hands is almost essential to the office of a
Minister, so you may see how Livy treating of the Ordination of Numa to be
Pontifex, delivered, upon Numa his head hands were laid ab augure sacerdote:
Julius Pollux in his Onomasticon discourses of the manner of the Ministers
ordaining and ordained; As at the making or electing of a Christian Minister no
Simony is to be be used, so is it plain by Dionysius Halycarnasseus no reward
was to be given for the making of Heathen Priests: And as the Minister under
the Gospel may be deposed or resign, so that the Heathen may be degraded, I
have already showed: That he might resign is showed you by Cicero in his
Brutus, where Augures might resign their Sacerdotium, and Livy writes their
Vestals after they were 30. years old might give over their order; And as long
as our Ministers continue of the Clergy, we know they have many privileges
above the Laity. So likewise that the Heathen Ministers had is plentifully to
be proved out of Aristotle, out of Caesar, out of Plutarch in Camillo. Not
unpolitickly therefore does Cardinal Baronius in one of his Tomes, perceiving
the argument of the Scriptures to prove the Popes Supremacy, are but straws, at
large maintain the Superiorities and Preheminencies of the Bishop of Rome to be
due unto him: Insomuch as he notes at the conversion of the Emperor of Rome
from Paganism unto Christianity, the privileges of the Heathen Pontifex
Maximus were at last transferred by the Emperor unto the Pope of Rome: Again,
look into the manner of the government and behavior of the Heathenish Priests
or Sacrifices in their profane Churches, and you shall see their good orders
are not refused by the Christian Clergy; For you may learn by Valerius and
Philostratus, that it is common to the Christians with the Gentiles to use a
white garment upon their bodies in their charges, because the Egyptians
brought no kind of woollen garment into the Temple. Gyraldus in his Syntagma
notes that they were called Linigeri, more particularly the Priests of the
Heathen Egyptian God Isis wore linen Surplices, as witnesses Nicolaus
Leonicenus and Apuleius in his Golden Ass; Alexander ab Alexandro reports, the
Priests of Arabia were clad in linen garments, having Miters on their heads:
And generally that other Heathen Priests did so, may appear by Virgil who
writes, fontemque ignemque ferebant vestiti lino. Servius in his Comment
calls the Surplice a pure religious garment.

To proceed, As our Ministers are bare-headed in the Saying of Service, so
generally was it used amongst the Heathen Priests, as appears by Macrobius;
And that God AEsculapius was worshipped bare-headed, Plautus may witness, Quis
hic est qui aperto capite AEsculapium salutat? Brissonius notes the manner of
the Heathen Priests being covered to sacrifice obn^^ato capite came first from
the Romans, So is the opinion of Servius writing upon the second of the
AEneids, and this is formerly noted by Polidore, Virgil out of Plutark: But
saving savor I take it, all Saturns Priests though Romans were uncovered at
their time of Service or Sacrifice; For so I learn cut of Plutark, because he
was the God of Time, and discovers and lays open concealed truth. And I
remember out of Alexander ab Alexandro that all the Priests of Hercules,
Honoris, Opis, did sacrifice bareheaded; He says that AEneas was the first
that invented any Priest should sacrifice covered, or with a vail upon his
face, lest their ears and eyes might withdraw them from doing their office:
Hence V^^^o his Etymology of Flamen is justified, namely, that in Italy he was
so called, quia Capite velato erat.

Again, As the Christian Ministers are not to suffer profane or excommunicate
persons to come into our Churches or Sacraments, so likewise would not the
Heathen Clergymen. For as in general appears by Theodoret and S^zomenes,
that the Gentiles would not admit Christians to their service, unless they
renounced their Religion, and appeased their Daemones (...), the drivers away
of evil, which also Julian commanded; Athenaeus notes Demophron would not admit
Orestes ad Choufestum, because he was an unsanctified person; and so in
particular at their Eleusine and other Sacrifices the Heathen Priests cried
(...); which words were used by Callimachus in his Hymn, and by Lucian; These
words exclude especially three sorts of persons, Atheists, Christians, and
Epicures; Vives notes out of Servius the words of Virgils verse, procul O
procul este prophani, were taken from the Heathen Pontifices, which is also
further evident out of Alexander ab Alexandro, who writes when the people came
to sacrifice, the Pontifex or Flamine asked them (...), the people answered
(...) many and good men: Suetonius saying to this purpose is familiar
concerning Nero. The Crier using in their Temples at sacrificing times to cry
that wicked and ungodly persons must not presume to offer sacrifice. Moreover
as we using to preach in our Churches, so the very Heathen Priests enlightened
only by natural reason, made moral exhortations unto the people: For Diodorus
Siculus writing that among the Egyptians when the King did offer sacrifice
with his Ball, the Priests out of holy Books, after he had prayed for the
health and prosperity of the King and State, delivered the counsels and actions
of excellent men, by which the King was warned to use his authority and command
godly and justly according to the example of others: He did further entreat
(says Diodorus) of their piety toward their God and Religion: And for that
purpose I gather out of Valerius Maximus, that the people which were to
approach to the Heathenish Altar, were commanded by the Priests to lay aside
out of their mind all former hatred and malice, or else not to approach.
Likewise the Heathen Priests had music in their Temples in the time of
Service. Wherefore for the general, to omit Livy and Valerius Maximus: In
particular Suetonius notes, it is a wonder in Tiberius Caesar for offering
Sacrifice unto the gods without Music.

Now as the Christians use in their Churches particular Psalms, Hymns, and
Prayers for set and Festival days; and this Giraldus shows in some part,
that upon chief and special days, the Heathen had their particular Verses,
Prayers and Hymns: But more particularly Julius Pollux writing (...), namely,
the special Psalms, if I may so speak, and to what gods they were due; It is
worth the remembering how the Papists if a Bishop or Abbot be canonized and die,
they have a glorious and special Antiphoneme, which begins, Ecce Sacerdos
Magnus, but if the Emperor or King be canonized, his Antiphoneme is but the
ordinary one for a Father. This last I learn out of a Treatise called Salome
and Bisance. And as for the bounding of the Meares of Parishes, our
Clergy-Priests on their Rogation week go on Procession. So likewise did the
Heathen, their perambulations for this purpose were called Ambarvalia. And it
appears by Livy that the Heathen Clergy might not be present at the sentence
of death. And Josephus notes that Pontifex Maximus might not behold a dead
body; and at this day that this is and has been the custom of our Clergy is
full apparent.

To conclude this particular with the nature of the coercive power used by the
Heathen Priests: Julius Caesar at large delivers of the Heathen Clergy of
this Island, and of France, namely, the Druides: if any private: or public
person would not stand to their Decrees and Orders, they used to forbid him
their Sacrifices, which (says Caesar) among them is a most grievous
punishment, for the party so interdicted is not only accounted a detested
person, and men are to shun his company, but neither shall he be capable of any
honor, or shall sue for his own right; Hence by good probability came the
excommunication used by the British Clergy anciently, and continued by our
English Clergy at this day, seeing the punishment and effect thereof is so
lively described, as if Caesar had been an author of our age.

For our Excommunication, whether it be hominis or Canonis, the former may be
Clavis Ecclesiae errans, says our Register, the later not: Does not only
bar the excommunicated person from entering into the Church at Service time;
and intimate a man not in osculo communicare cum Excommunicato, as it is in the
canon Laws, which is the reason Cyprian calls excommunicated persons abstenti,
because men refrain their company: but also it seems unto this day by the Canon
Laws of this Land, an excommunicate person cannot bring an action, or implead
any other for his right until he be absolved. I note out of Sophocles Oedipus,
that they which killed King Lucins were excommunicated, which took the same
effect with the Druids Excommunication: And for this also, says Plato in his
9. and 10. Book De Legibus. Pope Innocent the 4. calls Excommunication the
sinew of Ecclesiastical Discipline. The Canonists account Excommunication to
be the Keys of opening and shutting, which Christ gave at his departure to his
Disciples: But the Vulgar came not by many hundred years by the travel, and
employment, and mission of this good Thunderbolt, it is become Brutum or
Salmoneum fulmen.

In the last place I am to speak of the Religious Ceremonies of the Ethnic
people in their Churches that they are answerable to ours. It is evident by
Tertullian, Clement, Apuleius, and Servius upon Virgil, that the Heathens in
their Churches at the time of their service, praying or sitting, looked into
the East, but the Jews in their Churches, as appears by St Jerome, praying,
looked into the West; and yet we follow the Gentiles custom, and build our
Churches to that purpose as the Heathens did: For Vi^ruvius the Heathen
Architect commands that the face of the Temples be built in the West, that
they which pray may have their faces looking into the East: St Bazils opinion
then, that an Apostolical tradition of the Christians to pray looking into the
East, is not absolutely current. Caelius notes, Hermes Trismegistus praying
looking upon the South, the Jews looked upon the West, the Christians (says
he) looked into the East, which they learned of Pythagoras, as holding with
Ptolomy the motion of the Sun comes from the East: I read in Athanasius that
the Apostles appointed the Christian Churches to be built to the East, that in
praying they might behold Paradise: But to quit Tho. Aquinas his third reason
why the Christians in praying look into the East, I fancy the reason of our
praying into the East set down in the particular describer of the City of
Jerusalem, the Christians in Europe (says he) at their prayers looking into
the East, behold the Country where Christ was conversant on earth, and in so
beholding may behold the face of Christ upon the Cross looking upon them. Yea,
the Heathens in their prayers not only looked as the Christians, and praying
held up their hands toward Heaven, as Livy shows Camillus praying, and
Virgils Tendens ad sydera palmas intimates, but also in some points prayed as
we do.

To omit their joint order and decency of prayer out of Plutarch, Ne Caledonij
suis Tragedia renovetur. And Iamblicus the Scholar of Porphiry, as in general
he writes of the force of prayer, so in particular he concludes all their
sacrifices and Religion are better joined and perfected by Vows and Prayers;
yea, the wisest of the Heathens as Marsilius Ficinus notes upon Plato's
Alcibiades, prayed devoutly and in spirit Flagrantia animi offering up their
Vows without any Characters, which were invented to stir up their affection by
Orpheus and Zoroastes: And Alexander ab Alexandro writes, the Heathen man which
prayed first did confess himself a sinner: that I observe out of the Apopthegm
of the Heathen Lacedemonian to God, and not to the Priests, which the Heathen
Pontifex there confessed. And that in their prayers Alexander ab Alexandro
notes, they thanked the gods for benefits received, and desired aversions of
evils: Yea, the Heathens used to pray in their Churches for the afflicted in
body and mind, as the Christians do. For it appears by Lucian, if any were
hurt, he would sacrifice to the gods to be relieved: And by Plutarch not only
Sacrifices were used among the Heathen for the health of Pompey, but also
Cities celebrated Holy Days in their Temples for receiving great benefits of
their gods, as the health of Pompey; And the prayer of Arianus the Scholar of
Epictetus, as Lucian notes, when he would call upon the gods, was in these
words (...), Lord have mercy: And as I read Arrianus Book called Peri-plus, a
phrase of his is, but now (God willing.) And that Si Deus voluerit ought to be
the prayer of the Christians appears by Iam. 3. And if the Heathen prayers
were not conformable for the present state, the Heathen Magistrates caused them
to be amended; And this I learn out of Valerius, that Scipio Africanus the
public prayer being that the gods would make better and more ample the state
of Rome, he said, They are already great enough, and devised the form of prayer
to be, that the gods would continue and preserve the state of Rome: Again, as
the Christian Magistrates before they used to consult of the greatest affairs
use to resort to divine service; so this was an express Law to be observed by
the Roman Senators, is noted by Suetonius in Augusto: Nay, that before every
small exercise or recreation, that their unchristian men would call unto their
gods, I learn out of Hesychius, who says, that when they went to play at dice,
they would call upon their god Mercury, in these words, (...), good God: but
generally the Heathen prayers in their Churches were very long; For our Savior
teaches us when we pray, Do not make long prayers, as the Heathens do: For
this last, see Pererius in his note upon Genesis; And if we have not seasonable
weather we use particular devotion.

To this purpose you may gather out of Dionysius Halicarnasseus, that the
Gentiles proclaimed and kept solemn Feasts for the pacifying of their Panisme
gods.

In this place it were not improper to show how among the Infidels as well as
the Christians, the Civil Magistrate, especially the King, the politic
Father of the people made Laws to be observed by the Heathenish Clergy:
Therefore a common Lawyer in his Treatise of Salem and Bysance may well note,
that our King Lucius (buried at Winton) had as much prerogative over his
Flamines or Ministers, being Christians, as Heathen: And this also appears by
Aristotle in his Polit. by Virgil, by Strabo: But this I reserve for another
place. And to omit Wolfangus Lucius his discovery of Lent to have been
practiced as a policy among the Heathen; I shall conclude this particular with
the duty of Heathen people observed toward their Priests in relieving of them,
and paying them Tithes, as Parishioners do to their Pastors: but much of this
which I or any other can write in this kind, is already quoted in some of the
Canonists Writings, so covetous men are in advancing their own particular: As
the ancient elect people of God before the Law given in Mount Sinai, paid Tithes
to their Priests, as Genesis 14. Abraham paid Tithes to the greater Priest
Melchisedeck: but where it is said in Lev. 27. 32. the 10. sheep shall go under
the rod.

A Rabbin writes that in those days the tenth sheep was marked with Oaker; as
they use Tything at this day by putting sheep out of the Fold: This I take to
be Rabbinicall and full of conceit: So the very Heathen Priests have by the
consent of their people or Parishioners always a relief, yea, and that with a
tenth part of their Revenues; therefore for the first fruits Pliny writes, The
Romans were not wont to taste of their fruits or Vines, before the Heathen
Priests had sacrificed with them; and Porphiry confesses, That from all
Antiquity the first fruits of the earth were dedicated unto their gods. In
particular Euripides the Tragoedian says, that Diana had the first fruits of
every thing that the earth could yield. And Suidas in verbo (...) writes, The
Travelers in the Highway did use to offer unto the Idol of Mercury, that
guides them in their ways, the first fruits of the earth. And Herodotus
discourses of the Image of Delphos, which was made for receiving of Primitia^
terrae of the Graecians, who overcame Xerxes. Natalis Comes shows out of
Aristophanes and Euripides, the several first fruits which were due to their
several gods. But in express terms the tenth of their substance was offered
unto the Heathen gods, and consequently unto the Heathen Priests: For so it
appears by Lio Camillus gave the tenth of their Corn unto Apollo, and the
Ephesian Diana: but above all other gods, they were given to Hercules: for not
only by Plutarch many men offered the tenth of their substance unto Hercules;
but by Cicero in his Natura Deorum, Tithes were due unto Hercules: Nay, so
commonly was the tenth part offered unto Hercules, that Hercules part and the
tenth part were all one in signification; For Plautus writes, Mihi det Rex
Herculeanam partem: Good Reason then I note Tertullian had to speak of Tithes
that were properly due unto Hercules.

Lastly, Dionysius Halicarnasseus notes, That Jupiter and Apollo sent
barrenness upon the face of the earth, because men intermitted and neglected
the paying of their Tithes: Hence then it is more then colorable that the
Heathen Brittans our Ancestors before the time of Julius Caesar, paid Tithes to
their Priests and Druides, whether the tenth part or the eighth, Quota pars, I
have not to define, as holding with a Canon-Lawyer in his Treatise. Tithes and
Maintenance is due by the Law of God and man, but not Quota pars, namely, the
tenth part, unless in places accustomed to pay it.

Thus having chalked out the Paths the Christians tread in, having been
formerly beaten by the Gentiles, but first made (as I told you) by the Jews, in
whose steps the Gentiles tread, although awry.

By this my instant and last place they may perceive that even since the time
of the Gospel, and that Christianity was admitted into the world, the Heathens
in some things also began to imitate the Christians: but it was Diobolica
instigatione, as the ordinary phrase in indictments is: A touch of this given
by Erasmus. Tertullian in his time complains of the devils in Heathens
imitating Christian Baptism. Tinget and ipse (says Tertullian) fideles suos.
And after his time you may perceive Sozomenes, but especially by Gregory
Nazianzene in his Oration against Julian, the damnable Politic: Julian the
Emperor thought it the best way to extirpate Christianity, that the Heathen in
all points of service and adoration should correspond with the Christian
service: but it could not be effected (say they) because the Christians by
faith inwardly and in spirit worshipped God; Arnobius notes, because the
Christians God was not visible, the Heathens call the Christians Athiests.

Out of this precedent Discourse the Traveling Be, that is, the honest
Subject of this Realm with me, will reason thus: If our Forefathers which were
enlightened only by natural reason, would have so good Orders in their
Temples, at their worshipping of false and superstitious Gods: What great care
should Christians have for enjoining and observing of comely and godly
Ordinances in the worshipping of the true and everliving God!

FINIS.

