The Young Bastards Wish, A SONG
To the Tune of the Old Man's Wish
I.
IF I live to be King, as the world knows I hope,
I Will hang up the Bishops, L'Estrange, and the Pope;
My Father and Uncle, shall be the first Prey,
That I Will Murder upon my great Coronation Day.
I Will Govern three Kingdoms with absolute sway,
Grant Lisence for Whoring each Q. Bess -- day,
Ambition and Faction shall never decay, shall never decay.
II.
Then every Buffoon that the Rout can afford,
I Will quickly create him a Knight or a Lord:
Then court them with Congys, and smile on my Train*
And swear by my Maker I ever shall Reign.
I Will Govern, etc.
III.
I Will give them Commissions their States to possess,
Of every Lord, Duke, Great Peer and Marquess:
The Bishops and Clergy, I Will hang up in Chains,
Till none but the Saints of my Party Remains.
I Will Govern, etc.
IV.
And when thus Established all things to my Ends,
I Will hang up the Chief of my created Friends:
When three parts of the Nation, is fallen in my power,
'll burn down the City, Demolish the Tower.
I Will Govern, etc.
V.
And each Corporation that strength can afford,
Shall yield me Allegience, or dye by the Sword;
As Nero did Rome the Nation I Will burn,
Till each City dreads that the next is her turn.
I Will Govern, etc.
VI.
All this by the power of the Rout I Will perform,
And those that opposes I Will hang up in scorn;
And Laugh at their Nonsense that sat me on Throne
Till no Man dare say that his Life is his own.
I Will Govern, etc.
VII.
Then next I Will Debauch the sweet Wife of my Friend,
And ravish ten Sisters where none dare contend:
Each Night a true Virgin shall come to my Bed
If false, the next Morning I Will cut off her Head.,
I Will Govern, etc.
VIII.
The Daughters of those that I hanged for my Father,
Shall all be my Misses and Brood that comes after;
Their Lives may be 'lustrious in process of time,
As Pious and Powerful as this Life of mine.
I Will Govern, etc.
IX.
Danvers, I Will make him my Master of Horse,
And Argile in Scotland Command all my Force;
And Gray the Lieutenant of Ireland I Will send,
And my Palace in Kent-street in Southwark shall stand.
I Will Govern,
X.
No Parliament Rumps for fear of some Trick,
Lest they hang me, or serve me like Olivers Dick;
But as many Wenches the best I can Choose;
As will fill up Westminster, White Hall and the Muse.
I Will Govern three Kingdoms with absolute sway,
Grant Lisence for Whoring each Q. Bess -- day,
Ambition and Faction shall never decay, shall never decay.
London Printed for J. Dean, Bookseller in Cranborn-Street near Newport-House
in Leicester-fields, 1685


