TWO LETTERS OF HIS Sacred Majesty, One, In Vindication of Him, touching the
IRISH Affairs; The other, Concerning a late Mis-interpretation of one maine
Passage in his late LETTERS.

OXFORD: Printed by Leonard Lichfield, Printer to the Universitie. 1645.

TWO LETTERS Of His Sacred MAJESTY, etc.
My Lords and Gentlemen.
HIS Majesty having long expected a conclusion of a happy Peace within that
Kingdom, and his affairs having highly suffered by the faylure of his
expectations from thence, cannot choose but wonder what cause is of it; calling
to mind those fair professions and promises which you made unto him, when you
were employed here as Agents, and knowing well what powers and instructions he
has long since given my Lord Lieutenant to comply with you for your
satisfaction, as far forth as with any reason or honor his Majesty could in
civil things, or with prudence, or conscience, in matters of Religion; and in
this latter, as to the utmost of what for any wordly consideration, he will
ever be induced unto: so did he conceive it nothing less, then what you
declared unto him, you were persuaded the Catholics would be satisfied
withal; nay, ought not in their own interests, to seek more in the present
Condition His Majesty was in, lest any further concessions might by confirming
former scandalls cast upon his Majesty in matters of Religion, so alienate the
hearts of his Faithful and Loyal Adherents, as to make them abandon him,
which as yet would draw inevitable ruin upon him; so were you rightly
apprehensive, that when the Rebels should by that means have prevailed here,
it must soon after bring a certain destruction upon your selves; What your
change of Principles, or Resolutions are, His Majesty knows not: But he
finds, by the not concluding of a Peace there, that your Party (it seems) is
not satisfied with the utmost that His Majesty can grant in Matters of
Religion; that is, the taking away of the Penal Laws against Roman
Catholics within that Kingdom: And his Majesty hears that you insist upon
the Demands of Churches, for the Public Exercise of your Religion, which is
the occasion that His Majesty has commanded me to Write thus Frankly unto
you, and to tell you, that he cannot believe it possible, that Rational and
Prudent men (had there been no Propositions made to the contrary) can insist
upon that, which must needs be so destructive to His Majesty at the present,
and to your selves, in the consequences of His Ruin; that is, inevitably to be
made a prey to the Rebels of these Kingdoms, or to a Foreign Nation.
Wherefore, (my Lords and Gentlemen) to disabuse you, I am commanded by His
Majesty to Declare unto you, that were the condition of His Affairs much more
desperate then it is, he would never redeem them by any concession of so much
wrong, both to His Honor, and Conscience. It is for the defense of His
Religion principally, that he has undergone the extremities of War here, and
he will never redeem His Crown by sacrificing of it there: so that to deal
clearly with you, you may be happy your selves, and be happy Instruments of
His Majesty's restoring, if you will be contented with reason, and give him
that speedy assistance which you well may; and so if nothing will content you,
but what must wound His Honor, and Conscience, you must expect, that how low
soever his Condition is, and how detestable soever the Rebels of this Kingdom
are to Him, he will in that point join with them, the Scots, or with any of
the Protestant Profession,, rather then do the least act that may hazard that
Religion, in which, and for which, he will live and die. Having said thus much
by his Majesty's Command, I have no more to add, but that I shall think my
self very happy, if this take any such effect as may tend to the Peace of
that Kingdom, and make me

Your affectionate humble Servant, 1. August, 1645.
Cardiffe, the 4. of August, 1645. NICHOLAS,
HAving commanded your fellow Secretary to give you a full account, as well of
our Proceedings here as Resolutions, I will neither trouble you nor my Self
with repetitions; only for my self, I must desire you to let every one know,
that no distresse^ of fortune whatsoever, shall make me by the grace of God, in
any thing recede from those grounds I laid down to you, who were my
Commissioners at Uxbridge, and which (I thank them) the Rebels have published
in Print: and though I could have wished that their pains had been spared,
yet I will neither deny that those things are mine which they have set out in
my Name (only some words here and there mistaken, and some Comma's misplaced,
but not much material) nor as a good Protestant or honest man, blush for any
of those Papers: indeed as a discreet man I will not justify my Self, and yet
I would feign know him who would be willing, that the freedom of all his
private Letters were publicly seen as mine have now been. However, so that
one clause be rightly understood, I care not much though the rest take their
Fortune; It is concerning the Mungrell Parliament: the truth is, That Sussex
his Factiousnesse at that time put me somewhat out of patience, which made me
freely vent my displeasure against those of his party to my wife, and the
intention of that Phrase was, That his Faction did what they could to make it
come to that, by their raising and fomenting of base Propositions. This is
clearly evidenced by my following excuse to her for suffering those people to
trouble her, the reason being to eschew those greater inconveniences which
they had, and were more likely to cause here then there. I am now going to
supper, and so I rest

Your most assured Friend, C. R.

FINIS.

