A BREVIARY OF THE LATER PERSECUTIONS

Of the Professors of the Gospel of CHRIST JESUS, under the Romish and
Antichristian Prelates through Christendom, from the time of John VVickliff in
the year of God 1371. to the Reign of Queen Elizabeth of England, and the
reformation of Religion in Scotland: And of the cruel Persecutions of the
Christians under the Turkish Emperors, with some memorable occurrences that
fell out in these times through diverse Realms and Countries; Collected out of
the Ecclesisticall History and Book of Martyrs, By Mr. Robert Young.

Luke 9 23. And he said unto them all, if any man will come after me, let him
deny himself, and take up his cross daily and follow me.

Verse. 24 For whosoever will save his life, shall lose it and whosoever shall
lose his life for my sake the same shall save it.

Verse 25. For what advantageth it a man, if he gain the whole World, and
destroy himself, or lose himself.

Verse 26. For whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, of him shall
the Son of man be ashamed when he shall come in his glory, and in the glory of
the Father and of the holy Angels.

GLASGOW Printed by ROBERT SANDERS, Printer to the City, and are to be Sold at
his Shop. 1674.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
Rome is not now, as it was in the Primitive times, it was then the seat of the
true service and worship of God, where the Word or God was truly and purely
preached, professed and maintained, but now Rome is full of errors,
superstition and idolatry, of all iniquity and wickedness, full of vile
abominations. Petrark Mantuan, and many others, call Rome the Shop of all
wickedness, Babylon, Sodom, the School of errors, the Church of heresies, an
harlot with a shameless face; Mantuan thus notes the vice there used, Pudor in
villas, si non patiantur easdem
Et villae vomicas. Roma est jam tota lupanar,
that is, go shame to the Villages, if they be yet as free from the same filth,
or now all Rome is naught save bo^therlie. And Pasquil confirms the same,
when one having been at Rome, at his departure takes his leave thus,

Roma vale vidi, satis est vidisse, revertar
Cum leno aut mertrix, scurra, cynedus ero.
That is, Rome farewell, I have seen, and now I am glut^ed wi h the fight, I
will return when I am baud gester, catamit.

All things are now saleable at Rome, says Mantuan, -- Venalia nobis
Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coranae,
Ignis, Thura, Preces, Coelum est venale, deusque.
Temples, Priests, Altars, rites (I tell not tale)
Crowns, Sacrifices, Heaven and God are set to sale,
and the souls of men. Tecelius the Popes pardon-monger persuaded the people in
Germany that whosoever would give ten shillings should at his pleasure deliver
one soul out of the pains of Purgatory, and as soon as the money rang in the
Basen, that soul was set at liberty, but if it were one jot less then ten
shillings, it would profit them nothing. This gainful gul^e^^e Luther cried
down with all his might, and so marred the Market; and therefore it is said by
on^ very well, Vivere qui sancte cupitis, discedite Roma,
Omnia cum liceant* non licet essepium,
that is, ye that desire to live holy, depart from Rome, for when all things
are lawful, it is not lawful to be holy. And as Rome is not now as it was of
old, so neither are the Bishops of Rome such men as were in the primitive
times, they were then Preachers of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, maintainers and
defenders of it, and gave their lives to Martyrdom for the cause of Christ and
his Gospel, so that there were 25. of them that died Martyrs, in order one
after another. But now the Bishops of Rome ^re become Tyrants, and cruel
persecuters of the Saints of God, and Professors of the Gospel of Christ Jesus,
with fire and sword, as we may see in the Martyrdom of John Hus and Jerome of
Prage* and thousands ^^oe. And as this ensuing Treatise does declare, they are
men of wicked and vicious lives, given to unlawful Arts and Sciences, as to
Necromancy. There were eighteen Popes Necromancers, one succeeding another:
they are lifted up in intolerable pride, and claim and take to themselves high
and arrogant titles, as universal Bishops, Princes of Priests, supreme head of
the Universal Church, and Vicars of Christ here one earth, which must not be
judged of any, having all knowledge of Scriptures, and all Laws contained
within the Chest of their breasts, chief Magistrates of the world: they exalt
themselves above Kings, Princes and Emperors, causing some of them to ly under
their feet, some to hold their stirrup, some to lead their horse by the bridle,
some to kiss their feet, placing and displacing Emperors, Kings, Dukes and
Earls, whom and when they pleased. Was it not a presumptuous thing in
Gregorius the seventh, to cause the Emperor Henry the fourth to stand at his
gate three days and three nights barefoot and bare-legged, with his wife and
child, in the deep of Winter, both frost and snow, entreating for his
absolution, and after did Excommunicate him again, so that he was twice
Excommunicate in his days. And did not I Paschalis after Gregory set up the
son of the said Henricus against his father in war to possess the Empire, and
to put down his father, and so he did. And did not I Gregorius set up Robert
Wysard and make him King of Sicilia and Duke of Capua. Did not I Pope Alexander
bring under Henry the second King of England for the death of Thomas Becket,
and cause him to go bare foot to his Tomb at Caunterbury with bleeding feet.
Did not I Innocentius the third cause King John to kneel down at the feet of
Pandolphus my Legate, and offer up his Crown to his hands, and to kiss the feet
of Stephen Langtoun Bishop of Canterbury, and besides, merced him in a
thousand Me^ks be year. Did not I Alexander bring the valiant Emperor Frederick
the first to Venice by reason of his son Otho there taken prisoner, and there
in St. Marks Church made him fall down flat upon the ground, while I set my
feet upon his neck, saying that verse of the Psalm, Super aspidem and
Basiliscum ambulubis, etc. Did not I Adrianus Pope, an Englishman born,
control and correct the forsaid Frederick the Emperor for holding the left
stirrup of my horse when he should have holden the right, and afterward did I
not Excommunicate him and curse him, for that he was so s^wcy to set up his own
name in writing before mine. Did not I Pope Celestine Crown Henry the fifth
Emperor with my foot, and with my foot spurned the Crown from his head again
in St. Peter's Church, to make him know that the Popes of Rome have power both
to Crown Emperors and to dispose them again. And briefly says the Pope, who is
able to comprehend the greatness of my power and of my seat? All the earth is
my Diocese, and I the ordinary of all men^ having the authority of the King of
all Kings upon subjects, I am all in all, and above all so that God himself and
I the Vicar of God has but one Consistory, and I am able to do almost all that
God can do, clavenon errante. It is in my power to alter and abrogate Laws, to
dispense with all things, yea, with the precepts of Christ: and in a word, I
declare and pronounce to stand upon necessity of salvation for every human^
creature to be subject to me. And as their pride, so their avarice is
insatiable in exacting and gathering of money of all under their jurisdiction
and putting it into their treasury, for Petrarch records that in the Treasury
of Pope John the 22. were found after his death 250 Tuns of gold. And of
Boniface the 8. It is storied that when he was taken by Ph^lip the fair King of
France, and his Palace rifled, there was more Treasure found then all the Kings
of the earth were able to show again. What hudge sums of money did Thecelius
and his companions take together out of Germany for indulgences and pardons.
The Pope had yearly out of England above nine Tuns of Gold. Otto one of the
Popes Muscipulatores, mice catchers, as the story calls, departing out of
England left not so much money in the whole Kingdom as he either carried with
him, or sent to Rome before him. It was truly an trimly said by Pope Innocent
the fourth. Vere enim hortus deliciarum Papis fuit tum Anglia and puteus in
exhaustus. England was then a gallant garden to the Pope, and a Wel-spring of
wealth that could not be drawn dry. Cardinal Volsey emptied the land of Twelve
score thousand pound to relive and ransom Pope Clement the seventh imprisoned
by the Duke of Burbon. The Apostle Paul in the 2. to the These. foretells of the
nature and manners of those wicked men and their destruction, and by speaking
of one he points out the body of that tyrannous and persecuting Church, he
calls him that man of sin, that breathing Devil so portentuously, so peerlesly
vicious, Vtejus nomen non hominis sed vitii esse videatur, as Lipsius says of
one Tubulus a Roman Praetor that sin it self can hardly be more sinful, next
he calls him the son of perdition, destined to destruction even to be cast alive
into the lake of fire burning with brimston. Rev. 19.29. Well might Pope
Marcellus the second, strike his hand upon the Table and say, Non video quomodo
qui locum hunc altissimum tenent salvari possunt. I see not how any Pope can be
saved when I was first in order said Pope Pius Quintus, I had some good hope of
Salvation, when I wae made a Cardinal I doubted, but now that I am Pope I
almost despair. Again the Apostle calls him an adversary, and exalts himself
against all that is called God or that is worshipped, all men know who he is
that says he can shut up heaven and open it at his pleasure, and take upon him
to be Lord and Master above all Kings and Princes; before whom Kings and
Princes fall down and worship, honoring that Antichrist as a God. And he
sits as God in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God. In the
year 1540. Pope Paul the third suffered himself to be thus blasphemously
flattered. Paulo tertio optimo maximo in terris Deo. In the year 1610. Books
were printed at Bononi and at Naples with this Inscription, Paulo 5. Vice Deo
christianae reipublicae Monarchae invictissimo, pontificiae omnipotentiae
conseruatori acerrimo* To Paul the 5. Vice-god, most invincible Monarch of
Christendom, most stout defender of the Papal Omnipotency, The Pope can do all
that Christ can do, of wrong he can make right, of vice virtue, of nothing,
something says Bellarmine, he is lifted above the Angels, so that he can
excommunicate them, he can dispense against not only the law of nature, but
against all the Evangelists, Prophets and Apostles says Pope John etc. In
Extract, One of his parasits clawed him thus.

Oraclis vocis mundi moderaris habenas
Et merito in terris diceris esse Deus.
He is cried up for the Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, and that has both
the swords throughout the World, and an illimited Empire over all reasonable
creatures, duliae adorandus etc. Ye see then what kind of men their Popes are,
who call themselves universal Bishops, and that the charge and government of
Christ's universal Church is committed to them, that they are the Vicars of
Christ and the successors of Peter, yet they are the greatest enemies that
Christ and his Church have, they are subverters and overthrowers of his
Kingdom, what cruel and bloody practices they have used throughout
Christendom to subvert the Gospel, and the professors thereof, what innocent
blood they have shed, the Book of Martyrs does abundantly testify, and this
small ensuing Treatise does compendiously declare: but God will bring down
their intolerable pride and Tyrranny and lay them low and consume them with
the breath of his mouth, as says the Apostle. And as for Rome the Seat of
Antichrist which is called Babylon, shall come to fearful ruin and
destruction as St. John in the 18. Rev. foretells it is fallen, It is fallen*
Babylon that great City, and is become the habitation of devils, and the hold
of all soul Spirits, and a Cage of every unclean and hateful bird, for all
Nations have drunken of the wrath of her Fornication, and the Kings of the
earth have committed fornication with her; that is spiritual whoredom which is
Idolatry; the Merchants of the Earth which were enriched with the pomp and
luxuriousness of it shall weep and wail etc. But all the Elect shall rejoice
for the just vengeance that God has taken on her. Also the Emperor Frederick
is reported to have foretold the ruin of Rome in this distick.

Roma diu titubans variis erroribus acta
Corruet, and mundi desinet esse caput,
But not to trouble Thee Gentle Reader with longer preface, I rest.

Thine in the Lord to serve thee, Mr. ROBERT YOUNG.

A BREVIARY OF THE LATER PERSECUTIONS. Of the Professors of the Gospel of
CHRIST JESUS, under the Romish and Antichristian Prelates.
THe Persecution of the Christians in the Primitive Church under the Heathen
Emperors and Tyrants of Rome, continued the space of three hundred years after
the passion of Christ, to the seventh year of Constantine the great, who stayed
the Persecutions, and settled peace in the Church, so that there was no set or
universal persecution in the Church, for the space of a thousand years
thereafter, for all that time Satan was tied and bound up, and his rage
restrained against the Professors of the Gospel, thereafter was Satan let loose
again for a time, to vex and trouble the Church, as we have it in the 20. of
the Revelation in these words, And I saw an Angel descending from Heaven,
having a key of the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand, and he took
the Dragon the old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and bound him for a
thousand years, and put him into the bottomless dungeon, and shut him up, and
signed him with his seal, that he should no more seduce the Gentiles, till a
thousand years were expired, and after that he must be loosed again for a
little space of time, etc. The thousand years being now expired, and Satan let
loose, he begins again to persecute the Church of God, and the professors of
the truth, in the person of Wickliff, in the year of our Lord 1371. in the
days of Edward the third King of England.

This Wickliff was an Englishman, and a Professor of Divinity in Oxford, a man
of great spirit, and of great learning, he came to such a degree or erudition,
that he was thought the most excellent amongst all the Theologians at that
time, he perceiving the true Doctrine of Christ's Gospel to be adulde^at and
defiled with so many filthy inventions of Bishops; Sects of Monks, and dark
errors, and after long debating and deliberating with himself, with many secret
sighs and bewalings in his mind the general ignorance of the whole world,
could no longer s^ffer or abide the same; he at the last determined with
himself to help and remedy such things as he saw to be wide and out of the way,
and so he began as from a deep night, to draw out the truth of the Doctrine of
the Son of God, with the purity of the Doctrine which he taught, he also
lively touched the abuses of the Popedom, in so much that the Locusts (that is
to say, the Monks and begging Friars) listed themselves up against him, to
persecute him, with all the rabble of, the Popish Clergy, but the Lord gave him
for a Protector King Edward the third, the Duke of Lancaster the Kings son, and
Lord Henery Peircy the Marsha^l of England, for all the time of King Edwards
reign, he had great liberty of his profession, and that the King carried a
special favor and goodwill to him, appears in this, that he sent him with his
Ambassador over into the parts of Italy, to treat with the Popes Legates
concerning affairs betwixt the King and the Pope, with full commission.

This King Edward was a good man and has this commendation that he was,
Orphanis quasi Pater, afflictis compations miseris condol^ns, oppressis
releva^s, and cunctis indigentibus impendens auxilia opportuna, that is, to the
Orphans he was a Father, competient to the afflicted, mourning with the
miserable, releiving the oppressed; and to all them that wanted a helper in the
time of need, etc. Pope Gregory, being informed of Wickliffs, Doctrine, and
that was pred abroad through the land, He wrote to the Archbishop of Canterbury,
and to the Bishop of London, to cause apprehend the said John Wickliffe, and to
cast him into prison, and that the King and Nobles of England should be
admonished not to give any trust to the said John Wickliffe, or to his
Doctrine in any ways. As also, he wrote unto King Edward, or rather unto King
Richard who succeeded King Edward to persecute this VVickliff, but God shortened
the rage and fury of this cruel Prelate against him, for that in the same year,
or, in the beginning of the next year following, the forsaid Pope Gergory the
eleventh turned up his heels and died: Yet the Archbishop of Canterbury, and
the Bishop of London did vex and trouble him, and held sundry meetings of the
Clergy against him, to condemn him and his Doctrine. And here is not to be
past over the great miracle of Gods Divine admonition or warning; for when as
the Archbishop and Suffraganes with the other Doctors and Lawiers, with a great
company of babbling Friars and Religious persons were gathered together to
consult as touching John VVickliffs books and that whole sect. When as I say
they were gathered together at the Grayfriers in London to begin their
business upon St. Dunstanes day after dinner, about two in the cloak the very
hour and instant that they should go forward with their business, a wonderful
and terrible earthquake fell throughout all England; whereupon diverse of the
Suffraganes being feared by the strange and wonderful demonstration, doubting
what it should mean, thought it good to leave off from their determinat
purpose. But the Archbishop (as the chief Captain of that Army, more rash and
bold then wise) interpreting the change which had happened clean contrary to
another meaning and purpose, did confirm and strengthen hearts and minds which
are almost danted with fear stoutly to proceed and to go forward in their
attempted enterprise; who then discoursing VVickliffs Articles, not according
to the sacred Cannons of the Holy Scripture, but unto their own private
affections and traditions, pronounced and gave sentence that some of them were
simply and plainly Heretical, other some false, erroneous, other irreligious,
some seditious and not consonant to the Church of Rome.

John VVickliff a long time after this returning again, either from his
banishment, being banished by King Richard, or from some other place where he
was secretly kept, repaired to his Parish at Lutterworth where he was
Parson, and there quyetly departing this mortal Life, sleept in peace in the
Lord* 1384. Here is to be noted in this Man as in diverse others, whom the Lord
so long preserved in such rages, of so many enemies from all their hands, even
to his old age. This VVickliff had written diverse and sundry works, the which
in the year of our Lord 1410. were burnt at Oxford. And not only in England,
but in Bohemia. Likewise the Books of the said VVickliff were set on fire by
the Archbishop of Prage, who made diligent inquisiition for the same and burned
them. The numbers of the Volumes which he is said to have burned most
excellently written and richly adorned with bosses of Gold, and coverings (as
Aeneas Silvius writes) were about the number of two hundred. Great was the
testimony given out by the University of Oxford touching the commendation of
the great Learning and good Life of John VVickliff; as also great was the
testimony and commendation of Master John Hus concerning John VVickliff, who
affirmed that he was no Heretic, and yet the Counsel of Constance condemned
him for an Heretic, and caused his Body and Bones to be raised and burnt 41.
years after his Death, and took his Ashes and threw into the River, thinking
thereby utterly to extinguish and abolish both the Name and Doctrine of
VVickliff for ever, for though they dug up his Body, and burnt his Bones,
and drowned his Ashes, yet the Word of God and truth of his Doctrine, with the
fruit and success thereof, they could not burn; which yet to this day for the
most part of his Articles do remain. After the Death of Pope Gregory the
eleventh, there ensued such a great Schism in Rome between two Popes, Urban
and Clement, and other succeeding after them, one striving against another that
the Schism thereof endured the space of 39. years or there about, until the
time of the Counsel of Constance. As touching this pestilent and miserable
Schism, It would require here another Iliad to comprehend in order all the
circumstances and tragical parts thereof, what trouble in the whole Church,
what parts taking in every country, what apprehending and imprisoning of
Priests and Prelates taken by land and sea, what shedding of Blood did follow
thereoff; how Otho Duke of Brunswick, and Prince of Tarentum was taken and
murdered, how Joan his wife Queen of Jerusalem and Sicilia who before had sent
to Pope Urban beside other gifts at his Coronation 40. m. Ducats in pure Gold,
was after by the said Urban committed to prison, and in the same prison
strangled: What Cardinals were racked and miserably without all mercy tormented
on Gibbets to death, what slaughter of men, what Battles were fought between
the Popes, whereof 5000. on the one side were slain, beside the number of them
who are taken Prisoners, of the beheading of five Cardinals together after long
torments, And how the Bishop of Aquilonensis being suspected of Pope Urban for
not ryding faster with the Pope, his horse not being so good, was there slain
by the Popes commandment, sending his Soldiers unto him to slay him, and cut
him in pieces, with many more acts of horrible cruelty happening in the time of
this abominable Schism. About the same time also or about three years after
there fell a cruel dissension in England between the common people, and the
Nobility, the which did not a little disturb and trouble the Commonwealth. In
this tumult Simon of Sudbury Archbishop of Canterbury was taken by the
Rusticall and rude people and was beheaded.

In the year of God 1397. there was a battle foughteen betwixt Tamerlane the
Tartarian Prince, and Bajazet the fourth King of the Turks, not far from the
Mount Stella, where Bajazer there lost his son Mustapha, with two hundred
thousand of his men, and Tamerlane not many fewer. Bajazet himself was taken,
and being brought to Tamerlane, and after sundry things asked of him, he
inqired of him what he would have done with him if it had been his fortune to
have fallen into his hands as thou art now in mine, I would, said Bajazer, have
enclosed thee in a Cage of Iron, and so in triumph have carried thee up and
down my Kingdom; Even so said Tamerlane shall thou be served: And so he made
him to be schaked in fetters and chains of gold, and to be shut up in an Iron
Cage, made like a Great, in such sort as that he might on every side be seen,
and so carried him up and down as he passed through Asia, to be of his own
people scorned and derided. And to his own further disgrace, upon Festival
days used him for a footstool to tread upon when he mounted to horse, and at
other times scornfully feed him like a Dog, with crumes fallen from his Table.
A rare example of the uncertainty of worldly honor, that he unto whose
ambitious mind Asia and Europe, two great parts of the world were too little,
should be now carried up and down cooped up in a little Iron Cage, like some
perilous wild beast; all which Tamerlane did not so much for the hatred to the
man, as to manifest the just judgment of God against the arrogant folly of the
proud. It is reported, that Tamerlane being requested by one of his Noblemen
that might be bold to speak unto him, to remit some part of his severity
against the person of so great a Prince, answered, that he did not use that
rigor against him as a King, but rathet did punish him as proud ambitious
Tyrant, polluted with the blood of his own brother.

About this time Berthold Schwartz and Alchimist invented the Guns and Artilery.

After the death of John Wickliff, many were persecuted and suffered most cruel
death in England, and many more did forsake the Realm, and we^e persecuted for
the embracing, professing and maintaining of VVckliffs doctrine. And first of
all we begin at one William Sawtre, a good man, and a faithful Priest of the
Churrh of St. Margaret in the Town of Lin, and zealous of the true Religion, he
is brought before Thomas Arnndell Archbishop of Canterbury, and his Clergy,
and is before them convict and condemned for Heresy, he is first desposed and
degraded from his Office, and thereafter delivered to the secular power to be
burned: This it may appear how tKings and Princes have been blinded and abused
by ^he false Prelates of the Church, in so much that they have been their
slaves and butchers to slay Christ's poor innocent members. See therefore what
danger it is for, princes not to have knowledge and understanding themselves,
but to be led by other men's eyes, and especially trusting to such guides, who
through hypocrisy both deceive them, and through cruelty devour the people.

As this King Henry the fourth was the first of English Kings that began the
unmercifull burning of Christ's Saints for standing against the Pope, so was
this William Sawtre the true and faithful Martyr, the first of all them after
VVickliffs death, which I find to be burned in the reign of the forsaid King,
which was in the year of our Lord, 1400. After the Martyrdom of this godly
man, the rest of the same company began to keep themselves more clearly, for
fear of the King, who was altogether bent to hold up the Popes Prelacie. Such
was the reign of this Prince, that to the godly he was ever terrible, in his
actions immeasurable, of few men heartily beloved, but Princes never lack
flatters about them; neither was the time of his reign very quiet, but full of
trouble, of blood and misery.

After the death of William Sawtre was apprehended one John Badby a Tailor, a
Layman, he was accused of heresy and other Articles repugnant to the
determination of the Church of Rome, before Thomas Arundell Archbishop of
Canterbury, and other his assiants, both Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
was condemned for an Heritick, and delivered over to the Secular power to be
burnt, the Kings warrant is given for his burning, he is brought into
Smithfield, and there being put in an empty Barrel, was bound with Iron Chains
fastened to an Stake, having dry Wood put about him. And as he was thus
standing in the Pipe or Tun, it happened that the Prince, the Kings eldest son
was there present, who showing some part of the good Samaritan, began to
endeavor and essay how to save his life, he admonished and counseled him,
that having respect unto himself, he would speedily withdrawn himself out of
these dangerous Labyrinths of opinions, adding oftentimes threatenings, the
which might have daunted any man's stomach, but he hearkened not thereunto, and
then was the Tun put over him, and fire put unto him; and when he felt the
fire, he cried, mercy, calling belike unto the Lord, and so the Prince
immedialy commanded to take away the Tun and quench the fire: The Prince his
commandment being done, asked him if he would forsake Heresy to take him to
the faith of Holy Church, which thing if he would do he should have Goods
enough, promising also unto him a yearly Stipend out of the Kings Treasury so
much as should suffice his contentation, but this valiant Champion of Christ
neglecting the Princes fair words and promises, continued constant in his
profession; then the Prince commanded him straight to be put again into the
Pipe or Tun, and that he should not afterward look for any grace or favor, and
so he was burnt to death. Other servants of God good and religious men were
accused of Heresy, and brought before the Archbishop of Canterbury, as
William Thorp, who gave a large and notable confession of his Faith, and
answered wisely and godly to all the points whereof he was accused by the
Archbishop, where he suffered mocking and scorning and threatening; what became
of this good man, and blessed servant of God, is not at yet in Story specified,
by all conjecture, it is thought that the Archbishop Thomas Arundell being so
hard an adversary against him, would not let him go; much less it is to be
supposed that he would ever retract his sentence and opinion which he so
valiantly maintained before the Bishop, neither does it seem that he had any
such recanting spirit; Again, neither is it found that he was burned, wherefore
it remains most likely to be true, that he being committed to some strait
Prison (according as the Archbishop in his Examination before did threaten him)
was so straightly kept, that either he was secretly made away, or, else there
he died by sickness. The like end also I find happen to John Ashton another
good fellower of VVickliff, he was condemned by the Bishops, and because he
would not recant, he was committed to perpetual Prison, wherein the good man
continued till his death.

And as great was the constancy of the true professors, so many did shrink, and
did revolt and renounce for danger of the Law.

In those days great was the pride and glory of the Clergy of England, that
none durst stir, or once mute against them, having the King so full on their
side, armed moreover with Laws, Statutes, Punishments, Imprisonments, Sword,
Fire and Faggot, reigned and ruled as they listed, as Kings and P^inces within
themselves. So strong were they of power, that no humane force was able to
stand against them, so exalted in pride, and puffed up in glory, that they
thought all things to be subject to their reverend Majesty's, whatsoever they
set forth or decreed, it must be of all men received and obeyed: What greater
show of arrogance and pride could there be then in this. When Thomas Arundell
Archbishop of Canterbury passed by the high Street of London, and because they
did not ring their Bells for a triumph of his coming, took great snuff
thereat, and did suspend all such Churches in London, not only with the Steeple
and Bells, but also with the Organs; so many as did not receive his coming with
the noise of Bells. The like stir for Bell-ringing, and for Processions, had
almost happened between the Archbishop of Canterbury, Successor to this Thomas
Arundell, named Henry Chic^ly on the one part, and the Abbey of St. Albons on
the other part, had not the Abbot in time submitting himself to the Archbishop
so provided, that the ringing of their Bells at his coming might not redound
to any derogation of their Liberties, whereunto the Archbishop granted by his
Lettert direct to them. To express moreover, and describe the glorious pomp of
these Princely Prelates in those blind days of Popish Religion reigning then
in the Church. I though to adjoyn hereunto another example not much unlike,
neither differing much in time, concerning certain poor men cited up, and
enjoined strait penance by William Courtney, predecessor of the said Thomas
Arundell, for bringing Litter to his Horse, not in Wains as they should do, but
in privy Sacks, in a secret manner under their Cloaks or Coats, for the which,
so heinous, and horrible trespass, the said Archbishop sitting in his
Tribunall-seat, did call and cite before him the said persons pro litera. 1.
For Litter after his own Latin) and after their submission, injoyns them
Penance, that is, that they going leafurly before the Procession, every one of
them should carry openly on his shoulder his Bag stuffed with Hay and Straw, so
that the said Hay or Straw should appear hanging out, the mouths of the Sacks
being open; whereupon it was said, This Bag full of Straw, I bear on my back,
Because my Lords Horses his Litter did lack;
If ye be not good to my Lords Graces horse,
Ye are like to go bare foot before the Cross.


King Henry the fourth had a Prophecy that he thould die in Jerusalem, and
lying sick in a fair Chamber at Westminster, and lying on his Bed, he asked
how they called the said Chamber, and they answered and said Jerusalem, and
then he said, it was his Prophecy that he should make his end in Jerusalem:
And so disposing himself toward his end in the foresaid Chamber, he died upon
that sickness, whether of Leprosy or of some other sharp disease I have not
to affirm. The like Prophecy we read of Pope Sylvester 2. to whom being
inquisitive for the time and place where he should die, it was answered that he
should die at Jerusalem, who then saying Mass in a Chapel (called likewise
Jerusalem,) perceived his end there to be near, and died.

Sir John Oldcastle the Lord Cobham a most worthy and religious Knight was
suspect of Heresy, and to be a favourer and maintainer of VVickliffs
Doctrine, and the professors thereof, for the which he was apprehended, and
accused and falsely condemned for Heresy. In his examination before the
Archbishop Arundell and his Clergy, he answered wisely and Religiously to every
point he was posed upon, especially anent the Sacrament of the Lords Supper,
and constantly and zealously maintained the Truth, but in end he is falsely and
unjustly condemned as an Heretic. After that, the Archbishop Thomas Arundell
had read the bill of his condemnation with most extremity before the whole
multitude, the Lord Cobham said with a most cheerful countenance, though ye
judge my body, which is but a wretched thing, yet am I certain and sure that ye
can do no harm unto my Soul, no more then could Satan unto the Soul of Job, he
that created that, will of his infinite mercy and promise save, I have therein
no manner of doubt. And as concerning these Articles of my Belief that I have
given in unto you, I will stand to them even unto the very death by the grace
of my Eternal God. And therewith he turned him unto the People, casting his
hands abroad, and saying with a very loud voice; Good Christian people, for
Gods love be well war of these men, for they else will beguile you and lead you
blindfold into Hell with themselves, for Christ says plainly unto you, If one
blind man lead another, they are like both to fall into the ditch. After this
he fell there down upon his knees, and thus before them all prayed for his
Enemies, holding up both his hands and his eyes toward Heaven, and saying, Lord
God Eternal, I beseech thee of thy great mercy sake to forgive my persewers if
it be thy blessed will. And then he was delivered to Sir Robert Morley, and so
led forth again unto the Tower of London there to be imprisoned, but he escaped
afterward out of the Tower, how and by what means it is uncertain, and was in
Wales about the space of four years, at which time a great sum of Money was
proclaimed by the King to him that could take the said Sir John Oldcastle
either quick or dead, about the end of which four years being expired, the Lord
Powes, whether for love or greediness of the money, or whether for the hatred
of the true and sincere Doctrine of Christ, seeking all manner of ways how to
play the part of Judas, at length obtained his bloody purpose and brought the
Lord Cobham bound up to London, and was brought before the Parliament, and
being outlawed in the Kings binch, and excommunicated before the Archbishop of
Canterbury, for Heresy, where he was adjudged that he should be taken as a
Traitor to the King, and to the Realm: What was the point of Treason is not
expressed, that he should be carried to the Tower of London unto the new
Gallows in St. Giles without Temple Bar, and there to be hanged and burned
hanging, Treason was falsely surmized against him, his execution arose
principally of his Religion which first brought him in hatred of the Bishops,
the Bishops brought him in hatred of the King, the hatred of the King brought
him to his death and martyrdom.

The Clergy then tanq^am Leones rugientes, ceased not to roar after Christian
blood, and whatsoever else was in fault, still the Clergy cried, Crucify
Christ, and deliver us Barrabas, for then all horrible facts and mischiefs, if
any were done, were imputed to the poor Lollards, whom they so misnamed, that
is, withered Darnell: Lollard by the Popes interpretation is a word derived of
Lollium, that is Darnell. Yet after the burning of the Lord Cobham, the Bishops
and priests were in great discredit, both with the Nobility and Commons, partly
for that they had so cruelly handled the good Lord Cobham, and partly again,
because his opinion, as they thought all at that time was perfect concerning
the Sacrament. The prelates feared this to grow to further inconvenience toward
them both ways, wherefore they drew their heads together, and at the last
consented to use another practice, somewhat contrare to that they had done
before, they caused by and by to be blown abroad by their hired servants,
friends, and babbling Sir John's, that the said Lord Cobham was become a good
man, and had lowly submitted himself in all things unto the holy Church,
utterly changing his opinion concerning the Sacrament, and thereupon they
counterfeited an abjuration in his name, that the people should take no hold of
his opinion by any thing they heard of him before, and so to stand the more in
aw of them, considering him so great a man, and by them subdued. At this time
Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury died, and this may seem strange, that
the same Thomas Arundell, who a little before sat in Judgment against the Lord
Cobham, and pronounced sentence of death upon him, did himself feel the stroke
of death, and the sentence of God executed upon him before the other, who would
have thought but that the Lord Cobham being so cast and condemned definitely by
the Archbishops sentence should have died long before the Bishop, but such be
the works of Gods Almighty hand, whosoever turned the Wheel; that this condemned
Lord survived his condemner three or four years.

Now to leave England for a while, and to take a view of the Church of Bohemia,
and the persecution there, for the profession of the Gospel of Christ, in the
year of our Lord 1400. there was great divisions in Religion in the Country of
Bohemia. The Emperor Charles the fourth instituted the University of Prage, and
provided it of learned men, and as a Prince given to Letters, adorned often
with his presence the Disputations made in Schools, but because the^ Teutonians
(or Almains) in that University, seemed to carry away the praise and honor
there in Disputations above the Bohemians, they were greatly ashamed that
strangers should surmount them. It came to pass that one of the Bohemians
having recovered the Books of VVickliff, communicated them to his companions,
and they drew out of them great Arguments, which the Teutonians could not
resist, whereupon many dissentions fell amongst them, even to Batteries and
Murders: The Teutonians seeing this, forsook the place, in so much that more
then 2000 Scholars on one day went out of Prage, and came to Lipse, where they
began an University after leave obtained. John Hus then had the greatest
renown, a man that came out of a Village called Hus, which signisieth an Hen,
whereof he took his name, he was of a great and quick spirit, and well spoken,
beginning to recommend the Doctrine of VVickliff in his Sermons to the people;
the occasion how the Doctrine of wickliff came to Bohemia, was this, there
chanced at this time a certain Student of the Country of Bohemia to be at
Oxford one of a wealthy house, and also of a noble stock, who returning home
from the University of Oxford, to the University of Prage. carried with him
certain Books of wickliffs who being communicated to John Hus a man of great
knowledge, and of a prognant wit, took such pleasure in reading of them, that
not only he began to defend this Author openly in the Schools, but also in his
Sermon commending him as a good man an holy and heavenly man, wishing himself
when he should die to be there placed, whereas the Soul of wickliff should
be. The Bohemians being instructed with his Doctrine, began first to set
against the Pope, esteeming him no more Honorable nor great nor other Bishops
or Priests, and thereupon reformed the Doctrine by the conclusions and Articles
following. First, that the dignity makes not the Priest or Bishop honorable,
but Sanctity of life and good Doctrine. 2. That souls separat from the bodies,
go right unto eternal pains, o straight obtain happy life. 3. That there is no
witness in all the Scripture whereby can be proved that there is purgatory
after this life. 4. To make oblation and Sacrifices for the dead is an
invention of the covetousness of Priests. 5. Images of God or Saints,
benedictions of waters and such like things are forged of men against the Word
of God. 6. That the orders of begging Friars are invented by Devils. 7. That
Baptism ought to be administered with water without cream, oil, spittle and
such pollutions. 8. That the Temple of God is the world, That such as build
Churches, Monastaries and Oratories therein to enclose him, do enclose Majesty
which is incomprehensible. 9. That the Ornaments of Priests chasubles,
corporalls, chaleices, plates, vestiments, and Altars, are all but vanity. 10.
That in vain we implore the help of Saints, and that it is time lost using the
Cononicall hours, 11. That fastings, merit nothing 12. That the Eucharist ought
to be administered under both kinds 13. They rejected the Mass, and received
only the communion of the Supper, the word and prayer and many other Articles
draw from the holy Scripture.

Before we come to the Counsel of Constance where John Hus compeared and was
condemned, It shall not be impertinent nor out of purpose to repeat a certain
merry History and worthy otherwise to be noted that fell out at that time. Pope
John 23. of that name, holding a Synod at Rome, In the first Session of the
Synod, as the aforesaid John was sitting on an high seat after the Mass of the
holy Ghost was sung, there came an owl, who placing her self upon one of the
balks of the Temple, and looking directly upon the Pope, Saluted him in a
strange manner with her fearful Song, such as were there present began to
wonder, looking one at another, and also casting their view upon the Pope, they
could skant keep to be much ashamed, to sweat, and to be sore anguished and
tormented in himself, finally finding no other mean whereby he might remedy his
so great confusion, after he had given leave to such as were assembled, he rose
up and retired. There was an other Session after this, wherein came the like,
for this Owl could not be chased away, neither for any cries, no nor yet for
stones and staffes which were cast at it. There was then many which by this
spectacle were induced to believe that such spiritual pillars have long time
governed the Church of Rome. In the year of God 1414. there was a General
Counsel holden at Constance by Sigismund the Emperor, and Pope John the 23. for
the pacifying of the Schism in the Church which was then between three Popes
striving for the Popedom. The first was John whom the Italians set up, the
second was Gregory whom the French men set up, the third was Benedic whom the
Spainards placed, all three were deposed, and Martin is chosen Pope, he is
inthronized with great solemnity, the Emperor on foot leading his horse by the
bridle on the right hand, and the Marquess of Brandeburg, Prince Elector
likewise leading his horse on the left hand, the Pope himself ryding in the
mids upon his Palfrey. This Counsel of Constance continued for the space of
four years, and had in it 45 Sessions wherein many things were concluded; as
here it was inacted that the Popes Authority is under the Counsel, and that the
Counsel ought to judge the Pope. And touching the Communion in both kinds,
although the Counsel could not deny that it was by Christ and his Apostles used;
yet notwithstanding by the same Counsel it was decreed to the contrare. Great
was the convention at this Counsel of Constance. The number of Prelates
conveened at this Counsel were 346. Of Abbots and Doctors 564. Secular men,
Princes and Dukes, Earls, and Knights, Esquyers 16000. besides common women
belonging to the said Counsel. 450. Barbars 600. Minstrels, Cooks, and Jesters,
320. So that the whole multitude which were viewed to be in the Town of
Censtance between Easter and Whitsuntide were numbered to be 60500. Strangers
and Forrainers at the Counsel.

At this time Wenc^laus King of Bohemia was required by the Counsel to send
John Hus that he might purge himself of the slanders that was raised upon him,
who went thither with the Emperors safe conduct given him; he is brought before
the Pope and the Cardinals, and of them is slanderously accused of many crimes,
he is kept a while in prison amongst them, during which time he wrote certain
Books, that is to say, Of the Ten Commandments, Of the love and knowledge of
God, Of Matrimony, Of Penance, Of the enemies of Mankind, Of the Prayer of our
Lord, And of the Supper of our Lord After Pope John fled out of Constance, the
Popes servants delivered up the Keys of the prison where John Hus was, unto
the Emperor Sigismund, and to the Cardinals; then by the whole consent of the
Counsel the said John Hus was put into the hands of the Bishop of Constance,
who sent him to a Castle of the other side of the River of Rhine, not very far
from Constance, where he was shut up in a Tower, with fetters on his legs, that
he could scarcely walk in the day time, and at night he was fastened up to a
Rack against the Wall, hard by his Bed. In the mean season the Nobles of
Bohemia did all their endeavor to purchase hid deliverance, having respect to
the good renown of all the Realm, the which was wonderfully desamed and
slandered by certain naughty persons, and to this effect the Nobles of Bohemia
gave in a Schedul or Bill to the Counsel, humbly entreating that John Hus
might be delivered out of prison, and defend his own cause openly, he is
brought before the Counsel, where many things were falsely said to his charge
by his adversaries, whereof he cleared himself, yet he is condemned for an
Heretic, and a teacher of false and erroneous Doctrine: when sentence and
judgment was given out against him, kneeling down upon his knees, he said,
Lord Jesus Christ forgive mine enemies, by whom thou know that I am falsely
accused, and that they have used false witness and slanders against me,
forgive them, I say, for thy great mercies sake. This his prayer and Oration,
the greater part, and especially the chief of the Priests did deride and mock,
he is first degraded and deprived of all the Priestly ornaments and
privileges, and before they deliver him over unto the Secular power, they put
this reproach upon him, they caused to be made a certain Crown of Paper almost
a cubit deep, in the which were painted three Devils of wonderful ugly shape,
and this Title set above their heads, Haeresiarcha, the which when he saw, he
said, My Lord Jesus Christ for my sake did wear a Crown of Thorns, why should
not I then for his sake again wear this light Crown, be it never so
ignominious, truly I will do it, and that willingly. When it was set upon his
head, the Bishops said, now we commit thy soul unto the Devil. But I said John
Hus, lifting up his eyes toward the heavens, I commit my spirit unto thy hands
O Lord Jesus Christ, unto thee I commend my spirit which thou have redeemed
These contumelous opprobries thus ended, the Bishops turning themselves toward
the Emperor, said, this most sacred Synod of Constance leaves now John Hus
which has no more any office, or to do in any Church of God, unto the Civil
Judgment and power. Then the Emperor commanded Lodovieus Duke of Bavaria,
which stood before him in his Robes, holding the Golden Apple with the Crosses
in his hands, that he should receive John Hus off the Bishops, and deliver him
unto them which, should do the Execution, by whom as he was led to the place of
Execution, before the Church doors he saw his Books burning, whereat he smiled
and laughed: And all men that passed by he exhorted, not to think that he
should die for any error or heresy, but only for the hatred and ill will of
his adversaries, which had charged him with most false and unjust crimes; all
the whole City in manner being in Armor, followed him. When as he was brought
to the place of Execution, he kneeled down upon his knees, and lifting up his
eyes to heaven, he prayed, and said certain Psalms, and especially the 50. and
31. Psalms; and they which stood hard by, heard him often times in his prayer,
with a merry and cheerful countenance rep^^t this verse, In thy hands O Lord I
commend my spirit, etc. Which thing when the Lay People beheld which stood next
unto him, they said, what he has done before we know not, but now we see and
hear that he does speak and pray very devourly and godly. In the mean time
while he prayed, as he bowed his neck backward to look upward unto heaven, the
Crown of Paper fell off from his head upon the ground. Then one of the
Soldiers taking it up again, said, let us put it again upon his head, that he
may be burned with his Masters the Devils whom he has served. When as by the
commandment of the Torments he was risen up from the place of his prayer, with
a loud voice he said, Lord Jesus Christ assist me, and help me that with a
constant and patient mind, by thy most gracious help. I may bear and suffer
this cruel and ignominious death whereunto I am condemned for the preaching of
thy most holy Gospel and Word. Then as before he declared the cause of his
death unto the people, in the mean time the Hangman stripped him of his
garments, and turning his hand behind his back, tied him fast unto the Stake
with Ropes that was made wet. And whereas by chance he was turned toward the
East, certain cried out that he should not look toward the East, for he was an
Heretic, so he was turned toward the West. Then was his neck tied with a Chain
unto the Stake, the which Chain when he beheld, smiling, he said that he would
willingly receive the same Chain for Jesus sake, who he knew was bound with a
far worse Chain. Under his feet they set two Fagots, admixing Straw withal,
and so likewise from the feet up to the chin, he was enclosed in round about
with Wood. But before the Wood was set on fire, Lodovicus Duke of Bavaria, with
another Gentleman with him which was the son of Clement, came and exhorted John
Hus that he would be yet mindful of his safeguard, and renounce his errors.
To whom he said, what error should I renounce when as I know my self guilty of
none, for as for these things which are falsely alleged against me, I know that
I never did so much as once to think them, much less to preach them, for this
was the principal end purpose of my Doctrine, that I might teach all men
penance and remission of sins according to the verity of the Gospel of Christ
Jesus, and the exposition of the holy Doctors, wherefore with a cheerful mind
and courage, I am here ready to suffer death. When he had spoken these words
they left him, and shaking hands together, they departed. Then was the fire
kindled, and John Hus began to sing with a loud voice, Jesus Christ, the Son of
the living God have mercy upon me. And when he began to say the same the third
time. the wind drove the flamme so upon his face that it choked him, yet
notwithstanding he moved a while after by the space that a man might almost say
three times the Lords Prayer. When all the Wood was burned and consumed, the
upper part of the body was left hanging in the Chain, the which they threw down
stake and all, and making a new sire, burned it, the head being first cut in
Gobbets that it might the sooner be consumed into ashes. The heart which is
found amongst the bowels being well beaten with staves and clubs was at last
pricked upon a sharp stick, and roasted at a fire a part until it was
consumed. Then with a great diligence gathering the ashes together they cast
them into the River of Rhine, that the least remnant of the ashes of that man
should not be left upon the earth, whose memory notwithstanding cannot be
abolished out of the minds of the people, neither by water, neither by any kind
of torment. And here is to be considered that notwithstanding the Emperor had
promised unto Master John Hus safe conduct that he might come freely unto
Constance, but also that he should return again unto Bohem without fraud or
interruption, yet the Emperor is forced by the importunity of the Cardinals and
Bishops, to break promise, for said they, that no defense could or might be
given either by safe conduct of or by any other mean unto him which was
suspected or judged to be an heretic.

Not long after followed the burning of that famous and learned man and godly
Martyr of Christ Master Jerome of Prage burned at Constance for like cause and
quarrel as Master John Hus was. This Jerome grievously sorrowing for the
slanderous reproach and defamation of his country of Boheme. And also hearing
tell of the manifest injuries done unto that man of worthy memory Master John
Hus freely and of his own accord came unto Constance, to declare openly before
the Counsel the purity and sincerity of his faith and his innocence, and how to
purge himself of Heresy whereof he was slandered and defamed and gave
intimation set up in diverse places of the town of Constance, charging his
slanderers of what Nation or Estate soever: they be which will object against
him any crime of error or heresy to come forth openly before him in the
presence of the whole Counsel to object against him, and he shall be ready to
answer openly and publicly before the whole Counsel of his innocence, and to
declare the purity and sincerity of his true Faith. And finding no safe conduct
to compare before the Counsel, the Nobles, Lords, and Knights specially of the
Bohemian Nation present in Constance gave unto Master Jerome their Letters,
parents confirmed with their Seals for a testimony and witness of the
premises, with the which Letters the said Master Jerome returned again into
Bohemia, but by the treason and conspiracy of his enemies, he was taken and
brought back again bound with fetters and chains, and was cited to compear
before the Counsel, and compearing, after some examination he is sent to
prison, where he is cruelly handled with chains and bolts of Iron put upon him,
and being hardly entertained he is kept in prison the space of an year, in
end he is forced to abjure and recant and consent unto the death of Master John
Hus that he was justly and truly condemned and put to death by them, He, what
for fear of death, and hoping thereby to escape out of their hands according to
their will and pleasure, and according to the tenor which was exhibited unto
him, did make abjuration and that in the Cathedral Church and open Session, the
draught thereof penned to him be the Papists may be seen in the Book of
Martyrs.

After his abjuration he returns to prison where he is not so straightly chained
and bound as he was before, notwithstanding he is kept every day with
Soldiers and armed men; he is brought again before the Counsel, where his
enemies laid against him of new an hundred and seven Articles, to the intent he
should not escape the snare of death, which they provided and led before him,
unto the which Articles most subtly objected against him, he denied that he
held or maintained any such Articles as were either hurtful or false, and
affirmed that these witnesses had deposed them against him falsely and
slanderously, as his most cruel and mortal enemies; he revoked his former
recantation that he had wickedly consented and agreed to the sentence and
judgment of the condemnation of Wickliff and Hus and that he had most
shamefully lied in approving and allowing the said sentence; neither was he
ashamed to confess that he lied, yea he did also revock and recant his
confession, approbation and protestation which he had made upon their
condemnation, affirming that he never at any time had read any errors or
heresy in the Books and Treatises of the said Wickliff and Hus, etc. The
Counsel condemns him as an Heritick, and drowned in all kind of Heresies,
Excommunicat and accursed, leaving him unto the Arbitrament and Judgment of
the Secular Judge to receive just and due punishment according to the quality
of so great an oftence. After he is condemned of the Counsel, he told them
that his death would leave a remorse in their consciences, and a nail in their
hearts, and said he, Et cito vos omnes ut respondeatis mihi coram altissimo and
justissimo judice post centam annos, that is, And here I cite you to answer
unto me before the most high and just Judge within an hundred years; as also,
when the sentence was given out against him, a great and long Miter of Paper
was brought unto him, Painted about with red Devils, the which when he beheld
and saw, throwing away his Hood upon the ground amongst the Prelates, he took
the Miter and put it upon his head, saying, Our Lord Jesus Christ when as he
should suffer death for the most wretched sinner, did wear a Crown of Thorns
upon his head and I for his sake in stead of that Crown will willingly wear
this Miter and Cap, Afterward he was laid hold of by the Secular power and
brought forth to execution. When he was going out of the Church, with a
cheerful countenance and loud voice lifting his eyes up to Heaven he began to
sing, Credo in unum Deum, as it is accustomed to be sung in the Church.
Afterward as he passed along, he did sing some Canticles of the Church. After
he came to the place of Execution, where Master John Hus had before suffered
death innocently, kneeling down, he made a certain devour prayer: while he was
thus praying, the tormenters took him up, and lifting him up from the ground,
spoiled him of all his garments, and left him naked, and afterward girded him
about the Loins with a Linen Cloth, and bound him fast with cords and chains
of Iron to the picture of John Hus. which was made fast unto the earth, and so
standing upon the ground when as they began to lay the Wood about him, he sang
Salve festa dies, and when the Hymn was ended, he sang again with a loud voice,
Credo in unum Deum unto the end. That being ended he said unto the people in
the Germane. Tongue in effect as follows. Dearly beloved children, even as I
have now sung, so do I believe, and none otherwise. And this Creed is my whole
faith, notwithstanding I die for this cause because I would not consent and
agree to the Counsel, and with them affirm and hold that Master John Hus was
by them holily and justly condemned, for I did know well enough that he was a
true Preacher of the Gospel of Jesus Christ. After that he was compassed with
the Wood up to the crown of the head, they cast all his garments upon the Wood
also, and with a Firebrand they set it on fire; the which being once fired, he
began to sing with a loud voice, In manus tuas Domine commendo spiritum meam.
When that was ended, and that he began vehemently to burn he said in the vulgar
Bohemian Tongue, O Lord God Father Almighty have mercy upon me, and be
merciful unto mine offenses, for thou know how sincerely I have loved thy
truth. Then his voice by the vehemence of the fire was choked and stopped that
it was no longer heard, but he moved continually his mouth and lips as though
he had still prayed or spoken within himself. As he was burning in the sire,
they brought his bedding, his straw-bed, his Boots, his Hood, and all other
things he had in the Prison, and burned them all to ashes in the same fire. The
which ashes after that the fire was out they did diligently gather together and
carry them in a Cart, and cast them into the River of R^ine, which ran hard by
the City.

The Bohemians understanding what was done at Constance against their Doctors,
and being greatly grieved thereat directed their Letters to this Barbarous
Counsel of Popish murderers, compleaning of their cruel and unjust dealing
against Master John Hus being a just good and catholic man etc. Also that they
have apprehended, imprisoned and condemned and even now peradventure, like as
ye did to Master John Hus, ye have most cruelly murdered the worshipful man,
Master Jerome of Prage, a man abounding in eloquence, Master of the seven
liberal Arts, and a famous Philosopher, not being convict but only at the
sinister and false accusations of his and our accusers and betrayers, as the
Letter in it self at more length bears. The Nobles and Gentlemen of Bohem and
Moratia are cited up to the Counsel, and to suppress the Bohemians from
making any stir, did make Laws and Articles to the number of 14. whereby to
bridle them. And first, that the King of Bohemia shall be sworn to give
obdience, and to defend the Liberties of the Church of Rome. 2. That all
Ministers, Doctors and Priests shall be sworn to abjure the Doctrine of
Wickliff and Hus etc. The Bohemians notwithstanding these cruel Articles
contemning the vain de-devices of those Prelates and Fathers of the Counsel
ceased not to proceed in their League and purpose begun, joining themselves
more strongly together. And first of all these Bohemians partly for the love of
John Hus and Jerome their country men partly for the hatred of their Malignant
Papistry assembling together agreed to celebrate a solemn memorial of the
Death of John Hus and Jerome, decreeing the same to be beholden and celebrat
yearly; this done, they suppressed diverse Monastries, Pharisaical temples, and
idolatrous Phanes, beginning first with the great Monastry of the Blackfriars
8. miles from Prage, driving away the wicked and vicious Priests and Monks out
of them, or compelling them unto a better order, whereupon ensued great
troubles. Wars and Bloodsheds between the Pope Sigismund the Emperor on the one
hand, and the Bohemians on the other; Immediately after the death of Wenceslaus,
arose Zisca a Noble man, and being sore grieved with the death of John Hus and
Jerome, of Prage, he minded to revenge the injuries which the Counsel had
done, greatly to the dishonor of the Kingdom of Bohem upon their accomplices and
adherents, he gathered together a number of men of War and subverted the
Monastries and idolatrous temples, pulling down and breaking in pieces the
Image and Idols, driving away the Monks and Priests which he said were kept up
in their closters like Swyn in their styes to be fatted etc. He gathered
together about forty thousand men, many battles were foughten beween him and
the Emperor. Zisca having but one eye before, lost the other in Battle, yet
for all that he would not forsake his Army, but still took the charge of them.
As the Emperor with the whole power of Germany was busied on the one side
against the Bohemians, So Martin the Pope was as much occupied on the other
side who about the same time directed forth a terrible Bull full of all poison
to all Bishops and Archbishop^ against all such as took any part or side with
Wickliff, John Hus, Jerome or with their Doctrine and opinions. At this time
the Bohemians wrote a fruitful and Christian exhortation to the Kings and
Princes to stir them up to the zeal of the Gospel. Zisca being now sick and
near his death, being demanded what place he would be buried, he answered and
commanded his skin to be plucked off from his dead Carcass, and the flesh to
be casten unto the fowels and beasts, and that a Drum should be made of his
skin which they should use in their battles, affirming that as soon as their
enemies should hear the sound of that Drum, they would not abide but take their
flight: He was a valiant Captain of the Bohemians, he was eleven times victor
in the field, he was a severe punisher of the pride and avarice of the Clergy.
After Zisca was dead their was great fear, sorrow and lamentation in the Army,
the Soldiers accusing fortune which gave over such an invincible Captain to be
overcome with Death; immediately there was a division in the Host, the one part
choosing Procopius Magnus to be their captain, the other part saying, that
there was none could be found worthy to succeed Zisca, whereupon they choosing
out certain to serve the Wars, named themselves Orphans, and albeit that
oftentimes there was division between them, yet whenever any foraign power
came toward them, they joined their Powers together in one Camp and defended
themselves and prevailed mightily against their enemies. These things thus done
the Emperor sent for the Nobles of Bohem which went unto him into a town of
Hungary called Posonium in the bo^ders of Austria upon the banks of the River
Dannubius, but they would not enter into the Town, but remain without in their
Tents, whether as the Emperor going out unto them, communed with them as
touching His right and Title, and recovering of his Fathers kingdom promising
if there were any cause which did alienat the Bohemians minds from him, that he
would take away all the occasion thereof. They made answer that he had made war
upon them without cause, and that he had suffered their countrymen contrary to
his promise to be burnt at Constance not being heard, and the Kingdom to be
contumeliously interdicted, and the Nobles of Bohemia to be condemned by the
Church of Rome as Heretics, and that he should think the force and power of
the Bohemians not to be so small, but that they would provide for their own
honor, whereunto the Emperor answered very gently, and offered them a General
Counsel wherein they might declare their innocence, if they would submit
themselves to the judgment of the Universal Church. But the Bohemians which
were now become valiant victors in Arms, would not now be overcome with words;
and so nothing being finally concluded, the Emperor returned home. Then Pope
Martine perceiving the Gospel to increase daily more and more, sent the
Cardinal of Winchester, an Englishman, born of a Noble House into Germany, to
move them unto War against the, Bohemians, whereunto also the Emperor did
assist him. There was three Armies provided; In the first Army were the Duke of
Saxony and the lower Cities. The second Army which was gathered of the
Franconians was under the conduct of the Marquess of Brandeburg. The third
Army was led by Otho the Archbishop of Trevers, whom the Rhenenses, the
Bavarians, and the Imperial Cities of Snevia followed. These Armies entering
into Bohemia into three several parts, after they were passed the Wood they
joined together and pitched before Misia, this City which was taken from the
Papists the night before, before they went any further they were determined to
recover, but when as news came to the Host how the Protestants had gathered an
Army and came with all speed toward them, they fled before they saw their
enemies, leaving behind them their Warlike Engines with a great prey. In end
there was a Counsel h^^den at Basil, which went to the Bohemians that they
should send their Ambassadors which should show a reason of their Faith,
promising a safe conduct to go and come, and free liberty to speak what they
would. An Embassage of three hundred Horses was sent unto Basil, they compeared
before the Counsel, and being heard they were demanded in what point they did
disagree from the Church of Rome, they proponed four Articles; First, they
affirmed that all such as would be saved, ought of necessity to receive the
Communion of the Last Supper under the kinds of Bread and Wine. The second
Article, they affirmed all civil rule and dominion to be forbidden unto the
Clergy by the Law of God. The third Article, that the Preaching of the Word of
God is free for all men, and in all places. The fourth Article, as touching
open crimes and offenses which are in no ways to be suffered for the avoiding
of greater evil. Some were chosen by the Bohemians, and some by the Counsel,
to consider the Articles, and to dispute them; this Disputation continued fifty
days, where many things were alleged on either part. In end, after long
dispute and reasoning between the Bohemians and the Counsel, there was a
concord and unity concluded between them. The Counsel permitted the Bohemians
to Communicate under both kinds as a thing lawful by the authority of Christ,
and profitable and healthful to all such as duly received it. As for the
other three Articles the Bohemians promised to receive the Declaration of the
Church touching them, and confirmed it setting to their hands; what the
determination was of these three Articles I find it not. Thus the Bohemians did
constantly defend and maintain their Religion, that Bishop of Rome could never
yet divert them from it, especially from the Communion of both kinds.

In the year of God 1438. The noble Art of Printing with Letters made in Brass
was found out, a very Divine Invention, worthy of memory and admiration: yet
were it more admirable if it ware not so much profaned. The Invention was
Germanick, and very strange at the beginning, and of great profit. John
Gutemberge Knight was the first Author of this goodly Invention. The thing was
first essayed at Magance, sixteen years before it was divulged in Italy. One
says that John Faustus, called Gutman Invented it with Peter Scheffer.

Now to leave the estate of the Church of Bohemia for a while, we return to
speak of the Persecutions in England, and elsewhere, for if we will read and
mark and take a view of the stirs that have been from time to time for
Religion, we shall find that in England is more burning and slaying for
Religion, and more blood shed amongst them then in any other Country or Nation
in Christendom besides; and because we cannot name all that has been troubled
and persecuted amongst them for Religion, we shall name some of the most
memorable, And first of all in the first year of King Henry the sixth his
Reign, was burned the constant witnesse-bearer and testis of Christ's Doctrine,
William Tailor a Priest under Henry Chichelie, Archbishop of Canterbury, for
maintaining erroneous and heretical Doctrine as they alleged, as that prayer
ought to be directed to God alone, and to pray to any creature is to commit
idolatry. After long imprisonment, with great constancy did consumat his
Martyrdom.

Next, William White Priest, he was a follower of John Wickliff, and a Priest,
not after the common sort of Priests, but rather reputed amongst the number of
them whom the Wiseman speaks, he was as the Morning Star in the midst of a
Cloud, etc. This man was well learned, upright, and a well spoken P^iest, he
was apprehended and taken by the Bishop of Norwich, and of him condemned and
burnt in Norwich; this man was of so divine and holy life, that all the people
had him in great reverence, and desired him to pray for them, insomuch that one
Margret Wright confessed that if any Saints were to be prayed unto, she would
rather pray to him then any other, when he was come unto the Stake, thinking to
open his mouth to speak unto the people to exhort and confirm them in the
verity, one of the Bishops Servants took him on the mouth, thereby to force him
to keep silence. And thus this good man receiving the Crown of Martyrdom,
ended this mortal life, to the great dolor and grief to all the good men of
Norfolk. About this time also was burned Father Abraham of Colchester, and John
Waddon Priest, for suspected Heresy.

Many both men and women in those days in the time of King Henry the sixth
being suspect of Heresy or Lollaroy were apprehended and accused, and cast
into prison, and greatly vexed, and after their abjuration brought into open
shame in Churches and Markets; the form of the Popish penance was this, three
fuistgations or displings in procession about the Cathedral church three
several Sundays, and three displings about the market place three principal
market days, his head and neck and feet being bare, and his Body covered only
with a short shirt or vesture, having in his hands a taper of Wax of a pound
weight, which the next Sunday after his penance, he should offer to the
Trinity, and that for the space of three years after every Ash wednesday and
Monday and thursday he should appear in the Cathedral Church before the Bishop
or his Vicegerents to do open penance among the penetentiaries for his
offenses.

In the year of God 1430. shortly after the solemn coronation of King Henry the
sixth, a certain man named Richard Hoveden a woll-winder and a citizen of London
was burnt for suspicion of Heresy. This man when he could by no persuasions
be withdrawn or plucked back from the opinions of Wickliff, he was by the rules
of the Church condemned for Heresy and burned hard by the town of London.
Thomas Bagely a Priest being a valiant Disciple and adherent of Wickliff was
condemned by the Bishop, of Heresies at London and was degraded and burnt in
Smithfield.

In the days of King James the first Anno 1431. was deprehended in the
University of St. Andrews one named Paul Craw a Bohemian and delivered over to
the Secular power to be burnt for holding contrary opinions unto the church of
Rome touching the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, the worshipping of Saints,
Auricular confession with others of Wickliffs opinion; they put a ball of
Brass in his mouth, to the end he should not give confession of his Faith to
the people, neither yet that they should understand the defense which they had
against their unjust acculation and condemnation.

Richard Which Priest a man suspect of Heresy was degraded and burned at the
Tower Hill. It is testified of him that before his death he spoke (as
prophesying that the posterior of the Tower should sink, which also afterward
came to pass, wherefore of many of the people he was counted for an holy man
in so much (as it is affirmed) they came to the place where he was burnt and
there made their oblations and prayers, and a red great heap of stones and set
up a cross there by night, so that by this means a great clamor ran upon the
Church men and especially upon such as put him to death, Then to cease therein
more, the King gave commandment to punish such as went thither on pilgrimage.

Here is to be remembered the lamentable losing of Constantinople, in the year
of God 1453. Constantinus Palaeologus being Emperor of Constantinople, was
taken by the Turk Mahometes, after the siege of fifty four days, which siege
began in the beginning of April. The Emperor was slain, and the Turks sacking
and ranging about streets, houses, and corners, did put to the sword most
unmercifully whomsoever they found both aged and young, Matrons, Virgins,
Children and Infants, sparing none. The Noble Matrons and Virgins were
horribly ravished, the Goods of the City, the Treasures in houses the
Ornaments in the Churches were all sacked and spoiled, the Pictures of Christ
opprobriously handled in hatred of Christ. The spoil and havoc of the city
lasted three days together while the barbarous Soldiers murdered and rispled
what them listed. These things thus being done, and the tumult ceased, after
three days Mahomets the Turk enters into the city, and first calling for the
Heads and Ancients of the city, such as he found to be left alive, he commanded
them to be mangled and cut in pieces. It is also reported that in the feasts of
the Turks honest Matrons and Virgins and such as were of the Kings stock, after
other contumelies were hewn and cut in pieces for their disport. And this was
the end of that princely and famous city of Constantinople, beginning first by
Constantinos, and ending also with Constantinus. This terrible destruction of
the city of Constantinople the Queen of cities, may be a warning to all
Christendom.

Rynold Peacock Bishop of Chichester is greatly afflicted and persecuted by the
Pops Prelates for his faith and profession he is forced by menaces and
threatenings to recant, and notwithstanding his recantation he is detained still
in prison, where some say, that he was privately made away to death.

In the Reign of King Edward the fourth, Joh Goose, or John Hus, a goodly and
constant servant of Christ was unjustly condemned and burnt at the Tower Hill.
Thus had England also this John Hus as well as Bohemia: John Goose in Englsh,
is as much as John Hus in the Bohemian Language, This John Goose being
delivered to Robert Belisdon one of the Sheriffs, to see him burnt in the
afternoon. The Sheriffliffe a charitable man had him home to his house, and
there exhorted him to deny (says the Story) his error. But the godly man after
long exhortation heard, desired the Sheriff to be content, for he was satisfied
in his conscience. notwithstanding this he desired of the Sheriff for Gods sake
to give him some meat, saying tha the was very sore hungered. Then the Sheriff
commanded him meat, whereof he took and did eat, as if he had been toward no
manner of danger, and said to such as stood about him, I eat now a good and
complete Dinner, for I shall pass a little sharp shower ere I go to Supper;
and when he had Dined he gave thanks, and requested that he might shortly be
led to the place where he should yield up his spirit unto the Lord, and so he
was burned.

In the time of this King Edward the fourth this is not to be passed by, that
one Burdet a Merchand dwelling in Cheapside, at the Sign of the Crown, which is
now the Sign of the Flower deluce, merrily speaking to his son, that he would
make him Inheritor of the Crown, meaning indeed his own house, for the which
words King Edward causing them to be misconstrued, and interpreted as though he
had meant the Crown of the Realm, within leffe then four hours he was
apprehended, judged, drawn and quartered at Cheapside, here is Tyranny in
misconstruing a man's words, and the Laws of the Realm misconstrued for the
Kings pleasure.

In the ninth year of the Reign of Henry the seventh was burned a very old
Woman above fourscore years, named Joan Boughton, Widow and Mother to Lady
Young, which Lady was also suspect to be of that opinon that her Mother was,
she was a Disciple of Wickliff, and held so fast and firmly eight of his
opinions, that all the Doctors of London could not turn her from one of them:
And when it was told her that she should be burnt for her obstinacy and
self-belief, she set nothing by their menacing words, but defied them, for she
said that she was so beloved of God and his holy Angels that she passed not for
the fire. And in the mids thereof she cried to God to take her soul into his
holy hands, and so she was burnt; he night following the most part of her ashes
were had away of such as had a love unto the Doctrine she died for. In the next
year following was a Priest burnt which was so strong in his opinion that all
the Clerks and Doctors then there being, could not remove him from his Faith,
whereof the King being informed, he caused the said Priest to be brought before
his presence, who by his persuasion caused him to revolt, and so he was burnt
immediately.

The storm of persecution which had raged long in England against many good and
godly men, brake forth likewise in other parts of Christendom, as in Germany,
Italy and France: In Germany and other parts there about after the burning of
John Hus were many put to death for religion. In Italy one Thomas Rhedone a
Frenchman and a Camelit Friar was burnt for the profession of Christ at Rome.
At this time also fell out the Martyrdom and burning of Hieronymus Savanatola,
a man no less godly in heart then constant in his profession, he was a Monk in
Italy, and singularly well learned, he Preached sore against the evil life and
living of the Spirituality, and especially of his own Order, complaining sore
upon them as the Springs and Authors of all mischiefs and wickedness, etc. He
with his two companions was hanged and burnt for the Gospels truth. This man
foreshewed many things to come, as the destruction of Florence and Rome, and
the renewing of the Church, which three things have happened in these times in
this our remembrance; also he foreshewed that the Turks and Mores in the latter
days should be converted unto Christ; he also declared that one should pass
the Alps into Italy, like unto Cyrus, who should subvert and destroy all Italy,
whereupon Johannes Franciscus Picus Earl of Mirandula called him a holy
Prophet, and defended him by his Writtings against the Pope, as many other
learned men also defended the innocence of the said Savanarola.

And speaking of this Joannes Picus Earl of Mirandula, it shall not be amiss
to show this Story of him. This Picus being but a young man, was so excellently
witred and so singularly learned in all Sciences, and in all Tongues, both
Latin, Greek and Hebrew, Chaldie and Arabie, that coming to Rome Booted and
Spurred, he set up nine Conclusions to Dispute in the same with any in all
Christenstome, whosoever would come against him. Of which Conclusions diverse
were touching the matter of the Sacrament: And when none was found in all Rome
or in Europe that openly would Dispute with him, privily and in corners certain
of the Popes Clergy, Prelat, Lawyers and Friars by the Pope appointed,
consulted together to enquire upon his Conclusions, whereupon they did
Articulat against him for suspicion of Heresy: And thus the unlearned Clergy
of Rome privily circumvented and entangled this learned Earl in their snare of
Heresy, against whom they durst never openly Dispute: he died being of the age
of thirty two years, of such wit and towardness as is hard to say whither ever
Italy bred up a better. In his sickness Charles the eight then French King
moved with fame of his Learning came to visit him. The furniture of his Books
cost him 70^0. Florents, a little before his death his mind was to give all
away, and to take a Towl and Preach, but the Lord would not permit him. With
two Popes, that is, with Pope Innocent and Alexander the sixth he had much
vexation. Under the Reign of Fredericus the third Emperor of Germany, was one
John, a Pastor or a Neat herd, which was a keeper of Cattle, him the Bishop of
Herbipolis condemned and burnt for an Heretic, because he taught and held that
the life of the Clergy was ignominious and abominable before God.

But to proceed in the Persecutions of the Godly in England in King Henry the
seventh his Reign. In the Diocese of Lincoln in Buckinghame-shire, William
Smith being Bishop of the same Diocese, one William Tylesworth was burned in
Amershame, his only Daughter being a married Woman, a Godly and a Faithful
Woman, was compelled with her own hands to set fire to her dear father, and at
the same time her husband did penance at her fathers burning, and bare a Faggot,
as did also many more. At the burning of this William Tylsworth were sixty and
above that were put to bear Fagots for their Penance, of whom diverse were
enjoined to bear and wear Fagots at Lincoln for the space of seven years, some
at one time, some at another, etc. In which number was also Robert Barlet a
rich man, who for his Possessions sake was put out of his Farm and Goods, and
was condemned to be kept in the Monastery of Ashange, were he did wear on his
right Sleeve a square piece of Cloth the space of seven years together. About
the same time also of the burning of Wil^iam Tylesworth was one Father Roberts
burned at Buckinghame, he was a Miller and dwelt at Missenden and at his
burning there were about twenty persons that were compelled to bear Faggots and
to do such penance as the wicked Pharisees did compel them. After that, by
the space of two or three years was burned at Amersham Thomas Bernard a husband
man and James Mordan a labourer and they two was burned both at one fire, Also
there were thirty burned on the right Cheek at the same time and bare Faggots;
the cause was, that they would table against Superstition and Idolatry and
were desireous to hear and read the holy Scriptures. The manner of their
burning on the cheek was this, their necks was tied fast to a Poast or Stay
with Towels, and their hands holden that they might not stir, and so the Iron
being hot was put to their cheeks, and thus bare they the Prints and Marks of
the Lord Jesus about them. At this time also in the days of King Henry the
seventh, was one Laurence Ghest which was burned in Salisbury for the matter of
the Sacrament, he was of a comely and tall Personage, he was kept in Prison the
space of two years. This Laurence had a Wife and seven Children, wherefore they
thinking to expugne and persuade his mind by stirring his fatherly affection
toward his Children, when the time came which they appointed for his burning,
as he was at the Stake, they brought before him his Wife and his foresaid seven
Children, at the sight whereof, although Nature is commonly bent to work in
other, yet in him Religion overcoming Nature, made his constancy to remain
unmovable, in such sort, as when his Wife began to exhort and desire him to
favor himself, he again desired her to be content, and not to be a block in
his way, for he was in a good course running toward the mark of his Salvation,
and so fire being put to him he finished his life, renouncing not only Wife and
Children, but also himself, to follow Christ. As he was in burning, one of the
Bishops men threw a firebrand at his face, whereat the brother of Laurence
standing by, ran at him with his Dagger and would have slain him had he not
been otherwise stayed.

It is recorded likewise in the reign of this King Henry the seventh when the
people was returning from the burning of a faithful woman at Cheaping Sadbery
for alleged Heresy by Doctor Whitington the Bishops Chancelour who was
present at the execution, as he returned with the rest there happened that a
Bull, escaping from the Butcher into the street, he passed through the throng
of the people, every one drawing aside and shifting for himself, and touching
neither man nor child till he came where the Chancelour was, against whom the
Bull as pricked with a sudden vehemence ran upon him with his horns, and taking
him upon the paunch gorred him throw and throw and so killed him immediately,
carrying his guts, and trailing them with his horns all the streets over, to
the great admiration and wonder of all them that saw it. Here we see a plain
miracle of Gods mighty power and judgment both in the punishing of this
wretched Chancellor, and also in admonishing all other like persecutors by his
example to fear the Lord, and to abstain from the like cruelty.

Besides these before mentioned, many more in this King Henry the seventh his
reign were persecuted for their Religion, specially in the diocese of
Coventree and Lich-field, among whom we shall name these few. First, John
Blomston was openly and publicly infamed, accused reported and apeached that
he was a very Heretic, because he had preached, taught, holden and affirmed
that the power attributed to St. Peter in the Church o^ God, by one Savior
Jesus Christ immediately, did not flitte or pass from him to remain with his
Successors. Item that there was as much virtue in an Herb, as in the Image of
the Virgin Mary. Item that prayer and Alms avail not the dead, for incontinent
after death he goes either to Heaven or hell, whereupon he concludes there
is no Purgatory etc.

Richard Heghame in the same City of Coventree was accused to be a very
Heretic, because that he did hold that a Christian man being at the point of
death should renounce all his own works good and ill, and submit him to the
mercy of God. Item, It was fondness to worship the images of our Lady of Tower
in the forsaid City, or of other Saints, for they are but stocks and stones.
Item that if the image of our Lady of Tower were put into the fire, it would
make a good fire. Item that it were better to deal money unto the poor folks,
than to offer to the Image of Christ and other Saints, which are but dead
stocks and stones. John Smith was accused to be a very Heretic, because he did
hold every man is bound to know the Lords Prayer and the Creed in English if he
might for these false Priests. Thomas Butler was likewise accused to be a very
Heretic because he did hold that there were but two ways that is to say, to
heaven and to hell. Item that there was no Purgatory, for every man immediately
after death passes either to heaven or hell. Item that prayers and pilgrimages
are nothing worth, and avail not to purchase heaven etc. All these and many more
were forced to recant and put to penance. We are not here to let pass the
fearful and miserable end of Pope Alexander who before was called Roderick
Borgia that fell out at this time in the year 1502. who made a covenant with
the Devil that he might attain to the Popedom, and being inquisitive how long
he should reign, It was told him that he should reign the space of eleven and
eight, which was an ambiguous answer, for the Pope promised to himself the time
of nineteen years in his Popal dignity but Satan's meaning was but eleven years
and eight months, the time being expyred and his death drawing near, on a
certain day as he made ready an exceeding great banquet for certain rich
Senators and Cardinals and had recommended to his son Valentine that he should
give Wine to drink unto one of the said Cardinals wherein there was poison put.
It came to pass that he that had the charge to deliver the Wine, unwitting he
gave unto the Pope of that flagon wherein the poison was, who being of great
age, was taken with a languishment and grievous pain, he had by the space of
eleven years and ceretain months excessively oppressed Italy and troubled the
world. Being then detained in his Bed (as John Baleus says) he commanded one
of his men called Madena, which amongst all them of his Court and House was his
most faithful and familiar to go into his Guard rob or Wadrop and to bring him
a certain little Book enriched with Gold and precious stones which was in an
armory which he specified, but this little Book contained all manners and
kinds of illusions and enchantments of Necromancies, whereby the old man
thought to inform himself to be certified of the close and end of his life. The
servant obeying the commandment of the Pope his Master, and going unto the
place specified. And after he had opened the door, he was ready to have
entered into the Chamber, he saw a certain person sit in the Popes Chair who
was altogether like unto his Master at whose sight being supprised with an
horrible fear and astonishment, and as it were half dead without taking the
book ran back again toward Alexander, unto whom he rehearsed what he had seen,
namely that in his Wardrop he found such a Pope as himself set in a Chair.
Alexander after he had understood the thing, and seeing his servant exceedingly
afraid, suffered him to rest a while, after he did so much persuade him that he
returned unto the said Wardrop to see if again he could find the said Pope.
The servant then being entered found in the said chamber him whom before he had
seen, and that more is, being asked by him that sat there, what cause brought
him into that place and what business he had there, he being taken with a
sore trembling and as it were out of breath, answered he came to take a certain
garment for the Pope. All which words the Devil being then in the chair
making an horrible noise said, what Pope? I am the Pope. But after that these
things were reported unto Alexander, his evil began to increase and death
aproach. A short day after, a man apparalled like a carrier or Lackie, came and
fiercly knocked at the Chamber door, wherein the Pope was detained sick, saying
the must needs speak with him. The door being opened and he admitted partly
with the Pope, all others drew aside, and the Pope and he spoke together as
two use to do in secret causes, yet men may see a great and marvelous strife
and debate betwixt them two, and that the Pope was not content, for he said
unto him, how goes this? My term is not accomplished, thou know that thy
promise was 19. years, whereof I have brued but eleven and eight months Unto
which words the Lucky hardly answered, ye understand not well the speech, but
are with it abused, for I said not nineteen years as ye imagined, but I said,
ye should remain Pope eleven years and eight months, the which are come and
passed, and therefore ye must needs die. But although the Pope was very active
to require and to pray instantly that he would have regard to his life and to
the term that he had granted him in his Popedom, yet it was as to speak to a
deaf man, and to plead in vain, for all his allegations, remonstrations,
exceptions and requests profited nothing, so that they which were in the
chamber and heard this marvelous debate and difference, might judge that Satan
was more expert in the Art of Arithmetic then the Pope was, and they might
easily conclude that Alexander erred in his account; Finally to close up the
matter, even as Satan went and departed from the place, in like manner also
with great cries, sighs and fearful sobs, the Popes soul (as it were) following
his steps dislodged and miserably departed from his Body. This miserably and
ungodly died this Pope Alexander leaving to his Son his Seigniory altogether
wasted and ruinous, and to the Italians their commonwealth all confused,
perverted and wasted to the end he might be a public example to all ages how
things evil gotten melt away, and are wickedly and unluckily spent. This Pope
had with his said Son a daughter called Lucretia, with whom both he and his Son
lay, as Potantus and Samazarias have left written.

Now to come to the Persecutions that were in King Henry the eight his Reign.
During the time and Reign of King Henry the eight there was great alteration of
things as well to the civil State of the Realm, as especially to the State
Ecclesiastical and matters of the Church appertaining; for at last by him was
exiled and abolished out of the Realm the usurped power of the Bishop of Rome,
idolatry and superstition some what suppressed, Images and pilgrimages defaced,
Abbeyes and Monasteries pulled down, Sects of Religion rooted out, Scriptures
reduced to the knowledge of the vulgar tougue, and the estate of the Church and
Religion redressed.

There was at this time a fierce contention which long before had troubled the
Church, and now this present year 1509. was renewed afresh between two certain
orders of begging Friars, to wit, the Dominick Friars and the Franciscans,
about the Conception of the Virgin Mary the Mother of Christ. The Franciscans
or Gray-fries held that the Virigin Mary prevented by the grace of the Holy
Ghost, was so sanctified that she was never subject one moment in her
conception to Original sin. As for the Dominicks which were commonly called
Blackfriars or Preaching Friars held that he Virgin Mary was conceived as all
other Children of Adam be, so that this privilege only belongs to Christ to
be conceived without Original sin, not withstanding the said blessed Virgin was
sanctified in her Mothers womb, and purged from the Original sin, so as John
Baptist, Jeremiah, or any other privileged person. This frivolous Question
kindling and gendering between these two Sects of Friars brust out in such a
flame of parts and sides taking, that it occupied the heads and wits, Schools
and Universities almost through the whole Church, some holding one part with
Scotius, some the other part with Thomas Aquinas, but in end Pope Sixtus
decided the Question, and sent forth his Bull for the Conception of the Virgin
to be without Original sin.

Having made mention of this Pope Sixtus the fourth, It shall not be amiss to
she what manner of Pope he was, he builded up in Rome a Stews of both kinds,
getting thereby no small Revenues and Rents unto the Church of Rome. This Pope
among other his Acts reduced the Year of Iubile from the fifty unto the twenty
five: He also instituted the Feast of the Conception and the presentation of
Mary, and of Anna her Mother, and Joseph. Also he Canonized Bonaventur and Sir
Frances for Saints. By this Sixtus also Beads were brought in and institute to
make our Ladies Psalter, through the occasion of one Alanus and his order, whom
Baptista makes mention of in this Verse, hi filo insertis numerant sua murmura
baccis, that is, these men putting their Beads upon a string, number their
Prayers. This Sixtus the Pope made two and thirty Cardinals in his time, of
whom Patrus Ruerius was the first, who for that he was Cardinal, which was but
two years, spent in luxurious riot, wasted and consumed two hundred thousand
Florens, and was left 6000. in debt. And what vile abominations this Pope
permitted to this Cardinal and his Family to be done is unworthy to be named.
Wesellus Gromugensis in a certain Treatise of his de indiligentiis Papalibu^
does declare. The Pope Sixtus was a Monster rather of Nature then a Prelat of
the Church. After this Sixtus came Innocentius the eight, as rude and as far
from all learning as his Predecessors was before him. Amongst the noble facts
of this Pope this was one, that in the Town of Polus and Equicolos he caused
eight men and six women with the Lord of the place to be apprehended and taken,
and judged for Heretics, because they said that none of them was the Vicar of
Christ which came after Peter, but they only which follow the poverty of
Christ. Also he condemned of Heresy George the King of Bohemia, and deprived
him of his dignity, and also of his Kingdom, and procured his whole Stock to be
utterly rejected and put down, giving his Kingdom to Mathias King of Pononia.
Many godly persons both men and women were persecuted for their Religion in the
Diocese of London by Fitz James, and after him Tunstal Bishops of London, cruel
persecuters of Christ's Church. Amongst others, the chiefest objection against
Joan Baker was that she would not only her self not reverence the Crucifix, but
had also persuaded a friend of hers lying at the point of death not to put any
trust or confidence in the Crucifix, but in God which is in Heaven who only
works all miracles that be done, and not the dead Images that be but stocks
and stones, and therefore she was sorry that ever she had gone so often on
pilgrimage to St. Savior and other Idols. Also that she did hold opinion that
the Pope had no power to give Pardons, and that the Lady Young her Mother, who
was not long before that time burned, died a true Martyr of God, and therefore
she wished of God that she her self might do no worse then the said Lady Young
her Mother had done. Unto William Pottier besides diverse other false and
slanderous Articles, it was alleged that he should affirm that there was six
Gods, the first three was the Holy Trinity, the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost; the fourth was a Priests Concubine being kept in his Chamber the fifth
was the Devil, and the sixth the thing that a man sets his mind most upon,
The first part of his Articles he utterly denied, confessing most firmly and
truly the blessed Trinity to be only one God in one Unity of Deity, as to the
other three he answered that a Priest delighting in his Concubine made her as
his God, likewise a wicked person persisting in his sin without repentance, and
made the Devil his God. And lastly, he granted that he once hearing of certain
men which by the singing and chattering of Birds would seek to know what things
were to come either to themselves or others, and that these men esteemed their
Birds as Gods, and otherwise he spoke not. Some were accused and challenged for
speaking against Pilgrimages, praying unto Saints, that they denied the carnal
and corporal presence of Chtists Body and Blood in the Sacrament of the Altar.
And many were charged to have spoken against Pilgrimages, and to have read and
used certain English Books repugnant to the faith of the Romish Church, and the
four Evangelists, Wickliff, Wicket, a Book of the Ten Commandments of Almighty
God, the Revelation of St. John, the Epistles of Paul and James, with other
like, which these holy ones could never abide, and good cause why, for as
darkness could never agree with light, no more can ignorance the maintainer of
that Kingdom with the true knowledge of Christ and his Gospel. John Household
was charged to have called them Antichrists and Whoremongers, and the Pope
himself a strong strumpet and a common bawd unto the world, who with his
pardons had drowned in blindness all Christian Realms and that for money.
Moreover about the same time were certain articles objected against John Hig
alias Noke, alias Johnson, by the Bishops vicar General amongst which were
these, first that he had affirmed that is was as lawful for a temporal man to
have two Wives at once, as for a Priest to have two benefits. Also that he had
in his custody a book of the four Evangelists in English, and did often read
therein, and that he did favor the Doctrines and oppinions of Martin Luther,
openly pronouncing that Luther had more learning in his little finger then all
the Doctors of England in their whole Bodies, and that all the Priests in the
church were blind and had led the people the wrong way. Likewise It was
alleged against him that he had denied Purgatory and had said, that while he
were alive he would do as much for himself as he could, for after his death he
thought prayer and alms deeds would little help him, these and such like
matters were they wherewi^h these poor and simple men and women were chiefly
charged, and as heinous Heretics excommunicated, imprisoned and at last
condemned to recant, and some of them in utter shame and reproach, besides the
ordinary bearing of Faggots before the cross in procession, or else at a
Sermon were enjoined for penance (as they termed it) as well to appear once
every year before their ordinary, as also to wear the sign of a Pagot painted
upon their sleeves other part of their outward garment and that during all
their lives, or so often or so long as it pleased their ordinary to appoint, by
which long rigorous and open punishing of them, they meant as it should seem
utterly to terrify and keep back all others from the true knowledge of Jesus
Christ, and his Gospel. But the Lord be evermore praised, what effect their
wicked purposes therein have been taken these our most lightsome days of Gods
glorious Gospel do most joyfully declare.

William Sweting and John Brewster were put to death and burnt together in
Smithfield, the chiefest case of Religion alleged against them in their
Articles was their Faith concerning the Sacrament of Christ's Body and Blood,
which because it differed from the absurd, gross and Capernaiticall opinion of
the new School men, was counted as most heinous Heresy.

John Brown* was put to death and burned at Ashford in the year of God 1517.
about the fourth year of King Henry the eighth, upon the declaration of a
Priest in a conference between him and the Priest, who took him for an
Heretic, whereupon he was apprehended and committed to Prison, the same night
as he was in the Stocks at Ashford, where he and his Wife dwelt, his Wife came
and sat beside him all the night before he should be burned, to whom he
declaring the whole story how he was handled showed and told how that he could
not set his feet to the ground, for they were burned to the bones, and told her
how by the two Bishops Warham and Fisher his feet were heated upon the hot
coals, and burnt to the bones, to make me (said he) to deny my Lord which I
will never do, for if I should deny my Lord in this World, he would hearafter
deny me; I pray thee therefore (said he) good Elizabeth, continue as thou have
begun, and bring up thy Children virtuously and in the fear of God, and so the
next day this godly Martyr was burned, commending his spirit into the hands of
the Lord, At the fire the Bayllie Arrant bade cast in his Children also, for
they would spring (said he) of his ashes. This blessed Martyr John Brown had
born an Faggot seven years before in the days of King Henry the 7. Richard
Hunne Merchand Tailyour, dwelling within the City of London, and freeman of
the same, who was esteemed during his life, and worthily reputed and taken not
only for a man of true dealing and good substance, but also for a good
Catholic man; this man was suspect of Heresy, and committed to the Lollords
Tower, where he was first murdered by his adversaries the Priests, and by them
hanged, whereupon they made the people to believe that he had desperately hanged
himself, and after his death led a process against him, and condemned him of
Heresy; and at last burned him in Smith-field.

Thomas Man for alleged Heresy suffered much trouble and long imprisonment,
and in end was condemned and burnt in Smithfield. This Tomas Man, called Doctor
Man confessed that he turned seven hundred people to his Religion and Doctrine,
for the which he thanked God.

Against the faithful Christians of Amershame was great trouble and
persecution in the time of William Smith Bishop of Lincoln. At which time
diverse and many were abjured, and it was called abjuratio magna, the great
abjuration, and they which were noted of that Doctrine and profession were
called amongst themselves by the name of known men, or just fast men, as now
they are called by the name of Protestants.

At this time although public authority then lacked to maintain the open
Preaching of the Gospel, yet there were many in secret, good Christians and
true Professors of the Gospel; truly the fervent zeal of those Christian-dayes,
seemed much superior to these our days and times, as manifestly may appear by
their sitting up all night in reading and hearing, also by their charges and
expenses in buying of Books in English. In which rarity of books, and want of
Teachers, this one thing may be much marvelled and mused at, to note in the
Registers, and to consider how the word of truth notwithstanding did multiply
so exceedingly as it did amongst them, wherein is to be seen no doubt the
mavelous working of Gods Almighty power, for so it is found and observed in
considering the Registers, how one neighbor resorting and conferring with
another, often seemed with a few words of the first and second Table, did win and
turn their minds to that wherein they desired to persuade them, touching the
truth of Gods Word, and their Sacraments. To see their travells, their earnest
seeking, their burning zeal, their readings, their watchings, their sweet
assemblies, their love concord, their godly living, their faithful meaning
with the faithful, may make us now in these our days of free profession to
blush for shame. Four prinipal points they stood in against the Church of Rome,
in pilgrimage, adoration of Saints, in reading of Scripture-books in English,
and in the carnal presence of Christ's Body in the Sacrament.

After the death of William Smith succeeded John Longland, a bloody and cruel
persecutor of the Saints of God, he caused the Wife to detect the Husband, the
Husband the Wife, the Father the Daughter, the Daughter the Father, the Brother
to disclose the Brother, and Neigbour the Neighbor, neither were there any
Assemblies nor readings kept, but both the persons and also the books were
known; neither was one word so closely spoken, nor Article mentioned, but it
was discovered. So subtly and slightly these Catholic Prelates did use their
inquisions and Examinations, that nothing was done or said among these known
men fifteen or twenty years before so covertly, but it was brought at length to
their intelligence, as appears in a Table describing the grievous afflictions
of good Men and Women in the Diocese of Lincoln under John Longland their
Bishop, with the names both of the accusers and of them that were accused, also
with the crimes to them objected out of the Registers of the said Diocese; all
these were constrained to abjure and do penance, and they which were Relapse,
were committed to the Secular power and burnt.

As touching the burning of John Scrivener, here is to be noted that his
Children were compelled to set the fire unto their Father, in like manner as
Joan Clerk also Daughter of William Tylesworth, was compelled to give fire for
the burning of her own natural Father. The example of which cruelty, as it is
contrary both to God and Nature, so it had not been seen nor heard of in the
memory of the Heathen.

Now to leave England for a while, and to take a view of other Countries, and
the Persecutions for Religion there, we shall begin first with Germany.

OF MARTIN LUTHER by whom God began the Reformation of his CHURCH.
MARTIN LUTHER born at Isleben in Saxony one Augustine Friar arose in the year
of God 1516. to detect and discover the errors of the Church of Rome, and to
cry out against indulgences upon this occasion. Leo the tenth of that name,
Pope of Rome, who under pretense of War against the Turk, sent a ^ubile with
his Pardons abroad through all Christian Realms and Dominions, whereby he
gathered together innumerable riches and Treasure. The Gatherers and Collectors
thereof persuaded the people that whosoever would give ten shillings, should at
his pleasure deliver one soul from the pains of Purgatory, for thus they held
as a general Rule that God would do whatsoever they would have him, according
to the saying, quicquid solveritis super terram, erit solutum in Coelis,
whatsoever ye loose upon earth, the same shall be loosed in Heaven, but if it
were but one jot less then ten shillings, they preached that it would profit
them nothing. This filthy kind of the Popes Merchandise as it spread through
all quarters of Christian Regions, so it came also to Germany through the means
of a certain Dominick Friar named Tecellius who men impudently caused the Popes
Indulgences or pardons to be carried and sold about the Country. Whereupon
Luther much moved with their blasphemous Sermous of this shameless Friar, and
having his heart earnestly bent with arden desire to maintain true Religion,
published certain Propositions concerning Indulgences, and set them openly on
the Temple of Wittemberge. This Friar and the rest of the Monks there cried out
against Luther, that he was an Heretic, and worthy to be persecuted with fire.
And besides this, he burned openly Luthers Propositions, and the Sermon which
he wrote of Indulgences. This rage and fumish fury of this Friar enforced Luther
to treat more amply of the cause, and to maintain his matter. And thus rose the
beginnings of this controversy, wherein Luther neither suspecting nor dreaming
of any change that might happen in Ceremonies, much less such a Reformation of
Doctrine and Ceremonies as afterward did follow, did not utterly reject the
Indulgences, but required a moderation in them. The Duke of Saxony at this
time being very inquisitive to understand the truth of Luthers Doctrine and
consulted the learned men thereupon. In the number of whom was Erasmus, whom
the Duke desired to declare unto him his opinion touching that matter of Martin
Luther saying and protesting that he would rather the ground should open and
swallow him, then he would bear with any Opinions which he knew to be contrary
to manifest truth; And therefore he desired him to declare his judgment in the
matter to him freely and friendly Erasmus thus being entreated of the Duck,
began thus jestingly and merrily to answer the Dukes request, saying, that in
Luther were two great faults, First, that he would touch the bellies of Monks;
the second, that he would touch the Popes Crown, which two matters are in no
case to be dealt withal. Then opening up his mind plainly to the Duke, thus he
said, that Luther did well in detecting errors, and that Reformation was to
be wished and very necessary in the Church, and added moreover that the effect
of his Doctrine was true, but only that he wished in him a more temperat
moderation and manner of writing and handling. Luther was condemned of the Pope
as an Heretic, and rejected from the communion of the Faithful, he appealed to
the Counsel to come. After this, Leo the Pope commanded that his Books should
be burnt at Rome. And on the other side Luther burnt at Wittemberge his
Canons, Popish decretals. And the Emperor by the Popes instigation was ordained
to exile him, but he was kept secret and solitary for a time by the advice and
conveyance of certain Nobles in Saxony, In the absence of Luther out of
Wittemberge, Andreas Carolastadius proceeding more roughly and eagerly in
causes of Religion had stirred up the people to throw down Images in the
Temples besides other things more. For the which cause Luther returning again
into the City, greatly misliked the order of their doings, and reproved the
rashness of Carolastadius, declaring that their proceedings herein were not
orderly, but that Pictures and Images ought first to be thrown out of the
hearts and consciences of Men, and that the people ought first to be taught
that we are saved before God and please him only by Faith and that Images serve
to no purpose. This done, and the people well instructed, there was no danger
in Images, but that they would fall of their own accord. Not that he repyned to
the contrary (he said), as thought he would mantain Images to stand or to be
suffered, but that this ought to be done by the Magistrate and not by force upon
every man's head, and without order and authority etc. The cause why Luther so
stood against that violent throwing down of Images, and against Carolastadius,
seems partly to rise off this, by reason this Pope Adrian in his Letters sent
to the Princes and States of Germany does grievously complain and charge the
Sect of Luther for sedition and tumults and rebellion against Magistrates, and
subverters and destroyers of all order and obedience as appears by the words
of the Popes Letter, therefore Martin Luther to stop the mouth of such
slanderers, and to prevent such sinister suspicions, was enforced to take this
way as he did to proceed as much as he might by order and authority. Zuinglius
and Luther agreed in all points of Doctrine, saving in the Doctrine of the
Sacrament; neither were there opinions so different in the matter of the Lords
Supper, but that in the principal points they accorded. For if the question be
asked of them both, what is the material substance of the Sacrament which our
outward senses do behold and feel; they will both confess bread, and not the
accidents only of bread: Further if the question be asked whither Christ be
there present, they will both confess. His true presence to be there, only in
the manner of presence they differ. Again ask whether the material substance
laid before our eyes in the Sacrament, is to be worshipped, they will both deny
it and judge it Idolatry; and likewise for transubstantiation, and for the
Sacrifice of the Masle, they both do abhor and deny the same: As also the
Communion to be in both kinds to be administered, they do both assent and grant.
Only their difference is in this concerning the sense and meaning of the words
of Christ, hoc est corpus meum, this is my body etc. Which words Luther
exponneth to be taken nakedly and simply as the letter stands without trop
and figure, and therefore holds the Body and Blood of Christ truly to be in
the Bread and Wine, and so also to be received with the mouth Uldricus
Zuinglius with Joaunes Oecolampadius, and other more do interpret these words,
otherwise to be taken not literally but to have a spiritual meaning, and to be
expounded by a Trope and Figure, so that the sense of these words, This is my
body thus to be expounded; this signifies my Body and Blood The Saxons follow
Luther, and the Helvetians Zuinglius, and as time did grow, so the division of
these opinions in sides, spread in further Realms and Countries, the one part
called of Luther, Lutherians, the other having the name of Sacramentaries.
Notwithstanding in this one unity of opinion, both the Lutherians and
Sacramentaries do accord and agree, that the Bread and Wine there present is
not transubstantiat unto the Body and Blood of Christ as said, but is a true
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ. Many conflicts he had with the Pope,
his Cardinals and Clergy, and notwithstanding their fury and rage and plots
against him, and the great power of his adversaries, the Emperor and the King
of Spain and other Potentats, yet they could not prevail against him God
keeping and defending him, that they could not bereave him of his life, but
died peaceably in his own country where he was born, teaching and preaching
Christ the space of 29 years. Many dangers he escaped, especially these two
which are not to be passed by, wherein appears the great providence of God
toward him; First, when a certain Jew by his enemies was appointed to come to
destroy him by poison, yet was it so the will of God, that Luther had warning
thereof before, and the face of the Jew sent to him by picture, whereby he knew
him, and avoided the peril. Another time as he was sitting in a certain place
upon his stool, a great stone there was in the Voult over his head where he did
sit, which being stayed miraculously, so long as he was sitting, as soon as he
was up, immediately fell upon the place where he sat, able to have crushed him
all in pieces if it had light upon him. And what should I speak of his prayers
which were so ardent unto Christ, that (as Melancton writes) they which stood
under his window, where he stood praying might see his tears falling and
dropping down. Again with such power he prayed that he (as himself confesses)
had obtained of the Lord that so long as he lived, the Pope should not prevail
in his country. After his death (said he) let them pray who could. Again, it is
reported of him that a young man about Wittemberge, who being kept bare and
needy by his Father, was tempted by way of Sorcery to bargain with the Devil
or a familiar as they call him, to yield himself body and soul into the Devils
power, upon condition to have his wish satisfied with money, so that upon the
same, an Obligation was made by the young man written with his own blood and
given to the Devil. Upon the sudain, wealth and alteration of this young man,
the matter first being noted, began afterward more and more to be
suspsuspected, and at length after long and great admiration was brought unto
Martin Luther to be examined; the young man, whether for shame or fear long
denied to confess, and would be known of nothing, yet God so wrought being
stronger then the Devil that he uttered unto Luther the whole substance of the
case as well touching the money as the Obligation Luther understanding the
matter, and pitying the lamentable estate of the man, willed the whole
congregation to pray, and he himself ceased not with his prayer to labor, so
that the Devil was compelled at the last to throw in his Obligation at the
window, and bade him take it again unto him. And as he was mighty in his
prayers so in his ^^^mons. God gave him such a grace that when like preached
they which heard him, thought every one his own temptations severally to be
noted and touched. Whereof when signification was given unto him by his
friends, and he demanded how that could be; my own manifold temptation (said
he) and experiences are the causes thereof. For Luther from his tender years
was much broken and exercised with several conflicts, for he confessed that he
was afflicted and vexed with all kind of temptations saving only one which was
with covetousness. With this vice he was never (said he) in all his life to be
troubled nor once tempted.

Pope Leo the tenth of that name bare an irreconciliable heatred unto the
Gospel of the Kingdom of God, which he persecuted in the person of Luther and
many others: for as one day the Cardinal Bembo uttered before him a certain
thing drawn from the Gospel, he answered him mocking. It has ever sufficiently
been known what profit that sable of Jesus has brought us and our company. O
execrable blasphemy! Luther died in the year of our Lord 1546. being 63. years
of age. The Prayer of Luther at his death was this. My Heavenly Father,
eternal and merciful God, thou bath manif sted unto me thy d^ar Son, our Lord
jesus Christ. I have taught him, I have known him, I love him as my life, my
health and my redemption whom the wicked have persecuted, maligned, and with
injury afflicted, draw my soul to thee. After this, he said as ensues thrice,
I commend my spirit into thy hands, thou have redeemed me, O God of truth: God
so loved the World, that he gave his only Son, that all these that believe in
him should have life everlasting, Joh. 3.

The Martyrs of GERMANY.
MAny after the death of Luther were troubled for their Religion, some tossed
from place to place, same exiled out of the Land for fear, some cau^ed to
abjure, some driven to Caves in Woods, some racked with torment, and some
pursued to death with faggot and fire. And because we cannot name all that were
persecuted and put to death for their Religion, we shall name some few of the
choicest.

And first, there were two young men burnt at Bruxlies, the one named Henry
Voes, being of the age of twenty four years, and the other John Esh, which
before had been of the order of the Augustine Friars, for that they would not
retreat and deny their Doctrine of the Gospel, which the Papists call
Lutheranisme. As they were led to the place of Execution, they went joyfully
and merrily, making continually protestations that they died for the glory of
God, and the Doctrine of the Gospel, believing and following the holy Church of
the Son of God, saying also that it was the day which they had long desired.
After they were come to the place where they should be burned, and were
dispoyled of their garments, they tarried a great space in their shirts, and
joyfully embraced the Stake that they should be bound to, patiently and
joyfully enduring whatsoever was done unto them, praising God with Te Deum
laudamus, and singing Psalms and rehearsing the Creed in testimony of their
death. One of them seeing that fire was kindled at his feet, said, me thinks ye
do straw Rose, under my feet, finally the smoke and the flame mounting up to
their face, choked them.

The next year after the burning of these two young men before rehearsed, was
Henry Sutphen put to death by the conspiracy of the Monks and Friars, without
all order of judgment, or just condemnation: about the City of Diethmar in the
borders of Germany, in the year 1524. they resolved to take him by night and
burn him, before the people should know it, as he came to his defense to
answer. They with a confused multitude of people came unto him in the night,
and drew him naked out of his bed, bound his hands hard behind him, and carried
him away; then he being mavelous weary and faint required to be set on
horseback, for his feet were all cut and hurt with the ice, because he was led
all night barefoot, when they heard him say so, they mocked and laughed at him,
saying, must we hire an horse for an Heretic, he shall go on foot whither he
will or not, and after a world of indignities, mockings, striking and
bustetting him, he was burnt without any judgment, his cause not being heard.
In the mean time a certain Woman as he passed by, offered her self to suffer a
thousand stripes, and to give much money, so that they would pacify the
matter, and keep him in the prison, until that he might plead his matter
before the whole convocation of the country people. When they heard these
words, they waxed more mad, and threw the Woman down under feet, and trod upon
her, and beat the said Henry unmercifully; the fire as often as it was kindled,
would not burn, notwithstanding they satisfied their minds upon him, striking
and pricking him with all kind of Weapons, the said Henry standing in the mean
time in his shirt before all the rude people at the last they having gotten a
great Ladder, bound him hard thereunto, and cast him into the fire. And when he
began to pray, and to repeat his Creed, one struck him upon the face with his
fist, saying, thou shall first be burnt, and afterward pray and prat as much as
thou will. Then another treading upon his breast, bound his neck so hard to a
step of the Ladder, that the blood gushed out of his mouth, and nose. This was
done to strangle him withal, for they saw that for all his sore wounds he
would not die. After that with their weapons they had killed him, they roasted
him upon the coals, for the Wood as often as it was set on fire, would not burn
out. And thus, this godly Preacher finished his Martyrdom, and many more godly
Preachers were burnt.

About the same time many other godly Persons and such as feared God for the
testimony of the Gospel were thrown into the River of Rhene and into toher
Rivers were their Bodies afterward were found and taken up. In the same year of
God 1524. the Town of Mihtemherge in Germany was taken and ransacted and
diverse of the inhabitants there slain, and many impri^oned for mantaining and
keeping with them Carolastadius to be their preacher. The lamentable Martyrdom
of John Clerk of Melden in France. Melden is a City of France ten miles
distant from Paris where John Clark was first apprehended and taken for setting
up upon the Church door against the Popes pardon lately sent thither from Rome,
in which Bill he named the Pope to be Antichrist, for the which his punishment
was this, that three several days he should be whipped, and afterward have
a mark imprinted in his forehead as a note of infamy, his mother being a
Christian Woman, although her Husband were an adversary, when she beheld her
son thus pitionsly scourged, and ignominously deformed in the face, constantly
and boldly did encourage her son, crying with a loud voice blessed be Christ,
and welcome be these prints and marks; thereafter leaving the Town, he came to
Merz in Lotharing, where he remained a certain space, applying his Vocation,
being a Wool-carder in his Occupation; whereas he the day before that the
people of that City, should go out to the Saburbs to worship certain blind
Idols, thereby (after an old use and custom amongst them received) being
inflamed with the zeal of God, went out of the City to the place where the
Images were, and brake them all down in pieces; trial being taken who should
be the doer thereof, this man was suspected and examined upon the same, at
first confesses the fact, rendering also the cause which moved him so to do,
he was condemned and led to the place of Execution, where he sustained extreme
torments, for first his hand was cut off from his right arm, then his nose with
sharp Pinsons was violently plucked from his face, after that both his arms
and his papes were likewise plucked and drawn out with the same Instrument: To
all them that stood looking upon it was an horror to behold, and doleful
sighs of his pains. Again to behold his patience, or rather the grace of God
giving him the gift to suffer, it was a wonder. Thus quietly and constantly he
endured in his torments, pronouncing, or in a manner singing the Verses of the
115. Psa. Simulachra little sunt argentum and aurm, etc, Their Images be silver
and gold the work only of man's hands, etc. The residue of his life that
remained in his rent body was committed to the fire, and therewith consumed.

A certain godly Priest in Suevia being commanded to come and give good
counsel to sixteen Countrymen that should be beheaded, afterward was bid
himself to kneel down to have his head cut off, no cause nor condemnation
further being laid against him, but only of mere hatred against the Gospel.

After that George Sherter had instructed the people in knowledge or the Gospel
in Rastar, ten miles distant from Saltzburg, was accused of his adversaries,
and put in prison, where he wrote a Confession of his Faith, he was condemned to
be burned alive, but means, was made that first his head should be cut off, and
his body afterward be cast into the fire, going toward his death, he said
crying aloud, that ye may know (said he) that I die a true Christian, I will
give you a manifest sign, and so he did by the power of the Lord, for when his
head was taken off from his shoulders, the body falling upon his belly, so
continued the space while one might well eat an Egg, after that it softly
turned it self upon the back, and crossed the right foot over the left, and the
right hand over the left; at the sight whereof they which saw it were in a
great marvel. The Magistraces which before had appointed to have burned the
body after the beholding, seeing this mira^^ would not burn it, but buried it
with other Christian men's bodies, and many by the same example were moved to
believe the Gospel. Thus God is able to manifest the truth of his Gospel in the
midst of persecution who is to be blessed for ever. Amen.

Giles of ^rasels as he was brought to the place of burning, where he saw
agreat heap or Wood pyled, he required the greater part to be taken away, and
be given to the poor, a little, said he, would suffice him. Also seeing a poor
man coming by, as he went, that lacked shoes, he gave his shoes unto him;
better, (said he) so to do, then to have his shoes burnt, and the poor to
perish for cold. Standing at the Stake, the Hangman was ready to strangle him
before, but he would not, saying that there was no such need that his pain
should be mitigated, for I fear not (said he) the fire do therefore as thou art
commanded. And thus the blessed Martyr lifting up his eyes to Heaven in the
middle of the flame, was extincted, to the great lamentation of all that stood
by. After that time when the Friars of that City would go about for their
Alms, the people would say, it was not meet for them to receive Alms with
bloody hands. At this time also was great Persecution in Gaunt and other parts
of Flanders, as Charles, ths Emperor did lie in Gaunt, the Friars and Doctors
there obtained that the Edict made against the Lutherians might be red openly
twice a year, which being obtained, great persecution followed, so that there
was no City nor Town in all Flanders, wherein some either were not expulsed, or
headed, or condemned to perpetual prison, or had not their goods confiscat,
neither was there any respect of Age or Sex. At Gaunt especially many there
were of Head men which for Religion sake were burned: Afterward the Emperor
coming to Brusels there was terrible slaughter and persecution of Gods people,
namely in Brabant, Hennegow and Artoys, the horror and cruelty whereof is
almost incredible, in so much that at one time, as good as two hundredth men and
women together were brought out of the Country about into the City, of whom
some were drowned, some burnt quick, some prively made away, others sent to
perpetual prison, whereby all prisons and towers were replenished thereabout
with prisoners and captives, and the hands of the Hangman tired with slaying
and killing, to the great sorrow of all them which knew the Gospel; being now
compelled either to deny the same or confirm it with their Blood.

Ursula and Maria virgins of noble stock were burned for the Go^pel in Delden,
a Town in lower Germany, First Mary being the younger was put to the fire where
she prayed ardently for her enemies commending her soul to God. At whose
constancy the Judges did greatly marvel. Then they exhorted Ursula to turn, or
if she would not, at least that she should request to be beheaded. To whom she
said, that she was guilty of no error, nor defended any thing but which was
consonant to the Scripture in which she trusted, to preserve unto the end. And
feared not the fire, but rather would follow the example of her dear Sister
that went before. This was marvelous that the executions could in no wise
consume their dead bodies with fire, but left them whole lying upon the ground
white, which certain good Christians privily took up in the night and burned:
thus God many times shows his power in the midst of T^ibulations,

At Dornick in Fanders, Marion wife of Adrian Tailyour, for the Go^pell of
Christ was burned quick, she was enclosed in an iron grate formed in shape of a
paslie, was laid in the earth and burned quick. A certain Prince in Germany
about Hungary or the parts of Pannonia, his name is not expressed, put out the
eyes of a certain Priest in Germany for no other cause but for that he had said
the Mass to be no Sacrifice, in that sense as many Priests do take it. Neither
did the cru^l Prince immediately put him to death, but first kept him in
prison a long time afflicting him with diverse torments, then he was brought
forth to be degraded, after a barbarou^ and tyrannous manner, first, they
shaved the crowr, of his Head, then rubbed it with Salt that the blood came
running down his shoulders. After that, they razed and paired the tops of his
Fingers with cruel pain that no savor of the holy oil might remain. At last
the patient and godly Martyr four days after yielded up his life and spirit.

Joannes Diazius a Spainyard Martyr was killed of his own brother at Neoberge
in Germany.

In Hungary a certain godly Priest preached that the eating of flesh is not
prohibited in the Scripture, for the which the cruel Bishop after he had
imprisoned him certain weeks, caused him to be brought out and his body to be
tied over with Hairs, Geese, and Hens, hanging round about him, and so the
beastly Bishop made Dogs to be set upon him, which cruelly rent and tore
whatsoever they could catch. And thus the good Minister of Christ being driven
about the City with the barking of Dogs died and was Martyred. The sight
whereof as it was lamentable to the godly, so it seemed ridiculous to the
wicked, but within few days after the impious Bishop by the stroke of Gods
just hand fell sick, and became horn mad, and so raving without sense or wit
misarably died.

Great likewise was the persecution in Bohemia for two hundredth Ministers and
Preachers of the Gospel were banished out of Bohemia, for preaching against
the Superstition of the Bishop of Rome, and extolling the glory of Christ.

Besides these Germanus above specified and others a great number there was
both in the Higher and Lower Countries of Germany, which were secretly drowned
or buried, or otherwise in prison made away, whose names although they be not
known to us, yet they are Registrated in the books of life. But leaving to
speak any further of the Martyrs which suffered in Germany which were many, we
come to speak of the French Martyrs. And because it is impossible to name all
that suffered for the cause of Christ we shall make choice to some select ones.

The French MARTYRS.
ANd first, John Cornon a husband man of Mascon uncleetered, but to whom God
gave such wisdom that his judges were amazed when he was condemned by their
sentence and burned.

Stephen Brune a husband man at the place of his burning, the wind ^o^e and
blew the fire so from him as he stood exhorting the people, that he there
continued about the space of an hour, in manner not harmed or scarce touched
with any flamme, so that all te Wood being wasted away, they were compelled to
begin the fire again with new faggots and vessels of oil and such other matter,
and yet neither could he with all this be burned, but stood safe. Then the
hangman took a staff and let drive at his head, to whom the holy Martyr being
yet alive said, when I am Judged to the fire, do ye beat me with staffes like
a Dog, with that the hangman with his Pike thrust him through the belly and the
guts, and so threw him down into the fire and burned his body to ashes,
throwing away his ashes afterward with the wind.

Constantinus a Citizen of Rhone with three other for the defense of the gospel
being condemned to be burned, were put in a dung Cart, who the reat rejoicing,
said that they were reputed here as excrements of this world, but yet their
death was a sweet odor unto God.

Aymo^d D^lavoy a Preacher of the Gospel being accused to have teached false
Doctrine, and having intelligence that he was to be apprehended, was willed by
his friends to flee and shift for himself, but he would not, saying that he had
rather that he had never been born then so to do. It was the office of a good
shepherd (he said) not to flee in time of peril, but rather to abide the
danger, least the flock be scartered, or least peradventure in so doing he
should leave some scruple in their minds thus to think that he had fed them
with dreams and fables contrary to the word of God, therefore beseeching them
to move him no more therein, he told them that he feared not to yield up both
body and soul in the quarrel of that truth which he had taught, saying with
St. Paul that he was ready not only to be bound for the testimony of Christ in
the City of Bordeaux but also to die, the Somner came, and was in the City
three days, during which time Aymondus preached three Sermons, the people in
defense of their Preacher flew upon the Somner to deliver him out of his hands:
But Aymond desired them not to stop his Martyrdom seeing that it was the will
of God that he should suffer for him he would not (said he) resist. Then the
Consuls suffered the Somner, and so Aymond was carried to Bordeaux, there he
was accused and false witn^sse brought in against him, all their accusation was
only for denying purgatory; after long and miserable imprisonment he is put to
death and burnt.

Frances Bonbard was said to be Secretary of the Cardinal of bellare, who
being also for the Gospel condemned, after his tongue was cut off, did with
like constancy sustain the sharpness of burning.

The enemies of the Gospel seeing that these that were condemned to die at the
place of the Execution, moved many with their speech, therefore they obtained a
decree of the Judges that all which were to be burned, unless they recanted at
the fire, should have their tongues cut off, which Law diligently afterward was
observed.

Michael Michelot a Taylour being apprehended for the Gospels sake, was judged
first if he would turn to be beheaded, and if he would not turn then to be
burned alive, who being asked whether of these two he would choose, answered,
that he trusted that he which has given him grace not to deny the truth, would
also give him patience to abide the fire: He was burned at Warden by Turney.

Seven men and women of the City of Langres for the Word and Truth of Christ
Jesus were committed to the fire, wherein they died with much strength and
comfort, but especially Joan which was Simon Marshall his Wife, being reserved
to the last place because she was the youngest, confirmed her Husband and all
the other with words of singular consolation, declaring to her Husband that
they should the same day be married to the Lord Jesus to live with him for ever.

Anne Andebert an Apothecaries Wife, and Widow, going to Geneva, was taken and
brought to Paris, and by the Counsel there judged to be burned at Orleance.
When the Rope was put about her, she called it her Wedding girdle, wherewith
she should be married to Christ. And as she should be burned upon a Saturday,
upon Michaelmas-even, upon a Saturday I (said she) I was first married, and
upon a Saturday I shall be married again. And seeing the Dung-cart brought
wherein she should be carried, she rejoiced thereat, showing such constancy in
her Martyrdom, and made all the beholders to marvel.

Among many other godly Martyrs that suffered in France, a story of a poor
Taylour of Paris, that dwelt in the Street of St. Antony, is not the least and
worst to be remembered, his name is not expressed, he was apprehended of a
certain Officer in the Kings house, for that upon a certain Holy Day he
followed his Occupation, and did work for his living, before he was had to the
Prison the Officers asked him why he did labor and work, giving no observation
of the Holy Day, to whom he answered, that he was a poor man living only upon
his labor. And as for the day, he knew no other but the Sunday wherein he
might not lawfully work for the necessity of his living, he is clapped into
Prison: word hereof coming to the Kings ears, the poor man was sent for to
appear, that the King might have the hearing of him, who being come before the
King, the King commanded Petrus Castellanus Bishop of Mascon to question with
him. The Taylour being entered, and nothing appalled at the Kings Majesty, after
his reverence done unto the Prince, gave thanks to God that he had so greatly
dignified him being such a wretch as to bring him where he might testify his
truth before such a mighty prince. Then Castellanus entering talk began to
reason with him touching the greatest and chiefest matter of Religion.
Whereunto the Tailyour without fear or any halting in his speech, with present
audacity, wit and memory so answered for the sincere Doctrine and simple truth
of Gods Gospel as was both convenient to the purpose, and also to his
Questions aptly and fitly correspondent notwithstanding the Nobles there
present with cruel taunts and rebukes did what they could to dash him out of
countenance, yet all this terrified not him, but with boldness of Heart and
free Liberty of Speech, he defended his cause, or rather the cause of Christ
the Lord, neither flattering with their persons, or fearing their threats,
which was to them all a singular admiration to behold the simple poor Artificer
to stand so firm and bold answering before the King to these Questions
propounded against him. Whereat when the King seemed to muse with himself, as
one somewhat amazed, and which might soon have been induced at that present to
further knowledge, the egregious Bishop and other Courtiours seeing the King in
such a muse, said, he was an obstinate and a stubborn person obfirmed in his
own opinion, and therefore was not to be marvelled at, but to be sent to the
judges and punished, and therefore least he should trouble the ears of the
said King Henry, he was commanded again to the hands of the Officers that his
cause might be informed, and so within few days after he was condemned by the
high Steward of the Kings house to be burned alive. And least any deep
consideration of that excellent fortitude of the poor man might further
peradventure pierce the Kings mind, the Cardinals and Bishops were ever in the
Kings ear, telling him that these Lutherans were nothing else but such as
carried vain smoke in their mouths, which being put to the fire would soon
vanish. Wherefore the King was appointed himself to be present at his excution,
which was sharp and cruel, before the Church of Marie the Virgin where it
pleased God to give such strength and courage to his servant in suffering his
Martyrdom, that the beholding thereof did more astonish the King then all the
other did before. Thomas Sanpaulinus a Young Man of the Age of e^ghten years
coming from Geneva to Paris, rebuked there a man for swearing, for the which
cause he being susected for a Lutherian, was followed and watched whither he
went, and was taken and brought before the Counsel of Paris, and put in
Prison, where he was racked and miserably tormented, to the intent he should
either change his opinion, or confess others of his profession, his torments
and rackings were so sore through the setting on of Mallard and another
Sorbonists, that the sight thereof made Auberius one of the Counsel, a cruel
and vehement enemy against the Gospel, to turn his back, and wept. The young
man when he had made the tormenters weary with racking, and yet would utter
none, at last was had to Manbelt Place in Paris to be burned, where he being in
the fire, was plucked up again upon the Gibbet, and asked whether he would
turn. To whom he said, that he was in the way toward God, and therefore desired
them to let him go. Thus this glorious Martyr remaining inexpugnible, glorified
the Lord with constant confession of his truth.

Nicholas Nail a Schoemaker coming to Paris with certain fardels of Books was
there apprehended who stoutly persisting in coufessing the truth was tried with
his sundry torments to utter what follows he had besides of his profession so
cruelly that his body was dissolved almost one joint from another, but so
constant he was in his silence that he would express none. As they brought him
to the Stake, first, they put a gage or piece of wood in his mouth which they
bound with Cords to the hinder part of his head so hard, that his mouth on both
sides gushed out with blood, and disfigured his face monstruously; by the way
they passed an Hospital, where they willed him to worship the Picture of St.
Mary standing at the Gate: But turned his back as well as he could, and would
not, for the which the blind people was so grieved, that they would have fallen
upon him. After he was brought to the fire, they so smeared his body with Fat
and Brimstone, that at the first taking of the fire, all his skin was parched,
and the inward parts not touched, with that the Cords burst which were about
his mouth, whereby his voice was heard in the midst of the flamme praising God,
and so the blessed Martyr departed. One of the Parliament seeing the great zeal
and patience of the Martyrs at their burning, said that way not to be best to
bring the Lutherans to the fire, for that would do more hurt then good.

A Carpenter, and another a Poynt-maker, going to Execution to be burnt for the
profession of the Gospel, their tongues were commanded to be cut off, and being
cut off, there appeared a mavelous work of the Lord, for nevertheless that
their tongues were taken from them, to the intent they should not speak, yet
God gave them utterance, their tongues being cut out, to speak at their death,
saying, we bid sin, the flesh, the world and the devil farewell for ever, with
whom never we shall have to do hearafter. Diverse other words they spoke
beside, which the people did hear and note: At last when the Tormenter came to
smear them with Brimstone and Gunpowder, go to said Filiolus, salt on, salt on
the rotten and stinking flesh; finally, as the flamme came bursting up their
faces they persisting constant in the fire, gave up their lives, and finished
their Martyrdom.

There was at Montpelliers in the year of God 1554. a certain Sheer-man or
Cloath-worker, who had been long in durance for Religion, but at length for
fear and infirmity he revolted. To whom it was enjoined by the Judges to make
public Recantation, and to be present also at the burning of Alencon, who was
condemned to death. At the beholding of whose death and constancy, it pleased
God to strike in this man such boldness, that he desired the Judges that
either he might be burnt with this Alen^on, or else be brought again to Prison,
saying, that he would make no other Recantation but so: wheresore within three
days after he was likewise condemned to the fire, and burned in the Town
aforesaid.

There was a rich Merchant in Paris, who said in jest to the Friars of St.
Frances, ye wear a Rope about your bodies because St. Francies once should have
been hanged, and the Pope redeemed him upon this condition that all his life
after he should wear a Rope: Upon this the Franciscan Friars of Paris caused
him to be apprehended and laid in Prison, and so Judgment passed upon him that
he should be hanged, but he to save his life was contented to recant, and so
did. The Friars hearing of his Recantation commended him, saying, if he
continued so he should be saved, and so calling upon the Officers, caused them
to make have to the Gallows to hang him up while he was yet in a good way (said
they) lest he fall again. And so was this Merchand notwithstanding his
Recantation hanged for jesting against the Friars.

To this Merchand may also be adjoined the Brother of Tamer, who when he had
before professed the truth of the Gospel, and afterward by the counsel and
instruction of his Brother was removed from the same, fall in desparation and
such sorrow of mind, that he hanged himself. As one Thomas Galbergue was in the
flamme at Tourney, the Warden of the Friars stood crying, Turn Thomas, yet it
is time, remember him that came at the last hour. To whom he cried out of the
flamme with a loud voice, and I trust to be one of that sort: and so calling
upon the Name of the Lord gave up his spirit, As two Martyrs at Bordeaux were
in the flamme and almost consumed in the fire to ashes, suddenly without matter
or cause such a fear fell upon them at the execution, that the Justices and the
people, notwithstanding that they had the Gates locked to them, and were
defenced with all manner of weapons about them not knowing wherefore, took them
to their legs, in such haste flying away, that they overran one another. The
Pior of St. Antonies fell down so that a great number went over him. The Judge
Pontach on his Mule with his red robe flying as the other did, was overthrown
with the preasse in the street, in such sort that he was fain to be carried to
Pichons house a widow, and there cried within, hide me, save my life, I am
dead, my friends, hide my Mule that no m^n see her nor know her, briefly such
was the fear which came from them, that every man shut up their houses. After
the fear was past, every man asked what the matter was, but none could tell,
neither could the enemies of Gods truth perceive who was he that put them so to
the flight and fear without any semblance of any adversary about them, Impius
fugit and nemo perseqnitur.

Of the cruel Masscre in FRANCE. Anno 1572.
THere was at this time a marriage to b^e between the Kings Sister and the
Prince of Navar. To this pretended Marriage it was divised that all the
chiesest Protestants or France should be invited and meet in Paris, being met
and conveened that same night of the Marriage, Soldiers were appointed in
diverse places of the City to be ready at a watchword, to break in into the
Protestants houses; at which watchword given, they brust out to the slaughter
of the Protestants, first beginning with the Admiral who was slain in his bed,
and thrown out at a window into the street, where his head being first stricken
off and embalmed with Spices to be sent to the Pope, At this time there was
slain in three days above ten thousand Men and Women, old and young of all
sorts and conditions, yea, and slew all the Protestants they knew or could find
within the city Gates enclosed. So great was the rage of the Heathenish
persecution that not only the Protestants, but also, certain whom they thought
indifferent Papists, they put to the sword in steed of Protestants, In the
number of them that were sl^^n of the more learned sort was, Petrus Ramus,
Lumbinus, and others. And not only within the Walls of Paris was this uproar
contained, but extended further into other Cities and quarters of the Realm,
especially Lions, Orleance, Tholous and Roan. In which Cities it is almost
incredible, nor scarlely ever heard of in any Nation, what cruelty was showed,
what numbers of good M^n were destroyed, in so much that within the space of
one month thretty thousand at least of Religious Protestants are numbered to be
slain. Furthermore here is to be noted, that when the Pope first heard of this
bloody stir, he with his Ca^dinals made such joy at Rome with their procession,
with their Gunshot and singing Te Deum, that in honor of that lawful festival
Act, a Iubile was commanded by the Pope with great indulgence and much
Solemnity, whereby thou have here to discern and judge with what spirit and
charity these Catholics are moved to maintain their Religion withal, which
otherwise would fall to the ground without all hope of recovery. Likewise in
France no less rejoicing there was, the King commanding public processions
through the whole City to be made with Bone-fires, Ringing and singing, where
the King himself with the Queen his Mother and his whole Court resorting
together to the Caurch, gave thanks and laud to God for that so worthy victory
archieved upon St. Bartholomews Day against the Protestants whom they thought
to be utterly overthrown and vanq^ished in all the Realm for ever. And in very
deed to man's thinking, might appear no less after such a destruction of the
Protestants, having lost so many worthy and noble Captains-as then were cut
off, whereupon many for fear revoking their Religion returned to the Pope;
diverse fled out of the Realm, such as would not turn, kept themselves secret,
durst not be known or seen, so that it was past all hope of man that the Gospel
should ever have any more place in France, but such is the admirable working of
the Lord, where man's help and hope most fails, there he shows his strength
and helps, as here is to be seen and noted by stirring up Rochel to stand to
the defense or their Religion against the Kings power, by whose example certain
Cities hearing thereof, took no little courage to do the like, as Mountaban and
others who being confederat together, exhorted one another to be circumspect,
and take good heed of the false dissembling practices not to be trusted of the
merciless Papists, intending nothing but blood and destruction. Rochel
standing to the defense of their lives and consciences, and to adventure the
worst, whereupon began great siege and battery to be laid against Rochell both
by sea and land, which was Anno 1572. The whole power of France is set against
Rochel. Thus the whole power of France being gathered against one power town,
had not the mighty hand of the Lord stood on their side, it had been impossible
for them to escape. Daring the time of this siege which lasted about seven
months, what skirmishes and conflicts were on both sides, it would require a
long tractation, In all which assaults ever the Popes Catholics had the worst.
Concerning the first assault thus I find written that within the space of 26.
days were charged against the walls and houses of Rochel to the number or
thretty thousand shot of iron Bullets and globes, where by a great breach was
made for the adversary to invade the city, but such was the courage of them
within not men only, but also of Women, Matrons and maids, with spites, fire
and such other weapons that came to hand, that the adversary was driven back,
with no small slaughter of their Soldiers. Likewise in the second assault
2000. great field pieces were laid against the Town whereupon the adversary
attempted the next day to invade the Town, but through the industry of the
Soldiers and citizens and also of women and maids the invaders were forced at
length to flee away faster then they came. No better success had all the
assaults that followed. Many were the tokens of Gods gracious dealings with
them during the time of the siege, and amongst the rest this was very memorable
at Rochel, whereas the poorer sort began to lack corn and victual, there was
sent to them every day in the River (by the hand of the Lord, no doubt a great
multitude of fish called Surdones) which the poor people did use in stead of
bread: Which fish the same day as the siege brake up, departed and came no
more, testified by them which were present there in Rochel all the time. The
King in end being weary of those chargeable wars, there was a peace agreed and
concluded between the King and the Protestants of Rochel, in which were
included other Cities of the Protestants, granting to them benefit of peace,
and liberty of Religion. The next year following, died Charels the 9. the
French King and the Cardinal of Lorain brother to Guise. The King died of the
age of 25. years, and the manner of his death is to be noted. The constant
report To goes that his blood guishing out by diverse parts of his body, he
tossing in his bed, and casting out many horrible bla^phemies, laid upon
pillows with his heals upward and head downward, voyded so much blood at his
mouth, that in few hours he dyed. Which story if it be true as is recorded and
restified, may be an spectale and example to all persecuting Kings and Princes
polluted with the blood of Christian Martyrs.

The cruel Persecution and Bloody Boutchery of the MERINDOLIANS.
FOllows the Tragical Persecution, and horrible murder of the faithful flock
of Christ, inhabiting in Merindol in the Country of Province in France; this
people of a long continuance and custom had refused the Bishop of Rome his
Authority, and observed ever a more perfect kind of Doctrine then others,
delivered them from the Father to the Son ever since the year of our Lord 1200.
for this cause they were often accused, and complained of to the King, as
contemners and despisers of the Magistrates, and Rebels; they were oftentimes
persecuted, and many put to death for their Profession; in end the Court or
Parliament at Province gave out a cruel sentence against Merindol, and
condemned all the Inhabitants to be burned, both Men and Women, sparing none,
no not the little Children and Infants, the Town to be razed, and their Houses
to be beaten down to the ground; also their trees to be cut down, as well
Olive Trees as all other, and nothing to be left, to the intent it should never
be inhabited again, but remain as a Desert or Wilderness. The violence and
execution of this cruel and bloody sentence was for a time restrained, and the
rage of the adversaries repressed, till Minerius a bloody persecuter, and the
Kings Lieutenant of Province, forged a most impudent lie against these innocent
Christians, giving the King to understand that they of Merindol, and all the
Country near about, to the number of twelve or fifteen thousand, were in the
field in Armor; with their Ensign displayed, intending to take the Town of
Mansfield, and make it one of the Cantons of the Switzers, and to stay this
enterprise; he said it was necessary to execute the Arrest manumilitari, and by
this means he obtained the Kings Letters Patents though the help of the
Cardinal of Tournon, commanding the sentence to be executed against the
Meridolians, notwithstanding the King had before revoked the said sentence, and
given strait commandment that it should no ways be executed. After this he
gathered all the Kings Army which was then in Province, ready to go against the
Englishmen, and took up all besides that were able to bear Armor in the Chief
Towns of Province, and joined them with the Army which the Popes L^gat had
Levied for that purpose in Avinion, and all Countries of Venice, and employed
the same to the destruction of Merindol, Cabriers, and other Towns and
Villages, to the number of 22. giving Commission to his Soldiers, to spoil,
ransack, burn and destroy all together, and to kill Man, Woman, and child,
without all mercy, sparing none, no otherwise then the Infidels and cruel Turks
have dealt with the Christians So Merindol without any resistance, was taken,
ransacked, burnt, razed, and laid even with the ground, and killed all, both
young and old whom they found in the Town. When he had destroyed Merindol, he
laid siege to Catriers, and battered it with his Ordinance, but when he could
not win it by force, he with the Lord of the Town, and Powling his chief
Captain, persuaded with the Inhabitants to open their Gates, solemnly promising
that if they would so do, they would lay down their Armor, and also that their
cause should be heard in Judgment with all equity and justice, and no violence
or injury should be showed against them. Upon this they opened their Gates, and
let in Minerius, with his Captains, and all his Army; but the Tyrant when he
was once entered, falsified his promise, and raged like a Beast, for first of
all he picked out about thirty men, causing them be bound and carried into a
Meadow near to the Town, and there to be miserably cut and hewn in pieces by
his Soldiers; then because he would not leave no kind of cruelty unattempted,
he also exerci^ed outrage and fury upon the poor silly women, and caused forty
of them to be taken, of whom diverse were great with child, and put them into a
Barn full of Straw and Hay, and caused it to be set on fire at four corners:
And when the silly women running to the great Window where the Hay is wont to
be cast into the Barn, would have leaped out, they were kept in with Pikes
and Halberds: then there was a Soldier, which moved with pity at the crying
out and lamentation of the Women, opened a door to let them out, but as they
were coming out, the Tyrant caused them to be slain and cut in pieces, opening
their bellies that the children fell out whom they trod under their feet, with
many other cruel and barbarous acts against the poor innocents. This done, this
Tyrant more cruel then ever was Herod, commanded one of his Captains, with a
Band of Ruffians, to go into the Church (where was a great number of Women,
Children, and young Infants) to kill all whom he found there, which the
Captain at the first refused to do, saying that were a cruelty unused among
men of War: Whereat Minerius being displeased, charged him upon pain of
Rebellion and disobedience to the King, to do as he had commanded him. The
Captain fearing what might ensue, enters with his men and destroyed them all,
sparing neither young nor old.

We are not here to pass by the fearful Jugement of God that fell upon
Minerius the cruel Persecuter of their innocents, being stricken with a strange
kind of bleeding at the lower parts, in manner of a bloody Flux, and not being
able to avoid any Urine, thus by little and little his Guts within him rotred,
and when no Remedy could be found for this terrible disease, and his Intrals
now began to be eaten of Worms, a certain famous Surgeon named La Motte,
which dwelt at Arles (a man no less Godly then expert in his Science) was
called for, who after he had cured him of this difficulty of making Water, and
therefore was in great estimation with him, before he would proceed further to
search the other parts of his putrified body, and to search out the inward
cause of his Malady, he desired that they which were present in the Chamber
with Minerius would depart a little aside: Which being done, he began to exhort
Minerius with earnest words, saying, how the time now required that he should
ask forgiveness of God by Christ for his enormous crimes and cruelty in
shedding so much innocent blood, and declared the same to be the cause of this
so strange profusion of blood coming from him. These words being heard, so
pierced the impure conscience of this miserable wretch, that he was therewith
more troubled then with the agony of his disease, in so much that he cried out
to lay hands upon the Surgeon as an Heretic; La Motte hearing this,
eftsoons convyed himself out of sight, and returned again to Arles,
notwithstanding it was not long but he was sent for again, being entreated by
his friends, and promised most firmly that his coming should be without any
peril or danger, and so with much ado he returned again to Minerius, raging
and cast out most horrible and blasphemous words, and feeling a fire which
burnt him from the Navel upward, with extreme stinck of the lower parts,
finished his wretched life, whereby we have notoriously to understand that God
through his mighty arm at length confounds such persecuters of his innocent
and faithful servants, and brings them to naught, to whom be praise and
glory for ever.

The Persecutions of the WALDENSES, Or, WALDOYES.
THe Waldenses, otherwise called Pauperes de Lugduno, have their beginning of
one Petrus Waldus Citizen of Lions, their first teacher and instructor, by
violence o^ persecution being driven out of Lions, were dispersed abroad in
diverse Countries, of whom some fled to Massilia, some to Germany, Livonia,
Bohemia, Calab^ia, and Apulia, diverse strayed to the Countries of France,
especially about Province and Piemont, of whom came these Merindolians above
mentioned; they which were of the Country of Tolousa, of the place where they
frequented, were c^lled Albii. or Albigenses. Against the which Albigenses,
Friars Dominicus was a great doer, laboring and Preaching against them ten
years together, and caused many of them to be burned. And albeit great was
their Persecution in all parts where they were scattered, yet could they never
be utterly destroyed, nor yet compelled to yield to the superstitious and false
Religion of the Church of Rome, but ever abstained from their corruption and
Idolatry as much as was possible, and gave themselves to the word of God, as a
Rule both truly to serve him, and to direct their lives accordingly.

It happened that John Martin of Briqueras, a mile from Angrogne, which vaunted
every where that he would slit the Ministers nose of Angrogne, Was assaulted by
a Wolf, which bit off his nose, so that he died thereof mad. This was commonly
known to all the Town thereabout; this was the just hand of God upon this
Persecutior.

As the President of St. Julian coming to Angrogne to vex the people there, by
the way he enquired for one dwelling at St. John's near to Angrogne and examined
him whether he had not baptized his child at Angrogne, and wherefore he had so
done: The poor simple man's answered that he had baptized his child at Angrogne,
because baptism was there ministered according to the institution of Christ.
Then the President in a great rage commanded him in the Kings name to baptize
his child again or else he should be burnt. And here we see how the Papists
play the Anabaptists. The poor man desired the President that he might be
suffered to make his prayer to God before he should make answer thereunto,
which after he had done in the Hall before all the company there present he,
required the President that he would writ and sign it wi^h his own hand, that
he would discharge him before God of the danger of that offense if he should
baptize his child again, and that he would take the perrill upon him and his.
The President hearing this was so confounded that he spoke not one word a good
while after. Then said he in a great fury, away thou villan out of my sight,
and after that he never was called again any more.

Barbarous was the cruelty that the enemies of the Gospel did to a good
Minister of St. German in the valley of Perouse, they sent a company of
Ruffians by night who brought him out of his house and after sore impri^onment
they put him to a cruel death, for they roasted him by a small fire, and when
half his body was burnt, he confessed and called upon the Lord Jesus with a
loud voice; In all these parts at this time was great Persecution, great
robbery and spoiling of men's goods and lives.

In their cruel outrages against those innocent people of the Waldoyes this is
not to be passed by. A certain old man about threescore years of age, whose
name was Odut Gemet, being apprehendit of them suffered a strange and cruel
death, for when they had bound him, they took all kind of beasts, which live in
horse dung called in French Escarborz and put them unto his navel, covering
them with a Dish, the which within a short space, pierced into his belly and
killed him. In that fight between the lord of Trinity and the Angronguians
there were burned about 1000 houses of Angrogne. And here is not to be
forgotten that they often times set fire upon the two Temples of Angrogne where
the word of God was preached, but they could never burn them. A notable miracle
of God in keeping the temples of the Gospel from burning: So did they also to
the Ministers house, which notwithstanding remained whole, the houses round
about, being all consumed with fire. That day none of Angrogne was slain or
hurt, saving only one that was hurt in his thigh. There were in all Angrongne
but two that were enemies to the word of God, which that same day were slain by
the soldiers, not in the co^bat but for their riches they had about them as
they were running away. The one of them was a very covetous wretch and had
great store of gold and silver, and would spend nothing either to help himself,
or succor others, no not his poor parents. All this was spoiled by the
soldiers with a hundredth or two hundredth, Crowns besides, which he had about
him. Besides these two there was not one of Angrogne slain that day.

In the overth^ow of the Lord of Trinity his Army by the Walloyes, the rest
that retired cried out with a loud voice, God fights for them, and we do them
wrong. The next day one of the principal Captains of the Army surrendered his
charge to the Lord of Trinity, saying unto him that he would never fight
against this people any more, and upon that he departed. It is a marvelous
thing and worthy of perpetual memory that in that combat there were but two or
the Waldoyes flain and two hurt, through the whole country of Piemont every man
said God fights for them. One of the Captains confessed that he had been at
many fierce assaults and combats, and sundry battles foughten, but yet he never
saw soldiers so fa^nt-hearted and amazed, yea the soldiers themselves told
him they were astonished that they could not strike. Moreover they said, that
this people never shot but they hurt and killed some of the Soldiers. Some
other said, that the Ministers by their prayers conjured and bewitched them
that they could not fight, and indeed wondrous is it and marvelous are the
judgments of God, that notwithstand so many combats and conflicts, so great
assaults, and adventures so much and so terrible shot continually made against
this poor people, yet all in a manner came to no effect, so mightily Gods holy
power wrought for his people. In end after many battles and conflicts there is
agreement made up and agreed upon between the Lord of Raconis on the part of
the Duke of Savoy his Highness their Master; and them of the valleys of
Piemont called Waldoyes through the mediation of the Duchess, The first
Article is a promise of forbearing armor against his Highness. 2. That it
shall be lawful for them of Angrongron and the rest of the valleys to have
their congregations, sermons and others ministers of their Religion in places
accustomed 3. The goods already ^eased as forefault shall be restored to all the
inhabitants of the said valeyes, all their franchizes, freedoms and privileges
shall be restored and confirmed to them. The Mass and other service after the
usage of Rome, shall be kept in all the Parishes of the said valleys where
the Sermons, Assemblies, and other ministers of their Religion are made, but
none shall be compelled to be present thereat, no^ to Minister aid or favor to
such as shall use that service. Furthermore his highness shall set ordour to
stay all troubles, inconveniences, secret conspiracies of wicked persons after
such sort that they shall remain quietly in their religion with many other
articles, which for observance was subscribed by the Lord Raconis and the
Commissioners sent from their commonalities and their Ministers.

This accord being thus made and passed by the means of the Duchess of Savoy,
the poor Waldoys have been in quiet until this present, and God of his infinite
goodness having delivered them out of so many troubles and conflicts, has set
them at liberty to serve him purely, and with quietness of conscience.

To these foreign matters aforesaid, we will also adjoyn the History of a
certain Jew, who dwelling in the City of Constantinople, and there received the
Sacrament of Baptism, was converted and became a good Christian. When the Turks
understood thereof, they were vehemently exasperated against him, that he
forsaking his Jewishnesse, should be regenerat to the Faith of Christ, and
fearing lest his conversion should be a detriment to their Mahometicall Law,
they sought means how to put him to death, which in short time after they
accomplished. And for the greater infamy to be done unto the man, they cast his
dead Corpse into the streets, commanding that no man should be so hardy as to
b^ry the same; wherein the mavelous glory and power of God appeared, for the
dead Corpse lying so by the space of nine days in the midst of the streets,
retained so his native color, and was so fresh, without any kind of
filthiness and corruption, and also not without a certain pleasant and
delectable scent or odor as if it had been lately slain, or rather not slain
at all, which when the Turks beheld, they were thereat marvellously astonished,
and being greatly afraid, they themselves took it up and carried it to a place
near without the Town, and buried it.

The spanish MARTYRS.
WE come now to speak of the Spanish Martyrs: And first of all there was one
Franciscus San Romanus a Marchand at Bruges, laid in dark Prison under the
ground; often and many times he was called for to Examination, where he suffered
great injuries and contumelies, but ever remained in his conscience firm and
unmovable. The Articles whereupon he stood, and for which he was condemned,
where these; First, that life and salvation in the sight of God comes to no
man by his own strength, works or merits, but only by the free mercy of God in
the blood and Sacrifice of his Son our Mediator. That the Sacrifice of the
M^sse, which the Papists do account a vailable ex opere operato, for remission
of sins both to the quic^ and dead, is horrible bl^sphemy. That Auricular
Confession with the numbering up of sins, that satisfaction, Purgatory,
Pardons, Invocation of Saints, worshippin^ of Images, be mere blasphemy against
the Living God. Item, that the Blood of Christ is profaned and injured in the
same aforesaid. After that the Inquisit^rs perceived that by no means he could
be reclaimed from his Assertions, they proceeded at last to the sentence,
condemning him to be bu^ned for an Heretic.

Many other Malefactors were brought also with him to the place of Execution;
but all they were pardoned and di^missed, he only for the Gospel being odious
to the whole world was taken and burned, here ^arrabas was delivered, and
Christ taken. As he was led to the place of suffering, they put upon him a
Mitre of Paper, painted full of Red Devils, after the Spanish guise.
Furthermore as he was brought out of the City Gate to be burned, there stood a
Wooden Cross by the way, whereunto Frances was required to do homage, which he
refused answering that the manner of Christians is not to worship Wood, and he
was (said he) a Christian. Hereupon arose great clamor among the vulgar
people, for that he denied to worship the Wooden Cross; but this was turned
incontinent to a miracle. Such was the blind rudeness of that people, that
they did impute this to the Divine virtue, as given that Cross from Heaven,
for that it would not suffer it self to be worshipped of an Heretic and
immediately for the opinion of that great miracle, the multitude with their
swords did hew it is pieces, every man thinking himself happy that might carry
away some chip or fragment of the said Cross. When he was come to the place
where he should suffer, the Friars were busy about him, to have him recant,
but he continued ever firm: As he was laid upon the heap of Wood, and the fire
kindled about him, he began a little at the feeling of the fire to lift up his
head toward Heaven, which when the Inquisitors perceived, and hoping that he
would recant his Doctrine, they caused him to be taken from the fire, but when
they perceived nothing less in him, the Adversaries being frustrate of their
expectation, willed him to be thrown in again, and so he was immediarly
dispatched. After that the Martyrdom of this blessed man was thus consumat,
the Inquisitors proclaimed openly he was damned in Hell, and that none should
pray for him, yea, and that all were Heretics who doubted of his damnation,
Nevertheless certain of the Emperors Soldiers gathered of his ashes. Also the
English Ambas^adour procured a portion of his bones to be brought unto him,
knowing right well that he died a Martyr, yet this could not be so secretly
done, but it came to the ears of the Inquisitors, and of the Emperor. Wherefore
the Soldiers going in great danger of life, were committed to Prison. Neither
did the Ambassador himself escape clear from the danger of the Popes scourge,
for he was for the same sequestered from the Court, and commanded to be absent
for a space.

Rochus at St. Lucar in Spain was by his science a Carver or grover of Images,
who as soon as he began first to taste the Gospel, he fell from making such
Images as use to serve for idolatry in temples, and occupied himself in making
seals, save only that he kept standing on his stall an image of the virgin
Mary artificially graven for a sign of his occupation. It happned unhappily
that a certain Inquisitor passing by him in the street, and beholding the
carved Image asked of Rochus what was the price thereof, which when Rochus did
set (not willing belike to sell it) the Inquisitor bad him scarce half the
money. The other answered again that he could not so live of that bargain; but
still the Inquisitor urged him to take his offer. To whom Rochus again, it
shall be yours (said he) if ye give me that which my labor and charges stand
me in, but of that price I cannot afford it, yet had I rather break it in
pieces, yea says the Inquisitor break it, let me see thee Rochus, with that he
took up a chiss^l and dashed it upon the face of the Image wherewith the nose
or some oath part of the face was blemished. The Inquisitor seeing that cried
out as he were mad and commanded Rochus forthwith into prison. To whom Rochus
cried again that he might do in his works what he listed. And if the
workmanship of the image were not after his fantasy what was that to them. But
all this could not help Rochus, but within three days after, sentence was
given upon him that he should be burned and so was he committed to the
Executer. As Rochus was entering the place there to be burned, he, cried with a
loud voice, asking among the multitude which there stood by, if any man of
Flanders were there: It was answered, Yea, and also that there were two Ships
already fraught and appointed to sail to Flanders. Then said he, I would desire
some of them to signify unto my father dwelling in Antwerp, that I was burned
here in this City, and for this cause which ye all have heard. And thus after
his prayers made to God, this good man being wrongfully condemned after his
godly l^fe made this blessed end. And thereafter a certain Spainard coming to
Antwerp, made diligent Inquisition there among the Image-makers to find out the
Parents of this Rochus, and signified to them what had happened toward their
son, as has been by his said Parents and friends declared: And the Father at
the hearing of the said message for sorrow thereof died shortly after, many
were imprisoned and died in prison.

The execrable Inquisiton of SPAIN.
THe cruel and barbarous Inquisition of Spain, first begun by King
Ferdinandus, and Elizabeth his Wife, and was instituted against the Jews, which
after their Baptism, maintained again their own Ceremonies, that now it is
practiced against them that be never so little s^spected to favor the verity
of the Lord; the Spainards, and especi lly the great Divines there, do hold
that this holy and sacred Inquisition cannot err, and that the holy Eathers
the Inquisitors cannot be deceived. Three sorts of men most principally be in
danger of these Inquisi^ors, they that be greatly rich, for fear the spoil of
their goods, they that be Learned, because they will not have their misdealings
and secret abuses to be espied and detected; they that begin to increase in
honor and dignity; lest they being in Authority should work them some shame or
dishonor. The abuse of the Inquisition is most execrable; If any word shall
pass out of the mouth of any, which may be taken in evil part, yea, and
though no word be spoken, yet if they bear any grudge or ill will against the
Party, incontinent they command him to be taken, and put into an horrible
Prison, and then find out crimes against him at leisure, and in the mean time,
no man living is so hardy once to open his mouth for him. If the Father speak
on word for his child he is also taken and cast into Prison as a favourer of
Heretics; neither is it permitted to any Person to go in to the Prison, but
there he is alone in such a place where he cannot see so much as the ground
where he is, and is not suffered either to read or write, but there endures in
darkness palpable, in horrors infinite, in fear miserable, wrestling with the
assaults of death. And moreover, to these distresses and horrors of the
Prison, the injuries, threats, whippings and scourgings, Irons, Tortures and
Racks which they endure; And thus are they detained there, some many years, and
murdered by long torments, and whose days together entreated much more
cruelly (out of all compassion) then if they were in the Hang-mans hand to be
slain at once. During all this time what is done in the Process no person
knows but only the Holy Fathers, and the Tormenters which are sworn to execut
the Torments, etc. By the vigor and rigor of this Inquisiton, many good true
servants of Jesus Christ, have been brought to death, especially in the la^ter
years, since the Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

In the Town of Valedolid, where commonly the Counsel of the Inquisition is
wont to be kept, the Inquisitors had brought together many Prisoners, both of
high and low estate, to the number of thirty, also the Coffin of a certain
Noble-woman, with her Picture lying upon it, which had been dead long before;
there to receive Judgment and Sentence. To the heating of which sentence, they
had ordained in the said Town there might be Theaters or Stages: Upon the first
was placed Dame Jane, sister to King Philip, and chief Regiment of his Realms:
Also Prince Charles, King Philips son, with other Princes and Estates of Spain.
Upon the other Scaffold mounted the Archbishop of Sivill, Prince of the
Synagogue of the Inquisitors, with the Counsel of the Inquisition, also other
Bishops of the Land, and the Kings Counsel with them. After all were set and
placed in great pomp, were brought forth (as a spectacle and triumph) the poor
servants and witnesses of Jesus Christ, to the number of thirty, clothed with
their Sanbenito as the Spaniards do call it, which is a manner of Vesture of
yellow Cloth, coming both before them and behind them, spangled with red
Crosses, having burning Clerges in their hands, also before them was born a
Crucifix covered with black Linnen-cloath in token of mourning: Moreover, they
which were to receive the sentence of death, had Miters of Paper upon their
heads which the Spaniards call Coracas: After this followed a Sermon made by a
Dominick Friar, which endured about an hour. After the Sermon was finished, the
Procurator General, with the Archbishop, went to the Stage where the Princes
and Nobles stood, to Minister a solemn Oath unto them upon the Crucifix painted
in the Mass Book, the tennor, of which Oath was this, Your Majesty's shall
swear that ye will favor the holy Inquisition, and also give your consent unto
the same, and not only that ye shall by no manner of way hinder and impeach the
same, but also ye shall employ to the uttermost of your help and endeavor
hereafter to see all them to be executed which swerve from the Church of Rome,
and adjoyn themselves to the Entherian Heretics, without all respect of any
person or persons, of what estate, degree, quality, or condition soever they
be. Item, your Majesty's shall swear that ye shall constrain all your Subjects
to submit themselves to the Church of Rome, and to have in reverence all the
Laws and Commandments of the same. And also to give your aid against all them
whosoever shall hold of the Heresy of the Lutherians, or take any part with
them. After the Oath, the Archbishop lifting up his hand, gave them his
Benediction, saying God bless your Highness, and give you long life. In end
the poor Captives and Prisoners were called our, the Procurator-Fiscall, or the
Popes great Collector, first beginning with Doctor Cacalla, this Doctor Cacalla
was a Friar of Austines Order, a Priest of the Town of Valedollid, and Preacher
sometimes to the Emperor Chrales the fifth, a man well accounted of for his
learning, who, for that he was thought to be as the Standard Bearer to the
Gospellers (whom they called Lutherians) and Preacher and Doctor unto them,
therefore he being first called for, whose sentence was to be degraded, and
presently burned, and all his goods couns cat to the profit and advancement of
the Justice. Sentence was given out against the rest, some put to penance,
whereof there were some Noble Personages, some to be condemned to perpetual
Prison, and the most part to be burnt. After the sentence pronounced, they
which were condemned to be burned, with the Coffin of the dead Lady, and her
P^cture upon the same, were committed to the Secular Magistrate, and their
Executioners, which were commanded to do their endeavor; then were they all
incontinent taken, and every one set upon an Ass, their faces turned backward,
and led with agreat Garrison of armed Soldiers unto the place of punishment,
which was without the Gate of the Town called Del Campo. And thus these
faithful Christians for the verity and pure World of God were led to death as
sheep to the shambles, who not only most Christianly did comfort one another,
but also did so exhort all them there present, that all men marvelled greatly
both to hear their singular constancy, and to see their quiet and peaceable end.

There dwelt in Valadolid a Knight well qualified, who in the Inquisition had
two daughters which constantly perservering in the true Religion that they had
learned of the good Doctor Cacalla, and others Martyrs of Jesus Christ, were
condemned to be burned. The father being a most rank Papist, besought the
Inquisitors to permit them for their better information to be carried to his
house, which thing the inquisitors, in regard of the great credit they reposed
in him, granted. And brought th^s to his house, the father endeavored to
divert them from their constant resolution, but seeing he could not convince
them, but it was in vain, for the Lord (as in Luke 21.15. he had promised) gave
them utterance and wisdom, which the new Pharisees, Priests, and Friars were
not able to resist or gainsay. The father seeing then that his endeavor not
availed, went humself to his Grove, cut down Wood, and caused it to be drawn to
Valadolid, he himself kindled the fire, and so they were both burned. Now to
come to speak of the Martyrs that suffered for the Testimony of the Gospel in
Italy.

The ITALIAN Martyrs.
GAleacius Trecius, of the City called Laus Pompeia in Italy, a Gentleman of a
good Calling, and wealthy in wordly substance, and very beneficial to the
poor, he was apprehended and brought to the Bishops Palace, where he was kept
in bands, having under him but only a Pad of Straw, although his Wife sent unto
him a good Feather-bed with Sheets to ly in, yet the Bishops Chaplains and
Officers kept it from him, dividing the prey among themselves. When the time
came that he should be examined, he was thrice brought before the
Commissioners, where he rendered Reasons and Causes of his Faith answering to
their Interrogatories with such evidence of Scriptures, and constancy of mind,
that he was an admiration to them that heard him. Albeit not long after through
the importonat persuasions of his Kins-folks and friends, and other cold
Gospellers, laying many considerations before his eyes, he was brought at
length to assent to certain points of the Popes Doctrine, but yet the mercy of
God which began with him so left him not, but brought him again to such
Repentance and bewailing of his fact, that he became afterward according to the
example of Peter and St. ^yprian, and others more valiant in defense of Christ's
quarrel, neither did he ever desire any thing more then occasion to be offered
again by confession; that he had lost before by denial, affirming that he
never felt more joy of heart then at the time of his Examinations, where he
stood thrice to the constant confession of the Truth, and contrary, that he
never tasted more sorrow in all his life, then when he slipped afterward from the
same by dissimulation, declaring moreover to his brethren that death was much
more sweet unto him with Testimony of the verity, then life with the least
denial of Truth and loss of a good conscience. Again Galeacius returned again
to the defense of his former Doctrine with much more boldness of spirit,
confessing Christ as he did before, and detested Images, affirming and proving
that God only is to be worshipped, and that in spirit and verity. Also to be no
more Mediators but Christ alone, and that he only and sufficiently by his
sufferings has taken away the sins of the whole world, and that all they which
depart hence in his faith are ascertained of the everlasting life; they which
do not are under everlasting damnation; with such other like matter which was
repugnant utterly to the Popes proceedings. His adversaries perceiving that he
in no case could be revoked, caused him to be committed to the Secular Judge to
be burned. Thus Galeazius early in the morning being brought out of Prison to
the Marketplace, there was left standing bound by the Stake till noon, as a
gazing-stock for all men to look upon: In the which mean time many came about
him exhorting him to recant, but nothing could stir the settled mind of this
valiant Martyr, and so he was brought to the fire and burned. Touching the
story of this blessed Martyr, this by the way is to be given for a Memorandum,
that a little before this Galeazius should be burned, there was a controversy
between the Major of the City and the Bishops Clergy for the expenses of the
Wood that should go to his burning, he hearing thereof, sent word to both the
parties to agree, for he himself of his own goods would see the cost of that
matter discharged. Another note moreover is here to be added, that while
Galeazius was in captivity, certain of the Papists perceiving that Galeazius
had great goods and possessins, practiced with his wife, under color to
release her husband, that she should lay out a sum of money to be sent to the
wife of the chief Lord of Millain, called Ferrarius Gonzaga, to the end that
she should entreat both with her husband, and with the Senate for Galeazius
life: which money when they had thus jugled into their hands, Galeazius
notwithstanding was burned, and so was the silly woman robbed and defeated both
of her husband and also of her money.

Doctor Mollius a Gray-frier for the teaching and profession of the Gospel of
Christ Jesus was four times imprisoned, and as often delivered out of prison, all
the time he remained constant in the defense of Christ's gospel, at last was
brought with certain other men (which were also apprehended for religion) into
the temple of St. Mary at Rome either to revoke or to be burned. There sat on
them six Cardinals in high seats beside the Judge, before whom preached a
dominick-Frier, which cruelly inveying against the poor prisoners, incensed the
Cardinals with all the vehemence he might to their condemnation, the poor man
stood holding a burning Taper in their hands, of whom some for fear of death
revolted. But this Doctor Mollius with a weaver of Perusium remained constant.
Then Mollius began an earnest sermon in the Italian tongue wherein he confirmed
the articles of faith, by the sacred Scriptures, declaring also that the Pope
was not the successor of Peter, but Antichrist and his sectaries do figure the
whore of Babylon. Moreover he cited them up to the tribunal seat of Christ, and
they being replenished with anger, condemned him with the weaver to the fire;
and commanded them to be had away. So were they carried incontinent to the camp
or field called Florianum, where they remained cheerful and constant, first
the weaver, was hanged. Mollius then willing the hangman to execute his office
likewise upon him, began to exhort the people, to beware of idolatry, and to
have no other Savior but Christ alone, for he only is the Mediator between God
and man, and so also he was hanged, commending his soul to God, and afterward
laid in the fire and burned. The people having diverse judgments upon him, some
said he died an heretic, some said he was a good man.

Furthermore in the same city of Rome and about the same time in the Monastery
of St. Augustine were found two monks in their Celles with their tongues and
heads cut off, only for rebuking the immoderat and outrageous excess of the
Cardinals. Such was the cruelty then of the malignant adversaries.

In Pope Pius the fourth his time was hot persecution in all the territories of
the church of Rome against them which were suspected for Lutherans, whereupon
insued great trouble and persecution in the Kingdom of Naples in such cruel
sort that many Noble Men with their wives and others are reported there to be
slain in Calabria beyond Naples in Italy, likewise the same time suffered a
great number of Christ's welbeloved Saints both old and young put together in
one house, to the number of 88. persons, all which one after another were taken
out of the house, and so being laid upon the Butchers stall like the sheep in
the shambless, with one bloody knife were all killed in order, a spectacle most
tragical for all posterity to remember and almost incredible to believe;
beside also a great number condemned.

Now to return again to the Isse of Britain to England and Scotland, and to
take a view of the affairs of the Churches there. And first to begin with
England In the reign of King Henry the eight at Coventree there were seven
apprehended, and burnt for the gospel of Christ, to wit, Mistress Smith
widow, Robert Hatchers a Shoemaker, Wrigsham a glover, Lansdale a Hosier,
Archer a shoemaker, Hawkings a shoemaker, Thomas band shoemaker. The principal
cause of the apprehension and burning of these persons was for teaching their
children and family the Lords prayer, and ten commandments in English: the
children were sent for to the Grayfriers in Coventree before the Warden of the
said Friars called Frier-Stafford, who straightly examining them of their
belief, and what Heresy their Fathers had taught them, charged them upon pain
of suffering such death as their Fathers should in no ways to meddle any more
with the Lords prayer, the Creed, and the ten Commandments in English.

Thomas Harding, dwelling at Che^ham in the County of Euchingham with Alice his
Wife was first abjured by Wi^^am Smith Bishop of Lincoln, with diverse others
more which the same time were taken, and compelled some to beat Faggots, some
were burned in the check with hotirons, some condemned to perpetual prison,
some threstinto Monasteries and spoiled clean of all their goods, some
compelled to make pilgrimage to the great Block, otherwise called our Lady in
Lincoln, some to one part, some to another. Harding for reading upon English
boo^s waa condemned for rel^pse to be burned to ashes, and was burnt being of
the age of threescore years, Many simple people in the Diosie of Lincoln, were
vexed afflicted and persecuted for then Religion, the Son was compelled to
testify against the Father, the Father against the son, the wife against the
Husband, and the husband against the wife, the sister against the brother.

A Brief Discourse concerning the story and Life of Thomas Volsey, la^e
Cardinal of York, wherein is to be seen and noted the express Image of the
proud, vain glorious Church of Rome, how fare it differs from the true Church
of Jesus Christ.
THis Cardinal Volsey and the Popes Legate of Rome was so puffed up in pride that
he thought himself equal with the King. And when he had said Mass; he made
Dukes and Earies to serve him of Wine with a say taken and to hold the basen at
the Lavatories. Furthermore as he was Ambassador sent to the Emperor at
Eruxels, he had over with him the great Seal of England, and was served with
his Servitours, kneeling on their knees and many Noble men of England waiting
upon him to the great admiration of all the Germans that beheld it, such was
his monstrous pomp and pride. That glorious Cardinal in his tragical doings
did exceed so far all measure of a good subject, that he became more like a
Prince then a priest, for although the King bare the sword, he bare the strok
(making in a manner) the whole Realm to bend at his beck, and to dance after
his pipe. Such practices and fetches, he had that when he had well stored his
own Coffers, first he fetched the greatest part of the Kings Treasure out of
the Realm in twelve great barrels full of gold and silver to serve the Popes
wars. And as his avaritious mind was never satisfied in getting, so his
restless head was so busy rufling in public matters that he never ceased
before he had set both England, France, Flanders, Spain and Italy, together by
the ears, for his pride and avarice he was hated of all men. At what time Pope
Clement was taken prisoner, Cardinal Volsey wrote tot he Emperor to make him
Pope, but when he returned an answer, wherein he was not pleased, he waxed
furious mad, and sought all means to displease the Emperor, writeing very
sharply unto him many minacing letters, that if he would not make him Pope, he
would make such a ruffling between christian Princes as was not this hundredth
years before to make the Emperor repent, year, though it should cost the whole
Realm of England. Whereupon the Emperor answering, bids him look well about
him, lest through his doings and atempts, he might bring the matter in that
case that it should cost him the Realm of England indeed.

The King finding himself deluded by Cardinal Campegius and Cardinal Volsey,
anent the question of his Marriage, the decision whereof was referred to them
by the Pope but nothing in it by them done, Volsey tell from the Kings favor,
so that after that time he never came more to the Kings presence, for he was
mightily offended with him whom he before so highly exalted and promoted to so
many great dignities, as to the Archbishoprik of York, the Bishopric of
Winchester, of Durham, the Abbee of St. Albons, besides the Chancelorship of
England, and many other high dignities and preferments in the Realm: He is
deprived of his Chancelorship, and it is given to Sr Thomas More. There are
sundry Articles given in against the Cardinal, he is arrested and brought up
toward London, he fell sick by the way, and by immoderat Purgations killed
himself. This was the end of this vain glorious Cardinal.

It is recorded of one Humfrey Mummuth Alderman of London, much troubled for
his Religion, a notable example of Christian patience. In the Sermons of Master
Latimer, which the said Latimer heard in Cambridge of Master George Stafford,
Reader to the Divinity Lecture in that University, who expounding the place of
St, Paul to the Romans, that we shall overcome our enemy with well-doing, and
so heap hot coals upon his head, brought in this example, saying that he knew
in London a great rich Merchand, (meaning this Humfrey) which had a very poor
neighbor, yet for all his poverty he loved him very well, and sent him money
at his need, and let him come to his Table whenever he would. Now the Rich
Man began to be a Scripture-man, he began to smell the Gospel, the poor man was
a Papist still. It chanced on a time when the rich man talked of the Gospel at
the Table, where he reproved Popery and such kind of things: This poor man
being there present, took a great displeasure against the rich man, in so much
that he would come no more to his house, he would borrow no more money of him
as he was wont to do before-times, yea, and conceived such hatted and malice
against him, that he went and accosed him before the Bishops. Now the rich man
not knowing of any such displeasure, offered many times to talk with him, and
to set him at quiet: It would not be. The poor man had such a stomach that he
would not vouchsafe to speak with him. If he met the rich man in the street, he
would go out of his way. On a time it happened that he met him so in a narrow
street that he could not avoid, but come near him, yet for all that this poor
man (I say) had such a stomach against the rich man, that he was minded to go
forward and not to speak with him. The rich man perceiving that caught him by
the hand, and asked him, saying, Neighbor, What is come into your heart to
take such displeasue with me; What have I done against you? Tell me, and I will
be ready at all times to make you amends. Finally he spoke so gently, so
charitably, so lovingly and friendry, that it wrought so in the poor man's
heart, that by and by he fell down upon his knees and asked him forgivennesse.
The rich man forgave him, and so took him again to his favor, and they loved
as well as ever they did before. Agree with thine enemy while thou art in the
way with him, Mat. 5.

Great was the courage and constancy of Thomas Bilney in his Martyredome. The
night before his execution one of his friends coming to him, finding him at
his repast with such a cheerful heart and quiet mind, said that he was glad to
see him at that time, so shortly before his heavy and painful departure, so
heartily to refresh himself, whereunto he answered: Oh said he I follow the
example of the husband men of the country who having a ruinous house to dwell
in, yet bestow cost so long as they may hold it up: And so do I now with this
ruinous house of my body, and with Gods creatures in thanks to him to refresh
the same as ye see. Then sitting with his said friends in godly talk to their
edification, some put him in mind, that though the fire which he should suffer
the next day, should be of great neat to his body, yet the comfort of Gods
spirit should cool it to his everlasting refreshing. At this word the said
Thomas Bilney putting his hand toward the flamme of the candle barning before
then (as also he did diverse times besides) and feeling the heat thereof, O
said he, I feel by experience and have known it long by Ph^losophy, that fire
by Gods ordinance is naturally hot, but yet I am persuaded by Gods holy word,
and by the experience of some spoken or in the same, that in flamme they felt
no heat, and in the fire they felt no consumption. And I constantly believe
that howsoever the stuble of this my body shall be wasted by it, yet my soul
and spirit shall be purged thereby, a pain for a time, whereon notwithstanding
follows joy unspeakeable. At the coming forth of the said Thomas Bilney
preacher out of the prison doors, one of his friends came unto him and with few
words as he durst, speak to him, and prayed him in Gods behalf to be constant
and take his death as patiently as he could. Whereunto the said Bilney answered
with a quiet and mild countenance, ye see when the Mariner is entered his ship
to sail on the troublous sea, how he for a while is tossed in the billows of
the same, but yet in hope that he shall once come to the quiet haven, he
bears in better comfort the perrels which he feels So am I now toward this
sailing, and whatsoever storms I shall feel, yet shortly after shall my ship be
in the haven as I doubt not thereof by the grace of God, desiring you to help
me with your p^ayers to the same effect. And going forth into the streets he
gave much alms by the way, by the hands of one of his friends. Doctor Warner
taking his leave of Thomas Bilney, he said, pasce gregem tuum, pasce
gregenituum ut cum venerit Dominus inveniat te sic facientem that is, feed your
flock, feed your flock, that when the Lord comes he may find you so doing.

When Richard Byfield was degraded, kneeling upon the highest step of the
Altar, the Bishop of London took his crosier staff and smote him on the
breast, that he threw him down backwards, and brake his head that he sowuned,
and when he came to himself again he thanked God he was delivered from the
Malignant church of Antichrist, and that he was come into the true sincere
church of Jesus Christ Militant here on earth, and I trust anon said he to be
in heaven with Jesus Christ and the Church triumphant for ever, and so he was
led to the fire in his apparel manfully and joyfully, and there for laik of a
speedy fire, was half an hour alive, and when the left arm was on fire and
burned, he rubbed it with his right hand, and it fell from his body, and he
continued in prayer to the end without moving.

At the burning of James Baynham a Lawier, appeared a miracle and wondrous work
of God, that as he was at the stake in the midst of the flamming fire, which
fire had half consumed his arms and legs, he spoke these words. O ye Papists,
behold ye look for miracles, and hear now may ye see a miracle, for in this
fire I feel no more pain then I were in a bed of Down, but it is to me as a bed
of Roses. These words spoke he in the midst of the flamming fire when his legs
and arms (as I said) were half consumed William Tracie a worshipful Esquire in
Gloucester and then dwelling at Todingtown made in his will that he would have
no funeral pomp at his burying, neither passed he upon mass, and he further
said that he trusted in God only and hoped by him to be saved and not by any
Saint. This Gentleman died, and his Son as Executor brought the Will to the
Bishop of Canterbury to prove, which he showed to the Convocation, and there
most cruelly they judged that he should be taken out of the ground and burnt as
an Heretic. This Commission was sent to Doctor Parker Chancellor of the
Diocese of Worcest^r, to execute their wicked of sentence, who accomplished
the same. The King hearing his Subject to be taken out of the ground two years
after his death, and burnt without his knowledge, or order of the Law, sent for
the Chancellor, and laid high offense to his charge, who excused himself by the
Archbishop of Canterbury which was late dead; but in conclusion it cost him
three hundred pound to have his pardon. And as many were burnt at this time for
the profession of the truth, so multitudes both of men and women were compelled
to abjure and recant, and to do penance, and to bear faggots. So great was the
trouble of these times, for either they were driven out of the Realm, or were
cast out from their goods and houses, or brought to open shame by abjuration:
Such decrees and injunctions then were set ^orth by the Bishops, such Laws and
Proclamations were provided, such watch and narrow search was used, such ways
were taken by force of oath to make one detect another, so subtly that unneth
any good man could or did escape their hands that either his name was known, or
else his person was taken: yet nevertheless so mightily the power of Gods
Gospel did work in the hearts of good men, that the number of them did no
less^l^ssen for all the violence or policy of the adversa^ies, but rather
increased.

King Henry is divorced from Lady Cathrene Dowager, and married with Lady Ann^
^ullen, which was the first occasion and beginning of a public Refo^mation.
The King had married. Prince Arthur hi^ B^others wife; the Pope which then
ruled at Rome was Pope Julius the second, by whose dispensation this Marriage
which neither sense of nature would admit; nor Gods Law would bear, was
concluded, approved and ratified, and so continued as lawful without any doubt
or scruple, near the space of twenty years, thereafter there arose doubts and
scruples about the lawfulness of his Marriage, that first hindered the
Emperor to marry Lady Mary the Kings Daughter, and upon the same doubt the
King of France refused to marry the said Lady Mary the Kings daughter. The King
being herewith perplexed anent the lawfulness^ of his Marriage, consulted the
Universities of all Christendom, by whom it was discussed to be unlawful,
whereupon ensued a divorce between the King and the Queen.

In the Parliment in the year 1533. the commons gave in a supplication,
complaining of the strait dealing of the Clergy in their proceeding exofficlo;
this wicked act was broken by the King, for the King having more clear
understanding of the abuses and enormities of the Clergy, and in special of the
corrupt Authority of the Sea of Rome, provided certain Acts against the same.

In the same parliament it was enacted and decreed that no man should appeal to
the court of Rome, even the Parliament decrees the popes Annats to cease, etc.
All exactions and sums of money used to be paid to the Bishop of Rome, in
pensions, Peter Pence should utterly surcease. As touching these. Peter Pence
they were first brought in imposed, by King Iva about the year of our Lord 70.
Which Iva king of the West Saxons caused through all his dominion in every
house having a Chimney, a penny to be collected and paid to the Bishop of
Rome, in the name of Peter, and thereof were they called Peter Pence. And the
said Peter Pence ever since or for the most part have used of along custom to
be gathered and summoned by the Popes Collectors here in England from the time
of Iva, to this present Parliament. The oath of the Clergymen which they were
wont to make to the Bishop of Rome (now pope quondam was abolished and made
void by stature and a new oath ministered and confirmed for the same, wherein
they acknowledged the King to be supreme head under Christ in this Church of
England; these oaths were the occasion that the pope lost all his interest and
jurisdiction in England within short while after. In this Parliament amongst
other diverse statutes, most graiously, and by the blessed will of God, it was
enacted, that the Pope and all his College of Cardinals, with his Pardons,
Indulgences, which so long had clogged this R^al n of England to the miserable
slaughter or so manny good men and which never could be removed ^way before was
never abolished, eradicat and exploded out of this land, and sent home ^g^in to
their own country of Rome from whence they came, God be everlastingly praised
therefore, Amen.

An act was made concerning the Kings highness to be the suppream head of the
Church of England and to have authority to reform and redress all errors
heresies and abuses in the same.

When all other the Kings subjects and the learned of the Realm had taken and
accepted the oath of the Kings supreamacy, only Fisher, the Bishop of
Rochester, and Sir Thomas Moor refused to be sworn, who therefore falling into
the danger of the Law, were committed unto the Tower and executed for the same.
This Fisher, with Sir Thomas Moor, were great persecutors of the saints of God.
Tindal betrayed be Henry Philips, was delivered into his enemies hands and
burnt in Flanders by Filfoord castle. The worthy virtues and doings of this
blessed Martyr, who for his painful travels and singular zeal to his country,
(may be called in these our days, an Apostle of England (it were long to
recite. Among many other, this because it seems to me worthy of remembrance,
I thought it not in silence to overpasse, which has unto me credibly been
testified by certain grave Merchants, and some of them also such as were
present the same time at the fact, and men yet alive, the story whereof was
this: There was at Antwerp on a time amongst a company of Merchants as they
were at supper, a certain Juglar which through his Diabolical enchantments or
Art magical, would fetch all kind of Viandes and Wine from any place they
would, and set it upon the table incontinent before them with many other such
like things. The fame of this Jugler being much talked of, It chanced that as
Master Tindal heard of it, he desired certain of the Merchants that he might
also be present at Supper to see him play his parts. To be brief the supper
was appointed and the Merchants with Tindall, were there present. Then the
Juglar being required to play his feats, and to show his cunning, after his
wonted boldness began to utter all that he could do, but all was in vain. At
the last with his labor, sweating and toyling, when he saw that nothing would
go forward, but that all his enchantment were void, he was compelled openly to
confess that there was some man present at Supper which disturbed and setted
all his doings. So that a man even in the Martyrs of these days cannot lack
the miracles of true faith, if miracles were now to be desired.

After King Henry his Marriage was declared to be unlawful, and being divorced
from Lady Cathren, he married Lady Anna ^ullen, who three years after she was
married was had to the Tower with the Lord Rochford her brother, and the
nineteen day thereafter was beheaded. The words of this worthy and christian
Lady at her death were these, Good Christian people I am come hither to die,
for according to the Law, and by the Law, I am judged to death and therefore I
will speak nothing against it, I am to accuse no man nor to speak any thing of
that whereof I am accused and condemned to die, but I pray God to save the King
and send him long to reign over you, for a Gentler, or more merciful Prince
was there never, and to me he was ever a Good, a Gentle, and a Sovereign Lord.
And if any person will meddle of my cause, I require them to judge the best. And
thus I take my leave of the World, and of you all, and I heartily desire you
all to pray for me, so she was beheaded. Whatsoever the cause was, or quartell
objected against her life, this was a great commendation she left behind her
that during her life the Religion of Christ most happily flourished, and had a
right prosperous course, for she was an enemy to Popery, she was a great giver
of alms beyond all other Queens, and the Revenues almost of her estate, in so
much that the alms which she gave in, three quarters of a year in distribution
is summed to the number of fourteen or fifteen thousand pounds, beside the
great piece of money which Her grace intended to impart unto four sundry
quarters of the Realm, as for a stock there to be employed to the behoove of
poor Artificers and occupyers.

Again, what a zealous Defender she was of Christ's Gospel all the world does
know, and her acts do and will declare to the worlds end. After the suffering
of Queen Anna, the King marrid Lady Jane Seimer, of whom came King Edward as
great an enemy to Gods enemies the Pope, as ever his father was, and greater
too. Shor^ly after his birth Queen Jane his Mother the second day after died in
Child bed and left the King again a Widower, which so continued the space of
two years together. After this, Religion b^gan to go backward, as appears in
the condemnation, burning and martyrdom of John Lambert and others. For as the
King was ruled, and gave over some time to one, some time to another, so one
while Reli^ion went for^w^rd, and at another time as much backward again, and
sometimes clean altered and changed for a season according as they could
prevail which were about the King, so variable was the change and mutation of
Religion in King Henry's days, for the state of R ligion decayed, all the
resid^e of King Henry. A Parliament is summoned at Westmi ster in the ear, 15
(...) through the devise and practi^^ of certain of the Popes factors about
him: Al^o a Synod or convocation of all the Archbishops, Bishops, and other
lea^n^d of the clergy of this realm to be in like manner assembled. In which
Parliament, Sy^od or convocation, certain articles, matters and q^estions
touching religion, were decreed to the numb^r especially of six, commonly called
the six Articles, or the whip ^ith six strings to be had and receiv^d among the
Kings S^bjects in pretense of Unity.

The first Article in the present Parliament accorded and agreed upon was this,
that in the most blessed Sacrament of the Altar, by the strength and efficacy
of Christ's mighty word (it being spoken by the Priest) is present really under
the form of Bread and Wine, the natural body and blood of our Savior Jesus
Christ, conceived of the Virgin Mary, and that after the consecration there
remains no substance of Bread or Wine, or any other substance, but the
substance of Christ, God and man.

Secondly, that the Communion in both kinds is not necessary ad salutem, by the
Law of God to all persons, and that it is to be believed and not doubted of,
but that in the flesh under the form of Bread, is the very Blood, and with the
Blood under the form of Wine, is the very flesh, as well in parts as they were
both together.

Thirdly, that the Priests after the order of Priesthood received, may not
marry by the Law.

Fourthly, that the vows of chastity of Widowhood by man or woman made to God
advisedly, ought to be observed by the Law of God, and that it exeemeth them
from other liberties of Christian people, which without that they might enjoy.

Fifthly, that it is meet and necessary that private Masses be continued and
admitted in this English Church and Congregation, as whereby good Christian
people ordering themselves accordin^ly, do receive both godly and goodly
consolations and benefits, and it is agreeable also to Gods Law.

Sixthly, that Auricular Confession is expedient and necessary to be retained
and contained, used and frequented in the Church of God.

All agreed to these six Articles except Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, who
stood openly in the Parliament against them, bringing forth such Allegations as
might easily have helped the cause, nisi paucos major vicisset ut saepe solet
meliorem.

Great was the trouble and persecution at London for these six Articles, and
elsewhere through the land. Doctor Barnes, Garret, and Hicrome were burnt for
the Gospel at Smithfield.

At this time when Lambert was burnt, there was one Colins at London, sometime
a Lawyer, and a Gentleman, being distracted of his wits, coming into a Church
where a Priest was saying Mass, and was come to the place where they use to
hold and show the Sacrament, he seeing the Priest holding the host over his
head and showing it to the people, he in like manner counterfeiting the priest,
took up a little dog by the legs and held him over his head, showing him unto
the people, for this he was by and by apprehended and condemned to the fire,
and burned and the dog with him.

About the same time John Longland Bishop of Lincoln burned two upon one day,
the one named Thomas Bernard, and the other James Morton, the one for teaching
the Lords Prayer in English, and the other for keeping the Epistle of St. James
translated into English. Richard Mekins a boy not past the age of fifteen,
years, was condemned to be burnt by Boner, for speaking against the Sacrament
of the Altar.

In Oxford also the same time or not much there-about, recanted one Master
Barker master of Art of that University, a man excellently learned, who being
called up to Lambeth before the Archbi^hop Thomas Granmer, was in his
examination so stout in the cause of the Sacrament, and so learnedly defended
himself therein, neither Cranmer himself, nor all they could well answer to his
allegations brought out of Au^eu, wherein he was so promp and ripe of himself
that the Archbi^hop with the residue of his company were brought in a great
admiration of him, notwithstanding by compulsion of the time, and danger of the
six articles at last he relented, and returning again to Oxford was there
caused to recant. After which the good man prospered not but wore away.

The year 1541. The King was divorced from the Lady Anna of Cleve which was his
fourth wife and married to the fifth, which was to Lady Cathren Howard, Nice to
the Duke of Norfolk and Daughter to my Lord Edmund Howard, the Dukes brother,
but this Marriage likewise continued not long.

At this time were six Popish Monks executed for denying the Kings Supremacy.

Now as touching the late Marriage between the King and the Lady Howard, this
Matrimony endured not long, for in the year next following 1542. the said Lady
Cathren was accused of the King of incontin^ n^ living not only before her
marriage with Frances Durham, but also of spouse breach since her marriage,
with Thomas Culpeper, for the which both the men aforesaid by act of Parliament
were attained and executed for high Treason, and also the said Lady Cathren
late Queen, with the Lady Jane Rochford Widow, late Wise to Georg Bullen Lord
Rochfords, Brother to Queen Anna Eullen, were beheaded for their deserts within
the Tower.

The King missing Cromwell his old Counselor Earl of Essex, and smelling
somewhat the ways of Winchester began a little to set his foot again in the
cause of religion; And therefore in the same year after the execution of this
Queen, the King understanding some abuses yet to remain unreformed, namely
about pilgrimages and Idolat^y, and other things more besides to be corrected
within his dominions, directed his letters unto the Archbishop of Canterbury
for the speedy redress and reformation of the sam^.

A proclamation concerning white meats, as milk, eggs, butter, cheese and such
like during the time of lent, without any scruple or grudg of conscience, any
law, constitution, use or custom to the contrary notwithstanding,

All this time great was the persecution in Caleice for Religion. Amongst the
rest one Adam Damlip was falsely accused for Treason, and innocently put to
death, At his death, Sir Ralph Elleker Knight, then knight marshall there,
would not suffer the innocent and godly man to declare either his faith or the
cause he died for, but said to the executioner, dispatch the knave, have done.
Sir Ralph Elleker saying that he would not away before he saw the traitors
heart out. But sho^tly after Sir Ralph Elleker in a skirmish or road between
the Frenchmen and us at Eullen was amongst others slain whose only death
sufficed not his enemies, but after they had stripped him stark naked, they cut
off his privy members, and cut the heart out of his body and so left him a
terrible example to all bloody and merciless men, for no cause was known why
they showed such indignation against the said Sir Ralph Elleker more then
against the rest, but that it is ^ritten faciens justitias Dominus and judicia
omnibus injuria pressis.

It is reported of a certain poor laboring man of Caleice who being in a
certain company said that he would never believe that a priest could make the
Lords body at his pleasure, whereupon he was then accused and condemned by one
Harvie Commissary there, which Harvie in time of his judgment inveying against
him with approbrious words said that he was an Heretic, and should die a vile
death. The poor man answering for himself again, said, that he was no Heret ck,
but was in the faith of Christ, and whereas thou say (said he) that I shall
die a vile death, thou thy self shall die a viler death, and that shortly, and
so it came to pass, for within half an year after, the said Harvie was hanged,
drawn and quarterd, for Treason, in the said town of Caleice. Here is a notable
example of Gods judgment upon a bloody Persecutor. The rigor of the six
Articles were a little aswaged in a Parliament Anno 1544. Mistrisse Anna Askew
was brought before the Inquisitors and examined, and after that, sundry times
examined and put to great trouble, and put to the rack, because she would not
confess what Ladies or Gentlewomen were of her opinion, and therein, says
she, they kept me along time, and because I lay still and did not cry, my
Lord Chancellor and M. Rich took pains to rack me with their own hands till I
was nigh dead, then the Leivtenant caused me to be loosed from the Rack,
incontinently I sowned, and then they recovered me again. After that I sat two
long hours reasoning with my Lord Chancellor upon the bare floor, whereas he
with many flattering words persuaded me to leave my opinion, but my Lord God I
thank his everlasting goodness gave me grace to persevere, and will do (I
hope) to the very end; then was I brought to an house and laid in a bed, with
as weary and painful bones as ever had patient Job, I thank the Lord my God
therefore. Then my Lord Chancellor sent me word, if I would leave my opinion, I
should want nothing, if I would not, I should forth to Newgate and so be
burned: I sent him again word that I would rather die then to break my faith,
heareafter she is condemned to be burnt for her opinion touching the Sacrament,
for holding that after the Priest has spoken the words of Consectation there
remains bread still; they both say and also teach it for a necessary Article
of faith, that after these words be once spoken there remains no bread but
even the self same body that hang upon the Cross on goodfryday, both flesh,
blood, and bones: to this belief of theirs said I nay, for then were ou^ common
Creed false, which says that he sits on the right hand of God the Father
Almighty, and from thence he shall come to judge the quick and the dead. Lo this
is the heresy that I hold and for it must suffer the death. But as touching
the holy and blessed Supper of the Lord, I believe it to be a most necessary
remembrance of his glorious suffering and death. Moreover, I believe as much
therein as my eternal and only Redeemer Jesus Christ would I should believe.
She is brought into Smithfield to her execution in a Chair, because she could
not go on her feet by means of her great torments, there she patiently endured
death, with sundry more that at that time was burnt with her. Then Urisley Lord
Chancellor sent to Anna Askew Letters offering to her the Kings pardon if she
would recant, who refusing once to look upon them, made this answer again, that
she came not thither to deny her Lord and Master. Then were the Letters offered
unto the other, who in like manner following the constancy of the woman, denied
not only to receive them, but also to look upon them, whereupon the Lord Major
commanding fire to be put to them, cried with a loud voice, fiat Justitia.

Queen Catherine Parre, late Queen and wife to King Henry the eight was in
great danger for the Gospel, the Chancellor Bishop of Winchester, and others of
their conspiracy but she was graciously preserved by her kind and loving
Husband the King. King Henry died in the thirty eight year of his Reign. King
Henry of his own nature and disposition was so inclinable and forward in all
things, virtuous and commendable, that the like interprise of redress of
Religion has not lightly been seen in any other Christened Prince, as in
abolishing the stout and almost invincible authority of the Pope, in
suppressing Mon^steries, in repressing custom of Idolatry and Pilgrimages,
etc. which interprises as never King of England did accomplish (though some
began to attempt them) before him, so yet to this day we see but few in other
Realms dar follow the same. So long as Queen Bull^n, Thomas Cromwell, Bishop
of Cranmer, and such like good counselors were about him he did much good. So
again when sinister and evil counsel under subtle and crafty pretenses had
gotten once the foot in thrusting truth and verity out of the Princes ears, how
much Religion and all good things went prosperously forward before, so much on
the contrary side, all revolted backward again.

Prince Edward succeeded his father, being of the age of nine years, and
Reigned six years and eight months and eight days, and deceased Anno 1553. He
was a virtuous and religious Prince, of admirable gifts and graces far beyond
his years, Religion flourished in his time, for by the advice of his
Governors, especially by his Uncle Lord John Simer Duke of Somerset, Protector
of the Realm, that monstrous Hydra with six heads, the six Articles I mean, who
devoured up so many men before, was abolished and taken away, the holy
Scriptures were restored to the Mother Tongue, Mastes extinguished and
abolished, these that were before in banishment for the danger of the truth,
were again received to their Country, for the most part of the Bishops of
Churches and Diocesses were changed. Such as had been dumb Prelates before were
compelled to give place to others then that would preach and take pains.
Besides other also out of foraign Countries, men of learning and notable
knowledge were sent for and received, among whom was Peter Martyr, Martin
Bucer, and Paulus Phagius, which were set into the Universities. Of the old
Bishops some were committed to one Ward, some to another, but these meek and
gentle times of King Edward under the Government of this noble Protector, has
this one commendation proper unto them, for that amongst the whole number of
the popish sort, of whom some privily did steal out of the Realm, many were
crafty dissemblers, some were open and manifest adversaries, yet of all that
multitude there was not one man that lost his life, for during all the time of
King Edwards Reign, which was about six years, neither in Smithfield nor any
other quarter of this Realm any was heard to suffer for any matter of Religion,
either Papist or Protestant; either for one opinion or other, except only two,
one an English-woman, called Joan of Kent, and the other a Dutchman named
George, who died for certain Articles not much necessary here to be rehearsed.
Besides these two there was none else in all King Edwards Reign that died in
any manner or cause of Religion, but that one Thomas Dobbie, who in the
beginning of this Kings Reign was apprehended for speaking against the Idolatry
of the Mass, and in the same Prison died, whose pardon notwithstanding was
obtained of the Lord Protector, and should have been brought him if he had
continued.

The horrible and bloody Time of Queen MARY.
QUeen Mary succeeded her brother King Edward to the Crown, ingyring her self
by force and violence notwithstanding that Lady Jane was proclaimed Queen
before her by King Edwards testament and the consent of the Nobility. She
altered Religion that was in King Henry's time and King Edwards, she made an
Inhibition by proclamation that no man should preach or read openly in the
Churches the word of God, the Mass is set up and a proclamation that no man
should interrupt any of these that would say mass, the Popes Authority is
restored, In a word she banished the Gospel, and true Religion and brought in
the Antichrist of Rome with his Idolatry and supperstition, turned the English
service into Latin again etc.

About this time a priest of Canterbury said mass the one day, and the next
day after he came into the Pulpit, and desired all the people to forgive him,
for he said he had betrayed Christ, but not as Judas did, and there made a long
Sermon against the Mass.

Marriage is concluded between Queen Mary and the King of Spain.

Strange sights were seen before the coming in of King Philip, and subversion
of Religion, for in the month of February, 1553. there was seen within the City
of London about the 9. of the clock in the forenoon two Suns Shining at once,
the one a good pretty way distant from the other. At the same time was also
seen a rain bow turned contrary and a great deal higher then has been
accustomed, it stood with the head downward, and the feet as it were upward.

In the second year of Queen Mary, there was a Cat hanged upon a Gallows at the
cross in Cheap, apparelled like a priest ready to say mass with a shaven
crown, her two fore feet tied over her head with a round paper like a wafer
cake put between them, whereon arose a great ill will against the city of
London, for the Queen and the Bishops were very angry withal, and therefore
the same afternoon there was a proclamation that whosoever could bring forth
the party that did hang up the Cat should have twenty Nobles, but none could or
would earn it.

Philip Prince of Spain, and Mary Queen of England were married together by the
Bishop of Winchester in the presence of a great number of Noblemen of both the
Realms in the year of God, 1554. Cardinal Pool is sent legate to the King and
Queen to reconcile England to their mother Church Rome, the Parliament su^mit
themselves to the Pope his authority is restored which was matter of great joy
to Rome. Great was the bloody murdering of Gods Saints in the time of Queen
Mary. And first to begin with Master John Rogers, he is condemned of the Bishop
of Winchester and Lord Chancellor for two articles, first for that he affirmed
the Romish Catholic Church to be the Church of Antichrist, and that he denied
the reality of their Sacrament, he cursed him to be disgraded and cond^mned and
put into the hands of the L^itie, and so he gave him over into the Shireffs
hand which were much better then his. 2. That in the Sacrament of the Altar
there is not substantially nor really the natural body and blood of Christ.
After that this John Rodgers had been long and straightly imprisoned by the space
of an year and an half at Newgate amongst Thieves, often examined and very
uncharitably entreated, and at length unjustly, and most cruelly by wicked
Winchester condemned. Such was the Bishop of Winchester and Boner Bishop of
London their charity that he could not obtain of them that favor as to talk a
little with his wife before his burning; for his wife and children being eleven
in number, ten able to go, and on sucking on her breast met him by the way, as
he went toward Smithfield, this sorrowful sight of his own flesh: blood could
nothing move him but that he constantly and cheerfully took his death with
wonderful patience in the defense and quarrel of Christ's Gospel. As he was
going to Smithfield, he said the Psalm Miserere by the was, all the people
wonderfully rejoicing at his constancy with great praises and thanks to God for
the same. A litt^e before his burning at the stake, his pardon was brought if
he would have recanted, but he utterly refused it, so he was burned into ashes
washing his hands in the flamme as he was in burning, he was the first
Protomartyr of all that blessed company that suffered in Queen Mary's time that
got the first adventure upon the fire, he was viccar of St. Pulchers, and
Reader of Paul's in London.

After that M^ster Rodgers had broken the ice here, under Queen Mary there
suffered in like sort an Archbishop, four Bishops, twenty one Divines, eight
Gentlemen, eighty four Artificers, one hundred Husbandmen Servants and
Laborers, twenty six Wives, twenty Widows, nine Virgins, two boys, and two
Infants with many more, yea it is recorded that in less then four years they
sacrificed the lives of eight hundred innocents here to their Idols in Queen
Mary's days. We shall take a view of them that are most memorable.

Lawrence Sanders Preacher, a man of worshipful Parentage, was burned for the
defense of the Gospel at Coventree, being led to the place of Execution, he
went in an old Gown and a Shirt, barefooted, and oftentimes fell flat on the
ground and prayed. When he came to the fire he fell to the ground and prayed,
he rose up again and took the Stake to which he should be chained in his arms
and kissed it, saying welcome the Cross of Christ, welcome everlasting life,
and being fastened to the Stake, and fire put to him, full sweetly he sleeped in
the Lord.

Mr. John Hooper Bishop of Worchester and Gloucester was burnt for the defense
of the Gospel at Gloucester, he was a worthy Bishop, endued with these qualities
that St. Paul requires in a Bishop, he was condemned at London, and degraded by
Bishop Winchester and others, and sent to Gloucester to be burnt. As he went to
the fire he was led between two Sheriffs (as it were a Lamb to the place of
slaughter) in a Gown of his Hosts, his Hat upon his head, and a staff in his
hand to stay himself withal, for the grief of the Sciatica which he had taken
in prison, caused him sometimes to halt. All the way he was straightly charged
not to speak, the people mourned bitterly for him. After he was entered into his
prayer, a Box was brought and laid before him upon a Stool with his pardon (or
at the least wise, it was fained to be his pardon) from the Queen if he would,
he at the sight thereof cried, if ye love my soul, away with it, if ye love my
soul, away with it; the Box being taken away, the Lord Shandois said seeing
there is no remedy dispatch him quickly; Mr. Hooper said God my Lord, I trust
your Lady will give me leave to make an end of my prayers. Then said the Lord
Shandois to Sir Edmund Bridges, take heed that he do nothing else but pray, if
he do, tell me, and I shall quickly dispatch him; so he prayed in these words
following, Lord (said he) I am hell, but thou art heaven, I am swill and a
stink of sin, but thou art a gracious God and a merciful Redeemer, have mercy
therefore upon me most miserable and wretched offender after thy great mercy,
and according to thy inestimable goodness. Thou that art ascended into heaven,
receive me hell to be partaker of thy joys, where thou sit in equal glory
with t^y Father, for well know thou Lord, whereof I am, come hither to
s^ffer, and why the wicked do ^^^secute this thy poor servant, not for my sins
and ^^^sgressions committed against thee, but because I will not allow their
wicked doings, to the contaminating of thy blood, and to the denial of the
knowledge of thy truth, wherewith it did please thee by thy holy Spirit to
instruct me, the which with as much diligence as a poor wretch might (being
thereto called) I have set forth to thy glory. And well see thou my Lord and
God, what terrible pains and cruel torments be prepared for thy creature, such,
Lord, as without thy strength none is able to bear or patiently to pass, but
all things that are impossible with man are possible with thee. Therefore
strengthen me of thy goodness, that in the fire I break-not the rules of
patience, or else aswage the terror of the pains, as shall seem most to thy
glory. After he had done, he was put to the fire, and he abode three quarters
of an hour in the fire, for it was slow in burnning and thrice it was kindled
before he was consumed. In the midst of the fire he prayed with a loud voice,
Lord Jesus have mercy upon me, Lord Jesus have mercy upon me, Lord Jesus
receive my spirit, and these were the last words that he was heard to utter.
But when he was black in the mouth and his tongue swollen that he could not
speak, yet his lips went til they were shrunk to the Gams, and he knocked his
breast with his hands until one of his arms fell off, and then knocked still
with the other, what time the fat water and blood dropped out at his fingers
ends, until by renewing of the fire his strength was gone, and his hand did
cleave fast in knocking to the iron upon his breast. So immediately bowing for
wards he yielded up his spirit.

Doctor Tailyour was burned at Hadley for the testimony of the Gospel, when he
was going to execution the people greatly lamented him, and cried one to
another, Ah good Lord, there goes our good Sheepherd from us, that so
faithfully has taught us, so fatherly hes cared for us, and so godly has
governed us. O merciful God, what shall we poor scattered Lambs do? What shall
come of this wicked world? Good Lord, strengthen him and comfort him, with such
other most lamentable and pitious voices. And he cried to them, I have Preached
to you Gods word and truth, and am come this day to seal it with my blood.
Coming against the Almes-house which he well knew, he cast to the poor people
money which remained of that good people had given him, in time of his
imprisonment. As for his living, they took it from him at his first going to
Prison, so that he was sustained all the time of his imprisonment by the
charitable Alms of good people that visited him; he is not permitted to speak
at his death, and therefore he kneeled down and prayed, and a poor woman that
was among the people stepped in and prayed with him, but her they thrust away,
and threatened to tread her down with horses, notwithstanding she would not
remove, but abode and prayed with him. When he had prayed, he went to the Stake
and kissed it, and set himself in a pitch Barrel which they had set for him to
stand in, and so stood with his back upright against the Stake, with his hands
folded together, and his eyes toward Heaven, and so he continually prayed. So
stood he still without either crying or moving, with his hands folded together,
till Soyce with an Halbert stroke him on the head that the brains fell out, and
the dead Corpse fell down into the fire and burnt.

The Lord Chancellor, and other his fellow. Bishops, caused the Image of Thomas
Becket that old Romsh traitor to be set over the Mercers Chappeldoor in
Cheapside in London, in the form and shape of a Bishop, with Miter and Crosier,
howbeit within two days after his erection, his two blessing-fingers were first
broken away, and the next day his head also was stricken off, whereupon arose
great trouble, and many were suspected, among whom one Master John Barnes
Mercer, dwelling over against the same Chapel, was vehemently by the Lord
Chancellor charged withal as the doer thereof, and though rather for that he
was a Professor of the truth, wherefore he and three of his servants were
committed to Prison, and at his delivery) although it could not be proved upon
him (he was bound in a great sum of money, as well to build it up again as
often as it should be broken down, and also to watch and keep the same.

And therefore at his compelled charges, the Image was again set up the second
day of March then next ensuing, but (for lake belike of care^ull watching) the
14. day of the said month in the night, the head of that dangerous beast (over
whom there was such a charge given) was again the second time broken off, which
thing was so hainously taken, that the next Day there was a proclamation made
in London, that whosoever would tell who did strik off his head (though he were
of counsel and not the principal doer (he should have not only his pardon, but
also an hundredth crowns of Gold with hearty thanks, but it was not known who
did it.

Thomas Tomkins of the Diocese of London having first his hand burned, after
was burnt himself by Bishop Boner for the constant testimony of Christ's true
profession. This Tomkins was a weaver by his occupation, he was of so godly
life and disposition, that if any woman had come to him with her Web, as some
time they did three or four in a day, he would always begin with prayer, Or if
any other had come to talk with him of any matter he would first begin with
prayer, and if any had sought unto him to borrow money, he would show him such
money as he had in his purse and bid him take it, and when they came to repay
it again, so far off was he from seeking any usury at their hand, or from
strait exaction of his due that he would bid them keep it longer while they
were better able. When Boner saw that by no means he could prevail with Tomkins
to forsake the truth, he found out a cruel device, First he burnt his hand at a
Taper or wax-candle, supposing that by the smart and pain of the fire being
terrified, he would leave off the defense of his Doctrine which he had
received. In the time that his hand was in burning, the said Tomkins afterward
reported to one James Hinse that his spirit was so rapt up that he felt no
pain. In the which burning he never shrunk, till the veins shrunk and the
sinnews brust, and the water did spirt into Mr. Harpfields face, one that was
with the Bishop, insomuch that the said Mr. Harpsfield moved with pity desired
the Bishop to stay, saying that he had tried him enough, this burning was in
the hall at Fulham, and such was the cruelty of this Boner that he was not
contented with the burning of his hand, rested not till he had consumed his
whole body into ashes at London in Smithfield.

Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester and Chancellor seeing he could not
prevail by cruelty to reduce men to the unity of the Catholic faith, and to
call them from their errors and heresies, he gave over his murdering office to
Boner Bishop of London who supplied that part right doughtily as in the further
process of this History hereafter evidently and too much may appear.

William Hunter a young man of nineteen years, a Prentise in London is burnt
for the Gospels sake, when he is condemned to die, his father and his mother
came to comfort him, and desired heartily of God that he might continue to the
end in that good way which God had begun, and his mother said to him that she
was glad that ever she was so happy to bear such a Child which could find in
his heart to lose his life for Christ's name sake. As he came to the place of
execution, The Shireff said unto him here is a letter from the Queen, if thou will recant thou shall live, if not thou shall be burned. No quoth William
Hunter I will not recant God willing, then he went to the staik and prayed,
saying, Son of God shine upon me, and immediately the Sun in the Element shined
out of a dark cloud so full in his face that he was constrained to look another
way, whereat the people mused, because it was so dark a little time before, and
here was an external show of Christ's favor upon him.

After the burning of William Hunter was Mr. Highed, and Mr. Caustoun two
worthy Gentlemen of Ess^x, which for the sincere profession of their Faith
under Boner Bishop of London were martyred and burned in Essex.

John Laurence priest, laimed with irons in Prison was born to the fire in a
chair at Colchester, and so sitting was in his constant faith consumed with
fire. At the burning of this Laurence he sitting in the fire, the young
children came abo^t the fire, and cried as well as young Children could speak,
saying, Lord strengthen thy servant and keep thy promise, Lord strengthen thy
servant and keep thy promise, which thing as it is rare, so it is no small
manifestation of the glory of God which wrought this in the hearts of these
little ones, nor yet a little commendation to their parents which from their
youth brought them up in the knowledge of God and his truth.

Follows the worthy and constant martyredome of the Bishop of St. David in
Wales, called Robert Farrar, who was the next Bishop in this catalogue of of
Christian martyrs that suffered after Mr. Hooper. This foresaid Farrar by the
favor and good will of the Lord Protector was first called and promoted to
that dignity. This man I may well call twice a martyr, not only for the cruel
death of the fire which he suffered most constantly in the days of Queen Mary
unto the shedding of his blood, but also for diverse other injuries and
molestations in King Edwards time, which he no^lesse firmly then unworthily
sustained at the hands of his enemies after the fall of the Duke of Somerset.
Of these his vexations and troubles, with the wrangling articles and
informations laid against him to the number of 56. and of the malice conceived
against him by certain covetous Chanons of the Church of Carm^rthen, and what
were the proceedings of both pa^ts, as well of innocent, as of the crasty
adversaries, what were their names in their A^ticles against him is to be seen
in his History, unto the which he answered all. Thus this godly Bishop being
condemned and degraded, was committed to the Secular power, who not long after
was brought to the pl^ce of Execution in the Town of Carmarthen, where he in
the Mercat-place most constantly sustained the torments and passion of the
fire. Touching the which constancy of this blessed Mutyr, this is moreover to
be added and noted, that one named Richard Jonas a Knights son, coming to Mr.
Farrar a little before his death, seemed to lament the painfulnesse of the
death he had to suffer. Unto whom the Bishop answered again to this effect
saying that if he saw him once to stir in the, pains of his burning, he should
then give no credit to his Doctrine. And as he said, so he right well performed
the same, for so patiently he stood that he never moved, but even as he stood
holding up his stumps, so still he continued, till one Richard Gravel with a
staff dashed him upon the head, and so stroke him down.

There was one at this time called Rawlins White a fisher man in the Country of
Wales, gave his life like a valiant Soldier of Jesus Christ to martyrdom, and
was burned at Cardiff, he was illiterat, but had a great desire to know the
truth, he had a Boy that red to him the Scripture and other Books, whereby he
attained through the grace of God to the knowledge of the truth, and conferred
with others, and became an instructor of others, and converted many to the
truth; at last he was taken as a man suspect of Heresy, and committed to
prison, and being desired oftentimes by the Bishop to recant, could no be
persuaded thereto, he is condemned as an Heretic, and to be burnt. As he was
going to execution, he saw his Wife and Children by the way weeping and making
great lamentation, the sudden sight of whom so pierced his heart, that the very
tears trickled down his face. But he soon after, as though he had misliked this
infirmity of the flesh, began to be as it were altogether angry with himself,
insomuch that striking his bre^st with his hand, he used these words, Ah filthy
flesh, stayest thou me so, would thou fain prevail; Well, I tell thee, do
what thou can, thou shall not by Gods grace have the victory. As he went to
the Stake, he fell down upon his knees and kissed the g^ound, and in his rising
again, the earth a little sti^k^ng on his nose, he said these words, Earth unto
earth, and d^st unto dust, thou art my mother, and unto thee I shall return.
When he was standing at the Stake, he cast his eyes upon one, and called him
unto him, and said, I feel a great fighting between the flesh and the spirit
and the flesh would very fain have his swing, and therefore I pray you when ye
see m^ any thing tempted, hold your finger up to me, and I trust I shall
remember my self. When the Smith brought a Chain of Iron to fasten him to the
Stake, and as he was making it fast on the other side, Rawlins said unto him, I
pray you good friend knock in the Chain fast, for it may be that the flesh
would strive mightily, but God of thy great mercy give me strength and patience
to abide the extremity; so with patience and great constancy he suffered his
Martyrdom. He was of age about threescore years.

At this time died Pope Julius third, a Porkish and blasphemous Pope. Amongst
other pranks and deeds of this foresaid Pope, this is also reported of him in
his life that he delighted greatly in Pork flesh and Peacocks. Upon a time when
he was admonished of his Physician to abstain from all Swines flesh, for that
it was noisome for his Gout, and yet would not follow his counsel, the
Physician afterward gave warning to his Steward or orderer of his diet, that he
should set no more Pork flesh before him. Whereupon when the Pope perceived the
said Pork flesh to be laking in his accustomed service, where (said he) is my
Pork? and when his Steward had answered that his Physician had forbidden any
Pork to be served, then the Pope brasting out in a great rage, said these
words, bring me (said he) my Pork flesh, all dispet to di D^o, that is to say
in English, in the despite of God. At another time he sitting at dinner pointed
to a Peacock upon his Table which he had not touched, keep (said he) this cold
Peacock for me against supper, and let me sup in the Garden, for I shall have
Guests. So when supper came, and amongst other hot Peacocks, he saw not his
cold Peacock brought to his Table: The Pope after his wonted manner most
bitterly blasphemed God, fell into an extreme rage. Whereupon one of his
Cardinals sitting by, desired him, saying, Let not your Holiness I pray you be
so moved with a matter of so small weight. Then this Julius the Pope answering
again, What, said he, If God was so angry for an Apple, that he cast our first
parents out or Paradise for the same? Why may not I, being his Vicar, be angry
then for a Peacock, since a Peacock is a greater matter then an Apple? Behold
here, good Reader, by this Pope, the holiness of that blasphemous See, and yet
thou shall see how what affection was born unto this Pope here in England, by
the Dirigies, Hearses, and F^nerals commanded to be had and celebrated in all
Churches by the Queen and her Counsel. At what time it chanced a woman to come
into St. Magnus Church at the Bridge foot in London, and there seeing an Hearse
and other preparation, asked what it meant, and others that stood by said it
was for the Pope, and that she must pray for him, nay (quoth she) that will I
not, for he needs not my prayer, and seeing he could forgive us all our sins,
I am sure he is clean himself, therefore I need not to pray for him; she was
heard to speak these words of certain that stood by, which by and by carried
her to the Cage of London Bridge, and bade her cool her self there.

In the close of the Examination of John Simpson and John Audely, two
Husbandmen, is to be noted the sudden fear of Bishop Boner and his Doctors,
which was thus, there was assembled at that time a great multitude of people,
that because the Consistory was not able to hold them, they were fain to stand
in the Church near about the said Consistory, waiting to see the said prisoners
when they should depart, and hearing the Bishop say, Have him speaking to
Simpson, being in a rage at his stout answers, Have him away. Now the people
hearing in the Church these words, and thinking because the day was far spent,
that the prisoners had their judgment, they being desirous to see the
prisoners had to Newgate, severed themselves, one running one way, another,
another way, which caused such a noise in the Church, that they in the
Consistory were all amazed, and marvelled what it should mean, wherefore the
Bishop also being somewhat afraid of this so sudden fear, asked what there was
to do? The standers by answering, said that there was like to be so tumult, for
they were together by the ears. When the Bishop heard this, by and by his heart
was in his heels, and leaving his seat, he with the rest of that Court betook
them to their legs, hastening with all speed possible to recover the door that
went into the Bishops house, but the rest being somewhat lighter of foot then
my Lord, did soon recover the door, and thronging hastily to get in, kept the
Bishop still our, and cried, Save my Lord, save my Lord, but meaning yet first
to save themselves if any danger should come; whereby they gave the standers by
good matter to laugh at the rediculous fear of Boner and his Doctors, and so
thereafter their two godly persons Simpson and Audely were burnt.

The Counsel of Trent was in this Pope Julius his time, betwixt the first and
last Session thereof were eighteen years. In it all the Articles of the Popish
Doctrine were confirmed.

At this time by the Popish Clergy the bones of Martin Bucer and Paulus Phagins
which had lain almost two years in their graves, were taken up and burned at
Cambridge, besides this, they caused Peter Martyrs wife, a woman of worthy
memory to be dug out of the Churchyard, and to be burned on the dunghill.

A little before Thomas Hawks Gentleman his death, some of his aq^^intance and
friends which seemed not a little to be confi^med by the example of his
constancy, and by his talk, yet notwithstanding the same again being feared
with the sharpness of the punishment which he was going to, privily desired
that in the midst of the flamme he would show them some token if he could
whereby they might be more certain whether the pain of such burning were so
great that a man might not therein keep his mind q^iet and patient. Which thing
he promised them to do, and so secretly between them it was agreed that if the
rage of the pain were tolerable, and might be suffered, then he should lift up
his hands above his head toward Heaven before he gave up the Ghost. In the
fire when he continued long, and when his speech was taken away by violence of
the flamme, his skin also drawn together, and his fingers consumed with the
fire, so that now all men thought certainly that he had been gone, suddenly,
and contrary to all expectation, the blessed servant of God being mindful of
his promise made before, reached up his hands burning in a ligh^ fire (which
was mavelous to behold) over his head to the living God, and with great
rejoicing as seemed, did strike or clap them three times together. At the sight
whereof there followed such applause and outcry of the people, and especially
of them which understood the matter, that the like has not commonly been
heard, And so the blessed Martyr of Christ straight way si^king down into the
fire, gave up his spirit. Mr. John ^radfoord Preacher most constantly suffered
for the t^stimony of Christ and his truth, he was long in prison, he had many
conflicts with his adversaries, he was burnt at Smithfield, many Doctors and
Bishops did talk with him in prison, and two Spanish Friars dealt with him to
recant, and to leave his errors, but he abode constant in the truth. When he
came to the Stake he took a Faggot in his hand and kissed it, and so likewise
the Stake. And when he had so done, he desired of the Sheriffs that his servant
might have his raiment, for (said he) I have nothing else to give him, and
besides that he is a poor man; and the S^eriff said he should have it. And so
forthwith Mr. Bradfoord did put off his Raiment and went to the S^^ke, and
holding up his hands, and casting his countenance to Heaven, he said thus: O
England, England, ^epent thee of thy sins, beware of Idolatry, b^ware of false
Antichrists, take heed they do not deceive you: but he was commanded by the
Sheriff to be quiet. At that time with him was burnt a young man named John
Lease, a Prentise, of ninteen or twenty years, whom he greatly encouraged, and
said to him, be of good comfort brother, for we shall have a merry supper with
the Lord this night, and he spak no more words that any man did hear but
embracing the reed, s^id thus, strait is the way, and narrow is the gate that
leads to eternal salvation, and few there be that find it. Here is not to be
passed by a notable example of Gods hand upon W^droff, one of the Sheriffs that
would not suffer him to speak, but dealt churlishly with him. It happened
within half an year after the burning of this blessed Martyr that he was so
stricken on the right side with such a Palsy, or stroke of Gods hand,
whatsoever it was, that for the space of eight years after till his dying day,
he was not able to turn himself in his bed, but as two men with a sheet were
fain to stir him, and withal such an insatiable devouring came upon him, that
it was monstrous to see. And thus continued he the space of eight years
together. This godly Eradfoord, and Heavenly Martyr, during the time of his
imprisonment, wrote sundry comfortable Treatises, and many godly Letters, of
which some he wrote to the City of London, Cambridge, Walden, to Lancashire,
and Chasshire, and diverse to his private friends, and to his mother, brethren,
and sisters. Bradfoord was a godly and learned man, while he was in prison he
teached twice a day continually, unless sickness hindered him, where also he
ministered the Sacrament often. Preaching, Reading and Praying, was all his
whole life, and he was in great credit with his Keeper, that he might go out
and in when he pleased. He counted that hour not well spent wherein he did not
some good, either with his Pen, Study, or in exhorting of others, etc. He was
had in great reverence and admiration with all good men, that a multitude that
never knew him but by fame, greatly lamented his death, yea and a n^mber of the
Papists themselves wished heartily his life. In his Letter to his mother, he
disswades her from the Mass, and tells her the difference betwixt the Lords
Supper and the Mass. The Supper was ordained to be received of us in the
memorial of his death, for the confirmation of our faith, that his body was
broken for us, and his blood shed for pardon of our sins: But in the Mass
there is no receiving, but the Priest keeps all to himself alone. Christ
says, Take, eat, no, says the Priest, Gape, peep: There is a sacrificing,
yea, killing of Christ again as much as they may: there is Idolatry in
worshipping the outward sign of Bread and Wine, here is all in Latin, yea
cannnot tell what he says. To conclude, there is nothing as God ordained,
wherefore my good mother come not at it.

In mortem Johannis Bradfordi constamissimi Martyris.
Discipulo nulli supra li^et esse Magistrum,
Quique Deo serrit, tristia multa ferret.
Corripit omniporens natum quem diligit omnem,
Ad Coelum stricta est difficilisque via.
Has Bradforde tuo dum condis pectore voces,
Non hominum rigidas terribilesque minas,
Sed nec blanditias, non vim, nic vincula curas,
Tradis and accensae membra cremanda pyrae.
There were at this time also two Ministers, Rland and Frankish Sheterden and
Midletoun burnt at Cauterbury, at two several Stakes, but all in one fire
together, where they in the sight of God and of his Angels, and before men like
true Soldiers of Jesus Christ gave a constant testimony of the truth of his
Gospel. Sheterden wrote sundry Letters from the prison in Westgate, and one to
his mother before his execution, to whom he gives warning to beware of the
great idolatry, and blasphemous Mass. O let not that be your God which Myce
and Worms can devour; behold, I call Heaven and Earth to record that, that it
is no God, yea, the fire that consumes it, and that moistness that cau^eth it
to mould, and I take Christ's Testament to witness that it is none of his
Ordinances, but a mere invention of men, and a snare to catch innocents blood,
and now that God hes showed it unto you, bewarned in time. O give over all
customs, and become new in the truth: what state soever your fathers be in,
leave that to God, and let us follow the counsel of his Word.

Thomas Jueson Carpentar being earnestly traveled with all to recant, said in
this wise, I would not recant and forsake my opinion and belief for all the
goods in London, I do appeal to Gods mercy, and will be none of your Church,
nor submit my self to the same, and that I have said, I will say again, and if
there came an Angel from heaven to teach me any other doctrine, then that which
I am in now, I would not believe him: Which answer thus made he was condemned
as an heretic, and committed to the secular power and burned at Chicesher,
persuing him in his constant faith unto the end.

Among many that traveled in these troublesome days to keep a good conscience,
there was one James Ables a young man, which through compulsion of the tyranny
then used, was enforced to his part with his brethren in wandering and going
from place to place to avoid the pe^il of apprehending, but when time came that
the Lord had another work to do for him, he was caught by the hands of wicked
men, and brought before the Bishop of Norwich, Doctor Hopton, who examining him
of his Religion, and charging him therewith very sore, both with threats and
fair speech, at the last the said poor James did yield and resented to their
naughty persuasions, although his conscience consent not thereto. Now when he
was dismissed and should go from the Bishop, the Bishop calling him again gave
him a piece of money, which when the said James had received and was gone from
the Bishop, his conscience began to throb and inwardly to accuse his fact how
he had displeased the Lord by consenting to their beastly illusions, In which
combat with himself, being pitteously vexed, he went immediately to the Bishop
again and there threw him his said money which he had received at his hand, and
said it repented him that ever he gave his consent to the wicked persuasions,
and that he gave his consent to the taking of his money. Now this being done,
the Bishop with his Chaplains did labor a fresh to win him again but in vain;
for the said James Abbes would not yield for none of them all, although he had
played Peter before through infirmity, but stood manfully to his Masters
quarrel to the end, and above the force of the fire, to the consuming of his
body into ashes, which tyrany of burning was done in Berie.

M^ster John Denly at Uxbridg was burnt for the testimony of the truth, being
set in the fire with the burning flamme about him he sang in it a Psalm. Then
cruel Doctor Story being there present, commanded one of the to^mentors to
hu^le a Faggot at him, whereupon being hurt therewith upon the face that he
bled again, he left his singing and clapped his hands upon his face, truly quoth
Doctor Story to him that hurled the Faggot, thou have marred a good old song.
The said John Denly being yet still in the flame of the fire put his hands
abroad and sang again, yielding at the last his spirit into the hands of God
through his Son Jesus Christ.

There was six godly Martyrs burnt at one fire at Canterbury for the testimony
of the Truth. Elizabeth Narne widow that was one of them that was burnt at
Stafford bow nigh unto London, her husband was burnt before for the profession
of the truth in the month of May last by past; the chief thing objected against
her as against all the rest, was touching the real and corporal presence of
the body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar; many other matters
was objected against them, as for not coming to the church, for speaking
against the mass, for dispising their Ceremonies and new found Sacraments with
diverse other fond and trifling toys not worthy any mentioning. This woman
being exhorted to recant, she said, do what ye will, for if Christ was in an
error, then am I in an error, upon which answer she was adjudged and
condemned as an Heretic, and so delivered unto the secular power to be by them
put to death, and so she was burnt.

George Tankerfield a little before his execution prayed his Host to let him
have a good fire in his Chamber, he had so, and then he sitting on a Form
before the fire, put off his shoos and hose, and stretched out his leg to the
flame, and when it had touched his foot he quickly withdrew his leg, showing
how the flesh did persuade him one way, and the Spirit another way. The Spirit
said, be not afraid, for this is nothing in respect of fire eternal. The flesh
said, leave not the company of thy friends and acquaintance, which love, and
will not let thee lack nothing. The Spirit said, the company of Jesus Christ
and his glorious presence does exceed all fleshly friends. The flesh, said, do
not shorten thy time, for thou may live if thou will, much longer. The
Spirit said, this life is nothing unto the life in Heaven which lasts for
ever, etc. And when he came to the place of execution, after he ended his
prayer, he arose, and with a joyful faith he said, that although he had a
sharp dinner, yet he hoped to have a joyful supper in Heaven. While the Fagots
were set about him, there came a Priest unto him and persuaded him to believe
^n the Sacrament of the Altar and he should be saved. But George Tankerfield
cried out vehemently, and said, I defy the Whore of Babylon, I I defy the Whore
of Babylon, fie on that abominable Idol, good people do not believe him. Then
the Major of the Town commanded to set fire to the Heretic, and said if he had
but one load of Fagots in the whole world, he would give them to burn him.
There was an certain Knight by, and went unto Tankerfield, and took him by the
hand, and said, good brother, be strong in Christ; this he spoke softly, and
Tankerfield said, O Sir, I thank you, I am so I thank God, so he was put to the
fire and burnt.

Rob^rt Samuel a very godly and right faithful P^eacher of Gods Word in King
Edward his days, was now apprehended and cast into prison, and miserably
handled under the Bishop of Norwich, Doctor Hop^on an unmercifull Prelat, he so
far exceeded the bounds of piety and compassion in tormenting their poor
brethren as this Bishop did, in such sort that many of them he perverted and
brought quite from the truth, and some from their wits also, he is kept in
strict prison, where he was chained bolt upright to a great poast, in such
sort, that standing only on the tiptoe, he was fain to stay up the whole poise
or weight of his body thereby, and to this they added a far more grievous to
meant, keeping him without meat and drink, whereby he was unmercifully vexed
through hunger and thrist, saving that he had every day allowed two or three
mouthfuls of bread, and three spoonfuls of water to the end rather that he
might be reserved to further torment, then that they would preserve his life. O
worthy constancy of the Martyr. O pitilesse hearts of Papists, worthy to be
complained of, and to be accursed before God and nature O the wonderful
strength of Christ in his members, whose stomach, though it had been made of
Adament stone, would not have relented, and these intolerable vexations, and
extreme pains above nature, how often times would he have drunken his own
water, but his body was so dried up with his long emptiness, that he was not
able to make one drop of water. At the last when he was brought forth to be
burned, which was but a trifle in comparison of these pains that he had passed;
certain there were that heard him, what strange things had hapened unto him,
during the time of his imprisonment, to wit, that after he had been famished,
or pined, with hunger two or three days together, he then fell into a sleep,
as it were one half in a slumber, at which time one clothed all in white
seemed to stand before him, which ministered comfort unto him by these words,
Samuel, Samuel, be of good cheer, and take a good heart unto thee, for after
this day shall thou never either be hungry or thirsty, which thing came even to
pass accordingly, for sppedily after he was burned, and from that time that he
should suffer he feit neither hunger nor thrist. And thus declared he to the
ends as he said, that all men might behold the wonderful works of God. Many
more like matters concerning the great comfort he had of Christ in his
afflictions, he could utter (he said) besides this, but shamefastness and
modesty would not suffer him to utter it. The report goes among some that were
there present, and saw him burnt, that his body in burning did shine as light
and white as new tried silver in the eyes of them that stood by.

After the suffering of Robert Samuel was burned William Allen in Walfinghame,
a laboring man, he being brought before the Bishop, and asked the cause why he
was imprisoned, answered, that he was put in prison because he would not follow
the Cross, saying that he would never go in procession. Then being willed by
the Bishop to return again to the Catholic Church, he answered that he would
turn to the Catholic Church, but not to the Romish Church, and said, that if
he saw the King and Queen and all other follow the Cross, or kneel down to the
Cross, he would not, for the which, sentence of condemnation was given against
him, and he burned, who declared such constancy at his martyrdom, and had such
credit with the justices, by reason of his upright and well tried conversation
amongst them, that be was suffered to go untved to his suffering, and there
being fastened with a Chain, stood quietly without shrinking until he died.

There were five worthy Martyrs burned at Canterbury in one fire, because they
denied that Christ was corporally and bodily in the Sacrament: Master Robert
Glover at Coventree being apprehended for suspi^ion of Heresy and imprisoned,
was burnt for the testimony of the truth There was one Austen Bernher a
Minister and a familiar friend of his, testified this of him. After he was
condemned by the Bishop, and was now at the point to be delivered out of this
world, It so happened that two or three days before his heart being lumpish
and desolate of all spiritual consolation, felt in himself no ap^nesse nor
willingness, but rather a heaviness and dullness of spirit, finding much
discomfort to bear the bitter cross of martyrdom ready now to be laid upon
him, and here we see that Gods Saints may be destitute for a time, of the Lords
comfort. Unto whom the said Austen answering again, willed and desired him
patiently to wait the Lords pleasure, and how soever his present feeling was,
yet seeing his cause was just and true, he exhorted him constantly to stick to
the same, and to play the man, nothing misdoubting but the Lord in his good
time could visit him and satisfy his desire with plenty of consolation.
whereof he faid he was right certain and sure, and therefore desired him
when^oever any such feeling of Gods heavenly mercies should begin to touch his
heart, that then he would show some signification thereof whereby he might
witness with him the same, and so departed from him. The next day when the
time came of his martyrdom as he was going to the place, and was now come to
the sight of the Stake, although all the night before praying for strength and
courage he could feel none, suddenly he was so mightily replenished with Gods
holy comfort and heavenly joys, that he cried out, clapping his hands to
Austen and saying in these words, Austen he is come, he is come, and that with
such joy and alacrity, as one seeming rather to be risen from some deadly
danger to liberty of life, then as one passing out of the world by any pains of
death. And so he was put to the fire and burnt for the testimony of the truth.

Denton being afraid of burning said to Wolsey that he cannot burn, but he
that could not burn in the cause of Christ, was afterward burned against his
will when Christ had given peace to his Church, for his house was set on fire,
and while he went in to save his goods he lost his life with two other that
were in the same house. Not much unlike to this was also the example of Mr.
West Chaplain to B. Ridley, who refusing to die in Christ's cause with his
masters, said mass against his conscience, and soon afterward died.

The Death and Martyrdom of Bishop Ridley, and Bishop Latimer.
MAster Ridley Bishop of London, and Latimer Bishop sometimes of Worcester, men
of memorable leaning and incomparable ornaments, and gifts of grace, joined
with no less commendable sincerity of life, as all the Realm can witness
sufficiently, were burnt at Oxford for the testimony of the truth. This B.
Ridley was descended of a stock right worshipful, he was born in
Northumberland-shire. After he past his course at Cambrige and made Doctor of
Divinity, he went to Paris, and after his return was made Chaplain to King
Henry the eight, and promoted afterward by him to the Bishopric of Worcester,
and so from thence translated to the Se^ and Bishopric of London in King
Edwards days, and now in Queen Mary's time they were laid hands upon, and
committed to prison and accused as Heretics. Great was the conference and
godly talk that was between them while they were in prison. Mr. Ridley wrote
many letters from the prison, as a letter from him and his prison-fellows unto
Mr. Braidford, and his prison-fellows in the Kings bench at Southwark, and to
many others. And besides these letters of his, diverse other tracttations were
written by him, partly out of prison, and partly in prison.

As for Mr. Latimer that famous Preacher and worthy Martyr of Christ and his
Gospel, he was a long time a zealous and superstitious Papist, and in this
blind zeal he was a very enemy to the professors of Christ's Gospel, as both
his. Oration made when he proceeded Bachelor of Divinity against Philip
Melancton, and also his other works did plainly declare; but he through the
goodness of God was converted by Mr. Bilney unto the truth, so that whereas
before he was an enemy, and almost a persecuter of Christ, he was now a zealous
seeker after him, howbeit as Satan never sleeps when he sees his kingdom
begin to decay, so likewise now seeing that this worthy member of Christ would
be a shroud shaker thereof, he raised up his impious Impes to molest and
trouble him. He wrote also many letters from the prison. Touching the memorable
acts and doings of this worthy man, amongst many other, this is not to be
neglected what a bold enterprise he attempted, in sending to King Henry a
present, the manner whereof was this. There was then and yet remains still an
old custom received from the old Romans, that upon new years day being the
first day of January, every Bishop with some handsome new years gift should
gratify the King, and so they did, some with gold, some with silver, some with
a purse full of money, some with one thing, and some with another, but Mr.
Latimer being Bishop of Worcester then amongst the rest, presented a new
Testament for his new years gift with a napkin having this poesy about it,
Fornicatores and adulteros judicabit Dominus.

Now in Queen Mari^s time, after their long imprisonment they are brought forth
to their final examination and execution, are degraded and condemned as
Heretics, and delivered to the Secular power to be put to death. When they
came to the fire, they brought a Eagot kindled with fire and laid the same down
at Doctor Ridleys feet, to whom Mr. Latimer spoke in this manner, be of good
comfort Mr. Ridley, and play the man, we shall this day light such a Candle by
Gods grace in England as I trust shall never be put out. And here we see the
Church to be lightened by the Martyrdom of Saints. And so the fire being given
to them, when Doctor Ridley saw the fire flaming up toward him he cried with a
wonde^ful loud voice, In manus tuas Domine commendo spiritum meum, Domine
sujcipe spiritum meum, and after repeated this latter part often in English,
Lord, Lord, receive my spirit. Mr. Latimer crying as vehemently on the other
side, Oh Father of Heaven receive my soul; who receiving the flame, as it were
embracing of it. After, as he had stroaled his face with his hands (as it were)
bathed them a little in the fire, he soon died (as it appeared) with very
little pain, or none. B^t Mr. Ridley by reason of the evil making of the fire
unto him, he was long in burning, he c^ied to let the fire come to him, for his
nether pa^ts were burnt before the fire touched his upper parts, yet for all
this to meant he forgot not to call upon God still, it moved hundreds to tears
in beholding this horrible sight, for I think there was none that had not clean
exiled all humanity and mercy, which would not have lamented to behold the fury
of the fire, so to rage upon their bodies. Thus their two godly and learned men
ended their lives for the cause of Christ, and testimony of his truth.

The death and end of Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester, and Chancellor of
the Kingdom, enemy of Gods Word.
THe next month after the burning of Doctor Ridley and Mr. Latimer, which was
the month of November, Stephen Gardener Bishop and Chancellor a man hated of
God and all good men, ended his wretched life. The same day when as Bishop
Ridley and Mr. Latimer suffered at Oxford, came the servant of the said
Winchester posting in all possible speed from Oxford, bringing intelligence to
the Bishop that Ridley and Latimer were burnt, he came out rejoicing and saying
to the old Duke of Norfolk, being then in his house. Now (says he) let us go
to dinner. Whereupon they being set down, meat was immediately brought, and the
Bishop began merrily to eat; but what followed? The bloodyly ^yrant had not
eaten a few bits, but the sudden stroke of God, his terrible hand fell upon him
in such sort as immediately he was taken from the Table, and so brought to bed,
where he continued for the space of fifteen days in such intolerable anguish
and torments, that all that mean while, during these fifteen days he could not
avoid by order of Urine, or otherwise any thing that he received, whereby his
body being miserably in^amed within (who had inflamed so many good Martyrs
before) was brought to wretched end. And therefore no doubt, as most like it
is, came the thrusting out of his tongue from his mouth so swolen and black
with the Inflammation of his body; a spectacle worthy to be noted and behold of
all such bloody persecuters. Moreover it is recorded concerning the said
Bishop, that when Doctor Day Bishop of Chicester came to him and began to
comfort him with words of Gods promise, and with the free justification in the
blood of Christ our Savior, repeating the Scriptures to him. Winchester
hearing that, What my Lord (quoth he) will ye open that gap now, (then farewell
altogether) to me and such other in my case ye may speak it, but open this
window to the people, then farewell altogether.

The Martyrdom of Mr. John Philpot Archdeacon, was burnt for the defense of
the Gospels cause against the Antichristian See of Rome. After long
^mprisonment, and often Examination he is condemned as an Heretic, and delivered
to the Secular Power to be burnt. When he came to the place of suffering, to
wit, in Smithfield, he kissed the Stake, and said, Shall I disdain to s^ffer at
this Stake, seeing my Redeemer did not refuse to suffer most vile death upon
the Cross for me, and then with an obedient heart full meekly he said the
106.107, and 108. Psalms, and when he had made an end of all his prayers, he
said to the Officers, What have ye done for me, and every one of them declared
what they had done, and he gave to every one of them money, then they bound him
to the Stake, and set fire unto that constant Martyr, who in the midst of the
firey flames yielded his soul into the hands of the Almighty God, and like a
Lamb gave up his breath, his body being consumed into ashes. The writings and
examinations of Mr. Phipot were by the providence of God preserved from the
sight and hands of his enemies, who by all manner and means sought not only to
stop him from all writing, but also to spoil and deptive him of that which he
had written, for the which cause he was many times stripped and searched within
the prison by his Keeper, but yet so happily these his Writings were couveyed
and hid in places about him, or else his Keepers eyes so blinded, that
notwithstanding all this malicious purpose of the Bishops are yet remaining,
and come to light.

There were seven Martyrs that suffered together at one fire in Smithfield at
London for the testimony of Christ's Gospel, in the second year of persecution
under Queen Mary; five men, one wife, and one maid, all which seven as they
were burned together in one fire, so were they likewise all upon one sort and
form of A^ticles condemned in on day. Amongst the rest of the Articles objected
against them were, that they misliked the Sacrifice of the Mass, and the
Sacrament of the Altar, refusing to come to their Parish Church to hear Mass,
and that they did expressly say that in the Sacrament of the Altar is not the
very body and blood of our Savior Christ, really, substant^^ly and truly, and
has affirmed expressly that the Mass is idolatry and abomination, and that in
the Sacrament of the Altar there is none other substance but only material
bread, and material wine, which are tokens of Christ's body and blood, and that
the substance of Christ's body and blood is no ways in the Sacrament of the
Altar, etc. As for the first of these seven, to wit, Thomas Whitlie Minister
upon persuasion and coun^^l r^canted, and subscribed a Bill of submission to
renounce all errors and heresies against the Sacrament of the Altar, etc. And I
do protest and declare by these presents that I do both now hold ob^erve, and
keep in all points the Ctaholick ^a^th and belief of Christ's Church, according
as this Church of England ^eing a member of this Catholic Church does now
profess and keep, and in no ways to swerve, dec^ine, or go from the said
faith, during my natural life, submitting my self fully and wholly to you
reverend Father, my said ordinary in all things concerning my reformation and
amendment at all times. Now when he had thus done, he was troubled in his mind
and conscience for forsaking the cross of Christ and had no rest till he
obtained again the submission he had subscribed, which havin^ gotten he was
very glade and returned again, and with great constancy and fortitude stood to
the defense or Christ Doctrine to the fire against the Papists. Five other
Martyrs in Can^erbury, four Women, and on Man at two staiks and one fire
altogether burned, who when the fire was flaming about their ears, do sing
P^alms. Where at the good knight Sir John Norton, being there present, weeped
bitterly at the sight thereof.

The Martyrdom of Thomas Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury.
THe Martyrdom of the reverent Pastor and Prelat Thomas Cranm^r A^ch-Bishop of
Canterbury, who was burned at Oxford under Queen Marie, for the confession of
Christ's true Doctrine, he was a gentleman born of good parentage, he attained
to great knowledge and learning, and was reader of Divinity lecture in the
College of Cambridge, and was in such special estimation and reputation with
the whole University, that being Doctor of Divinity, he was commonly appointed
one of the heads? which are two or three of the chiefest learned men) to
examine such as yearly profess in comencement, either Batchelors or Doctors of
Divinity, by whose approbation the whole University licenseth them to proceed
unto their degree, and again by whose dissalowance the University also
rejects them for a time to proceed until they be better furnished with more
knowledge. When the great and weighty cause of King Henry the either his
divorce with the Lady Kathren D^wager of Spain came into q^estion, which being
many ways by the space of two or three years amongst the Canonists, Civilians
and other learned men diversely disputed and debated, at what time Cardinal
Campeius and Cardinal Volsey being in commission from the Pope to hear and
determine that great cause in controversity between the King and the Queen his
pretended wife, dalied and delayed all the Summer time, hearing the said cause
in controversy debated, and the little minding to p^oceed to sentence giving,
took occasion to finish their commission, and not further to determine therein.
So on a night two Doctors of the kings side and Doctor Cranmer being lodged in
one house, and as they were at supper, they conferred with Doctor Cranmer
concerning the Kings cause, and asking his judgment, he answered that in his
opinion they made more ado in prosecuting she law ecclesiastical then needed.
It were better I suppose quoth Doctor Cranmer that the question whether a man
may many his brothers wife or no, were decided and discurss^d by the Divines,
and by the authority of the word of God, whereby the conscience of the Prince
may be better satisfied and q^ieted, then thus from year to year by frustretory
delays to prolong the ein^, leaving the very tr^th of the matter un^oulted o
it by the w^rd of God, and this may be done as well in England in the
Universities here, as at Rome, or else where in any fo^raign nation. When
Doctor Cranmer had thus end^d his Tale, the other two well liked of his devise:
The King hearing of this advise of ^ranmers, caused in all haste to send for
him, I perceive said the King, I pe^ceive that, that man has the Sow by the
right ear. And if I had known of this devise two years ago, it had been in my
way a great piece of money, and had also red me out of much disquietnesse, he
comes to the King and after conference between the King and him, he lays a
charge upon him to search the Scripture in the cause of his divorce, and to
write his mind therein, so he went about the business, and incontinent wrote
his mind concerning the Kings question adding to the same besides the authority
of the Scriptures, of General Counsels, and of ancient writers also, his
opinion which was this, that the Bishop of Rome had no such authority as
whereby he might dispense with the word of God and the Scriptue. When Doctor
Cranmer had made this book, and committed it to the King the King said to him,
will ye abide by this that ye have here written before the B. of Rome, that
will I do by Gods grace quoth Doctor Cranmer, if your Majesty do send me
thither? Marie quoth the King, I will send you even to him in a sure Embassage.
And this by means of Doctor Cranmers handling of this matter with the King, not
only certain learned men were sent abroad to the most part of the Universities
in Christendom to dispute the question, but also the same being by commission
disputed by the Divines in both the Universities in Cambrige and Oxford, It was
there concluded that no such Matrimony was by the word of God lawful.
Whereupon a solemn Embassage was then prepared and sent to the Bishop of Rome,
wherein went the Earl of Wiltshire, Doctor Cranmer and other Doctors. And when
the time came that they should come before the Bishop of Rome to declare the
cause of their Embassage, the Bishop sitting on high in his cloth of state and
in his rich appar^el, with his Sandals one his feet, offering as it were his
foot to be kissed of the Ambassadors, the Earie of Wiltshire disdaining
thereat, stood still and made no countenance thereunto, so that all the rest
kept them from that idolatry, howbeit one thing is not here to be omitted as
a Prognosticat of our separation from the seat of Rome, which then chanced by a
Spaniel of the Earl of Wiltshire, for he having there a great Spaniel which
came out of England with him, stood directly between the Earl and the Bishop
of Rome, when the said Bishop had advanced forth his foot to be kissed, now
whether the Spaniel perceived the Bishop foot of another matter than it ought
to be, and so taking it to be some kind of repast, or whether it was the will
of God to show some token by the Dog unto the Bishop of his ino^dinate pride,
that his foot were mo^e meet to be bitten of dogs then kissed of Christian men,
the Spaniel I say when the Bishop extended his foot to be kissed, no man
regarding the fame, straight ways (as though he had been of purpose appointed
thereunto) went directly to the Popes foot, and not only kissed the same
unmannerly, but as some plainly reported and affirmed took fast with his mouth
the great toe of the Pope, so that in have he pulled in his glorious feet from
the Spaniel, whereat one man smileing in their sleeves, what they thought God
knows. But in fine the Pontifical B. after that, sought no more at that
present for kissing his feet, but without any ceremony gave ear to the
Ambassadors what they had to say. Who entering there before the Bishop offered
on the Kings behalf to be defended that no man Jure Divino could or ought to
Marry his Brothers wife, and that the Bishop of Rome by no means ought to
dispense to the contrary. Diverse promises were made, and sundry days
appointed wherein the question should have been disputed, and when one part was
ready to answer, no man there appeared to dispute in that behalf. So in the end
the B. making to our Ambassadors good countenance and gratifying Doctor Cranmer
with the office of the penitentiariship, dismissed them undisputed withal, the
Ambassadors retu^ned, but Cranmer went forward in his Embassage to the Emperor,
and there to answer such learned men of the Emperors Counsel as would or could
say any thing to the contrary part, etc.

At this time B. Warhame then Archbishop of Canterbury departed this transito^y
life, whereby that dignity then being in the gift and di^position of the King
was given unto Cranmer as worthy for his travel of such a promotion. He proved
a notable B. being endued with all these qualities that the Apostle requires in
a Bishop. He had many enemies in King Henry's time, but the King held him up.
In Queen Mary's time he is put to great trouble for his Religion, he is
imprisoned and kept long in prison, and brought out to his examination and
trial sundry times, he is degraded from his office, and condemned. The
Doctors and Divines of Oxford busied themselves all that ever they could about
Mr. Cranmer to have him recant, assaying by all crafty practices and
allurements they might devise, to bring their purpose to pass, he at last
overcome with their persuasions, whether through their importunity, or by his
own imbecility, or of what mind I cannot tell, the recantation is drawn up and
subscribed by him, the Doctors and Prelates without delay caused the same to be
imprinted and set abroad in all men's hands, this made the Papists greatly to
rejoice; all this while Cranmer was in no certain assurance of his life,
although the same was faithfully promised to him by the Doctors. The Queen
having now gotten a time to revenge her old grief, received his recantation
very gladly, but of her purpose to put him to death she would nothing relent.
The Queen appoints Doctor Cole to make his Funeral Sermon before his death. At
the day of his execution he makes his Sermon at S. Mary's Church in Oxford,
there was a Stage set up over against, the Pulpit of a mean height from the
ground, where Cranmer had his standing, waiting until Cole made him ready to
his Sermon. The lamentable case and sight of that man gave a forrowf^ll
spectacle to all christian eyes that beheld him, he that late was Archbishop,
Metropolitan, and Primat of England, and the Kings privy Counselor being
now in a bare and ragged Gown, and ill favouredly clothed with an old square
Cap, exposed to the contempt of all men, did admonish men not only of his own
calamity, but also of our state and fortune, wherein he declared against him
that being a traitor he had dissolved the lawful Matrimony between the King
her Father and Mother, besides the driving out of the Popes authority while he
was Metropolitan, that he had been an heretic, etc. Beside^ these, there were
other just and weighty causes which seemed to the Queen and Counsel, which was
not meet at that time to be opened to the common people, etc. He enc^urageth
him to take his death patiently by many places of Scripture. Doctor Cole
rejoiced in his conversion, but that lasted not long. After the Sermon Cranmer
was required to declare his faith, he declared the true confession of his faith
without all color or dissembling, for now is no time to dissemble, whatsoever
I have said or written in time past, I believe in God the Father Almighty maker
of Heaven and Farth, etc. And now I come to the great thing that so much
troubles my conscience more then any thing that ever I did or said in my whole
life, that is the setting abroad of a writting contrary to the truth, which
here now I renounce and refuse, as things written wi^h my hand contrary to the
truth, which I thought in my heart, and written for fear of death, and to save
my life if it might be etc. And for as much as my hand offended writing contrary
to my heart, my hand shall first be punished therefore, for may I come to the
fire, it shall be first burned. And as for the Pope; I refuse him, as Christ's
enemy, and Antichrist, with all his false Doctrine. And as for the Sacrament, I
believe as I have taught in my Book against the Bishop of Winchester, the which
my Book teaches so true a Doctrine of the Sacrament, that it shall stand at
the last day before the Judgment of God, where the Papisticall Doctrine
contrary thereto shall be ashamed to show her face. Here the standers by were
all ashamed, marvelled, were amazed, did look one upon another whose
expectation he had so notably deceived. Some began to admonish him of his
recantation, and to accuse him of falsehood; briefly, it was a world, the Doctor
beguiled of so great an hope: I think there was never cruelty more notably or
better in them deluded and deceived, for it is not to be doubted but they
looked for a glorious victory, and a perpetual triumph by this man's
recantation, so the Papists were in a great chafe against him, he is plucked
down from the Stage by Friars and Papists for the true confession of his faith,
he is led to the fire, when he is brought to the fire, he puts his right
hand which subscribed, first in the fire, which he held so steadfast and
immovable (saving that once with the same hand he wiped his face) that all men
might see his hand burned before his body was touched, his body did so abide
the burning of the flame with such constancy and stedfastness, that standing
always in one place, without moving of his body, he seemed to move no more
then the Stake to which he was bound, his eyes were lifted up unto heaven, and
oftentimes he repeated his unworthy right hand so long as his voice would
suffer him, and using often the words of Stephen, Lord Jesus receive my spirit;
in the greatn^sse of the flamme he gave up the Ghost.

At this time in Suffolk at Ipswich Agnes Potten and Joan Trunchfield were
burnt for affirming that in the Sacrament was the memorial only of Christ's
death and passion, for, said they, Jesus Christ is ascended up into heaven, and
is on the right hand of God the Father, according to the Scriptures, and not in
the Sacrament as he was born of the Virgin Mary, for this they were burned,
which they constantly suffered, which was to be wondered at, who being so
simple women so manfully stood to the confession and testimony of Gods word and
verity. The burning of Agnes Potten was revealed to her before in her sleep,
for being asleep in her bed, saw a bright burning fire right up as a Pole, and
on the side of the fire she thought there stood a number of Queen Mary's
friends looking on. Then being asleep, she seemed to muse with her self whether
her fire should burn so bright or no, and indeed her suffering was not far
unlike to her dream.

Hugh Laverock Painter, an old lame man of sixty eight years, John Apprice a
blind man, Martyrs, were burned at Stratford the Bow. In this discourse of this
parcel or part or History, I know not whether more to marvel at the great and
unsearchable mercies of God (with whom there is no respect in degrees of
persons, but he chooses as well the poor, lame, and blind, as the rich,
mighty, and healthful, to set forth his glory) or else to note the
unreasonable, or rather the unnatural doings of these unmercifull Catholics
(I mean Bishop Boner and his accomplices) in whom was so little favor or mercy
to all sorts and kinds of men, that also they spared neither impotent age,
neither lame nor blind, as may well appear by these poor creatures. They after
their trial and examination by B. Boner, were condemned and delivered un^o the
civil power to be burnt. At their death the old lame man casting away his
Couch, and comforting the blind men his fellow Martyr, said unto him, be of
good comfo^t my brother, for my Lord of London is our good Physician, he will
heal us both shortly, thee o^ thy blindness, and me of my lamenesse; and so
patiently these two good Saints of God together suffered.

After the burning of this lame and blind man were brought to the fire a^
Smithfield a widow and three maids, they constantly suffered for the cause of
Christ There was also about this time a blind boy named Thomas Drowrie put to
death at Gloches^er, in his examination besides Doctor Williams then Chancellor
of Gloucester, amongst other Articles, he urged the Article to
Transubstantiation, saying, do thou not believe that after the words of
Consecration spoken by the Priest, there remains the very real body of Christ
in the Sacrament of the Altar, the blind Boy answered, that I do not. Then said
he, then thou art an Heretic, and shall be burned, but who has taught thee
this heresy; Ye M^ster Chancellor, when and where did I teach so, when ye
preached, naming the day a Sermon to all men, as well as to me, upon the
Sacrament: Ye said, the Sacrament was to be received spiritually by faith, and
not carnally and really, as the Papists, have therefore taught. Then said the
Chancellord^ as I have done, and thou shall live, as I do and escape burning.
Then said the Boy though ye can so easily dispense with your self, and mock
with God, the world, and your consci^nce; yet will I not so do, then said the
Chancellor, God have mercy upon thee, for I will read the condemnatorie
sentence against thee, Gods will be done, said he. The Register being herewi^h
somewhat moved, stood up, and said to the Chancellor, Fie for sh^me man, will
ye read the sentence against him and condemn your self: away, away, and
substitute some other to give sentence and judgment. No, said the Chancellor
to the Register, I ill obey the Law, and give sentence my self according to
mine office; and so he read the sentence condemnatory against the Boy (with an
unhappy tongue, and more an unhappy conscience) delievering him over to the
Secular power. So he was b^ought to the fire and burnt: who constantly suffered
for the defense of the truth.

There were burned at one fire at Stratford the Bow by London, eleven men and
women, whole dwellings were in sundry places in Essex, the eleven men were tied
to three Stakes, and the two women loo^e in the midst without any Stake, and so
were all burnt with such love to each others, and constancy in our Savior
Christ, that it made all the beholders to marvel. The Sheriff that attended
upon them came to the one part, and told them that the other had recanted, and
their lives therefore should be saved, willing and exhorting them to do the
like, and not to cast away themselves. Unto whom they answered, that their
faith was not builded upon man, but on Christ crucified. Then the Sheri^ff
perceiving no good ^o be done with them, went to the other part, and said (like
a liar) the like to them, that they whom he had been with before had recanted,
and should therefore not suffer death, counselling them to do the like, and not
wilfully to kill themselves, but to play the wise men, etc. Unto whom they
answered as their brethren had done before, that their faith was not builded on
man, but on Christ and his sure word.

The Martyrdom of a learned and virtuous young man called Julius Palmer, some
time Fellow of the Magdalen Col^edge in Oxford burned at Newberie. This young
man in all King Edw^rds days when the Gospel was preached and professed was a
Papist within the University of Oxford and so obstinat that he did utterly
abhor all godly prayer and sincere preaching and almost of all them, with
whom he lived, was therefore likewise abhorred, and (as I may say) pointed at
with the finger, yet did after in Queen Mari^s time when the Gospel was
surpressed, and the Mass let up, suffer most cruel death, so the Lord does
call when and whom it pleases him, according to his good will and pleasure, and
animats and strengthens them to give their life for his cause. When Palmer came
to the fire and two other with him, they fell all three to the ground, and
Palmer with an audible voice pronounced the 31. Psalm, but the other two made
their Prayers secretly to Almighty God And as Palmer began to arise there came
behind him two popish Priests, exhorting him yet to recant and save his soul.
Palmer answered and said, away, away, tempt me no longer, away I say from me
all ye that work iniquity, for the Lord has heard the voice of my tears, and
so forthwith they put off their raiment and went to the Stake, and kissed it,
and when they were bound to the Post, Palmer said, good people Pray for us,
that we may persevere unto the end, and for Christ's sake beware of Popish
teachers, for they deceive you. As he spoke this, a servant of one of the
Bailiffs threw a F^ggot at his face, that the blood gushed out in diverse
places, for the which fact the Sheriff reviled him, calling him cruel
tormenter, and with his walking staff brake his head that the blood ran about
his ears. And when the fire was kindled and began to take hold upon their
bodies, they lift their hands toward Heaven and quietly and cheerfully, as
though they had felt no smart, they cried, Lord Jesus strengthen us, Lord Jesus
asist us, Lord Jesus receive our souls. And ^o they continued without any
struggling, holding up their hands, and knocking their hearts, and called upon
Jesus until they had ended their mortal lives. Among other things this is also
to be noted that after their three heads by force of the raging and devouring
flames of fire, were fallen together in a plump or cluster which was marvelous
to behold, and that they all were judged already to have given up the ghost,
suddenly Palmer as a man awaked out of sleep, moved his tongue and jaws, and
was heard to pronounce this word, Jesu. So being resolved into ashes, he
yielded to God as joyful a soul (confirmed with the sweet promises of Christ)
as any one that ever was called beside to fuffer for his blessed Name.

The Martyrdom of three women, with a young infant burned, to wit, the mother,
her two daughters, and the child, in the Isle of Garnsey, for Christ's true
Religion, the year of our Lord 1556. Among all the Martyrdomes of this Book
rehearsed, there is none almost either in cruelty to be compared, or so far off
from all compassion and sense of humanity, as this merciless fact of the
Papists done upon these women; their challenge was for not coming to the
Church. Upon rash information given before their cause was tried, was
condemned, and ordained ^o be burnt for Heretics, and notwithstanding that
these three women were willing to be conformed to the Queens ordinances, were
condemned; they made their appeal to the Queen, but could not be heard. One of
the women being great with child, by the vehemence of the flame, the infant
being a fair man child, fell into the fire, and eftsoons being taken out of
the fire by one standing by, and was laid upon the grass, then was the child
had to the Provest, and from him to the Bailiff, who gave censure that it
should be carried back again, and cast into the fire, and so was the child
burnt; a merciless and barbarous fact. Such was the bloody rage of persecution
at this time that ^pared neither man nor woman, child wife, nor maid lame,
blind, nor creeple.

The Martyrdom of Joan Wast, a blind woman from her birth, in the Town of
Derbie, about the age of 22. years, burnt. In her examination before the B. and
Doctor Draicot, and being asked sundry questions of them, and if she believed
there things, answered, she believed as the holy Scriptures taught her, and
according to that she had heard preached unto her by diverse learned men,
whereof some suffered imprisonment, and other some suffered death for the same
Doctrine, among whom she named, beside others, Doctor Tailor, whom she said
took on his conscience, that, that Doctrine was true, and asked of them if they
would do so in like case for their Doctrine, which if they did not, she desired
them for Gods sake not to trouble her, being a blind, poor and unlearned woman,
with any further talk, saying (by Gods assistance) that she was ready to yield
up her life in that faith, in such sort as they should appoint; for all this
she is condemned and given over to the secular power tobe burnt. Doctor Draicot
being appointed to preach at her execution, the blind woman being brought to
the Church, and set before the Pulpit, where the Doctor entering the Sermon, he
railed mightily against this poor blind woman, saying to the people that she
was condemned for denying the blessed Sacrament of the Altar to be the very
body and blood of Christ, really and substantially, and was thereby cut off
from the body of the Catholic Church, and said that she was not only blind of
the bodily eyes, but also blind in the eyes of her soul. And he said that as
her body should be presently consumed with material fire, so her soul should
be burned in hell with everlasting fire, as soon as it should be separated from
the body, and there to remain world without end. And said that it was no^
lawful for the people to pray for her. And thereafter she was taken to the
fire, which she constantly endured praying to the Lord to have mercy upon her.

Follows a pitiful Story concerning the unmercifull handling of William
Dangerfield, and Joan his wife, being in childbed taken out of her house, with
her sucking infant of fourteen days old, and laid in the common Jayle, amongst
thieves and robbers. There was in Gloccester, in the Parish of Wotton, not far
from Bristow, one Dangerfield, a right honest and godly poor man, who by his
wife had nine children, and she now lying in child bed of the tenth. This
William after he had been abroad from his house a certain space for fear of
persecution, hearing that his wife was brought to bed, repaired home to visit
her, as natural duty required, and to see his children, she being now delivered
four days before. The return of this man was not so soon known to some of his
unkind and uncharitable neighbors, but they incensed with the spirit of
Papistry, eftsoons beset the house about, and there took the said William, and
carried him to prison, and so at length was brought to the Bishop, being then
Doctor Brooks, in whose cruel handling he remained a certain space so long
till his legs were almost fretted off with irons. After the apprehension of the
husband, the wife likewise was taken, with her young born child, being but
fourteen days of her childbed and carried into the common Jayle, and there
placed among thieves and murderers, where both she and her poor innocent found
so small charity among the Catholic men, that she could never come to any
fire, but was driven to warm the clothes that she should put about the child in
her bosom. In the mean season while they lay thus enclosed in several
prisons, the husband and the wife, the B. practices with the man, and made him
believe falsely that his wife had recanted, and so persuaded him likewise to
recant, and so subtly drew out a form of recantation, and so likewise
promised to recant, he being permitted to go to his wife, he showed this to
her, whereat she was wonderfully grieved, and lamented the fall of her husband,
and he lamented his promise made to the B. and to make his prayer to the
Almighty God, and so departed he home to his house, whereby the way he took his
death, and shortly after departed. After this Joan his wife continued still in
prison with her little Infant, till at length also the child being sta^ved for
cold and famine, was sent away when it was past all remedy, and so shortly
after died; and not long after the mother also followed, besides the old woman
which was Mother of the husband of the age of ^o years and upward, who being
left in the house after their apprehension for lack of comfort there perished
also, what became of their nine children it as uncertain.

There were five famished at Canterbury Castle by the unmercifull tyranny of
the Papists.

There were at this time fifteen Martyrs and confessors together prisoned in
the Castle of Canterbury, of which number not one escaped with their lite, but
either were burned o^ else famished in prison. In the fifth year of Queen Marie
there is an visitation commanded to be holden by the Cardinal at the
University of Cambridge and Oxford for, reformation of Religion, and any abuses
and disorders that were there; many Bishops and Doctors with great pomp and
solemnity were conveened there, among other things done there, they enter into
process against Martin Eucer, and Paulus Phagius for heresy, who were now
dead and buried long ago, they are condemned for, heres^^, they are taken up,
and their bones and books burned. When the country people saw this, M^^^ed to
execution that were dead before partly dete^^ed and abhorred the extreme
cruelty of the Commissioner toward the rotten Carcasses, and partly laughed at
their folly in making such preparation for their burning, for what needs any
weapon, said they, as though they were afraid that the dead bodies which felt
them not, would do them some harm, or to what purpose serves that chain
wherewith they are tied, since they might be burnt loose without any peril,
for it was not to be feared that they would run away. And not only dug they
up Peter Martyes bones and burnt them, but such was the despitefull handling
and madness of the Papists toward his wife at Oxford, that they took her out
of her grave, at the commandment of Cardinal Pool, and after buried her in a
dunghill, for they could not prove her to be an Heretic to burn her, but in
the time of Queen Elizabeth she was taken out of that unclean and dishonest
place where she lay, and solemnly in the face of the whole Town to bury her
again in amore decent and honest monument.

After this there is abloody commission given forth by King Philip and Queen
Mary to persecute the poor members of Christ: There were many apprehended, and
at one time 22. prisoners were sent up together for Gods word to London from
Colchester, all whom bloody Boner B. of London was minded to have executed, by
persuasion of the Cardinal he was stayed. This Cardinal, was a Papist, but no
bloody papist, always for fear of stir among the people to see so many execute
at once, upon a reasonable submission were sent away again, yet the rage of the
persecution ceased not, so that sometime ten at once, sometime seven, sometimes
five excuted and burnt in Smithfield, and some in other parts of the Country.

A certain woman being condemned of the Bishop to be burnt at Canterbury, had
two children named Patience and Charity, who then said to the Bishop that if he
would need burn her she trusted that he would take and keep Patience and
Charity, meaning her two children. Nay quoth the Bishop, by the faith of my
body I will meddle with none of them both, for the Bishop will neither keep
patience nor charity.

At Colchester there were three men and three women burned in the forenoon,
besides four other burned at afternoon. There that were put to the fire before
noon they clapped their hands for joy in the fire, that the standers by which
were very many, cried generally all almost, the Lord strengthen them, the Lord
comfort them, the Lord pour his mercies upon them, with such like words as was
wonderful to hear, thus yielded they up their souls and bodies into the Lords
hands for the testimony, of his truth.

Cicely Ormes was burnt at Norwich, she was a very simple woman, but yet
zealous in the Lords cause, she did for a twelve month before she was taken,
recant, but never after was she quiet in conscience until she was utterly
driven from all their Popery, between the time she recanted and that she was
taken, she had gotten a letter made to give the Chancellor, to let him know
that she repented her recantation from the bottom of her heart, and would
never do the like again whilst she lived, but before she exhibited her bill,
she was taken and sent to prison, and going to execution, she said unto the
people, I would ye should not think of me that I believe to be saved in that I
offer my self here unto the death for the Lords cause, but I believe to be
saved by the death of Christ's passion, and this my death is and shall be a
witness of my faith unto you all here present. Good people, as many of you as
believe as I believe, pray for me. Note well this saying of hers. Then she came
to the Stake and kissed it, and said, welcome the sweet cross of Christ, and
so gave her self to be bound thereto. After the Tormenters had kindled the fire
to her, she said, my soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in
God my Savior. And in so saying, she set her hands together, right against her
breast casting her head and eyes upward, and so stood having up her hands by
little and little, till the very sinews of her arms brast asunder, and then
they fell, but she yielded her life unto the Lord, and quietly as she had been
in a slumber, or as one feeling no pain. So wonderfully did the Lord work with
her, his name therefore be praised for evermore. Amen.

In this furious time of persecution was burned John Rough Minister, he was
born in Scotland: At the age of 17. years he entered into the order of the black
Friars at Sterling, he remained the space of 16. years, until such time as the
Lord Hamiltoun, Earl of Arrane, and Governor of the Realm of Scotland,
casting a favor unto him, did sue unto the Archbishop of St. Andrews, to have
him out of his professed order, that as a Secular Priest he might serve him for
his Chaplain. At which request the Archbishop caused the Provincial of that
house, having thereto authority to dispense with him for his habit and order.
This suit being thus by the Earl obtained, the said Rough remained in his her
service one whole year, during which time it pleased God to open his eyes, and
to give him some knowledge, and thereupon was by the said Governor sent to
preach in the freedom of Air, where he continued four years, and then after the
death of the Cardinal he was appointed to abide at St. Andrews, and there he
had assigned unto him a yearly pension of twenty pound from King Henry the
eight King of England; howbeit at last weying with himself his own danger, and
also abhorring with himself the idolatry and superstition of his count^ey, and
hearing of the freedom of the Gospel within the Realm of England, he went to
England in King Edwar^s time, and there was preferr^d by the Duke of Somerset
as a Preacher to serve at Ca^lill, and other plac^s, but in the beginning of
the reign of Queen Mary, he fled with his wife into Friesland, there laboring
truly for his living, in knitting of Capes, Hose, and such like things, till
about the end of the month of October last before his death: At which time
lacking yarn, and other necessary provision for the maintenance of his
occupation, he came over again into England here to provide for the same, he
joyneth himself to the Congregation at London, and was there Minister, and
thereafter he was betrayed and apprehended, and sent to Newgate, he is brought
to his examination before Boner. After his examination he is condemned as an
Heretic and degraded, exeeming him from all been fits and privileges of their
Church, and committed his body to the Secular power. Touching him two things
may be noted, first, he being in the north Country in the days of King Edward
the sixth, was the mean to save Doctor Watsons life, who in Queen Mary's time
was Bishop of Lincoln, for a Sermon that he made there. The said Watson after
that in the said days of Queen Mary, being with Boner at the examination of
the said Mr. Rough, to requite the good turn in saving his life, detected him
there to be a pernicious Heretic, who did more hurt in the north parts, then
an hundred beside of his opinion. Unto whom Mr. Rough said again, Why Sir? Is
this the reward that I have for saving your life when ye preached erroneous
Doctrine in the days of King Edward the sixth. 2. Being before Boner, among
other talk, he affirmed that he had been twice at Rome, and there had seen
plainly with his eyes which he many times heard of before namely, that the Pope
was the very Antichrist, for there he saw him carried on men's shoulders, and
the false named Sacrament born before him, yet was there more reverence given
unto him, then unto that which they counted to be their God, When Boner heard
this, rising up, and making as though he would have torn his garments, have
thou (said he) been at Rome, and seen our holy father the Pope, and do thou
blaspheme him. After this sort, and with that flying upon him, he plucked off a
piece of his beard, and after making speedy haste to his death, he burnt him
half an hour before six of the clock in the morning, because the day (belike):
should not be far spent before he had done a mischievous deed. Another note
concerning John Rough is this, being at the burning of Austo in Smithfield, and
returning homeward again, met with one Mr. Farrar a M^rchant of Hallifax, who
asked him where he had been, unto whom he answered, I have been (says he)
where I would not for one of mine eyes but I had been. Where have you been said
M. Farrer? Forsooth says he, to learn the way; and so he told him he had been
at the burning of Austo, where shortly after he was burned himselt. As also
John Rough had a vision of his trouble before his death, the friday before he
suffered, he had a dream, in his sleep, the matter was this, he thought in his
dream that he was carried forcibly to the Bishop, and that the Bishop plucked
off his beard, and cast it into the fire, saying these words, now I may say
that I have had a piece of an Heritick burned in my house, and so accordingly
it came to pass.

Richard Gibson being brought our of prison unto his n^al examination. Here is
to be noted that Mr. Gibson being a very big and tall man, of a personable and
heroical sta^ure, was sent for of Boner by a little and short person, a
promoter, like Robin Pap^st, called Robin Caley, if it were not he himself.
This Robin Caley having the conducting of the said Gentleman from the Pultrie,
would needs hale him through Cheapside, the Gentleman desiring him to turn some
other way, but the more the Gentleman entreated the more fierce was the silly
Jack upon him, and drawing and holding him by the arm, would needs hale him
through the high street, that all the world might see what he could do in his
office. Mr. Gibson desirous to be led without holding, willed and entreated him
to let his arm loose, he would go quietly of his own accord with him whither he
would, only craving that he might go by him freely without noting of the
people: The saucy and impotent miser the Promoter hearing this, nay, says he,
thou shall not escape me, so come on thy ways, thou shall not choose but come,
and so reaching at his arm would needs drag him to the Bishop The Gentleman
content to go, yet loath to be notified in the streets, gently requested again
and again that refraining his hold he would suffer him to go of his own free
and voluntary will, he should not need to fear him, for he would not start from
him. To whom the catiff looking upon his face, come on thy way, says he, I
will hold the fast spite of thy beard, and whether thou will or no. Mr. Gibson
seeing and beholding the intolerable braging of the wretched miser, and moved
therewith not a little, could bear no longer, but said, will thou not, said he,
and adds moreover, bitterly looking down toward him, that if he did not
incontinently pluck away his hand (and so stayed withal) he would immediately
wring his neck from his body whereupon Robin Papist the ^Romotor was fain to
pluck away his hold, and so proceeded they to the Bishop.

Next after, the Martyrdom of Mr. Rough Minister of the Congregation,
succeeded in like Martyrdom the Deacon also of the said godly company or
Congregation in London, named Cuthbert Simson, being committed to fire. This
Cuthbert Simson was a man of a faithful and zealous heart to Christ and his
true flock, insomuch that he never ceased laboring and studying most
earnestly, not only how to preserve them without corruption of the Popish
religion, but also his care was ever vigilant how to keep them together without
peril or danger of persecution, etc. And as Mr. Rough had a vision of himself
touching his afflictions, so had he of this Deaconfor he dreamed that he saw
two of the Guard leading Cuthbert Simson Deacon of the said Congregation, and
that he had the book about him, wherein were written the names of them all
which were of the Congregation, whereupon being fore troubled and awaked, and
called his wife to strike light, for I am much troubled with my brother
Cuthbert this night, and giving himself to read upon his book a while, he fell
asleep again: being asleep, he dreamed the like dream again, and awaked
therewith, he said to his wife, my brother Cuthbert is gone. And as Mr. Rough
was making himself ready to go to Cutbert to see how he did, in the mean time
the said Cuthbert came in with the book concerning the names and accounts of
the Congregation, to whom he said he was fore troubled with him all night, and
declared to, him his dream. After he had so done he willed him to lay the book
from him, and so carry it no more about him, unto which Cuthber answered he
would not so for dreams he faid were but fantasies and not to be credited. Then
Mr. Rough straightly charged him in the Name of the Lord to do it, and so he left
the book behind him. The next night following he had a dream of his
afflictions, Simson is apprehended and sent to the Tower of London by the
Counsel. And being there commanded to tell whom I did will to come to the
English service, he answered he would tell nothing, whereupon he was set in a
rack of iron the space of three hours, then they asked him if he would tell
them, he answered as before, then he was loosed, and carried to his lodging
again. On the Sunday after he was brought into the same place again before the
Leivtenant and the Recorder of London, and being examined, he answered as he
said before, then the Leivtenant did swear by God he should tell, then they
bind his two fingers together, and, put a small arrow betwixt them, and drew it
through so fast that the blood followed, and the arrow brake. Then they racked
himtwise, but he would not confess. Now as touching this Cuthbert Simson, this
further is to be noted, that Eoner in his Consistory, speaking of Cuthbert
Simson, gave this testimony of him there to the people, saying, ye see this man
(faith he) what a personable man he is, and after he had thus commended his
person, added moreover; And as concerning his patience, I say unto you, if he
were not an Heretic, he is a man of the greatest patience that ever yet came
before me, for I tell you, he hes been thrice racked upon one day in the Tower,
also in my house he has selt some sorrow, and yet I never see his patience
broken, etc. It is thought and said of some that, that arrow which was grated
betwixt his fingers being tied together, was not in the Tower, but in the
Bishops H.B, he is condemned sad burns in Smithfield, and two other with him.
The day before this Simson was condemned, he being in the Stock, Cloney his
Keeper comes in with the keys about nine of the clock at night, after his
usual manner to view his prison, and see whether all were present, when he
^spied the said Cuthbert to ly there, departed again, locking the doors after
him within two hours after, about eleven of the clock toward midnight, the said
Cuthbert, whether being in a slumber, or being, awake, I cannot say, heard one
coming in, first opening the outward door, then the second, afterward the third
door, and so looking, in to the said Cuthbert, having no Candle or Torch that
he could see, but giving a brighnesse and ligh most comportable and joyful to
his heart, saying Ha unto him, and departed again: who it was he could not
tell, neither I dare define, this that he saw himself, he declared four or five
times to the said Mr. Austen, and to others, at the sight whereof he received
such joyful comfort, that he also expressed no little solace in telling and
declaring the same.

Roger Holland in his examination by Bishop Boner, propnefied thus, this I dare
be bold in God to speak, which by his Spirit I am moved to say, that God will
shorten your hand of cruelty, that for a time ye shall not molest his Church.
And this shall ye in, short time well perceive, for after this day in this
place shall there not be any by him put to the trial of fire and faggot. And
after this day there was never one that suffered in Smithfield for the
restimony of the Gospel. So Roger Holland was the last that suffered in
Smithfield. This Loner was a bloody persecutor, for in the space of three years
he put three hundred to death. The last that suffered in Queen Mary's time,
were five at Carterbury burned about six days before the death of Queen Mary.
Their godly Martyrs in their prayers which they made before their martyrdom,
desired God that their blood might be the last that should be shed, and soit
was.

Many were delivered by Gods providence from the fi^e in Queen Mary's time,
amongst others the D^chesse of Suffolk with her husband were preserved, and
fled out of the Country.

Great were the b^oubles of Lady Elizabeth in Queen Mary's im her sister, being
assly suspect of Sir Thomas Wyats rising, was sent for by the Queen with great
routs and bands, being armed men, as the greatest traitor in the world. And as
at that time she was sick and not able to travel, and yet notwithstanding they
brought her to London, and not seeing the Queen she was clapped into prison
into the Tower. And again tossed from thence from house to house, from prison
to prison, at length also prisoner in her own house, and guarded with a sort of
cutthroats, and was continually in fear and danger of her life. Stephen
Gardener Bishop of Winchester and Chancello^, was a great foe unto her, and
sundry conspired against her, to take her life, but God graciously delivered
her out of their hands, especially out of the hands of the Bishop of
Winchester. being in prison at Woodstock in the hands of her enemies hearing
upon a time a certain milk-maid singing pleasantly, wishing her self to be a
milk-maid as she was saying, that her case was better, and life more merry then
was hers in that state as she was. At this time died the Bishop of Winchester,
and so by Gods providence Lady Elizabeth was delivered from the snares and
plots that by him was laid for her life; three years after the death of
Winchester died Queen Mary.

Queen Mary being long sick, died on the 17. day of November, Anno 1558. and
the same day she died was Elizabeth proclaimed Queen. As touching the manner of
her death, some says she died of a Tympany, some by her much sighing before
her death, supposed that she died of thought and sorrow. Whereupon the Counsel
seeing her sighing, and desirous to know the cause, to the end they might
minister the more ready consolation unto her, feared, as they said, that she
took that thought for the Kings Majesty her husband, which was gone from her.
To whom she answering again, Indeed (said she) that may be one cause, but that
is not the greatest wound that pierces my oppressed mind, but what that was
she would not express to them, but afterward opened the matter now plainly to
Mr. Rise etc. When I am dead and opened, ye shall find Caleice lying in my
heart; she took though for the loss of Calice. There was more English blood
shed in Queen Mary's time for the space of four years, then ever was in any
Kings reign before her, and so her reign was unprosperous to her and to all her
Realm in all respects, for she had never good success in any thing she went
about. She reigned only five years and five months.

The severe punishment of God upon the persecuters of his People, and enemies
to his Word, with such also as have been blasphemers, contemners, and mockers
of his Religion.
LEaving now Queen Mary being dead and gone, I come to them which under her
were the chief Ministers and doers in this persecution, the Bishops (I mean)
and Priests of the Clergy, to whom Queen Mary gave all the execution of her
power, as did Queen Alexandra to the Pharisees after the time of the Machabees,
of whom Josephus thus writes, Ipsa solum nomen Regium serebat, caeterum omnent
Regni potestatem, Pharisaei possidebant that is, she only retained to her self
the name and title of the Kingdom, but all her power she gave to the Pharisees
to possess, etc. Touching which Prelates and Priests here is to be noted in
like sort the wonderful and miraculous providence of Almighty God, which as he
abridged the reign of their Queen, so he suffers them not ^o escape unvisited:
First, beginning with Stephen Gardener the Arch-persecuter of Christ's Church,
whom he took away about the midst of the Queens Reign, or w^ose poisoned life
and stinking end, for so much as su^ficient has been touched before, I shall
not need here to make any new rehearsal thereof.

After him dropped others away also, some before the death of Queen Mary, and
some after, as Morgan Bishop of St. David's, who sitting upon the condemnation
of the blessed Martyr Bishop Farrar, and unjustly usurping his room, not long
after was stricken by Gods hand after such a strange sort, that his meat would
not go down, but rise and pick up again, sometimes at his mouth, sometimes
blown out of his nose, most horrible to behold, and so continued till his
death. Where note moreover, when Mr. Leyson being then Sheriff at Bishop
Farrars burning, had fercht away the Cattle of the said Bishop from his
servants house, into his own enstody, the cattle coming into the Sheriffs
ground, diverse of them would never eat meat, but say bellowing and roaring and
so died.

Also J^stice Morgan who sare upon the death of the Lady Jane, and not long
after the same fell mad, and was beseft of his wits, and so died, having ever
in his mo^th, Lady Jane, Lady Jane.

Before the death of Queen Mary, died Doctor Dunning that bloody and wretched
Chancellor of Norwich^, he died suddenly. The like sadden death tell also upon
^errie Commissar of Norfolk, four days after Queen Mary's days, he suddenly
fell down to the ground with a heavy groan, and never st^red after. The Bishop
or Suffragan of Dover brake his neck falling down a pair of stairs in the
Cardinals chamber at Greenwich, as he had received the Cardinals blissing.

One John Cowper an Carpenter, an honest and godly man, that favored Religion,
and these that were religious, had a couple of fair Bullocks, one William
Fenning came to him to see if he would sell them, who told that he would not
sell them, but keep them for his own house, then Fenning threatened him, and
falsely accused him of high Treason. The words he charged him with were these,
how he should pray that if God would not take away Queen Mary, that then he
would wish the devil to take her away, upon this he was taken, and Fenning
brought in two false witnesses against him, whereupon he was condemned to be
hanged, quartered and drawn, leaving his wife and nine children behind him, and
all their goods taken from them. In the Harvest after, one Greenwood that was
one of his witnesses, as he was stacking corn, having his health, and fearing
no peril, suddenly his bowels fell out of his body, and immediately most
miserably he died, such was the terrible judgment of God to show his
displeasure against this bloody act, and to warn the rest by this his
judgments to repentance. Doctor Goffery Chancellor of Salisbury died in the
midst of his buildings. Moreover, as touching this foresaid Chancellor, here is
to be noted, he had appointed, to call before him ninety persons to examine
them by Inquisition, had not the goodness of the Lord and his providence thus
prevented him by death, providing for his poor servants in time.

So the heavy hand of God fell upon Bishop Thorntown Suffragan of Dover,
abloody persecuter or the Saints of God, upon a Sunday, looking to his men
playing at the bowls, fell suddenly in a Palsy, and so was had to bed, and
being willed to remember God, yea so I do, said he, and my Lord Chancellor too,
etc. And now to come from Priests to L^ymen, we have to find in them also less
terrible demonstrations of Gods heavy Judgment upon such as have been vexers
and persecuters of his people.

And first, of Mr. Woodroff Sheriff used much to rejoice at the death of the
poor servants of Christ, and so hard he was in his office, that when Mr. Rojers
was in the Cart going toward Smithfield, and in the way his children were
brought unto him, the people making a Lane for them to come, the Sheriff
threatened to break the Carters head for staying the Cart, but what happened, he
was not come out of his office the space of a week but he was stricken by the
sudden hand of God, the one half of his body in such sort that he lay benumbed
and bedred, not able to move himself, but as he was lifted of others, and so
continued in that infirmity the space of seven or eight years, till his dying
day.

Barton Bailiff of Crowland being instant to have the Mass set up, and
threatening the Curat for not saying Mass. Not long after this, the Bailiff rode
from home upon certain businesses, accompanied with one of his neighbors, and
as they came riding together homeward again, a Crow sitting on a Willow Tree
took her flight over his head, singing after her wonted note, Knave, knave, and
withal let fall upon his face, so that her excrements ran from the top of his
nose down to his beard. The poisoned scent and savor whereof so noyed his
stomach, that he never ceased vomiting until he came home, where with his
heart was so sore, and his body so distempered, that for extreme sickness he
got him to bed, and so lying, he was not able for the stinch in his stomach,
and painful vomitting, to receive any relief of meat or drink, but cried out
still, sorrowfully complaining of stink, and with no small oaths cursing the
Crow that poisoned him. To make short he continued but a few days, but with
extreme pain of vomiting and crying, he desperately died without any token of
repentance of his former life.

As James Abbes Martyr was led by the Sheriff toward his execution, diverse
poor people stood in the way, and asked their alms, he then having no money to
give them, and desirous yet to distribute something amongst them, did pull off
all his apparel saving his shirt, and gave the same amongst them, to some one
thing, to sonme another: In the giving whereof he exhorted them to be strong in
the Lord, and as faithful followers of Christ to stand steadfast unto the truth
of the Gospel, which he through Gods help would then in their sight seal and
confirm with his blood: while he thus occupied, a servant of the Sheriffs going
by, and hearing him, cried out aloud unto them, and blasphemously said, Believe
him not good people, he is an Heretic, and a mad man out of his wit, believe
him not, for it is heresy that he says. But immediately after the fire was put
to him, such was the fearful stroke of Gods justice upon this blasphemous
railer, that he was there presently in the sight of all the people stricken
with a frenzy, who in his furious rage and madness casting off his shoes,
with all the rest of his clothes, cried out unto the people, and said, Thus did
James Abbes the true servant of God, who is saved, but I am damned, and thus
ran he round about the Town of Bury still crying out that James Abbes was a
good man, and saved, but he was damned, etc.

Clark, an open enemy to Gospel and all goodly preachers in K. Edwards days,
hanged himself in the Tower of London.

The great and notable papist called Torling Smith, of late fell down suddenly
in the street and so died. Dalie the Promoter was eaten into his body with
lice, and so died.

Cox, and earnest Protestant in King Edwards days, and in Queen Mary's time a
Pastist and a Promoter going well and in health to bed, was dead before the
morning.

Alexander the Keeper of Newgate, a cruel enemy to those that lay there for
Religion, died very miserably, being so swollen that he was more like a monster
then a man, and so rotten within, that no man could abide the smell of him. This
cruel wretch to hasten the poor Lambs to the slaughter would go to Boner,
Story and othe^s, crying out, rid my prison, I am to much pestered with the^e
Heretics. John Peter son in Law to this Alexandr, an horrible blasphemer of
God and no less cruel to the said prisoners, rotted away, and so most
miserably died, who commonly when he would affirm anything, were it true or
false, used to say, if it be not true, I pray God I may root or die: with many
more who felt the stroke of his hand. To add to these also the stinking death
of Edmond Boner, commonly named the bloody Bishop of London, who not many years
ago, in the time and reign of Queen Elizabeth, after he had long feasted and
banquetted in Durance at the Marshal-sea, as he wretchedly died in his blind
Popery, so as stinkingly and as blindly at midnight was he brought out and
buried in the outside of all the City amongst thieves and murderers, a place
right convenient for such a murderer, with confusion and derision both of men
and children, who trampling upon his grave, well declared how he was hated both
of God and man.

I might bring in here many more, and foreign examples of Kings, Princes, and
great men, of the wrath of God that hes pursued them, for persecuting of the
Professors of the Gospel, but I content me with these already rehearsed.

After the death of Queen Mary succeeded Lady Elizabeth her sister to the
Crown, a godly and religious Princess that brought much joy and happiness to
the Realm by her gracious and peaceable government.

The Queen immediately at her entry haying heard of the diversity of opinions
in certain matters of Religion amongst sundry of her loving subjects, and being
very desirous to have the same reduced to some godly and christian concord by
the advice of the Lords and others of the privy Counsel, as well for the
satisfaction of persons doubtful, as also for the knowledge of the very truth
in certain matters of difference, to have a convenient chosen number of the
best learned of either part, and to confer together their opinions and reasons,
and thereby to come to some good and charitable agreement. And so there was
named on the one side nine, and on the other nine On the Papists side were
named the B. of Winchester, the B. of Lich, the B. of Chester, the B. of
Carlill, the B. of Lincoln, Doctor Cole, Doctor Harpsfield, Doctor Langdale,
Doctor Chedsey. On the Pretestants side, o^ l^t^ b^n shed P^eachers, Doctor
Scorie, B of Chicester, Doctor Cox, Mr. Whythead. Mr, Grindal, Mr Horner,
Doctor Sands, Mr. Gest Mr. Aimer, Mr Juel who were to confer and reason at
Westminster upon certain questions or Articles of Rellgion to be proposed in
presence of the Nobility, and Lords of his Majesty's secret Counsel, the matter
they should talk upon was comprehended in these three propositions
under-specified. 1. It is against the Word of God, and the custom of the
ancient Church to use a Tongue unknown to the people in common prayer and
administration of the Sacrament. 2. Every Church has authority to appoint,
take away, and change Ceremonies and Ecclesisticall R^tes, so the same be to
edification. 3. It cannot be proved by the Word of God that there is in the
Mass offered up a Sacrifice propitiatory for the qui^k and the dead. It was
hereupon fully resolved by the Queens Majesty, with the advice afores^id, that
it should be in writting on both parts, for avoiding of much alteration in
words, and in English, and each of them should deliever their Writings to the
other what were to be improved therein etc. And their writings were to be put
in the English Tongue. Now after they had sitten one day in this conference,
the second day it was broken up by the Papists default, for they would have the
order inverted and altered, that was appointed and agreed upon. Afterward for
this contempt so notoriously made, and dissolving of the Assembly, and the
godly and most christian purposes of the Queens Majesty made frustrate, the B.
of Winchester and Lincoln who showed more folly then the other, were condinly
committed to the Tower of London. Boner about this time B. of London was
committed to the Marshal-sea, whereas he both in his blind bloody Heresy, as
also in his deserved captivity, long remained abiding the Queens pleasure.

About this time at the beginning of the flourishing Reign of Queen Elizabeth,
was a Parliament summoned and holden at Westminster, wherein was much debating
about matters touching Religion, and great study on both parts employed, the
one to retain still, the other to impugn the Doctrine and faction which before
in Queen Mary's time had been established. But especially here is to be noted,
that though their lacked no industry on the papists side to hold fast that
which they most cruelly from time to time had studied, and by all means
practiced to come by, yet notwithstanding was the providence of God at that
time, that for lack of the other Bishops, whom the Lord had taken away by death
a little before, the residue that there were left could do the less. And in
very deed, (God be praised therefore) did nothing at all in effect, although
yet not withstanding their laicked in them neither will nor labor to do what
they could, if their cruel ability there might have served. Although in this
Parliament then, some diversity there was of judgment and opinion between
parties, yet notwithstanding through the merciful goodness of the Lord, the
true cause of the Gospel had the upper hand, the Papists hope was frustrate,
and their rage abated, the order and proceedings of King Edwards time
concerning Religion was revived again, the Supremacy of the Pope abolished, the
Articles of bloody statutes of Queen Mary repealed, briefly the furious
firebrarnds of cruel persecution which had consumed so many poor men's bodies,
were now extict and quenched: Finally, the old Bishops deposed for that they
refused the Oath in renouncing the Pope, and not subscribing to the Queens just
and lawful Titles, in whose rooms and places, were others put.

The SCOTTISH Martyrs.
HAving spoken of the Martyrs of England, let us now speak of the Martyrs of
Scotland. And first to begin with M. Patrick Hammilton Abbot of Ferm, he was a
man nobly descended, for he was Nephew to the Earl of Aran by his Father, and
to the Duke of Albany by the Mother, and not much past twenty three years of
age; this young Gentleman had traveled in Germany, and falling in familiarity
with Martin Luther, Phi. Melanchton, Frances Lamberr and other learned men, was
by them instructed in the knowledge of true religion; In the profession whereof
he was so zealous as he was resolved to come back into his country, and
communicate the light he had received unto others etc. under color of
conference he is brought to S. Andrews and accused before the B. for
maintaining erroneous, points of doctrine, as that the corruption of sin
remains in children after their Baptism. 2. That no man by the power of his
free will can do any good. 3. That no man is without sin so long as he lives,
etc. After answer and censure of the Theologs of thee Articles he maintained,
is declared to be an heretic, and given over into the hands of the secular
power to suffer punishment due to heresy. He was condemned by the secular
Judge, and burnt alive: when he came to the place of Execution he put off his
gown, and gave it with his bonnet, coat and other apparel to his servant,
saying this stuff will not help in the fire, yet will do thee some good, I
have no more to leave thee, but the example of my death, which I pray thee keep
in mind, for albeit the same be bitter and painful in men's judgment, yet is
it the entrance to everlasting life which none can inherit that denies Christ
before this congregation. At his death the Friars vexed him bidding him
convert, pray to our Lady, and say, salve Regina, but none was more troublesome
then Fire Alexander Campbell whom he often besought to depart and not to vex
him, but when he would not cease, he said, wicked man thou know I am not an
heretic, and that it is the truth of God for which I now suffer, so much thou
did confess unto me in private, and thereupon I appeal thee to answer
before the Judgment seat of Christ: his body was quickly con^umed, for the
fire was vehement, but the patience and constancy he showed in his dying,
stirred up such compassion in the beholders as many of them doubted not to say
that he suffered an innocent, and was indeed a true Martyr of Christ. This
opinion was further confirmed by the death of the F^^er and that manner of it,
for within a year and l^sse, he fell into a frenzy and died as one despe^at;
numbers were brought to the knowledge of ^he truth by his suffering. This Mr.
Patrick Hammiltoun suffered martyrdom^ in the year of God, 1527 Under Jimes
Beton Archbishop of St. Andrews ^^d Chancel^o r of the Kingdom.

After the de^^h of Mr. Patrick Hammilton, his Brother german James Hammilton
o^ Levingston was accused likewise, but the King did cause convey him secretly
out of the way. Also Kathren Hammilton his sister was accused, and being
questioned upon works, she answered that none was saved by his works. Then John
Spence spoke to her of the works of congruo and condigno, to which she
answered, work here, work there, what kind of working is all this? no works can
save me but Christ's. At this the king being present laughed, and after conveyed
her away secretly.

One Henry Forest a Monk of the order of Benet, and Cellet, as they spoke
then, was also accused of Heresy, but without sufficient proof. Then he was
sent to Walter Ange (whom Buchanan in his Satyr against the gray Friars called
Langius) to be confessed, Langius having asked him by way of confession what he
thought of Patrick Hammilton, he answered that he was a good man, and that his
articles were to be mantained. Lang discovers this simple man's confession, and
this confession being taken for a sufficient proof, the poor man was condemned
to be burnt, and so he was immediately after they degraded him according to
their custom. As they were leading him to the execution place, he complained
of the Friar who had betrayed him, and said let no man trust the false Friars
after me, They were despisers rof God and deceivers of men, they burnt him at
the north style of the Abbey Church in Sr. Andrews, that the heretics of Angus
might see the fire.

Mr. Normend Gourley and David Straton were brought to trial, and condemned,
the one for denying Purgatory, and that the Pope should have no jurisdiction
within Scotland, the other was charged with the same points, and further was
accused for maintaining the Tithes were not due to Churchmen, which point he
denied, confessig that the tithes of ^ome fish which his servants had taken at
sea being too rigourously exacted, he said that if they would have the tithes
of the fishes, they should go and receive them where the stock was taken, and
that he gave order to his servants to cast every tent fish they took into the
sea, because he saw nothing but rigor would content the Church, these two were
burnt at one stake as heretics, between Leith and Edinburgh to the intent the
inhabitants of Fife seeing the fire, might be stricken with the more terror
and fear not to fall into the like.

After the death of the foresaid Martyrs under James Betoun Archbishop of St.
Andrews, consultation was taken by the Bishops to proceed and to burn more
heretics, for then men began liberally to speak of religion. A merry
Gentleman named John Lindsay familiar to B. James Betoun standing by when
consultation was had, said, my Lord, if ye burn any more except ye follow my
counsel, ye will utterly destroy your selves, if ye will burn them, let them
be burnt in hollow Cellars, for the smoke of Mr. Patrick Hammilton has
infected as many as it blew upon. Thus it pleased God that they should be
taunted in their own face.

At this time when Normond Gourlay and David Straton were put to trial and
condemned, were summouned Sir William Kird, Adam Days Henry Kernes, John
Stewart of Leith, with diverse others, such as Mr. William Johnstoun Advocat,
Mr. Henry Henderson Schoolmaster of Edinburgh, of whom some compeared in the
Abbey Kirk of Halyrudhouse, and so abjured, and publicly burnt their Bills; the
burning of the Bill was a sign of recantation, others compeared not, and
therefore was exiled.

About this time Mr. George Buchanan for some biting verses against the
Franciscans, was commanded to prison, but he escaping by a window of the
Chamber where he was detained prisoner, whilst the Keepers were fast asleep,
fled into France, thus there passed few days wherein some one or other was not
called into question for Religion, but the more hot the persecution was, the
favorers of the truth did every day the more increase.

The Archbishop James Betoun committed the charge of the Church affairs to his
Nephew the Cardinal, who succeeded in his place, for he was sickly himself, and
not seen often abroad. In his time lived Mr. John Major, Hector Boeth. Gilbert
Crab, and William Gregory, men of good learning, and worthy to be remembered.
Hector Boethius was Principal of the College of Aberdene, a great
Philosopher, and much commended by Erasmus for his Eloquence and felicity of
ingenie. Buchanan who could well discern of learned men, speaking in a certain
place of him, says, quod non solum artium liberalium cognitione supraquam illa
ferchant tempora insignis erat, sed etiam humanitate and comitate singulari
praeditus, that he was not only learned in the liberal Sciences above the
condition of these times, but also of an exceeding courteous and humane
inclination, yet is he traduced by some of the English Writers for a fabulous
and partial Historian. But they who like to peruse his History, will perceive
that is spoken out of passion and malice, and not upon just cause. Mr. John
Mair wrote also the History of Scotland, and wrote upon the four Evangelists.

Sir John Borthwick Knight, commonly called Captain Borthwick, who being
accused of heresy (as the Papists call it, and cited therefore, and not
appearing, and escaping into other Countries, was condemned for the same, being
absent, by the sentence of David Betown Archbishop of St. Andrews, and other
Prelates of Scotland, and all his goods confiscat, and his Picture at last
burned in the open Marketplace, the Articles whereupon he was accused and
condemned came to his hands whereunto he answered very wisely and religiously,
confuting them all.

At this time also was Thomas Forret Priest, Friar John Kello, Friar Beverage,
Duncan Simpson Priest, Robert Foster a Gentleman, with three or four other men
of Striviling persecuted for the Gospel and testimony of Christ. This Dean
Thomas Forret preached every Sunday to his Parishoners the Epistle or Gospel as
it fell for the time, which then was a great novelty in Scotland, to see any
man preach except a black Friar, or a gray Friar, and therefore the Friars
envyed him, and accused him to be the B. of Dunkel, in whose Diocese he
remained, as an heretic, and one that showed the mysteries of the Scriptures
to the vulgar people in English, to make the Clergy detestable in the sight of
the people. The B. of Dunkel named George Crighton, moved by the Friars
instigation, called the said Dean Thomas, and said unto him, my Joy Dean
Thomas, I love you well, and therefore I must give you my counsel how ye shall
rule and guide your self. To whom Thomas said, I thank your Lordship heartily.
Then the B. began this counsel on this manner, my Joy Dean Thomas, I am
informed that ye preach the Epistle or Gospel every Sunday to your parishoners,
and that ye take not the Cow nor the upermost cloth from your parishoners,
which thing is very prejudicial to the Churchmen, and therefore my Joy Dean
Thomas, I would ye took your Cow and your upmost cloth or Mortuary as other
Churchmen do, or else it is too much to preach every Sunday, for in so doing
ye make the people think that we should preach likewise; but it is enough for
you when ye find any good Epistle, or any good Gospel that sets forth the
liberty of the holy Church, to preach that, and let the rest be* Thomas
answered, My Lord, I think that none of my parishoners will complain that I
take not the Cow nor the uppermost cloth, but will gladly give me the same,
together with any other thing that they have, and I will give and communicate
with them any thing that I have, and so my Lord we agree right well, and their
is no discord amongst us. And where your Lordship says it is too much to
preach every Sunday, indeed I think it too little, and also would with that you
L. did the like. Nay, nay, Dean Thomas (says my Lord) let that be, for we are
not ordained to preach. Then said Thomas, when your L. bids me preach when I
find any good Epistle, or a good Gospel, truly I have read the New Testament
and the Old; and all the Epistles and the Gospels amongst them all I could
never find any evil Gospel, or any evil Epistle, but if your L. will show me
the good Epistle, and the good Gospel, and the evil Epistle, and the evil
Gospel, then I shall preach the good and ommit the evil. Then spoke my Lord
stoutly, and said, I thank God that I never knew what the Old and New Testament
was (and of these words arose a proverb which is common in Scotland, ye are
like the B. of Dunkelden that knew neither new nor old Law) therefore Dean
Thomas I will know nothing but my Portuise and my Pontifical: Go your way; and
let be all these fantasies, for if ye persevere in these erroneous opinions, ye
will repent it when ye may not mend it. Thomas said, I trust my cause is just
in the presence of God, and therefore I pesse not much what do follow
thereupon; and so my Lord and he departed at that time. And soon after a
summonds was directed from the Cardinal of St. Andrews, and the said B. of
Dunkelden upon the same Dean Thomas Forret, and upon two black Friars called
Friar John Kello, and another called Reverage, and upon one Priest of
Striviling called Duncan Simpson, and one Gentleman called Robert Forrester in
Stirling, with other three or four with them of the Town of Stirling, who at
this day of their appearance, after their summonding, were condemned to the
death without any place of recantation (because, as was alleged, they were
Heresiarchs, or chief Heretics, and teachers of Heresies, and especially
because many of them were at the Brydell and Marriage of a Priest who was Vicar
of Till^bodie beside Stirling, and did eat flesh in Lent, at the said Brydell,
and so they were altogether burnt upon the Castle-hill of Edinburgh, where they
that were first bound to the Stake, godly and marvellously did comfort them
that came behind. At this time likewise were apprehended two of the Diocese of
Glasgow, the one named Jeremiah Russel a gray Friar, a young man of a meek
nature, quick spirit, and good learning; and one Alexander Kennedy who passed
not eighteen years of age, one of excellent wit in vulgar poesy. To assist the
B. of Glasgow in that cruel judgment, or at lest to dip his hands in the
blood of the Saints of God, were sent Mr. John Lawder, Mr. Andrew Oliphant, and
Friar Mortman, servants to Satan, apt for that purpose. The day appointed to
the cruelty approaching, the two poor Saints of God were persecuted before
these bloody Boutchers. Grievous were the crimes that were laid to their
charge, Kennedy at the first was faint, and gladly would have recanted, but
while the place of repentance was denied unto him, the Spirit of God, which is
the Spirit of all comfort began to work in him, yea the inward comfort began to
brust forth, as well in visage as in tongue and word, for his countenance began
to be cheerful, and with a perfect joy upon his knees, he said, O eternal God,
how wonderful is that love and mercy that thou bear unto mankind, and unto
me the most catiff and miserable wretch above all others: for even now when I
would have denied thee and thy Son our Lord Jesus Christ, my only Savior, and
so have cast my self into everlasting damnation, thou by thine own hand have
pulled me from the very bottom of hell, and made me to feel that heavenly
comfort, which takes from me that ungodly fear, wherewith before I was
oppressed. Now I defy death do what ye please, I praise God I am ready. This
godly and learned Jerremie railed upon by these godless Tyrants, answered this
is your hour and power of darkness. Now sit ye as Judges, and we stand
wrongfully accused, and more wrongfully to be condemned, but the day shall come
when our innocence shall appear, and that ye shall see your own blindness to
your everlasting conconfusion. Go forward and fulfill the measure of your
iniquity. While that these servants of God thus behaved themselves, variance
arises betwixt the B. and the beasts that came from the Cardinal: for the B.
said, I think it better to spare these men then to put them to death, whereat
the idiot Doctors offended, said, what will ye do my Lord? Will ye condemn all
that my Lord Cardinal and the other Bishops and we have done? If ye so do, ye
show your self enemy to the Church and us, and so we will repute you, be ye
assured. At which words the faithless man afraid, adjudged the innocents to
die according to the desire of the wicked, and so they were burnt, constantly
triumphing over death and Satan in the midst of the fire.

The King at this time was ruled wholly by the Cardinal, and made a solomn vow
that none should be spared that was suspect of heresy, yea although it were
his own son, which put many into fear.

The fearful vision which the King had by night much terrified him, that he
withdrew his mind wholly from the extremities on which the Clergy had set him.

The King died in the year of the Lord 1542. being overwhelmed with grief and
passion for the loss of his Army received at Solway by the Englishes, he
departed this life at Falkland in the 32. year of his age, some few days
before he died, he had advertisement that his Queen was deliveaed of a daughter
at Linlithow, at which time it is said he brust forth in passion, saying, it
came with a Last (meaning the Crown) and will go with a Less, fie upon it,
after which he was not heard to utter many words.

The Earl of Arran, Lord Hammilton was chosen Regent and Governor of the
Realm. At this time there was a certain act of Parliament made, giving
privilege to all men of the Realm of Scotland to read the Scripture in their
Mother tongue and language, secluding nevertheless all reasoning, conference,
convocation of people to hear the Scriptures read or expouned. Which liberty of
private reading being granted by public proclamation, lacked not his own
fruit, so that in sundry parts of Scotland thereby were opened the eyes of the
elect of God to see the truth, and to abhor the Papistical abominations. Now
there was certain in St. Johnstoun that were apprehended and accused for
transgressing the act of Parliament before expressed and then conference and
assemblies in hearing and expounding the Scripture against the Tenor of the
said act. All these were condemned and judged to death, as Robert Lamb William
Anderson, James Hunter and his wife Helen Stirk and others, and that by an
assise by violating as was alleged the act of Parliament in reasoning and
conferring upon the Scripture, for eating flesh upon the days forbidden, for
dishonouring of images, etc. There was great intercession made by the Town in
the mean season, for the life of these persons aforenamed to the Governor who
of himself was willing to have done that they might have been delivered. But
the Governor was so subject to the appetite of the cruel Priests, that he
could not do that which he would, yea, they menaced to assist his enemies, and
to depose him except he assisted their cruelty, the men were hanged, and the
women drowned. Robert Lamb prophesied of the ruin and plague that came upon
David Beton the Cardinal thereafter.

The Martyrdom of Mr, George Wisher.

This Mr. George was a brother of the house of Pittarrow in Merns, a great
knowledge, etc. He made his chief resort in the Towns of Dundie and Montrose
where he taught publicly with great profit and applause. He is discharged
from preaching at Dundie, he goes to the West where the Archbishop of Glasgow
seeks to apprehend him. In end he is apprehended and put to his t^yall, and
condemned to be burnt as an heretic. As he came forth of the Castle gate,
there met him certain beggars asking his alms for Gods sake. To whom he
answered I want my hands wherewith I should give you alms, but the merciful
Lord of his benignity and abundance of grace that feeds all men vouchafe to
give you necessaries both unto your bodies and souls, then afterward met with
him two false fiends, I should say Friars, saying, Mr. George pray to our Lady
that she may be Mediatrix for) on to her Son, to whom he answered meekly, cease
tempt me not my brethren. After this he was led to the fire with a rope about
his neck, and a chain of iron about his middle. After his prayer made to God,
and his exhortation to the people, the hangman that was his tormentor, ^ate
down upon his knees, and said, sir, I pray you forgive me, for I am not gullty
of your death, to whom he answered, come hither to me, when that he was come to
him, he kissed his cheek, and said, Lo here is a token that I forgive thee, my
heart do thy office, and by and by he was put upon the Gibbet and hanged, and
there burnt to powder. At his execution he prophecies of the Cardinals death,
he who from you higher place beholds us with such pride, shall within few
days lie in the same as ignominiously, as now he is seen proudly to rest
himself. The Cardinals death is conspired by Normond Lesly brother to the Earl
of Rothesse, John Lesly his Uncle, William Kirkaldy of Grange, Peter Carmichel
of Fyfe, and James Melvill one of the house of Carnbie they met at St. Andrews,
and entered into the Cardinals chamber and killed him in his chamber. The
people of the town crying for a sight of the Cardinals corpse, was brought to
the very same place where he sat be holding Mr. George Wishart his execution,
many then did call to mind the Martyr his last words were thereby confirmed in
the opinion they had of his piety and holiness.

After this David Betoun succeeded John Hammilton Archbishop of St. Andrews,
who to the intent that he would in no ways appear inferior to his predecessor
in augmenting the number of the holy martyrs of God in the next year following,
called a certain poor man to judgment whose name was Adam Wallace, he was
accused for teaching, saying and teaching of abominable heresies which are
particularly la^d to his charge, as first thou have said and taught that the
bread and wine on the Altar, after words of consecration, are not the body, and
blood of Christ. He turned to the L. Governor, who was there present with a
number of Noblemen, and of the C^ergy, saying, I said never, nor taught nothing
but that I found in this book and writ (having there a Bible at his belt, in
French, Dutch and English) which is the word of God, and if ye will be content
that the Lord God and his word be judge to me, and this his holy writ, here it
is, and where I have said wrong, I shall take what punishment ye shall put to
me, for I never said nothing concerning this that I am accused of, but that
which I find in this write, etc. They gave forth sentence and condemned him by
the Laws, and so left him to the hands of the secular power in the hands of S.
J. Campb^l Justice Deputy, who delivered him to the Prov^st of Edinburgh to be
burnt on the Castle-hill, who incontinent made him to be put into prison with
Irons about his legs and neck. At his forthcomming the Provest with great
menacing words forbade him to ^peak to any man, or any to him, as belike he had
commandment of his superiors. Coming from the town to the Castlehill, the
common people said, God have mercy upon him, and on you said he; being beside
the fire, he lifted up his eyes to heaven twice or thrice, and said to the
people, let it not offend you that I suffer the death this day for the truths
sake, for the Disciple is not above his Master. Then was the Provest angry that
he spoke then looked he to Heaven again and said, they will not let me speak.
The cord being about his neck, the fire was lighted, and so departed he to God
constantly and with good countenance to our sights.

There arose in Scotland about this time a Schism for the Pater Noster, by
reason of a Sermon of Richard Marshall a black Friar, teaching that the Pater
Noster should not be said to Saints, whereupon the Doctors of the University of
St. Andrews, together with the g^ay Friars who long ago t^ught the people to
pray the Pater N^ster to Saints, had great indignation, that their old Doctrine
should be repugned, and stirred up a gray Friar called Toitts to preach again
to the people that they should and might pray the Pater Nost^r to Saints: Upon
this followed incontinent a dangerous schism in the Church of Scotland, for
not only the Clergy but the whole people were divided among themselves, one
defending the truth, and another the Papistry, in such sort, that there arose a
Proverb, to whom say ye your Pater Noster. And although the Papists had the
upper hand as then, whose works were almost holden for Law, so great was the
blindness of that age, yet God so inspired the hearts of the common people,
that so many as could get the understanding of the words of the Lords Prayer in
English, which was then said in Latin, utterly detested that opinion, holding
that it should be in no ways said to the Saints, so that the Craftsmen and
their servants in their Booths, when the Friars came, exploded him with shame
enough, crying Friar Pater Noster, Friar Pater Noster, who at last being
convict with his own conscience, was ashamed of his former Sermon, was
compelled to leave the Town of S^. Andrews. Shortly the Christians were so
hotly offended, and the Papists on the other side so proud and wilful, that
necessary it was to eschew greater inconveniences, that the Clergy at last
should be assembled to dispute and conclude the whole matter, that the Lay
people might be put out of doubt, which being done, and the University agreed,
whosoever had been present might have heard much subtle Sophistry, for some of
the popish doctors affi^med that it should be said to God formaliter, and to
Saints materialiter, others ultimate and non ultimate: Others said i^ should be
s^id to God Principaliter, and to Saints minus Principaliter; Others that it
should be said to God Primarie, and to Saints Secundarie Others that it should
be said to God Capiendo stricte, and to Saints Capie^do large. Which vain
distinctions being heard and considered by the people, they that were simple
remained in greater doubtfulnesse then they were in before, so that a well aged
man and a servant to the Superior of St. Andrews, called the Subprior Thome,
being demanded to whom he said his P^^er Noster, he answered to God only. Then
he asked again what should be said to the Saints, he answered, give them Aves
and Creeds enough in the devils name, for that may suffice them well enough,
albeit they do not spoil God of his right. Others making their vaunt of the
Doctors, said, that because Christ (who made the Pater Noster) never came into
the Isle of Britain, and so understood not the English tongue, therefore it was
that the Doctors concluded it should be said in Latin. This perturbation and
open slander yet depending, it was thought good to call a Provincial Counsel
to decide the matter, which being assembled at Edinburgh, the Papists being
destitute of reason, defended their parts with lies, alleging that the
Univeasity of Paris had concluded that the Lords prayer should be said to
Saints, but because that could not be proved and that they could not prevail,
by reason they used their will in place of reason, and sometime despitefull and
injurious talk. As Friar Scot being asked of one to whom he should say the
Pater Noster, he answered, saying, say it to the devil knave. So the Counsel
perceiving they could profit nothing by reasoning, they were compelled to pass
voting* that is to the numbering of votes. But then incontinent they that were
called Churchmen were found divided and repugnant among themselves, for some
Bishops with the Doctors and Friars consented that the Pater Noster should be
said to Saints, but the Bishops of Sr. Andrews Caithnes and others with other
more learned men refused utterly to subscribe the same. Finally with consent of
both parties, commission was given by the holy Church to D^an John Winram then
Superior of St. Andrews to declare to the people how and after what manner they
should pray the Lords prayer, who accepting to the Commission declared that it
should be said to God, with some other restrictions which are not necessary to
be put in memory, and so by little and little the bruit and tumult ceased.

Queen Dowager past by sea to France and took with her diverse of the Nobility
of Scotland, with diverse Barrons and Gentlemen and many others. The Dowager
had to practice somewhat with her brethren the Duke of Guise and the Cardinal
of Lorrane, the weight whereof the Governor after felt, for shortly after her
return was the Governor deposed of his government (justly by God, but most
unrustly by man) and she made Regent in the year of our Lord 1554. She was an
deadly enemy to the Gospel.

In the cruel persecution used by Queen Mary of England, were godly men
dispersed into diverse nations, of whom it pleased the goodness of God to send
some unto us for our comfort and instruction. And first came a simple man
William Harlaw, whose erudition, although it excelled nor, yet for his whole
and diligent plainness in doctrine is he to this day worthy of praise, and
remains a faithful member within the Church of Scotland. After him came that
notable man John Willock as one that had some commission ^o the Q. Regent from
the Duchess of Emden, but his principal purpose to assay what God would work
by him in his native country. These two did some times in several companies
assemble the Brethren, who by their exhortations began greatly to be
encouraged, and did show that they had an earnest thrist of godliness. And
last came John Knox, who bot privately and publicly preached the word of God.

John Knox returned again to France to visit that little flock of his which he
had in Geneva of the Englishes, which the wickedness of men had compessed him
to leave. Immediately after his going away the Bishop summoned him for
nonappearance, burnt him in Effigy at the Cross of Edinburgh in the year of
our Lord 1555. from the which unjust sentence the said John made his
appellation, and caused to print the samine, and directed it to the Nobility
and Commons of Scotland, which is yet to be seen. But John Willock returning
again from Emden and others, as William Harlaw, John Douglas, and others, began
in Edinburgh and others Towns of the Country publicly to exhort. The Nobility
and Gentry and others, being by them godly instructed and comforted, they keep
their conventions, and held Counsels with such gravity and closnesse, that the
enemies trembled. The Images were stolen away in all parts of the Country.
And in Edinburgh was that great Idol called St. Gile, or Sanctus Egidius, first
drowned in the north Loch, after burnt, which raised no small trouble in the
Town, for the Friars rooping like Ravens upon the Bishops, the Bishops ran upon
the Queen, who to them was favorable enough, but that she thought it could not
stand with her advantage to offend such a multitude as then took upon them the
defense of the Gospel, and the name of Protestants, and yet consented she to
summond the preachers, whereat the Protestants neither offended, nor yet
thereof afraid, determined to keep the day of summonds, as that they did, which
perceived by the Prelates and Priests they procured a Proclamation to be
publicly made that all men that were come to the town without commandment of
the authority should with all diligence repair to the Borders, and there remain
fifteen days, for the Bishop of Galloway in this manner of ryme said to the
Queen, Madam because they are come without order. I rid you send them to the
Border. Now had God so provided that the quarter of the West-land (in the which
was many faithful men) was that same day returned from the Border, who
understanding the matter to proceed from the malice of the Priests, assembled
themselves together and made passage to themselves, till that they came to the
very privy Chamber, where the Queen Regent and the Bishop were. The Gentlemen
began to complain upon their strange entertainment, considering that her
Majesty had found in them so faithful obedience in all things lawful. While
the Queen began to craft a zealous and bold man James Chalmers of Gaithgyrth
said, Madame, we know that this is the malice and device of the Jewels, and of
that Bastard (meaning the Bishop of St. Andrews) that stands by you, we avow
to God we shall make a day of it, they oppress us and our Tennants, for feeding
of their idle bellies, they trouble our Preachers and would murder them and
us, shall we suffer this any longer? no Madame it shall not be, and therewith
every man put on his stee bonnet. There was heard nothing of the Queens part
but my joys, my hearts, what ailes you, me means no evil to you nor to your
preachers, the Bishops shall do you no wrong, ye are all my loving subjects, I
know nothing of this proclamation; the day of your Preachers shall be
discharged, and we will hear the controversy that is betwixt the Bishops and
you, they shall do you no wrong. My Lords (said she to the Bishops) I forbid
you either to trouble them or their preachers, and unto the Gentlemen who were
wondrously commoved, she turned again and said. O my hearts, should you not
love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your minds, and should
ye not love one another as your selves: With these and the like words she
kept the Bishops from buffers that time, and so the day of summonds being
discharged, began the brethren universally further to be encouraged, but yet
could the Bishops in no fort be quiet, for St. Geils day approaching, they gave
charge to the Provest Baillies and Counsel of Edinburgh, either to get again
the old St. Gile, or else upon their expenses to make a new Image. The Counsel
answered that to them the charge appears very unjust for they understood that
God in some places had commanded idols and Images to be destroyed, but where he
had commanded Images to be set up, they had not read, and desired the Bishop to
find a warrant for his commandment. Whereat the Bishop offended, admonished
under pain of cursing which they prevented by a former appellation, appealing
from him as a partial and corrupt Judge unto the Popes holiness, and so great
things following that passed in oblivion. Yet would not the Priests and Friars
cease to have that great Solemnity and manifest abomination which they
accustomedly had upon St. Giles day, to wit, they would have that Idol born,
and therefore was all preparation duly made. A Marmouset Idol was borrowed from
the Gray-friers, Thus the Priests and the Friars carried with Tabors and
Trumpeters, B^nners and B^g-pipes, and who was there to lead the ring, but the
Queen Regent her self with all her shavelings for honor of that feast, well,
about goes it, and comes down the high street to the Bow. The Queen Regent
dyned that day in Alexander Carpenter his house, betwixt the Bows, and so when
the idol returned back again, she left it and past into her dinner. The hearts
of the brethren were wonderfully inflamed to see such abomination so manifestly
maintained, and so immediately after that the Q. was entered into the lodging,
some of them drew nigh unto the Idol, and willing to help to bear him, and
getting the ferror upon his shoulders, etc. And some began to cry, down with
the idol, down with it, and then without delay, it was pulled down and broken,
the Priests and Friars fleed. Queen Regent laid up this amongst her other
inventions, till that she might have seen the time proper to have revenged it.
After this some Noblemen, and Barrons, and others resolving upon a Reformation
of Religion, their petitions put up to the Queen Regent taking no effect,
joining in Counsel, did bind themselves by oaths and subscriptions to assist
one another, and hazard their lives and substance to advance the cause of
Religion, and so proceed peace and peace till the Reformation was established.

Shortly after these things, that cruel tyrant, and unmerciful hypocrite,
falsely called B. of St. Andrews apprehended that blessed Martyr of Christ Jesus
Walter Mill, a man of decreeped age, whom most cruelly and unjustly he put to
death by fire in St. Andrews in the year of God, 1558. Which thing did so
highly offend the hearts of all godly, that immediately after his death, began a
new fervency among the whole people, yea, even in the Town of St. Andrews,
began the people plainly to condemn such unjust cruelty, his constancy moved so
the hearts of many, that the B. steward of his Regality, Provest of the Town
called Patrick Lermond refused to be his temporal Judge, to whom it
appertained if the cause had been just. Also the B. Chamberlane being
therewith charged, would in no ways take upon him so ungodly an office, yea,
the whole Town were so offended with his unjust condemnation, that the B.
servants could not get for their money so much as one cord to tie him to the
Stake, or Tar-barrel to burn him, but were constrained to cut the cords of
their own masters Pavilion to serve their turn. Nevertheless one servants of
the B. more ignorant and cruel then the rest, called Allexander Somervel
interprysing the office of atemporal judge in that part, conveyed him to the
fire. While he was exhorting the people, there was great mourning and
lamentation of the multitude, for they perceiving his patience, stournesse and
boldness, constancy and hardiness were greatly moved and stirred up, and
their hearts mightily inflammed for him.

This Walter Mill was the last Martyr that died in Scotland for Religion, and
his death, the every death of Popry in this Realm.

John Knox returns again from Geneva to Scotland and joins himself to the
congregation (for the Reformers of Religon at this time were called the
congregation (he preached to them at Perth where the Reformation began. The
people having heard how odious idolatry was in Gods presence, what commandment
he had given for the destruction of the Monuments thereof, and what idolatry
and what abomination was in the Mass, they were so inflammed, that neither
could the exhortation of the Preachers, nor the commandment of the Magistrate
stay them from destroying the place of idolatry. So the Monastry at Perth was
demolished, the Charterhouse a building of exceeding cost and largnesse was not
only ruined, but the stones and timber so quickly taken away, as in less then
two days space a vestige thereof was scarce remaining to be seen, the Images
were publled down at Cowper in Eyfe, which the Curat took so heavily as the
night following, he put violent hands in himself, And so the Images and Altars,
and Monasteries were demolished throughout the Country, and by the just
judgment of God in the same place where Walter Mill was burnt, the Images of
the great Church of the Abbey which passed both in number and costlinesse were
burnt as the rest were. When Q. Regent heard what was done at Perth she was so
enraged that she did vow utterly to destroy St. Johnston Man, Woman and Child;
and to consume the same by fire, and the reafter to salt it in sign of a
perpetual desolation. The congregation labors to pacify the Q. Regents rage
by their Letters directed unto her, but her rage and the Priests could not be
stayed, but forward they move against these, who then were in St. Johnston a
very few and mean number of Gentlemen, who perceiving the extremity to
approach, did write to all their brethren to repair toward them for their
relief, to the which they found all men so ready bent, that the work of God was
evidently to be espied; for the Earl of Glencarn and the brethren of the West,
came with all haste for the relief of St. Johnston, by whose presence the
tyranny of the enemy was bridled. There is an appointment concluded between Q.
Regent and them, and so the Lords departed out of the Town, but before their
departure they make a new Covenant to concur and assist one another for the
mentinance of Religion. The Q. entered into the Town, the Duke Monsieur Dosel,
and the Frenchmen, who in discharging their volley of Harquebuts, killed a Son
of Patrick Murray about ten or twelve years of age, who being brought to the Q.
presence, and understanding whose Son he was, said, It is pity it chanced on
the Son and not on the Father, but seeing it is so chanced, we cannot be
against fortime. She erects idolatry against the appointment. The Q. began to
rage against all godly and honest men, their houses were oppressed by the
French, the lawful Magistrates as well Provest and B^illies were unjustly and
without all order deposed from their Authority. She left four colors of the
Soldiers to abide in the Town to mantain idolatry and to ressist the
congregation, and so she left the Town in extreme bondage, but shortly after
from this bondage was the Town delivered by the Congregation, and the French
forced to leave the Town, and made parent to all the Kings subjects. When the
Nobility and Gentry and others of the Congregation saw that their just
petitions was rejected of Queen Regent for Reformation of Religion, and
strangers brought in to suppress them, their commonwealth and posterity,
Idolatry mantained, and Christ Jesus his true Religion despised, while idle
bellies and bloody tyrants the Bishops maintained, and Christ's true Messengers
persecuted, while finally virtue contemned and vice extolled, and while that a
great part of the Nobility and Commonallity are most unjustly persecuted, after
consultation and good advice, they deprive her from all regiment and authority
amongst them, and this was divulga^ by sound of Trumpet at the Market cross of
Edinburgh, and proclaimed by officers of Arms in head Burrows within the Realm
of Scotland.

The day following all the Soldiers in Leith, French and Scots are summoned by
sound of Trumpet to depart out of Leith within the space of 12. hours: defyance
is given; whereupon there was Skirmishing without great slaughter, and
preparation of Scalls and Ladders was made for the assault, which was concluded
by common consent of the Nobility and Barrons. The French Soldiers issued many
a time out of Leith and did great harm through the Country, the Congregation
not able to suppress them and Queen Regent her faction, they were constrained
to implore the Q. of England her aid and support, which she most willingly
granted upon certain conditions specified in a Treaty past at Barwick betwixt
the Duke of Norfolk, Lieutenant to her Majesty on the one part, and certain of
our Commissioners on the other part. The Army she sent by Land was esteemed ten
thousand men, the Town is assaulted. The Queen Regent sat all the time of the
assault (which was both terrible and long) upon the fore-wall of the Castle of
Edinburgh, and when she perceived the overthrow of us, and that the Ensigns of
the French were again displayed upon the walls, she did laugh heartily, and
said, now I will go to the Mass and praise God for that mine eyes have seen.
The French proud of the victory, stripped naked all the slain, and laid their
dead carcasses before the Sun along the wall, where they suffered them to ly
more days then one. And here we may see the inhumanity of the merciless
French. The siedge is continued, and 2000. fresh men sent for that purpose,
which the Camp greatly comforted, began to forget the former discomfiture, and
to sustain the daily Skirmishing as they did before. In the which the French
after the day of the assault, did ever receive the hurt and the repulse.

At this time Queen Regent sickned, and shortly thereafter she finished her
life, unhappy to Scotland from the first day she entered into it, until the day
she departed this life, which was the 9. day of June, in the year of God 1560.

Upon the 16. day of June, after the death of the Q. Regent, came into Scotland
Monsieur Randam, and with him the B. of Valance in commission from France to
negotiate a peace, from England there came Sir William Cecill chief Secretary,
and Doct. Whitton their negotiation was long some, for both England and we
fearing deceit, sought by all means that the Contract should be sure: In end
peace was concluded and proclaimed, and sudden provision was made for
transporting of the French to France. The English Army departed by Land, the
most part of our Nobility Protestants honorably conveyed them (as in very deed
they had well deserved) but Lord James would not leave the Lord Gray with the
other Noblemen of England till that they entered into Berwick. After whose r
turning the Counsel began to look as well upon the affairs of the Commonwealth
as upon the matters that might concern the stability of Religion. And first of
all there is public thanksgiving to God for their delivery, and the Ministers
distributed as the necessity of the Country required. And so was John Knox
appointed to Edinburgh, Christopher Goodman, (who the most part of the troubles
had remained at Air) was appointed to St. Andrews, Adam Herriot to Aberdene,
Mr. John Row to St. Johnstoun, Paul Messen (to whom was no infamy then known)
to Jedburgh, William Christison to Dundee, David Ferguson to Dumfermling, and
Mr. David Lindsay to Leith. There were nominated for Superintendents and
overseers, that all things should be carried in the Church with order and well,
Mr. John Spotswood for Lothian, Mr. John Winram for Fyfe, Mr. John Willock for
Glasgow, the Lord of Dun for Angus, and Merns, Mr. John Carswell for Argyl and
the Isles, these to be elected at the days appointed, unless that the
Countries whereto they were to be appointed, could in the mean time find out
men more able and sufficient, or else show such causes as might disable them
from that employment. The sum of the Doctrine that they were to establish and
maintain was drawn up in plain and several heads, as most true and necessary to
be believed, and to be received within the Realm, which was presented to the
Parliament; and by them confirmed, ratified and approven as wholesome and sound
Doctrine, grounded upon the infallible truth of God. Also at the same time in
the Parliament there was an act made against the Mass, and the sayers and the
hearers thereof, and the abuse of the Sacraments. And an act for the abolishing
of the Pope and his usurped authority in Scotland. The 19. day of August 1561.
betwixt seven and eight hours before noon arived from France, Mary Queen of
Scotland then widow, her husband the King of France then being dead, she is
received with great mirth and joy, but the Sunday thereafter, the 24. of August
when that preparations began to be made for that Idol of the Mass to be said
in the Chapel, the godly began to be offended and displeased thereat, and to
cry out against it, and openly to say, shall that Idol be suffered again to
take place within this Realm? It shall not be. The Lord Lindsay (then but
Master) with the Gentlemen of Fyse and others, plain cried in the Closse or
Yard, the idolatrous Priests should die the death according to Gods Law, the
godly departed with grief of heart, and after noon repaired to the Abbey in
great companies, and gave plain signification that they could not abide the
Land which God by his power had purged from idolatry, should in their eyes be
polluted again. Great pains and travel was taken by the Nobility and the Church
to move the Queen to renounce the Mass, but could never prevail with her, but
were forced to suffer her to enjoy it.

In the year of God 1564, about the midst of July (the dispensation of the
Marriage being brought from Rome) the Queen was espoused to the Lord Darnley
after the Popish manner in the Chapel of Halyrudhouse, by the Dean of
Restalrig, and the next day he was by the sound of Trumpet proclaimed King, and
declared to be associated with her in the Government.

The slaughter of Signeur Davie is conspired. Diverse tails were brought to the
King of the neglect and contempt that he was holden in, and of the great
respect carried to the stranger, the vanity and arrogance of the man himself
was likewise so great as not content to exceed the chief of the Court, he would
outbrave the King in his apparel, in his Domestic furniture, in the number
and sorts of his horses, and in every thing else, so as no speech was for the
time more common and current in the country then that of Davies greatness, of
the credit and honor whereunto he was risen, and of the small account that was
taken of the King, this the King taking in heart, he did open his grief to his
Father, who advised him to assure the Nobility at home, and to recall these
that were banished in England, which done he might easily correct the
insolency, and aspyring pride of that base fellow. The slaughter of Davie was
this: The King taking of the Lord Ruthven with him, who was but lately
recovered of a fever, and followed by four or five men at most, entered into
the room where the Queen sat at supper, Ruthven seeing Davie at the table (for
the Queen was accustomed when she supped private, to admit others to sit by
her) and that night the Countess of Argyle and beneath her Davie was placed,
commanded him to arise and come forth for the place where he sat did not beseem
him. The Queen starting up hastily, went hastily between Davie and Ruthven to
defend him, and Davie clasping his hands about her middle, the King labored to
loose them, willing her not to be afraid, for that they were come only to take
order with that villane. Then was he dragged down the stairs to the Gallery,
where Morton with his company was walking, there they set upon him, and
striving who should give the first stroke, killed him with many wounds. The
conspirators fleed into England. The King by sound of Trumpet at the Mark^^
Cross of Edinburgh protested his innocence, denying that ever he gave his
consent to his death, yet was the contrary known to all men, so as this served
only to the undoing of his reputation, and made him find few or no friends
thereafter to aid him in his necessity; Inquisition being made for the
murderers, Thomas Scot Sheriff-Depute of Perth and servant to the Lord
Ruthven, with Sir Henry Zair sometimes a Priest, being apprehended, were after
trial hanged and quartered. Many for not appearing were denounced rebels. In
all this proceeding there was none more earnest or forward then the King,
notwithstanding whereof the hatred of the fact lay heavy upon him, nor could he
ever after this again recover his former favor with the Queen.

Anno. 1566. the 19. of June, betwixt nine and ten of the Clock in the evening
the Q. was brought to bed of a son to the exceeding joy of the Subjects, for
which the Nobles and whole people assembled the next day in the Church of St.
Geils, gave solemn thanks to God.

The Queen waxing strong went by water to Allaway, a house belonging to the
Earl of Mar, and kept private a f^w days. In that place brake out first her
displeasure against the King her husband, for he followed her thither, was not
suffered to stay but commanded to be gone. And when at anytime after he came to
Court, his company was so loathsome unto her, as all men perceived she had no
pleasure nor content in it, such a deep indignation had possessed her mind,
because of the disgrace offered to her in the slaughter of her man Davie, the
envy whereof was all laid upon the King as she would never digest it.
Preparation is made for the Princes Baptism, he is baptized in Stirling the 15.
day of December 1566. Ambassadors were sent from France to be Gossips and
witnesses to the Baptism. The Earl of Bedford is sent from the Queen of
England, who brought with him a Font of Gold; weying two stone weight, with a
Basen and Ewer for the Baptism;'s the King was neither admitted to come to the
Baptism, nor suffered to come to the feast, the Ambassadors had a watch word
given them not to see nor salute him; the King all this time kept his
Chamber, his Father hearing how he was used, writ to him to repair unto him who
soon after went (without goodnight) toward Glasgow to his Father, he was hardly
a mile out of Stirling when the poison (which they had given him) wrought so
upon him that he had very great pain and dolor in every part of his body. At
length being arrived at Glasgow the blisters brake out of a bluish color, so
the ^^^ysicians presently knew the disease to come by Poison, he was brought ^o
low that nothing but death was expected, yet the strength of his youth at last
did surmount the poison. The Queen hearing that the King was recovered, she
went to Glasgow to visit him, and thereafter goes with her to Edinburgh where
he is murdered by Bothwell, and the house where he lay burned with powder
about twelve of the clock in the night, his body was cast forth in a yaird
without the Town wall adjoining close by: there was a servant likewise
murdered beside him, who had been also in the Chamber with him, he had been
King but 18. Months, he was of a comely stature, and none was like unto him
within this Island, he died under the age of 21. years. The Earl of Lennox in
the mean time wrote to the Queen to cause punish Bothwell with his other
accomplices for murdering the King. A day is appointed for his trial by an
assyle, he is acquit of the murder by the Jury, yet the suspicions of the
people were nothing diminished. Bothwell is devorced from his wife, the banes
of Bothwell with the Queen asked, Mr. John Craig protests against it,
notwithstanding of his opposition the marriage went on and was celebrated, the
15. of May by Adam B. of Orkney in the Abbey of Halyrudhouse after the manner
or the reformed Church, yet was no sooner finished, then the ill fruits thereof
began to break out. The Queen by Bothwels persuasion taking purpose to visit
the Borders, and having cha^g d the Subjects to accompany her thither with a
provision for 15. days, it was publicly rumoured that these forces were
gathering for some other business, and that the intention was to have the
Prince her Sone in her own custody, and taken out of the Earie of Mar his
hands. The Noble men that had combined themselves at Stirling, took Arms,
Bothwell flies, and the Queen rendereth her self to the Lords, she is sent
prisoner to Lochlevin and Bothwell was declared by open proclamation^ not only
the murderer of the King, but also the committer of it with his own hand, and
a thousand crowns were offered to any man that would bring him in. Bothwell
takes the sea, and there he plays the Pirat, and made spoil of all that came
in his way, he is pursued by Grange with five ships well manned who coming
upon him unlooked for as he lay in one of the Creeks of Orkney, gave him the
chase, and had certainly taken him if they had not been hindered by Rocks and
shallow waters. Shortly after he was taken upon the coast of Norroway, and
conveyed to Denmark, where being detected by some Scottish Merchants, he was put
in a vile and loathsome prison, and falling in a frenzy, which kept him 14.
years made an ignominious and desperate end, such as his wicked and flagitious
life had deserved. The Q. is moved to make resignation of the Crown, the King
is Crowned at Stirling, the Earl of Murray is elected Regent.

Few days after the commitment of the Quenn the Earl of Glencairn with his
domestics, went to the Chapel of Halyrudhouse where he brake down the Altars
and the Images, which fact as it did content the zealous Protestants, so it did
highly offend the Popish affected.

The Bishop of Orkney was conveened before the General Assembly of the Church,
and deposed from his function and Office for marrying the Queen and Bothwell,
and the Countess of Argyle ordained to make public satisfaction for giving
her presence at the Princes baptism, at the Papistical rites there used.

At this time John Hepburn called Bolton, John Hay younger of Tallow, and two
chamber boys of Bothwells, Powry and Dalgleish were brought to trial for the
Kings murder, and found guilty by their confessions, being entised to the said
wicked fact by Bothwell.

The Queen after eleven months imprisonment escapes out of Lochlevin. The
Queens resignation is decerned null being extorted by fear, and proclamations
made in her name, commanding all the Leeges to meet is Arms at Hamilton for
pursuing the Rebels that had usurped the Royal Authority: Many of the Nobility
took her part. The Regent assembleth his Forces, there gathered to him about
40^0. The Queens power was much greater. The Earl of Argyle was Lieutenant on
the Queens part the battle between them was foughten at Langside the 13. of May
1568. The Queen who stood a mile off from the battle on a little height,
perceiving the field lost, made toward the borders, the rest that escaped fled
the readiest way they could find, every man to his own house, the number of the
slain was about 300. Many were taken prisoners, amongst whom the most eminent
was Lord Seaton and Rosse, the Mrs. of Cassels and Eglinton, Sir James Hamilton
of Evendale, and Sherifts of Air and Linlithgow.

Of the Regents side one only was slain, the Lords Hoome and Ochilerie wounded:
all the rest with few escaped that followed the chase too far returned with him
to Glasgow, where they went first to the Church and gave thanks to God for the
victory they had obtained almost without any effusion of blood. This conflict
happened upon the 13. of May the eleventh day after her escape from Lochlevin.
The Queen flees to England, and writes to Queen Elizabeth.

The Bishop of Orkney was reponed to his place, and for removing the scandal
he was enjoined in his first Sermon to make public acknowledgement of his
fault, and crave forgiveness of God, the Church and State whom he had offended.

The Duke of Chattellerault returned, and being made Deputy by the Queen,
caused publish his Letters prohibiting the subjects to acknowledge any other
Sovereign then the Queen, hereupon the Regent gave forth Proclamations,
charging the Lieges in the Kings name to meet him in Arms at Glasgow the 10.
of March. The Regent and the Duke were agreed by the means of the
Superintendents.

James Hamiltoun of Bothwell-Haugh takes in hand the Regents murder, he is
killed by him at Linlithgow as he was riding, by the shot of a Bullet: the
Murderer escapes, and the death of the Regent was greatly lamented.

The Earl of Lennox is chosen Regent and Governor of the Realm until the
Kings Majority, or till he were able by himself to administrate the public
affairs.

The Regent was shot by Captain Calder at Stirling and with the same bullet
Wormestoun who did what he could to save the Regent was stricken dead.

After him the Earl of Mar was elected Regent. After the Earl of Mar was
the Earl of Morton elected Regent, as the man in that time of greatest courage
and counsel.

The Earl of Morton is challenged for the murder of the Kings father by
Captain James Steward, and is committed, and thereafter brought to his trial,
sentence is pronounced, and he execute for concealing the Kings murder.

The Queen is excute and beheaded after 19. years captivity in England.

The Spanish Navy was in the year of God 1583. In the year of God 1597. there
was a great business for the trial of Witches. Amongst others one Margaret
Aikin being apprehended upon suspiti^n, and threatened with torture, did
confess her self guilty; being examined touching her associats in that trade,
she nam^d a few, and pe^ceiving her delations find credit, made offer to detect
all of that sort, and to purge the country of them, so she might have her life
granted, for the reason of her knowledge, she said that they had a secret mark
all of that sort in their eyes, whereby she could surely tell how soon she
looked upon any, whether they were Witches or not, and in this she was so
readily believed, that for the space of three or four months she was carried
from Town to Town to make discoveries in that kind. Many were brought in
question by her delations, especially at Glasgow, where diverse innocent women
through the credulity of the Minister Mr. John Cowper were condemned and put to
death. In end she was found to be a mere deceiver, for the same persons that
the one day she had declared guilty, the next day being presented in another
habit, she cleansed and sent back to Fife where first she was apprehended. At
her trial she affirmed all to be false that she had confessed, either of her
self or others, and persisted in this to her death, which made many for think
their to great forwardness that way, and moved the King to recall the
commissions given out against such persons, discharging all proceedings against
them, except in case of voluntary confession, till a solid order should be
taken by the Estates touching the form that should be kept in their trial.

In the year of God 16^0. was Gowries conspiracy against the King discovered,
both he and his brother Mr. Alexander Ruthven were killed at St. Johnstoun, and
the King delivered. The Ministers of Edinburgh, being r^q^ired by the Counsel
to give thanks for his Majesty's deliverance, refused to obey, excusing
themselves that nothing ought to be deliv red in Pulpit, but that whereof the
truth was known, and that all which is uttered in that place should be spok^n
in faith. When by no persuasion they could be moved to perform that duty, it
was resolved that the Counsel should go together to the Market Cross, and that
the Bishop of Rosse should after a naration of the Kings daughter and
deliverance conceive a public thanksgiving, which was done, the multitude
applauding and expressing a great joy. Mr. Patrick Galloway the Mononday
thereafter in presence of the King Preached at the Market Cross, who choosed
the 124. Psalm for his Theme, did take occasion to discourse of all the
particulars of the conspiracy, and gave the people great satisfaction, for many
doubted that there had been any such conspiracy, the condition of Princes being
as the Emperor Domitian said herein miserably, that even when conspiracies made
against their persons are discovered, yet they are not credited unless they be
slain. The King to testify his thankfulness for his deliverence mortified a
thousand pound to the poor yearly to be taken of the readiest fruits of the
Abbacie of Scoon. After this order was taken for a public and solemn
thanksgiving to be made in all the Churches of the Kingdom. The Ministers of
Edinburgh who gave the refuse were commanded to remove themselves out of the
town within 48. hours, and inhibited to Preach within his Majesty's dominions
under the pain of death. Three of the number, to wit, Mr. Walter ^elcanquel,
Mr. William Watson, and Mr. John Hall, acknowledging their fault were pardoned,
Mr. James Balfour likewise remitted, But Mr. Robert Truce taking a course by
himself, and saying he would reverence his Majesty's report of that accident,
but could not say he was persuaded of the truth of it, was banished the King
dominions, and went into France.

The 15. of November a Parliament was held at Edinburgh, wherein sentence of
the forfeiture was pronounced against Gowry and Mr. Alexander his brother,
their posterity disinherited, and in detestation of the paracid attempted, the
whole surname of Ruthven abolished, but this last was afterward dispensed
with; and such of that name as were known to be innocent, tolerated by the
Kings clemency to enjoy their surnames and titles as in former times. The
bodies of the two brethren being brought to the Parliament house, were after
sentence given, hanged upon a Gibbet in the public street, and then
dismembered, their hands cut off and affixed upon the top of the prison house,
and the 5. of August ordained to be kept yearly in remembrance of his
Majesty's delivery.

Prince Charles was born at Dumfermling.

The Queen of England continuing constant in her affection when she was asked a
little before her death by the Lord Keeper and Secretary who were directed by
the Counsel to understand her will touching her Successor, answered, none but
my Cosen the King of Scots After which words she spoke not much. A Queen
incomparable for wisdom and fidelity of Government. She departed this life the
24. of March, in the 70 year of her age, and 44. of her reign. The same day in
the forenoon the King of Scots was procl^imed King first at the Palace of White
hall next at the Cross in Cheapside within the City of London with an infinite
applause of all sorts of people. But leaving the prosecution of any more
occurences that fell out in this our Realm, which late Histories at large does
declare, I shall close this part with one or two remarkable things specially
concerning Glasgow, in reckoning out the Bishops of Glasgow till the
Reformation, I find St. Mungo to be the first.

This City was made famous at first by Kentigern commonly called St. Mungo. He
was begotten by Engenius the third, King of the Scots upon Thametis Daughter to
Loath King of Picts. His Mother finding her self with child, out of shame and
fear of her Fathers wrath, stole privily away; and entering into a little
Vessel that she found in the nearest coast, was by the wind and waves cast on
land where the town of Culrosse is now situated, and there was delivered of her
birth, and leaving the Child with a Nurse, returned home. His Parents b^ing
unknown, he was brought to Servanus and baptized, and bred up by him, yet it
seems by the Hymn they did ordinarily sing in the Festivals that made his
Father afterward to be known. They repo t of him that a Lady of good place in
the Country having lost a King, which her Husband gave her, as she crossed the
River of Clyde, and her Husband waxing jealous, as if she had bestowed the same
upon one of her lovers, she did mean her self unto him in r^ating his help for
the safty of her honor, and that he going to the river after he had used his
devotion, will^d one who was making to fish, to bring him the first that he
caught, which was done, in the mouth of the fish he found the Ring, and sending
it to the Lady, she was thereby fred of her Husbands suspicion. The credit of
this I b^lieve upon the reports, but howsoever it be the sea and City do both
of them w^ar in their Arms a fish with a ring in the mouth even to this day: He
was certainly a man of rare piety, and to the poor exceeding bountiful, lived
to a great age beyond the ordinary course of men, to wit nine score and five
years as in the conclusion of the hyme is said. Cum octogenos centum qu^que
quinque vir annos
Complerat, sanctus est Closgow sunere sunctus.


He laid the foundation of the high Church of Glasgow, and was therein at his
death interred.

After his death for many ages the Sea was in a manner desolate unto the reign
of Malcolm the third, who restored the same to some integrity. The first Bishop
I find named after the restitution, was 1. John Achaian, who took great pains
in building the Cathredal, and having brought it to a reasonable perfection did
dedicate ^he same in the year 1137. Jocelin Abbot of Melrosse was his
successor, in his time the City of Glasgow was erected a Burgh royal.

Willi^m Babinton Chancellor of the Kingdom was after him elected Bishop. In
his time as Boeth. writes, the fabric of the Church of Glasgow was fully
accomplished, his words are, absolutum est ea temp^state Templum Cat^edr^le
Glasgu nsis seeds profe^to magnifica cujus ^aud exignam partem Guilielmus ibid
m Epise pus iberalitate sua extruxerat, nec d^u operi perfecto, supersuit. He
died the 25. of January 1261.

William Rae the 19. Bishop, a good and z^alo^s man build the stone Brid e of
Glasgow, and died in year 1367. In the time of Mr. Matthew Gl n linni^g the 21.
Bishop the steeple which was all built of timber was burnt by lightning, in
place whereof he intended to build one of stone, and made therefore great
preparation, but was prevented by death in the year 1408. His successor William
Lawder finished the work, he was Chancellor of Scotland.

Mr. William Tu^^bull the 25. Bishop founded the College of Glasgow.

The cruel persecuti^n of Ch^istians under the TURKISH Emperors.
NOw last of all having spoken of the persecutions of the Christians under the
Roman Empero^s in a tractate by it self, and of the persecutions of the Roman
Bishops in this place for the professing of the Gospel of Christ Jesus, we
shall speak a little of the miserable persecutions, slaughter and captivity of
the Christians under the Turks; thus from time to time the Church of Christ
almost has had little or no rest in this earth, what for the heathen Emperors
on the one side, what for the proud Pope on the other side, on the third side
what for the barbarous Turk, for these are and have been from the beginning the
three principal and capital enemies of the Church of Christ signified in the
Apocalypse, by the Beast, the false lamb, and the false prophet, from whom went
out three foul spirits like Frogs, to gather together all the Kings of the
Earth, to the battle of the day of the Lord God Almighty, Apoc. 16. The cruelty
and malice of these enemies against Christ's people has been such that to judge
which of them most exceeded in cruelty of persecution it is hard to say, but it
may be thought that the bloody and beastly tyrranny of the Turks, especially
above all the rest incomparable, surmounteth all the afflictions and cruel
slaughters that ever were seen in any age, or read of in any story, in so much
that their is neither History so perfect, nor writter so diligent, who writing
of the miserable tyranny of the Turks is able to express or comprehend the
horrible examples of the unspeakable cruelty and slaughter exercised by these
twelve Turkish tyrrants upon poor Christian men's bodies, within the compass of
these later three hundredth years. Where of although no sufficient relation can
be made nor number expressed, yet to give to the Reader some general guesss or
view thereof, let us first perpend and consider what Dominions and Empyres, how
many countries, Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, Towns Strong holds and forts,
these Turks have surprised, and wone from the Christians, in all which
victories being so many. This is secondly to be noted, that there is almost no
place which the Turks ever came to, and subdued, where they did not either slay
all the inhabitants thereof, or led away the most part thereof into such
captivity and slavery that they continued not long after alive, or else so
lived that death almost had been to them more tolerable. Like as in the time
of the first persecutions of the Roman Emperors, the saving was that no man
could step with his feet in all Rome but should tread upon a Martyr, so here
may be said that almost there is not a town, city or village in all Asia,
Grecia, also in a great part of Europe and Africa, whose streets have not
flowed wi h the blood of the Christians, whom the crueli Turks have murdered,
and of whom are to be seen in Histories, Heaps of soldiers sl^in, of men and
women cut in pieces, of children sticked upon Poles and staiks, whom these
detestable Turks most spytfully (and that in the sight of their Parents) use to
gore to death, some they drog at their horse tails, and famish to death, some
they tare in pieces tying their arms and legs to four horse s, other some they
make Mar^^s to shoot at, upon some they try their swords how deep they can cut
and slash, the aged and feeble they tread under their horse, Women wi h child
they spare not, but ^ip their bodies, and cast the Infants into the fire, or
otherwise destroy them. Whether the Christians yield to them or yield not, all
is a matter. As in their promises their is no truth, so in their victories
there is no sense of manhood or mercy in them, but they make havoc of all. So
the Citizens of Croia after they had yielded and were all promised their lives,
were all destroyed and that horribly. In M sia after the King had given himself
to the Turks hand having promise of life, Mahomet the Turk slew him with his
own hands. The Princes of Rasia had both their eyes put out with B^s^ns red hot
set before them. Theodosia otherwise called Capha was also surrendered the Turk
having the like assurance of life and safty, and yet contrare to the league the
citizins were put to the sword an slain. At the winning and yielding of Lesbos
what a number of young men and children were put upon sharp stakes and poles
and so thrust throw At the winning of the City of Buda, what tyrranny was
showed and exercised against the poor Christians which had yeeled themselves,
and against the two Dukes Christopher Biss^rer and Joannes Tranbunger contrary
to the promise and hand writing of the Turk is to be seen in the story of
Malchior Soiterns de bello pannonico.

The like also is to be read in the story of Pernardus de Brydenbach, who
writing of the talking of Hydrantum a City in Apulia, testifies of the
miserable slaughter of the young men that were there slain, of old men trodden
under horse feet, of matrons and virgins ravished, of women with child cut and
rent in pieces, of the Priests in the Churches slain, and of the Archbishop of
that City who being an aged man, and holding the Cross in his hands, was cut
asunder with a wooden Saw, etc. The same Bernardus also writing of the
overthrow of Nigro-Pontus, otherwise called Chalcides, describes the like
terrible slaughter which was their exercised, where the Turk after his promise
given before to the contrary, most cruelly caused all the youth of Italy to be
pricked upon sharp stakes, some to be dashed against the hard stones, other
some to be cut asunder in the midst, and other more with other kinds of
torments to be put to death insomuch that all the streets and ways of Chalcid^s
did flow with the blood of them which were there slain. In which History the
foresaid Writer records one memorable example of maidenly chastity, worthy of
all Christians to be noted and commended. The story is told of the Pretors
daughter of that City, who being the only daughter of her father, and noted to
be of an exceeding singular beauty, was saved out of the slaughter, and brought
to Mahomet the Turk to be his Concubine. But she denying to consent to his
Turkish appetite and filthiness, was commanded forthwith to be slain and
murdered, and so died she a Martyr, keeping both here faith and her body
undefiled unto Christ her Spouse. The like cruelty also was showed upon them
that kept the Castle, and afterward yielding themselves upon hope of the
Turks promise, were slain every one. What should I speak of the miserable
slaughter of Methone, and the Citizens thereof, dwelling in Peloponesus who
seeing no other remedy, but needs to come into the Turks hands, set the Barn on
fire wherein they were gathered together, men, women, and Children, some women
also with child voluntarily cast themselves into the sea, rather then they
would sustain the Turks captivity. Miserable it is to behold, long to recite,
incredible to believe all the cruel attempts, and horrible slaughters wrought
by these miscreants against the Christians through all places almost of the
world, both in Asia, and Africa, but especially in Europe, etc. At the siege of
Vienna, were all the Christian captives were brought before the whole Army and
slain, and diverse drawn in pieces with horses, but especially at the winning
of Constantinople abovementioned, also at Croia and Methone, what beastly
cruelty was shed, it is unspeakable, for as in Constantinople Mahomet the
drunken Turk never rose from dinner, but he caused every day for his disport
300. Christian captives of the Nobles of that City to be slain before his face.
So in Methone after that his Captain Omares had sent unto him at Constantinople
five hundred prisoners of the Christians, the cruel tyrant commanded them all
to be cut and divided asunder by the middle, and so being slain, to be thrown
out into the fields.

Leonicus Chalcondyla writing of the same story, adds moreover a prodigious
narration (if it be true) of a brute Ox, who being in the fields, and seeing
the carcasses of the dead bodies so cut in two, made there a loud noise after
the lowing of his kind and nature, and afterward coming to the quarters of the
dead bodies lying in the field, first took up the one half, and then coming
again took up likewise the other half, and so (as he could) joined them both
together. Which being espied of them which saw the doing of the brute Ox, and
marvelling thereat, and word being brought thereof to Mahomet* he commanded the
quarte^s again to be brought where they were before, to prove whether the beast
will come again, who failed not (as the Author record^th) but in like sort as
before, taking the fragments of the dead Co^ps, laid them again together. It
follows more in the Author, how that Mahomet being astonished at the strange
wonder of the Ox, commanded the quarters of the Christian men's body to be
interred, and the Ox to be brought to his house and much made of. Some said it
to be the body f a Ven^ian, some affirmed that he was an Illyrian, but
whatsoever he was, certain it is that the Turk himself was much more bestiall
then was the brute Ox, which being a beast, showed more sense of humanity to a
dead man then one man did to another.

What Christian heart will no^ pity the incredible slaughter done by the Turks
in Euboia, where Fab^r testifies that innumerable people sticked and go^ed
upon stakes, diverse were thrust through with a hot iorn, children and infants
yet not wained f om the mother were b^shed against the stones, and many cut
asunder in the midst. But never did country taste and feel more the better and
deadly tyranny of the Turks, then did Rasia called Mysia Inferior, and now
Servia, where the Prince of the same Country being sent for, under fair
pretense of words and promises to come and speak with the Turk after he was
come of his own gentleness, thinking no harm, was apprehended, and wretchedly
and falsely put to death, and his skin slain off, his brother and sister brought
to Constantinople for a triumph, and all the Nobles of his Country, as Faber
adds, had their eyes put out, etc. Briefly to conclude, by the vehement and
furious rage of those cursed catiffs: It may seem that Satan the old Dragon,
for the great hatred he bears to Christ, has stirred them up to be the
Butchers of all Christian people* inflaming their beastly hearts with such
malice and cruelty against the name and Religion of Christ, that they
degenerating from the nature of men to devils, neither by reason will be ruled,
nor by any blood or slaughter satisfied.

And now to speak a little of the miserable estate of the Christian captives
under the Turk. And here, First is to be noted that the Turk never comes into
Europe to war against the Christians, but there follows after his Army a
great number of brokers or Merchants, such as buy men, and children to sell
again, bringing with them long chains in hope of great cheats. In the which
chains they lock them by fifty and sixty together, such as remain undestroyed
with the sword, whom they buy of the spoils of them that rob and spoil the
Christian countries, which is lawful for any of the Turks Army to do, so that
the tent of their spoil or prey (whatsoever it be) be reserved to the head
Turk, that is to the great Mr. Chief. Of such as remain for Tith if they be
aged of whom very few be reserved alive, because little profit comes of that
age) they be sold to the use of husbandry or keeping of beasts. If they be
young men or women they be sent to certain places there to be instructed in
their language and Arts, as shall be most profitable for their advantage, and
such are called in their tongue Sarai, and the first care of the Turk is this
to make them to deny the Christian Religion and to be circumcised, and after
that they are appointed every one as he seems most apt, either to the
learning of their Laws, or else to learn the fates of the war, the first
Rudiments of war is to handle the bow, first beginning with a weak Bow, and so
as they grow in strength coming to a stronger Bow, and if they miss the Mark,
they are sharply beaten, and their allowance is two pence or three pence a day,
till they come to take Wages to serve in War. Some are brought up for the
purpose to be placed in the number of the wicked Janziarics, that is the ordour
of the Turks Champion, which is the most abominable condition of all other. And
if any of the foresaid young men or children shall appear to excel in any
beauty, him they so cut, that on part of that which nature gives to man
remains to be seen in all his body, whereby while the freshness of age
continues, he is compelled to serve their abominable abomination, and when age
comes then they serve instead of Eunuchs to wait upon Matrons, or keep horses
or mules, or else to be secullians as drudges in their Kitchens. Such as be
young Maidens and beautiful, are deputed for Concubins. They which be of mean
beauty, serve for Matrons for their drudgry work in their houses and chambers,
or else are put to spinning and such other Labors, but so that it is not
lawful for them either to p^of^sse their Christian Religion, or ever to hope
for any liberty. And thus much for them that fall to the Turk by Tith. The
other^ which are bought and sold among private subjects, first allured with
fair words and promises to take circumcision, which if they will do, they are
more favorable entreated, but all hope is taken from them of returning again
into their own country, which if they attempt, the pain thereof is burning. And
if such, coming at length to liberty will marry, they may, but then their
children remain bound to the Lord for him to s^ll at his pleasure, and
therefore such as are wsse among them marry. They which refuse to be
circumcised are miserably handled, etc. When they are brought to the Market to
be sold, the buyer if he be disposed, plucking off their garments, vieweth all
the bones and joints of the body, and if he like them, he gives his pirce and
carries them away into miserable servitude, either to tilling of their ground,
or to p^stor their C^ttel, or some other strange kind of misery incredible to
speak of, so much that certain of such Christian captives yoked together like
Horse and Oxen, draw in the plough. The maidservants likewise are kept in
perpetual toil and work in close places, where they neither come in sight of
any man, neither be they pe^mitted to have any talk with their fellow servants,
etc. Such as are committed to keep beasts, ly abroad day and night in the wild
fields, without house and harbor, and so changing their P^sture, go from
mountain to mountain, of whom also b^side the office of keeping the beasts,
other handy-labour is exacted at ^pare hours, such as pleases their masters
to put them unto. And such is the lamentable afflictions of our christian
brethren under the cruel tyranny and captivity of the Turks, p^ssing all other
captivities that ever have been to Gods people, either under Pharaoh in Egypt*
or under Nebu^hadn^zzar in Babylon, or under Antio^hus in the time of the
Machabees. We are to pity the lamentable sl^very that christians are in under
the ba^barous Turks, and to pray for their delivery, and to be thankful to God
for our liberty and freedom.

FINIS.

