The Three Royal CEDARS Or Great Britains Glorious DIAMONDS, BEING A Royal
Court NARRATIVE of the Proceedings, Travels, Letters, Conferences, Speeches,
and conspicuous Resolutions of the most High and Renowned KING, CHARLES by the
Grace of God, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, His Highness Prince
James Duke of York, and the most Illustrious Prince. Henry Duke of Gloucester.
With a brief History of their memorable Transactions, Results, and judicious
Councels, since their too-much-lamented Exile in Flanders, and the Lord
Chancellor Hide, the Marquess of Ormond, the Earl of Norwich, the Lord
Wentworth, the Lord Digby, and many other Nobles and Gentlemen, created Lords
of his Majesty's Privie-Council. Also, The resplendent Virtues appearing in
these Princely Pearls, to the great joy of all Loyal Subjects, who have for
their Sovereign a just KING to Govern, a Valiant DUKE to Defend, and a Wise
COUNSELOR to Advise.

By E. Sanders Esquire a Lover of his Countries Liberty, and a Loyal Subject and
Servant to his Sacred Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for G. Horton, living near the three Crowns in Barbican, 1660.

The Three ROYAL CEDARS.
DIvine Providence having been pleased to return the Subject to his due
Allegiance, and to give encouragement to those who have constantly continued
Loyal, that they may at length once more enjoy happiness, and every man sit
under his own Vine, and under his own Figtree, which the God of Heaven be
praised, we have now greater hopes of then ever; Moderation and Impartiality
are the chiefest Virtues of a Loyal pen; it is such a task I chiefly aim at, no
less then the difficult Travells of our most high and renowned King, with his
exiled Nobles, Charles the second, Heir a parent to the Crown of Great
Britain, and Ireland, and Crowned King of Scots, touching whom I intend to
treat. He was born on the 29 of May, 1630. to the great joy of the King, Queen,
and indeed the whole Kingdom; for never yet had England a Prince born of so
Noble an extract, and Grand Alliance, his Father by Lineal right and descent,
King of Great Britain and Ireland, his Mother Daughter to that thrice
Illustrious Prince Henry the 4 th King of France, and worthily surnamed the
Great, and Isabella Infanta of Spain. By his Grand mothers side was he near
allied to the Kings of Denmark, by the Marriage of his Ant, the Noble Princess
Elizabeth, to the Elector Palatine of Rhine, and King of Bohemia, and
afterward, by the marriage of his Royal Sister the Princess Mary, to the
Prince of Orange. Thus was he allied to most of the most potent Princes in
Christendom. And happy might this Nation have been under his Government, if we
may believe the vogue of that wisest of men Solomon, who pronounces that
Kingdom blessed whose Prince is the Son of Nobles.

But to return to his Majesty in Flanders; of whose itenary life we have
already given you a particular account; it will not be impertinent to say
somewhat of his sedentary and reti^ed living, that by his economy we may judge
of his Monarchy, and of the government of those few subjects in his Family, of
that of his three Kingdoms.

His Majesty has spent most of his time, wherein he has been out of his
Dominions, in Flanders under the protection of the Catholic King of Spaine^
nor had he ever any where else so settled a Court and habitation as here, where
his chief attendants are the Lord Chancellor Hide, the Marquis of Ormond, the
Earl of Norwich, the Lord Wentworth, the Lord Digby, and many others, Nobles
and Gentlemen, whose Loyalty to his sacred Majesty and his Royal Father has
made exiles to their Country; a particular number of which he makes use of for
his Council, doing nothing without serious and mature advice; and yet being of
so sagacious a judgment that whatever he says is seldom contradicted by the
most ju^icious of his Counselors, not out of fear or flattery, but out of a
real assent to, and concurrence with his judgment.

And indeed those great opportunities which he has had, by his so long being
abroad, of diving into the great Councels of Forr^in Princes and States, must
necessarily make him a person of a very perspicuous understanding, endow him
with all those qualities which may deservedly attain the name of Great, and
render him as well an able Statist, as a King; he having during his expulsion
traveled through, and lived in the Countries of three the most potent Princes
in Christendom, viz. the Emperor's of Germany, and the Kings of Spain and
France; and so to the Germain resolution added the Spaniards prudence, and the
Frenchmans expedition.

To these extraordinary helps which never Prince in Christendom can boast of,
we may yet add, those more then ordinary gifts wherewith nature has been
pleased to endow him, which being so extremely improved, we can hardly now
discern; but that it may be known what they were, take the character of an
Honorable Lord upon his death bed, who speaking of him when about fifteen or
sixteen years of age, has these words: Truly I never saw greater hopes of
virtue in any young person then in him: Great judgment, great understanding,
strong apprehension, much of honor in his inclinations. So that both nature
and industry have seemed to use their utmost endeavors to make him a perfect
Prince, his very affliction turning in this benefit, and making him in
knowledge and sufferings (the Refiner of knowledge) unparralel'd. Some foreign
Princes as well envying, as pitying his expulsion.

This perfect knowledge of his he has indeed had but small occasion to
practice, except a little in Scotland: where, I think, he demonstrated himself
a person so prudent and careful in his affairs, that it is beyond my pens
expression.

His Subjects good was his only care: nor did he ever act any thing but what
might tend more to theirs then his own interest; still consulting whether it
might benefit them, not himself.

His Letter to Col. Mackworth Governor of Shrewsbury sufficiently demonstrates
his affection to his very enemies; he would win, not conquer the hearts of
those who though they have broke their Allegiance to him, yet he would esteem
still his Subjects.

He would not conquer with blood, lest he should be thought a Tyrant. He
endeavoues by fair means to attain the love of his Subjects, that what ever his
very enemies think of him) he may approve himself to be a just Prince.

And did fortune give him power, yet would he rather attempt blandishents then
force. He knows that whilst he kills a Subject he weakens his Kingdom. Rebels
themselves may be found useful, and though justice cannot, yet his Majesty's
clemency will admit their pardon; but if they resist to the utmost, their blood
is on their own heads. What man is not willing to destroy him who he knows
would his murderer.

Thus is his justice and his clemency mixed together; he would not kill, where
he might with safety save. Not does his unspott^d innocence raise fancies or
fears in him. As he is guilty of nothing, so there is nothing he fears. Whilst he
endeavors to be true to his Subjects, those endeavors force a belief in him
that his Subjects will be true to him.

His very nature enclines him to a compassion. He pities those that will not
pity themselves; and whilst they are conspiring his destruction, his prayers
procure their safety. Nor can the utmost of their injuries provoke him to a
retalliation. He has learned not only of God, but of the King his Father, to
forgive his enemies.

Nor is it his desire to obtain his Kingdoms that makes him willing to forgive
his enemies, but his desire to forgive his enemies that makes him willing to
obtain his Kingdoms: he counts the possession of his Royalties but as a
transitory dignity, the pardon of his enemies a Divine and lasting one.

Neither is his pity less then his justice, they are both in the Superlative
degree, he hates wickedness, not because the wo^ld should see him glory (that
would make him an Hypocrite) but because God abhors it; it is Love not Fear
makes him Religious, he Fears God only because he loves him.

He hates not the Vicious, hut abhominates their Vices, his hatred extends not
to persons, but to things; He dislikes not the swearer, it is his Oaths he
abhors he hates not the Drunkard but his Drunkenness.

Yet does his mercy extend beyond their sins, as he is a King so he is a God,
he is gracious to pardon, as well as just to punish; nor can a submission or
reformation but overtake his remission.

His constant service of God excites others to live by his example, he sleeps
not without invoking the blessing of the Almighty, nor do his eyes open without
a returned thanks, He knows it is God alone which can restore and protect him;
nor can the wickedness of man prevail against Him.

Nor does his public devotion show him less zealous then his private, the one
demonstrates him full of Zeal, the other void of Hpocrisie; he would have
others holy as well as himself; he knows that saying concerns him, being a
King, above all private Men, Non nobis solis nati sumus.

Private persons are not alone born for themselves, muchless Kings, the
public concern is their duty: it is not enough for the Master of the house
that he be godly, whilst his Family is wicked. There must be Precept as well as
Example: and if need be, correction as well as instruction.

This makes his Majesty deservedly famons; he counts it as great a fault to
suffer a sin in another whilst he has power to correct it as to commit it
himself. He knows that what crimes soever a Magistrate suffers willingly to be
committed, he brings upon his own head.

He is therefore above all things careful not to farther vice, lest he should
be accounted vicious: he detests that in another which did he commit, he knows
he might justly detest himself for: and endeavors by Example to reform that in
others which he knows were it in him would seem odious.

He abhors vice, as well because it is so, as because God abhors it. His nature
inclines him to virtue, and as he cannot admit it contrary in himself, so he
cannot endure it in another.

His constancy in Religion is no less conspicuous then his piety. His
discerning judgment knows what is truth, and that truth is followed by his
settled will; Yet he hates not the Popish Religion, but their Idolatry: he
abhors not them, but their false worship. He loves all that know Christ at all,
but wishes that they might know him more.

His stedfastness in Religion proceeds not from self interest; he sticks not so
much to the true Protestants, because he knows the English to be addicted to
that Religion; because he thinks it for his benefit; because he imagines that
it would prove very difficill to obtain his Crown and leave it. But, because he
knows it to be true.

He knows the Prince is born for the people, as well as the people for the
Prince. He knows their interests to be interwoven. He knows that without them
he cannot stand; yet will he sooner loose them relinquish ve^i^y.

He is the perfect pattern of Piety but more of Patience, his afflictions have
not made him repine, he knows God to be just: he believes that as God restored
Job twofold, so will he likewise restore unto him his Kingdoms. Yet he thinks
it just in God to suffer them to be detained from him.

He laments more his Subjects slavery then his own Exile, he grieves that they
have been so long blind, yet rejoices for their sakes that they have now a
Glimmering; he constantly prays for the restoring of their sight, not so much
because they should restore his, as their own Rights and Privileges.

He is inwardly troubled and perplexed at the many Schisms, Sects, and Heresies
that are raised in the Church of England, he is sorry that their rise is from
some men's envy toward him; he pitties, and his pity produces his prayers for
them. He is willing that though they will not obey him, yet that they may serve
God.

He was never heard to curse his enemies, many times to pray for them, and
desire God to forgive even his Fathers Murderers; his good will surpasses
their cruelty: And whilst they are conspiring his destruction, he is p^aying
for their salvation.

He is a perfect enemy to all debauchedness, he is sorry those who pretend
themselves his friends in England are so great a scandal to him: He wishes that
they would so carry themselves, that he might adventure to own them as his
friends; for he understands not the good will of those who drink his health for
the liquors sake, nor wishes for their help, who over their Sack only swear
they will fight for him.

He is no greater a hater of vice then a cherisher of virtuous actions, he
loves them in his very enemies and often he grives when he finds occasion to
think that many of them will rise up in Judgment against his most pretended
friends.

He is most exactly just in all his Commands, and faithful in performance of
all his promises. Take the Character given him by the dying Marquess of
Montrose. For his Majesty now living (says he) Never People I believe may be
more happy in a King, his Commands to me were most just, in nothing that he
promises will he fail: He deals justly with all men, etc. So punctual is he,
that when a word is once gone out of his Mouth, he will rather suffer by it
then break it.

To conclude, he is the pattern of Patience and Piety, the most righteous and
justest of Kings. The most knowing and experienced of Princes. The holiest and
the best of Men, The severest punisher of vice. The strictest rewarder of
Virtue. The constantest perseverer in Religion. And the truest lover of his
Subjects.

This a short Character of his illustrious Majesty, which I fear those that
know him will rather think to come short of then reach his due praise, so
sweetly virtuous is he in all his carriages, so affable in his discourse, so
void of passion and anger, that he was never yet heard or seen in Chollor, the
utmost extent of any passion that ever was discerned in him, being toward one
of his Menial servants, who justifying himself in what he had done amiss, his
Majesty with some motion told him, that he was an insolent fellow.

Yet this is that Prince whose virtues we have given leave to Foreign Nations
to admire, whilst we our selves have ^ested as well ignorant of his deserts, as
destitute of our own Liberty, whilst either infatuated or blinded by those who
have Tyrannically usurped governments over us, we have been contented to sit
still and see him expul^ed and exiled from his due Rights and Royalties, and
our selves from our Freedom and Privileges.

Nor has God alone been merciful to us in endowing his sacred Majesty with
such Heroic virtues, but he has given us a stock of Noble Princes, who seem
to emulate Virtue in one another, and grow up like Royal Oaks, to maintain the
honor and glory of this Nation, but are yet and have a long time been the
disgrace of it, all the Nations in Europe laughing at the English folly, who
slight that happiness which they might enjoy.

As for the illustrious Duke of York his Fame is spread so far over the World,
that my self have heard the very Turks commend and applaude his Valor which
was so esteemed of among the French, that before he arrived at twenty one years
of Age he was by that King thought worthy the command of Liev. General of his
Army's, which he managed with such care and prudence that seldom any affair he
took in hand, produced not its desired success; and since, his being in
requital of his services, complemented out of that Kingdom of France, though he
has not had such eminent commands conferred on him by the Spaniard, yet have
they always thought him worth the Highest employment and respect.

As for the Duke of Gloucester, he is esteemed by most to be fitter for a
Counselor then a Soldier. His carriage is grave and somewhat severe; of a
Sagace Genious and understanding, and very much prying into State Affairs,
which have made most judge him fitter for a Council board.

These three Princes, are like three Diamonds or Pearls, which we have
ignorantly cast away, and not come to know the worth of them till we come to
want them, Their virtues having made them resplendent throughout all the world,
and rendered them, if we justly consider it, the only means whereby we can
attain to happiness; for what Nation can be more blessed then that which has
for her Prince a just King to Govern, a Valiant Duke to Defend, and a Wise
Counselor to Advise.

FINIS.

