THE IRISH FOOTMAN'S POETRY. OR GEORGE THE RVNNER, AGAINST HENRY THE WALKER, In
defense of John the Swimmer.

Being A Sur-rejoinder to the Rejoinder of the rusty Ironmonger, who
endeavored to defile the clear streams of the Water-Poet's Helicon.

The Author GEORGE RICHARDSON, an Hibernian Pedestrian.

Printed in the year 1641.

TO GEORGE RICHARDSON HIS CVRRANT FRIEND IN any part of the Kings Dominions.
NO more (friend George) shall we see
Thee marching in the Infantr'ie,
Now, thou have gotten greater force,
And mounted on the winged Horse,
After no chariot thou shall run
Henceforth, but that of Phaeton.
H. F.
To GEORGE RICHARDSON the Pedestrian Poet.
WHen first thy lines I read, I did admire
Them like the learning of Promethean fire;
For he, who knows thee have so little Art
Could think that nature should so much impart
To raise thee to the height to vindicate
Th'Aquatique Poet, from the furious hate
Of weavers, tinkers, (through the nose that whistle)
Ironmongers, and Brethren of the bristle?
Now trust me George, this work deserves such praise,
That not to us but unto after days
'T will say thou wer`t a Poet of a maw,
As great, as thy great namesake of the Law.
W. B.
To my ingenuous Countryman the Author.
It Is stranger you would go swift paced steps forsak
And rest a strangers task to undertake
Doubtless you mean to ride hence forth; this matter,
Deserves a horse, if not to ride by water.
T. LL.
GEORGE RICHARDSON the Author to the most ingenious aquatique Poet Mr: JOHN
TAILOR.
SIr though a stranger to your self, your worth
Is known to me, by what you have set forth;
And though I cannot judge, yet I admire
The lively flames of your Phaebean fire;
Which wisemen do approve, none do deprave,
But such as know not fancy, as this slave;
Rusty, as his old iron, dull, as stone,
Or th'anvill, that his ware is wrought upon.
Who stupid slave (by what he never writ
But bought for's money) your undoubted wit,
Would call in question, Sir, my infant muse
(Seeing this slave persist in his abuse;
And knowing, 'twould a great dishonor be
For you to match your ingenuity
With his notorious folly,) speedily
Did undertake to make a swift reply.
Which (soon as my employment did allow
Me time) in two hours space, I did run through.
Upon the title of Walkers Book.
BEhold the Master piece of Walker's wit,
Fancying his friend the Devil here at shit.
Who first with malice did inspire his breast,
And then his first Books matter did suggest.
But it is some silly fiend (as sure as day)
The same perhaps was made an Ass in the play
Long since, but I Am deceived, there is much brave wit
In The play, but Walkers books have none of it.
What are they fit for then, that only rail?
Naught, but to wipe his shitten Devils tail.
1. His view of the transformed Devil.
What wondrous raptures this our Author here
Does dream of wine, who hardly ere drank beer,
Or any thing so mighty Horace's Lire
Tells us what drink does most, what least inspire?
2. His Pedigree.
A Monstrous Birth! sprung from the sheaves of wheat,
Tresh'd out he should have said, for sure the great
Father of this brave Spark some tough blade was,
That cudgelled the corn, and slashed the grass;
For such his base demeanor speaks him, I
Do not detract from the old family
Of Bredsall all this while, nor do I know
Whether he be extracted thence, or no.
Often it is of worthy families the fate,
To send some Children forth degenerate.
But by his manners he should rather be
Of that Ape Carriers affinity
Hight Richard Walker, but called Cherry-lickam,
Whom with his well taught-beast I saw at Wickam
Doing rare tricks, with many a lofty strain
For Englands King, but clapped his Arse at Spain.
Told money, which his Master cannot do;
Yet he a Walker is, and Wanderer too.
But lets admit our Libeller to be
Sprung from the wheaten Bredsall family,
And that the Golden-sheaves that do belong
Unto that family, this Ironmong-
Er may justly challenge for his own, yet he
Has arms, which better fit his quality.
The Arms of his own atcheivement.
A Gridiron passant, on which lies
A Libeller does simbolize
A Cart, that does up Holborne pass,
A sable trivet next, we place
In chief, which you may easily
Conceive, does Tiburne signify,
To seek a Rope weel'e not take pains,
For worst delinquents hang in Chains,
Then for supporters, there shall stand
Two men as true as steel, in hand
They rusty Iron forkes shall weild,
Thus you may blazonize his shield.
2. His Disposition.
IS it not vain? to tax his muse, that writ
Of a bad Subject to discover it
Unto the heedles World; that when they see,
The thing attired in it is deformity,
They then may loath it, that before appeared
Pleasing to them, before the mist was cleared.
Tailor his whore, if rightly understood
Deserves much honor, 'twas his Countrie's good
That set his muse on work, the rogue set forth
In Spanish, is a Book of matchless worth.
Which honest men approve, he that does look
Awry on it, is Subject of the Book.
4. The Encounter.
I Know it is not your custom, to abuse
The peoples ears, with fancies of your muse;
For where there is no invention, strains of wit
Can have no birth, were you endu'd with it
What monsters you would beget alreadi's known
By fathering of these are not your own.
But what you publish here, if we admit
To be your own, Tailor those works has writ,
That a just Catalogue of them will fill,
More leaves, then you have stained with your quill,
Leave then your ostentation, time never saw,
An Eagle dared to combat by a Daw.
5. His Religion.
6. His Hypocrisy.
I Have made a scrutinie, but cannot find
One word in Tailors Book shows him inclined
To Popery, it is true he cannot approve
Of Brownists, nor the Familists of love,
Of Anabaptists, nor of Adamites,
Nor those instruct their audience, when the lights
Are out, and by their own example too
As well as precept, teach them what to do;
Though Ir'nmongers or Feltmakers they be,
Or Cobblers, or what else fraternity.
This being all, it is straing he not invites
Your spleen, that has described the Adamites,
The Brownists conventicle too that writ,
But it is your envy to brave Tailors wit,
He only is accused, although they be
Guilty of as much Popery as he.
Your faith I do not question, nor will make
Much matter of argument, what side you take.
But Taylor's guilty of Hypocrisy,
Because he did comply with misery.
A powerful reason! shame to vent such stuff
Snuffers are sweeter ware, with unquencht snuff.
7. The Church persecuted by water.
A Title (which does promise at the least,
A copious treatise) like that pregnant beast,
That traveled with a mountain, yet brought forth
A little molehill, see the lesser worth!
Of this poor fellow, who can scarce discern
A difference, 'twixt him, did guide the stern
Of the great Bark oth'Church, and him that near
A bigger vessel then an oar did steer.
8. His weakness in judgment
NOw I do pity thee, that dares to tax
Another judgment? when more time 'twill ask
Then was to teach the Ass to speak, assigned,
To render thy dull wits half so refined,
As the well-tuter'd Ape, that is Pupil to
Thy namesake Walker; yet with much ado
Tha'st made an Anagram of thine own name,
And an AEnigma to thou think, what fame?
Will not be due to thee? well thou may scoren
The Dunghill Pamphlets thou set'st forth t'adorne
With th'honoured subscription of the name,
That Is graced, with such an heavenly Anagram.
9. His horrible lies.
ONe Distichon is all the verse has writ
There Is just as many faults, as lines in it.
10. My sincerity to England.
IF you affirm this with sincerity,
Im'e confident in it we do agree.
11. His humble Petition.
What forward impudence is this? to dare
Before those noble Senators to appear
Clad in such rags? if ought against Church or State,
He has offended, with an equal hate
I shall pursue him, or transgressed the laws,
And made unto himself a guilty cause,
Or that it shall appear, in the least word,
He has ^^aduc'd, that loved, and honored Lord;
But if o'th contrary it shall appear,
His conscience and his judgment, were more clear,
And that he did nor Church, nor State traduce,
Nor that most noble Lord; with least abuse;
Then Caesar-like, when Horace did acquit
Himself, before him; then, when against all right,
A base officious Tribune did accuse
The harmeles recreation of his muse;
As, that in mistique Hieroglyphickes, he
Had plotted against the State, some teachery;
Great Caesar gave the Poet, higher place
In's favor, and the Tribune, the disgrace
To wear a pair of Asses ears; so now,
When these great Senators, on Taylor's brow
Read innocence, his merit they shall raise,
By giving thee the whip, and him the bays.
12. The Conclusion.
ANd now friend Walker this, but to prepare
My muse to encounter, if you dare,
With a foote-Poet, enter in the sand,
You, as you have lost by water may by land.
POSTSCRIPT.
ALthough in Ireland I was born and bred
In Englands Church I nourisht am and fed
Therefore let no dull Brownists apprehend
That in defense of Popery I contend;
I do esteem both Sects as most a cursed
But of the twayn I think the Brownist worst.
FINIS.

