JEHOJADAHS JUSTICE AGAINST MATTAN, BAALS PRIEST: OR THE COVENANTERS JUSTICE
AGAINST IDOLATERS.

A SERMON PREACHED upon occasion of a SPEECH, uttered upon Tower Hill.

Wherein you may find his likeness to Mattan rather then to Christ.

His place in John 11.48. charged upon himself.

The weakness of the choice of his Text.

How great cause we have to give thanks.

By J. H. Minister of the Gospel.

JUDGES 5. 31. So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord; but let them that love
him be as the Sun when he goes forth in his might: And the Land had rest
forty years.

LONDON; Printed by M. Simmons for Henry Overton, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Popes-head-Alley. 1645.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL SERGEANT WILD; J. H. wishes grace and peace in
CHRIST JESUS.
WORTHY PATRIOT,
THe life we live we live in God, happy is the improvement of that life that is
lift up to him, and to his ways. It is a glory (above the crown) of the
worthy Kings of Judah, that they prepared their hearts to seek the Lord. What Is
the life of man without comfort? And what greater comfort does man enjoy in
life, but his communion with God? The life of the best is but a pilgrimage; and
a life of service lies upon every man; though the race be short, employment
attends it; if a servant neglect his Lords affairs, he had the honor to be
called a servant, but lost his glory for casting by his industry; how sweet is
their peace that know their Lords command, and cheerfully take up his charge?
Every man is at work, but many mistake their Masters business, they do their
own, and put his name upon it. Servants that love to walk in the dark, are
unfit to attend npon the Lord of light; light and darkness have nocommunion.
This present age affords us full testimony: how do the deeds of darkness
vanish, that past without control not long ago, which in this time of trial
will not endure the touchstone? Men's confidence of their actions is no ground
of their justice, the Judge will search him out that seems just in his own
cause, nor must the Judges, or those that assist them in advancing Justice, be
discouraged, though the impeached challenge them of unjust proceeding. Who
shall be innocent, if the condemneds test may be sufficient to fix a crime?

Sir, I reckon it a part of your honor, that God has conferred upon you, to
be an instrument to bring so great an offender to justice, rather then to be
ensnared by him. You served our Lord Christ in helping to subdue a mountain of
ambition; you have suffered for your love and endeavor, to establish a throne
for Christ, and a throne for the King in righteousness: your labor of love
will not be forgotten; your work is with your God, and your reward in the Lords
hand. Go on and prosper, and God that has made the evil bow before the good,
and the wicked at the gates of the righteous, make you every day more
succesfull.

If this ensuing Subject may yield any refreshing to your spirit, or provoke
the church of Christ to exalt their Lords glory, and sanctify his glorious
Name that has delivered us from so great a burden; my spirit has rest;
rejoicing in the God of our salvation; waiting for further manifestation of
greater consolation. The God of peace fill you with comfort in believing, and
preserve you to his heavenly Kingdom.

Your Worships in all service of love;

JEHOJADAHS JUSTICE UPON MATTAN, BAALS PRIEST.
2 CHRONICLES. 23. 16, 17. And Jehojadah made a Covenant between him and all the
people, and between the King, that they should be the Lords people.

Then all the people went to the house of Baal, and brake it down, and brake
his Altars and his Images in pieces, and slew Mattan the Priest of Baal before
the Altars.


IN this History we have a clear discovery of Gods faithfulness to David, in
keeping promise, which was to support his throne by a supply of issue, out of
which descent the Lord Christ was to arise. Here was now but one life for the
house of David to hold by, and that a tender one in his nurses hands, hunted
after by a bloody persecutresse, who thought she had made him as sure as his
brethren; and so to have devolved the State of Judah to the Kingdom of Israel,
thereby to have made void the Lords Grant. But God had delivered him to more
faithful hands, who virtuously bred him, and in time brought him forth,
anointing him before all the people; And after Athaliahs life had satisfied for
the Kings, then Jehojadah drew the people into a Covenant.

National mercies should draw a people to renew Covenant Observe.
with their God, it has in it a testimony of thankfulness as well as a
binding act to obedience. So that the omitting of it would proclaim us guilty
of swallowing down more mercies then we are thankful for. If it be doubted,
whether it be not too forward to covenant till our mercies are more completed;
you may observe a people entering into Covenant with God, when they were in
expectation of mercies; when the people waited for the settling of the Arc,
Samuel binds them to put away their strange Gods, and Astaroth, and prepare to
serve the Lord only, and he will deliver you out of the hand of the
Philistims, and they did, and served the Lord only, 1 Samuel 7.3, 4.

By this we see there is Scripture-ground for a National Covenant, when our
mercies are made up, or coming; by which a people bind themselves unto a
strait communion with God, and to abjure all false ways. When we esteem the
precepts of God so high, as that concerning all things they are right, then we
must hate every false way, Psalm. 119. 128. He that would raise his heart to
such a degree of walking in covenant with God, shall do well to meditate
David's example, Psalm. 119. 105. to the 112. He sets up Gods Word for his lamp
at home, and lanthorn abroad; he is resolved to walk by no light but Gods; to
fasten the bond of that resolution, that he may perform and keep, he binds
himself by an oath to observe righteous judgments without diversion; but now
he must walk between strivings within and reproaches without: I am afflicted
very much, there the carnal mind grudgeth against strictness; My soul is
continually in my hand, his life in jeopardy to preserve his conscience pure.

In this conflict he makes his address to God.

1. For quickening grace, that he may live and hold on his progress according
to his Covenant.

2. For accepting grace, that he may find in his spirit that he is approved of
God in his way.

3. For feeding grace, that he may still be taught the things that he knows
not.

4. For preserving grace; Lord, said he, the snare of the wicked is laid for
me; I have not yet erred; keep me by thy strength.

5. He exercises discerning grace, and approves his choice of God to be the
best heritage, and his testimonies the rejoicing of his heart.

6. He acts a powerful inclination upon his heart continually, that he may
keep up the grace of perseverance.

By all this we may inform our selves of three things.

1. That Covenanting to cleave to God is the work of such as love communion
with God.

2. There arises great hatred in the world, against them that gather
themselves into so strict a bond of walking with God.

3. There is no possibility of keeping faithfulness and truth with God in
Covenant, against which there is so great opposition, but by a daily renewing
of communion with God, and drawing near to him for a constant supply of grace
of all sorts, to uphold us against the snares that are laid to bring us to
apostasy. But this may suffice for the 16th verse.

Now follows the operations and working of the Covenant, they turn reformers
presently, and fall to work with Baals house.

Here we may observe; Gods Covenant will not admit communion Observe.
with Idolatry or Idolaters: the more the heart is leavened and sweetened with
the Covenant, the more it abhors both it self and others, whatsoever
derogateth from Gods glory. And that it may appear to be the duty of a people
that are entered into Covenant with God, to act their zeal in rooting all that
is odious unto, and that offends God, is evident by that in Deuteronomy. 12.30, 31.
lest the people that were the Lords by Covenant should be ensnared, God forbids
them to enquire how the Nations served their gods; for God was wise enough to
give them the dress of his worship, without borrowing national rites of the
Heathens; therefore the Lord makes a perpetual act to destroy all their places
of worship; he puts words enough in the act without any proviso, Mountains,
Hills, Green Trees, Altars, Pillars, Groves, Graven Images, utterly destroy
their names out of that place. But suppose a Prophet should rise up and
prophecy in Baal, and teach the way of error, what shall be done to him, must
he be destroyed too? Chap. 13. 5. That Prophet shall be put to death, because
he has spoken to turn you away from the Lord your God; So shall ye put evil
from amongst you. But what if son, or daughter, wife, or friend, go about to
seduce? it is death without pity, ver. 8. When the people consented to Elijah,
that the Lord was God; Then, said he, take the Prophets of Baal, let not one of
them escape. I grant, men in hypocrisy may show a fiery disposition against
false worshippers, as Jehu did, but it was not the effect of an holy Covenant,
nor the fruit of a well ordered faith, but a work of the flesh, and a politic
envy against Ahabs way of worship, to win the more credit to that bloody act
of murdering the whole race of the Kings sons. But if you observe the Text
here, it is the fruit of their Covenant, and not out of pride or private
spleen.

More especially we may consider;

First, What they did; They went to the house of Baal; So they (...)
had before, but now they are of another heart; before they went a whoring
after Baalim from the Lord, but now they went with zeal and courage for the
Lord of Hosts, to destroy and to demolish whatsoever had been a snare to them
before: This lesson is evident for our instruction.

It is no shame for men to desert, forsake, and abominate, that Observe.
which in former time was embraced, when God shall reveal unto us that it is a
snare to our perdition: it is no error to forsake an error. If a man walking
after the frame of a carnal heart, had wholly neglected the sanctifying of
himself and his family, by a total omission of calling upon God, be now
convinced that he cannot escape the pouring out of Gods wrath upon him and his
family; it will be his shame to persist in his sloathfull neglect, but his
glory to raise up himself, and return to God. Some men count forsaking of
lying vanities and superstition, fickleness and wavering; this is a method of
the Serpent, to hinder conversion, to accuse the growing in grace, and in the
knowledge of our Lord and Savior, to be instabilitie, whereas the Apostle
urges it as a special help to keep up steadfastness.

Secondly, The time when they went: It does not relate so much Consid. 2.
to the time of the day or the year, nor the precise day nor year, as from
the time that they entered into Covenant. It does not appear whether it were
the same day, or on the morrow, or at what set season, but after they had been
at the house of the Lord to renew their Covenant, they went to the house of
Baal.

When God gives covenant-light, men ought to walk with God Observe.
in covenant-strength: we must pray, and vote, and give, and contend, and in
every thing act with covenant-zeale, and covenantfaith, and covenant-love, to
exalt his glory who has so often looked upon us with favor. I say, from that
time that we renew our says and love to God by Covenant, we solemnly protest
to walk after God with strength, and to stir up our whole might to serve the
Lord against the mighty impediments that oppose his glory. When Paul was
gathered unto Christ, out of the wild wast of such as trusted in themselves,
his lot was for a season to refresh himself in Athens; time was he had an
Athenian wit, and could have jeered with the nimblest, but being in covenant
with Christ, he acts with covenant zeal for Christ, his spirit was moved when
he saw their superstition. When God has revealed unto us the glory of the
Lord Christ, and that the striving of men is but to oppose the brightness of
his rising: the virtue of our covenant clothes with a strength to resist
oppugners of our Lords throne. Iehojada happily might pity Mattan as he was an
Israelite; but when an Israelite should turn Baalists, justice must proceed.
Covenanters are tender of their Lords honor, they can bear with any thing but
what pollutes his name, and Worship, and that stands against his glory. When
we are girded unto God by covenant, we should look upon our selves as Temples
of the holy Ghost; if any defile the Temple of God, as the body by drunkenness
or whoredom, the tongue by blasphemy or contempt, him will God destroy in fury
for breach of covenant: with what furious rebukes suppose ye will he proceed
against them, that cast from them his covenant, and depart from him? Increase
in covenant-light, that ye may renew in covenant-strength.

Thirdly, who went; All the people; for all were entered into Consid. 3.
covenant, they had all vowed obedience unto God, to live and die together in
the cause of God, therefore they went as one man, the Rulers zeal gave life to
the people to take courage to follow their example; as it is reported of David,
that whatsoever the King did, pleased all the people, 2 Samuel 3.36.

They that enter into covenant with God, enter into a mutual Observe.
covenant one with another, to walk with one heart toward the Lord. Ezra 10.4.
Arise, for the matter belongs unto thee, we also will be with thee. They that
were for Christ after his resurrection and ascension, were altogether with one
accord in one place. These are the days wherein God will assemble the
Kingdoms, to power out upon them his indignation: but then he promises to the
people that engage themselves to him by covenant, to turn to the people a pure
language, that they may all call upon the name of the Lord, and serve him with
one consent, Zeph. 3.8, 9. The Lord is one, his worship is one, our covenant is
one, ought not then our hearts to agree in one? If men in covenant divide
against themselves, and despise one another, for the rage of their tongues
Egypt shall deride them, Hos. 7.16. There is nothing divides men so much as
when either they strangle a public heart in the crowd of private interests, in
seeking to secure self, and leaving the public to hazard. If we let Gideon
conquer, thinks the house of Ephraim, we shall eclipse our glory, Judge. 8.1.
Or else, when all consent not to put away detestable things, when one part is
to put them away, another to keep them, hence grows the strife, Ezekiel. 11.18,
19, 20, 21. They that are of one heart, will keep Gods ordinances, but they
whose heart walks after the heart of their detestable things, are liable to
answer Gods vengeance for their contempt.

The fourth circumstance is, what they did at the house of Baal. They did not
gaze about, lamenting, and crying pity that a thing of that cost should in one
instant be demolisht; that was a posture now fit for Babylonish Merchants, Rev.
18.16, 17. but they set to work with all their might, first, to demolish the
house; next, to execute the Priest: the house they brake down, and the Altars
and Images in pieces. The Priest they slew before the Altars, that were the
delectable things of his heart: their eye did not spare, nor did they show pity
upon any thing that had the face of Idolatry.

A people covenanting for Reformation, must abolish all that is Observe.
idolatrous; So did Josiah, 2 King 23.4. Nehemiah found that Tobijah an
Ammonite had gotten him a Chamber to lodge his household stuff in, within the
Courts of the house of God: Now this was contrary to law: for an Ammonite might
not come into the house of God for ever, therefore he cast him and his household
stuff clean out, Nehem. 13.1. 8. For 1. God will not be served by the halfes,
Christ left not the work of redemption half done, and half undone; Agrippa
was half a Christian and half a heathen, Laodicea was half a Church and
half no Church, the work of salvation is a work that must be wrought out; and
he that will keep the feast of Christ, must purge out all filibinesse of flesh
and spirit. 2. The house that is but half swept, is never clean, and a Church
that is but half purged, is never pure. If a wife should leave many lovers,
and retain but one beside her husband, that is brand enough of harlotry. 3.
That which is left will make way for that which is cast out, to return: a
stump of a broken tooth may put a man to as much pain as if the whole were
hollow. 4. That which is cast out, will cry out of injustice, if as bad be
reserved, favored, and set up. Demolisht Abbeys are grieved that Cathedrals
flourish in their ruins; and Cardinals quarrel at that justice that casts
them out, yet keep their Bishops in like Lordly honor. The heart that is
prepared to exalt Christ and his glory, is fully bent to level every mountain
that stands in the way to his glory.

But if any demurre and plead, We could willingly endeavor and rejoice to have
all manner of superstition and Idolatry removed; but this slaying work is
terrible, and men's lives are precious.

It must be answered, 1. That malefactors lives are not to be valued: 2. They
that so plead, may as well say, I am weary of my gross sins, and I could
wish they were all mortified, but might we not get a dispensation for that old
man of a corrupt nature to be preserved in life? 3. Better one cut off, then
that a whole Nation should incur the wrath of God for sparing one that is
guilty. Cruelty is the judgment decreed against rebellion, Pro. 17.11. and 19.
19. A man of great wrath shall suffer punishment: for if thou deliver him, yet
thou must do it again. Sin that is unpunisht is as good as cherisht. 4. The
Law binds as well to judge the person that seduceth, as to condemn idolatry,
Deuteronomy. 13.5. albeit Josiah spared the lives of the Priests of Judah, yet he slew
all the Priests that belonged to the Idols of Samaria, 2 Kings 23. 9. 20. When
Hananiah had taught rebellion against the Lord, God put him to death, because
men would not, Ierem. 28. 16. 17. There Is ground therefore for this conclusion.

A people that have covenanted to keep righteousness, and do Observe.
justice, must not spare when God condemns. If therefore it shall be demanded
why the Rulers, and all in covenant with them, should be so zealous and forward
to have Mattan slain? It was not that they delighted to shed blood, as they
that in their anger dig'd down a wall. Iehoiadah was not moved with emulation,
as one that would be competitor with him for Court honor, which peradventure
Baals faction would suggest, that he put Mattan to death that he himself might
rule as a Lord in his stead: but the truth is, God had given sentence Mattan
should die, and they had covenanted to do justice.

Object. It is a bitter covenant that binds men to shed blood.

Answ. Gods covenant is bitter against none but such as are rebellious.

But what probable grounds were there why Mattan should be put to death?

1. He was a Priest of Baal, and had taken Orders to serve those Idols, he was
a professed idolater, which was death.

2. He was Queen Athaliahs favorite, and did strengthen and obdurate the Queen
in her error.

3. He was not content to infect Israel with idolatry, but came over into
Judah, and sought to poison that State also, that under pretense of uniformity,
he might join both Kingdoms in Apostasy.

4. It is probable he was of counsel with Athaliah to make away the King, and
afterward to lay hands on the Kings children; by affinity with Ahabs house,
Ahaziah was persuaded to join in an unnecessary war, wherein he was slain,
chap. 22. 9. and afterward cruel hands seized on the Kings children, hoping
thereby to devolve the Kingdom of Judah to Israel for want of issue.

If it be objected, that that was Athaliahs fact: It Is like enough so, but
though the fact be atttibuted to one that is eminent in the plot, yet it is
probable that more were of counsel; and if any, it is very likely the Priest
would not be left out of the conspiracy.

5. It is probable he perished in impenitencie, was proud and obstinate,
without any remorse for his error, counting it honor to die before his Altars,
and therefore excluded himself from mercy.

6. It Is probable he justified the way of the house of Ahab, and magnified that
way of worship to be the only true pattern, opposing and scorning at the
present Reformation that God had wrought by Jehojadah in the State of Judah,
and thereby sought to kindle sedition in the peoples heart, against those whom
God had raised up to be their helpers. Now if these things were found in him,
who could without injustice clear him from the sentence of death?

Peradventure this or the like might be the plea that the Priest of Baal might
use before his death: You the people of this City are very forward to break
down the house of this worship, where formerly your Anoestors worshipped, and
you your selves not long since spent your devotions; but now you cry out upon
the Rulers to break it down, and to shed the blood of the Prophets that
taught you, but God will require it. To the former part it has been said, that
it is no error to turn from dumb idols to serve the living God, and that it is
but just to demolish idols and their dens. To the latter clause let it be
thus answered: If it had been righteous blood that had been shed, there had
been cause to fear, or if they had favored him whom God condemned, there had
been equal danger: For he that condemns the just, and he that justifies the
wicked, even both are abomination to the Lord: but to execute justice on them
whom God has sentenced to death, is no crime.

Whereas that place of John 11. 48. is made use of, thus: Men are afraid, that
if they let this man alone, the Romans will come, and that Popery will
prevail, then they will take away our place and our nation: but it proved the
contrary; for after they had put that man to death, than the Romans came and
vanquished the City? 1. The place is alledgad to reproach the people that cry
for reformation and justice; but the words are the high Priests, who was
jealous his glory would not stand long, if Christ and his reformation were
tolerated, and therefore rested not till he was crucified; and then the place
is strong against the alledger; he that under pretense, if the people should
believe in Christ, the Romans will come, take occasion to persecute Christ,
and put him to death, lies liable to the justice of God to be taken away
himself. 2. It is true that Jerusalem was destroyed because it shed the blood
of the Prophets, and of the Lord Jesus, but not for doing justice upon Mattan,
Baals Priest: upon you shall come all the righteous blood that has been shed,
but none of the idolatrous: men shall never answer God for that which is not a
crime.

Consider this, it may be this Priest of Baal had been the occasion of the
death of many of Gods messengers and servants, for opposing his idolatrous
courses: as the high Priests were of the death of Christ, for they provoked the
people to cry out upon Pilate that Christ might be crucified: now what way
could people and Rulers take to free the nation from the guilt of the blood of
Gods servants, then to sacrifice him to Gods justice who was the offender?
which when they had done, the City was quiet, 2 Chronicles. 23. v. 21. Caiphas
therefore has spoken the truth in this sense, It is expedient that one man
should die for the people, rather then that the whole nation perish by
contracting the guilt of a malefactor.

But suppose that Mattan should take it upon his death that his conscience
cleared his innocence, and that he should comfort himself in the example of
others that have suffered death.

1. Every way of man is right in his own eyes, but God pondereth the spirit;
Paul's conscience permitted him to make havoc of the Saints: was Paul therefore
innocent? when he was converted he judged it persecution: what will it be then
at Gods tribunal?

2. When God gives over men to impenitencie, and to choose their delusions,
answering according to the Idols and dreams of their own heart, they count it
their great honor to live and die in their own principles; that which in the
balance of the Sanctuary is obstinacy, they deem constancy, and reckon it the
greatest shame that is, to confess the least guilt. As he that being urged to
seek peace by the merits of Christ, when he was near his death, rejected the
exhortation, crying out, that that was the way to overthrow all that they had
built.

3. It is the policy of the old Serpent, and his great advantage, to harden
the condemned in their error, even unto death, as thereby to raise a scandal
and hatred of their Judges, falsely suggesting to unstable minds, that those
Judges cannot be innocent that condemn the guiltless: so likewise to obdurate
the ignorant in their blindness, by beholding one persisting to death in
maintenance of that which they think the truth.

4. It is easy for men of learning to make use of any thing, but yet to come
short of true comfort of things they know: malefactors and martyrs are not
alike in their cause, though they are in their sufferings, strangers shall not
intermeddle with their joy, Steven witnessed a good confession of Christ before
his Judges; he that would run parallel in comfort at death, must hold equal
race of integrity in life, else though the baptism be equally bloody, the
resurrection will greatly differ.

First, adore his divine Majesty, who has magnified his onmipotent Application.
arm, and infinite wisdom in the sight of his people at this day; the
believers in Sion will no doubt worship in heart, and exalt the Lord who has
done a mavelous and wonderful thing before the Saints, in one day he has
gotten himself the victory over Baals house, images, worship and Priests; by
one concurrent vote he has cut off the terror of nations, and the prop where
on he built his religion and worship. When God comes down in fury, he makes the
mountains flow and tremble at his presence. Since the beginning of the world
men have not heard nor seen a God like thee that does so prepare for him that
waits for him, thou meetest him that rejoices and works righteousness,
but those that turn aside to crooked paths, the Lord leads forth with the evil
doers, that he may shut the doors, and feast his Israel with peace. He looks
too low that sees no more then a man taken out of the way; the horse and his
rider, the man and his pomp is descended; he who smote the people in wrath
with a continual stroke, he that ruled the nations in anger, is persecuted and
none hinders; yea, the whole earth is at rest, and breaks forth into
singing: for Lucifer the son of the morning, is cut down to the ground,
which did weaken the nations, Isai. 14.6.7. 12. Adore him who executes
righteousness and judgment for all that are oppressed.

But secondly, let all the earth tremble before him, who is able to set his
foot upon the high places of the earth, and to crush them and their power to
nothing in a moment, a month shall devour them, he will famish all the gods
of the earth, and the powers against him shall come to naught, he will subdue
the mighty, and bring down the Spear-men, and scatter the people that delight
in war: we worship him that can do good or evil, he can bring to the grave
and make alive; he will make the evil bow before the good, and the wicked at
the gates of the righteous. The turning of things upside down are in his hands.
It was Mattans yesterday, and to day Jehojadahs, Baals lease was out, and now
pure worship was at liberty, to run in its own channel. Improve freedom, and
stand in awe, prize religion, and fear to provoke the Lord to cancel our free
grant. Hitherto he has brought us with great joy and trembling, strengthen
steadfastness, lest he turn us back to the wilderness; let no man's heart fail
him for the accusations of an enemy, that calls petitioners for justice
seditious, and such as convince him of crime, to be witnesses that seduce the
Judges, but hold on integrity, and love righteousness, and keep judgment at
all times, Remember covenant.

Thirdly, Acknowledge with heartiest thankfulness the loving kindness of the
Lord, the goodness of our Lord Jesus to his Saints at this day. He has snared
the wicked by the work of their own hands, and in the thing wherein they dealt
proudly, the Lordhath set himself above them: When the decree was sealed to cut
off the Jews, there was general mourning, but when Haman becametheir ransom,
there was great joy: The righteous shall rejoice when be sees the vengeance;
and when he washes his feet in the blood of the wicked, he shall say, There is
a reward for the righteous; for there is a God that judges the earth, Psalm.
58.10, 11. Have we not cause to see, narrowly to look, and to consider this
great and wondrous work, in taking off so great an enemy; and to say, Is this
the man that made the earth to tremble, that did shake Kingdoms? Isa. 14. 16.
The seed of evil doers shall never be renowned, ver. 20.

How should we increase our joy, by considering what in times past he did,
which he shall never do? He shall no more play the beast against the Lamb; nor
set up superstition above worship; nor open a door to thrust out holiness,
and let in profaneness; nor accuse strictness, as hypocrisy; and cry up
liberty for religion; He shall no more give liberty to profane the Subbath;
nor set up May-poles as his pillars, to proclaim all strict observing of the
Sabbath to be Jewish; or rear them up as spears and weapons of war, against
the holiness of that day; He shall no more set up Candlesticks, and put down
Catechizing; nor deifie singingservice, and suppress Lectures; nor tolerate
plays, and suppress christian liberty in private communion for fasting, to
increase faith and renew repentance; nor countenance men in profaneness, and
convent men as offenders to his tribunal, for sanctifying their families in
conceiving prayers; He shall no more watch opportunities against the Watchmen,
and faithful Pastors of the Land, that were the Lords husbandmen, to turn
many to righteousness; He shall no more remove them from their Congregations,
by suspensions, extrusions, forcing to banishment, by imprisonment, by
affamishment, by death; nor make their lives grievous by threats and scorns;
He shall no more seduce the Kings of the earth; nor delude great ones; nor
overawe the Judges, to cause wrong judgment to proceed; nor terrify the
Counselor, that he dare not plead for his client; nor slay the fatherless in
judgment; nor condemn the guiltless; He shall no more exalt the proud, be a
terror to the just, a vexation to the thirsty soul, in taking away the bread
of life from Congregations that faint for the word of consolation to build them
up in faith; He shall no more sow fedition, set Kingdoms on fire, raise war
against the peaceable, despise dominions, nor study to subvert supreme
Judicatures. In a word, he shall no more in any wise Lord it over Gods
heritage, not sit upon the mount of the Congregation in the sides of the North,
Isa. 14. 13. for the Lord has swept him away with the besome of destruction,
ver. 23. Now what is our duty, but to rejoice in the God of our salvation?

Would one imagine, there could live so much impudence so near a sudden death,
as for a man (so eminent an enemy of all righteousness in his life, an
apptossour in an high nature, a persecutor of rich and poor, that set their
faces toward Sion) I say for him (in an open place, on the Scaffold of death,
before such a confluence of people of this City, that have had such open
testimony of his pride and cruelty) to justify himself by the example of our
Lord Jesus? for wherefore else were those words chosen, Heb. 12. 1, 2. and this
gloss, that he despised the shame for Jesus? Durst any but a spirit past holy
fear and humility, compare himself with Christ in that particular of his
sufferings, his beheading with Christ's crucifying, and his ignominy to Christ's
undeserved shame? Weigh but the imparitie of the parallel, when you have
considered one not well shapen passage, Christ despised the shame for me, and
God knows I despise the shame for Christ; if the Speech be comparative, as he
for my example, so I by his example, and no more, then he died a Socinian, not
a Protestant. But how unlike are the sufferers? Christ for the joy that was fet
before him, was going to his Father; but this man for griese that he could live
no longer to vex Christ in his members, was going to the tribunal of him whom
he had pierced: In Christ's mouth was found no guile; under this man's lips were
nothing else but deceit and strise: Christ endured the Cross in obedience to
his Fathers will, and as our Surety; but this man despised the cross as a
fool goes laughing to the stocks: Christ despised the shame, as being no way
conscious of desert; but this man endured the shame, as the just wages of his
ambition and pride: Christ entered into his glory, and laid down his reproach;
but this man laid down his honor at one blow, and lives under perpetual
ignominy: Christ prayed for them that cried him down to be crucified; but this
man has branded a famous City with sedition for praying for Justice on the
Kingdoms disturbers: Christ endured the contradiction of sinners; but this man
sought to set dissension between two Houses, in clearing his Judges, and
condemning them that accused him unto them: finally, Christ died as a Lamb; but
this man as a fox, whom Christ the Lord of glory has taken away, never to
destroy his vines any more: So let all thine enemies perish, O Lord, that when
it goes well with the righteous the City may rejoice, and when the wicked
perish there may be shouting, Prove. 11. 10.

But fourthly, In as much as when God chooses to feed men with their own
delusion, and to leave them under impenitency, then they justify themselves in
the way of their error, and glory in their shame; Mattan esteemed it his
renown to die for his Altars, and through the blindness of his judgment,
after the ransacking of his heart with his own dark lantern, could find
nothing that he had done with all his Baaliticall innovations, that was
contrary to the pure worship of God, nor his conspiracy with Athaliah against
the State, nor any thing that he had done could proclaim him guilty of that
death that he suffered; we may

1. Fear the judgment of an hardened heart, for it can neither blush, nor
repent, nor give glory to God by confessing sin, but deliver up a man to the
treasures of wrath.

2. Let Us be careful what foundations we lay, for men live according to their
principles, the things that are bred with us, we hardly part from; when we are
called to question for them, we are obstinate in defense of them, and rather
choose to suffer with them then to be severed from them; an heretic will burn
with his heresy: when men are drunk with error, though God send plagues on
every side, yet they that are not slain with the plague, repent not of their
murders and their fornications, Rev. 9. 20, 21. they that live in error, will
lie down in the shame.

3. Let the testimony of truth be dearer to us then our lives, by how much the
more we see proud men love their errors to the death; they dye for that which
deceives them, but they that dye for the truth of Christ, have Christ to
comfort them; men that dye for their error, complement with Christ, rather
then call upon him to save them, but they love their error, and not Christ;
but it is love to our Redeemer, that carries the soul above sufferings.

To conclude, fifthly, Let us not be secure upon the remove of an enemy, lest
out of the Serpents root should come a Cockatrice, Isa. 14. 29. When Mattan is
slain, Satan is not cut off, the Prince of darkness keeps his seat, when the
ministers of Satan are brought under; cleave to Convenant, and stand upon your
watch; remove not from your steadfastness, but renew your graces continually;
cool not in your love, but kindle in spirit and fervor unto Christ for ever;
let Rulers wax valiant for the truth, for the Lord is their helper; let the
people rejoice, and give God the glory of subduing them that rise up against
us: there is nothing that we should seek the ruin of, so much as that which
opposes the advancement of Christ's glory; for fear the Serpents brood should
break forth into a viperous generation, it is good to spoil the vipers neast;
and when the people that were under a cloud see light, let them confess unto
God, thou have multiplied the nation of them that rear thee, and not increast
the joy of their enemies, therefore we joy before thee, according to the joy
of harvest; he that does less then joy in the downfall of Christ's foes, may
pass amongst them for a friend; let no man's heart melt, as if Mattan dyed a
martyr; If any repent of the deeds that he has done, and seek his peace with
Christ, whom he has persecuted, as well as peace with God by Christ, who would
not rather rejoice then be offended at conversion? breach with God Christ makes
up, for offense against Christ the Spirit makes intercession; but if the Spirit
be refused, there is none left to make request to him, and so the work of
mediation between God and the soul falls: If any man walk in communion with
God, and Christ, and the Spirit of grace, who would not rejoice in his peace
when he lies down in his bed of rest, but one that is ignorant? But if a
person make no more profession of knowledge of God and Christ, but only
because it is the profession of the Nation, nor at any time makes addresses to
God but in times of horror, and then rather seeking for safety, than
holiness as God is holy; who would conceive that worship to proceed from faith
and love, but he that does not understand the way of the Spirit of life? Cloth
not proud offenders with the robe of Martyrs, thereby to take occasion to
contemn the justice that God executes: when transgressors are cut off, let
God have the glory, and let all that love the Lord rejoice, when the
adversaries of Jefus Christ are brought to their doom; To him that reigns be
glory.

FINIS.

