Medicaster Medicatus, Or a Remedy for the ITCH OF SCRIBBLING.

The First Part.

Written by a Country Practitioner in a Letter to one of the Town, and by him
prefaced, and published, for cure of John Brown; one of his late Majesty's
Ordinary Chyrurgeons, containing an account of that vain Plagiary, and Remarks
on his several Writings.

Wherein his many Thefts, Contradictions, Absurdities, Gross Errors, Ignorance,
and Mistakes, are displayed, and diverse Vulgar Errors in Chyrurgery and Anatomy
refuted.

By James Young, Chyrurgeon.

Licensed

Aug. 24th, 1685. Rob. Midgley.



LONDON, Printed for Gabriel Kunholt, at the Kings Head, at Charing Cross, over
against the Muse: 1685.

Ars non habet inimicos, praeter Ignorantes.
A Rod for the Back of a Fool.
IN every point of your Art, carry your self wisely, unadvisedly to ERR
therein, you will as readily be accounted amongst the number of FOOLS, of which
sort of people I am afraid we have too many at this day in our Nation;
Surgery is crept into acquaintance with such Strange Creatures, and owned in
its profession by such mean spirits, among whom the name with the Art, is but
small and little.

John Brown of Wounds, page 136. The truth is, such Ignorant Pretenders cures,
may more properly be called corruptions, and their judgments, Ignorance plumed
out, and set forth with the best advantage of impudence.

Idem ibidem, page 17. The Authors unavoidable absen^^ from the Press, may
occasion some Errors to pass uncorrected, which the Reader is desired to amend
with h^^ Pen, as they occur to him.

The Publishers Preface TO THE READER.
Giving a brief account of Mr. B. and his three latter Books, of Glands,
Struma's, and Muscles, together with an Apology for thus exposing them.
THE Author of the following Animadversions, observing with great Regret, his
Art abused, and its rules, and methods corruptly represented by the Impudent
scribbling Medicasters of the Age and Nation, whereby Tyro's and young men are
traduced, and misled into ill Principles, and infected with erroneous
Institutions; thought it his duty to take upon him, not only to expose the
deceivers, but set things right, and rectify the abuses, in the same public
manner they were made, and because none among the many blind guides, this age
has produced, seems so obnoxious, and proves so confident an imposer of false
principles, or such a misguider of youth, into erroneous and defective methods
of practice, as Mr Brown, he has singled him out, as the first example, and
fittest subject for chastisement.

Not provoked thereto by any partia^ cause, or byast by personal quarrel, for
he does solemnly aver, that he is utterly a stranger to the man, has received
no particular affront, or injury by him, that their abode, and places of
business are very many Miles distant, that no competition, interference of
practice, or other cause whatever, which makes men prejudiced, and quarrel,
(except those of his Book,) has incited his resentments; but for the sake of
truth, the credit of his Art, the advantage of youth, and the refuting several
vulgar errors revived or broached by him, and such other artless Writers he
has made it his province, to scourge them out of the Press.

And if among other abuses he has endeavored to redress, he has contributed
any thing to the breaking that deceitful practice, of famous men's gilding
poisonous Books with imprimaturs, and staking their starling credit in vouch of
base coin, and by prefixing their known names, set off, and make vendible
rotten Books, he will account that he has done the public good service, and
bafled as great a cheat and imposture, as any the World endures, for such
certainly is the humor of vouching at a venture, for the honesty and ingenuity
of men, or Books, (which appear to be the present fashion,) whereby those of
the greatest learning, and abilities, unawares contribute to the propagation of
the most notorious follies, and errors, and such as they would disown, and be
ashamed of, if they would but consider, and inspect before they praise. Its
certainly a fatal complement, and pernicious courtesy, to flatter fools into an
opinion their works are complete, or publicly say of the most erroneous
writings, what the best do not deserve.

Even death begins to fear thy searching Art,
Least thou should find a balm against his dart. T. W. his dog'rill comium,
Preface Adenochoiradelogia.

Is an hyporhole when said of any man, but amost extravagant clawing, when
written (as it is) of one so wretchedly Ignorant, and erroneous, as the Author
of Adenochoiradelogia.

I am sorry and ashamed, men should be so regardless of their own credit, so
negsgent in matters of public importance, so unjust to their friend, (if they
are such whom they applaud,) and act ^o much like Mountebanks, by making large
Encomiums, on notorious cheats, and praise to the People, what would mischief
them if they use it.

This is not said with any design to affront, but to reprove them, for that
detestible custom, which sprang from a sort of People I am loath to name, and
they would be ashamed to imitate, I beg pardon for having said thus much, it
was necessary for me to remove the only thing that looks reputably in the
writings of our imposture, and take off their varnish, the better to expose the
rottenness it hides, were I sure they would excuse this just freedom, Mr. B.
should be as certain of his Antagonists, of which however if he be very greedy,
and desirous, undoubtedly his Encomiaster Mr. G -- y, by the help of the Stars,
can inform him.

Certainly this undertaking of my friend, though it be severe, is not
ungenerous; Its every honest man's duty to be a Champion for truth, and rescue
mankind from such mischievous errors, as those pernicious and anskilful
institutions convey, for being like common Nusances, the law allows every man
a right to remove, and destroy them, at least to antidote such venomous
positions, as being of daily use, may in tract of time destroy more lives, than
desease, or battle. An error of this nature, is not like those in Geometry,
Astronomy, or matters of mere speculation, wherein a man may err without hurt
to himself, or others, but like poisoning of fountains, of infinite danger to
the public, and therefore every good man's duty, and interest to suppress, and
prevent from spreading.

But although I do approve, I could not presently prevail with my self, to be
concerned in this undertaking, not that the man is any way terrible, but from
an opinion I had, that it was as needless as its object was contemptible, his
faults and follies, methought were so manifest, his thefts so obvious, his
vaunts and pretenses, so plainly precarious, that I could not think they would
escape the observation, and censure of wisemen, and for others, I thought them
too like him, to receive any impressions to his prejudice.

I thought it also an unmanly quarrel, and a conquest that would deserve no
glory, or triumph, to overcome a man unable to weild his sword, or manage his
weapon; its too much like killing a dead man, or a late Authors writing a Book,
to confute a man he thought had no brains.

Beside which, I was discouraged by the man himself, from being concerned in
hi^ refutation, by an observation he tell^ us Preface to his Book of Struma's.
he had ever made, that never yet any entered the lists with an Ignorant
bugbear, but he lost much by the encounter. This perhaps was cunningly
insinuated and (like a stumbling block,) laid in the way of Critics, to
prevent, and discourage them from engaging against him, or looking too narrowly
into his writings.

I doubt also, lest instead of cooling the Opinion he (and only he truly) has
of his great performances, I might envigorate his conceit, that he would pride
himself, and become more elevated to observe his Books regarded; and thought
worth notice, and public opposition, a pleasure which some men by a strange
Antiparistasis have conceived, and so vehemently thirsted after the glory of a
public opponent, that they have entered the lists against themselves, I (mean
not Richard; against Baxter, nor Titus, against Oats, such as have done it for
want of a good memory, through heat, or inadvertency, but) designedly, with
full intent to inhance their own reputation.

I have known other both men and Books, contract credit from public censure,
and acquire esteem, by being proscribed, and executed by Authority, of which
its said the famous Author of Leviathan was very sensible, when he complacently
said, the day his Book was burnt by the common hangman at Paris, that they had
given it the greatest reputation it was capable of.

But I considered the necessity of chastizing a wanton unskilful pretender, one
whose insipid, spiritless writings, could not flame by opposition, or
strengthen by recompass.

But that consideration which most of all engaged my pen was sense of duty, to
the young Tyroes, and studiers of our Art, whom I thought, I ought to disabuse,
lest being tempted by the gayty of the Frontis-peice, the recommendations of so
many eminent men, and the reputation of being written by one of the Kings
Surgeons, they might too greedily suck in those many errors those Books
contain, wherewith being once imbued servabent odorem testa diu.

To which end, his Character being no way serviceable, nor yielding any light,
and because I could not give an account of him, that would be to his credit; I
lai^ aside that part till I found he usurpt (...) intollerably, soared so high,
and put on u^ so audaciously a false ambitious history o^ himself, then I grew
impatient and angry could not forbear (though it may seem ungenerous,) showing
the falsehood of his several pretenses, and how in them, as in a^ other things,
he has imposed upon us and is much inferior to the man he describes himself
to be.

Enough having been said in the remark on his two first Volums, to discover the
Ignorance, and disability of the man, and because the following three Books,
are o^ things not so strickly Chirurgical, and o^ less danger in practice, I
have not made my disquisitions on them, neither so particular or critical,
(although they are altogether a^ liable,) but by a succinct account of them* and
some few specimens of their severa^ faults, show that they are of a piece, an^
the same make, that his hand is not mended, nor his head righter, but that the
Topics of Ignorance, Plagiary, Errors, etc. comprehend the whole of them, and
that he has been here more insolent and usurping; bad he been less arrogant, I
had spared him in the point of History, or Character, but he ought to be taught
more modesty, and the World furnished with another instance, that great
pretenders, and the confident men, are not always the ablest.

Adenochoiradelogia, is the third Book in order of his writings; it pretends to
treat of Glands, and Struma's, and the Author, that he is one of his Majesty's
Chirurgions in ordinary, which vain empty title, was procured him by a very
near relation of his, who being of private use to some Courtiers, procured him
that nudum nomen for her Brother. Of this little title, there were many men
possessed in the late Kings time, who (as our pretender) had neither sallary,
fee, board-wages, or stipend, were not obliged to any waiting, or attendance,
had no manner of Privilege, or advantage thereby, not so much as Sanctuary
from the Catchpoles AS HE WELL KNOWS. And so far from being the least step to
any preferment, that should all the late Kings actual Surgeons have died before
him, this airy Character, would not have given them any better claim to
succeed, than that of a mere stranger.

And although their number was very many, not one of them to be found in the
Roll of that Princes Servants, as is evident in all the Editions of the Present
State of England, and particularly the 14 or last, part 1 page 179. where a^
the Kings Servants, and particularly hi^ Chirurgions (which are but three) ar^
named, this being written by Dr. Chamberlain, who being very conversant a^
Court, may be depended on as Authentic.

The Patent prefixed to this Book, prohibiting any from selling it without the
Authors license, is as easy and insignificant a purchase, as that for his
froathy title. In the jumbling Epistle Dedicatory, which he presumes to make to
his grace the Duke of Ormond, he has a delicate punning complement, on the
name of that Illustrious Person, which smelling rank of the Academy of
Complements, I will here insert, and as your graces name does carry in it the
Golden World, so your puissant nature, does bear the rich pearl of inestimable
value.

He prefaceth this learned treatise, with a pile of hard words, and abstruse
notions, stolen partly from Helmont, Sylvius, etc. but mostly from the Ch
miasters of the age, and so confusedly jargon'd, as if his brains had no more
Symetrie, than the un^ickt Cub of a Bear.

Herein he asserts, heat is natures principal AGENT in the World, the TWO
ENGINES of natural motion that the Spirits are BOUNDLESS as to limits,
spreading themselves into ^iquifaction, compares the solid parts to earth, and
calls them the primum frigidum, -- this DIAPHANIOUS body of man, being much
Bless us! what will he make of man before he leave comparing? See page 10. Of
his Book of Tumors, and the remarks thereon, in the following disco r se.
like a looking glass, heat by the Rays of the Sun, and drawn up by its
likeness, -- urine, and sweat, he accounts among the excellent balsamic
liquids of man's body, -- phlegm is a crude humor, the crude part of the blood;
but not an excrementitious humor. -- This, with abundance more such wild, crude
affirmations, rudely set down, compose his preface, wherein their occurring
very little belonging to Surgery and Anatomy, (nor indeed to sense, or
ingenuity,) I pass on to the tract of Glandules, wherein he asserts diverse
things, contrary not only to what he had delivered in his former Books, but
even in the same, steals as notoriously, writes as erroneously, and ignorantly,
and translates from his Authors, as falsely, as he is discovered to do in his
first Books. I will give you a few instances, as I discover^ them in once
looking over that tract: for must confess I wanted patience to read oftener, his
style is so broken, his way of expression so confused, and his notion so sill
stolen, and absurd, that it renders a Reade^ passage through it, as uneasy, as
traveling the Alps, and as dry and barren, (...) the Arabian Deserts.

His errors are too numerous to be r^counted, much less confuted in a prefac^
that shall be the work of a second part o^ this Book, except his future modesty
suffe^ this to suffice. In the interim, compare hi^ with Wharton, Diomerbroeck,
or an new Anatomist, and you will presently fin^ by them, that he understands
not the nature of the Glandules, (although it be the subjec^ of which he treats,
is very manifest from his fine and general accounts of them page 4, 7, etc. he
calls them scavengers to suck up the excrementitious humors by which Sperm,
Chyle, Milk, and the mos^ refined elaborate liquors of the body, are a^ once
thrown to the dunghill, page 6. h^ defines them (among other general qualities)
to be Friable, yiedling an OLEAGINOUS humor thence extilling, and do SELDOM
leave the body, by which he discovers himself Ignorant of the common
^^stinction into friable, and tenacious; ^akes tears, and a thousand Lympid
li^ors more Oily, and suggests as if the ^landules, do sometimes leave the ^dy.

In the same page he affirms, Glandules, ^^d hair have one use, that the latter
(...) way result from, and discover the ^^rmer, that neither are to be met in
^^dry part of the body. So that he is ^ainly Ignorant of the Glandules of the
^^in, and argues as if the scalp were full: ^^ere, (excepting those poor ones
mentioned (...) Duhamel, Malpighius, Willis, etc.) ^ere is not one, nay he is
so inconside^^tely confident, against plain and com^on testimony, to affirm,
that the Paro^s (which page 50. he confesses to be ^^der the ears,) are
covered with ^air.

Page 1, 2. He admires the advantage (...) this age, and the defective
knowledge (...) the former in Anatomy, and yet not ^^ly pursues the absurd
results of their short ^^ill, and sets up their exploded doctrines, (...) his
Theory of the evil, but Anatomy of ^^e Glandules, affirming that the Paro^^s,
suck in ALL the excrements which ^ome from the brain, the Axillary ^lands,
those which come from the heart, and the inguenal they of the Liver. Page 5. He
makes all effects (...) the Glands to be Struma, or Scrophula^ which deseases
he defines to be, a repletio^ from the Arteries, collected from a^^ the parts
of the body, so that the Brai^ and Nerves accused by others, are by hi^
excused. Willis de coreb. c. 20.


Page 21. This Plexus arising from the lower posterior parts of those
ventricles, which the branch of the Caroti^ Arteries do either ways enter, the
which do constitute the Retu mirab^ for the Glandula Pituitaria, by the Plexus
is carried the Arterial blood for making of the Arterial Spirits, the is a
riddle to Oedipus. Page 66. H^ says, The Tonsils have four uses, a^lowed by
Wharton, when in truth th^^^ uses he mentions, are quoted by the Doct^^ to
confute them, page 80. he says, the Salival Juice manifestly appears to
pr^ceed from the head, which is manifest^ false, for its strained from the
Arteri^ by those Glands, as Diemerbroeck, a^^ Sylvias, could have told him,
page 9*97. he says, the Lacteal Vessels covery the Milk to the Breasts, although
t^ promoters of that Hypothesis, viz. E^^ Diemerbroeck, etc. do not make it
cle^^ de facto, and himself, page 155. of Tumors, says the way is not yet
found out. Page 120. He makes Tumors to result from afflux of matter only,
that in dead bodies we meet no such Tumors, because in them a Fluxion cease.
Thus ignorant is he that inflation, fermentation, restitution of spungy body's,
when the parts compressing them are loosened by corruption, or other cause,
will make a Tumor, without an afflux of matter, as appears by the instance he
gives to the contrary, viz. That of dead bodies, which often times swell, nay I
have known an emaciat Corpse, bloat in 24 hours at a prodigious rate.

Page 198. He calls the Testicles the mansion of a Gonorrhea, by which he not
only contradicts what he said in the same Chapter, viz. That the prostatae are
the feat thereof, but discovers his wretched Ignorance of an hernia Humoralis,
for he says (to prove his assertion,) that the Tumor following a sudden
stoping of Gonorrhea, is of the stones, where as its of the coats, and adjacent
vessels, distended by the matter of a Gonorrhea, which begets this Tumor, and
that spewed out of the Arteries, for that desease seems to me (I speak with
submission) to be a critical separation, and rejection of the blood, and other
liquors, tainted with the venerea^ Lues, insinuated in Coitu and thrown out a^^
the place where its received; thus I have sometimes seen that matter which
usually issues through the Urethra; glees from between the Glans, and
preputium, though no solution of unity were there to give it way, but as it was
insinuate^ per poros cutis, so its in part extruded.

The Gonorrhea in women, page 199^ he affirms to proceed from their testicles,
which is a most egregious error, an^ inexcusable in a man who has seen ne^
Authors of Anatomy, all which agree that their testicles are Ovary's, that i^
coitu one of those Eggs is tumbled into the womb, but no moisture; by this I
perceiv^ he is not so well acquainted with de Grae^ as he pretends, page 131.
he says, non^ of the Chyle is sent out of Guts, into the pancreas, but sent
thence into the Guts. 140. the peristaltick motion of the Guts, drives the
nourishmen^ from the pylorus to the ductus pancreaticus, which is but four
fingers breadt^ below it. 168. in the kidneys the serum mixeth it self with the
blood. 122. the cure of the Scrophula is for the mos^ part by Topics. Page 17.
The passages ^n man are narrower than in women. 18. ^corbutick Rheumatick pains
fall from the head. 26. the Saliva comes from the brain, are all erroneous
positions, which need no other refutation than barely to recite them; more of
which you may find, Page 10, 12, 15, and 16. in his discriptions of the Tongue,
which together with the Brain, Testicles, Liver, Spleen, Kidneys, etc. He
impertinently reckons among Glandules.

In many places a man cannot understand what he would mean; thus page 6. and
here (as natures general maxim is) we shall find that the moist parts of the
Body, do declare their chief abode, -- for we shall find the hairs of the body,
as readi^y taking up the moisture which is sent unto the Glands, and
discharging it, which arrives at the exterior parts thereof, as the Glandules
do take the same into them, when it once do arrive at them. Page 11. The
intestines have also their due health given them, by meats and drinks, sent
thither from the Stomach, after digested, and do receive a moisture under the
Cuticula, by which it is also thence sucked up by the Glandules there planted.
Page 16 Like People in a passion, do showe^ down as a torrent, their ready
wishes to their present humor.

Page 17, 18. He gives a silly Character of women. Pago 103. BOTH hi^ animal
faculty, with the principl^ functions of the mind. 123. he wa^ spent (as our
English proverb has it, to skin and bones. 200. a patient recovered of his
destiny. Many such instances of his skill in Sense, Syntax, Rhetoric, and
Letters, you have mingle^ in his writings. A man that designs t^ contradict
himself, and speak nonsense, ca^ scarce contrive it so well, and in so fe^
words, as he does, page 121. where sayin^ that Riclan does place the Root of
Struma^ in the mesentry, he brings in Guido (wh^ died before either of the
Riolans were hatched) as his follower, affirming (quot^ he) that Strumas have no
further affinity with the Glandules of the mesentry only allowed for a further
preparation of the Chyle, neither can Struma's b^ said to have any cause, or
originatio^ in the mesentry, when as every days use thereof, does teach that
most strumous People being sound in the body ^^ve suffered many troubles
arising from ^s mesenterick desease. -- If he can ^^ke Sense, Syntax, or
Grammar of this, will put on his coat.

I confess he is the less to be blamed for ^e errors he commits, because (good
man) does all that he can to avoid them, he is (...) so wicked, or foolish, as
unhappy; for ^ough there be but an even lay between ^^th and falsehood; yet he
to be sure of being (...) the right, often contradicts himself, ^^d affirms
pro, and con, thus page 21, (...) he owns the existence of the Retu mibile in
man, and in the next page viz. (...) fearing that should not be true, says,
^ere is no such matter. So page 10.62. ^c. He says, the Tonsils in some
mea^^re answer the shape of Almonds, and ^^rry a good resemblance of them, ^^d
to be sure of truth, within ten lines, ^^ith, they no way carry in them the
^^eness, or figure of that Nut. So again ^^ge 77. he affirms the salivating
vessels ^ere unknown to the Ancients, and ^^thin five lines, quotes Galen, and
Avi^n, as giving an account of their use. So ^^ge 80. the Saliva proceeds from
the ^^ad, and in the 82 page from the Arte^^es, page 67. the Tonsils are the
primary organs of tasting, but in page the Tongue was the Instrument of (...)
sense. page 8.51. he sets down, that ^^ture planted the Parotis, to suck up the
superfluous moisture of the Br^^ but page 52. and 53. reasons against and by
Dr. Whartons Arguments, plodes it, as impossible, for want o^ ductus per quem.
Page 17. The pages in man, are narrower than in ^^men, and yet in the same
folio, he sa^^ man has the advantage, and can m^^ readily discharge the
superfluous ex^^ments, pent into the Glandules, wh^ is not consistent with
narrowness. P^^ the 4th the Glandules are Scavang^ suck up excrements, etc. But
being a better humor, page 8. says, they c^^mure the Blood, defend the Vess^^
keep them warm, and generate Spe^^ Milk, etc.

But to evade being discovered, to w^^ so opposite to himself, he has contri^^
that the hysteron shall be in one Book, (...) the proteron in another. In this
Preface.
B^^ acids coagulate and thicken the Blo^^ in that cap. 55.
of wounds, they attenua^^ and dissolve it, here he speaks despi^bly of the
skill of the Ancients, page. 1.
in A^^my, etc. saying they had but light ^^uches, and dead colors of it, ^ut
there, he is wholly guided by them, and recommends them as the best Pilots, Of
Tumors page 55.
^ere page 4. he speaks diminutively of Anatomy it self, that it does not
satis^y or reward a curious mind, there ^e makes Surgery nothing without it,
calls it the Of Tumors page 31.
Basis of our art, ^he foundation and treasury of it, ^here he says, the cap.
35. of wounds.
brain is Glandu^ous, here page 20. that Hippocrates and all else do err, that
are of that opi^ion; here page 235. the Tongue is ^ade of proper flesh, Coat,
Nerves, Veins, Arteries, Muscles and Liga^ents, but there its a Muscle; here
^age 62. the Tonsils do not resem^le Almonds, there they much re^emble the
figure, and shape of them, ^ompare him, cap. 48. of Tumors with cap. 8. of
Glands, and you will find very different accounts of those Glandules; here cap.
10. Milk is from Chyle, there cap. 51. of Tumors, ^ts from blood; here cap. 20.
the Testicles are not Glandules, there page 322. of wounds, they are; thus the
man forgets himself, or is so fickle in ^his Judgment, to be (as its said of
some men,) of the opinion of the last Bo^^ he reads.

He discovers himself to be the sam^^ plagiary, he was when he wrote his t^^
former complete treatises, for there is n^^ a passage in this, that looks like
sens^ (be it in the tracts, or Epistles,) b^^ is stolen, and most of that which
is other wise, is no honester come by, for its b^^ a disguised transcripts, or
ill recitals (...) other men's works.

Quem recitas, meus est o Fidentine libellus.
Sed male cum vecitas, incipit esse tuus.
(Martial epigr. 39. lib. His Theories, are for the most part taken from
Wharton and Dieme^broek, some few things of sten^ de Graeff, etc. but by his
way of m^naging, I find he understands neither (...) them right, or perhaps
ever saw the tw^ latter, his works are like stolen plate, melt^^ into another
shape, here is a horse (...) Whartons without ears, a calf (...) Diemerbroeks
without a tail; to (...) short, like the storehouse of a commo^^ Rook, or
theif, you have all pillage, b^^ so deformed, and dishappen, that the rig^^
owner can hardly know his own.

His Discourse of Tears, are sto^^ from Diemerbroek Anat. lib. 3. c. 1.15 (...)
chapter of the Tongue, is from ^harton Aden. cap. 3. the story of ^^^r. W.
Needham page 103. he stole ^^om Sergeant Wiseman, page 252. the ^^ree stories
of his 15 chap. are stolen ^^om de Graeff, de sua pancr. cap. 7. ^^e many
stories page 185. are stolen, ^^rtly from him, but mostly from his old ^agazine,
Schenkius, obs. med. from whom I find him theiving for about 7. ^ories in ten,
of those his Book relate, and in above 50. which it contains, ^ere are but two
(and those very trite ^^es,) his own.

The two stories, page 31. (one of which is falsely cited,) the observations,
^age 37.70. (falsely cited also)
71.^3.97.102.114.154.155.158.^66.167.170.171.177.178.200.^01.205. being in
number 38. are all ^oln from Schenkius obs. med. page
^56.199.290.294.260.492.389.^90.392.394.407.408.299.486. etc. And translated
according to his ^ormer skill and sincerity, thus page ^65. the greasy matter
in the story of Hildanus, is originally materia Gypsea, ^age 37. the span long,
is in the origi^al, senripalmaris longitudinis, page ^1. calculum gypseum
excreavit, he translates from Langius, did here FRAME a kind of a limesto^^
page 114. in the story of Vesalius, translates Vix librae, vel sesquilib^^
pondus excederat, scarce weighe^ pound, or half a pound. Page 97. In History of
Vega, stolen from Schenki^^ Page 290. He says the Physician whom she was
committed, did clear (...) from the blame which was put upon (...) by her
Master, and excused her mode^ by affirming, women might have M^^ in their
Breasts, without concepti^^ this contrariwise is in the origin^ Medicus vero
cui res fuit commis^^ (accusabatur enim ab hero) constant^ sime affirmabat
ipsam gravidam e^^ At the like rate he cripples things in many other of his
translations, particula^ page 60. from Dr. Wharton cap. 1^ page 63. from the
22. Chapter of (...) same Author, and page 68. where (...) translates the
Doctors five uses of t^^^ Tonsils, very odly.

Come we now to his Book of the Kin^ Evil, which he calls an exact discour^^ in
that modest plain dress, -- tho^^ God wot there is neither exactness, m^desty,
nor plainness, but the wilde^ loosest, most defectiv^ absurdest, a^
unintelligible miscelany of words, a^^ ^ost impudent affirmations, that ever
^^me from the press, and because his ^pistle to the Reader, contains much of
^^at kind, I will be a little particular on (...) Since its the mode of the
age, ^quoth he) to let no Book go without a Preface, it may well seem a wonder,
that among the multitude ^f Books, so little has hitherto ^een writ of his
desease, it ^vermore having been of ancient ^anding, and so general concern
^ith men; especially since there is ^arce any kind of skill, but may be ^arnt by
Art, -- match me this ^aragraph, in any but his own Books, and I will not say
he is the Ignorant bug^ear; in the next page, certainly none ^ut such would
thus infer, and make it a ^onder, more is not writ of Scrophulae, because its a
fashion to write prefaces, ^^r that's his logic, and like saying, ^nce my Mare
has stratted Colt, it ^ay well seem a wonder you don't ^o to Church

I know there have not very many ^mple Theories been published of that dis^^ase,
but he is of little acquaintance with ^ooks, if he thinks there has been but
^^ttle, in general written thereof, I will undertake to name above an Let him
consult Schenkius, Gualterus, Moronus, and Bonettus, and see if he cannot find
this number-
hundr^^^ forreiners who have published eith^^ Observations, Remedies,
Theorie^^^ Methods, or Counsels, concerning (...) and many of them such as he
prete^^^ to know, besides diverse of our own Cou^treymen, as Primrose, Wharto^^
Crook, Low, Bannister, Pem^^^ Bruil, Clowes, Tookes, Bonha^^ Cook, Digby,
Barrough, Willi^^ and beyond them all, Mr. Sarjea^ Wiseman, who writ but eight
years before this novise, and yet is no where taken notice of by him, save in
the 122. p^^ his tract of Glands, and there only to confute him, as the
Preacher did Bella^mine, with THOU LIE.

But to proceed in the examen of the most absurd Paragraph, the Kin^ Evil has
EVER MORE been a di^ease of ANCIENT standing, wh^ always an old desease! is it
infinit^ never had a beginning! this certain^ was not spoken with that
exactnes^ the Title page promises, lets go on; an^ of so general a concern
with mankind, especially since there is scar^ any skill but may be learnt by A^^
-- This is just such an Impertinent Conclusion as the first, and an inference
(...) ^ore agreeable: If a man would be very Critical, here is work cut out in
this one ^eriod, enough to prove, that none ^ut a very Ignorant, or a very
care^ess writer, would deliver himself ^o very incoherently, and absurd.

Passing by his silly Apology for suspision of theft, we jump upon that for
stepping aside from the opinion of the Ancients, of which, if any one accuse
him, I will be his advocate, and prove him not guilty, that is to say, that he
has followed them as well as he could, and steered by their compass according
to the best of his understanding. Its true, he varyeth now and then, a point or
two, but that's nothing among friends, its plain he follows none but their
gray headed, and his own addle brained thoughts, notwithstanding he pretends
the contrary, but that he has raised a new pile of matt, er, for the
generation of this disease is utterly false, unless nonsense, and absurd,
unskilful rambles be it; for there is not a new, nor a sound notion concerning
it in all the Book.

From hence he makes a sudden transition, into his own History, where he
modestly says of himself; I EVER MORE Here Is another infinite, in a determinate
Sphere.
having been conversant i^ Surgery, almost from my Cradle, being the sixth
This pedigree must be from his Uncle Crop, a kind of bastard-like way of
Geneology, as if he either had no Father, or were ashamed to own him.
Generation of my own Relations, all eminent Masters of our profession, some of
the latter of which have been extraordinary well known, for their parts and
skill, by many of the most worthy and knowing Masters: I came early into the
practice When he was Mr. Hollyers Cub.
thereof, in this great City, and have for above twenty four years seen the
practick, as well as read the Theorical part thereof; and this not at whiles
and and intervals, but I had the a usual trope with such Rhetoriclans.
eye of the Hospital, as my first and early gleanings, and since I could write
man, the late wars had my skill shown on my which way
self, as well as many others who were committed to my charge.

Since I have been blessed by my dread Sovereigns command, to attend as one of
his CHIRURGIONS at all healings, ( although The meanest healing, or the meanest
Surgeon.
the meanest) and have seen several The beef eaters have out seen him in this
particular.
thousands approach his Royal presence for ease, and cure; I thought it my
duty, as will express.
well as my zeal, to search into the roads, and circuits of this evil, -- I
have herein therefore, kind Reader, presented thee, with a more plain discovery
of this disease, The falsehood of these latter assertions, are very manifest.
than hither has as yet appeared in the World, and this performed with that
plain, and easy method and dress, that the meanest capacity may be allowed a
sufficient judge, in the description thereof, by way of distinction, unriddle
me his meaning h^re.
to prevent confusion.

These boastings are enough to tempt a credulous man, into a great opinion of
our pretender, that he is some mighty issue, of a whole race of Aesculapius's,
and Hippocrates's, but alas its otherwise, the Son, and Brother of poor
Tailors, may as justly make the same pretense, one that was bound Apprentice to
a Sea Surgeon, and never served him, but became a skillet carryer to Mr.
Hollyer two years without lodging, or eating in his house, or being educated
by, or turned over to him, may with equal truth affirm the same. Its true
indeed, our modest exact man, was in a small employ 1666. and in one of the
fights at Sea, an accidental splinter hurt his Arm, as he was in the hold, for
which he claimed and had allowance out of the poor Scamens Chest at Chatham,
though it was not instituted for Officers of his rank.

Its very true also, that in the absence of His Majesty's three Surgeons some
small time from Windsor, he did attend at two or three small healing^ happening
there, and this is all the color he has so impudently to boast, that he
traced the evil in all its nooks, seen thousands approach the King and was by
his command blessed with attendance.

This made him look big, and beyond his betters; affront and quarrel the whole
fraternity, forgetting that he had been but a property to a cunning Fox, and
spending his time, and money in an unprofitable attendance, while he who had the
reward, was depluming Geese in another place, but such is this temper of base
sordid minds, to be elevated with such accidents, as usually supple, and make
more condescending, all generous* and ingenious natures.

Upon renewing our Charter for the Chirurgions Company, he (who was (...)
freeman newly made,) aspired to be a^ assistant, but he was most shamefully
baffled, and scorned.

But to finish my remarks on his Preface, he concludes with affirming, That the
Pox, and the Scurvy are too great Clubbers toward this disease; I knew he
borrowed, or stole this from medela medicina, who would persuade us, they have
a share in all other Sicknesses, but if the Kings Evil be so old a disease, as
its known to be, how comes two new diseases to compound it, or if they do, what
makes him search for its causes, and among Authors that were dead, a thousand
years before either Scurvy or Pox were heard off, such are most of those he
coppyeth from, and some of them which in his Catalogue he says are concerned
in this Treatise, viz. Avicen, Aetius, P. Aeginetta, Celsus, Galen,
Hippecrates, etc.

In the Book it self, Page 12. He defines the Kings Evil to be a cold, and
moist preternatural intemperiety, generated IN the Glandules from a subsaline,
and subacid juice, collated from the wheyish part of the Blood, hardening them,
and converting the same, into a coagulate caseous substance; this is his exact
and plain way of describing things, than which nothing can be more the
contrary* He must certainly be a great stranger to Authors, and to the disease,
that does not know its not always cold and moist, but often hot, and accompanied
with great inflammation, and has choler mixed with it, as he afterward
unawares confesses, Page 84, and 85, 90. That its generated in the Glandules,
and always possesses them, is no more true, for the seeds lie in the Blood, and
nervous Liquor, which myasma falling into the glands, and meeting proper
matter, beget alterations accordingly, not always hard; cheesy, curdling, as he
would make us believe, but sometimes the sorts.

That this pabalum is a subacid, and subsaline, is as unlikely, for its held
rather to be strongly acid and saline, ev'^ to the hight of corrosives, by
learned men and appears to be so, by the common phenomenon, especially on
Bones, which is frets asunder at a strange rate; what he means by the wheyish
part of the Blood, (...) know not, unless it be the serum; but h^errs in that
too, the Nerve and Brain* being by diverse good Authors, and a very learned
Physician of our own, W llis de cereb. c. 20.
held t^ have a great laud in it. But that it har^ dens the glands, and makes
them cheezy (which is the meaning of his word caseous,) is to be confuted at an
easy rate it being common to have those Tumors soft, and filled with different
sorts of matter, Aden. cap. 40, 41.
all this Dr. Wharton (if he would not believe Mr. Wiseman) could have told him.

It cannot be expected that I should criticize upon the whole Tract, I must beg
my Reader to consider and peruse it, and then (he be ingenious) he cannot but
find it ejusdem farinae, some scattered Tokens of his sense, skill, and
learning, I will present him withal, as specimens.

He says. Page 4. That infirm Women, and those of an ill habit* and
cacochymick, most readily bear Children. Page 10. Scrophulae is by Authors
derived from Scrophae, or Swine, those Creatures being also very subject, and
the subjects of this disease, this in them arising from their gulosity. Page
11. The strumas are found evermore, either in the Neck, Throat, Breast,
Axillaries, or Inguens. This is contrary to his assertions elsewhere, for page
20. he makes it possess other parts, and page 82. mentions one that was all
over so. Page 14. The Strumas disease may well enough be allowed a moveable
constitution, Page 22. That which shows the DIFFERENCE between a Glandula, and
a struma, is this: they are generally made both of ONE, and the SAME matter,
and lodge about the SAME places, viz. the glands page 24. nodes happen MOSTLY
on the tendons, but CHIEFLY on the head, etc. page 25. The lachrymal gland has
passage to the Lip. Page 29. The Nerves send forth their EXCREMENTITIOUS juices
into the glands of the inguen, etc. Page 30. the Increment of Botium does
proceed from a Phlegmatic Carnosity begot from a Rheum distilling from the
Brain into the Throat, page 38. from the 42 year of a man's age to the sixtieth,
neither struma, Stone, Gravel, or Renal pain are generated. Page 60. Young
Children are most cold and moist, 62. A new, and adventitious disease, is that
which is brought into the Country, ARISING from the faults of the Country.
Abundance such uncouth, unintelligible passages are in his writings, which
discover him a very illiterate, especially page 7, 12, 22, 43, 45, 52, 62, 69,
92, 109, and 88. In the last of which he delivers among his Prognostics, That
all those who do attain to the consistance of this disease, do escape the
danger thereof, being carefully examined, unless by chance some other disease
be therewith adjoined, or does afterward come after it, and disturb the
Patient with a higher increase; and in the next Page, speaking of the struma,
he says wherever they happen without pain, they are not easily to be
extirpated.

Page 45. In treating of Hereditary diseases, he commits all the errors, an
illiterate, insensate creature can he guilty of, says, there are two
differences, thereof, proper and improper, the one has pre-existente in the
Parents, THE OTHER HAS NOT, can a disease be Hereditary, and not in the
Parent, that is like the Parsons seekers, of which he said there were three
sorts, those who sought and found, those who sought and found not, and lastly
those who neither sought nor found; but to proceed page 44. the Pox, and
Scurvy, club for the evil, he affirms confidently, and yet page 89. makes many
an if of it, and page 55. affirms its no contagious disease, Page 57.
Surgeons (he says) use no cold, or moist remedies to the disease, a sign
how skilful he is in Medicines, and forgetful of his own advice, for he
directs mostly to things of that temperament, viz. Althea, Lillies, sem.
lini. fenugreci. Butter, Oil, Figgs, Yolks of Eggs, diverse Fatts, Mucilages,
etc. As you may see, page 116, 117, etc.

Page 67. He undertakes to prove the Pox, page 1. of this charisma, he reckons
them among the deseases, newly crept in among us.
and Scurvy from Scripture to be old diseases, and faith both are made good,
Levit. 21.20. The former he vainly presumes to be meant by the Scabb, the
latter our Translation names plainly enough, but upon what ground is
uncertain, the Translators from the Septuagint, render the word scabies
agrestis, St. Jerome, Scabiem, Junius and Tremellius, psora, and our old
translation Scirfy, thence probably proceeds the mistake, some sort of
Scabbynes being in old English called Scurf. But that the diseases there
mentioned, were neither of those our Author suggests, no man of sense will
deny, the other quotation from Scripture, is not to be fouad where he directs.

Page 68. the French Pox, he defines to be a preternatural disposition, by
which the body is sensibly hurt, in its operations, and disordered in its
functions, which definition, will serve any disease. Page 83. he says from
Arnoldus (but tells us not which of them) that we may guess at the inward
swellings, by the number of the outer ones, a thing he denied to be true page
122. page 96. He forbids the use of strong purges, contrary to warrantable
practice, and his own directions to medicin, page 108.
among which you will find Resin, Inlappa, dulcis, Euphorbeum, pil. cochiae
troch. Alhaudi, etc. page 84. Aqua pendens says Strumas, are no Strumas, and
103. dehorts from the use of vomits, contrary to reason, and successful
experience, Dr. Willobij -- who is famous for curing of the Kings Evil, does it
by a drink which gently vomits, and begets constant pewking of matter from the
Stomach, had I time to reason the case, I believe I could prove, that no
evacuation is more agreeable to the rules of Art for the cure of that disease,
than spitting, and vomiting.

His skill in Physic he bewrayes to be but small, for he says nothing of
Salivation, Milk, Diets, Mineral-Waters, Paranychia, Rutac. fol. and a great
many other arcana, against this malady, nor is he much better verst in the
Chirurgical part, which though it ought have been most minded, is least meant
oned; for he carelessly passes over h^ duty with slight directions, which
cannot help or enable any one to perform the part; causticks, extirpations,
fontawel^ scrophulous ulcers, and many other Chirurgical effects of this
disease, and way of curing it, are wholly pretermitted.

Page 106. Among his simple Remedies, are many compounds, and his collection of
Medicines, exactly like an empericks, he has neither chosen the best digested
them into a method, adapt^ them to the various circumstances, an^ Rules of
curing, nor diversified them according to constitutions. But as he foun^ them
among some Antidotaries, and ^ther collections, so he has set them down^^

Of his third part, I will say nothing, because time will fail me, only this I
a^ sure is truth, that be has managed good Subject very ill, and weakly, an^
in some particulars given a false accou^^ of things, is not concerned in the
stori^^ he pretends to, nor in the account of t^^ Persons healed, but begged
them from him or them that delivers the Gold.

His fourth Book, he calls a comple^ Treatise of Muscles, and beside the Kin^
and D. of Albemarl, he dedicates it by a Latin Epistle to the College,
(written by Mr. Turner, Hospitler of St. Thomas, it being a language
(notwithstanding his scraps, and pretenses) he has not skill enough in, to
construe three lines,) in his Epistle to the Reader, he talks at his wonted
perplextrate, and is at his old Tropes of Rocks and shelves, and his mumprimus
of maternal Bloods, milking our Muscles, etc. and in a barbarous confused
manner, attempts to give us an account of steno's Mathematical hypothesis of
Muscles, and Musculary motion. The Table which he says do give the names of
the Muscles as they arise in dissection, is verbatim from Mr. W. Moline's
Myotomia, as are all his descriptions throughout the Book, word for word. His
Cutts are taken from Casserius Placentinus, and Spigelius ( I know where he
borrowed several of them, Syllabus added to Mr. Molins Myotomia.
for the Gravers to work by.) His Table showing the Reduction of Muscles, each
to their proper place, use and part, is a verbatim Transcript from Dr.
Scarboroughs, and yet such is the ingratitude and dishonesty of this Thief,
that he no where owns it, and does not List the Doctor, nor Mr. Molines among
the Authors, he says were concerned in his Book. The errors I shall show you,
by and by, compar^ his account of Muscles in his tract of Wounds, and in this
larger Book, and you will see in some places great difference, so that one or
both, cease to be complete.

This Book, he got Mr. Turner to put into Latin, and gave him several Volumes
for his pains, he has added one or two Icons, and set down the names of, the
Muscles, upon each of them as they show themselves in the figure, which indeed
looks pretty, and is an ease, and advantage to his Reader, but this is not new,
nor his own, he stole this also from a muscular scheme, or schemes in Mr.
Molines Parlour, drawn by the accurate Pencil of Mr. Fuller, so that there is
not one thing, (errors excepted) in either of those his own, and the latter,
(although he call it opera et studio. I. B.) might have been as truly said the
labor, etc. of Tom. Styles. In his Title page, he calls it myagraphia nova,
sive musculorum omnium (in corpore humano factenus respectorum) accuratissime
descriptio -- situque naturali in Aentis iconibus. etc. When in all his Book,
their's no Icon for Anconaeus, Subclavius, Triangularis, etc. Nor description
of the Glutaeus minimus, of which he gives the Image, in his 32 Table, and
although he pretend to describe omnium hactenus repertorum, icones, usus, etc.
and though he has taken notice from both the syllabusis, of Dr. Scarborough to
Dr. Crown, of the obliquus major cum Trochlea, et musculo Trochlari, yet he
has given no figure, description, nor use of the musculus Trochlearis, lately
discovered, nor of the Quadratus Femoris, although that be in both the
syllabusis, aforesaid, unless he intend the Quadrigeminus for it, which he
ought to have explicated, however Quadratus, is the more modern word.

He is so far from giving an accurate description, that he perplexeth, and
confounds things, as in page 48. Teres minor, and page 49. nonus humeri
Placentini: He makes them two distinct Muscles (as indeed they are,) but gives
them one description, and the same use, as you may find by comparing leaf with
leaf, for he makes them both depressors of the os humeri, and in his Synopsis,
he makes them one, and the same nonus Humeri Placentini sive Rotundus minor.

Octavus Humeri Placentini, sive Coracho Brachialis (for so he writes it in his
Synopsis,) are two distinct Muscles: corachobrachialis is the nonus humeri
Placentini (but he is ignorant thereof,) -- he makes them one, though in both
the syllabus, he might plainly see, they were two, and accordingly of two
different uses, for the first is a depressor, and the last an adductor.

He very disingeniously makes the octavus in both the syllabuses, to be an
elevater, when as the learned Authors, in the original, and in their public
exercises of Anatomy, always delivered that the octavus humeri was a depresser.
This mistake I believe he was lead into by Mr. W. Molins, Myastomia, Page 38.
so unable is he to be an Author, and unfit even for a Plagiary.

Of the nonus Humeri Placentini, he says Folio 49. -- inseritur acuto Tendine
in collum ossis humeri: But in the Sculpt. Tab. 20. He plainly shows it,
(rightly enough, for it is Placentinus his own cut,) in medio ossis Humeri. Of
the octavus Casseri (i. e. Placentini) he says Page 46. Per corpus ejus
transit nervus quidam: Thus the Blind lead the Blind, Mr. W. M. Myotomia page
41. told him, that through the Body of this Muscle, does pass a Nerve, but our
^uide in his Figures (not knowing, or for^etting that he had fixed it in the
octavus ^umeri, when he accurately described that Muscle,) shows it in his
Icon Tab. ^0. relating to the nonus humeri, which (...) very true, for its
Casserus Placenti^us's own Cut.

I shall detain you no longer in the Pre^ace, having much exceeded the common
^ounds, what remains to be said against ^im, shall be kept cold, only I must
Apo^ogize, that if in our endeavor to cure ^im of this Pruritus scribendi, or
itch of ^cribling: Which thus busieth his Fin^ers, and makes them scratch
Paper, we ^ave acted smartly, himself must confess ^t S. A. And conformable to
the method of ^uring that disease, i. e. By painful sharp Remedies, and folly
being ever commixed, ye pursue the wisest man's advice, in using (...) Rod. Its
true, we have been severely plain, ^ut not rude, (as he has been to many of
^is betters,) a very eminent Casuist of ^ur own, Bishop Tailor Grand Exemp. p.
247.
allows us to reprehend evil ^ersons in Language, properly expres^ive of the
crime, which I think we have ^ot transgrest, by indecent reproofs, or un^uit
able words. I know no name for a Spade, ^ut a Spade, nor any extraordinary
courtesy due to a man, who bestows himse^^ with so little truth, or modesty,
or offer^ that violence, and injury to mankind, i^ things of that importance to
them, as h^ has done by perverting, and corruptin^ the means, and methods of
their recovery and preservation, from hurt, and those m^serable distempers, to
which they are so incident, and obnoxious, and the contrary t^ which, viz.
Health, is accounted by wise men, the greatest temporal happiness*

If where he plays the Fool, an^ shows himself an Impostor, Thievish
Ignorant, etc. we tell him so in plai^ English, I think he has no wrong do^^
him. If he can prove the contrary, th^^ we have abused, or falsely accused him,
l^^ him make it out, and instead of a secon^ part of Medicaster Medicasturs,
(...) shall have a retraction, and peccavi (...) A FORM OF HIS OWN, which u^ on
occasion of the late hearing before (...) Person of Honor, between himself a^^
our Company, was publicly read before his Face, and (as I am informed) (...)
therein acknowledges himself more vi^^ and mean spirited than mine or any
oth^^ Pen can express.

Medicaster Medicatus.
The First Part. Containing Animadversions on Mr. Brown's Books, of
Preternatural Tumors, and of Wounds, being a Letter from a Country Practitioner.
SIR,
THat extravagant Curiosity, which so strongly inclined me to the perusal of
new Books, (especially of Natural Philosophy, and the Art of Healing,) and has
heretofore given you the trouble to procure, and me the cost to purchase, all
that come forth, is very much cooled and abated, by the disappointment I have
lately met in some of them; not that I so much regret being deceived in my
expectations, or of my money and time; nor which is worse) the fruitless trouble
in has occasioned my Friend, as I resent the indignity, and disparagement,
they have begotten to a noble and very useful Art, of whose reputation and
interest I am very tender and zealous.

I am moved with indignation to find, that while Ingenious, and Inquisitive
men, are laboring to improve and advance it, and its esteem in the world, by
their excellent Writings, laborious Experiments, and useful Discoveries; so
many meddling Fops busily interpose, and not only amuse, disturb, and discourage
them by the gagling of their Goose-quils, but disparage the growing credit of
the faculty, by their follys and falsehoods, to see so many bold Ignorants
thrust themselves through the Press, with swollen Titles, under their nauseous
fantastical Pictures, with which (like Ballads) they front, and lead in their
empty Books, which no more answer the pretense of their Title Pages, than the
excrements of a few bad do the Marrow of many good Authors, and come so far
short of what they would imitate, or oppose, as they who have attempted to Ape
our inimitable Duty of Man, or adventured to confute our Immortal Harvey.

Who that is Loyal, or has a due veneration for his Prince, can without
abhorrence behold, the Sacred name of the King debased, and profanely mixed,
with that of every Quacksalver, that dares assume it to make himself a Title,
to see the August Illustrious Character of Majesty trampled on, and laid at the
feet of every Empericks Effigies, who is but Audacious enough to style himself,
His Majesty's Physician, Surgeon, Operator, or Oculist; though perhaps the
Coxcomb be not fit enough, for a Toad-eater to a Mountebank.

To observe men of our profession write, as if they designed to engross to
themselves the Character, which P. de Commines, and Mo. Sorbier, generously
bestowed on the whole Nation, what else means the scurrilous Conclavist, the
nonsensical Galenopale, the verbose Polyrhizos, the filly Hilminthologer, the
no-bone fashion Alamode man, the snarling Glowworm, the churlish Topographer
of B. and other clamorous Witlings, whose writings serve that odious end and
design; men who discover their own ignorance and ill natures, in attempting to
manifest it in others, as far above their reach, as the Moon from the barking
Animals; such are Culpepper, and his Successor Doron, Synopsis, Sermon, and a
world of Cacata Charta men, who I could name, beside the Astrological
Medicasters, and Whimsica^ Chemists, (those Phanaticks in Physic, who throw
dirt in the face of the Orthodox, fill the world with much noise to no purpose;
men that puzzle mankind with mysterious nonsense, and are as unintelligible in
Physic, and as Enthusiastical in Philosophy, as Jacob Behem, or the
Rosie-crucians. These are men I say, who seem of this design or fate, strive to
outvie^ one another in Ignorance, as strenuously as if the prize of an Olympic
Game were at stake, for the most obstreperous Blockhead, or clamorou^ Fool in
p^int.

Indeed we are not singular in such productions, all others have their
Impertinents, their Trif^ers, their Plagiaryes, their Bathyllus's, etc. the
Press having in this Age of Mo^s^ers sp^^^ Prodigies, and deformities in all
kind^ of writing, ^^^^ity (...) been abused by wran^ling^ (...) ^^^ors perverse
Expositors, and the damnable Doctrines of Traitors, Heretics, and
Schismatics. The Scripture has been made a Nose of Wax, to serve the turn,
and justify the Opinions and Actions of the most adverse Parties in the World,
has been urged to justify Parricide, Murder, Sacrilege, Rebellion, and the
worst of Villainies by our Fanatical Covenanters, and other Divines of the
Faction, both in See Edwards Gangrena, Dissenters Savings. Long Parliament
Sermons, etc.
England and See Ravillack Redivivus, and the spirit of mouths of Fanatics,
etc.
Scotland.

The Law has been publicly, and in print mis-stated, and perversely urged in
behalf of Treason and Sedition, by the Hunts-Postscripts, and Liberty of the
Subjects; a Book whose Contents are no less a contradiction than its Title; for
Statutes, made against Dissenters, are there most impudently avowed not to
concern them, and the very Act of Uniformity alleged in behalf of Toleration
and the Schism. Instances of this sort of prevarications are innumerable,
witness the many Pamphlets that have lately swarmed from the Hive of

Bull-fae't Jonas, who could Statutes draw,
To mean Rebellion, and make Treason Law.
History has had its Johnson, who, in the Life of his Brother Apostate Julian,
has not blushed to affirm, contrary to known truth, (as the Learned and
Reverend Dr. Hicks, Dean of Worcester, has more clearly proved in his Jovian,)
that the Roman Empire was Hereditary; and prevaricated notoriously, to form a
Topic, for an execrable design against the Succession, and like a Minister of
Peace, set us a cutting one another Throats.

Thus Truth has suffered, in almost all ways of writing, by the folly and
knavery of men, who like those named in our English Juvenal.

-- in spite Of Nature, or their Stars will write. And almost all Arts
contracted scandal, by the impotence, etc. of busy Scriblers.

But among them all, none so deceived my expectations, or gave such a Rude stop
to my longing fancy, and incautelous humor of buying new Books at a venture,
as did two Tracts published by John Brown, the one of Preternatural Tumors, the
other of Wounds, the Title the Author bore, the many Encomiums and Imprimaturs,
(a new French mode,) from men of learning, discernment, and considerable
figure, which prefac't and ushered them in tempted me to believe there was
somewhat extraordinary in them, but I found it over the left shoulder, and the
man (maugre their many Plaudits, by which he endeavored to anticipate, and
delude his Readers Judgment,) to be like his Pictures, all forehead and
flourish, face and feathers; so I laid him by, in a dark hole of my Study, to
hoot and catch Mice, the natural Employment of such Animals.

This may seem a rude abusive Treatment, and bold Censure, to those who look no
farther, than the sparkish Picture, and florid appearance of the man, and read
not, beyond the wheedlings, precarious invitation of his Approvers, but let any
Impartial Artist pursue him, and with an ordinary heed survey his writings, if
he find he deserves better usage, or do not discover him wretchedly Thievish,
and notoriously defective, and ignorant, that he has equaled the most faulty
Author, I will have that Imputation and Character, and suffer the chastisement
due to him for abusing the world, and putting on them an indigested Fardle of
other men's works, as his own.

Had he treated us as an Artist ought, written with the becoming
qualifications of a useful good Author, and given us somewhat new, as did
Hippocrates, and the first Writers, and those who even in this Age, have found
new subjects for their Pens, as Harvey, Malpighius, and many Columbus's in
Physic, Chyrurgery, or Anatomy; or had he corrected the errors, evinced the
mistakes, explained the meaning, or supplied the defects of other Writers, as
did Galen, and the many Commentators on Hippocrates, (beside diverse Neoterick
Authors,) had he abridged the copious, like Dr. Read, Blasius, or Dr. Gibson;
had he collected the choice of many Authors, as did Schenkius, Moronus, Burnet,
Bonetus, Gualterus, etc. had he strengthened the Principles, and confirmed the
Methods of Art, by new Theories, Experiments or Remedies, like Sanctorius,
Willis, Quercetan, Scultetus, Wise Man, Meckeren, Bartholine; etc. and many
more; had he accommodated constant Methods to new discoveries, or revived some
obsolete, and worn-out way of cure, etc. grown undeservedly out of use, as has
Sennertus, Blasius, Dr Harris, and the Answerers of Medela Medicinae, he had
been praise worthy; and merited those Impertinent Encomiums, he prefixeth so
fondly to his Books.

But, Sr, we see nothing like this, on the contrary his works are twice sodden
Cabbage, nothing new, nothing his own, scarce a medicin, or an observation, or
a notion but is ecchoed; nay he is so ridiculous a Plagiary, that he does not
represent fairly to us the things he steals, nor has he for want of skill to
choose taken the best to be had, among the Authors from whom he filtcht,) which
is to me an argument of his low parts, and mean abilities; to steal the
crudities, and corruptions of Books, argues that things of an ingenious nature,
are not agreeable to him, and is like Childrens stealing Rattles and Bawbles,
from among Jewels and things of worth, secundum modum recipientis. Thus I say,
our Author is so unfit to write Books, that he gives us nothing new, all from
others, and that generally, either of it self Ill, or made so by his awkward
way of representation, impertinently and lamely used, not at all to the
purpose. In short, things old, stolen, and borrowed; things absurd, jejune, and
nugatory, collected in a very rude (though he call it a new) method, or rather
confusion, in a broken style and way full of Rambles, and strange Transitions,
as if his wits were gathering Wool, is (with Tautologies, silly Metaphors, and
unintelligible Phrases) the composition of his Book, and the man
(notwithstanding the pretenses, and opinion of himself and friends, an Ignorant
Plagiary and most Ridiculous Scribler,

The Justice of this Censure, I will manifest to you very plainly without a
rigid, or particular survey of all he has written, and without squeezing or
putting any thing to the Rack, and here I must profess copiousness of matter
which is usually an advantage, is become to me an Impediment. I am choked with
plentitude. He is so all over vanity, that I know not where to begin; his
Follies are so perplexed, I know not how to unravel them, without being as
Immethodical, and appearing as great a Bungler as himself. I will begin as he
does, and attack his Complete Treatise of Tumors, which being the first
broaching of his Hog-s Head, his fresh, and untired, Effort may be presumed
most nervy and strong, and give us the greatest difficulty to encounter and
subdue.

This Book we find by the Authors Picture, was written in the 35th year of his
age, which I suppose is pointed to us, that we may admire the profound Sagacity
and great abilities of so young a man. His Title Page calls it a Complete
discourse of Tumors. Complete either to distinguish it from others who have
written defectively on that Subject, or else a slye suggestion, as if he had
said all that Subject was capable of, or perhaps because it has discoursed of
all the diseases, compellated under those Titles; how little it deserves that
Character, on either of these accounts will be sufficiently demonstrated in the
ensuing Pages, and that on the contrary its empty, defective, stolen for the
most part from imperfect, erroneous, and obsolete Writings, abounding with
vanities, errors, contradictions, nonsense, impertinences, and more faults,
than any Book of its bigness, of a Subject so common and easy, and affording
such plenitude of excellent precedents and guides.

Its scarce credible, that any man should be so blockish, as this, to obtrude
on the World under those Titles, things so little deserving them; nor less
surprising is it, to see a Book so full of Palpable errors, and manifest
evidences of a silly Illiterate Author, containing nothing Ingenious or
valuable, full of the Scum, and Crudities of their Notions, Medicines, and
Observations, who were long since exceeded, and exploded, to see such things
proclaimed useful, commendable, ingenious, learned, elaborate, etc. by men that
knew better, and from whose Sagacity, his egregious errors, manifest faults,
and aberrations, could not escape, (had they perused what they praised) is to
me matter of Astonishment, and should be to them occasion of shame, and
repentance.

We wanted one that could our griefs declare,
And thank our happy Stars, we have him here,
What Is then thy due, who curest each malady.
Yet thy great Skill is such, --
-- Thy work being perfect, --
Were famed Hippocrates alive to write,
He from thy work, would humbly borrow light.
-- For having this Learned Book, men need no more. --
John Gadbury, Student in Physic and Astrology. Its strange that neither the
Stars, nor Skill in Physic, could undeceive this Hyberbolical, Poetical,
Astrological, Physical, Applauder, and teach him better than to think, this
dull, empty, Scrible, deserved the praise he gives it, or that Hippocrates
could, or would borrow from one who stole from himself, and those that ecchoed
his Doctrine.

He dedicates this praiseworthy Piece to his Uncle, Crop, who ( by what
Authority, and good manners I know not,) he calls the chief Surgeon in
Norfolk, to whom, and to his Readers, he makes rambling impertinent Epistles,
using the same Tropes and vain glorious Ostentations, he has over again in his
Book of wounds, -- Impudence plumed with various colored Feathers, of
Ignorance and Boldness, -- this tract well deserves the study and practice of a
young Surgeon, who ought to read it soberly, and practice it constantly, --
I have here acted the part of a faithful Surgeon -- This is a Subject indeed
not to be touched with every COMMON Pen, every Slip whereof, in some cases, may
dislocate the Discourse, and cause a solution of continuity, in the matter, --
its leaves are not lined with froth, or Emperical Romance, but rather gathered,
furnished, and delineated, with digested wholesome fruit, of LEARNING, example,
history, most lively resembling the rose, -- the Lading is well besiowed on our
Vessel, having received your gentle Winds to blow on it, I question not its
well sailing, and may be kept from the Shelves, and Rocks. --

Now after so many Encomiums, from such men as the President, and Censor of the
College, from Sr. T. B. Mr. Sarjent K. Mr. Daniel and the starry Doctor.
Strengthened and confirmed by the Authors own kind approbation and applause of
himself, and the Minerva of his Mercurial Brain, who but would have raised
expectations, and look Sharp for some great and transcendent performance, but
alas! Its a birth of the mountains, great Cry and little Wool, nothing but the
Husk or Shell of some seed, whose kernel by length of time is turned into
Maggot, or other noxious Insect; and being here by our Novice, noysily cracked,
is exposed to Sale, as wholesome, good, new, fruit.

Although I am as great an admirer of the Antiquity, and usefulness of our Art,
and would assert its Interest, and Reputation as much as any man; yet I am so
much an Enemy to Arrogance, and a Friend to Truth, that I must expose him, when
he reasons at so ridiculous a rate to illustrate it, and screws his pretenses
too high, as he does, page 1. where he unreasonably asserts, The Art of
Healing, came into the world, almost as soon as man. For soon after his Birth
was this found out, as both Reason and History make good. Page 2. And here also
may we Epitomize, that Healing and Medicine were invented before other Arts --
Now all the Reason produced to make this good, is an uncertain supposition,
that primitively they were subject to diseases, and consequently put upon
inventing Remedies; and the History is from Genesis 50.2. where it is said,
Joseph commanded the Physicians to Embalm Jacob.

As to the first; How does it appear, they had ANY diseases in the first Ages
of the world, one would think otherwise by their longevity; and I think Mr.
Burnet has rendered it more than probable, In his Theory of the Earth, a Book
of extraordinary thoughts, and uncommon ingenuity.
that before the Flood, they were very healthy, had a general Eucrasia, and
temperamentum ad pondus. Dr. Brown in his Garden of Cyrus, page 1. gives an
ingenious proof of the great Antiquity of Physic, because Adam had a
Dormitive, when he slept, while God performed all the parts of Chyrurgery, in
making Woman out of his side; but that is too Poetical. The Tailors will tread
on our heels, with the same way of reasoning, and pretend near it if not equal
Antiquity for their Craft, by the sewing of the Fig Leaves, and making Aprons.
Others imagine, that after the fate of Abel, men bethought of Remedies for the
accidents to which they saw themselves liable, but we have not the least
footsteps, or color of any such matter in History, sacred or profane; we are
told very early of Musicians, etc. but no where of Diseases, or Healing.

As to his Instance from History; viz. the Physicians Embalming Jacob, it is not
at all to his purpose, being 2000 years after the Creation, as were the
Diseases said to be among the Egyptians; as to his opinion, that Healing was
invented before other Arts, it is not only destitute of proof but probability,
at least where he refers, viz the holy Scripture, where it is plain, that
Agriculture, making Tents, Music, Artifice in Brass and Iron, were soon upon
the Creation, as is recorded Genesis 11. but not one word of Diseases, Hurts, or
Healers. Beside which, before the days of Hippocrates, it is probable there were
only some Emperical Practisers, that all the skill lay in such hands, and
methods, as our Quacks, old Women, etc. with whom our Author is too angry to
allow them Artists.

In all this, I do not detract from this modest Assertion, That Medicine is a
very ancient Art and practiced by considerable men who were afterward Deified,
as Apollo, the two Aesculapiu's of Egypt, and Greece, as the most learned, Dr.
Charleton discourses in the Preface to his first Cutlerean Anatomical
Prelection.

Of such groundless Assertions, and Insignificant Harangues, pretending to show
the Origin, Antiquity, or Splendour of Inventions, etc. Of the Art of healing,
(in which all, that's like sense or truth, is stolen, and corruptly transcribed
from Parey, Read, Woodal, etc. He composeth his Chirurgical Introduction to
this Treatise, which equals, if not exceeds that which prefac't his Book of
Wounds. Of which pray accept a few Instances.

Page 10. He bestirs himself to show the similitude and semblance, the little
World, Man, has with the great one, pray observe the wit and Ingenuity of it,
for I assure you, ITS VERY EXTRAORDINARY -- his outward Wall resembles the
Element of Earth, its next covering made of Spermatick fibers Imitates WATER,
that fine Web, Spun by the Almighty hand, which covers the brain, paints out
Air, Did you ever hear of Fountains, and Rivulets of Fire, before now?
the Body of the brain it self, represents fire, this fountain sends forth many
Rivulets, -- its outward Cap very prettily resembles a fair Wood, clustred
with young. Trees. The SALT Tears which trickle from his Ey's carry a LIVELY
RESEMBLANCE of Dow; Vapors obscuring his sight resemble Clouds and Mists; the
noise in the Ears, Winds and Storms; frothy Spitle carries the lively
portraiture of Snow, as well as Coagulatedor Conglohated phlegm the
representative of hail, a Coryza in the nose carries the similitude of Rain,
sneezing resembles Thunder, and the redness of the eyes Lightning: is not the
Sun seen in the native heat of the brain, as well as the Moon in its watery
Element. Jupiter in its temper, as well as Saturn in its Melancholy, Mars in
its choler as well as Venus in its phlegm; into what extravagant Absurdities,
does this liberty of comparison, plunge a man? Is there any agreeableness, or
umbrage of it, in the things he parallels, at this rate he might have resembled
a man to any thing in the World, his great toe to a wheelbarrow, his nose to a
carthorse; it had been more Ingenious. to have pursued the similitude, and made
pissing in Bed the overflowing of Nile or a Neitherland Inundation, claps the
burning Islands of Stromboli, Vulcania, Aetna, Fuogo Sh. -- his Breeches, the
Sulphurious, evomitions of those mountains, might he not have made a more
pertinent Comparison between Farting and Thunder, a string of shankers and the
chain of mountains, which Kircherus says binds, and hoops about the Earth or
the Windmill, and Vertigo in his own head, and the Copernican System of the
Earths motion.

But trifling a part; let us seek somewhat serious, Page 24. He comes to define
Surgery and thus he does it. A Parey tells us, it is an Art which
informs with reason, how we may cure, prevent, and mitigat diseases, by help
of the hand, but its more proper and essential definition is taken from
eradicating diseases by Art, and manual operation. Thus busily endeavoring to
amend Pareys definition, he ridiculously gives you the same, in terms nearly
alike, though less expressive.

Page 28. He says a disease is incurable three ways, first when its so in its
own nature, as the Elephantaisis. 2dly, When the Patient uses no proper means.
3dly. When the CURING one distemper threatens another. As to the first, that
the Leprosy is incurable, is notoriously false. 2dly. The neglect of means
cannot properly be said to render a disease incurable, unless there be no
difference between the power, and the will, which is as egregious nonsense, as
to say, a man cannot do that which he will not; and thirdly the CURING of one
disease threatening another, is direct nonsense, contradiction, and begging the
question. For in the very Assertion its supposed curable.

Page 31. He says, a Surgeon ought to be well Skilled in Anatomy, for hinc
discimus artem rectissime operandi and securitate inscidendi. It being as the
chief Pillar, or Basis, on which Surgery planteth its foundation. Now I
cannot but admire, why if Anatomy be so very necessary, the chief Basis of
Surgery, and its greatest Magazine, he has so overweening a conceit of the
ancient way of practice, when Anatomy was in its Infancy, See the Catalogue of
Authors, Page 55 56. Which he recommends as the best Pilots.
full of defects, and errors.

At what a Wild rate does he talk of humors, in his second Chapter, which
consists of ridiculous Assertions nonsense, and errors, and discovers both the
great Folly and Theft of the publisher. I will only name some of them,
presuming no Reader can want capacity to apprehend them, nor sense to perceive,
where their vanity lies, Page. 35. He says they are more properly called
humors, which are Juices made by the liver in the Sanguinary mass, for its
nutriment, and thinning of the blood all over the Body, all those are choler,
phlegm, and Melancholy. Page. 36. As the four humors do, work man into a good
humor, so this Choler) burns him into a passion, Page 39. He says Choler
has but few Spirits somewhat of Sulphur, most of Salt and Earth, bred out of
the thinner part of the Chyles, Page 42. He makes three sorts of Sapor, in
phlegm, and adds as a fourth, its Insipidness. Page 43. He reckons as a first
Species of Melancholy, Bilis nigra and a second Black choler. Page 45. He gives
a Schem of humors, stolen fron Pareus Lib. 1. Cap. 6. (one of the Crudest, and
most erroneous things in that large Volum,) and asserts, that phlegm serves the
brain, the cold and moist parts, and in taste is either sweet, or Insipid. Is
like Water, of a liquid consistence, and yet Choler attenuates it, Melancholy
is painting Earth does nourish the Spleen and prepares an acidness for
PREVENTING the blood. I profess I know not what he means by these last
Assertions.

His general division of Tumors is not more rational and consistent. Page 47.
He says an Abscess often follows a Phlegmon, and yet comes without an
Inflammation premised. Page 51. He Computes malign Ulcers among Melancholy
tumors, and Aneurisms among Schirrus's. He defines ^nchymomata, and Metasmata,
to be painful and dangerous effects of the Arteries, happening by contusion of
the Abdomen. Page 52. He lists Epiplocele, Entero-Epiplocle, etc. among Tumors
bred out of humors. And defines a Polypus to be an excrescence growing out of
the Nostrils, as if that were the only part, to which they were incident. Page
55. He defines a Tumor to be a pretern^tural disease, very difficult because it
hinders contraction, and for this quotes Fallopius, without telling where its
delivered. I find in that Author, a multitude of Definitions examined, and non
like this, Tom. 1. cap. 3. de tumor praeternat.
that which he give as his own, is in these words. Definitis ergo vera tumoris
erat ista: Tumor est morbus instrumentalis simplex, in magnitudine extensa
constans. Why our Author calls it a disease preternatural, I know not, I think
Morbus had never any such Distinction, nor are there any diseases that are
natural. What he means by calling it difficult, because it hinders
contraction, I cannot Fathom.

At this wise rate, he proceeds. And hence it may raise in us a diligent
enquiry hereof, how this first happened, what may be the best and safest way to
sail herein, what the best order to observe, but before we launch too deep into
the main Ocean, let us take and purchase such Pilots, as may safely bring us of
from the Shelves, and Rocks, of fears and distrusts -- Then after this nauseous
preamble, he recommends the sta^e writings as the best Guides. Hippocrates,
Galen, Aegineta, Albucas, Rhasis, Haly Abbas, Avicen, etc. -- In pursuing him,
you will find him ploughing with Parey, Read, etc. and filching from their
writings, but he so confounds and disguiseth them, and makes such a rude
disfigured Copy, that its not presently discerned, but if any thing be
erroneous, and trifling in an Author, its so agreeable to his Genius, that he
is sure to have it, as I shall further demonstrate anon.

His sixth Chapter is of Phlebotomy, (how pertinent here, I need not say.)
Where he talks as if he had never heard of Circulation, or did not understand
it, (perhaps the Author, he was dealing with, wrote before Harvey) many of his
positions and directions being contrary to that Doctrine; among the veins
usually opened, he mentions not the Jugulars -- Page 82, he makes no difference
between Digestion, and Discussion, and seems to understand neither, for he
calls the Fire an Evacuation of a thin matter, gathered in a part, by
insensible evaporation, and that Digestives are hot and dry in the third
degree, and of thin Parts, and instanceth in Mallows, Camomil, Ammoniacum,
Lillies, Fenugrick, Red-Roses, March-Mallows, Melilot, Meal of Beans, Barley,
Lupines, Lin-Seed, Mucilage Plaster, Violets, Saffron, Goose-Fat, Butter,
Milk, Nightshade, and cujus contrarium, its scarce credible, a man could so
grossly err from the most common Rules of his Art, and such as are known almost
to every Apprentice, being one of the first things they are taught; its plain
he understands not the true Chirurgical notion of Digestion, the way of
procuring it, nor the temper of Ingredients in most Common use for that end,
for though he had delivered; that it must be procured by things hot and dry, in
the third degree, he directs to many things of different, and some of the
Contrary qualities; all that I have picked out from him, being cold, moist, or
temperate, and that this is no slip or oversight in him, but his firm and fixed
opinion, consult Page 88. and 107. of this same Book.

Page 95. He says, we must not bleed far distant from the Part affected, by
which I perceive he forgets or knows not that Phlebotomy is often made near the
Ancles, and that leeching the Hemorrhoids is frequently and succesfully used
for pain, and other diseases, of the Head. Page 88. He blunders, and runs into
strange absurdities, and contradictory affirmations, concerning that way of
treating ripe Tumors, the signs of ripe suppuration he gives us in this
distracted way -- The Tumor offers it as a sign of its tending to suppuration,
by its intenseness, and when pain, inflammation, etc. increase, then use NO
Digestives, but maturative Medicines, and if therefore we may procure the Tumor
for this suppuration, and produce good laudable matter, we are to increase the
quantity of Native Heat, by such Medicines as be of a digesting faculty, the
which ought to be of the Native Heat with the Part, these are to be applied
from the beginning of its Augment to the end of its Vigor. -- Certainly I
should correct a Boy, who had seen a plaister-Box but two years, if he talked in
no better sort, than he in this unintelligible ramble, wherein he so
contradicts himself, and for want of a good memory, sense, understanding, and
way of expression, does run into the strangest and most absurd Directions, I
have met.

At no better rate does he deliver himself, Chap. 19. Concerning Choler, of
which he says there are three sorts, Natural, Preternatural, and Unnatural,
and talks so disagreeable, and contrary to what he had done out the same
subject, Page 39. (though neither of them reconcilable to sense, or
Philosophy;) as shows in him a very great disposition or strong fate to error,
for he cannot hit right in either Part of a Contradiction. Page 40. Choler is
excrementitious, unfit for Nutriment, an enemy to the radical moisture, and yet
Page 45. It nourishes Parts of its own temper, Page 18. It perfects natures
works, is a Vehicle for nourishment 41. Its proper use is to render the
excrements Fluxil 45. Moves the expulsive faculties. 109. He denies it to
have any bitterness or sharpness, I mean (quoth he) that in the Bladder of
Gall, for else it would soon fret the guts in pieces, and beside this, daily
experience shows, it is free from any acidity, for it daily passes through the
kidneys, into the bladder, and then makes its exit. Page 39. It has in it no
great quantity of Sulphur. Page 109. That which his Preternatural, though it
does not nourish the Body, yet it does not offer any mischief to it, this is
both unprofitable, and unnatural, and Preternatural, always hurting the Body --
at this most incongruous, sensles rate he confounds the things he treats of. I
am very sorry to find a man pretending to be acquainted with Books, and to
understand Art, should write so much like a stranger to both, as well as to
Common sense, and letters.

His Discourse of Phlegm in the Chapter of Oedema in every whit was as wild and
extravagant, Page 123. In one place he says, those Tumors never suppurate, in
another that they do, here he affirms they always possess remote Parts, and then
gives an instance (stolen from Pareus) the only one he has) of one on the lower
Jaw, Page 132. He says, a Schirrus is the only brat of Melancholy. If he mean
as the words lie, to wit, that Melancholy has no other brat, he contradicts
what he had said, Page 51. If (as I believe he intended,) a Schirrus be the
effect of Melancholy only, (one of them it must be) he has contradicted that
also, Page 134. Where he delivers, that that Tumor may arise from Phlegm only.

His Discourse concerning the Breasts, Page 154.
and production of Milk, is of the same sort, and for the most part
contradicted, Page 297. In the one its made of Blood, in the other its pure
chyle, and nervous Juice; Page 156.
so he discourses of Cancers, which first he resembles to a Sea-Crab, like
whose claws it sticks, and adhereth to the part so close, as a Key to a
Door, HAVING IN IT, by some REPORTED TO CARRY IN IT exalted veins, -- and at
last he confesses, this is more fabulous than true, and justifies its non
sense, -- he tells us, Page. 159. We may never expect to cure a Cancer, we
ought not to meddle with Vlcerat Cancers, because by Galen held to be
altogether incurable, neither ought we to attempt the cure of any other, but by
amputation, which carried with it great danger, and hazard as Celsus offers,
and yet immediately after all this positiveness, he not only spends many Pages
in a Method for cure, but subjoins two stories, the one from Hildanus, the
other from Schenckius, of two that were healed; from this last named Author, I
find him very often stealing the Observations, he quotes, to back and confirm
his several Chapters, he was a laborious Learned German Physician, lived at
Friburg in Brisgow, above an hundred years since, and published a vast
Collection of Observations, Physical and Chirurgical, taken from all the
Authors of any note, then extant. I know our plagiary is stealing from other
later Writers, as Hildanus, Mat Glandorp, and one or two more, but his greatest
and vilest thefts are from Schenckius, though he seldom name him, but such
Authors as he quotes from; This is manifest to me, because I find him take him
errors and all, where he misnames the Author or Chapter, or falsely represents
the story, (as he sometimes does,) our plagiary swallows it Verbatim, as I
shall have occasion to prove by many Instances. I desire also that you would
observe, wherever I say he steals, that then he names not the Author, where he
does fairly Cite the Book, I shall give it a more suitable Character.

Page 185. He says an Herpes exedens not only erodes the skin, but depopulates
the subject flesh, Page 187. He gives you the story of one, which corrupped the
whole thigh so vehemently, that the Surgeon thought to have made Amputation.
-- I believe it was such a Surgeon as himself, for where would he amputate,
if all the member were infected, or to what end or benefit would it prove. When
he distinguishes between a Gangreen and aSphacelus, Page 191. He says, in the
former the parts are alive, and that the later is a completion thereof.

I cannot pass by a novelty which he gives us in this Chapter, to wit, the
History of a cure he performed on a gangrened leg, (as he calls it,) which
because its his own, (an unusual thing in his writings,) I will take a
particular regard to it. He ushers it in with this preamble -- For brevities
sake, because I do not desire to swell up my book with TAUTOLOGIES, or commit
to your reading, any thing you shall ELSEWHERE FIND PARALLEL, -- who would
think this should drop from the nodle of a man that had been so guilty of
numerous Tautologies, and Impertinence, or had vended so many insipid stolen
stories, but lets see this wonderful thing -- a virtuous Gentlewoman, after a
long sickness, had a very large great Inflammation seized her foot, he which
very speedily spread her Leg, and got into the Thigh, with pain, heat,
discolouration, and fever, my never to be too much esteemed Uncle, (he keeps
much ado about this Nuncle of his,) being sent for, could not go; when I came,
I found all those Symptoms, and consulted with MY SELF, AND REASON (it seems
they are two distinct things,) and with this method, I got her loosed from the
fears, and perplexities that threatened a Gangrene. I pray you, Sir, observe the
manner how he relates this History, and the pertinence of the case here,
together with the method which Mr. Brown, and Mr. Reason, after consultation
had determined. His expressions are so palpably filly and weak, that I need not
point to them, a prolix scribler affects brevity, a loquacious one disclaims
Tautologie, and a most imparallel'd Plagiary affirms that he desires not to
commit to our reading, any thing elsewhere to be matched, is like a Rebels
pretending to Loyalty, a whore to Chastity, or a Theif, and Rook to honesty. I
do not deny the story to be unparallel, because its his own, and scarce to be
matched in any Author but himself, for impertinence, etc. What is there in it of
a Gangreen, when only her fears THREATENED one Its much to be wondered his
awkward method had not made it such, the part was inflamed, had Pain, etc. And
he anointes it with Oils, which in Page 122. He had cautioned his Reader
against, in such cases, by an instance, where a Phlegmon became a mortal
Gangreen upon the use of them, now if a Gangreen was only threatened at he
says, and Oils be apt to turn hot Tumors into that malady, he did not think
this such, and if so, where is the extraordinariness of this imparallel'd
history, or what does it in this Chapter, and in a discourse on that subject. I
confess considering his way of treating it, it was strange that accident had
not betided the poor Patient, for, as he said, Oils add fuel to the flame,
and an inflamed arm was gangreen'd on the use of them, and yet he not only
directs them as a remedy, and used them in embrocation, but mixed some with his
Gallymaufry Cataplasm, composed of Ingredients, cold and hot, dry and
humecting, adstringent and relaxing, repercussive and attractive, which would
have served any intention as well as this, what effects it produced, seem very
plainly confessed, in the sequel of the story, and how much skill, the man and
the reason that advised him had, is also manifest, by applying a repercussive
Ointment, and Poultice, to the critical metastasis of a disease, which ought
rather to have been evacuated by Scarification and bathing, and expelled by
Cardiack, and Aleixpharmac al sweats, according to that common direction, ubi
natura movet, ibi move. I pray you observe, that in most of my quotations from
him, I give you his own words, (where I do otherwise, its not to his
prejudice,) and in many places leave them naked, without remark or
animadversion, because they are obvious, and that I am unwilling to stretch my
letter to an exorbitant length. Thus I believe its enough barely to tell you,
That he compares the Brain to Fire and the Sun for Heat, Page 10. And yet in
many other places, talks of it at a rate, as would chill a man to hear him.
Page 13.
So also, That the wheels and Instruments of our motions, from first to last,
14.
are lodged in our middle Region. That the Mediastinum keeps up the heart from
falling. 16.
That the Pancreas is tied to the Guts, as a Pillow or Prop, to keep up the
Veins, Arteries, and Nerves. 26.
That cutting hare-lips belongs to the separative Part of Surgery, reducing
Ruptures, and curing blindness, 28.
to the supplying Part. That Album, or the Common white Ointment, does
Agglutinate, and Consloidate. That solution of continuity must be removed, 34.
(as if it were a substance, and to be remedyed by Ablatrix. 39.
) That Choler, is bred out of the thin, hot parts of the Chyle, and has no
Spirits. That insipidness is tastable. 42.
Page 51. That Aneurisms are Schirrus's, and malignant Ulcers a Melancholy
Tumor. That an Abscess is a substance converted into Pus, 57.
and that when white Pus is making, a fever and pain occur, Page 84. And yet
achieved without inflammation. That HIPPOCRATES CHRISTIANNED all Tumors Oedema.
Page 66.
That Phlegm is the proper Instrument of the joints. 67.
That the great Artery is not descending until it be as low as the Navel. 75.
That Rue and Scordium are cold Antidotes. 119.
That a hot intemperiety of the Liver breeds a plentiful quantity of blood, and
a flux of humors to the face, causing an Erysipelas there. 178.
That there is a double humor in a Carbuncle, the one flowing, the other
flowed. 191.
That a Gangreen is a disease consequent to the effect, not the cause. That in
an Unguis, 251.
Paulus, advises to sprinckle a little salt in fine powder on it, mixed with
the white of an egg, and so applied on Cotton or Lint. That a pair of cold
nippers or forceps, 256.
induce a Cicatrix. 289.
That a humor appearing outwardly is a most certain sign of an Empyema. These
and a great many, more which I pretermit, are wise sayings of ours kilful
Author, and need only be cited, and exposed. Some more concise phrases, and
modes of expression, are Familiar to him, as running soars calling in their
leakage, depopulating the flesh, a heathen Christen a disease, etc. But I wave
them, chap. 29. He flourishes in his discourse of Amputations, at a rate, that
would tempt an unwary Reader to believe, he has been a man of extraordinary
practice in war's, and experience in foreign Countries, beside a particular
excellency in that operation, but when you come to inspect his Chapter, and
compare it with other Authors, or the most Common and vulgar way, you will find
it less considerable than the worst of them, and that they signify no more to
instruct Youth, or direct an Artist, than the silly insignificant picture,
which he says does give a lively portaicture of this operation, which its so
far from being, that scarce any thing can be less descriptive, or more
erroneous, for he paints the Surgeon sawing upon the undivided flesh of a
leg, obliquely over the calf thereof, and instead of a griper, you have a
fellow that looks (more than half scared,) in the operators face, and instead
of griping, leans upon the upper part of the patients knee, he makes a ligature
above the Elbow, as if he were going to bleed him, and passes his knife as far
below it, no dress, or Instrument in the whole scene, save a knife, and a saw
with the teeth wrong set, no dish of Ashes, Rolers, Fire, Irons, or other
necessaries common in that work, but the whole draught seems made by one
possessed which the vulgar error, that Chirurgions, in taking off the limb, saw
through flesh and all, his nuncupative Directions are such as no less tempt me
to believe him a a stranger to the expert way of Amputation, for he says, you
must make strict bandage by a Roler, below the knee, and below that, divide the
flesh, (is any men the wiser for these Directions) he calls a catling a
dividing knife, and advises therewith to separate the membrane, (it should be
the flesh) between the bones, but not one word of the periosteum on them, no
other than a corrosive dress to the ends of the bone, then he directs to
unctuous, and slabby dresses, even to the end of the cure, which certainly can
never cure the stump of a Leg, (of which he then discourses,) for want of
dryers and detergers, to suppress the fungus and exuberant flesh, and desiccate
those stubborn difficult ulcers, which they always result into. Moreover a man
would expect from one of practice or skill, a better Testimony, than the
dismembring a Child above the Elbow, which is the only one he does (or perhaps
then could,) produce de proprio, as which that of a man's great Toe had been as
considerable an instance.

I find (him, as I have already hinted,) often mistaken in the Chirurgical
notion of Digestion, and of the faculty of Digestive Medicine, viz. That they
rarify and discharge matter per poros cutis, which is properly discussion,
dissipation, or dispelling. Digestion is by all Artists known to mean
suppuration or maturation, ripening or turning into Pus or quittor extravasate
blood, lacerate fibers, or other matter cast out of the vessels This every Boy
knows to be the first Intention in curing wounds, and he himself has so said
in the 69 Page of his Book of that Subject, how different it is from his sense
thereof in this place, and elsewhere, and how fit he is to write Books, who
has so bad a memory, and so wrong a Judgment, I refer even to himself.

An Hydrocephalus, he says, Page 225.
is to be cured by insensible evacuation, as being that which he much better
approves of than sensible; BECAUSE its neither so safe, nor so secure -- Jesu!
He is so great an enemy to sense, that he will not endure it in his practice,
how then can we expect it in his writings, I perceive now the reason for all
the errors, nonsense, and falshhoods in his Books i. e. because things less
safe, or secure, are with him most eligible; was there ever such a reason given
before, or any thing preferred on such a principle? Well, dear Squire, next
Edition of Bakers Chronicle, thou shall be recorded for one of the men of note,
in Charles the Seconds time; should he endeavor to excuse his perverse
passage, by pretending it a slip of his pen, or that he meant that the sensible
was the less safe way, how came he to overlook it, when he corrected the Errata
of the Press, or what makes him speak so kindly of a Paracentesis in the same
Chapter, which he concludes with five stories, all stolen from Schenckins, Obs.
med. Page 9.
and mostly represented his wonted way, in that from Leonellus, puer, a young
child. Scissurae apparebant apertae. You might see the sutures through the
Scalp. Gausa jstius -- propter obstetricem, vel propter nutricem quae quandoque
in extractione foetus, vel in nutriendo, vel in fasciendo caput, stringunt
ultra modum, The cause of which was occasioned by the Midwife, and the Nurse,
the one in extracting the child from the womb while the other did second it by
compressing its head, exprimitur humidit as illa, quae est in Cerebr^; ad
exterior a cranii inter acutum, et cranium, and sic intumescit caput
vehementer. The humidity it self, which was in the brain, came to the outward
covering of the head, and thither pressed out its humidities, and this was the
occasion of this tumified head.

After the same wise exact manne^ he translates the fourth story, puerul^^
nuper natus, a Child nutrici imperavimus, ut victus ratione exsiccante
uteretur; Illamque saepius purgavimus cum Pil. Hiera. He commanded the Nurse
that HE might have a drying Diet. It was often times purged with Pills of Hiera
Picra. -- Thus what was said by the Author to be given the Nurse, is by the
plagiary said to be given to the Infant, which at once shows his skill in
Latin and Physic, for none but an Ignorant in both, could so mistake, and
think that Pills, and such a Pill, P. Forest. obs. med. lib. 8. obs. 29.
could be swallowed by an Infant, for such in the Orignal Author, the patient
is said to be. The Fifth History of this Chapter, which our filcher quotes from
Montanus de Infant. Page 8. is truly in Hieron. Montuus de Infant. Prag. Page
8. and thus translated. Vir qui furnariam exercebat. A Smith cum tenuissima
victus ratione By keeping every kind of a thin Diet, but to put his Skill in
Physic and Latin beyond all question; consider his Chapter of Cataracts Page
240. Where he affirms, that they arise from thick and sumid vapors arising
from the Stomach, and so getting into the substance of the Brain, are from
thence sent and diffused into the Eye, and at length do there contract its
concretion; and as Platerus does observe, it grows in length of time to the
thickness and hardness of an Excocted Egg, (so he renders tandem albuminis ovi
excocti instar diuturnitate albescat and induretur. Which words are in
Schenckins, who (as does our Author) quotes them from Forestus, in whose works
I can find nothing like it,) and among other remedies, Page 243 he directs to
this Pill as a purgative. So the like Page 324.
Syrup. Pill. sine quibus, 1 sc. Pil. Cynoglo. half dr. ol. faeniculi. gr.
iiij. Syrup. Beton q. s. F. Pil. -- a Cataract in the Eye, as big and hard as a
boiled Egg, generated by Fumes from the Stomach, carried through the Brain, and
to be purged off by an Opiat Pill, ( Narcotical enough to make a man sleep out
his Eyes, rather than Purgative sufficient or proper to carry off a Cataract)
are things which no Man of the least Skill, (if be he in his wits,) would
assert, and too plainly disco^vers our Author does not understan^ the things he
writes of, nor the Author he writes from, although h^ pretend to both. In the
same Page where he gives you this admirable Pill, he presents you with a
Collyrium, made of Juice of Ground jvy, Caelndine, Daizies, Rose Water, and
white Sugar Candied. Which in the Margent he calls his own. I cannot judge it a
proper Medicine, to dissolve a Cataract, nor to have the qualities he ascribes,
viz. attenuating, and penetrating. I take the ground-Jvy to be very binding,
and for that faculty celebrated in Dysenteries, Haemoptysis, internal Wounds
and Ulcers, the Rose Water and Sugar, cannot pretend to it, and the Celandine
(be it which sort it will,) and daizies, have it too weak to perform such a
cure, by dissolving a suffusion in the Eye, the Medicine is Common, and good in
Ophthalmies, Epiphora, etc. And to be found in many Books; but by none that I
know, commended in this case, wherefore I must leave the honor of that, to our
skilful Author, he does not show how to discover a mature Cataract, or one
that's fit for the Instrument, not the true or intelligible way of couching, he
calls this operation, the only piece to be admired of all Surgery, he gives
an Impertinent story of the mischeivous effects of a rotten Apple, and makes a
false quotation from Riverius, as additional proofs of his skill and
sincerity, and concludes with a silly uselless picture, page 245. Which he a
lively portraict of the operation, with all the necessary Instruments belonging
thereto. When there appears nothing, but one man poaching another between the
Canthus of the left Eye, and the Temple, and not one Instrument delineated, nor
the other Eye bound fast, nor any sign, that he who directed the Graver,
understood the operation.

Page 236, he sets down, as from Hercules Saxonia, a Story stolen from
Skenckius, wherein (according to his wonted way of nonsense) he delivers, that
a Woman having the Disease called Tinea, by lotions recovered her health, but
in the INTERIM, she endured continual pain and Fever, of which she died. --
Recover of a Disease, and in th^^ interim dye of its effects! recove^^ health,
and in the interim endu^^ continual, and deadly pain, Fever, and^^. Is no more
agreeable to sense, tha^ it is to the original. Vide obs. 3. de Cute Capitis
lib. 1.

Page 256. Speaking of Polypus Forceps, he declares, that they perform 4
Intentions of which Cicatrizing is one. Its the first-time I ever knew, tha^
done by a cold Instrument. But mark his Explanation, it apprehends, and draws
forth like forceps, and thirdly separates the Polypus, from the Bone, and for
the 4th or last, (which was inducing a Cicatrice) we throw up a Powder, and
thus, quoth he, I have shown you all its 4 intentions. To this he adds a Figure
of the Instrument, (no way like that of the Inventor Tabula 3d.
Fab. ab. Aq. Pendente, (though Mr. Cook says he gives none,) nor that in
Tabula 9.
Scultetus, which are the only two, I know, extant of that sort. How unfit for
this work, I shall have occasion to show you by and by.

That heap of foul errors Page 258. concerning Glandules, I forbear to expose,
till I see how he mends the matter, in his adenography, and tract of struma's.

Page 260. He tells us, a Woman had a Parotis, in which the matter was plainly
prepared, but the tough Skin, kept it in longer than it should, at length it
broke, the Patient falls into Swoonings, little or nothing comes from the
Abscess, and she died: Hence may the Surgeon learn that they do not break
Abscesses of the Emunctuaries, or their Neighboring Parts, until they of their
own accord do break -- Bless me, what a Preachment is here! The Apostume break,
nothing came out! The Skin, behind the Ears so thick, to suppress a Mature
Abscess! And from all this to infer, that its not good to break such Tumors by
Art! When in all probability, the want thereof destroyed the Patient, is
strange History, a very absurd reasoning. Thus again Page 261, advising how to
cure an Epulis, or Fungus of the Gums, he says, that which is not painful may
be revelled, the manner of which may be this way acted and performed, by tying
a double Thread about it, and bring the same every day streighter, until you
have wholly eaten it away, the makes no difference between Revelling and
Extirpation, nor Incision and Erosion.

By his Chapter of Struma's and Scrophula, Page 265.
I foresee how fit he is to write an entire Volum on that Disease, he says
Scrophula is a Wen, and Struma the Kings Evil, and immediately subjoins,
Scrophula is soft, and Wens are hard. As if they were two, which just before he
had made one, so Page 281. How their Tumors are Translated from one place to
another, attribute chiefly to the Nerves in their Operations, these being most
proper Messengers, to carry to and fro. -- This is not said like one that
understood the Nerves, nor is the Chapter written, as if he knew either the
causes, or remedies of the disease it treats of, for he says nothing of what
was most suitable to a Chirurgical discourse thereof, viz. manual operation,
designedly omitted perhaps, to make it a COMPLETE Treatise. I take the less
notice of this Chapter, because I expect a greater occasion from his Treatise
of that disease.

Page 281. the second quotations here, are stolen from Obs. med. Page 210.
Schenkius, Pract. lib. 6. cap. 7.
or Riverius, that of Aetius falsely said to be the 5 cap. lib. 6. Instead of
lib. 15. cap. 6. Truly I have sought in Aetius both in his Chapter de Angina,
and where he relates the virtues of Agarick and can no where find what these
men say, as from him. Agaricum occultos Abscessus absorbere, vel for as
materiam evocare, which our plagiary thus renders, Agarick does suck up hidden
Abscesses, AND draw them outward; monuiquene Illam statim deglutiret. he was
ordered not to swallow it, he other ways spoils the story, by adding water to
the gargle, and diverse omissions, that made it considerable.

The Tonsils or Amigdals, Page 283.
he says, are made, or framed, out of a cold concreted, oleaginous, and
malleous substance, save only that its thicker, and more firm, and this he
says is allowed by Dr. Wharton, Adenographia, that he understood not (though
he would Ape,) that excellent and Learned Author, pray consider his description
of those Glands cap. 22. Substantia similaris tonsillarum friabilis, and quasi
granulata est, instar From hence he says they are malleous.
mellis, aut olei frigore concreti, nisi quod firmius cohaereat, and veluti
membranea connexione. Est similiter colori^ subflavi, tactui mollis, coctione
tamer induratur, quippe dum cruda est, spongiosa, and porosa conspicitur, eam
vero porositatem coctione amittit. This he proceeds to translate. They are of a
yellow color, soft in touch, but in being boiled hard, spongious, and porous.

Page 289. He delivers as a most certain sign in a Empyema, that some humor
appears outwardly, lodging betwixt the Ribs, and the exterior parts, or its
discerned by its Tumor, and after he has very weakly treated of the disease,
omitting the best through common Remedies, and exact way of apertion, he gives
us a curtaild story from Riverius, in most parts of it falsely represented and
abridged, it being no where in the Original, That the Patient was able only to
walk upward, or that the Abscess after it did break inward, did also break
outward.

Page 294. He says, Tumors of the Diaphragma are made of hot matters, and in
the next Page says, Phlebotomy is no way proper, because the Peccant matter is
cold, in the end of the same Chapter, he says, HE once saw in a Gentleman, a
Tumor bred in the Diaphragm, out of crude and thin blood, in which pain and
difficulty of breathing, a ^hard and small pulse, were present, the matter and
humor was cold, and tough and crude. -- This he relates, as if it were is own,
when its manifestly stolen from Schenkius Page 277, bating the contradiction and
nonsense, viz. That the humor was thin and yet tough, the pulse hard and small,
and that for the performance of this disease, there is required pain,
difficulty of breathing, a hard, small pulse, little or nothing changing it
self, his account of a Gonorrhea, and its causes, is as full of absurdity, and
mistake, as is that of Ruptures, Page 300.
viz. That they dwell in the Hypogastrick Region. Page 310.
-- Have their lively forms and shapes, in the Tumors of the Testicles --
other humors have allowed them three Causes, as being bred out of an influx of
humors, decumbency of parts, or congestion -- the Testicles being the chief
causes, and effects, of most of those Ruptures. -- After many such wild
assertions, he falls into that common error, concerning the Testicles, that
they are Glandulous, and for it quotes Celsus, lib. 7. cap. 28. Where is no
such thing, its an unhappy quality, that (as in this case) where every
Anatomist might have been cited as an evidence, he chooses one, that comes not
up to his case, and can give him no help; the place he means, must be the
18th not 28 chap. for that only treats de testiculorum natura, etc. And
therein he has these words. Igitur testiculi simile quiddam medullis habent,
nam sanguinem non emittunt, and omni sensu carent. This is all the Description
he gives of them, and no where he says they are Glandules, or Glandulous, I
know Dr. Wharton lately so describes them, as did Galen, Fallopius, Riolan,
Spigelius, Veslingius, Adenogr. c. 28.
Highmore, etc. But A. D. 1667. Reynerus de Graef, an inquisitive Anatomist, of
Delph in Holland, in his most Exact and Ingenious Treatise, De virorum Organis
generationi inservientibus, as also in his defensio, and Letter to the. Royal
Society, Philos. Transact. Numero, 52. (where you have the Experiments of Dr.
King, confirming that of Mr. Graeff,) has most unanswerably confuted that
Opinion, proved it a mistake, and demonstrated, that the Testicles divested of
the tunica Albuginea, are only a congeries of Vessels, and their Liquors,
without any parenchyma -- congeries minutissimorum vasculorum semen
conficientium, quae siabsque Ruptione dissoluta sibi invicem adnecterentur,
facile viginti ulnarum longitudinem excederent -- illa enim, qui testas corpora
Glandulosa pronunciant, vehementer errant, quando quidem in toto test neminima
quidem pars glandulae conspicicatur.

How he swerves from the right notion of Hemorrhoidal Fluxes, and the Anatomy
of that part, will be very plain to him that will compare it with the very just
and ingenious account Mr. Wiseman gives thereof, page 212. And although our
Spark impudently affirms, that Modern, as well as Ancient Anatomists, allow
of his Description of their Origination, let him show one, since the
Circulation, that does so; or that says, the Hemorrhoid Veins pour forth their
blood, or that the blood which is there spewed out, comes from the Porta to
the Anus; and I will confess there has been one beside him in the world, that
has talked at Random, and without Book, as he does in this Chapter, p. 374. And
therefore it is necessary, that the melancholy blood should this way be
discussed; for by this passage only is Melancholy best discussed, and the
Schirrus of the Spleen cured. So page 311. The Testicles have a VERNACVLATIVE
FACVLTY, of attracting and educing the spermatick matter, from all parts of the
body, page 315. If you perceive a soft Tumor in the Inguen, suspect a DILATION,
being made by the Intestines; a Bubo in the beginning BEING hard, especially
BEING venereal, it being a Rupture -- page 324. he calls a decoction of Osmond
Royal, Rupturewort, Comfry-Roots, Bistort, Aniseed, flor. Hyperici, made in Red
Wine (all which are Adstringent) sweetened with Syrup of Comfry, a PVRGING
APOZEM. Page 327. He directs to melt Olibanum, sang. Draconis, bolus Arm.
Mastick, Aloes, Mummy, and Thus, over a gentle fire, into an Emplaister, which
it will as soon do, as Brickbats. Page 329. He calls, Half an ounce of Syrup,
mixed with nine onnces of a Liquor, an excellent Syrup; errors that an
Apothecarys Boy of one years standing to the Pestel and Mortar, would have more
sense, than to be guilty of.

Page 333. He directs to put the Patient to bed, with his head supinely or
downward; his whole Chapter of Sarcocele, is defective and erroneous, both in
the notion of the disease, its cause, remedy, etc. as also that of an Hernia
Humoralis, page 258. so he contradicts and blunders, page 365. defining a
pestilential Bubo, to be a tumor long, and moveable, sharp, with a mucronated
turbination IMMOVABLE, and deeply fixed in the Glandules, concomitant with a
putrid Fever, wherefore bleeding is very requisite, and in purging be sure you
mix, etc speaking of vesicating in the Plague, he says, they may be used, if
your Patient lives to use them, but its very rare, for they seldom are cured,
they dying the first day. Page 384. Revulsive MEDICINES are hot and ATTRACTING,
viz. Scarification, and Friction, and Nodes are bred from a hard Phlegmatic
Phlegm. If the perusal of this sort of nonsense, be pleasant to you, the end of
the 390 page, the beginning and middle of the 391. will afford you delight.

I am already weary with raking in this heap or confused mass of error and
absurdity, and almost tired with the unpleasant Employ of exposing and
chastizing this wanton Ignorant. It Is of no more credit than to correct a Boy,
and not a whit more difficult than to castigate a Cripple, nor indeed more
pleasant than to pore in a Dunghill; I will therefore end with this Book, after
I have given you one or two remarks more, out of many under my Eye. Page 317.
he says, Women for the most part are troubled with a Bubonocele, because the
Womb falls down from the Vterus, and so does produce an Hernia Vterina. What
he means by that nonsense, that the Womb falls from the Womb, is to me, and
perhaps to himself, unknown; but by it, and his way of reporting the
Observation from Fabritius (though he says not which) of a prolapsed Vterus; it is
manifest, he does not understand the true History of that Disease, but with the
Ancients, and many Moderns, thinks the Real Matrix appears in the pudenda, and
is the esse of that protuberance, called (though very corruptly, and improper)
procicidentia Vteri.

There was scarce any oversight, or mistake the Ancients were guilty of, that
is more strange, and to be admired than this, that so many intuitive men should
see the number of Vessels, that terminate, and are fastened to the Womb, and
must be unavoidably broken in its proper prolapsion, and consequently great
extravasations of Lympha, Blood, etc. be thrown into the Abdomen, that men
knowing the number and strength of the ligaments, etc. which fasten that bowel,
and frequently seeing the utmost force of a man, used to extract a Child, mola,
secondine, etc. without begetting the exitus; nay, (which is more strange,)
that they should write not only that they have seen Women, cui uterus plurin^um
prociderat, gerentem in utero, lib. 11. cap. 27.
as does Prax. lib. 15. cap. 14.
Trincavella, Sennertus Platerus Zacutus Benevenius. Wierus Avenzoar vide de
Graef mulier. org. cap. 10. Job. meckeren obs. chir. 54.
Riverius, etc. but that after part, sometimes the whole Womb, has fallen out,
and been extirpated, the Women have not only recovered, but conceived, (as is
to be seen in some of their * Observations,) and yet be so blind, not to see
the absurdity, or discover the mistake, is to me a very great wonder.

Ambros Pary, a man intuitive, sagacious, learned and bold, a good Anatomist,
and excellent Chyrurgion in his time, gives the History of the Dissection of a
Woman, from whom the whole Womb (as they thought,) had been extirpated; and
finding unexpectedly in the Abdomen, a substance like it, (though indeed it was
the same) he is content, and pleased with calling it the effect of natural
Industry, to supply the want of that which they had cut away thus; (such is the
power of Opinion, and force of Eduution, even over wise men,) by a slight piece
of fancy, and groundless conceit, he conquered and solved the many
difficulties, that attended those Phoenomena; particularly how the Testicles
should appear in a Womb prolapsed, since the Vterus, if it fall out, must be
inverted, and consequently all the Oviaryes, Fallopian Tuba, etc. be buried and
lie hidden.

But that after the mistake has been long discovered, the truth for some years
found out, and published by men of note; nay when Sckenchius (our Authors great
Intimate) had published the History of a Woman, quae cum uteri procidentia
laborans, concepisset, our Writer of complete Discourses, should be ignorant
thereof, would be yet more strange, if such incorrigible Ignorance were not
common to him, and took off the wonder. Procidentia Vteri, est Relaxatio
tunicae internae Vaginae, qua per pudendum prolabitur, is the definition of
lex, medicam.
Blancard, and the sense of obs. med. chir. 3.
Rhoonhuyse, Prax lib. 4 cap 10.
Barbet, mul. organ. cap. 10.
De Graeff, in vesling. anat. cap. 7.
Blasius, obs. chir. 54.
Meckeren, Spigel anat. o^s. 20.53.
Kirkringius, etc. which last save one, and Rhoonhuyse, have put the thing
beyond dispute by diverse Observations; particularly one of a Woman, from whom
was cut off a prolapsion of a monstrous bigness, and a ligature left above the
incision, the Woman dying in four days, diverse, who saw the operation, were at
the dissection, and though men of the erroneous opinion were convinced by
seeing the entire Vterus, the Ovari's etc. remain in due place, and in the
midst of the Vagina, the unhealed place of extirpation, with the ligature about
it.

The Women of Holland being generally of a large size, Phlegmatic and full of
moisture, their bowels more lubricous, and slippery, and (according to Common
Fame) their Vulva's higher, and lower than others, none may be presumed more
incident, than they, to a prolapsion of the real Vterus, (if such could be) and
consequently those Authors, being all of them of that Country, and eminent
Practizers, could not be Ignorant thereof, or deceived into a wrong opinion. I
once dissected a Woman, who dyed of an Ascitis, which had vexed her two years,
and had for ten months a very large prolapsion, two Physicians were present,
and saw the womb entire, and that the Tumor was a Sarcoma, or excrescence of
the inner coat of the Vagina. I have been called to a Woman with Child, who
has had this accident very largely, and I know another, Mother of diverse
Children, that always since her first bringing forth, had a small prolapsion in
her last month, after Conception.

But to return to our Author. Page 378. Begins his Chapter of Aneurisms, in
treating of which, he omits diverse necessary things, and commits many
extravagant ones, and that not only in the manner but matter of his discourse,
which I shall have occasion more at large to canvas, when I come to consider
his Notions thereof, Page 280. In his Book of wounds, there he tells us, that
some allow inward Causes, and reckons as such CONTUSION, CONCUSSION,
Intenseness, and Obstruction, these being accounted the chief inward Causes. An
Absurdity and Tautology that would make a Schoolboy Blush -- Contusion,
Concussion, the chief inward Causes, and not one word of Erosion, Impetus,
Plethora, etc. Which are common, and very considerable ones. -- Some (quoth he)
also add melancholy blood as a Cause, but the most usual sign of its Causes, is
drawn from the Ignorant Chirurgions pricking too deep -- the two scopes of
cure, are Pharmacy and Surgery, the first are convenient Ligature,
(excellent Pharmacy) and Lead, strictly bound over the part. If it be large,
and in the INGUEN, expect no cure, Page 378. Large Aneurisms NOT happening in the
GROYN, or head, are accounted mortal. 380. Ligature of the Artery in an
Aneurism, is dangerous, troublesome, painful, and seldom brings any benefit to
the patient, I would rather have Amputation -- at this perverse rate, he
amuseth them that cannot understand him, and misguides those who think they do,
and this not only by his pen, but his pencil; his pictures may please youths,
profit them they cannot. Page 166. He pretends to show by Sculpture, the manner
of Amputating a Cancerate Breast, but gives you nothing like it, save a Woman
dressed very modish, sitting in a chair, and a man with a Pencil, as it were
marking, or writing on her Breast, which is half covered with her clothes, not
in any posture, or is there any Instrument fit for the operation. Just so he
gives a lively portraicture, (as he calls the picture Page 245.) of couching a
Cataract, that looks nothing like it, but as if one were going to bleed another
in the Temple; his lively picture expressing the manner of Amputating large
Limbs, Page 205. I have already examined. Page 256. He shows himself as unable
to draw after another figure, or depaint pictures, or stories, (especially
Latin ones,) this is manifest in that of Aqua Pendents Polypus Forceps, which
are not at all like the Original, or that in Scultetus, nor his own
Description, for the edge of the curved end, which should cut through the
Pedunculus of a Polypus, and ought to be sharp for that purpose, is delineated
thicker than the edge of a mill-crown.

Thus, Sir, in defense of my censure, and Apology for my caution, in buying
books at all adventures. I have freely imparted to you those observeable faulty
passages, which I found in Mr. Browns first Book, that bawlkt me; There
remains only that I show, how little it deserves the title of being Complete;
what Impertinent, and superfluous Chapters it contains, and how far from having
those many excellent, modern Observatio^s, said, in the Title Page, to conclude
most Chapters.

It cannot be a complete Treatise of Tumors, because it treats not of all the
diseases properly so called, and very defectively and erroneously of those it
does, the later I have sufficiently evinced; as to the former, he omits
Priapismus, Polypus Cordis, Arthritis nodosa, Anchylops, and some Tumors about
the eyes. Spina Ventosa, Variola, Hypersarcosis, Testudo, Phymosis,
Paraphymosis, Gangleon, Thymi, Crystae, Condyloma, Exitus any, Procidentia
Vaginae and Vteri, gutta Rosacea, Elephantiasis, Impetigo, Ecchymosis, Varex,
Pernio, Furuncle, Epynyctis, Terminthus, Tympany, Gibbosities of the joints in
the Rickets and Gowt, Tumors Symptomatical to wounds, and Contusions, Tumors of
the Collumellae, or Uvula, abscesses of the womb and vagina in Childbed,
Warts, Corns, Scorbutic Tumors, intumescency of the Spleen, and many more, to
be found in other Writers on this Subject.

His Impertinent Chapters, treating of Subjects not properly comprehended among
Tumors, are that of Phlebotomy, Vlcerate Cancers, Herpes exedens, Tinea,
Cataract, Gangreen, and Spacelus, because they are often without swellings, and
use not to be computed among them.

His Observations, are some of them quoted (though stolen at second hand) from
Galen, Hippocrates, Paulus, Albucasis, Aetius, Celsus, Halyabbas, Rhasis, etc.
and such as were very ancient; the rest are either from Vigo, Schenkius, Aqua
pendente, Bauhinus, Benivenius, Fallopius, Hildan us, Forestus, Guido,
Laurentius, Lusitanus, Placentinus, Tagaultius, Pareus, Vigierius. Who, (and
their contemporaries,) he calls the Ancients. Page 216. of his Book of wounds,
many of them wrote above 200, most of above one hundred years since, all of
them before this age, there then remains, as truly modern, of all his
Catalogue, only Bannister, Crook, Read, Wharton, and Barbet, the two former are
accounted old, and long since dead, so is Dr. Wharton, and Dr. Read, but
allowing them modern, and add Barbet, they have not yielded him one in ten of
his Observations, and Schenckius more than altogether, so that contrary to his
Mounte-Banck Title Page, instead of most of the observations being modern, they
are almost all old, yea very Ancient.

His Book of Wounds, we find written when he was a year older, though not a jot
wiser, than when he hatched that of Tumors, one years experience has not
strengthened his reason, added Nerves to his Judgment, or bettered his
acquisitions; we find some alteration in his face by the picture, but not a
whit in his abilities by the discourse, although with his wonted vanity, he
calls it also Complete. Indeed he runs his Chapters into as great a number, and
the Treatise into as many divisions, as I have met in any Book, mincing them
so, that he gives us one Chapter concerning wounds of Arteries and veins, and
another for wounds of the veins and Arteries, viz. cap. 60.61.
and has scarce avoided giving one for the cure of this thigh, another for
that; one for the first, another for the second toe, of this or that foot. Who
they are that divide the art, into so many parts, he tells them, Page 136. I
know some others have been very nice and particular, I wish our Author had
out-don them in other things, that he might justly claim the Epithet, he has
given his Book, surely we have had in our own age, and Mother Tongue, Books of
wounds, less incomplete, (unless unnecessary division, be a perfection,) and
our presumptuous Ignorant, venturing to appear on the Stage (like a farce,
following an excellent Comedy) after those, whom he was not able to imitate,
much less excel, deserves to be hist off again.

How fit he was to perform the promise of his Title Page, and write Books, he
gives you an early demonstration, in that Farrago, which he begins with, and
calls Chirurgical Institutions as touching wounds, than which perhaps there
never was so confused and impertinent a thing; words jumbled together like
lots, and thrown out by chance, would cohere as pertinently, and as much to the
purpose, as this gally mawfry, a pretty teacher of young Surgeons, that had
need be taught himself the first Principles of the Art, of which he undertakes
to Write Complete Books.

He weakly attempts to set forth the usefulness of Surgery, but does it as
slovenly, as when he undertook it in the beginning of his Book of Tumors:
Ligature he makes to be of two sorts, See Galen, Fallopius, etc. and you will
find near 100.
straight and slack, Incision and Cautery, he says, must be so performed, that
it bring NO pain to the patient. Cupping-Glasses, he says, are generally used
for Revulsion, and yet draw from the remotest parts. He then only names three
or four Instruments, most in use, to extract extraneous bodies, and in using
them advises the young Surgeon not to be too hasty, because sometimes
nature will lend her assisting hand to his work, an excellent reason, confirmed
by three as Idle and Impertinent Experiments, two of which might have served
any purpose as well as this for which he designs them, one is from Albucas, of
a Woman shot into the Belly with an arrow, and recovered of the wound; another
from Gilbertus Anglicus, of a man shot into the guts with an Arrow also, which
was DRAWN FORTH with the excrements, can any mortal unriddle the use of these
stories here, and make them any way pertinent, in a dehortation from a speedy
extracting of Bullets, or extraneous body from out of a wound; the third from
Alsaharavius, he quotes false Tract. 6. instead of the 16. and all of them
(according to his wonted sincerity) stolen from Schenkius.

At the same rate he treats, of the difference of weapons, some (quoth he,) are
taken from their figure, round, etc. having SHARP points. -- Some from their
habits, some of which are SHARP pointed, -- is not this pure Logic, to make an
Identity, a Diversity; he then only names the pocket-Instruments, and over
again the great ones, together with the names, and a concise account of the
natures of some Plasters, in which its pleasant to behold his skill, Empl.
Mucilaginibus (quoth he,) partly mollifies, and partly digests, and in some
measure does suppurate, it is generally reckoned among the emollients and
suppurative. Surely I need not tell you, where the Impertinence and Tautologie
of this passage lies, I know I write to an Artist, and a man of sense, to whom
a bare representation of his faulty passages, without comment or remark, is
sufficient.

But if you will behold the most superlative Nonsense and Impertinence, that
perhaps ever issued from the pen of any Writer, read that train of hard words,
which he calls, the Appropriation of Medicine. I should undoubtedly believe
them stolen from some Lexicon, or Physical Dictionary, if I had ever seen one so
absurd, for here are Medical and Chirurgical Terms, and Remedies
promiscuously, without respect to parts, or Alphabet, obtruded among
Chyrurgical Institutions as touching wounds, and many of them so falsely
explained as shows the prodigious Ignorance of the Publisher. What in the
name of dullness and nonsense, have Oreticks, Hepaticks, Spleneticks,
Hystericks, Nephreticks, Arthriticks, Aperitives, Carminatives, Diaphoreticks,
Catharticks, Emeticks, Diuretics, Sudorifiques (again) and Salivaticks, to do
among Chirurgical Institutions of wounds, except to show the weakness, of the
artless, unthinking, Illator, what can discover his unskilfulness more than his
Impertinence, for beside his saying Cephalicks are Medicines APPLIED to the
head, as if there were no internals; Oreticks, APPYED to the stomach, do by
their delicate taste delight, and please it; as if a man's palate, or gusto were
without him, Anodines by a gentle heat, ease pain, as if they were not, most of
them, of the contrary temperament, Carminatives, expel wind by an anodine
quality, as if they did not assuage pain, by expelling wind; Incarnatives, OR
Epuloticks, as if there were no difference betwixt a Sarcotick, and
Desiccative, he there (as if none of the abovementioned had been Internals)
begins to reckon such, as are (quoth he,) inward Medicines, bringing sweaters,
under the name of Sudorifiques, which he had accounted, under that of
Diaphoreticks among his pretended externals! Go, dear scribler, read Woodal,
Low, Vade mecum, and such A. B. C. Authors, and consult Castellus, Blancard,
or one of Culpeppers or Salmons explanation of hard terms of Art, before you
set up again for an Author or adventure to write more Books.

He finisheth those his Institutions, (as he calls them) with old fulsom
distinctions of wounds, (which he pretends he had from Galen, Avicen, Guido,
etc. When in all probability, he went no further for them than Pary,) which
shows him a stranger to the more concise and polite fashion of the age, which
rejects all such impertinent and unnecessary distinctions, because they (for
the most part) consist of accidental not essential differences, and are of
themselves not really useful in cure, or enable an Artist a whit the better, to
serve his Patient, but are the Inventions of Ancient Writers, in the compliance
with the rules and nicities of their other studies and ways of erudition, this
he might have found suggested by two of the latest, (and perhaps the best)
Chirurgions, that have written in these days. viz. Wiseman, and Barbet, the
former in diverse places, especially his Book of wounds, and diseases of the
anus, the other in the Preface to his Chirurgical, Anatomical. works.

At length after many hard words, he lets his Reader pass on to the Book it
self, where he entertains us with a rant against such as you make no difference
between a simple and compound wound, but tells us not where the man is to be
found that has been guilty of this foul error. I believe he never knew it
asserted by any mortal, but suggests it. Here, perhaps to show his Reader
betimes, how satyrically he could Harangue, or bestow his own elegant Character
on an Vmbrage, for I profess I know not where else to find the Quack he is so
angry with, a man would suspect his own dear Worship to be the Ignorant plumed
with impudence, that does but consider the blunder of his first step, and at
what an incoherent, though very confident, rate he talks in his first Chapters;
but I intend no account of all his failures, and innumerable aberrations, that
were to make a Book bigger than all his own, but resolve to point at some, the
most considerable of them in series as they lie in his first Chapters, and
digest the rest into Classes, for your more easy apprehending, and my succinct
and methodical displaying of them.

Page 21. Its (quoth he) the Chyrurgions greatest reason and prudence, not to
undertake such wounds, as he has no Authority or encouragement from Art to be
concerned with, were these much practiced, the art of Chyrurgery would not fall
to that low degree, as it appears non in. -- A very odd advise the which if
persued will bar all future improvements of art; A Principle that has done
much mischief, and been the loss not only of innumerable lives, but ruined the
credit of that Art, he says is mischieved the other way. These noble courages,
and bold Artisans, who have acted contrary to this pernicious admonition, have
been Authors of the best inventions, the noblest discoveries, and bravest
performances of Chyrurgery. Where are those rules, that are so infallible, and
on which a man may so rely, as to be assured of his prognostic. Look we to the
Ancients, there is scarce a prediction among them, which this last age has not
found fallible; enquire of the Moderns, they will tell you. Nunquam
derelinquatis aegros, semper sperate salutem. How many wounds, etc. which
according to the rules of art, laid down by the Ancients, were mortal are now
frequently cured, which had never been, had they regarded such an unreasonable
direction, nor would there be any possibility of future increase of skill. Nay,
so far is the consequence he suggests, from being true or reasonable, that art
has not been more elevated, or its reputation inhaunced, by any thing
comparable to the succesful attempts of such brave ingenu^ties, where aphorisms
and standing prognostics have discouraged them by contrary denouncements. I.
de. Vigo, is the only Author I remember, to have matched our Idle scribler, in
this pernicious dehortation, non oportet desperatos attingere, but the contrary
is directed, by almost all rational Writers, and the artist persuaded to
pursue, by all likely methods, let the case seem never so desperate, and dicant
antiqui and moderni medici, quicquid sibi placuerit, says one, quos
(Chyrurgos) adhortor, ne unquam de sanitate aegri, quantumvis morbus magnus
fuerit ac prima front incurabilis videatur, desperent, says another, and our
own most agreeable inconsistent, scribler forgetting what he had here and
elsewhere written, does in diverse places of this same Book, Echo from the
Authors before him, the contrary, as may be seen Page 100.163. etc.

I pass by that nonsensical passage in the same Page; Page 21.
For in this does the life of man very often consist, and depend, as a way of
expression very peculiar to him, as is also that cunning prognostic, that
large and great wounds bring of tentimes much danger with them, as if any man
were so injudicious or Ignorant, not to know it before he wrote; or so
incredulous, not to believe it, unless Galen were pedantically brought in for a
voucher, as Aristotle is by one, to prove sheep were cloven footed. Apolloneus
Tyaneus by another, that men commonly were greedy of Life; and a train of
Fathers, and multitude of Texts, from Scripture, by a third, to evince that all
men are mortal.

At this rate he triflles in diverse of his presages, and errs in most of the
rest, having borrowed them from the first Writers, who were in the dust, long
before the mistakes of their prognostics were discovered by the happy
experimentators of after ages, or the admirable explorations of their posterity
came into the World, nay that less exceptionable one concerning wounds of the
heart, (which (allowing the faulty transcript) is to be found (the lively coal
not excepted,) in observe. chir. Page 449.
P. Forestus, has been discovered to the fortunate practicers of their
posterity, sometimes to fail, as the Authors Skenki Glandor^ etc.
to whom I find him mostly indebted, could have told him, and he himself
confesses Page 275. I know he had this prognostic from a wrirer before
Circulation was discovered, by our Harvey, and because of the agreeableness in
words, presume it Forestus, the whole train of blood (quoth he) makes its
speedy address thither, from the veins, and ARTERIES, as SMALL RIVULETS, to the
Ocean, Well said silly Corpusculum.
this could not be asserted by one that understood, or considered the noble
exploration, the history of the Valves, or that the Arteries in all dead
persons are empty.

That he transcribes abruptly, and represents confusedly, see the firit
paragraph. Page 24. That he trades in Old Authors, and steals obsolete notions,
observe the second, where he calls the parenchyma of the liver grumous
coagulated blood, and suggests, that the heart is nourishes thereby, and
Sangnification performed therein. Page 25. If any wounds of the lungs be cured
(quoth he) they commonly do prove. so mischeivous, as to turn into a fistula,
and so in length of time, do spin a man's life out, by a Marasm, and do run him
into a Consumption. These are is own elegant words, containing a position
notoriously false, by almost all new Authors, and experienced Hildan cent. 2.
obs. 32. etc. Sennert pract. med. lib. 2. cap. 11. and lib. 5. p. 4. c 3.
Forest. obs. chir. 4. lib. 6. Falop cap. 4. de vuln. genesis Skenkius, Page 253.
Horstius obs. 11. lib. 6. Miscellan. Curios. Vol. 3. lib. 190. Vol. 2. decur.
2. obs. 37. who all speak of great wounds, (sometimts with loss of large
pieces) of the lungs, cured.
practicers confuted. I my self have cured two shot through the Lungs, the one
with Musket, the other a Pistol-Bullet, the former a man above fifty years old,
who had not been dressed in nine days before he came into my hands, and but once
upon his being wounded. I mention not the frequency of curing those wounds when
made by rapiers, etc. But our Author is so destitute of skill, and experience
in the profession he pretends to, so unacquainted with Neoterick writers and
discoveries, and so stupidly guided by the Ancient, and imperfect Authors, that
its no wonder if he appear as ridiculous as a man discoursing of Geography, out
of Pliny, or Strabo, in a dress that was in mode, when King James the first
came into England.

That recent wounds, are soonest healed, was a saying among the Ancients, and
revived by our artless Ape; as if it ceased not to be recent, beforre it was
cured, or that the nearer a man were to his Journeys end, the farther he had to
go. Page 28. He says wounds do ONLY then inflame, when they do not suppurate,
which is another proof of his skill, and reading, it being manifest in Books,
and practice, (as himself Page 49. confesses,) that as digestion is procured
by things, more or less hot, so while Nature or Art are on that work, there
occurreth heat, pain, pulsation, etc. dum pus conficitur, dolores ac febres
magis accidunt, says Aph. 17. lib. 2.
Hypocrates, Pulsus, dolor, and color aucti signant pus fieri, says instill.
chir. lib. 1. c. 3.
Tagaultius; see Galen in his comment on the aforesaid Aphorism, and on
Hypocrates Predict. lib. 1. c. 13. Dr. Read Lect. 5. Of Tumors. Mr. Woodal Page
141. with many more.

As wisely does he assert. Page 29. That the main spring of the blood is given
the heart from the Arteries, which is quite contrary to truth, the spring of
the blood being from the heart to them, all that comes into that noble entral
being by the veins, especially the Cave, as every boy that understood the
common notion of Harvey's discovery, can inform him, but he cannot forget the
tone of his great Grandfathers, the Authors he trades with, nor forbear that
Shiboleth, by which he discovers from what magazine he furnishes himself; thus
he insinuates, as if the pulsifying wheels of the heart do give life and
motion, which is a corrupt and exploded opinion of Aristotle so far from truth,
that its now discovered, Th. Barth. Anat. Reform lib. 2. cap. 6.
not only that all the Organs of motion, are from the brain, but that this
inspontaneous one of the heart, is made by particular Nerves from the Cerebel,
as Dr. Willis has has evinced, and that some palpitations, and all the
unequal motions of that noble Bowel, (as in Malignant Fevers, etc.) are from
the impediment of the Spirits conveyed, in those Nerves.

His eight ways of restraining the Hemorrhagies of wounds are taken exactly
from Dr. Read. lect. 3. of wounds, a little dishapen, and sullyed by passing
through his hands.

Page 32. Begins his Chapter of removing extraneous bodies, which he affirms to
be the next duty or Intention of a Chyrurgeon, if he mean next in order of
practice, he is wrechedly out, and makes work for Penelopes Loom, as
experienced writers and rational practisers will tell him, I know some have led
him into this way of writing, and he leads on as he is led, to use
restrictives, while extraneous bodies are in a wound, (unless in very unusual,
and extraordinary cases,) will by hardening the flesh, contracting the wound,
and exasperating the sense of the part, make the extraction more difficult, and
when achieved, leave a flux more impetuous, than what its intrusion provoked.

The first, and second paragraph of this his sixth Chapter, is little other than
a vain repetition of what he had faultily enough said, Page 6.21. His
insignificant picture of a wounded Gladiator, the few (and not all the best)
Instruments for extracting shot, etc. abundantly exceeded by Fab. ab. aq.
pendente, Scultetus, Pareus, Clowes, Low, Woodal, etc. His absolute directions
to purge in great wounds, and three insipid reasons for it, his irrespective
dehorting from unctuous Medicines, and saying that they make wounds sordid and
rotten, his affirming that Ichor issues either from the veins, or wounded
part, without mentioning the Nerves, Lympha-ducts, Arteries, Tendons, Muscular
fibers, articulations, etc. his calling the skin, the Instrument of touching,
(as Doctor Read does,) together with other such phrases and positions in the
seventh Chapter; are additional evidence of the skill of our Author, who
concludes as he began, saying over again in his last Paragraph, what he had
from Guido delivered concerning Sutures, in the end of the next proceeding Page.

In his eighth Chapter, he delivers, that Sarcoticks should be of a cold
quality, gives a Catalogue of them, very little varyed from those in Pary,
Barbet, etc. as is his lift of ep^loticks, he directs to have TENTS, etc.
armed with such medicines, as have an AGGLUTINATIVE quality in them, which can
stop pain, assuage inflammation, and repel the humors, of which sort (says he)
may be reckoned this,. terebinth. lot. in aq. plantag. one Ounce and a half
mel. optim depurati one Ounce ung. Basilic two Ounces. Vitel. ovor. no. 2. M.
ad. ignem fine addendo pulv. Myrrhae, Aloes, ana one Dram, croci, a scrup. M.
pro linimento, or this ol. hyperic. c. 9. ol. Catellorum ana two Ounces, G.
Etemni half an Ounce pulv. Veronicae, Salviae, Myrrhae, ana one Dram. tereb.
ven. one Ounce and a half and these in the margent, are called Digestives of
our Authors, a whole sheet of Paper cannot afford Room enough, to display the
faults of this passage. Agglutinative, Anodine assuage inflammation, repel
humors, and yet be a Digestive, is to assert a great contradiction, all
Digestives heating, and so far from being agglutinative and repellent, that
they perform the contrary by relaxing and attracting, and maturation when doing
by unassisted nature, is always accompanied with pain, perturbation, etc. as I
have shown.

Page 43. Begins his ninth Chapter, of removing Symptoms and accidents, which
he accounts to be pain, Inflammation, Hemorrhage (again) fainting, delirium,
Fever, Palsy, and Convulsion, but to make his discourse complete, leaves out
Erysipelas, Gangreen, and some others reckoned by Fallopius, and diverse
Authentic writers.

Pain he defines from Galen to be, a sad and heavy sense of change, following a
disease, as a shadow does a substance, so he interprets Tristis sensatio, and
had as good have said pain is pain. Algema, sive dolor, aut tristis sensatio, a
molest a nervosarum partium irritatione cerebro impressa, oritur ex continui
solutione sensibili, vel insensibili, says Blancard. -- Fibras convellens and
corrugans, Spiritus ab invicem distrabit ac dissipat, Anim. Brut. p. 1. c. 11.
says Wallis.

Inflammation, says our Author Page 44. happening by a puncture of a nerve,
divide it wholly, because its better let a member lose its use, than the whole
body its life. He is in the right, were it an unavoidable dilemma, in such
accidents, (though perhaps our novice never saw it,) there are innumerable
instances of severer Symptoms than Inflammations, attending punctured Nerves,
which yet have been cuted without the ultimate, pernicious refuge of our
skilless Author, who takes his measures from the first writter in this and most
things else, so much has Mr. Gadburies Astrology mistaken, in affirming that
if Hypocrates were alive, he would borrow from our Plagiary.

With his usual Ingenuity in representing things from other hands, he defines
from Galen a Syncope to be a principal lapse of all the Spirits, (for so he
understands praeceps omnium virium lapsus, which are the words of that Author,
de morb. cur. lib. 12.
(as our Countryman Linacrus interprets them,) and for this quotes the 15th
Book of Galens Methodus Medendi, which contains in all but 14.

At the same rate he talks of a Delirium, which he affirms is nothing else, but
a deprivation of motion, and an alienation of sense. (I doubt the man speaks
feelingly) contained in the wounded brain, by essence or consent -- and from
deprivation of the principle faculties of motion, is this delivered like one
that understood plain Latin? was it ever so mistaken by the most Ignorant and
erroneous scribler is not the man possessed with the disease that talks thus out
of the way. Delirium, is derived from de and lira, going crooked, or out of the
way, and is commonly englished, doting or, talking beside ones self, as our
Author now does.
Let us compare it with other descriptions. Galen lib. 5. de sympt. causis,
omne delirium depravatus est principis Facultatis motus, apravis succis, aut
cerebri intemperie ortum habens, with this definition lib. b. obs. chir. 22.
Forestus Instit. Chyrurg. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Tagaultius, Fr. de delirio in vuln. lib. 2. cap. 28.
Peccettus and some others acquiesce, and without doubt our Ingenious Author
aimed, and intended to express himself in this sort too, but wanting sense and
Latin enough to do it, has failed and most egregiously erred, not
understanding the difference between deprivation, and depravation, and that
depravatus est principis facultatis motus, is in plain English, a depraved
motion of a principal faculty, not a deprivation of motion, as he says in one
place, or a deprivation of the principle faculty of motion, as he mistakes it
in another, of this Chapter.

Hypocrates calls it levem desipientiam, but tetrah sermon. 1. cap. 22.
Aetius gives a very strange Character thereof and fatuity, oriuntur ambae
affectiones frigidorum cerebro facto -- aliquando vero, modica pituita ad
cerebrum illapsa Alex, Benedictus differs not much from him lib. 1. cap. 28.
Avicen delirium est mentis alienation -- est symptoma actionis animalis
depravatae -- with this P. M. cap. tract. 2.
B. Bauderon I. M. lib. 1. cap. 3.
F. Planterus, canon 3.
and lib. 1. p. 11th cap. 6.
Sennertus sit down. As to other moderns ^. M. lib. 1. cap. ^1.
Riverius says, per delirium Ratiocinationis errorem prcecipue intelligimus.
cap. 15. lib 9.
A. Pareus calls it a perturbation of the faculties, and functions of the mind
from pain, feverishness, venomous myasma, or expense of Spirits. lib. 2. cap.
34.
Vigierus, Pary, Willis, and almost all Authors, although they write of it in
distinct Chapters, do carefully note that its a Symptom. Anim. Brutor.
Willis calls it a hurt of the animal function, such as arises in the paroxsms
of fevers, drunkenness, hysteric, etc. making men speak, think, and do foolish
and absurd things, for some time caused by an irritation, or confusion -- verum
in delirio spiritus simul omnes exiliunt, and sibi invicem tumultuose
occursantes, aut se vary proripientes, velut choreas Bacchantium agunt:
Agreeable to which, are the definitions of nov. Idea. lib. 2. c. 14.15. etc.
Sltvius de Boe. lexic. medicum.
Blancardus, etc. now consider how much our Author is beside the Cushion, not
only in his most scandalous, notorious mistranslation of Galens definitions,
and the Impertinent method he directs for deliriums arising from wounds, but
the notion of the thing it self, which is no more like his, he would imitate,
nor any other extant (that I know) than it is to sense, for inquietude,
perturbation, garrulity, etc. are the common Smyptoms, and diagnosticks of the
disease, which he quite contrarily calls nothing else but a deprivation of
motion, and an alienation of sense, a description that has no foundation in
Authority, experience, or reason, if he can prove the contrary, he shall be to
me a great Apollo, thus he delivers himself like a man that understood not what
he was doing, and (although a most ridiculous Plagiary,) talks without Book,
when he attempts to give us any thing his own, he bewrays his most scandalous
inability, and even where he copyeth, either through misapprehension, or a vain
endeavor to disguise what he steals, he not only murders and confounds the
Subject, but most illiteratly alters the words so as they become unintelligible
and nonsense, as are those two short and plain definitions from Galen, of a
Syncope, and Delirium.

A Sixth Symptom to which wounds are incident, he accounts a Fever, which he
very civilly refers to the Physicians, as if most of the other accidents were
not as much their province, but manger this great regard and deference,
inevitable maggot will work, his humor of interloping is irresistible, he must
in despite of fate, (or rather in obedience to it, for he was born under some
strange ascendent) come in with some old musty definition, though as greyheaded
as Avicen, whom he introduces calling a Fever, an extraneous, adventitious,
accensive heat in our heart, by which the veins and Arteries therewith
sharing, its conveyed through the circuit of our whole body, and hurts its
actions, certainly, absurdity is at natural to him as milk to a calf, he has
neither truly given you Avicens definition, (though he call it so,) nor is it
like, either sense, or the novel sound description of that disease, Febris est
inordinatus sanguinis motus, ejusque nimia effer vescentia.

Page 47. He injudicially directs to Phlebotomy, if a fever arise from the
biting of a venomous creature, his discourse of the causes, and remedies of
Crudity, are stolen from Dr. Rea^ Lect. 12. and treats of all those accidents,
as if they were not Symptomatical, or dependent on wounds, but essential and
primary diseases.

Pags 48. The three causes of the Palsy our Author borrows from Dr. Willis
omitting a fourth, not improperly added by Dr. Read, beside^ others intimated
by Galen, Sennertus, Riverius, etc. his enquiring what humor causes a Palsy,
is very odd at this time of day, but his attributing it (especially here) to
phlegm, is not only contrary to the opinion of the humorists themselves, but to
Aetiology, and right reason, it most commonly proceeding from defect, sometimes
redundancy, and violent explosion of the Spirits, distortion of the nerves,
plethora, acidity, Spasmes, etc. But in the case before him, none other ought
to have been considered, but that of Contusions, or wounds is method for cure
is stolen from Dr. Willis, how he alters the words, and inverts the method, you
may discern by comparing them together, as I here verbatim transcribe from
both, to our your hand, as another pattern of his learning, sincerity, etc. Vt
plurimum illius haec tria erunt genera, seu potius tres erunt medendi rations,
quarum modo haec, modo illa, vel altera, circa morbi hujus. Therapiam jniri
debet, nimirum quatenus resolutio, (qualiscunque and quocunque in loco fuerit)
vel primo ab externo accidenti, scil. plaga, casu ab alto, vulnere, frigoris
excessu, aut similibus subito infertur, vel secundo, affectui cuidam alteri,
sc. Apoplexiae, caro, colicae, aut febri diuturnae succedit, vel tertio illa
primarius and per se morbus a procatarxi, sive apparatu praevio dependens,
sensim excitatur. -- And as there are generally allowed three kinds or sort
hereof, so should there be proposed three kinds of cure, first for Resolution,
this being the main agent, this is to be cured. Secondly, if it happen by a
wound, incision, excessive cold, or fall from au high place, this also must
have allowed, its way of cure. Thirdly, as it is a procatarcktick, or primary
disease of it self. --

What a kind of Trinity has he made, the Doctor says, Resolution (which is
the esse of the disease,) is caused three ways, and the dunce in attempting to
translate him reckons Resolution, which is a general, to be the first
particular, and does so unhappily express himself, as if he conspired to his
own shame; first (quoth he) Resolution this being the main agent, is to be
cured, resolution an agent! An agent is always a cause, resolution in the sense
here illated, must be an effect. -- But why do I criticize with so dull and
inchoherent a Dorido, I ought rather to direct him for better understanding,
(if it be possible to him,) of this matter, to Platerus, Piccettus, Vesalius,
Mercuriales, Holerius, Heurnius, Sylvius, Willis, etc. not Barrow, Bruel, etc,

He begins and ends the Prognostics of this disease, with one, and the same
presage, to wit, that a Palsy is hard to cure in aged People, the remedies he
directs to, viz. pull. ad casum, and decoction, are stolen from Dr. Willis; only
he was scared at the Antimony, and left it out, the pills are in Bauderon,
Sennertus, and diverse Antidotaries, as are the rest of his medicines: He
recommends Coffee as a remedy for this disease, which by very many learned
Physicians, is condemned as a cause.

He concludes this Chapter with one only history, and that borrowed (I had
almost said stolen, the quotation is so coucht,) from Willis, An. Brut. cap. 9.
I should commend his giving us a bit now and than, from a fresh Author, if he
did not so harsh, and tincture them with the ill savor of the stale ones, and
dress them in the old modes; for in the few places where we have this rarity,
its so misshapen and deformed, that a man of no uncommon intuition would be apt
to be imposed on. In the story before us, he shows himself scandalously
impertinent, in treating of a Palsy proceeding from an outward accident, to
serve us with an instance as wide from the purpose, as his translation is from
the original. What relation has a Palsy, Convulsion, delirium, etc. From
Ebriety, to do what a Palsy Symptomatical to a wound, that his skill in Latin,
is as little as in writing Books, so his translating this impertinent story.
Iuvenis, a young Gentleman, post lautiorem coenam, and vini potum
immoderatiorem, after eating a large supper, DID drink very plentifully of
wine, ut chicotheca quam forte tenebat, in voluntary exciderit; So that the
glove, which did COVER his hand, did involuntarily fall off, medico
peritissimo, a worthy Physician, modo in delirium, modo in convulsiones,
aliasque Spiritum Animalium distractiones subin^^ incidens, falling into a
delirium, an^ AFTERWARD into a Convulsion* he was within a short while, force^
to shut up his last minute, his Spirit^ being dissolved. Capite Aperto, his
dead CORPSE being opened, Corpus unu^ Straitum Comprimente, comprssing one
straited body.

Hss eleventh Chapter is of Convulsions, the two first Paragraphs of which are
of the old leven, what there is like notion, or distinction, is stolen from the
same Authors, only one from Celsus (but where, he does not say,) is falsely
delivered, at first by Doctor Read, and from him by our Plagiary, who does
bring him in for the ninth Convulsion, viz Spasmus Cynicus, whereas lib. 4.
cap. 3.
Celsus when he treats of those diseases, reckons only the three usual
distinctions, viz. Emprosthotonos, Opisthotonos and Tetanos. What he says of
Spasmus Cynicus is in another Chapter. I beg you to consider by comparing our
scriblers quotation, and Celsus his discourse, how well he understands the
Books he quotes, whether Read rather than Celsus, ought not to have been called
the Author of the causes and me^hod of cure, which he there sets ^own, the
former being plainly also (...) lib. 9. cap. 9.
Pareus, and with the following Theory, confuted by our most excellent morb.
Convuls. cap. 1.
Willis.

His discourse endeavoring to show, how Plethora begets Convulsions is very
inartificial, and ridiculous, for he says, the nervs being filled with
purulent matter, or other excrements, generated either in the wounded part, or
sent thither from others, and so sucked up by the nerves, as it happens. -- I
want patience to pursue this most absurd way of talk, its certainly his own,
for though the Ancients had very odd notions of those things, I never met any
so void of sense as this. Fr. Sylvius was enraged at the more agreeable
reasoning of A. Pary, Nov. Idea. lib. 2. c. 3.
and cried out! quid hoc est dicere! itane! exsudatne expuncti nervi substantia
humor serosus ac virnlentus, sed quis amabo^ unquam serosum aut virulentum in
nervorum substantia deprehendit humorem. -- Surely he would be stark mad at
those reasonings of our Ignorant, a man pretend to read the Neurologia of
Willis and talk in this fashion! Old Snarl in the vertuoso would laugh at him
for an old fashioned Idiot.

The Prognostics he stole from Doctor Read, and his medicines from him, Page
63.
Pary, Riverius, Willis, etc. The first history he stole from Skenkius Page 49
Being of a man overfilled with wine, so that by a general opinion, he was
reputed in toxicated, (pray mark the elegancy, and Tautologie,) who lying on
his back in a Coach, never spoke more, but dyed of a Convulsion. This story is
originally in P. Forestus Schol. obs. chir. 27. lib. 9. but as much disfigured
by the translation, as the Patient was by the disease, or death, and not less
impertinent here.

Discoursing of Convulsion by inanition, he sets down amethod stolen from Pareus
and Read. His quotation from Dovinaetus of a man 50 years old, who falling into
a Convulsion and SYNCOPE, occasioned by a GREAT EFFUSION OF BLOOD, was
perfectly cured, by cupping Glasses and PHLEBOTOMY, is very strange, and (if
truth) looks as little like it, as any story I have met with so positively
affirmed, That from Platerus, of a Maid shot into the Backbone, (which I
cannot find in the place the points to, Obs. lib. 1. fol. 120.
nor any where else in that Book, though mine be of the best Edition,) having
no Convulsive Symptom, but a plain Paresis, had been proper in the foregoing
Chapter, is not at all so here, the others, to wit, from H. Saxonia, Fernelius,
Camerarius, Jason, etc. He had from Skenkius, Page 118.113.120, commiting a
mistake in the last, by naming Vesalius, instead of Vallesius, who was a
learned Spaniard, wrote a Book de Sacra Philosophia, and large Comments on
Hippocrates Epidemicks, and a Preface to Holerius, he quotes Hollerius to prove
that men seldom die of a Convulsion by an Hemorrhage: But names not the Chapter
nor Page, and I am sure talks without Book, for that Author de Morbis Internis
its in the Scholia of that Chapter.
lib. 1. cap. 12. reckons a Convulsion to be deadly, when it follows a large
Flux of Blood, and no where speaks of it, as our Author feigns, it being
contrary to the Doctrine of the most Famous Writers, Read. Page 199. Hildanus
de gangr. c. 26. Sylvius de Boe, lib. 2. Cap. 23. Paragr. 64.
who reckon, as he does, that Convulsions following a plenary loss of Blood are
mortal, and always very dangerous, when from any other inanitions. He refers to
an Observation of Hildanus concerning Spasmus Cynicus, fol. 37. cant. 5.
whereas that Century begins fol. 379. And the case which I suppose he means, is
in Observe. 9. fol. 392.

Thus far, my worthy Friend, I have gone in order, and remarked, on some
faults, as they lie in a Series I will ease my self, and relieve you by
quitting this rigid and critical method, (though all that follows be ejusdem
farinae,) and digest the rest of the objectible or faulty passages of this
Book, into the following Common-places, and refer you to the Pages wherein he
discovers himself GROSSLY ERRONEOUS, AND MISTAKEN, ABSURD AND VOID OF SENSE,
CONTRADICTORY AND INCONSISTENT WITH HIMSELF, PLAGIARY AND THIEVISH, ILLITERATE
AND SILLY, IMPERTINENT AND TRIFLING, AND UNSKILFULLY IGNORANT AND
UNEXPERIENCED. And then shall conclude this Letter, and refer it to the
judgment of any man of common sense, whether he be not the man I say, culpable
under all those Topiques, guilty of all that can be ill in an Author, and
deserve as severer reprimand and Castigations, than I have inflicted on him.

As to his errors and mistakes, they are innumerable, not a Page wherein he
appears not so, he affirms in the 70th, that new Flesh in Wounds is generated
of the Blood lodged in the Muscles, neither considering that Intention is often
performed where no Muscles are, nor knowing that Blood is not the immediate
nutritious juice. Vide Dr. Charleton Exercit. 5. (...) his not. H^^^ory, an^
(...) his five Anat. Prelect.
Page 79 treating of Gunshot-wounds, he says, he is wholly conducted by the
hand of Hippocrates, Master of the Ceremony, so dull and incogitant does this
pedantick humor of quoting the Ancients make him, that he forgets his guide
was dead, above a thousand year before Swarts, the inventor of Gunpowder and
Cannon, was born. Page 98. he says Nitre is made out of a fatty substance,
forcing it self through the walls, of old, and cold Cellars, whereas Nitre does
not only sweat out of Walls and cold Cellars, but is on them and other places,
where the air stagnats condensed from that Element, which is supposed greatly
Vid. P. Sardi. and our Dr. Mavow, de sal. Nitro. cap. 1.
replenished therewith, at is also the earth of vaults, subterraneous caverns,
and places, where sheep, etc. have urined.

Page 116. and 120 he affirms the sutures vent Fumes and excrements, not from
the brain only, but the kichin of the whole body, which is an exploded opinion
of some former Writers, Spigelius, Laurentius, etc. From whom he stole all the
Anatomy of this chapter. The Doctrines of Fumes and Vapors, so much embraced
in the former Ages, being rejected in this, render it needless to say any thing
to him on that particular, but if he understand the imperviousness of those
seams, I admire how he becomes guilty of so foul an error. Sculls, when dry,
(when one would think the sutures should open,) are still tight and close, and
will contain (without leaking,) Water, Oil, etc. Do we not see in Fractures of
the Cranium, be they never so inconspicuous, that the serosities of the Blood,
under it, does glees through them, but not any appears from their natural seams
Add to this, that the sutures are not only covered with a strong double
Membrane Externally, (beside the opaque Calvaria) but the like Internally, and
both glewed as it were to the Bone, by which it seems impossible, that any
steams or exudations should be that way discharged. He has always talked of the
Brain, as if it were made of Groenland Ice, how comes it now again to yield
warm steams. Dear Medica, lib. 8. cap. 1.
Celsus, a Writer of as great reputation and ability, as any of the Ancients, (
Hippocrates excepted) affirms, that they who have no sutures are very healthy,
live without pain of the Head, and that this was most observable in hot
Countries, where certainly those supposed Vapors and Emanations must be most
plentiful, and apt; but that the Smoke of the KITCHEN OF THE WHOLE BODY vents
it self at this Chimney, is such a wild conceit, as peculiarly (for ought I
know) belongs to our wise Author.

He errs much in the Figures he gives us of Humane Sculls, as is easily
discoverable, by comparing them with the Life, or those given us by Spigelius,
Bauhinus, Laurentius, Veslingius, Riolanus, or Bartholine, from whom also he
might have copied more useful, and greater variety than those he has obliged
us with, for we have neither the open Face, the Basis, Occiput, nor Vertex, so
far is his Book from being complete.

Page 129. Children being of a hot and moist Constitution, (he says) are not
so apt for the admittance of Putrefaction, which is not only contrary to common
Observation in their Wounds, foetid Sores, Lice, etc. (to which they are so
naturally incident,) and to what himself delivers in another place, but to
Reason and Philosophy, Warmth, and Humidity most aptly occasioning
Putrefaction, as is evident in Wounds, Cadavers, etc. When the Air is of that
temperament.

Page 32 and 131, he erroneously prefers (and quotes Hippocrates for it,) the
Diagnostick part of Art to the Curative, or Therapeutick. Calling it the
laudable part of Practice, certainly that which is a causa sine qua non is the
most Eligible, let all the Authors in the World say the contrary, the most
useful is the most necessary, and the Curative part, (to whichall the rest
subserve and tend,) most laudable. In short, the best skill in Diagnosticks
alone never can, and never did cure a Wound, but a very slender judgment in the
Therapeuticks, without any at all in the other, has done it a thousand times.

Page 134 If the Cranium be fractured (quoth he) the parts above it must suffer
a solution of Unity, except in contrafissure. To which Experience frequently
gives the Lie. A Patient has not been long out of my hands, who had a large
Rima, reaching from the Sagital suture to the Squamosa, by a fall from a very
high place, and the Skin not broken, nor any Tumor appeared.

Page 157. He gives us another instance of his Falsehood, in a misrepresenting
what he steals, or borrows from others, for although that be his Trade (his own
Stock being beggarly and empty, affording nothing,) yet the constancy of the
practice has not made him a Proficient therein. the story is from A. Pary,
Lib. 10. c. 7.
who says the os coronale was cut off the length and breadth of three Fingers.
The Plagiary says, the breadth only of three Fingers, in the original it is
said, to be done by a sharp Sword, in the transcript, by along and a strong
Sword, the Author does not say, as the Bathyllus, that he fell with his Face to
the ground, that the Dura matter was hurt, or out of its place, upon the cutis
of his Face, that he was compelled by necessity to take away any of the
pericranie, or Scull, used Tents, or Dossils, nor that the Body was stabbed
through in diverse places. Thus he shows himself so great a stranger to truth
and sense, that he is no less able to copy them fairly, and truly relate them
from others, than produce any of his own, to say the Dura matter fell on the
cutis of a man's Face, was never spoke like a man of truth or Surgery.

He fetches almost all his Prognostics from the Ancient Writers, who were
Strangers to the cure of those Wounds and diseases that are now frequent, this
is one cause why he falls into so many errors, when he comes to Presages, as I
shall have occasion elsewhere to observe. At present I will single out only
one, and that the most likely to be true, as having much reason, and agreeing
with the common Phaenomna, the sense of former Ages, and opinion of most men in
this, viz. That Wounds of the Heart are absolutely mortal, and incurable. This
noble Intral seems the only part of the Body, which being hurt brings
inevitable death, for reasons which our Author has stolen from Fallopius, and
Read; its in his 60th Chapter, that he treats on this subject, and he does it
with his wonted preface of Anatomy, and usual absurd, incoherent way of
expression, the errors of the former are too manifest and obvious, the
fantastical chimera's and whimseys, which nor he or any other man can make
intelligible, the false notions and descriptions are no less plain, having been
long since refelled by many accurate Anatomists, the Position (how strong
soever backed) which I shall refute, stands thus. Page 273 The Heart being once
hurt brings present death. I will not take hurt in the largest sense, but
strictly, as I believe he meant, viz. Wounded; the same Prognostic is almost
in the same words and with the like assurance, delivered by Hippocrates,
Aristotle, Pliny, Aegineta, and the many Ancient Writers both of Physic and
Philosophy, Cor nullam fert continuitatis separationem. Or for the sake of a
little Poetry take it in verse.

Afferat ipse licet sacras Epidaurius herbas.
Sanabit nulla vulnera cordis open. Ovid. 1. de Pont. 4.
Galen, Fallo^ius, Forestus, and some others express themselves less
confidently, but diverse do affirm, that People have survived such Wounds,
(though large) many days, and some say such hearts have been cured.

That Wounds of the Heart do not always bring sudden death. Many of the
Commentators on Hippocrates's Aphorisms have reported. Galen. lib. 5. loc. Aff.
cap. 1. and in other places, writes, that Beasts have bellowed, cried and
walked after their Hearts have been cut out, Hist. c^^t. ^. 1. obs. 77.
Tho. Bartholine says a youth was deeply wounded in the Heart, with a Knife,
that he walked alone afterward into the City, and lived five days; that he saw
a Stagg shot through both Ventricles, and walked fifty paces before he fell Lib.
9. (...). 30.
. Pareus reports, that one in a Duel was wounded so deeply, that his finger
could lodge therein* and yet he not only fought afterward, but pursued his
Enemy two hundred paces. M^ Zodia^. Med. V^l. 2. page 97.132.
Nic. Blegny says, he knew one so wounded, who lived five days, and another
seven. Obs. 39.^. cent. 2.
J. Rhodius faith, one wounded into the Cavity of the heart, lived nine days,
and another six. N. Lib. 2. obs. 18.
Tulpius, of one who was wounded into the Liver, Stomach, Lungs, Midriff,
Mediastinum and Heart, that lived two days, D. P. Med. lib. 5. part. 2. cap 3.
Sennertus, of one deeply wounded in the heart, who lived sixteen days. See
more in the second Book, part 4. cap. 3. and the like in Schenkius, page. 254,
262. Bartholini Anat. Reform. Ed. ult. c. 6. Gualterus, Sylva Medica, page 406.
Moronus Index, page 85. Amat. Lusitanus, cent. 6. obs. 38. Crook Anatom. page
420. Fennelius Observe. Chiro 38.
Meckeren, who knew one survive the wound of his heart six days. We have
frequent Instance of hearts Fab. Hildanus, cent. 2. obser^. 27. says, he found
a heart prodigiously rotten.
rotten, ulcerate, aposthumate, tumified, having sordid sores, of long
continuance Theod. Kirkring* Spicil. Anatom. obs. 78, 3.
, stones, excrescencies, tabid, torrified, and some have been found without any
heart at all. Vide Tillesias rerum not. lib. 5. cap. 28. Schenkius, and
Bartholine, ubi supra Li b. 1. obs. 31.
, Dominic. Panarolus, and Schenkius, from Jordan, write of a Torrified heart
Obs. Med. 87.
. Riverius, of an Ulcer eroding a great part thereof, which was spit up, the
Patient enduring it forty days Prax admir. b. 1. obs. 14. and lib. 20bs. 41.
. Zacutus, of a Rotten heart, and another Schirrust. Obs. Chiro
Job Meckeren, of an Ulcer under one of the Auricles of long continuance.
Sennertus ubi supra, writes of one who wanted the left Ventricle, another was
indurated. And. Anat. q. 18 lib. 9.
Laurentius, of one whose heart was half rotted away, of a Deer, in whose heart
an old piece of a Dart was found, of many Stones, and Aposthumes in the heart
of a Woman, and that a Florentine Ambassador at the Court of France, being
dissected -- inventum You have the like in Theod. Kirkring, Spic. Anat. obs.
16. miscel. curios. vol. 1. obs. 70.
cor prodigii instar in eam molem excrevisse, ut Thoracem fere totum
contineret, and that in its Ventricles was near four pounds of blood. See more
Barthol. Hist. cent. obs. 32, 45, 54, 50.

That wounds of the heart are curable, is the Opinion and dixit of Job
Meckeren, cap. 36. Blogny Zod. Med. Vol. 2. page 139. Gualterus Sylva M. page
106. Caspar Schottus Physica Medica cur. lib. 3. mirab. Hom. cap. 34. Moronus,
Index page 86. Beniven. cap. 65. Zacut. Lusitan. P. Mirand. obs. 9. fol. 251.
says, that Leeches stuck to the heart of a person, that survived it. Matthew.
Glandorp, Spec. Chirurg. cap. 33. relates that Rabbits lived many months after
they were run through the heart. Page 254, 261. Sken^kius says the like of a
Stagg, and of one in whose heart a piece of an Arrow was found, that had long
stuck there; that a Boy was cured, cui os pectoris excisum, and cor aliquandiu
nudum apparuit, nam involucrum ejus computruerit; the History, page 254. which
he calls a wound of the Tunicle of the heart, was undoubtedly (as his Author
first thought) of the heart it self. Page 256. He reports, that some have been
found without Miscell. curios. Vol. 5. obs. 25.
hearts, as does also Hildanus, cent. 4. obs. 51. Moronus, Index page 85.
Tillesius rer. not. ubi supra, my Lord Bacon. Mr. Boil, vide Bart holin. Lib.
2. cap. 6.
Anat. Reform. Editio ultima. Rhodius, obs. 39. cent. 2. relates the cure of a
large wound of the Pericardium; he supposes that wounds of the heart it self
are incurable, and says, there was a Stagg, who had a small piece of Dart
sticking in his heart, sine vitae noxa, that a Boy was dissected without a
Pericardium -- But what need I say any more, when our most agreeable Scribler,
is his own Confuter; for after all his positive Prognostics, page 23, 273,
etc. he very fairly confesses, that superficial wounds here happening may be
c^^red.

I have taken unusual pains, and been very particular on this point, partly to
refute our Confident, partly to show the incertainty and fallacy of many
presages delivered by the first Writers, and the vanity of relying on them, but
chiefly to persuade my Brethren of the Plaister-box, that no wound is
incurable, and beat them out of the contrary discouraging and mischeivous
opinion.

The vital flame in the heart, and the airs ingress then, and mixing its
nitrous particle with the blood, are things much controverted among learned
men, though positively affirmed by our Author, I will say only this, that I am
sure he understands not that controversy, and that many very eminent
Anatomists, are against the later Hypothesis, vide Dr. Harveys Proem to his
book de Cord, and circulatione* Dr. Walter Needham, format. foetu. cap. 6.
(where he declares it the Opinion of Dr. Highmore also,) Dr. Henshaw Aero
chalinos, page 62. beside Demerbrook, Cornelius, etc.

Page 281. He defines with most of the Ancients, an Aneurisma to be a breach of
the inner coat of an Artery, the blood distending the outer, which I know has
been the common Opinion, but the absurdity thereof you will find well
discovered by Van Horn, Microtecne sect. 1. paragr. 15. page 215. Wiseman, lib.
1. cap. 16. Pareus calls it the Rupture of an Artery, the Blood extravasating
among the Muscles, and he himself varieth from his definition, in the Histories
he gives, page 380. of his Book of Tumors, (where he has a particular Chapter
of this Disease,) which is of an Aneurism from a wound, and says in that
Chapter, that the common cause is puncturing an Artery.

But to be short in this Topic, because in all the rest I shall have occasion
to evince abundance of his Errors, take those brief Instances, which I shall
but name, page 23, 29, 44, 45, 273: and many other places, he makes the heart
the fountain of motion, page 309. he calls the stomach a cold Intral, and (in
reckoning the coats) omits the crusta See willis Pharm. Rat. part. 1. cap. 2.
sect. 1.
villosa, page 287. and 297. he affirms, the meseraick Veins convey the Aliment
to the gate of the Liver, and suck up the nourishment from the small guts, page
227. he reckons the ascent and descent of the Cava from the Liver, page 194. he
suggests, that the Heart and Liver are not only the Original of the Veins and
Arteries, but the Oceans from whence they fetch both their vital, and natural
blood and spirits, page 179. that the Brain is made of sperm and maternal
blood, that it is of a cold and moist temper, page 198. the chief seat of cold
and glutinous moisture, that the Nerves are cold in nature, and cold in
substance. Thus, as I have said, by his Ignorance in the improvement of our
Art, and injudicious sucking the fallible Principles and Opinions of the
Ancients, (men to whom we are infinitely indebted, and from whom it is no
detraction to say, they knew not as much as is now known,) he runs himself into
many gross errors and mistakes, chiefly in Anatomy, Prognostics and Dogma's,
of which I shall superadd a few instances more, and conclude this Head.

Page 316. He pronounces Wounds of the Kidneys in general Mortal, and
inevitably so, if the Pelvis be hurt, though Pareus relates the story of an
Archer condemned to be hanged, and upon Solicitation by some great men, who had
been troubled with the Stone, he submitted to have those Parts opened, survived
the operation, was cured and pardoned. We have also a Tradition, that our
Famous Harvey cut out a Stone from a man's Kidney. But his old Friend, and
constant supplier, Schenkius tells him, Page 451. Three stories of Wounds of
that Part cured, and himself, notwithstanding his Prognostic, subjoins to this
Chapter, the History of another, stolen from Glandorp. See also P. Foresius obs.
Chir. 5. lib. 6.

He discovers many errors in his discourse Page 266. of the Lungs, and
respiration, positively presumes to determine the dispute, as yet undecided
among the best Philosophers, and Thruston Diatribe. Mayow de respicar. Willis
Phar. Ration. F. Burtis Epist. Barthol. Swammardam de Re spir. Malpighius.
Casp. Barthoy Dinphr. struct. Dr. Gibsons Epitom. Dr. Needham de foe tu, etc.
Anatomists of the Age, viz. What (...) the cause, and use of Pulmonary
respir^tion. He says Page 255 from Gale^ that matter heaped up in the Breast,
pa^ing into the vena sine pari, is through t^^ vena ava carried to the right
Ventricl^ of the Heart, and passing thence DOWNWARD by the descending Trunk of
the Cava to the Liver, [pr^mark how he contradicts, what (...) said Page 277,
that the ascent and descent of this Vein, was from the Liver.] Its carried to
the Emulgents, Page 254. He delivers, that Wounds penetrating the Breast, are
known by Wind, coming through the Orifice. Which is a fallible Diagnostick,
especially when the Wound is made by a small Rapier, and the Body deflexed when
its received, so that upon returning to a right posture, the parts alter, and
cover one another; in discoursing concerning Wounds of the Gullet, he commits
many mistakes. Page 244, he says, that Pipe marches on the right side of the
Spondyls, that Deglutition is helped by the Muscles of the Larinx, Willis
Pharm. Rat. part 1. cap. 2.
attributes nothing thereof to the Gullet, (whose Anatomy he does not
understand,) and accounts the Muscles of the Phariax, among those of the
Larinx. He directs to Nutritive Glisters. Page 246. Which I doubt do signify
little, or nothing, since Bauhinus discovered the valve in the Colon, unless
Dr. Antidiatribe.
Ents, and Dr. Anat. praelectio.
Charltons notions of Percolative Nutrition, help him.

Page 240. Treating of Wounds of the Throat, he delivers as signs, that the
upper part of the Neck, loss of voice, and Air happen, (who knows what he means
hereby,) and when it reaceth the Windpipe, its dangerous, because the
Oesophagus hereupon tumifying, Deglutition is hindered. I never knew such a
Tumor accompanying Wounds of the Trachea, although I have cured many very large
ones, nor do I know where its accounted among the Symptoms by any other Writer.

But to our Second Topic, ABSURDITY AND NONSENSE, which are so common with
him, as if they had got (as Hudibras says of the Presbyterians) the advowson
of his Conscience, of this I have already given you diverse instances, and
pretermitted a great many more, for indeed the whole strain of his Pen^ and way
of writing has that Byasnay though he have a f^ir Copy before him, written in
good sense, and coherent enough, its against his nature t^ represent it,
without marring it i^ the Transcript, and Tincturing it with his own
absurdities. So that in the whole course of his writings, where he plays the
Thief for Histories, (easy enough to transcribe,) he employ^ this Talent,
adding Forgery to Robbery, and making his Author say more or less than indeed
he does, by which a good Tale is often spoiled, of this you have had many
instances already, I shall show you more in due place.

Page 113. And as a Wound does chiefly require drying Medicines, BLACK-WINE is
for this purpose, a most excellent RECEIPT; for it dries both of it SELF, and
per accidens, and of its own natural quality does dry up by repulsion. Perhaps
there is not more absurdity and nonsense, in so few words in any Book extant.
First, that Wounds chiefly require drying Medicines, is false in general, (all
digestives and balmes being moist) and of the Head, (his present Subject,) in
particular, because Arcaus's Liniment, (the most celebrated Balm for those
Wounds,) is of the same temperament also. Black-wine (a liquid) recommended as
a dryer per se, a simple called a the repetition of dry; and per accidens of
its own natural quality, is a Tantology or two expressions for the same thing.
The odd Phrase, dry up by Repulsion, is absurd, and this is the Composition of
this silly senseless passage, the like of which are plentiful, page 135 and 136.
Oedipus is not able to unriddle what he means in his presages. 17, 18, and 19.
It seems written near a full Moon, for none, but a Lunatic, could write at so
distracted and confounded a rate; words dropped by chance, or the garrulity of a
delirious Patient, are equal sense, and not less Rhetorical, than this Chaos of
Syllables, excepting the Learned (or rather Pedantick,) bringing in
Hippocrates, saying, that the name, with the name, is no false Heraldry, but
this, like the rest, I suppose was said at Ra^dorn.

Page 128. He most absurdly calls his twenty third Chapter general sig^^ of
wounds of the head; when in abo^^ twenty Paragraphs that compose (...) there
are but three properly such, (...) the rest being Prognostics, for t^^ most
part taken from Hippocrates, a^^ repeated in the next Chapter, und (...) the
right denomination; and as (...) fate, as nature, conspired to h^^ shame, he
gives several signs, as presages, and in the preceding Chapt^^ delivers
Prognostics, under the ti^^ of signs. The whole second period, page 138. which
takes up almost two pages, is a most extravagant and delirious fardle of
nonsense, calling Symptoms sentences, reckons the ignorance and neglect of the
Surgeon among the pernicious signs of wounds, reflects upon the narrow
genius of some Artists, who, he says, BY ordering their Patients thin Broths,
Ptisans, and the like, DO give way for their Patients (again) to drink Wine,
eat at pleasure, use Venery, etc. who can conjure up the meaning of this
Paradox, or explain how by ORDERING a slender Diet, a Patient is PERMITTED to
use excess, which is as rational as to say, by binding a man you let him loose,
and by tying him neck and heels you suffer him to run away.

Page 99. Speaking of the signs of gunshot wounds, he is no less in the
clouds, and talks as if the wind of that shot, which contused and broke his arm
in the foregoing page, had turned his brains upside down in this. I will
transcribe all that he says under that head, and pose you and all mankind, to
fathom or reconcile it to sense and common understanding, the signs of these, (
viz. gunshot) wounds are taken from their figure, or color, for they are
generally round, and of a livid color; from the sense there inflicted, making
or causing an obtuse sense in the part, or contusion, the part chiefly sufferan
ECCHYMOSIS by reason of the Bullet; if these appear, they declare a gunshot
wound. I give you his own elegant words, and pointings.

Pago 146. Children and Infants, because of their weak heads, and legs, are
often subject to fall from high places; but tells not how those Infants and
weak legs got into those Altitudes. I pray you consider the rest of that
Paragraph, and tell me if they be not of a piece. So page 150. speaking of
Fissures, he says, If any man neglect to raze them at first, although there
seem to be no need of his dilatation, he may for a few days find the cure
succeed according to expectation, but shall as readily meet, that to take heed
and beware hereof, is the master event of fools; pray, Sir tell me what he
means by this reflection.

Page 156. The story from Fallopius, stolen from Sckenckius, page 32. is most
falsely translated, and absurdly represented. I will tell you his words, those
of the Original, you will find among the Examples of his wisdom and learning,
the outward part being contused, this Contusion was communicated to the second
Table; and whereas the outer could not fall into itself, nor the inward into
itself, hereby it suffered this Fissure; can you understand the Philosophy
hereof, and what there is in this story, agreeable to a Seeds, which was the
subject of this Chapter?

Page 200. Next indeed in respect of the nervous substance being cold and dry,
we are authorized to use hot and dry Medicines; dry, that they may keep up and
maintain the proper temper of the Nerves; and hot, that they may take off all
cold from them. Although most of the nonsense in this passage be evident
enough, I will presume to point at one singular and most coherent piece of it.
The Nerves, he says, are cold and dry, and ^o preserve the later part of its
^emper, we have warrant to use dry Medicines; but why then hot things, to take
off all the cold from them, which is also one part of their tem^er; how does
that which ruins it, preserve it? or how can the intention of preserving its
temper, which is cold, be pursued by things hot, and taking away all cold? Oh
preposterous Hysteron and Proteron!andpunctured Nerves can endure the hottest
Oils, which the finger cannot; whence I collect, that a Nerve has not the most
exquisite sense; thus you see, erranti nullus terminus.

Page 273. The heart cannot long be corrupted with injuries, neither does it
spin out its grievous punishments This absurd passage was stolen from Crook.
Anat. page 419. where he says of the heart, only this of all the bowels is
not wearied with Diseases, neither endures it the grievous punishments of this
life. Crook was as great a Plagiary as this his Ape. and sometimes as unhappy
at a Translation; this is a quotation from Pliny, in Laurentius, Anat. page
368. to which refer.
of life. Page 234. he bids his Reader take these one or two Histories, and
then relates only one blind story, which he fathers on Glandorp, of a Scholar,
who FALLING upon a Door Perhaps it was a stone Door.
FELL upon a Stone, which broke two of his Teeth, which were afterward reduced.
This mus^ be a new and extraordinar^ Art to reduce broken teet^ I hope when it
is public^ the Bone-setters will no usurp upon us, and claim i^ as their
Province. Page 270 he says, Fallopius writes, that he hat^ seen Inflations of
the Lungs cured, an^ others to have died of the same. This piece of nonsense
Sckenkius led him to, by misquoting and misciting that Author, as I shall show
anon, till when I reserve my reflections on this passage.

For more concise and succinct Patterns of his absurdity and nonsense, see cap.
18. where he calls gunshot wounds WHOLLY the employ of the Sea-Chirurgion, and
yet advises Milk in the first dresses, (perhaps he thought the Surgeon
General allowed a barrel, or two among the necessaries.) Page 141. The head-saw
is used to remove away the distance of the Cranium left after the use of a
Trepan. Page 246. Vinegar wonderfully dissolves, and discusseth concrete Blood.
251. The heart is circumscribed by the Clavicles, Sternon, etc. 246. Boiling
Honey makes it more rancid. 240. Cartilages of the Windpipe are in continual
motion. 213. The Spleen ^s an Organical Bowel. 234. In Wounds of the Spinal
Marrow, although all sense and motion is destroyed, yet Seed, Urine and
Excrements, are VOLUNTARILY avoided. 216. Spigell. Laurentius, and Bauhine,
although they wrote in this Century, he calls Ancient Writers; the Eye is
framed of six Muscles. 214. The Eyelids are appointed as Draw-bridges, to lift
the Eye up and down. 231. The Ears (he must mean the outward flap, for he
professes not to meddle with the inward Organ,) are created for understanding.
If it were true, a great deal of that faculty would come to his share. 257.
Blood in the Cavity of the Thorax must necessarily and speedily be suppurated,
being consentaneous in a cut, where the great Veins or Arteries are untoucht.
266. The Lungs are the Instruments of Voice, made as it were of frothy Blood.
271. The Pericardium is so much softer than a Bone, as it is softer than the
Lungs. 274. The Heart, in its passive qualities, is more moist than the Cutis.
255. It distributes to, but receives not from, any part, giving MOTION to
others, diffusing its proper virtues, as it pleases it self, disposing its
sorrows as it thinks fit. 277. Is the Chapter of Wounds of the Arteries and
Veins; and next page, Wounds of the Veins and Arteries. 278. A Wound of the
great Artery is followed with a Fever, Inflammation, etc. [put out the fire,
and the house will scorch.] 287. Wounds of the Abdomen may be seen to penetrate
with, or without hurt. 290. An Incarnative Fomentation to expel Wind. 299. He
directs to supplemental Noses, the Fantastical Ridiculous way of Taliacotus.
These, and abundance more of self-evident pieces of nonsense and absurdity, you
have scattered here and there in this Complete Book of Wounds; sometimes single
passages, otherwhiles whole pages, often entire periods, that may justly come
under this censure, which I will only point at, to save the trouble of numerous
Recitals. See 2, 3, Paragraph of the 33th Chapter, p. 172. from the 18th to the
22th line, p. 176. the first seven lines; page 222. almost all the first
Paragraph, especially the later end, concerning the excellency of the Skin of
the Face; page 227. 1 Parag. See also f. 240, 251, 257, 266, 275, 277, 303,
308, etc. beside many absurd Phrases and Allusions, without sense, which are
frequent in this Book, of a new Method, as steering by a Microscope, page 111.
alluding a Caution, page 5. Instruments are Figures, page 143. and regulating
non-naturals; Engines to work with; every thing that putrifieth is affected
with a hot and moist humor; 72. storming by Catharticks; 199. sailing on the
Coast of Wounds; 210. steering a course on the Bloody Main; 349. dismantling
the parts of the body; 285. swimming on the bottom of the Stomach; 293. small
Rivulets, 23. with many more.

As to his Contradictions and Inconsistencies, they are thicker than I have met
in ten times the number of pages, demonstrating his Memory to be as shallow as
his Judgment; for he often opposes himself in the same page, sometimes in the
same or next line; his Method and Observations frequently confute, and
contradict his Prognostics; for what in the one he affirms to be absolutely
mortal, and incurable, in the other he not only directs to a Method for Cure,
but relates Proofs and Examples that they have been healed. I know little
Contradictions, and small Inconsistencies may insensibly and unawares slip from
the Pen of any man that written much, but it is very unusual to have so many, so
palpable, and obvious, so thick, and numerous, and opposite averments, so near
one another, as they are in so small a Book as this before us.

Page 77. He positively and without exception says, an Ecchymosis must be
suppurated, and soon after directs to a method for resolving them. Page 21,
169, 245, 304. and elsewhere, he dehorts the Surgeon from meddling with such
cures, as he has no Authority or encouragement from Art to be concerned with.
But Page 100, 132, 138, 163, 305, etc. being in a better humor, advises to the
contrary, and persuades him not to forsake any Patient, or be discouraged, in
the most desperate cases. Page 113. He forbids the use of moist things to parts
without the Scull. And soon upon it, directs to Wine, (which is actually such,)
and Oil of St. John's Wort, Yelks of Eggs, which are both actually and
potentially such. Page 129. Hot and moist Constitutions are not so apt for
admittance of Putrefaction. Yet, Page 72, 73. he affirms, that those Medicines,
which procure it, are all of that temper. Page 28. When the Skin is broken, he
decryeth the use of Oiles. And yet in many places directs the use of them in
Wounds, so Page 36. He is at it again, dissuading from the use of unctuous
Salves, especially where Consolidation is to be performed, because Page 40.
Oils do hinder Agglutination. Yet in Page 42. He directs. ol. Hyperic.
catellor. ana ij. G. elemni. pulv. veronicae; salviae, ana i. Tereb. Venet.
iss. as a Salve Agglutinative, and repelling humors. Page 28. He says, wounds
do only then inflame, when they do not suppurate, yet Page 49. He says pain
and heat do attend the part, while digestion is performing; and inflammation
increases, while matter is making. Page 136. He reflects on those who divide
the Art into many parts. When he himself is not only guilty of all the
superfluous mincing extant, but exceeded them, in giving two Chapters for one
subject, though the Title be somewhat diversifyed. See Chap. 60, 61. Page 134. He
says, if a Fever happen on Wounds of the Head, before the fourteenth day, its
a deadly sign. And in the very next period makes the like danger to attend
such, to which a Fever supervenes after that time. Page 129. He says,
Childrens Heads wounded are not so apt for Putrefaction; and Page 137. A more
speedy purulency of matter happens in them, than in Persons of age; and to
strengthen the contradiction beyond all excuse, he gives the same reason for
the one, that he does for the other, viz. Heat and moisture, making it in the
one the cause, why Putrefaction and digestion is tedious, and in the other,
more speedy and quick. Page 160. His Doctrine, and advise in the first
paragraph, is not only very inartificial and absurd, but contradicted in the
next, and the subsequent story. Page 273, 275, etc. He calls the Heart, the
principle of Life, the Prince of the Bowels, the chief Engine, and yet Page
178. He says, that the Brain is the principal Part. Page 186. He absurdly
affirms. That Putrefaction, and Sphacelus of the Brain are deadly Symptoms,
not to be found out by the opening of the Scull, after the Party be dead, and
immediately gainsaith it by an instance from Volch Coiterus, (stolen from
Skenckius. Page 24,) of many dissections, where more than half the Brain was
putrifyed, the Ventricles full of foetid green matter, and in the cerebellum,
very putrid Aposthumes. Page 188. He forbids the use of cooling astringent
things to the Head, in concussions of the Brain. Not only contrary to almost
all Authors, but his immediate direction of a Cataplasm of that temper and
quality, he says, (the same Page) restringents are not to be used, because
they hinder the exhalation of the fuliginous Vapors, through the sutures. And
in the very Page, not only directs to the use of Repulsives, and to have them
continued the first four days, but a Fomentation and a Plaster, (stolen from A
Pary, lib. 10, cap. 22.) which are both of them binding or restrictive, as you
may see by the Ingredients, Orris, Lalam. Aromaticus, Red-Roses, Frankincense,
Mastick Red Wine, Myrtils, Cypresnuts. etc. Page 200. He Apologizeth for the
use of Oil in wounds of the Nerves, because a moist Medicine. And immediately
urges with the same Zeal and heat of Argument, that use of dry things for the
same purpose. Page 254. He reckons (very erroneously) extrusion of the
airthrough wounds of the Breast, as a constant sign of Penetration. And in the
same Chapter, gives a story to the contrary. Page 256. He directs to the use of
Vinegar to discuss and dissolve Blood, cast into the Breast from a Wound, so as
it may be expectorated. And yet in the next Page says, such Blood must
necessarily and speedily be suppurated. Page 257, 258. After he had discoursed
of three ways (completely omitting a See Fallopius cap. 13. de vuln. pocul.
fourth, viz. Paracentesis,) to fetch off the Blood extravasate, in Wounds in
the Breast, of which two were Expectoration, and pissung, he persists in the
use of Tents, to discharge it that way. Page 25, 266, 267. He denounces
lingering death at least to Wounds of the Lungs. And yet not only directs to
their cure, but reports two stories from Glandorp, and several stolen from
Skenckius of prodigious Wounds there cured. Page 271. He makes Wounds of the
Pericardium easily curable, and in the same Chapter, says, that they generally
bring Consumptions, hectic Fever, ard death. Page 273. He Prognosticates
present death to Wounds of the Heart. And confesses in the same Chapter, not
only that a man may survive such a Wound, two or three days, but that
superficial ones may be cured. Page 278. The great Artery wounded, the Body
grows chill. Although in that very Chapter he delivers, that a Fever and
Inflammation are symptoms of that Wound. He says, page 279. The Veins carry
Blood to the Heart; and page 275 he affirms, that it does not receive from any
part, that its disputable, whether the Veins have their Original from the Heart
or Liver; and on the contrary affirms in diverse places, that they have their
Original in the Liver. Page 297. he says, The Gut Jejunum is exsanguial, and
in the same breath says; page 298. they are full of Vessels, and that the
plenitude of Meseraick Veins does contradistinguish it from the great Guts.
Pagr 304. He denounces absolute death to large Wounds of the Liver; and in the
same Chapter relates from Glandorp, the Cure of one, who lost great part
thereof; and another from Forestus, of one who lost a less piece and was cured.
Page 309. Death (quoth he) soon follows if the Stomach be cut; although in
the same Chapter he not only confesses such Wounds are curable, but gives a
borrowed story from Glandorp, and two stolen from Sckenkius, of most prodigious
ones healed. Page 24. He represents the substance of the Liver, as grumous,
coagulated Blood; and yet page 302. he says once and again, that the same
whole substance is a composition of Glandules and Ramifications. Again, in the
same page he suggests (as he does in many other places,) Sanguification is
performed by the Liver, and again says the contrary. Page 237. He says, If
the Tongue be wounded transversly, it is altogether incurable, and delivers in
the same page, that it is to be accounted curable, if it be not wholly cut off;
as he exemplifieth by a borrowed (though falsely quoted) story from Hildanus.
Page 233. He relates the story of a Soldier shot through the middle of the
Ear, but presently forgetting himself, says, the Cartilage was not hurt. Page
140. He says, Incision cannot, ought not, to be made through the temporal
Muscle; and page 225. directs to it, as a thing necessary and feasible. To
conclude this Topic, look into his 215 page, and you will find a sufficient
proof of his skill, agreeableness, sense, etc. which I will give you verbatim.
To CONCLUDE this Chapter, I shall END with THIS observable History; the FIRST
whereof shall be of a young man, who looking upward had a small Stone fall down
upon the upper Eyelid, the which did both hurt it, and its CARTILAGE -- suture
being made, and the parts enclosed by a Needle, the Cartilage remaining unhurt,
etc. is not this a most excellent account? is not the man fitter for a bawble,
or a suckingbottle, than to be an Author, that writes at this rate? Do not the
senseless wretches in Bedlam talk more rational, and ageeeable? Do not men in
their sleep, and in their drink, express themselves wiser, and more coherent,
than this vainglorious Scribler, although he had a Copy before him, which
would have guided him to more sense? -- To conclude, I shall end, -- the first
of one single History -- the Cartilage of the Eyelid was hurt, and was not
hurt -- separate parts enclosed by a Needle. I have not patience to trace this
vain naughty Scriblers doublings, contradictions, and perplexed notions; let us
shift the Scene, and go in quest of his Thefts, with a Hue and Cry after Mr.
Plagiary Brown.

His Robberies, as to History, are mostly from Sckenkius; and to be thought of
plenary and various Reading, he quotes not the Book whence he had them, but the
quotations, as he finds them in the Collector. I know this were very uncertain
to me, (because diverse men may quote originally one and the same Author,) if I
did not find all the Errors, miscitations, etc. that are in Schenkius, exactly
transcribed by our Plagiary, of which hereafter you shall have several
Instances. The greatest Part of that Anatomy which he gives us, is stolen from
Laurentius, Bauhinus, Spigelius, Veslingus, Read, and (as great a Thief as
himself,) Crook; this begets in him so many Errors, and Contradictions, his
Medicines, and Notions are promiscuously collected from several Authors, though
(as I have already said,) he had not the wit, and judgment to take the best of
either. Parey, Read, Glandorp, and a few more, seem his Magazines for this sort
of furniture.

What is more wicked, absurd, dishonest, and vain, what more ridiculous and
hateful to men of Sense and Letters, than this sort of Pickerooning? Sometimes
he delivers his stolen Stories and Medicines, as if they were his own; sometimes
names his Author plainly enough, out of a cunning crafty design, that those
which are Anonymous may pass more probably as his; sometimes he coucheth his
Author, and covertly quotes him, that an unwary Reader may think so, of them
also; but frequently, and for the most part, (especially when he steals from
Sckenkius,) he names those, which that Author quotes from. I shall take no
notice of those he truly owns. My intention is to discover to you, whence he
stole those which he thrusts upon us, without an honest confession where he had
them; of which sort I have already in Series given you diverse Instances, I will
now show you many more in the following part of the Book.

Perhaps he thinks to acquit himself from this imputation, by the List of
Authors, he proudly Catalogues in the beginning, but that will not excuse him.
Many of them being no where concerned in the Book, and diverse in the Book not
named in these; nor half of either of them ever known to him. So little does he
deserve the name of an Author, that wants skill to give us any new thing, wit
to choose the best from others, ability to express them legibly, and deliver
them truly, or ingenuity to produce any thing de proprio, for in the whole
Book, I find not one Medicine truly so, and but two that he pretends to, the
one of which is a digestive. Page 42. known almost to every Boy, the other a
Cataplasm for concussions of the Brain. Page 189. The like of which are in many
common Vigierus, lib. 2. cap. 7. Sckenkius, page 34. Forest. obs-Chir. 43. l.
6. Scultetus, obs. 3. Wiseman, lib. 5. cap. 9. Aq. Peadent. lib. 2. cap. 20.
Hildan. obs. 10. cent. 8. -- obs. 5. cent. 2. A. a Cruce, lib. 1. cap. 14.
Cook, Mel. Chir. cap. 13. sect. 3.
Writers, and the composition word for word, (excepting one ingredient) in John
de Vigo. 3. lib. 1 Tract. chapt. 5.

The Observations ending his thirteenth Chapter, are from Forestus obs. Chir.
lib. 6. Which he concludes with a great falsehood, to wit, that the cure was
performed by the method of that Chapter. The liniment he directs, he stole from
old Mr. Clowes. obs. 2. Who had it from the Florentine Physicians, our plagiary
sets down but half the composition, the first Inventors appointed Nitre, not
Vitriol, and commended it chiefly against burning and scaldings, for which it
was used by Mr. Clowes. His discourse chap. 14. of an Ecchymosis, is a lame
Transcript from Guido, and Tagaultius etc. and his method of cure, though like
Mr. Wisemans, is much short thereof, the two stories concluding it are both
stolen from Forestus, and falsely related; his theory of a wound by the bite of a
mad Dog, chap. 15. is stolen almost verbatim from Dr. Read, who wrote
defectively enough of the nature of Poisons, and their contagions; and to make
it worse, our padder gives no Prognostic or uncommon Remedies; the first
History in this Chapter is in Morb. Con. tag. lib. 2. cap. 10.
Fra^castorus, the other three in Sckenkius, in transcribing which, he omits
contradict. between Cardanus an^ The first observation of his 16. cha^
concerning Boccatius, and his Wi^^^ is Memorabil. cent. 1. de venenis.
in Mialdus, and Ramsey, though i^ all likelihood stolen from Sckenki^^ Page
834. His second is from Cap. 24. de venen.
Pare^^ but miserably butcherd, as is also the first, in his 1. chap. Which,
though he pretend to have from Ctesias, was stolen from Sckenkius, where the
story is related from Mercurialis.

His discourse of Gunpowder is stolen from Lib. 11.
Pareus, and Sect. 15.
Dr. Read. This first story of his eighteenth chapter is stolen from Obs. 4.
Clowes, but very ill transcribed. For he not only omits much of what the
Author delivers, as to median, and manual operation, (which are most material)
but adds what is not in the original, viz. That the Patient was much tormented
with pain, and other evil accidents. Pray compare the two Relations, and
observe the care, sincerity, and honesty of our complete Author All the
stories. Page 107. Are stolen from Sckenkius. Page 697, 698. His Anatomical
discourse of the Head, from Spigelius, Bauhine, Crook, etc. His 23, 24, 25.
Chapters are most of them taken from Hippocrates de vul^er. cap. errors and
all, without regard to the correction of Fallopius his Comments thereon, and
delivered in so ^awkard and slovenly a manner, with mixture of silly metaphors,
and odd phrases, that it is almost wholly disguised.

In his twenty third Chapter, you may discover him in Dr. Read, although he
doubles and inverts the method, omits many things, alters the way of writing
out of a vain design to conceal his stealing, or a presumption that he could
express it better than that learned man has done; for what he calls
Prognostics, sect. 17 the Plagiary calls Signs, cap. 23. The Doctor says,
Wounds of the Heads of Children prove sometimes rebellious, partly because they
are of a hot and moist constitution, which IS MOST APT to admit putrefaction;
partly because the habit of their bodies is thin, and so ministers occasion to
the breathing out of the spirits. -- in deadly Wounds of the Head, the Patient
lives longer in the Winter, than in the Summer, for in it the natural heat is
not so easily raised as in the Summer. -- This I know was taken from
Hippocrates by the Doctor, Parey and some others; but see now, ho^^ our
Bathyllus has mangled an^ grimac't it. Page 129. Wounds in th^^ Heads of
Children oftentimes prove un^ happy, they being of a hot and moist
comstitution, and this NOT SO APT* for the admittance of putrefaction -- in
Summer time, the Patient lives a shorter time than in the Winter, for in this
time the unnatural heat is not procured for putrefaction.

I know not a more absurd or unintelligible passage in all that learned man's
Works, (excepting his Anatomy, which is nothing but Errors,) than in the 20th
Lecture of Wounds, where speaking of the use of the Head-saw, he says, It will
serve to cut asunder the distance of the Cranium left after the application of
the Trepan in diverse parts. At this our Filcher would be nibbling, supposing
there was some extraordinary meaning in it, (fools naturally admiring most,
what they understand least,) and resolved to have it; but to make it more like
his own, varieth it thus, page 141. used also to remove away the distance of
the Cranium, left after the application of the Trepan.

His whole discourse of Trepanning cap. 25. has nothing in it, which is ^ott o
be found more fully, methodically, and intelligibly expressed, in abundance of
Authors, which I need not name. The two Stories ending them are from Hildanus,
obs. 19, 21. cent. 1. in whom there is no mention of the Venereal act with a
common Strumpet, which, our Author says, was the occasion of that Relapse; so
that here he adds to this Story, and omits a considerable part of the next,
viz. an account of what was observable upon dissection, within the Skull of
that unfortunate Lady. The Cataplasm which he gives, page 147. is stolen from
Doctor Read, sect. 10. The Story, page 148. from Blotius concerning the Son of
Philip King of Spain, (which our Author (for Alterations sake) falsely calls
Nephew to Charles the Fifth, So he translates Nepos, which in Classick Writers
is used for Grandson, but perhaps it is not agreeable to our Authors way of
Pedigree, nor skill in Latin, who finds it more credit to be accounted the
Nephew of Mr. Cropp, Chief Surgeon of Norfolk, (as he calls him) than the
Son of -- Brown a Tailor in Norwic^.
is in Sckenkius, page 15. and Bonnetus, Index, page 95. but transcribed
according to his wonted exactness and integrity. The other Story of the same
page, concerning a^ Boy fifteen years old, i^ stolen from Hildanus, wh^ (says
he) fell into the Fe^ver the 14th day from the hurt, and our exact Plagia^ry
says the 11th. The two Observations, page 162. are stolen from Scke^kius, Page
18. And placed here very unsuitably, the second, third, and fourth stories Page
170. are also stolen from Sckenkius. Page 31, 32. The first quotation quite
spoiled in the Copy.

The unguent Matrisylva. Page 174. is from Forestus, though he points not where
its to be found; the Author gives two Receipts thereof, the one simple, the
other compound; Obs. chir. 42.44. lib. 6.
of the Mastick, and thus, the Author prescribes, an ounce, the plagiary i. the
last. Page 175. is stolen from Dr. Read, Page 137. The History of Dodoneus is a
defaced transcript, from his usual Magaine Sckenkius, Page 27. And here most
impertinently illated; the Chapter treating of Wounds, of the two Meninges, and
in the observation, not so much as the cranium broken, or hurted. Page 181,
182. The several Medicines there directed, are from A. a cruce, and to be found
in Sckenkius, 23. Page. The Docoction. Page 182. is from Dr. Read. Page 141.
The History 184. from Sckenkius. Page 19. The Decoction and Plaster. 188. from
Pareus lib. 10. cap. 22.

Page 189. He promises as a rarity, viz. Something HIS OWN, which he prepares
our expectations to receive, as a great boon, giving it the Character
Bromfield, and other Quacks, do their Pills, viz. A true and happy composition,
of which I have with admirable success, had the advantage to speak the truth of
it. (pray mark the Grammar and Elegancy,) This great Arcanum, in the margent he
calls his own, and in the Column, Nunckle Cropps. Now is he not a most
despicable and odious plagiary, abandoned to impudence and ignorance, if it
appear that he puts upon us, and that the invention of this (not extraordinary)
Cataplasm was neither the ones, nor the others. I have already showed you where
there are many like it, and in John de Vigo the very same, Lib. 3. tract. 1.
cap. 5.
save only that Nuncle Cropp, or his wise Nephew, put in Motherwort, instead of
Woodbine. Behold now the skill, the honesty of the confident Assumer, I find
but this, and one more directly titled his own, and both of them as common, in
many Books, as nonsense and impertinence are in his own, and the later on which
he plumes, and brags, to have been invented before either of the pretenders to
it were in their swaddling clouts.

The fomentation and powder, Page 193. are stolen from Doctor Read, Page 14. and
Cornarius observation, from Schenckius, Page 26. His method for one of
punctured Nerves, Page 201. is stolen from Fallopius; so are his medicines viz.
the two unguents, only where the original de vulnerib. particul. Page 231. Ed.
Francf.
says common oil, the echo translates ol. ant. scrip. Page 189. The
observation of Dodoneus was nothing at all to the purpose, and stolen from
Schenkius, Page 27. as was that of the jvy leaves, Page 190. from Page 28. and
impertinently here inserted. Page 204. he gives us an history from Forestus,
which he says is in obs. 20. fol. 183. but is in 38 obs. cent. 6.1. much
wronged in the translation. That from Horatus Augenius, is Verbatim in
Schenckius, Page 636. that of Amat. Lusitanus is in Forestus loc. cit. most
impertinently placed in this Chapter, and the patient, though a Countess,
veryrudely called old Gentlewoman an Epithit most detestable to that Sex.

The three stories Page 265. of Hollerius, and Alexand. Bened. are stolen from
Schenckius. Page 280. So are those Page 270. of Gemma, and Fallopius. (see
Schenckius Page 253.) The later containing an absurd assertion, not to be found
in the Author, whence Schenckius borrowed, and our Author stole them. The
Histories of Benivonius, Cardanus, P. Salius, are stolen from the same Book, as
is also that of Cyriacus Lucius, for which he quotes de suis observat. when it
was but a private Letter sent to Schenckius. Page 262. The Histories of Galen.
Beniverius, etc. in the 285. page of our Scribler, is stolen from the same hand.
Page 270. That of Albucas. page 292. from him. page 367. Those of Jacotius,
Hollerius, Pareus, etc. in his 300 Page, are in the of 368. if Schenckius.

The Observations. Page 317. a^^ stolen from Schenckius and Glandor^ How he has
butcherd the two last^ I shall show anon. Those in his 312. page, from
Fallopius and Oethaeus, (whom our heedless Transcriber calls Ortheus) are in
the 332. page of the same Author. That in page 320. is in the 484. of
Schenkius, so are the two stories of Dodoneus. page 313. From him also page
150. that of Arceus 223. is from the said hand. Page 177. That concerning the
Prince of Orange. page 243. from him also, page 201. So that in all, he has
stolen in this single Treatise, from that one Book, above sixty Histories of
observations.

My next work was, to prove our Spark (notwithstanding his vain pretenses to
the contrary, by numerous quotations, much Greek, etc. pretense to learning) to
be an Illiterate, and silly scribler, and that even in the easiest, and most
inferior parts of writing, this the whole tenor of his language, and strain of
expressions, together with most of his translations, plainly enough
demonstrates, as I have already exemplified, and shall further prove. He cannot
excuse himself, by the common pretense, viz. That any of those faulty words or
passages were the errors of the press, because he corrected them, and that I
have no where fixed my reflections on any of them, nor have I taken any notice
of little common slips of the pen, or faults in Orthography, such are
Procataretick, Paracenthesis, Epolonticks, Raninae, etc. those being incident
from the best Writers. But I shall attempt my point by substantial and
inexcusable aberrations, and of them give you but a few (and those cogent)
instances, it being needless as well as endless, to produce all this book
affords.

Page 94. treating of venomous wounds, he most impertinently brings in the
famous story of Parysatis poisoning of Statira, for which he quotes Ctesias,
(an Author never seen by him,) its delivered to us by Plutarch in the life of
Artaxerxes: From him Hieron Mercurialis had it (as I conjecture,) and from him
Schenkius quotes it, Page 811 and thence ou^ Illiterate, according to the best
of him skill in Latin, translated it. Plutarch Mercurialis, and Schenckius
agree i^ the story thus. Ctesias Author antiquissimus, in libro de Rebus
Persicis scribit, quandam mulierem Statyram vocatam, maxim semper timuisse
venenum, and omni diligentia usam, ut illud evitaret; factum tamen, ut quaedam
alia mulier eam hoc modo venenaret; Cultelli partem alteram tantum veneno
infecit, and deinde coram Statyra, divisit aviculam parvam coctam, and qua
part avis tacta fuer at a veneno cultelli, oblata Statyrae, illico eam
extinxit; cum interim qua part avis non fuerat tacta a veneno, nullum
detrimentum ipsi ministranti intulerit. This strange story (the truth of which
is much questioned) is by our man of letters, Sr. Tho. Brown pseuded. ep.
thus rendered into English. Page 94. Ctesias an old author in lib. de rebus
persicis writes of a Woman, who through her whole life time dreaded poison, and
made it her greatest care to escape it, she invited another Woman to Dinner,
who seeing her Knife lie on the Table, that which for many years before, never
parted from I believe so he Tran slates, cultelli partem alteram tantum Venen^
infecit etc.
her side, but at Dinner time, took up this Knife, and poisoned it at the end,
she cutting her victuals therewith, was soon dispatched of her life, and the
other parts of the meat, which were untoucht with the Knife, were void of all
Poison. --

Page 148. He gives us a story of Blotius, but stolen out of Schenkius. Page 15.
And by him thus delivered from the original. Carolus Philippi Hispaniarum Regis
Filius, Caroli V Nepos, ex quartana aerem mutare jussus, in arce quadam nobilem
puellam corollas nectentem intuitus, cum ludendi causa ad illam properaret:
Illa vim metuens, in cubiculum fugit, pessulumque ostio obdidit, Juvenis eo
magis irritatus, in cubiculum praeceps pergradus effracta violenter janua
delapsus, gravissimum vulnus in capite accepit. -- This we find thus translated
by our artless Author, -- Charles, Nephew to Charles the Fifth of Spain. Who
after having been troubled with a quartan Ague, was by his Physicians directed
to walk, and refresh himself in the Air, as he was going out of his
Chamber Door, and seeing a Maid of Honor making of Garlands, made have to her;
she hereupon being surprised, making have away, fell against the Bar of her
Chamber Door, the young Gentleman being herewith vexed, that he should be the
occasion of this mischief, in a fury, going to his Chamber, meets with an
unhappy fall, which caused a Wound in his Head, coming from his Chamber. --
This is neither agreeable with the original, or sense, going to his Chamber
meets with a unhappy fall, coming from her Chamber. -- Who can reconcile this
contradiction, and nonsense.

Page 156. He quotes Fallopius, expos. in lib. Hippoc de vulner. cap. 16. for a
story that is in the 13. chap. and stolen from Schenckius. Page 32. Who thus
delivers it, verbatim from the Author. -- Ratio autem est, quia pars exterior
patitur contusionem, qua communicatur interiori laminae, quae durior est, et
ideo superficies interna ejus vitrea dicitur, quare externa in eodem ictis
potest cedere in seipsam, et interior cum non possit cedere in seipsam
contrahit rimam. -- Now observe the nonsense, and falsehood of the Translation
Page 156. of our illiterate -- The reason of his proceedings, after this
manner, was, the outer part being contused, the contusion was communicated to
the second Table, and whereas the outward, could not fall into it self, nor the
inward Table into it self, hereby it suffered this fissure.

Once more he is at Fallopius, page 270. quoting him as the Author of this
nonsensical passage, Pulmonibus vidi inflatos sanatos; inflatos etiam mortuos,
quare vulnera pulmonis ex aequo se habent; by him thus translated, I have seen
Inflations of the Lungs cured, and others to have died of the same, Fallop. de
Vuln. cap. 12. that he stole this from Schenkius, is most certain, for there
the words are thus falsely transcribed, and the reference mistaken, the place to
which he points, (if he mean lib. de vuln. pecul.) does indeed discourse of
Wounds of the parts contained in the Breast, but has not a syllable in it like
this. But in the fourth Chapter of his Book de vuln. in genesis Tom. 2. He has
something like it, de pulmonibus autem hoc scio, quod vidi plurimos sanatos,
imo infinitos, infinitos etiam mortuos, quare vulnera hujus partis ex aequo se
habenct. Its excusable in Schenkius to mistake, because he did it but seldom,
and among so many thousand Transcriptions, to err sometimes, is scarcely
evitable, but for our Scribler to take upon trust, and swallow nonsense,
misquotation and all, and pretend he had it from the original, there remains no
excuse, but an unanswerable proof, that he quotes at second hand, and
understands not what he delivers to us, is unacquainted with Latin, and the
Books he pretends to know and understand.

If there be not enough to prove this part of my undertaking against him, I
must refer you to cap. 10. And see how he comes off with Dr. Willis's notion,
and History there delivered, to chap. 29. for the History from Pareus to his
16. chap. for another from the same Author, to his 25. chap. for the two
stories from Hildanus, to his 33. chap. for the two stories from Nicholas
Florentinus, (vide Schenkius p. 31.) to his 34th. chap. for a story from
Hollerius, stolen from Schenkius page 27. to his 39th. chap. for an History from
Peter Forestus, obs. chir. 38. lib. 6. (not the 20th as he misquotes) to his
14. chap. for a story from the same Author, to cap 44 for an observation from
Solenander, Sect. 5. cons 15. which you will find to be the 32. story in that
Consal, and all these with almost all the rest of the observations in his Book,
translated after such sort, as shows plainly he does not understand Latin,
duorum canum magnorum from P. Forestus, two little Dogs, Page 78. in ditione,
from Schenkius page 332. in the City Depravatus, page 46. Deprived; praeceps,
Principle, depravatusmotus, deprivation of motion, tenebat, did cover, capita,
dead Corpse, etc. Nay I undertake to assure you, that there is not one story in
ten, of those his Books contain, but are falsely translated, and would have been
more truly rendered by a Schoolboy, of a years standing.

To conclude this Topic, take two Evidences more of this nature, they are both
in his 317 page, and stolen from Schenkius Page 461. The first from Dodoneus,
speaking of a Woman stabbed in one of her Kidneys, quem Vulneratum fuisse
particula ejus e vulnere exempta ostendit, he wholly neglects the other from
Fallopius, (whom by this and other citations, I find he never read, for he
quotes him usually de vulneribus, not distinguishing (because not knowing,)
whether it be his Book de vulner, capitis, an exposition on Hippocrates, in his
first Tom. or that de vulneribus in genere, or that de vulneribus peculiaribus,
both which are in his second Tom.) in the place before us he quotes him, lib.
de Vuln. cap. 12. Schenkius says, de vulneribus capitis, cap. 12. But there is
no such matter in that place, nor is that sort of hurt mentioned any where, in
those three Books of Wounds, save in his 22. chap. de vuln. pecul. and cap. de
vuln. in genere, in the former there is no such passage, as this our Author
mentions, in the later there is somewhat like it, viz. et ego vidi post ictum
pugionis concrevisse carnem illam laxam et sanasse. -- Schenkius thus renders
it. Vidi renem sinistrum pugione vulneratum sanari: Quia parenchyma, scilicet
sanguis ille crassus, concrevit in carnem. -- And our unlettered plagiary, I
have seen the left Kidney pricked and wounded, because the Parenchyma like
thick Blood, concreted into Flesh. -- O most egregious ignorant! With what Face
can thou appear in the Front of such impudent falsehoods, and heaps of
nonsense, blush for shame, and do penance for this most Criminal way of abusing
the World, and misguiding young Tiro's in an Art of so much use to Mankind,
draw a Curtain before all thy Pictures, thy Faces (like the Brass that stamped
them,) hide in some gloomy place, never to see light, till thou have expiated
the discredit thou have done our Art, and learnt more modesty, knowledge, etc.
And then appear in print again, and Title thy Book the Retractation or Index
expurgatorius of John Brown, who now sensible and ashamed of his own ignorance
and vanity, does make this public confession thereof to the World, whom he
has shamelesly abused, by his empty insignificant writings.

Sir, I pray you pardon this little transport, and suffer me to make good my
charge against him, by pointing to you a few passages out of an abundance
wherein he expresses himself as weakly, and silly, as any Writer you can have
seen. page 137 he makes no differences between Symptoms and Sentences. page
187. Contusions of the brain proceed from some outward cause invading the
brain, happening by a fall from an high place upon a hard part, being either
stony or rocky. page 199. Puncture of Nerves is an accident that does happen
most COMMONLY, by the Ignorance of the Surgeon SOMETIMES. page 200. And here
also as to the affected part, we are here to consider both the breadth and
narrowness of the affected part, page 271. The pericardium is a membrane
enwrapping the heart, swimming in it, (this to a man that knows Anatomy must
seem such sense, as to say, the purse swims in the money,) abundance of the like
instances of his wit, and learning in Orthography, Syntax, and other parts of
common sense, and literature are intersperst in his writing, and cannot escape
the intuition of any man, tho but indifferently skilled in either.

I must not pass by a very great example of his way of reasoning, etc. in his
185 page. where he wisely endeavors to prove, the possibility of an Abscess in
the brain, by urging this Aphorism of Hippocrates. If matter, water or blood,
issue from the Nostrils, Mouth or Ears, of any troubled with the headache, it
does discharge it, as if what thus flows thence, must certainly be from an
Abscess from within the meninges, and not rather extravasations, or congestions
without them, as is usual, as wise, and as much to the purpose, is his calling
on Galen, Avicen, Rhasis, to prove that nature found out ( contrived had been
better said,) these as proper Channels for that purpose, if a man would argue at
this rate, and reason from such Topics, how easy is it to prove the Moon made
of a green Cheese.

I had almost forgot to entertain you, with some pleasant instance of his skill
in Etymology, which he shows very often, and not seldom appears a ridiculous
fop, whether it be more silly than illiterate thus to force derivations, as is
commonly practiced, we will not dispute page 211 Frons a ferendo, because it
carries in it the LIVELY resemblance of heavyness, sadness, moroseness, etc. a
very pretty comparison, the lively resemblance of dead, dullthings. I know by
others its said so to be derived. Quod indicia animi prae se farat. But why not
more likely from Frondis, the branch of a tree, because it lively resembles the
invisible dilemma's, and divarications, some men's Wives place there Page 222.
Vultus a voluntatis indicio, why not from volvendo, as some have derived it, or
rather from Vulva, because of their lively resemblance, in mouth, beard, etc.
Facies, a faciendo because it makes the difference between a man, and a beast
I am sure that does not always hold, for I have seen some men's faces not exceed
a beautiful Baboons, and have constantly learned, and always understood, that
Religion and reason, not complexion or countenance, had made this
discrimination. The face (quoth he) sur^^sseth all other parts for beauty FOR
in it may be easily seen, ^^e storms and tempests of anger (...) passion, the
attempts of death, sadness, melancholy, etc. Very beautiful objects indeed, an
angry or melancholy countenance is without doubt as pleasant to behold, as the
society of men in those passions, is to enjoy. page 231. auris ab hauriendo,
the air being drawn in thereby. page 302. jecur quasi juxta cor. page 222.
oculus ab occulendo, at this rate some men, force Etymons, from consonations,
or semblance in sound as proper and pertinent, as to say Brown, a Brumosus,
filthy, stinking, or a Brundus a fool.

Although it be needless after all this, to say any more concerning this vain man,
to demonstrate him a very naughty scribler, I resolve while my hand is in, to
pursue my blow, and prove more particularly that he is an IMPERTINENT TRIFLER,
and that shall be the business of this head. His many mincings and divisions,
(against which he himself rants. page 136.) unnecessary distinctions,
insignificant parti^^larities, justly deserve to be censured under those
Characters, for to what end or advantage its done, appears by the little or no
difference, (except in needless words,) there is in the substance, and reality
of the things, as I have once and again observed, and reflected on.

Most of the observations are impertinent to the subject of those Chapters to
which they are annexed, and might as properly serve any other, for instance
what has the story of one, poisoned by eating invenomed sage, or flesh, to do
in a Chapter of wounds, made by the bite of poisonous animals, as little to the
purpose, is his Theory and discourse of Palseys, Convulsions, etc. because they
contain nothing in them ad rem, but are absolute, and general notions
(erroneous enough) of those diseases, not as Symptomatical (which is the
province of a Surgeon, but as primary and Independent, this I have again and
again pointed to, in diverse places. chap. 16: Discoursing of wounds made by the
bitings of venomous beasts, he brings in that of a Toad ^s one, I know he is
not the only ^mpertinent of his kind, but that ^imal having no teeth (as
Gesner, Johnson, Parey, etc. all Naturalists, could have told him,) cannot make
a breach in the Continuum, and consequently (be the venom insinuated how it
will,) its impertinent to reckon his bitings among poisoned wounds.

His 18. chap. is an heap of impertinent, trifling, rambling fancies, without
sense, coherence, or ought else like a man. -- I will give you a taste. -- Such
Masters of Art, who have dwelt many years in the wars, and have hazarded their
lives as well as fortunes, with their experience therein, -- that they may make
their speedy address to their entrance, form, and shape, -- what can be the
meaning of this Rhodomontado way of talk, and (to make short) referring us to
an insignificant picture, page 37. as a most elegant representation, how a man
may be wounded,) to supply the defects of his Theory, and bringing in head and
ears, the story of his arm being contused, and broken by the wind of a
Cannon-Bullet, what was i^ to the purpose of that part of hi^ Chapter, which
was to explain how Eskars were produced in gunshot wounds, perhaps there might
be some Ambition in it, and the occasion forced to show his Reader, that he had
been Surgeon of one of His Majesty's It was not the Kings, but a Merchant
Ship, hired into his Majesty's service, which in time of war, is an employ of
the least credit comparatively.
Ships. Though he wisely conceal her name and rank, as well knowing it would
have then stamped no more real credit on him, among knowing men, than his late
bare title, of one of his Majesty's Chirurgions in ordinary.

Can any man be the wiser for the Toyish Impertinent picture, page 104. that of
a Carpenter boring an Auger-hole, would as well direct to the use of the
Terebellum, or other extracting Instrument, what a ludicrous harangue and silly
comparison does he run upon, in the first period of his 19 chapter. -- The head
is such an admirable Syntax, etc. page III. being already assured of having our
sails filled with the gentle gale of our friends, and all kind artists, we
intend to STEER the Vessel of our present Discourse, by the MICROSCOPE of
Anatomy -- and then shall we arrive at the cranium it self. Chap. 26.
discoursing of contusions, (most absurdly numbered among fractures,) he defines
it to be an inward bent, or swelling of the Scull, and adds a story, no more
pertinent to the discourse, than the discourse is to the subject of the book;
his second history of the same Chapter is not less incongruous, being of a
fracture with a wound, which was no way suitable to the occasion. page 151. He
says for rasping out chinks, and small fractures, the Trepan is not so fit or
proper an Instrument as the Rasper, its a most silly assertion, though as true,
as if he had said a thimble is not so fit to cut cloth as a pair of sheers.
page 112. He gives us three heads worthy of note, the first and second of which
tantamount, viz. If the membrane, covering the Scull, be broken or divided, the
bone is to be suspected, says he in one place, suffer detriment and be
deraded, in another. page 159. he pedantickly quotes Hippocrates, for an
observation he confesses we daily see, viz. That hard things do rather break
than bend, whereas soft things WE SEE do rather bend than break. So page 255.
he quotes Galen, to prove that diuretics work by urine, as silly and trifling,
as going backto Euclid, to demonstrate, that three and two make five, or that
two parallel lines are equidistant; away Trifler, study more sense, and cast
off this Idle ostentatious way of naming Authors to no purpose, but to gratify
an Itch, and show your own vanity.

He is so affected with his new way of backing Chapters with observations, or
experiments, that rathan let one go without it, he does often produce stories,
nothing to the purpose, thus those two in his 31 chap. of concameration (stolen
from Schenkius) no way concern that case, and might serve any other fracture,
or wound of the head, as pertinently. In his 32. cap. treating of Collision, he
does not (for compleatness sake) define it, nor is the story subjoined any way
suitable. page 107. are eight impertinent useless pictures, which he calls
figures of the several species of a broken Scull, for which one can be no more
the wiser, than by his discourse, A. shows and indeed signifies nothing. C.
and F. differ not, nor does B. E. and H. what does H. demonstrate of a
contusion. E. of depression. F. of cancameration. H. of contrafissure. They
cannot possibly advantage the understanding, they may indeed make the Book
vendible to Boys, but no way useful to them.

His 36 Chap, is concerning Abscesses of the Brain, how fit to be place in a
Treatise of Wounds, let the World judge, or what the stolen story of Arceus is
to the purpose, he might have had more pertinent proof of the possiblity of
such Apostumations, and instances more suitable to the case in hand, than those
he produces, if he had consulted Sennertus, Zacutus, Tulpius, and diverse
others, who relate, that the whole Brain has been rotten and become matter.

Under the Imputation of this Topic, may be reckoned these darling words and
phrases, which he so sillily affects, and impertinently drags in by the ears,
such are, ALLOWED, AS TOUCHING, AND HERE ALSO, HERE MAY WE SEE PROPER ENGINES,
LIVELY REPRESENTATIONS, CORREPTED, ABRADED, SHELVES AND ROCKS OF FEAR, etc.
some of which he uses above ten times in a page. the Brain and its substance
dries of its self, and of its own natural quality dries. page 287. A probe or
wax-Candle going directly a great way into the Belly, in wounds thereof, is a
sign the wound penetrates. Thus he trifles, and by Tautologies, and Impertinent
Verbosity, spends his Pages, abuses his Reader, and exposes himself.

To conclude, the later part of his Book (the Chapter of Jointwounds only
excepted) is nothing but impertinence and trifling, giving superfluous
Chapters, for Wounds of the Shoulders, Elbow, Wrists, Arms, Hands, Fingers,
Thighs, Legs and Feet, I call them superfluous and needless, because that for
Wounds of the Joints was enough for the first three, and where he discourses
of the rest, is constrained to repeat, or refer to the same Method and
Medicaments he had directed before in general, and after all those many
distinctions and divisions, beyond any I have met, he not only omits many more
needful to be taken notice of, than some of which he has written, such are
Wounds of the Womb, Meseentry; Buttocks, Knees, Ancles, etc. And neglected some
of the usual accidents of great Wounds, viz. Erisypelas, Gangrene, etc. But
has plainly shown himself, to be the Fool he rails at, for dividing the Art
into more parts than God intended, and that his complete discourse of Wounds is
not only erroneous, absurd, trifling and contradictory, but defective and
incomplete, and written by a man of LITTLE EXPERIENCE or SKILL in the Art he
pretends to, to evince which was the last part of my undertaking, and al^ though
it has been abundantly manifested already, under the foregoin^ Topics, I will
superadd a few more to make it a charge indisputably tru^ and to prove that
none but a ver^ unskilful Person, could write as he does in ANATOMY AND
SURGERY in general, and particularly of definitions, Diagnosticks,
Prognostics, curatory method, and medicaments, observations, and some other
things promiscuously occurring in this Book.

That he is ignorant in the improved modern Anatomy, is manifest to every Boy,
that has read Blasius anatomia contracta. P. Barbet, or Dr. Gibsons Epitomy.
The cause whereof is his taking upon trust, and for want of skill, blindly
delivering what he has stolen from Bauhinus, Crook, Read, and men that writ
egregiously wrong, in most parts of that Art, in his discourse of Nerves, etc.
though he has mixed a little of Dr. Willis, and other Novel Authors, (perhaps
as much as he could understand,) with the old notions and opinions, yet he
cites few or none of them, but ^eems fond of calling on Galen, Hip^ocrates,
Avicen, Aetius, AEginata, ^^verhois, and Albucasis. As if there ^ere some
glory, or charm in the ^ames. Though he understands not, nor probably ever saw
their Books but from Crook, and other common Plagiaries in English, furnishes
himself with those smatterings he has of their Doctrines. Hence is it that he
falls into so many errors, and evidenceth so great weakness, and want of
skill, he might as cheaply have furnished himself, and his Reader with the
truest, and most accurate accounts, from Willis, Bartholine, Blasius,
Diemerbrook, Malpighius, etc. With whom in some places, (especially in his
Catalogue) he pretends acquaintance.

Sometimes he writes as if he had never heard, or were unacquainted with the
circulation, the Valves, etc. For he delivers (contrary to those Doctrines)
from Galen. lib. 5. de loc. Affect.
That matte^ lodged in the Thorax, is carried off b^ Urine, being first carried
to the Branches of the Vena Azygos, thence into the vena cava, Page 255.
to the right ventricle of the Heart, passing thence DOWN WARD from the
descending Trun^^ of the cava, to the Liver to come (...) the emulgents --
again, page 275. The Heart is the Radix, or Ocean both (...) Veins and
Arteries, the best of all Bowels, distributing to, but not receiving from any
part, giving life and motion unto others. --

As ignorant does he appear, in the Doctrine of Aliture, and the Lacteal
Vessels, when he affirms page 297. and 287. that the Meseraick Veins, suck up
the chyle, and convey the Alimentary Juice to the gate of the Liver, his
ignorance in the true Anatomy of the Brain (which he calls a Glandules
substance,) Heart, Liver, Lungs, Gullet, Stomach, Spleen, (which he calls an
Organical Bowel,) will be very manifest to any man, that can compare his
accounts of them with those of Malpighius, Glisson, Willis, Lower, Tilingius,
and other modern Anatomists, as to smaller parts, he ^s not a whit wiser, when
he affirms the Eye is made of six Muscles. Page 214. And that the Eyelids draw
them up and down, that the Piama^er, is made of the first scatterings of the
Sperm, and composed chiefly of Veins and Arteries. Page 174.

Page 124. He gives imperfect and false Figures of the Scull, the easiest part
of Anatomy, and affirms Page 118. that the outer Lamina, is thicker and
harder than the innermost Page 233. That the Ear was shot thorough in the
middle, and the Cartilage not hurt. He seems ignorant of the valve in the
Colon, by directing to Nutritious Glysters, and knows not the true Anatomy of
the Oesephagus, when he gives that odd description thereof. Page 244. And
attributes Diglution to the Muscles of the Larynx. He says, Page 198 The
Nerves are cold and dry, replenisht with a thick and viscous humor, and although
he has written two large: Books of Muscles, I doubt he will come off as Lame
and defectively there, as in other parts of Anatomy, unless he have learnt
better, than he has here delivered, for cap 71. inreckoning the Muscles of the
Scapula, he mentions not the Serratus major Anticus, cap. 72. in the Muscles of
the Arm, which he accounts to be but eight, he leaves out the Coracoidens, and
chap. 76. computes the gluteous minimus, among the extenders of the Thigh. Some
other mistakes in Anatomy, arguing his ignorance therein, being too many to
refute in this place, I pass over, only must tell you, that he calls the
Stomach a cold Entral, Page. 309. and says, that the Air is drawn in by the
Ears.

Instances of his great Skill in Surgery, are too obvious to need so much as
to be pointed at, much less remarked on. In definitions he always follows the
Ancients, or marries those of the Moderns, bewraying his ignorance in the
improvements and discoveries of latter ingenuities, Indiagnosticks, which he
accounts the chief part of Surgery, he is the same skilful man, affirming
that a solution of continuity, must be over fractures of the Scull, only
contrafissures excepted Page 274. That Wounds of the Heart, are made under the
Breasts, that in penetrating Wounds, the Air rusheth out. 254. That wounds of
the liver happen always on the right side, ( page 304) and under the short Ribs,
and that blood and purulent matter is voided by stool; that Wounds of the
Stomach are made under the sternon. 309. without considering that those parts
may be wounded other ways, as backward, upward, downward, from within, etc. So
that a Surgeon confiding in those signs that he gives, may be many times
deceived.

In Prognostics, he not only errs most notoriously, but contradicts himself,
and so confounds them, and signs together, as if he were as Ignorant in their
distinctions, as he is of their natures. Page 55.266. He pronounces wounds of
the Lungs mortal, if not suddenly, or speedily, yet after a tedious marasm or
Tabes, so he seems absolutely to presage of the liver page 304. Stomach. page
309. Heart, Bladder, Small-Guts, Diaphragma, etc. though examples to the
contrary, are frequently annexed, and very common in the Authors he pretends to
Write by, Fallopius Writes of (...) Woman shot through the Stomac^ and cured,
and that he has see^ abundance of the Lungs, of which Schenkius also page 253.
gives a prodigious See miscel. curios. decur. 2. vol. 2. obs. 37. Idem, vol.
3. obs. 189. Horstius, obs. 11. lib. 3.
instance. So of the Liver there are many wonderful Histories from the same
Author. page 397. Hildanus. page 108.109. Sennertus, pract. lib. 5. part. 4.
cap. 3. And himself quotes a monstrous one, from P. Forestus, where he doubles
the quantity of Rhubarb prescribed by that Author.

Page 132. He repeats what he had delivered in the preceding Chapter, that
wounds in the hinder part of the head, are less dangerous than those in the
forepart; Its what Fallopius makes a very doubtful question, its true, the
Temporal muscles are seated forward, and hurts of them are very dangerous, but
within the Scull, the occiput has no advantage, if it be true, as some affirm,
that all merely natural actions, or motions, as that of the Heart, Lungs, etc.
be performed by Nerves proceeding from the Cerebellum, and what Bapt. Hamel
has written, that upon dissecting living animals, he found the motion not to
cease, upon cutting the brain, but as soon as he hurted the Cerebellum, all
motion, and life, immediately vanished.

Page 180. He avoweth Hippocrates to be his chiefest guide, and recommends him
to his reader as the safest, a great argument of his little experience, even in
the case then before him, for immediately he says from him, that in wounds of
the brain, there is a fever, vomiting of choler, loss of speech, foaming at the
mouth, cloudiness in the sight, delirium, Convulsion, Fever, vomiting of
choler, (twice) Palsy, and lastly, he correpted with an Apoplexy. Mr. S.
Wiseman relates that sometimes in those wounds, the persons have remained long,
free from any such Symptom. I had once a patient that was wounded a
considerable depth into the brain, and yet rowed above two Miles afterward in a
Boat, and was diverse days under cure, before any of those accidents did
appear. But Sennertus gives an account of a Carpenter, that by a wound lost as
much brain as a walnut shell would contain, and yet -- Toto morbi decursu, nec
de dolor capitis, nec de ullo Symptomate conquestus est, and ambulare sine
ullo impedimento potuit, this is an aditional instance, of our Authors skill in
Diagnosticks, as of his implicit, and blind adhering to the opinions, and
Doctrines of the Ancients, and the mistakes they lead him into, as also of his
being a stranger to this sort of practice. I do not wonder at either of those,
but that he could not find this in any of the Authors he quotes, nor ever heard
of it, is to me very strange, since this, and the like, are in several of the
Books, listed in the beginning of his.

Can he be supposed a man of skill, or experience, that in so large a Book, and
a subject of such common practice, is not able to produce one medicine, or
notion that is his own, or that's uncommon, nor the best or choice of those that
are in every man's hand, neither an observation (putting aside that ridculous
one of his arm, for which he was allowed from the Chest at Catham,) that he
has not stolen, or borrowed, his Judgment and skill, in Therapenticks, and
application of remedies, you have already seen in his directing to an opiate
pill for a purge, and to melt sanguis draconis, and other dry gumes for a
plaster; here he multiplyeth instances of the like nature, directing to
suppurate Ecchymosis speedily, Page 75. 77. and giving a strange fomentation
for that purpose, made of Wormwood, Sage, Rhue, Scordium, Century, Hypericon,
Scabios, Speedwell, Chammamel, Cummin, etc. Boiled in Wine, which are far from
suppuratives, and hinder that intention, all of them resisting maturation,
rarify and discuss the homor, or blood extravasate, which are faculties
contrary to digestives, or suppuratives. Page 70. 103. And in many other
places, he mixeth large quantities of Myrrh, Thus, (which resist maturation,
sang. draconis, myrtils, and things which bind, with digestives for a Wound,
page 73. he calls Chamamel Flowers, hot and moist, page 36. 101. he gives a
very defective parcel of Instruments, as the needful to extract extraneous
bodies, infinitely short, not only of the variety many former Authors had
given, but are now used, and in the hand of every understanding Artist, page
112. the Scull being bare, must be scaled, or Raspt. 113. moist things must not
be used to Wounds of the Scull.

Page 142. He directs the teeth of the Trepan to be oyled when used, which I
know where he stole, but I cannot omit to note it as a sign of his
unskilfulness; for the Scull in living persons, is softer than they Imagine,
and apt to make that disturbing noise, they would prevent thereby. Moreover oil
is an enemy to the bones, especially where revently divided, begets caries,
fungus, and the operation is made more tedious by rendering the teeth of the
Instrument apt to slip over, and make less, and superficial Rasures of the
Scull. In his discourse of opening the Calvaria, he makes no mention of
excision, so much better than Cruciats, or any other manner, and become the
common way of laying ^are, fractures of the Cranium.

Page 147. He frequently directs Vormwood, in Fomentations, and Cataplasms for
the head, as several have done before him, but its no proper Cephalic,
offending the head which way soever used thereto, or conveyed into the Stomach,
page 26. he says the Jugulars wounded, are seldom cured, but does not say
which Jugular; if he mean the external, every Farryer can confute him from
daily experience, page 188. he forbids the use of cool repellent things to the
head in concussions, contrary to constant and commonly approved practice, and
to his own foregoing advise, and directs to Phlebotomy, under the Tongue, in
the Arm, by Cupps, etc. but says nothing of the Jugulars, which in such cases,
is better than they all; he directs irrespectively to the use of Tents, in
penetrating Wounds of the Breast, being (I perceive) Ignorant, that many such
are cured without them.

In other matters not strictly Chirurgical, he appears the sam^ man, his
Ignorance in the Philosophy and nature of poisons, he bewrays in his 17 chap.
calling the^^ compound substances, not natural, etc. page 135. in giving the
reason why Wounds of the temporal muscle, are so very dangerous, he omits the
chiefest, his Ignorance in any of the new Hypothesis, of Generation of Animals
is very notorious in those places, where he calls the brain a composition of
sperm, and maternal blood, Page 173.179. that the Piamater is made of the first
scattering of the sperm, etc. but these things are ecchoed from him, out of the
ancients, who like our novice, were strangers to those new, clear, and most
agreeable opinions, de generatione animalium, first started by Fallopius,
Harvey, and others, and since prodigiously improved, confirmed, and explained,
by Theod. Kirkringius, Regn. de Graeff. Casp. Bartholin. Tho. Filius, and
almost all modern Anatomists, and Philosophers to say nothing of the more
subtle, and new sprang Hypothesis of Mr. Levenhooks Animalcula. --

He seems not to know the Piamater to be a thin, and almost imperceptible
membrane, when he says its placed for a defense of the brain, from injury by
the dura matter, which membrane, though so called, is not on the inside, hard
enough, to beget any such hurt as he Imagines, nor is the brain capable of it,
because it has no sense of feeling, the piamater also being most exquisitly
tender as well as very thin is altogether unfit for the use he assigns it, what
follows in this page 173. as from Plato (to whose writings our pretender is a
stranger,) is another effort of his sense, which I need but repeat. And as
Plato Writes, even as a medium between fire and earth; these being of a
contrary quality, the Almighty has interposed water, and air; even thus the
brain, and the cranium, being of a different nature, mould, and substance,
nature has put these two membranes between. Oh! admirable sense, and most
ingenious comparison!

At length I have brought the man to his end, where he looks back on his mighty
performance, and not a little elevated with a conceit of its excellency; he
falls into this notable, whimsical encomium of himself, and his elaborate
writings. Thus (quoth he) have I sailed through the bloody Ocean of Wounds,
wherein I have like a faithful Pilot, shown how the young Surgeon may steer
his course, in the wounded main, and how he may keep himself and the Ship of
his Art, from the Rocks, and shelves of ignominy, and slander; my method is
good, and capable enough, of teaching young Artists, how to procure health, to
the wounded Patient.

He is so ridiculously fond of marine allusion, and affected with comparisons
from the Sea, and forces them to Tally, with what is no way suitable. That I
doubt the same Planet which rules that Element, guides and influenceth his
head, how well he merits the praise he gives his doughty work, and what an
excellent guide, he is to young Tyro's in Surgery and Anatomy, I have
sufficiently demonstrated, and dare appeal to the censure of all rational men,
Whether he be not a most unfit man for an Author, and his works the most
erroneous extant, of this day. I avow that I have not exposed the fifth part of
his faults particularly, but in general, do Challenge him, to produce that
page, in these two Books, wherein I will not show him culpable* under one of
those Topics, or heads of Censure, and reflection, which I have last proceeded
with, there being not one Folio, scarce a period, and but few sentences, or
lines but justly demerit it, and he above any man, in danger of coming under
Squire Ketches Operations, if Ignorance and Impudence were High Treason.

But I am not so much displeased, or deceived by his first sallies, as
astonished at his renewed efforts, and the repeated instances he gives of his
ignorance, and boldness. I know nothing more prolifique, and fruitful than
Vermin and noxious Animals, accordingly it seems the Mountain has again
conceived, the long eared* Creature has engendered anew by the wind, and
teemed more Books, no less than Twins having at once their Birth, and
thundrings, names, (able to cramp a man's mouth) proclaimed by the Mercury of
the Press, Adenochoiradalogia, Myotomia, Myographia.

What has the man no more shame, or modesty, than wit or learning, or are the
Fraternity as sunk in ignorance, or blindly mistaken, to encourage his Pen, by
giving sale, and reputation to his writings, like him who lately listed him an
Author of the best credit, to prove Wounds of the Brain curable, he might as
well have produced a broken echo for a Compurgator, but I perceive the humor
of ranking the vilest evidence, among the most Authentic, and those of the
greatest probity, (when it will serve a cause,) is got among the Plaster
box-men, as well as the Whiggs.

I wonder some Friends (for some I will presume he has) do not kill the Worm
in his head, (a sign there is no Mercury in it) by representing to him how
unskilful he manageth his Goose Quill, and dehort him from so profuse a
dispensation of his little Talent, or that some of his Enemies (of which I hear
he has contracted great store,) do not expose the folly, and chastize the
wickedness of his Pen, and by one of those ways, prevent him from troubling
the World with his impertinencies. I am told one of the approvers of his last
Books, is Doctor Allen of Bedlam, I believe a course of Physic from the same
hand, would do him more service, for he appears not only troubled with the
simples, but as distracted, and out of his wits as much as any Patient the
Doctor has, in that fine Hospital in Morefields, so indigested, and
incoherent, so full of Absurd Transitions, Ridiculous Assertions, Silly
Metaphors, and Allusions, Crude Notions, Notorious Thefts, Errors, and effects
of Ignorance, so Whisling and Extravagant, so Immethodical, Trifling, Empty and
Void of all Sense, so contrary to common literature, is all that is his own in
his first two Books, (as I have evinced) that it manifests him cracked in the
head, unsound in his intellect, wants Phlebotomy, Hellebor, a dark Room, and a
Keeper, to which I wonder none of those many skilful Gentlemen, whose names
(how obtained, I admire and wonder,) are prefixed, did not advise him, one I am
told, from whom he begged an approbation to his Book of Wounds, having good
regard to both their credits, refused to subscribe, and honestly exhorted him
to learn to write English, before he set up for an Author.

Tracts of Tumors, Wounds and Muscles, are innumerable, and even this age has
produced extraordinary discourses on those subjects, so that the path is well
beaten and plain, the road full of guides, (among whom I find him playing) and
yet since our scribler has wandered, and gone lame in so easy a way, what then
can be hoped, if he Travel in one more intricate, and less trodden, as is that
of the Kings Evil, a growing disease, with new phenomenon, become almost
Epidemical, and of which few have written large Theoryes: He is certainly a
bold man, to venture at such a knotty and difficult subject, (I smile to think
on the Ass chewing Thistles,) and a very ingenious one if he have exceeded Mr.
Sergeant Wiseman, whose discourse, (composed by the owned assistance, of the
most worthy and learned Dr. W. Needham,) on that Protean, Rampent Malady, I
cannot forbear, to praise and celebrate, and to pay my grateful
acknowledgments, to the memory of that judicious, and experienced Artist, who
writ so much like a man, on many other subjects, to the great advantage of
mankind in general, and we of the healing faculty in particular, I wish our
Author could as justly claim the Bay's but ex quovis ligno. --

Sir, the business of this Letter is not to tell you, how free you are like to
be from future importunity for more Books, but to let you know your trouble
will be enhanced, by the addition of a more tedious employment, for I must now
beseech you, (who I know to be a very competent judge) to examine before you
buy, and become both Censurer and Factor; particularly I desire from you, an
account of this Author, and his other writings, whether they be of the same
meal, or (which I can by no means persuade my self to hope,) has acquitted
himself better like an Arcist, than he has done in the more facil, and
presidented subjects of his former Books. A Physician is like a Friend in re
incerta cernitur, (you see I am for a scrap now and then, as well as he, but my
hopes hereof are discouraged not only by his 2 first Books, in general, but an
unlucky passage in the 31 page of that concerning Tumors. -- and as we seldom
see a wiseman gain knowledge from a Fool, so is it as rare to gain a wise
Medicine from an ignorant Block. -- I would also know his Education, what
esteem his Person, and Books have among the worthy Brotherhood in the Town,
what right he had to be called one of his late Majesty's Chirurgions in
Ordinary, whether it were real, and he in salary, and attendance or it be only
a Feather, obtained by the power of Guinia's, and become a Fashion for every
emperical pretender, to wear in his Cap, formerly used by them of little money,
to keep them from the men of Gath, now by them of little wit, and skill to
delude the People into an opinion of their merit, on account of both your
answer to those particulars, and what else you know of the like nature
concerning this busy Squire, will gratify an impertinent curiosity, of your
true Friend and Servant.

Sutton Tuesday after Easter Week, 1685.
FINIS
The Author of these Papers, (as became a Critic) used all possible care to
have them very correct, that he might not be liable to recrimination, and seem
guilty of such errors, as he reproved in the Books he undertook to censure: But
in despite of all his caution, diverse oversights and mistakes have happened at
the Press, which his absence deprived him of ability, timely to correct; he
has therefore collected the most important of them, leaving those of less
moment to the Readers Charity to amend, as his Skill discovers them, among
which are many mispointings, and errors in the Margent.
PAge 17. line 25. read genesis 4. p. 24. l. 4. and 19. r. construction, p. 25. l.
29. r. first, p. 27. l. 11. r. the way, l. 13. blot out Ripe, l. 19. r. that
therefore, p. 29. l. 20. r. is every whit, as wild, p. 30. r. carries, p. 32.
l. 7. r. corrupted, p. 34. l. 20. r. as he, p 36. l. 28. r. and that while pus,
p. 42. l. 7. r. facando, l. 15. r. cutem, p. 44. l. 3. r. Platerus, l. 7. bot
out Syrup, p. 48. l. 10. and very, l. 20. excission, l. 30. these Tumors, p.
49. l. 1. I attribute, l. 17. r. the two, p. 53. l. 25. testes, l. 29.
conspeciatur, p. 54. l. 25. vernacuate, p. 58. l. 28, natures, p. 59. l. 1.
education, l. 10. ova^yes, tube, in the margent, r. Spiceleg. Anat. p. 73. l.
11. blot out you, p. 78. margent, r. little corpusculum, l. 14. nourished, p.
80. l. 3. r. calor. p. 83. l. 8. his list of, l. 21. c. g. l. 22. Elemi, p. 84.
l. 25. est tristis, p. 87. l. 12. alienatio, p. 88. l. 7. of Sylvius, p. 90. l.
4. as not. p. 91. l. 8. his method, p. 94. l. 6. to do with l. 8. see his, l.
20. Spirituum, l. 27. compressing, p. 95. l. 8. the fourth, p. 101. l. 19.
glect. p. 110. l. 20. curable, p. 118. l. 16. Random. p. 130. l. 18. calam, p.
138. l. 24. and 9. l. 27. miraldus, p. 139. l. 11. medicin. p. 145. l. 9. for
cure of, p. 151. l. 3 from her, p. 152. l. 27. habent, p. 173. l. 12. marreth.
p. 179. l. 12. ^ot apt, l. 15. ricently, p. 186. l. 27. for wonder, r. ignore,
(...). 187. l. 11. him padding, always. r. Hippocrates, Chi^urgery, Schenkius,
etc.

In the preface, p. 1. l. 14. seduced, p. 9. l. 12. blot ^ut him, p. 12. l. 20.
his first, p. 13. l. 14. poros, p. 15. l. 8. ^ringy, p. 16. l. 5. gleet. p. 18.
l. 13. rete. p. 21. l. 13. reci^^s, p. 22. l. 7. succo, p. 31. l. 13. other
sorts, p. 38. l. 10, 11. ^umpsimus, making our, p. 39. l. 26. Hactenus
repertoum, l. 28. Ae^eis, p. 43. l. 19. medicatus.


