DIES DOMINICA, OR THE Lords Day.

Ignat. Epist. ad Magnes. After the Sabbath, let all that love Christ,
celebrate the Lords Day, as being consecrated to the Lords Resurrection, the
Queen, and Princess of all days.

THE Lord's Day. OR, A SUCCINCT NARRATION Compiled Out of the Testimonies of H.
SCRIPTURE, and the Reverend Ancient FATHERS: and Divided into Two Books.

In the former whereof is declared; That the observation of the Lords Day was
from the Apostles: and by the Christian Church solemnized in a continual
series: that its Institution was Divine; and what things do hinder its
solemnity.

In the Later is shown, In what things its Sanctification does consist.

In both which also Several Ecclesiastical Antiquities, not unworthy to be
known, are explained.

Lately Translated out of the Latin.

Aug. de verb. Apost. Sermon. 15. The Lords Resurrection has promised us an
eternal day, and consecrated for us the Lords Day: which is called the Lords
Day, because it seems to belong properly to the Lord.

Acta Martyrum, apud Baronium, an. 303. n. 37, etc. The Martyrs being called
into judgment, and asked of the Proconsul, Whether they had done their Collect,
or celebrated the Lords day? answered, with the same words often repeated, that
they were Christians, that they had done these Lords Collect, and celebrated the
Lords Day, with a congruou devotion of Religion, because it could not be
intermitted.

London, Printed by E Leach, and are to be sold by Nevil Symmons, at the
Princes Arms in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1672.

TO THE READER.
Reader,
IN the midst of our distractions, confusions, and desolations, our declinings,
and the increase of wickedness in the land, it would be no small reviving to
our hopes, if we could but procure a more general and conscientious observation
of the Lords day; I mean not [a Judaizing, Touch not, Taste not, Handle not, Go
but a Sabbath days journey, Heal not on the Sabbath day, Rub not the Ears of
Corn to eat, etc.] but a holy diligence all the day, in learning the Will of
God, in reading and hearing his Word, in singing and speaking out his praises;
in calling upon his name in the Communion of Saints, in the Sacramental
Commemoration of the Death and Resurrection of our Savior till he come: Nor do
I mean the preferring of the Name of the Sabbath, before the naming of it The
Lords Day: But the real separation of it for these Holy works, from all works
that are common and unclean; not calling that unclean, which God has cleansed;
but avoiding all unnecessary things, which are a true impediment to the duties
of the day, and to the edification and comfort of our Souls.

Could we but procure a general Conscience of this Holy day and work, Oh, what
a blessed means would it prove to the increase of knowledge, and holiness among
us! How could men spend one day of seven in the serious reading and hearing of
Gods Word, and not grow in the understanding of it? How could they spend each
week a day in hearing heavenly discourses, and in holy prayers, praises, and
thanksgivings, and not become themselves more holy, if they did this in good
earnest, and not with hypocritical formality! Where there is a profitable
public Ministry, what a furtherance would this be to its success? Where there
is not, O what a supply would this be in Families. If Parents and Masters did
but spend the day in Catechizing their Children and Servants, and reading to
them the Word of God, and holy, profitable Books, and in praying, singing of
Psalms, and fruitful Conferences, how much would it make up the loss of a
profitable Ministry, where there is none? But, I confess, for those many
thousand families where none is able thus to Read or Pray, the case is hard, in
these times when they dare not come to their neighbors families that can help
them! But O, that the love of our souls were as strong, as natural self-love is
in the preservation of our lives! If prohibited persons did put the case to me,
Whether it were lawful for them, against their Rector's wills, to go beg bread
at their neighbors houses, rather than famish, or feed on grass, I think their
resolutions would anticipate my answer. And if he have not the love of God in
him, who sees his brother in need, and shuts up the bowels of compassion
from him; I may infer, that he neither rightly loves God, nor himself, who
will suffer his Soul and Family to famish, and deny God his Worship, and spend
the Lords own Day unprofitably, and think it a sufficient excuse to say, I was
forbidden, and man must be obeyed.

Nor will it excuse Neighbors from helping one another, who live out of the
reach of public helps (as alas, too many do, especially in the remote parts of
the Kingdom) to cast the blame on negligent Ministers, or to cry out, It is
the Prelates that famish so many souls, nor to complain of the silencing of
Faithful Teachers; For every man has his own part to do in building up the
City of God: And if you do not your own work, you do but condemn your selves
while you complain of others.

Was that your Covenant with Christ, that you would serve him, if others did,
or if none forbad you, or else not? If others perform not their duty, will you
sin for company, and yet condemn them? If you think they do ill, why will you
imitate them? If well, why do you blame them? Do you cry out of silent or
unprofitable Ministers? and do you think that silence and unprofitableness in
the Governor of a Family is no crime? What if all the rest of the Town denied
food or clothing to the poor? Would your obligation to feed and cloth them,
think you, be the less or the greater?

As ever you would have your families to be under the blessing and protection
of God, and not exposed to the miseries of such as he forsakes, see that you
dedicate them as holy Societies to God, and set up his Government over them,
and his worship among them; especially in the Holy Improvement of the Lords
Days.

And I take it to be a merciful and comfortable prognostic, that God has
suddenly stirred so many, to write on this subject, and to confute all that is
said against this duty. And some more are ready (if not hindered) shortly to
come forth.

Among them all, I take this Book to be of singular weight and worth; which
having declared in my own, lately published, on this subject, it has
occasioned many to enquire after it; and a worthy Knight, who had this
Translation by him, to be willing to publish it. I confess, I intended no more,
than to provoke the Learned to take more notice of the Book as it is in the
Latin Tongue; For being strong in the testimonies of Antiquity, and the opening
of Church-customes, (on which, as an historical evidence of fact, I laid in
this controversy no small stress) I thought it fittest for the perusal of the
Learned. But, seeing it is now translated, I hope it will also be profitable to
many, especially of the more judicious sort of Readers, who have no more than
the English tongue. The Author was a man eminent in his time, for great
Learning, Judgment, Piety, Humility; but especially for his acquaintance with
the Writings of the Ancient Teachers of the Churches, and the Doctrine and
Practice of former ages. The Lord bless this, and all other Labors of his
Faithful Servants, for the preservation of Knowledge, Holiness, and Concord,
which Satan and his forces are so fiercely, and alas! so successfully
assaulting throughout all the world.

Thy fellow Servant in the Faith, Labor, and Patience of Believers, Richard
Baxter.
Sept. 2. (the anniversary day of Londons flames) 1671.
To the HOLY, ORTHODOX CHURCH OF CHRIST. Happily cleansed from the filth of
POPERY, My dear Mother, GRACE and PEACE.
THe Church of Christ in old time, appealed to the Scriptures, Councils, and
Records of the Ancients, in deciding of questions, whereby the Peace of the
Church was disturbed, or course of the Gospel retarded: and then the Ancients
did interpret the Scriptures, not as they were by the crooked interpretations
of Sectaries, or Heretics, accomodated to their own dreams, but according to
the Analogy of Faith, by the consent of other Scriptures. In the Church there
has always been great profit by, and very much need of Councils: and in
conclusion, if ill-employed men had rejected the Records of the Ancients, they
were forthwith exploded by the Church.

To these, I say, did the Church go straightway, as to an holy anchor, when any
tempest arose, as may be seen in Sisinnius, who persuaded Theodosius, studying
to put an end to the unseasonable controversies of that time, (...), Sozom. 7.
12.
etc. to avoid disputations, with Sectaries, and to require of them, Whether
they would receive those, who before the distraction of the Church, were the
interpreters of the Scripture and Doctors? Unto whom pronouncing judgment on
the questions emergent, according to the Scriptures, they should submit
themselves.

I judged the same was to be done by me, (O Spouse of Christ, and beloved
Mother) when this unhappy question about the Lords Day solemnity (always in
use and esteem in the Christian Church) arose: that the things which the Lord
has written upon this matter in the Holy Records, being first observed, I
might betake my self to the Councils and Records of the Ancients: by whose
engines, (for no new ones do I judge to be necessary to vanquish the enemies
which oppugn the solemnity of this Festival) I may assault the adversaries of
this ordination, both with the authority of Scriptures, and likewise with the
consent and records of reverend Antiquity plainly attested: in gathering
whereof, I thought it expedient to discover to Thee the purpose of my mind,
which take briefly thus.

First of all, I gathered into one, the judgments of the Ancients, upon this
Subject, not that I ascribe more to Antiquity than Truth: for that I leave to
the Papists: but I am determined with St. Hierom, to read the Ancients, try Ep.
ad Alex.
all things, hold fast what is good, and not recede from the faith of the
Catholic Church. I run not unweaponed, that is, deprived of spiritual
knowledge, revealed in Gods Word, to the Ancients; as to the Philistian Smiths,
for sharpening my husbandry instruments, but because I see that the Holy Ghost
has very sparingly delivered himself in the Scriptures (although in them he
has recommended to us its name, use, and Apostolical institution) about the
Lords Day, I therefore consult the Ancients, who faithfully retain what they
received from the Lord by the Apostles, that their pious opinion and practice
being observed, we may observe likewise what we are to do in this case.

Secondly, Diverse have set out sundry things upon this subject, to the great
profit of the Church: but few have touched what was the sacred practice of the
more pure Church, in keeping this solemnity entirely. These things gave me
occasion to enquire more deeply into the question; not only to help me against
my own forgetfulness, but also to mitigate tediousness to others, into whose
hands Ecclesiastical Writers have not either fallen, or being detained with the
weighty offices of their charge, could not peruse them. Ut profit hominibus, si
fieri potest, multis; si minus, paucis; si minus, proximis; si minus sib^
Senec. de ^tio sapientis.
It was in my design hereby to make provision for both vacancy and studies,
whilst I present unto their eyes a brief account of the antiquity of the Lords
Day. This is required of every man, even* nature dictating it, That he profit
many, if it can be; if not so, yet a few; if not so, yet his neighbors; if not
so, yet himself.

Thirdly, I judged it not unseasonable, in this deplorate state of the Church,
to set forth this solemnity; and that for a twofold reason; because the
abominable, and un-christian-like violation of the Lords Day, does expose the
holy Worship of God Almighty to the wicked's scorn: and from hence, even hence,
has flown an inundation of all that misery, whereby the darkened glory of the
Church has fallen. Alas! with what squalor and miseries, is the face of the
Church, sometimes shining and happy, now in all Nations obscured! They who love
it with a sincere love, do see, and lament it; although they who are bewitched
with the malignant spirit of Popery, see, and rejoice at it: Neither is there
among us any Ps. 74. 9.
that knows how long; the godly are fallen by the sword, the little ones are
dashed together; and they that are with child are cut asunder: oh, woe is me!

-- Quis talia fando
Temperat a lacrymis? --
-- Who can forbear
At telling such events to shed a tear?
This afflicted face of Christ's Church does call us to true repentance, in
performing whereof, the violation of the Lords Day (which brings fuel to this
fire) in the Church of every Nation, ought to grieve us. For this Festival has
been solemnized, as was fit, in the exercises of piety, according to the rule
of Gods Word, but by few: which the many Fairs upon it, for gainful labor, in
all Nations, feasts, drunkenness, dancings, and the impious profanations of it,
by Stageplayes, do testify. These flagitious Crimes (which do obscure the
grace of Christianity, and give farther occasion of slander to those who
blaspheme the name of Christ; and which the purer Church abhorred) do every
where rage on the Lords Days, without punishment, to the great scandal of
Religion.

In another respect also any man sees that this argument agrees not with the
secure condition of these times: because in this age, if ever, Religion among
many, languisheth under a bare profession of the Gospel, and its power lies
down almost extinct, and dead.

I judge the sanctification of the L. day, to be a present remedy for both
these maladies. First, it will prepare a way to extinguish that vehement flame
where with the Church is every where a burning. This may easily be taught by
the example of Gunther amnus, that most pious King of France: who, after he had
observed, not without grief of ^onc. Ma^^s^. 2. c. 1.
mind, that the State of his Kingdom waxed worse, and that he fought with
unhappy success against the Goths; the source of so great an evil being a
little more deeply sought out, he reproved the Bishops which sed not with
Gospel Doctrines the people committed to them, who, by their profligate manners
stirred up the wrath of a revenging God against him: to prevent which evil for
the future, it was ordained in a Council, That the Lords day should be kept
religiously. The pattern of this most Christian King, while the victory in this
our age inclines to the enemies, persuades us devoutly to keep the L. day
solemnity; for which we have ^ought unsuccessfully almost these twenty years,
against the enemies of our liberty, that have roared in the Churches of God, to
our great sorrow. When we count the causes of this will, why should we not
apply our minds with Gunther amnus to bewail the heinous violation of the Lords
day? and with the ancient Conc. Paris Can. 50.
Fathers, who observed, that the Lords day was not reverently kept, ordained,
That first of all the Priests, then Kings and Princes, and all the Faithful,
should chiefly see to it, that the due observation, and Religious Devotion of
so great a Day, now in so great a part neglected, be hereafter for a sign of
Christianity more devoutly exhibited: and that the Christian Magistrates
excellency be humbly desired of the Priests, that in honor and reverence of so
great a Day, all may be put in fear, that men presume not to keep markets, do
their own pleasure, and works, on this Holy and Venerable Day. For when this
solemnity is either taken away, or neglected, there is no more hopes of the
other parts of Religion, than there is of the bodies safety, when the head is
cut off.

Neither can there be used a more excellent remedy for curing the other malady,
than the holy observation of this Festival; for the zeal of Religion waxing
cold, and purity of holy Doctrine being obscured, what will be more fit to heal
errors, and stir up the languishing strength of zeal, than that an entire
Worship be offered up both publicly and privately, to God on this day? while
the holy Word of God is piously preached, attentively heard: the Sacred
Mysteries devoutly, and according to Christ's institution celebrated: Prayers
poured into the hearts of the Faithful, by the Holy Ghost, are with all
humility offered up to God: Sacred Hymns sound in the Church, with a godly joy;
the afflicted members of Christ, and the poor provided for bountifully by the
rich; and those that are sound in mind do mercifully comfort them that are
sorrowful.

These are those exercises of the Lords Day, which will uphold Religion, when
it is falling: which, if they be religiously observed of the Church, every one
sees how great an access will be made from thence to the Christian Religion,
which we all profess. And these are the things (Most Holy Church of Christ)
which in this elaborate Treatise I do not utter foolishly of my self: but
humbly offer all things to Thee, as they are taken out of the Holy Scriptures
(where they afforded me any light in discussing of this dispute) and the lights
of purer Christianity: not because, as sometime Chrysostom, Homil. post
prioris exilii reditum; Thou stand'st in need of my Doctrine, which indeed, I
acknowledge to be but small, but that I might testify my good will to thee,
and that at length thy natural Sons (to whom Religion is both their care and
their pleasure) may in some sort see what works they are to attend on that Day,
and from what to abstain, and with what authority the institution of this
solemnity is supported. With Gods assistance I will briefly show from the Holy
Scriptures, and Fathers of better credit, asserting all these things.

Thou have therefore (most Beloved Mother) the purpose of my mind in sending
forth this little work. Do thou then, of thy humanity to thy friends, pardon
the mistakes how great soever they be, in collecting these things, and take in
good part the slenderness of my wit, which endeavored according to its power,
to benefit chiefly thy natural sons that sojourn in Germany (which I love upon
many accounts:) This does he humbly ask of thee,

Who loves Thee and Thine, with a sincere Love in Christ, Theophilus
Philo-kuriaces Loncardiensis.

AN INDEX OF THE CHAPTERS.
BOOK 1.
THe Preface; in which first is propounded the Scope of this Treatise.
Secondly, is shown why we meet with more things about the duties of the Lords
Day* in the later, than in the former Councils. Thirdly, how far the Church at
this day may be obliged by the authorities of Provincial Councils, that ordain
these duties, although some things of lesser value be put among their Canons.
Fol. 1. Chapter 1. That to the solemn Worship of God a determined time is
necessary. Concerning the Assemblies of the Apostles, and how they were present
in the Jewish Synagogues on the Sabbath day. 1. Chap. 2. The ordinary time
observed for celebrating the public worship of God, after Christ's death, was
the Lords day, solemnly used by the Christian Church, in the very Apostles age.
Three Texts of the New Testament, namely, Acts 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 2. and Rev. 1,
10. are briefly weighed. 14. Chap. 3. After the Apostles death, the Church met
upon other days than the Lords. The ancient Christians observed the Sabbath
not as an holy day: the differences between the observation of the Lords day
and Sabbath. How Constantine the Great ordained the Parasceve to be observed.
Anniversary Festivals were not celebrated with that solemnity, as the Lords
Day. Anniversary Festivals not to be preferred to the Lords days: anciently
they bowed not the knee on the Lords Day. 30. Chap. 4. The chief of the Fathers
make mention of the Lords day solemnity: the authority whereof depends not upon
the Emperors Constitutions. When it was first ordained that Judges should
cease from hearing Lawsuits on the Lords day: the Christians were punished for
observing it. What it is Dominicum agere. 52. Chap. 5. The reason of observing
the Lords Day. It Is called the first day of the week by the Evangelists and
Fathers, and the Lords day: Sunday also, and why: the Sabbath, and Christian
Sabbath. Why the Fathers used so seldom the name Sabbath. What Synaxis may
signify with the Ancients. 66. Chap. 6. The whole Lords Day is to be
sanctified to God, and not only some part thereof. 77. Chap. 7. The ordinance
of the Lords day is not properly to be reckoned amongst unwritten Traditions.
It was instituted of Christ by the Apostles. The Apostles prerogatives above
other Ministers of the Church: the things ordained by the Apostles are of
Divine right. 90. Chap. 8. In the compass of a week one day was sanctified,
from the beginning of the world. This is affirmed by Jews and Christians. How
Adam had need of the Sabbath. Mention of a seventh day observed amongst the
Heathen. The authorities are weighed, wherein the observation of the Sabbath
among the Patriarchs, is denied. Why the Heathens are not upbraided with the
profanation of the Sabbath. 107. Chap. 9. One day in the week is even under the
Gospel, to be sanctified. The morality of the Fourth Command, which is
perpetual, requires this. Christ has not abolished the Law. How the Sabbath is
said to be a sign between God and the Church. 134. Chap. 10. A day in every
week is to be sanctified under the Gospel, which is not the seventh, but first.
The cessation of the Jewish Sabbath. Col. 2. 16. and Gal. 4. 10. are
considered. The places on which the observation of the Lords Day in the New
Testament, is bottomed. The Fathers acknowledge its Divine authority. The
Church cannot change that day; and substitute another in its room. 145. Chap.
11. Wherein the sanctification of the Lords day consists: where something is
said about resting from gainful labors; which the Fathers carefully cautioned
against, that they should not be used on that day. A place of Chrysostom,
Gregory M. and of the Coun. of Laodicea is explained. And a Canon of the second
Co^n^. of Matiscon. 178. Chap. 12. How far forth on the Lords Day we may attend
labors, namely, of necessity and piety. Country* men are bound to sanctify
the Lords day. The indulgence granted to Country men by Constantine the Great
is examined, and revoked. The fact of Paula, and the practice of the Coenobite^
[or Monasticks] in Hierom is weighed. The sense also of a Canon of the Council
of Orleans. Manumissions, and certain transactions on the Lords day. 197. Chap.
13. The Lords day not to be profaned by surfeting. Servants not to be called
off from sanctifying the Lords day. We are not to fast on the Lords day.
Whether St. Ambrose was wont to feast on the Lords Day. 218. Chap. 14. Sports
are not at all to be held on the Lords day, by the judgment of diverse Fathers
and Emperors. Four kinds of shows condemned by the Fathers, and not to be
acted on the Lords day, and not only while the sacred meetings are kept. 2^9.
BOOK II.
Chap. 1. THe Lords Days solemnities were both public and private: public
assemblies of the Church on the Lords Day, the mention whereof we meet with
more frequently in the succeeding, than the former Church. Night meetings: and
why abolished at this day. Meetings before day, and on the day, in the morning,
and in the evening. 249. Chap. 2. What was done in the public meetings of the
Church. Reading of the Scriptures. What Scriptures were read: Humane writings
were also read in the Church. The order in reading of Scriptures. The Readers
of Scripture stood in the sight of the whole people* 262. Chap. 3. Explaining
of Scripture on Lords Days, which was called Treating. Whose office it was to
do this. Who the Clerici were among the ancients. Bishops, q. Watchers,
Overseers, and Superintendents. The Bishops interpreted the Scriptures.
Presbyters, Deacons, sometimes Catechists, and sometimes also private men did
the same. 274. Chap. 4. Converning the manner of expounding Scriptures, in use
with the ancients. Treating begunwith Prayer. The text of the Treating. The
Scriptures that were read, applied to the peoples use. The Treaters did
sometime stand, and sometimes sit. After Treating followed Prayer: when that
was ended; a Psalm was sung to God. 285. Chap. 5. Whether the bare reading of
Scripture in the Church assembly, be properly preaching? and how the reading of
the Scripture may be called preaching. 295. Chap. 6. The time assigned to the
Treatises of the ancients, namely, how long they lasted Their Treatises were
not long: ordinarily about an hour: but they were not tied to an hour: None
were to go forth before the end of the Treatise. 301. Chap. 7. The ancients
treated every day out of the Scriptures. Neither did they prohibit others, who
taught diligently from that their diligence in teaching. 307. Chap. 8. They
were wont on the Lords days to Treat out of the Scriptures. 312. Chap. 9. Both
in the Old and New Testament, in celebrating the Sabbaths solemnity, after
reading of the Scriptures, followed their interpretation. It Is considered
whether amongst the Jews before the Babylonish captivity, the interpreting of
the Law was used on their Sabbath days. 318. Chap. 10. The Church used Prayers
on the Lords Day. Conventicles for Churches. Prayers only to God: the
Praefectus began them. He prepares the people to pour them out. The Sursum
corda: in Prayer the voice of all that worshipped was one. They prayed as the
Holy Ghost suggested to them. How this custom: for what the Church prayed. The
posture of the body in prayer. 335. Chap. 11. Concerning Psalms and Hymns that
were sung on the Lords Day. The use of Hymns was but of late time in the
Western Churches, although Baronius think otherwise. Whence the matter of Hymns
was taken. 353. Chap. 12. The manner of singing in the Church, was modest and
sober: the incommodities of a sweeter voice in singing. The commodity of a well
moderated singing. Antiphones, Organs. How none were to sing in the Church, but
those that were chosen for that purpose. Broken Music disallowed. A censure of
that Music which is in use with the Papists. 359. Chap. 13. Administration of
the Sacraments on the Lords Day. 373. Chap. 14. Who was to be present at all
the offices of the Liturgy, and who not. The Catechumeni, Audientes,
Competentes, Poenitentes, and their sundry degrees: namely, some Lugentes,
others Audientes, others Substrati, others Consistentes, others Sacramentorum
participantes. At what offices these were to be present, and what not. 375.
Chap. 15. Of places in which the Churches public assemblies were held. 390.
Chap. 16. Private Duties of Religion to be performed on the Lords Day.
Examining of what they heard. Conferring on the same. Meditating of the life to
come: Amesig^th^^ed for the poors use. (...) Chap. 17. The Conclusion. 407.
A Table of the Fathers, and other Writers, out of whom this Narration is
transcribed; together with the places where, and times when they were set forth.
Since nothing can with that faithfulness be brought to light out of the
pleasant Gardens of the Ancients, against which malevolous detractors do not
whet their spiteful tongues: therefore knowing the temper of such men, I
thought it would be for the Readers profit, in the very entrance of the
Treatise, to make mention of the Places, and times of the Editions of the Grave
Fathers, and others, whose Testimonies are here alleged; to the end that both
the Detractors may be prevented, and also, if the Reader, who thirsted after
Truth should any where stick doubting, he might the more easily make recourse
to the Authors cited, and consult their meaning; and so all occasion of
doubting being cut off, he might at length willingly embrace the Truth set
before his eyes.

A
AGrippa de vanitate scientiarum. Colinae Agrippin^. 1598. Ambrosius excusus
Basileae. 1567. Amesii Medulla. Amsterodami. 1627. Antonius de Dominis de
Repub. Christiana. part 2. Londini 1620. Arnobius contra Gentes. Parisiis 1605.
Athanasius Graeco Latin. ex officina Commetiana, 1601. Athenaeus Lat. Lugduni,
1583. Augustinus Basileae, 1556.
B
Baronii Cardin. Annals, Moguntiae, 1691. Basilius Mag. Graece, Basileae,
1551. Basil. Magn. Lat. Basileae, 1565. Bellarmini Cardin. Controv. Coloniae,
1620. Bernardus, Antuerpiae, 1616. Bibliotheca Patrum. Parisiis 1614.
C
Canones Ecclesiae Afric. per Justellum Parisiis, 1614. Casauboni exercit. in
Baron. Annal. Francof, 1615. Centuriae Magdeburgicae. Basilae, 1624.
Chrysostomus. Graece, Londini. Chrysostomus Latin, Basileae, 1530. Clement.
Constitut. Graeco-Latin, Parisiis, 1618. Clemens Alex. Graeco-Lat. Lugduni,
1616. Conciliorum Tomi per Severinum Binium. Coloniae, 1606. Corpus Juris
civilis, Genevae, 1626. Cyprianus apud Joannem le Preux, 1593. Cyrillus
Alexandrinus, Lat. Paris. 1615.
D
Damascenus, Graeco-Lat. Paris. 1575. Dionysius Areopagita, Graeco-Lat. Paris.
1625.
E
Epiphanius, Graece, Basileae. Epiphanius, Latin, Coloniae, 1617. Eusebii
hist. Graeco-Lat. Colo. Allobrogum, 1612. Eusebius de praep. Evangel. Lat.
Paris. 1534. Examen Council. Trident. per Chemnit. Francof. 1599.
F
Flavius Josephus, Lat. Colo. Agripin. 1693.
G
Gratiani Corpus Jur. Canon. Paris. 1507. Greg. Nazianz. Graec. Basileae, 1550.
Greg. Nazianz. Lat. Basileae, 1671. Greg. Nyssenus Lat. Basil 1571. Greg.
Magnus Paris. 1518. Galatinus, apud haered. Andreae Wecheli, etc. 1603.
Gelasius de artis Council. Nicaeni Paris. per Marcellum.
H
Hieronymus. Basiliae, 1526. Hilarious. Basileae, 1560. Hist. Ecclasiasticae
Scriptores. Graec-Lat. Colo. Allobr. 1612. Hist. Ecclestiastica Tripart.
Parisiis. 1574.
I
Ignatius Graeco-Lat. Genevae 1623. I^enaeus Basileae, 1572. Isidori Pelus.
Epist. Graeco-Lat. Parisiis 1585. Isychius, Parisiis, 1584.
L
Lactantius. Basileae 1563.
M
Macrobius. Lugduni, 1628. Minutii Felicis ^ct^avius, Paris, 1605. Mortonii
Apologia. Londini, 1605.
N
Nicephori Historia. Paris. 1576. Nomocanon Phothii. Paris. 1615.
O
Origenes. Basileae. 1572. Optatus. apud Commelinum, 1599.
P
Philo Judae. Graec-Lat. Colo. Allobrogum, 1613. Plutarchi vitae, Lat.
Basileae, 1558. Plutarchi Moralia, Lat. Basil. 1570. Platina de R. Pontificum
vitis. Colon. 1600. Primafius in Epistolas. Lugduni, 1537.
R
Ruffinus. Parisiis, 1580. Rivetus in Decalogum. Leidae.
T
Tertullianus. Antuerpiae, 1584. Theodoret. Lat. Colon. Agripp. 1527.
Theodoreti Questiones. Graece Paris. 1558.
Z
Zonaras in Concilia Graeco-Lat. Parisiis, 1618.
The Lords Day The first day of every week is to be sanctified in the exercises
of Religion. whose institution is Divine. Sanctification consists in ceasing
from worldly matters. A. attending on Divine Worship. B.



A. Therefore not to be profaned by gainful labor. or by Surfeiting. Sports.


B. Here the duties of Religion are of right public private. C. in every Chur.
meeting as namely the Ministry of the Word, in and Prayer. Singing Psalms.
Administration of the Sacraments. reading expounding of Scripture.




C. When the faithful were dismissed from the public Assembly. in
contemplating of the works of God Eternal Life. or in meditating discoursing of
what they had heard.





comforting the weaker relieving the poorer brethren.


A PREFACE TO THE READER.
In which is propounded, first, the scope of this Treatise. Secondly, is shown
why we meet with more things about the duties of the Lords Day in the latter,
than in former Councils. Thirdly, how far the Church at this day may be obliged
by the authorities of Provincial Councils, ordaining these days: although some
things of smaller value be put amongst their Canons.

THat old Serpent, the perpetual hater of Divine truth, and true piety, has
busied himself to remove every stone since the first promulgation of the Holy
Gospel, that he might turn aside the minds of men bewitched with an impure
hatred of light and godliness, from a sincere love to the same. Therefore,
having stirred up a terrible flame of persecution, he has sometimes
disheartened the favorers of the Gospel, from all affection to godliness, by
most crafty means to hinder the happy progress of Gods Word: sometimes by the
diligent care of pious Princes, ihis unhappy flame of persecution being
quenched, he has not feared either to set together by the ears the very
Professors of Religion (not attentively enough observing his tricks and snares)
or shamefully to alienate them (men's minds being inclined to lust, and a too
great love of this present world) from the holy practice of godliness, and from
all exercise of true Religion. But this in vain. For so long as a door is open
to hear Gods Word, at a time solemnly observed for the public Worship of God,
and the private practice of Godliness not neglected, through the Divine
Providence [it shall happen, that] (maugre the enemies of the Gospel) godliness
shall flourish, Faith shall abound, and Charity, the manifest token of Christ's
Disciples, shall not wax cold; and men's minds shall be stirred up with a
greater desire of unfeigned love to the Gospel, and the violent shall take the
Kingdom of Heaven by force.

This thing that masked Serpent observes with no small disdain, whilst that he
considers he is a falling like lightning from Heaven, by the power of
Apostolical preaching, and upon that account, by his Emissaries, employes all
his power, that he might retard the course of preaching the Gospel. Nor could
he take a more ready way to promote this unhappy enterprise, than either by
utterly abolishing the time appointed from heaven for this work, or by
corruptly perverting the use thereof. Which being once obliterated out of men's
minds, at length piety would decay, and all care of Religion would lie extinct.
For it is well enough known, that the Professors of Christian Religion do there
most endeavor after godliness, and that Church by God is most abundantly
adorned with all manner of gifts, where, with greatest reverence, and strictest
observation, the Lords Day is wholly spent in Divine exercises. For, if the
Ignat. Epist. ad Magn. c. 57.
Lords Day be the Queen of Days; that Church which gravely studieth the
setting forth of this solemnity, is deservedly to be reputed the Queen of
Churches. But the deadly enemies of piety, with all their strength, endeavor
to relax the observation of the Lords day, (whereon they willingly suffer not
themselves to be holden bound by the exercises of godliness) and to extricate
themselves from this burden, thereby rovingly to give up themselves without
check, to impiety and idleness. Wherefore Constantine the Great, that most
godly Emperor, not ignorant of these men's temper, when he determined with
himself to obviate this evil, and begun with greatest care to practice the true
Religion of Christ, and provoke his Subjects to observe it, he made a law for a
diligent observing the Lords solemnity, as witnesses Sozomen. For since l. 1.
c. 8.
it is the Churches part, intermitting the affairs of this world, to meet
together for the exercises of piety, such Conventions cannot fitly be holden
without a certain and determinate time. The time therefore destined for
performing the the holy duties of Religion being abolished, the minds of men
will not be intent upon the offices of Religion. Whence, of necessity piety
must fail; and that being extinct, what other thing can men expect, but that a
tempest of all evils should be ingruent?

But yet, since it is no casie thing to obliterate, and wholly to eradicate the
matter of that Law which commands us to set apart a whole Chrysostom. hom. 10. in
Genesis T. 5
day within the compass of a week, and refer it for Spiritual Labor: therefore
that sly Adversaries by his Emissaries (whose wit is ready, and that have a
mercenary tongue for coloring Impostures; changing their opinion at pleasure
with the inconstant Ecebolius) at the first, only desputes after his crafty
manner, whether such a time be ordained of God. These men more boldly than
truly acknowledge the authority of time to be received not from Gods, but Men's
constitution; as though the Lord's Day were like the Holy Days which were
Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 16. p. 226.
commanded the Romans; namely, such as the Praetors according to their
arbitrary power did proclaim. And so its observation should depend upon the
civil Magistrate, and Churches authority.

These things thus being handled after these men's will, and others not
strenuously applying their minds to retard the speedy course of their
enterprises, reasons are found out with a little ado (for error is a fruitful
thing) by which men not very religious and observant of piety, may at last rush
upon the constant sanctification of this time with unwashen hands and feet, as
the Proverb is, and tread it under feet, as if it were only instituted of God
not for the sake of any Spiritual work, but carnal idleness.

These things (courteous Reader) have given The sum of those things handled in
this book.
me occasion more narrowly to search out both the Institution, and
Sanctification of this time; namely, whether first it could be shown from the
Fountain of holy Writ (from whence wise men know we must always judge what is
to be defined of every Divine Truth) and the ancient practice of the following
Church (which learned it from the Apostles) any part of time weekly be destined
to perform the holy exercises of Religion? Secondly, by what Authority that
time is imposed upon the Church, Divine, or Humane? Thirdly, in what things the
solemn sanctifying thereof consists? Touching all which, what may be shown
from the foresaid Fountains, the following pages will briefly, without
prejudice of others, judging according to truth, by the grace of God inform us.

These are, I say, the things of which I have Why mention of the day is more
frequently made in the latter than former Councils.
purposed to treat, God assisting, which, before I enter on, some things
remain, of which the Reader studihus of truth, is timely to be admonished.
First of all, though there be none of any authority and name amongst the
Professors of more pure Christianity, who bears not most clear testimony to
the Lords Festival; yet in no case must we expect, that all things which
chiefly make for the illustrating it, can be demonstrated out of the papers of
the most approved Fathers in one age. Nor can any one of right be offended, or
wonder at this, since the reverend authority of the Fathers, especially in the
controversies that unhappily sprang up in their age is to be attended; in
weighing whereof they have professedly and openly declared what their mind was;
but in other things, which they have touched upon only by the bye, they have
not so roundly showed their judgments. Besides, we know there is no point of
Christian Religion, the illustration whereof has not more and more increased
in the Church by progress of time; to effect which, the succeeding Church was
enforced through a certain necessity: for sometimes the foolish frowardness of
adversaries, and sometimes the lewdly-imployed manners of their own men, have
required this, that diverse Canons about some heads of Religion (the knowledge
whereof formerly increased in the Church) should be appointed. I believe none
will deny that the most profound mystery of the Holy Trinity was known to the
Christian Church from its infancy: yet in several Councils of the succeeding
Church, diverse Canons were ordained about it. The Reverend Fathers in the
Council of Nice ordain, that our Lord Jesus Christ is not a Creature: and this
they did according to Paul's word. In the Council of Constantinople all profess
they did believe that the Holy Ghost is true God, as co-essential to God, both
Father, and the Son. In the Council of Ephesus, under the Emperor Theodosius
the younger, the Divinity of the Son is again concluded.

These mysteries were illustrated by these new constitutions: and yet who will
be so mad, as for that cause to contend they were first then known to the
Church, when these new Canons were set forth about them? which only the Holy
Fathers ordained to obviate the frowardness of Heretics that either denied, er
adulterated the received Truth: that the Divine verity, which the former Church
embraced, being obscured, and held down by the wicked artifices of adversaries,
might be restored to its ancient vigor.

But not only the madness of Heretics* but sometimes also the inordinate
manners of Christians, have occasioned new Canons ordaining about things
formerly known: for it was an usual thing for the Fathers to inquire into the
manners of those Churches that were commended to their care; and when they
observed that their Christian people were ensnared in error, or wandering from
the path of truth, or at least walking not uprightly, according to the received
rule of piety, they straightway used new Canons, as medicines congruous to both
these evils: and so in the Church, as in the Commonwealth, good Laws grew out
of evil manners. And although the things that were before ordained were
abundantly sufficient to quench those errors newly sprung up, or reform their
lewd manners: yet either the new breaking out of error, or dilating of
manners, not at all consonant to the holy light of the Gospel* and creeping
every way like leaven, were stopped by the bar of new Canons. But thereupon we
must not think that the former Church was not bound to the truth which was by a
Postliminium established with new sanctions, or to manners reformed by their
authority: Which is easy to be observed in this business of the Lords Day.

The succeeding Church, through the care of the best Emperors, having obtained
peace, established diverse things about the Lords Festival, which are not now
extant in the Doctors of the Primitive Church. But who will say, that the piety
established by new Canons, for observing that solemnity, was not known to the
former Christians? whenas, even in the Apostles age, as it shall afterward
appear from the Scriptures, the Lords Day was solemnly used for all the
exercises of Religion, in which the true manner of keeping it holy does
consist. And the Fathers of the succeeding Church, ordaining new Canons about
its solemnity, have not concealed this, as is to be seen in the second Council
at Matiscon, An. Dom. 588.
Can. 1. in which they gravely study to set forth the Lords solemnity, but to
this they were moved by the rash custom of some, as they say, who exposed the
Lords day to contempt. In Council. Cabilon, Can. 18.
held about the year 664. caution is taken for prohibiting Country labors on
that day; which thing, when the Fathers did ordain, they confess, they did not
appoint any new thing, but renew the old. Moreover, in the Council of Friuli,
An* (...)*
Can. 13. all Christians were commanded to observe with all reverence the Lords
Festival: in which, as in other Canons of that Council, they acknowledge, they
do not institute new rules, but having recited the sacred pages of their
forefathers Canons, they persist to embrace with greatest devotion, and (...)
with a fresher style, the things that were digested by them, and promulgated by
a wholesome pen. There came out also An. 829.
a new Decree in a Council at Paris, for the strict observing the Lords day, of
which, this reason is assigned by the Fathers: because Can. 50.
a due observation, and the religious devotion of that day, was in a great
measure neglected. That was not then the first time they decreed a religious
institution of the Lords day, but it being grown into a disuse, they labor
Postliminio, to renew it, and call to remembrance the neglected or obscured use
thereof: and the dissolute manners of Christians, in performing on that day the
exercises of Religion have produced new Canons about observing this solemnity:
whenas yet the solemnity it self, and the holy duties thereof, were well enough
known to the former Church: and so the things which were neglected, through the
carelessness of the people, were afterward with great labor inculcated.

Another reason also is to be added, for the ordaining new Canons about this
Festival. The Heathen Emperors being haters of the Christian name, provided by
their Laws, that the Christians should not have liberty on the Lords day, to
keep their meetings. Which the wicked Edict of Dioclesian, touching this thing,
informs us of. How therefore would they observe out of the writers of that age,
all the mysteries of godliness to be performed on that day, whenas, not without
great peril of life, they did celebrate the Lords days, not on the day time,
but on the night? yet all Authors of any note, as I said, do acknowledge, that
the day it self was to be celebrated from the beginning of the Church: and if
they had had liberty, they had executed the same offices of Religion on that
day, by which it was celebrated in the succeeding Church. And these are the
things, for whose cause the Fathers of the succeeding Church being moved, have
treated more at large concerning the Lords day duties, than those of the
foregoing.

There remains one other rock, upon which, lest How other Churches may be bound
to Provincial Assemblies.
any dash, I judge them also to be advertised. Many of the Canons, upon whose
authority a great sort of the duties of Religion on that day to be performed,
do lean, were set forth by Councils which were Provincial: perhaps therefore
some will object, that none but the Churches of those Provinces are obliged to
keep those Canons. But indeed, since the Decrees of Provincial Councils serve
for the profit of the whole, and not of any particular Church only, why should
they not be received of other Churches professing the same Faith with them?
although not by virtue of any Provincials authority, but of Divine truth,
albeit determined in a particular Province. And since the reason of a
Provincial Synods determination is universal, why should not Canons so
determined, even in that respect, oblige other Churches, although not to
undergo the punishment? For the imposing of the punishment is particular, where
the Law in respect of equity may be general. And whenas we see the authorities
of particular Fathers to be esteemed amongst all; we should be too partial
toward them, if we should set at naught the Canons of Provincial Councils, at
which several Fathers and Bishops were present: unless some body will think
that a sentence approved by the judgments of many, be of less weight and
authority, than when it is pronounced by one single person apart.

Because Paul's Epistles were written to particular Churches they are not
therefore rejected of others, for that in Gods intention they pertain to the
Churches of all ages and Nations* nor do they less agree with their moral state
and condition, than with those for whom they were primarily designed.

Moreover, if in any Province there be Churches rightly constituted, and
according to the rule of Gods Word, doubtless they are to be honored with the
name and title of Churches: and the right hands of Christian fellowship are to
be given them: neither is there extant at this day a Church, which, upon
occasion, does not freely use the authorities of some Provincial Councils, in
confirming the truth: to which yet this is by none imputed as a fault: and why
may not its assertors sometimes have liberty to use the Provincial authorities
of Canons for propagating the truth about the Lords day?

The Orthodox Fathers anciently, when any question arose, by which the peace of
the Church was disturbed, did advise, and mutually help one another. The French
Bishops, in the case of communion with Felix, consulted the Bishops of Rome and
Millain, whose Letters were read in the Council of Tauritan. as appears by
the fifth Canon of that Council. The Spanish Bishops, in the case T. 1 p 640.
Exempl. profession. in Conc. 2. Tolet. Conc T. 1. p. 565.
of the Priscillianists, profess, they will not communicate with the lapsed,
although reclaimed, without the consent of the Roman Bishop, and Simplicianus
of Millain: Liberius Bishop of Rome writes to Athanasius, and begs it of him
before God and Christ, that if he be of his mind, he would subscribe his
Epistle. A pud Athanas. p. 397. That was indeed a sweet communication, and
modest prudence in the ancient Bishops, Cypr. Ep. 20.
that one act, and one consent should be kept, according to Gods Laws, amongst
them all: And hence it was, that they entirely studied to Cypr. Ep. 29.
use one common counsel about the profit of Churchadministration: and did not
reject with a supercilious disdain, that which seemed best to be done to their
fellow Bishops, although distant from them in other Provinces, Cypr. Ep. 97.
sect. 3.
but the association of Priests, although large, was so coupled together with
the glue of mutual-concord, and bond of unity, that one falling into danger,
the rest helped him. Whatever therefore was thought just by Pastors of other
Churches, (especially those that were (...), as Petrus Alexandrinus says in
Sozomen, of the Roman Bishop, l. 6. c. 18.
although congregated in a Provincial Council, or out of Council) was by good
desert not rejested of other Bishops of the same Faith: but they helped one
another by mutual counsels and labor. Whence it follows, that Canons ordained,
although in Provincial Councils, about the Lords Festival, are not to be
rejected. But I will stay no longer to take this remora out of the way.

One Objection remains, which, lest any thing What we are to think of the
Canons that ordained some incon. siderable things about observing the Lords Day.
be wanting to the knowledge of the truth, must be prevented. Some, having no
care of the Lords Festival, do contend, that the Fathers in those latter
Councils, do stick in small things, and do mingle, I know not what, matters of
little value, with their Canons about observing the Lords solemnity: for whose
sakes they judge whole Canons to be nothing worth: as in some Councils it is
ordained, that what sometime the Priest Abimelech asked of David, 1 Samuel 21. 4.
that should (...) done by Christians on the Lords Day. So in the Council of
Friuli, Can. 13. this is reputed by some for a trifle. Concerning which thing,
it yet troubled not St. Paul to make a Canon for the married in case of Prayer
and Fasting, 1 Cor. 7. 5. Put for that part of Friuli's Canon, wherein it is
ordained, to abstain from our Wives on that day; whether it was added by the
Fathers, or foisted into the Canon by some Sciolist, on the Marginal
explication of a Carnal work, I dispute not: I only assert this, if it be
their grief that trifles repugnant to the Word of God, are obtruded on the
Church of Christ, in this I commend and accept very well their temper, who set
at naught whatever point is dissonant from the Holy So^iptures, however
approved in the judgments of many men: but, if under the name of trifles, as
they call them, they shall reject those Canons that contradict not the reverend
authority of writers, I cannot approve their fact in this, at least I would be
taught this thing of them: which they may find out by the whole huge Volume of
Councils. All the things therein ordained, are not approved now adays by all;
and yet those Councils are not therefore rejected by wise men. Some things
enacted in the first Council of Nice, which have come to our hands, (if the
authentic acts of the Council have not perished through the injury of time, or
cunning of the Arrians) are over orude, which savor not of Athanasius, Ofius,
or Paphnatius's wit, and other approved Fathers, which were present at the
Council, and which things are now also antiquated: shall we therefore judge all
things in the reverend Council, which has so many witnesses, to be rejected?
far be it from us. In that Council also it is ordained, that there must be no
bowing of the knees on the Lords Days, or from the Passover to Pentecost, in
pouring out prayers to God. Perhaps there will be some, that will think this
ordinance worthy derision, rather than observation: who will not yet for that
cause reject the Council. Once in a Council at Trulla, Spiritual affinity, as
they call it, was forbidden: Can. 53.
yea, there we read an injunction (for the fifth Canon says (...), etc.) for,
avoiding ridiculous jesters, and other spectacles at any time: but at this day
they esteem it a trifling Canon, who judge those tumblers to be rejected not
always, but even on the very Holy day do permit Christian people to be present
at the childish arts of tumblers, when the public exercises of Religion are
ended, and yet they refuse not all the Canons of that Council. I can bring
forth many more other examples of Canons determining small matters, but I Will
spare this labor: At least, I add but this, when in Provincial Councils of
every Province, Questions were handled (Conc. 1. Constantinop. Can. 2. T. 1. p.
510.) and So Conc. African. Can. 95.
nothing was brought to the General Council, but what could not fitly be
determined in the Provincial: it was needful for the Fathers to determine of
the propounded questions, of what kind or weight soever they were: and so if
any minute things (which by some are reckoned trifles) do occurr in the Canons,
they are rather to be ascribed to others, who propounded them to the Fathers
assembled in Council, than to them determining of them.

These are the rocks, which in the following Treatise by Gods help, shall be
more clearly explained in their places: of which things (most courteous Reader)
I judged it expedient to admonish thee, before I dismiss thee to read it over,
lest in any place thou be at at a stand. In which things, having briefly
prefaced, by Gods assistance, I hasten to my purpose.

THE Lord's Day.
THE FIRST BOOK.
In which is demonstrated the Solemnity and Antiquity of the Lords Day.

CHAP. 1.
That to the Solemn Worship of God, a determined time is necessary. Concerning
the Assemblies of the Apostles, and how the Apostles and other Christians were
present in the Jewish Synagogues, on the Sabbath Day.

THat some certain time is to be assigned by Divine Institution, on which, men
ceasing from common affairs, are diligently to bend themselves to* Divine
Worship, for Gods glory, and the Churches good (although no Religion be placed
in Holy Days) I think to be without controversy: the custom received amongst
Nations of all Ages (that namely, at a stated time, and upon certain days, all
should meet to invocate, and worship that Deity which they took for their
supreme) does witness this: and reason it self does require the same.

Conventions also for performing exercises of Piety, were always used by the
Christian Church, in which said exercises, it practiced what pertained to
godliness, and the worship of God, for which cause the Apostle, Heb. 10. 25.
allows not of that readiness in Christians, to forsake (...), i.e. that coming
to the Synagogue [or meeting together] and if Christ disdained not to come
himself to the Temple, and the Jews Synagogues, (...), Luke 4. 16. 1. As his
custom was; who will he be that shall think the places dedicated for the
Churches assemblies are not to be gone unto by Christians? But the necessity
(which Hom. 1. c. 1. p. 81.
Chrysostom at large decyphers de verbis Isaiae) of these Assemblies (of which
more afterward) being admitted: we must at this time briefly enquire out the
fit season (without which the exercise of Divine worship cannot fitly be acted
in them) for holding of them: for the best sign of the time which was
solemnized by the Church, must be observed from the public conventions which
were held for performing of the Duties of Religion.

The time assigned for Divine worship The extraordinary time for Divine worship.
amongst the ancient Christians, was either extraordinary, or ordinary:
solemnly to celebrate the extraordinary time, they were called upon only by an
extraordinary occasion, when it sell out: so while the Apostles were living,
Luke tells us, Acts 12. that many were gathered together in Mary's house,
during St. Peter's imprisonment, and for his sake poured out Prayers
continually 10 God; -- the occasion of which convention was extraordinary, yet
did they not therefore intermit the ordinary time of meeting: the ancient
writers do also witness, that such were the meetings of the Christians after
the Apostles times, when a just occasion was offered: who, as often as
persecutions, or public calamities sell out, they then joined Prayers in their
meetings congregated on that occasion: and so, as it were, Tertul. Apol. cont.
Gentes. c. 39.
by making a band in their Prayers to God, they compassed him about as they
prayed: which thing we read was done by the Apostles and Church, Acts 4. 23.
31. When the Elders of the People forbad the Apostles they should not preach
Christ, the Church poured forth Prayers to God.

The ordinary time for the exercises of Piety The ordinary time for the worship
of God.
was, at which they attended Divine worship upon a stated and determinate day:
to manifest which, it will be worth the while to know, that for convocating the
Church ordinarily, more days were set apart after the Apostles death, than the
former Church observed.

Concerning the Assemblies of the Church while the Apostles were yet alive,
some things observable do occurr in the Evangelists (the Holy Ghosts
amanuenses, and the faithful describers of the Acts of the Apostles) in
declaring whereof, we will first consider what is recorded of the Apostles in
this thing, and then of the other members of the Church.

And first of all we will shortly touch upon the assemblies of the Apostles
(although they cannot truly be reputed amongst the ordinary conventions of the
Church, because which way soever the Apostles turned, they took every occasion
to preach the Gospel) because they open us a way to understand others. After
the saving Passion of Jesus Christ, our most merciful Redeemer* the mention of
the The meetings that were held by the Apostles.
first of these, at which were present the rest excepting Thomas, occurrs Joh.
20. 19. in which Christ vouchsafed his presence. The, occasion of which meeting
is not mentioned; but doubtless, as all Interpreters conjecture, this was done,
that by their mutual presence they might comfort one another: For as many as
are Christ's, do perpetually incline to communicate all things, whether their
sorrows or joys, among themselves: and then their Lord being gone, their
greatest fear was of the Jews; for which cause we read that the place wherein
they held their meeting was shut and barred: when the Apostles were assembled,
they conferred among themselves of what diverse related of Christ's Resurrection:
the time of this meeting is noted in John, Ioh. 20. 19.
it was the first day of the week, and about evening of that day, or after
Sunset; at which time, Christ, having conquered the grave and death, presented
himself to them alive.

Secondly, after eight days, or the eighth day current from his appearing, the
same Evangelist tells us, John 20. 26. that they were all met together, where
Jesus came again, and stood in the midst of them. Here some make a question,
whether the day of their second meeting was the eighth from the first, or after
the eighth day? l. 12. in Jo^. c. 58. p. 1026.
Cyril affirms it was the eighth, or Lords day, the first and last being
reckoned: neither does it hinder that it is said after eight days. Christ
taught, that the Son of man must suffer many things, etc. and after three days
rise again. Mar. 8. 31. yet Christ rose from the dead on the third day from his
burial, not after the third day. So also it is said Luke 2. 21. When eight days
were accomplished for the circumcising of the Child, i. e. on the eighth very
day: for the H. Ghost speaks of the eighth day current, and not finished: so
here after eight days, or on the eighth day, are all one. It must be added
also, that Christ appeared in the evening of that day.

Afterward some of the Apostles were together, when they went to fish, to whom
also Jesus appeared. Ioh. 21.
.

Thirdly, the General convention of all the Apostles is declared, Act. 1. 4. in
which they were commanded, not to depart from Jerusalem, but there wait for the
promise of the Father: and thither they came after the glorious Ascension of
Christ, where being gathered together, they tarried for the Spirit, promised of
God the Father, and Christ. Act. 1. 14.
. Luke reports that women also were present at this Congregation of the
Apostles: where they continued their meeting, till the Feast of Pentecost,
abiding with one accord in Prayer and Supplication: which fell out also on the
first day of the week. So thinks Isychius in Levit. l. 2. c. 9.
, who says, the day of Pentecost fell out on that day which our Savior rose
on; and indeed, whoever shall compare his reckoning with the Law of God, about
keeping Pentecost, will find that Isychius in this misses not the truth at all.
For the day of Pentecost (which the Scripture elsewhere calls the Feast of
Weeks, or of New-fruits, because on that day the Shewbread was offered out of
the new fruits) was the fiftieth inclusively from the day of offering the
First Fruits, Lev. 23. which was the day immediately next after the Passover 1
Cor. 15. 20, 23.
, on which the Lord Jesus, who was the firstfruits of the dead, lay in the
Grave: and the fiftieth day from that inclusively, was the first in the week,
upon which the H. Ghost descended on the Apostles, as they were that day
assembled. Act. 2.

These are the meetings* which the Holy Scripture testifies the blessed
Apostles held upon the fiftieth day from Christ's resurrection: which being held
upon the first day of the Week, Christ oftentimes honored with his presence.
But why they met on that, and not another day, it is not easy to declare;
although one may guess at the cause of the first and last meeting, yet has the
Holy Ghost shown us nothing of the second occasion. And it is uncertain whether
Christ before his death, or for those forty Ioh. 20. 26
days wherein he reasoned with them after his resurrection, of things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God, gave his Apostles any command for setting
apart some new time for their meetings. Epiphanius says, they Contr. Ebion.
haer. 30. ^^. 32.
knew very well that the Sabbath was at an end, from his converse with them,
and Doctrine before his Passion. This at least is an indubitable truth, that
they met on the first day of the week, and that Christ made renowned their
meeting held on that day by his own gracious presence, and mission of the Holy
Ghost. And St. Cyril must be credited, Holy Congregations are held at this day
^ibi prius.
of right in Churches, because on that day Jesus appeared to his Apostles, as
they were met together. Nor does Isychius think otherwise in the place before
quoted. Therefore according to those most grave Fathers, because the eighth day
was made famous with the presence of Christ, and the gifts of the Holy Ghost
sent down from Heaven, it is at this day also by the Church solemnized with a
more honorable worship.

Afterward the Apostles, together with the faithful, are said daily to meet to
hear the word of God, and receive bread, Act. 2. 46. Yea, the Apostles ceased
not to teach from house to house, and in the Temple, Act. 5. 42. And these are
the things which the Holy Ghost has afterward left us written in the Holy
Scriptures, concerning the Apostles meetings: to the solemnizing whereof, we
read not that they observed a certain or set time; because they had to do with
the Jews, to whom, before others, according to the ancient prophecies, the
Gospel was to be declared. Therefore the Apostles were often present at the
Jews assemblies, and that upon their Sabbaths. And whether the Apostles, when
first they went for^^ ^o preach the Gospel, met apart from the Jews amongst
themselves on other da^^s, the Holy Ghost is silent in the Script^re. But at
that time the Candidates of Christianity being hindered with fear of the Jews,
could not without great difficulty meet together. We must then think they held
their meetings in those days when they could. But the Church being wonderfully
increased, and daily corroborated in the Faith, by the frequent preaching of
the Apostles, it appears by the History of the Apostles travels recorded by
St. Luke, that the Christians wherever they lived, were wont to meet upon set
days, to handle Religion: to prove its truth, diverse examples are ready in the
Acts of the Apostles, and their Epistles; in which the celebrating of their
meetings is usually denoted by these phrases; meeting together to hear the word
of God, Acts 13. 44. coming together to break bread, Acts 20. 7. to come
together, 1 Cor. 11. 20. ministering to the Lord. Acts 13. 2, etc. they are said
sometimes to meet in the Temple, Act. 2. 46. Sometimes other Christians than
the Apostles were at the Jews Synagogues: because there the Apostles preached
Christ to the Jews, and therefore other Christians also resorted thither, that
they might hear the Apostles teaching. Act. 5. 12.

That the first Christians were sometimes How the Apostles and other Christeans
were present at the Jews Synagogues.
present at the Jews Synagogues on the Sabbath day is granted, the Holy Writ
being witness hereof, Acts 13. 14. also Acts 17. 2. it is said, the Apostle, as
his manner was, went in unto them, and three Sabbath days reasoned with them
out of the Scriptures, etc. but not to solemnize the Sabbaths after the Jewish
manner (from whose observation the Christians, and that by authority committed
to the Apostles from the Lord, were far enough off) especially when Paul
himself could most severely reprove the Colossians and Galatians, because some
amongst them stood for the Sabbath, and other feasts of the Jews: but because
they then had obtained a good occasion of communing with the Jews, being met
together: that their readings of the Law and Prophets being finished in the
Synagogues, they might preach the Gospel with more fruit in such a concourse of
men (which upon other days they could not so easily obtain) and for no other
end, as from the alleged testimonies is evident. Which things let the Reader
seriously weigh with himself. For at what time, or in what place soever they
could speak with the Jews, they set upon them, and preached the Gospel to them.
Therefore, both on the Sabbaths, and other days, as well in the Synagogues, as
when they were met other where, the Apostles were not wanting amongst the Jews
in the office of preaching. When they had tarried certain days amongst the
Macedonians, because no fit occasion for preaching the Gospel was offered (as
the circumstances of that place teach) which the Apostles every where greedily
sought after, they preached Christ on the Sabbath days out of the City, by
Act. 16. 13.
a River side, to the women which resorted to public Prayers according to
their custom. St. Paul hastened to keep the Feast of Pentecost at Jerusalem,
only because he might have many of the Jews living dispersedly in diverse places
of the world there gathered together, with whom he might treat about Christ,
and so the preaching of the Gospel by them returning home might be made famous
through the world. So thinks Chrysostom. Hom. 43. in Act.
who says, What means that haste of his? (he speaks of Paul's hasting to the
Feast) it was not for the Feast, but for the Multitude. Afterward he says, He
made haste to preach the word.

It Is granted therefore that the Apostles and other Christians in those first
times, were present at the Synagogues of the Jews: yet although they met with
them on the Sabbaths, they are not read in the Scripture to meet on the Sabbath
days apart from the Jews, and by themselves. Neither do we read that this was
done of them with an intention to solemnize the Sabbath, or have a worship
common to the Jews, which was not lawful to be done. St. Paul sometimes
disputed in Areopagus, Act. 17. 19. and the Schools of the Heathen, Act. 19. 9.
In which the Schoolmasters were wont to explain Tert. lib. de Idol. c. 10.
the names, genealogies, fables, and histories of their gods, to observe their
Feasts, and instruct their Catechetae in their rites. Yet no man will thence
conclude, (as Mr. Eaton well observes) that because he was present in their
Schools, he did observe the Heathens feasts, and worship their gods. In like
manner the Apostles must not be said to have observed the Jewish Sabbath,
although they had diverse disputations thereon, as the concourse of the Jews
gave them occasion.

Moreover if the Christians had observed the Sabbath, then Justin Martyr had
satisfied Dial. cum Tryphon.
with little ado, Trypho the Jew, that counseled him to observe the Sabbath.
For it had been enough for Martyr to have answered the Jew, that the Christian
Church did observe the Sabbath. Yet this he grants not, but that blessed
Martyr* plainly denies that the Jewish Sabbath ought to be observed by the
Christians. The same do other Fathers against the Jews, as we shall see
afterward.

Lastly, we read not that the Apostles were always at their Synagogues. For
it is said Act. 19. 9. when the Jews hearts were hardened at Paul's Doctrine,
first Paul himself departed from them, neither is he ever after read to enter
into their Synagogues. Besides he segregated from them the Disciples that
embraced the sounder Doctrine, lest, as it is in the Proverb, the sick cattle
should infect the sound. Therefore as long as they conceived any hope of
converting the Jews, they neither declined their company nor Synagogues. But
when they observed, that they rose up against the sound Doctrine of the Gospel
with an obdurate heart, they forthwith forsook them, neither are they read in
Scripture ever after to enter into their Synagogues any more.

CHAP. II.
The ordinary time observed for celebrating the public worship of God after
Christ's death was the Lords day, solemnly used by the Christian Church, in the
very Apostles age. Three Texts of the New Testament, namely, Act. 20. 7. 1 Cor.
16. 1, 2. and Apoc. 1. 10. are briefly considered.

Afterward, when the Christians had no dealing with the Jews, we read that
they met by themselves, in the Apostles age, and that on the Lords day, to
exercise the offices of Piety and Divine Worship. But for the period of time,
in which at first they held these conventions by themselves, apart from the
Jews, there is nothing occurrs in Scripture, and diverse dispute about it.
Passing by whose dispute, it plainly appears in the Holy Scripture* that the
Lords day, while yet the Apostles were alive, was destined for the public
meeting of the Church.

There are three Texts of the New Testament, All Interpreters of Scripture are
not at one with themselves.
(namely, Act. 20. 7. 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2. and Apoc. 1. 10. in which there is plain
mention of that days celebrity) on whose most grave authorites the religious
observation of the Lords day, by the common suffrage almost of all Divines,
does chiefly rest. Yet all Interpreters agree not amongst themselves in their
Expositions of them: and no wonder, since to all it is not given presently to
hit upon the sense of what is delivered in the Scriptures, but to some that
prophecy some things are revealed, according to the Apostle, whilst other sit
by. Yea, men of every 1 Cor. 14. 30.
age studiously following after the known truth; even while they diligently
apply their ages to the study of the Scripture, are blessed with a New-light of
knowledge not observed by their Predecessors. It sometimes also falls out,
that some things may be revealed to men of inferior condition, which are hid
to others of greater name and authority; as may be seen in St. Paphnatius, who
being armed with the Divine authority of the Epistle to the Hebrews, wherein
it is asserted, that Marriage is honorable in all, opposed in that famous
Council of Nice the Socr. Hist. l. 1. c. 8.
Bishops that ordained an excess of rigor, or studiously endeavored to
prejudice the Church with an intolerable inconveniency of too severe a
prescription: yet all that famous convention of Holy Bishops, Presbyters, and
Deacons, yielded to Paphnatius his opinion. Chrysostom gives leave to the Hom.
18. in 2 Cor.
weaker, although the least, to speak any thing that is profitable, even in the
Churchassembly.

Moreover, one and the same understanding at the same moment, receives not all
the sacred mysteries of Faith; but the Holy Ghost, (the only teacher of truth)
opens to men their understanding at diverse times. And most commonly it
happens, that he that cannot have the first place for wisdom, may have the
second for modesty, by Aug. prolog. in Retract.
retracting what he has inconsiderately spoken. Now as in the Expositions of
other Scriptures, there are more Masters, when they judge diversely, and
contradictorily amongst Aug. ibid.
themselves: so it falls out in the gloss of the foresaid Texts. For some of
them (whereof the first and second do note, that the offices of Religion are to
be performed by the Christian Church on that day; the third its name) being
supported by testimonies, do piously and modestly defend the authority of the
Lords day: which others of them contend, cannot be defended by those
authorities. The former of these opinions is more common, and received of more
both ancient and modern Divines: Neither does the latter want asserters of
great authority in the Church.

Mr. Calvin, of blessed memory, in his Ap. Mar^^rat.
Learned Commentaries, so interprets that place, Act. 20. 7. that it seems to
bring little help to prove the Lords day solemnity. Whose opinion I see diverse
do embrace; whose temper I cannot enough wonder at in this: because in this
point they stifly-adhere to Learned Calvin's opinion, from which, in other
matters of Christian Faith, they are altogether aliens, and cry out that the
vilest Comments of the Papists are far to be preferred to his elaborate
Expositions, which breath forth Piety and excellent Learning: and whatever is
approved by the judgment of that well exercised Divine, Mr. ^. Calvin*
Calvin, they little esteem it: and that because the most famous Calvin
sometimes thought so. Yet in this business they judge nothing ought to be
approved, but what, forsooth, seems good to Calvin.

When I consider these men's temper, it comes into my mind, what Theophilus
sometime did to the Monks surnamed Longi, at Sozom. Hist. 8. c. 12.
whom he was displeased. He conspired with the common sort of Monks, who
affirmed with Origin, that God had an humane shape (although he thought
otherwise) against those Friars Whence arose a great contention amongst the
Monks, who turned themselves to rail and not dispute. So diverse, who matter not
Mr. Calvin's judgment, do yet, under a pretense of his authority, studiously
defend their own opinions, to the end they might set by the ears those whom
they observe to admire and love famous Calvin's judgment, as reason requires,
in other things, while some of them adhere to, and others dissent from his
opinion; when yet in the mean time they value not Mr. Calvin a straw.

Whoever knows the Learned Calvin, cannot but acknowledge him for a most stout
maintainer of Gods truth: by whose auspicious labors, in this age, through
Gods mercy, an admirable course has been made to all excellency of Doctrine
and Religion: which might have perished, had not he, being stirred up by Gods
grace, as another Atlas, upholden the ruinous affairs of the Church. He was
also a most earnest restorer of Christian liberty, which with might and main
pursued about the use of meats, and days, against the Papists, and other
adversaries of the truth. And let none think it strange, if upon the matter he
find the same happen to him, which does to the diligent Husbandman, after that
his good seed sprouts out in his field: who perceiving Darnel and Tares, while
he goes about to root them out, contrary to his purpose he plucks up some of
the Wheat with the Tares. Whilst that famous Divine observes the observation of
the Jewish Sabbath to cease, and that upon Apostolical authority: he thought it
congruous to truth, to pronounce the Christian Church free from observing the
Weekly Sabbath. This opinion he manifested especially, when he set himself
against the unnecessary Festivals of the Papists, from whose most grievous
yoke, he had an earnest desire to free the Church of Christ.

It will not be well taken for me to dissent from Calvin, together with the
Learned Beza, Gallacius on Ex. 31. and Fajus, Mr. Calvin's most intimate
Colleagues, and other Divines of great name, though it be done with never so
great modesty, and craving his pardon; however I judge him worthy to be
reckoned amongst our greatest Writers. But I will come now to weigh the
foresaid Texts, whereof the first is in Act. 20. 7. Act. 20. 7. is considered.
where St. Luke says, (...). Upon the first day of the week, when the
Disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to
depart on the morrow, and continued his speech until midnight. Where the
Church-assembly is, as they say, painted to the life, by all its circumstances:
and first from the time, then from the duties performed of the Church in that
assembly: concerning all which, a double question is moved of some that seek a
knot in a bulrush. In the one whereof, what Luke means by (...). i. the first
day of the week: in the other they discuss what must be understood by (...). i.
breaking of bread.

In describing the Church of Troas, first, the time is noted, namely, (...).
where some interpret it, not for the first, but one day of the week: as if Luke
had signified nothing else by that phrase, than that they met on a certain day
of the week, when St. Paul was there. They eat, according to the Proverb, with
very tender jaws, to whom these dainties relish. But with their leave, what
they say cannot agree with the genuine sense of that place. For in that place
Sabbatum must needs be taken either for the whole week (as the Hebrews usually
speak) or for the last day in the week. We must not understand it here in the
latter sense, because the Apostle abode at Troas only seven days, Act. 20. 6
and in that space only one Sabbath, properly so called, did occurr: therefore,
since he tarried there but only for one Sabbath, it cannot be said he preached
to them on one of the Sabbath^: neither is (...), as diverse observe, ever read
in the New Testament for (...). It follows therefore from thence necessarily,
that Sabbatum should be taken for the whole week; and then on one, or the first
of the Sabbaths, will be all one. In which sense, that phrase occurrs else
where, as in Mar. 16. 2. (...) i. very early in the morning, the first day of
the week: as in the ninth verse of the same chapter, (...). there the
Evangelist expounds (...) by (...). i. one by the first. And so the Greek
Fathers next the Apostles times, interpreted (...).

Justin Martyr Dial. cum Tryph. says, (...), etc. One of the Sabbaths,
remaining the first of all the days, according to number, the spaces of all
the days being run again into a circle, is called the eighth; and remains
the first, as it is. p. 201. Chrysoft. Hom. 43. in Act. Apostol. expounds one
of the Sabbaths by the Lords Day. So Hieronymus. Nor otherwise Augustine, Ep.
86. One of the Sabbaths, says he, was then called that day, which now is
called the Lords, which is more plainly found in the Gospel.

Some also by breaking of bread understand a private banquet, not the Lords
Supper: of which doubt this seems to be the cause. In that age the Christians
meeting in the Church, did sup together, and also received the H. Eucharist;
and so both tables, the common and sacred were joined together, as Chrysostom
teaches, Hom. 26. in 1 Cor. Upon set days they made common tables, and Hom.
43. in Act.
when the assembly was ended, after communion of the Sacraments, they went to
eat and drink together. And hence it was, as Chrysostom thinks, that they Acts
20. 7. met to break common bread: because when the communion was celebrated,
the common table followed: and Chrysostom affirms, in the beginning of that
Hom. that the day on which they met was the Lords, and that all things that
there were done were joined to preaching; But the breaking of bread in the
foresaid place, is to be expounded of the Holy Eucharist: for there were sundry
there, and Paul took bread, not at Supper time, but midnight. In that Text
therefore the duties of a Christian Sabbath (such are an holy assembly,
breaking of bread, or admistration of the Lords Supper, preaching of the Word,
devout Prayers, etc.) are read to be performed of the Church on that day: which
holy duties were not performed of them on another day, otherwise Paul having
stayed there the space of seven days, could not have deserred them to this
day, especially when he was to depart the day following: neither does Luke
affirm the Apostle to have proclaimed this meeting of the Church as
extraordinary, because he was to depart the day after: but he teaches that the
Church met (namely, as it was wont) to break bread, and not to take leave of
the Apostle: and St. Augustine consesses that Ep. 86.
Paul's departure was the express cause of continuing his speech, because he
desired sufficiently to instruct them. The received custom therefore of the
Church, and not the blessed Apostles departure from Troas, gave occasion to
this assembly. For he stayed there seven days, not so much for the Eucharist,
as waiting for the Lords Day. Whence it appears, that that Text shows that the
Apostolical Church kept solemnly the Lords Day in the public exercises of
Religion. But upon what authority the Christians met on that day, we will
afterward examine, here it is enough for me only to demonstrate that they did
meet on that day.

The second Text, out of which the celebration 1 Cor. 16. 1, 2.
of the Lords Day is shown, is, 1 Cor. 16. 1. 2. Now concerning the collection
for the Saints, as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia, even so do
ye, (...). i. upon the first day of the week, etc. The former place taught us,
that the Apostle Paul did celebrate the Lords Day with the Church: this, that
he commands it to be celebrated by the Church. And his practice is not here
only recorded, but here is mention made of his Apostolical ordination about
that thing. Where (...) must be taken distributively for, upon the first day of
every week. In which Apostolical command, nothing is commanded the Church of
Corinth, which is not also required of the whole Church of Christ, according to
the golden rule of Tertullian, very profitable for understanding of the
Scripture, Some things, says he, uttered specially De specta. cap. 3.
are to be understood generally: which rule cannot but have place in this Text:
because what things the Apostle writ to the Church of Corinth, the same belong
to all that call upon the name of Christ in every place, he himself being
witness, 1 Cor. 1. 2. Moreover, who will deny that all who have given their
name to Christ, are bound to relieve their necessities? For you must not think,
says Chrysostom, that these Hom. 2. ^. 6.
things were written to the Corinthians alone, but to every one of us, and all
that shall be after us. Let us do therefore as Paul prescribes us, and let
every one of us lay by him at home on the Lords Day, the Lords riches ( i. to
be employed for such use as the Lord has prescribed) and hereupon let it
become a low and immutable custom, etc. Therefore in Chrysostoms judgment, the
Apostle applies the manner of the Church in collecting alms on the Lords
Days, for the benefit of afflicted brethren, which were then at Jerusalem,
which office of Christian Charity, although no brethren lived in that place,
ought not to be omitted of Christians: but in Chrysostoms opinion is to be
established by an inviolable law for ever, as it was done (even as it appears
by Justin Martyr, and Tertullians Apologies) in the succeeding Church. I only
add this; Although a general law for making collections on that day to the use
of the poor, be set down by the Apostle, yet they that at this day do it at
other times, must not be judged transgressors of the Apostles law. That kind of
collection was not so affixed to the Lords Day, as it could not be done on
other days; although a peculiar reason was in it, why they did rather on that,
than another day; namely, for the Church Assemblies held at that time: and no
time, as Chrysostom witnesses, which we shall see afterward, is more fit to
perform that office on than the Lords Day.

Others again, set to another Engine, by which they oppose the usual
interpretation of the Apostles foresaid phrase, and contend that (...) does
signify every day of the week, ( singulam Sabbatum) This they assert, not
because it is the probable construction of the Apostles words, but that they
might elude, if they could, the genuine interpretation received every where of
the Church. But whoever shall weigh with himself the blessed Apostles purpose,
(who did studiously provide that his ordinances should not be a burden to the
Churches of Christ, which in those days for most what consisted of men of an
inferior condition) will not easily admit, that the Apostle did so ordain,
that collections should be made daily: neither is it like that he should
ordain, that these should be gathered on every Sabbath, properly so called:
since when the Apostle was present at Corinth, the Christians could not meet in
one place: much less after his departure from them, was it safe for them to
frequent the Jews Synagogues on the Sabbath day. Let that place, Act. 18. 17.
be consulted. Lastly, neither must we believe that the Christian Corinthians
did hold their public meetings on the Sabbath day amongst themselves: since
they were held on the Lords days in every place: neither is there extant any
testimony in the whole Volume of the Scriptures, by which it can be shown, that
the Christians kept Sabbath Day meetings among themselves, or apart from the
Jews. Therefore the received Exposition of the Apostles words, is to be
retained; namely, that the Apostle did ordain in the Church of Corinth, yet
when they met for Religion, weekly, as the Lords days returned, alms should
be collected for the poors use: and they seem privately to have laid aside what
their condition permitted to bestow for the comfort and relief of the poor: and
that which was thus laid aside, they kept with themselves till the first day in
the week, at what time they deposited it with the Rulers of the Church for the
poors use. He that shall more considerately weigh the Apostles phrase, may well
enough see this was his meaning: for he says, (...) etc. i. against the first
day in every week, or when the first of every week comes; so as is said amongst
the Grecians Suidas.
, (...) i. Water ready for washing ones hands. In like manner, the Alms which
were privately laid aside of every one, were deposited on the first day of the
week for the help of the needy, and then, when the Church met, are said to be
gathered, because their collection was made of those who privately had laid
them aside, on the Lords day, or or first day of the week. Le^ admonished his
hearers, Baron. An. 44. n. 68.
because on the Lords day there should be a Collection, toprepare themselves
for a voluntary devotion, and that every one according to his ability, might
have fellowship in that most sacred oblation: from which testimony one may
easily gather, that the Christians laid aside by themselves their Collections
against the Lords day, which then they deposited with the Rulers of the Church,
to be bestowed. Although Chrysostom Hom. 43. in 1 Cor.
thinks that the people reserved their alms, laid aside on the Lords day, till
the Apostle himself came, to whom they should be brought in; but the former
exposition does more agree with the custom of the Church.

The third place is Rev. 1. 10. where Rev. 1. 10.
there is had express mention of the Lords day; out of which, almost all
Writers fetch the custom of the Lords day solemnity, from the very Apostles
time. For the Lords day, as we see, is expounded by as well ancient, as late
Interpreters of Scripture, to be the first day in the week: and some new
expositions of that phrase (which cannot stand with the signification of the
Lords day in the Evangelists themselves, and some famous Wallaeus de 4. Praec.
c. 7. does learnedly confute some of the foolish expositions which some make of
the name of this day.
Writers next the Apostles age) are solidly resuted by diverse; and therefore
omitting them, we set it down for a certain, that in the Apostles age (that I
may use Ribera's words, on Rev. 1.) the solemnity of the Sabbath was changed
into the Lords Day, being consecrated by the Resurrection of our Lord. For it is
not once that it appears from Scripture, that the Apostolical Church kept
solemn the Lords Day, by celebrating the Supper, preaching the Word, and
collecting of Alms, in which the true manner of solemnizing it does consist.
Yea, the history of the Apostles travels lets us know, that the Christians of
that time held not their ordinary meetings but upon the Lords day. He that
shall teach the contrary, confiding in Scripture authority, I will freely hear,
although after the Apostles death, the succeeding Church in some places, as
afterward we shall see, kept their meeting on the Sabbath days. In the mean
time we find that the Lords day in the Apostles age, the sacred records
attesting the same, was solemnly observed. Which thing was first to be proved
by us.

CHAP. III.
After the Apostles death, the Church met upon other days than the Lords. The
ancients observed the Sabbath not as an holy day. The differences between the
observation of the Sabbath and Lords Day. How Constantine the Great ordained
the Parasceve to be observed. Anniversary Festivals were not celebrated with
that solemnity, as the Lords Day. Not bowing the knees on the Lords Day.
Anniversary Festivals not to be preferred to the Lords Day.

NOne who will diligently look into the gravest writers of the following ages
shall be ignorant, that after the Apostles were dead, the Church did in all
Nations celebrate the Lords Day: which that it may more plainly be known to
all, we must know; as I said in the first Chapter, when the Apostles were
translated to Heaven, the number of days (on which ordinarily the
Church-meetings were had) received an increase. For while the Apostles were
alive, the Christians ordinarily held their meetings on the Lords days only,
but afterward the ordinary time for performing the exercises of public
worship was not only weekly, but anniversary; that came every week, this but
once every year. But here we will not speak of the extraordinary, and
anniversary festivals, that were used by the succeeding Church; but of the
ordinary time returning every week, destined for Religious exercises. Where, in
the first place, it will be for the Readers profit to consider, that although
the use of the Lords day spread The Christians met on the Sabbath.
abroad through the world in the Church of God, yet in some places the Church
had weekly her public meetings on other days besides the Lords. Socrates
acknowledges the Sabbath and Lords Day for feasts returning every week, on
which meetings were wont to be kept. Hist. 6. c. 8. And elsewhere, when he
treats of the sundry rites of Churches, l. 5. c. 22. he tells us, that the
Presbyters and Bishops of Cappadocia* Cesaria and Cyprus, did interpret the
Scriptures on the Sabbath and Lords Day. When l. 7. c. 19.
Sozomen notes the time of calling the Church together, he says, some met on
the Sabbath, and the day after the Sabbath. Epiphanius in Panario contr.
Heresi. lib. 3. T. 2. acknowledges, that the Church met upon the Wednesday,
instead of the Sabbath, and Feria*
Lords Day. When St. Epist. ad Jan. 11. 8. cap. 2.
Austin shows what Christians must do when they see the customs of Churches to
vary, he confesses that some do daily partake of [the Lords] blood and body on
the Lords day (which all the ancients do witness was done in the
Church-assembly) and others only on the Sabbath and Lords day and in other
places only on the Lords day. Lib. 2. in Gal. c. 4.
Hierom acknowledges the Christians did observe Quartam Sabbati, Parasceven,
and the Lords day: although he shows they differed from the Jews in the
observation of those days.

The testimonies of the Fathers hitherto mentioned, do show, that although the
use of the Lords day grew every where, yet the Church had in some places
oftener, in others more rarely, their weekly meetings, whereupon it seemed
equal and just to some to ordain other days (which the succeeding Church
proclaimed for public meetings) to be equallized with the Lords day: and that
chiefly for three causes; first, the public meetings of the Church were held
on other days besides the Lords. Secondly, the Christians were bound to the
same duties of Religion on other days, appointed by the Church for meetings,
which were required by the Church on the Lords day. Lastly, some Feasts, the
Anniversary namely, were more esteemed in the Church than the Lords: and these
things are confidently enough affirmed, that they might show, if by any means
they could, that the original and obligation of the Lords day and other
Festivals is the same, both which they set forth to the world for humane: but
let them look to it, to whom they affirm it, lest they be twit with that of
Ezekiel. 43. 8.

But that the prerogatives of the Lords Day above others, may more clearly
appear, let us by Gods help weigh of what value the reasons are, with which
they contend for other feasts to be equallized with the Lords day: which, that
it may be done with plainness, we will first clearly distinguish the
Church Assemblies held on the Sabbath days, from others which were held on the
Lords day, relying upon the gravest testimonies of the ancients; then by Gods
assistance, we will show the peculiar excellency of the Lords Day; for the
dignity whereof it is superior to other days, while others contend against it
in vain.

First, we affirm, that, excepting the The ancients celebrated the Sabbath* not
as an holy day.
Lords, there was no other weekly (we speak of stated and ordinary) holy day,
with the whole Church next the Apostles. We have heard in the first Chapter,
that the Christians met on the first day of the week: and for the allegations
in this chapter out of the Fathers and Historians, for the observation of the
Sabbath, they cannot demonstrate, that the Sabbath was observed by the
Christian Church as an holy day: which, unless it be first explicated, they
that peruse the records of the Ancients, will happily fall into a troublous
matter. After the Apostles death, Socrates, Sozomen, Epiphanius, Hieronymus,
Augustine, and if there be any more, say, that the Church in the public
assembly did perform the duties of piety as the Sabbaths came about: yet
whoever shall say that the Sabbath was neither accounted holy, nor equalled to
the Lords day, will do no wrong to the truth. Who will say the Sabbath is holy?
when in the holy Records a tittle cannot be read of its institution, or
observation in the Christian Church, as is of the Lords day: but that the Lords
day was instituted of the Apostles, endued with extraordinary power, and moved
by the Holy Ghosts inspiration, we will afterward by the Grace of God inform
you. Yea, let him tell who can, that the Christians in the Apostles age met by
themselves on Sabbath days, which thing yet they did on the Lords days, is
apparent enough from the Scriptures: but after the Apostles death I deny not
that the Christians met together on Sabbath days, (although they accounted not
the Sabbath holy) and those assemblies were chiefly in use with the Oriental
people, according to some; because the Jews dispersed in the Orient, and
accustomed to the Sabbatical solemnity, could not easily be contented to be
plucked from it, although they observed the Lords Day (which what is it else to
do, but brand them with Eus. 3. 21.
Ebionism?) or as An. 57. n. 202. 203.
Baronius thinks, because certain Heretics reproached the Sabbath, that the
God of the Hebrews, whom they called Evil, rested on that day, therefore they
fasted on the Sabbath: Contrariwise, the Catholics not Judaizing, but that
they might worship him as God the Father, Creator of heaven and earth, with a
solemn celebrity, said, that in honor of him the Sabbath, as well as the Lords
day to the glory of Christ, ought to be celebrated. Thus they. To whom Vedelius
in his notes on Ignatius's tenth Epistle, numb. 6. does answer Learnedly and
Orthodoxly enough. Or because the Sabbath has (...) i. a regard of creation,
as is defined in the l. 8. c. ^^.
Constitutions which they call the Apostles. But how much these kind of
conjectures are to be valued, that are supported with no reasons of any
authority, or genuine testimonies of the Fathers, let others judge. It Is
without controversy, that the Oriental Christians and others, did at that time
hold assemblies on the Sabbath day, although upon what reasons they were
chiefly moved to this, it is not well enough known by the Writers of that age.
Yet did they not hold the Sabbath day holy.

The difference of the Eastern from the The ancients fasted on the Sabbath.
Western Church in observing the Sabbath, teaches this: while the Oriental
people kept holy day on the Sabbath, most in the West fasted: I say the most of
them, because they of Millain, though in the West, Aug. Ep. 86.
and diverse others of the West, were not attentive to fast on Sabbath days,
but dined soberly. Ambrose had a custom to dine on the Sabbath. Paul. de vit.
Ambros.
Witness Paulinus. Ambrose confesses this of himself in Augustine: Augustine
Ep. 86.
acknowledges he dined on the Sabbath, without superstitious vacation, Ep. 86.
Yet the Roman Church, and some Bar. 57. n. 204. 205. Conc. Eliber. can. 26.
Conc. Agatheus. can. 12.
others, and at length every where, even they of the East fasted on the
Sabbath. These things about those who fasted on the Sabbath, do not declare
that they acknowledged it for a Feast, or holy day, on which fasting was
altogether to be forborne (according to the custom of the Church. Aug. Ep. 86.
and other Authors being witnesses) yet that the Lords day was accounted holy at
that time, is granted of all.

Moreover, the Sabbath was not every The difference between observing. the
Sabbath and Lords day.
where amongst the Christians observed with that solemnity of the Church, as
the Lords day. For the meetings were not held in the same manner on Sabbaths,
as on the Lords days. Some things touching both, observed out of the Fathers,
will show this.

1. What things are reported of Historians 1. The Sabbath was not observed
every where.
and others, about observing the Sabbath, touching gathering assemblies, were
not used in every Church every where. For in the Churches of Rome and
Alexandria the manner of meeting on the Sabbath held not. Witness Sozom. Hist.
l. 7. c. 19. and afterward in other Churches it grew out of use. Athanasius
Hom. de semente, glories, that he never meddled with the Sabbath (after the
Jews manner, namely.) Tertul. de Idol. cap. 14. says, the Sabbaths are
extraneous to Christians, and that Holy days were sometime time beloved of
God. The Nazaraei observing the Sabbath, are branded for Heresy by Epiphanius,
l. 1. number. 30. and likewise the Ebionites. If it had been the Christians duty
to observe Sabbaths, why had the Catholics imputed its observation as a fault
to the Heretics? which yet they have done more than once, as sure as sure can
be. But Christians have celebrated their Lords day every where without brand of
heresy, or any other crime: and therefore since the festivity of the Sabbath
was not every where in use with the Christian Church; nor does any where occurr
any Apostolical ordination for continuing it in the Church, we do by good right
affirm, that Christians are not obliged to its celebration: which to affirm of
the Lords day, that was observed in the Apostles age, and ever after, is an
heirrous thing.

2. When meetings were held on Sabbath 2. They met not every Sabbath.
days, they met not weekly on all Sabbaths, as they came about; for on one
Sabbath public Conventions were to be omitted, if we may believe the foresaid
Constitutions: so it is ordained Constit. Ap. lib. 5. cap. 19. and what that is
they explain the Sabbath in the great week, Constit. Ap. c. 24. lib. 7. [The
Sabbath] of the Lords burial, on which it is fit we should fast, but not
celebrate a festival. So also August. to Casulanus, Ep. 86. but for the
omitting Churchassemblies on the Lords day (as often as it came about, and were
safe for the Church for the Persecution of the Tyrants) we read nothing was
ever ordained of the ancients. There is a sanction in the same Constitutions
that the Lords day should be celebrated without intermission. Lib. 7. cap. 31.

3. In populous Cities, where without 3. All exercises of Religion were not
performed on the Sabbath.
damage to their Estates, they could be present at reading of Scripture, and
their interpretation, meetings were more frequently kept. Therefore the Council
of Laodicea decrees, that the Gospels should be read on the Sabbath. Can. 16.
Ambrose treated of Prayer the same day. de Sacram. lib. 4. c. 6. But all the
exercises of piety were not every where performed in those assemblies, that yet
were not omitted on the Lords day. Ep. 118. c. 2.
Augustine says in another place, On the Lords day only the Communion of the
Lords Body and Blood is used. Hist. lib. 5. c. 22.
Socrates does not record, that they of Alexandria and Rome did celebrate those
mysteries on the Sabbath. While Chrysostom requires it of the rich Lords of
Villages, that they build Churches in them, Hom. 18. in Act. he distinguishes
those congregations that were on other days from those that were held upon the
Lords day. Upon those Synaxes.
Congregations, Prayers and hymns were had, in these an oblation was made on
every Lords day: and for that cause the Lords day is in Chrysostom called dies
panis, i. the day of bread. Apol. 2.
Athanasius purges himself of a calumny imputed to him; for breaking the cup,
because it was not the time of administering the holy mysteries: for it is not,
says he, the Lords day. Whence it is evident, that the Lords Supper was
administered on the Lords days: otherwise the argument wherewith Athanasius
purges himself, were of no weight. Although therefore they met upon the
Sabbath day, yet did they not every where observe it equally to the Lords day,
on which they celebrated all the mysteries of Religion.

4. The people were free to be present or 4. Meetings on the Sabbath were free.
absent from Sabbath Day meetings, as they saw good: that is, they were not
obliged by any necessity of law to meet on that day: for the Sabbatarii
contending for a necessary observation of the seventh day, were of the whole
Christian Church condemned of heresy, in this behalf, as I have briefly shown
before. I confess Hom. 10. in Genesis
Origin reproves his hearers which came seldom to hear the Word of God, that
scarce did come to the Church on Feast days. Gregory Nyssen, in that Oration
which he made against those that would scarce endure reproofs, nips the people
that met not on the Sabbath. With what eyes, says he, look thou on the
Lords Day, that despisest the Sabbath? Do thou not know that these days are
Sisters? that if thou reproach the one, thou offendest the other? But he speaks
of those who had oftener liberty to meet for hearing the Word, which they
regarded not to embrace, out of a certain supine negligence, or being puffed up
with pride, despised the Church-meetings on Sabbath-dayes. Whether it was the
sluggishness or arrogance of these men, it was deservedly blameable: whenas
they might diverse days meet at Church, without damage of their worldly
affairs, which yet to do, they were not easily moved, although the duties of
their calling would bear it. In the old Testament, some hours in a week were
consecrated to Gods Worship, Numb. 28. 3. but yet all the day long the whole
people of Israel should not attend on the holy duties of piety; this was only
enjoined to them that could commodiously do it. So in the Churches planted by
the Apostles, they met on other days as often as they could, besides the Lords
days: but on the Lords days, appointed for this end, they were bound to be
present at the public assemblies, and their absence for a certain time from
these on the Lords day, was to be reprehended by the sentence of the first
Council. Eliberitan. Can. 21. Item Council. Trull. Can. 80. Council. Sard. Can. 11.
And yet where are any Canons established for punishing their absence from
Sabbathday-meetings? Although the Fathers do often reprove those that come
seldom on the Sabbath, and other days to hear the Word.

5. Although on the Sabbath days they 5. Though they met on the Sabbath, yet
they abstained not from labor on that day.
might meet to hear the holy Oracles of God, yet when that days meetings were
ended, they might not be idle: but an Anathema is denounced to them that work
not on that day. Conc. Laodic. Can. 29. Ignatius in an Epistle to the
Magnesians, exhorts them to spend the Sabbath in labors without rest: and
therefore the Sabbath had not its vacation from labors. So Athan. de semente.
Ambros. Ep. 72. which we never read was ordained of the Lords day, (on which
it is a sin to give our selves to labor.)

And let these things suffice for the Lords days prerogatives above the
Sabbath; by which we find that the Sabbath day was not kept holy of the Church,
( i. e. the ancients did not separate it from common use and labor, nor
consecrate it wholly to God in an holy rest, that on it the acts of Divine
Worship, and those things that pertain to a spiritual life, should only be
exercised) neither were the conventions on that day to be compared with those
held on the Lords day: which things surely once to define, had been much to our
profit. For the Institution of other days to hold meetings on, it is not
needful to take much pains, since we have nothing writ of it in the Word of
God, as of the Lords day; and many things which were not instituted of the
Apostles, but first arose in particular Churches, were introduced by little and
little into other, which at length in process of time, are made more common:
which Socrates ascribes to the Bishops of diverse Churches Hist. l. 5. c. 22.
: and those that received such rites from the Bishops, transmitted them as a
law to Posterity: as in other things, so in the meetings of the Church, it is to
be observed, whose original was not used by the Church in the Apostles age.
Epiphanius in Panario tells us of Synaxes Ecclesiae quarta, Prosabbato, and
Dominico fartas. Ens. de vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 18.
Constantine the Great ordained by Law, the Parasceve to be celebrated: of
which nothing is yet extant in Scripture, but Hist. l. 1. c. 8.
Sozomen seems to touch upon the cause of its institution, who says that
Constantine gave great honor to the holy Cross, both for the help that was
brought him in managing his wars against his enemies, through its vertu^e, and
also for the heavenly Vision that was offered him about it; which things teach
us, that Constantine (if we may say so of so godly an Emperor) did very
superstitiously worship the Cross: whence it happened that he attributed more
to the Cross than was fitting: and for that cause instituted that day to be set
a part for meetings in memorial of Christ's Passion on that day accomplished.
Yet who will from that sanction compare the observation of that day, ordained
of Constantine, and not of the Apostles, with the Lords day? which was long
before Constantines days observed of the Church, which we must take for
certain did so often meet to hear the word of God, as it fitly could.
Afterward we shall see, that the Fathers did treat to their people out of the
Scriptures, almost every day; yet I trust none will equallize every day, on
which these assemblies were holden, to the Lords day. But these assemblies were
free, neither was the universal Church obliged by any law to keep them, which
yet we acknowledge of the Lords day: therefore I will add no more of them. And
from what has been said, the attentive Reader will easily perceive, that no
day was observed of the whole Catholic Church, with that solemnity that the
Lords day was: and that on the Sabbath day the Christians did not intermit
their ordinary labors.

Now having gotten out of a very troublesome Anniversary Feusts were not
equalled to the Lords day.
disputation, I hasten to that which in the third place I thought to enquire
about; namely, Whether Anniversary Feasts were observed of the Church with
greater solemnity than the Lords day, as some think? especially because amongst
the ancients they were sometimes equalled to the Lords day, and sometimes far
preferred to it. From the Passover-holy-dayes until Pentecost, being intentive
on Prayers, they did no more bend the knees, than on the Lords days: yea, the
answer in Just. Mart. quad orth. 115.
Justin affirms the same things, that Pentecost was in equal power with the
Lords day. The same is ordained in the twentieth Canon Conc. Nic. 1. Mention
also is made of this custom in other Fathers, Basil. de S. Sancto, cap. 27.
Tertul. de corona milit. cap. 3. Hieron. advers. Luciferianos. Aug. Epist. 118.
cap. 15, 17, etc.

From their freedom from kneeling, some conclude the equality of these days:
which I acknowledge was interdicted on those days; and they were glad for
their immunity at that time from their Fasts; and yet I do not think that those
days are to be compared with the Lords. Verily, if these prerogatives had
constituted an holy day, they that for this cause judge the days of Pentecost
to be equalled to the Lords, had said something: but if they so think, I doubt
not at all but they are mistaken: and what St. Austin sometime answered Urbicus
disputing against those that dined on the Lords day, is hither to be referred.
Austin Ep. 86.
concludes the Lords day must be preferred to the Sabbath for the faith of the
Resurrection, not for custom of refection, that is, they prefer not the Lords
day to the Sabbath, because they remit fasting on it; which yet they do not on
the Sabbaths; but because Aug. Epist. 119.
it was declared to the Christians to be the Lords day by the Resurrection of
the Lord, and thereupon began to have its own festivity. So we say here, the
days of Pentecost are not to be compared with the Lords Day, although as well
on those as on this, the time was passed without bowing and fastings: because
the ordination, whereby bowing and fasting were interdicted them, was merely
humane. Austin thinks it is not Ep. 86.
defined by the Lords command, or the Apostles on what days to fast: and not
many ages since, while the Lords solemnity remained in the Church, that
ordination was vanished. No body therefore that is always one, can by right
compare the solemnity of Pentecost with the Lords: (whose institution
afterward we will prove Divine;) neither is there in the places cited, made
any comparison of that with this amongst the Fathers; but only in regard of
that immunity. in Luc. l. 8. c. 17.
Ambrose says, For these fifty days the Church knows not fasting, as the
Lords day: Afterward he adds, they are all as the Lords day: because upon
them, as he said, as on the Lords day, there was a relaxation of fasting. After
the same manner are Justin Martyr and Tertullian de cor. mil. to be understood.
That I may therefore dispatch in a word; if the Lords day had not been
celebrated in the Apostles age, and if it had been honored with no other
prerogatives than immunity from bowing and fasting, then certainly they would
have equallized them to this day: but that this is false, even, as the Proverb
is, the blearcyed, and barbers know: and so they conclude, arguing like
Sophisters from that which is (...) ad (...).

And thus far of the equality of some Anniversary feasts not to be preferred to
the Lords d^^.
days with the Lords, which some men dream of: It will farther also be worthy
our consideration, [to know] whether some Feasts, which they call anniversary,
were preferred of the Church to the Lords day. To those that think thus, it is
enough to answer them once after this manner; Whereas we cannot read that the
Holy Ghost in Scripture affords a testimony to the institution or observation
of these, they are to be received as humane institutions: which, omitting
others, may be cleared by this one argument: If those feasts had been
instituted of the Apostles, then they had been observed every where by the
Church, in the same manner and time, according to the rule of Vincentius
Lirinensis: yet the contrary does plainly appear by Ecclesiastical Writers and
Fathers: which it will not be irksome to demonstrate in some of them. If the
Feast of the Passover had been ordained by the law of Christ or his Apostles,
(says the learned Chamier) then that law had unanimously been propounded of
the Apostles, and accordingly celebrated of all Churches, in the same manner,
at least at the beginning. But that is not to be found, which the unhappy
controversy about this matter (whereby the concord of diverse Churches has
wonderfully been interrupted) shows, They of Asia contend it must be
celebrated on the fourteenth day, they of the West on the Lords day only: and
which is more, those acknowledge their Sozom. l. 7. c. 19.
opinion received by tradition from John, these from Peter and Paul. This
controversy, Eusebius Hist. l. 5. explains more at large. Who therefore can be
brought to believe, if the festivity of the Passover was ordained by the
Apostles authority, that so soon diverse Churches, that were governed of the
very Apostles Scholars, would make a departure from so holy a precept? and that
in celebrating the Lords day, all the Churches of Christ through the whole
world should follow one and the same rule? Why had they not also done the like
in the Feast of the Passover, if it had been instituted by Apostolical
authority? It is not likely therefore it was ordained of the Apostles. And yet
I cannot but wonder at the wit of some men, who hold the Passovers festivity,
which the Scriptures are silent in, for divine; and yet they repute the Lords
day, whose observation we meet with in Scripture, for Ecclesiastical and
humane. If therefore the Passovers festivity was instituted of the Apostles, no
man can justly prefer it to the Lords day, ordained of Christ by his Apostles.

Nor must we judge otherwise of the Feast of the happy Nativity of Christ,
whose solemnity was anniversary, but on what day of the year to be celebrated,
it is uncertain.

Chrysostom (although he conjectures De Natio. Baptistae. Hom. 27.
Christ was born on the eighth before the Calends of January in December,
recites diverse opinions about this matter, but follows his own opinion, without
condemning of others, and permits De Not. Dom. Hom. 34.
every one to abound in his own sense, till such time as the Lord shall reveal
to every one of us what must be holden for certain.

St. Hierom (if so be that Sermon de Nativitate Domini, which goes commonly
under his name, be Hieroms) says, Whether the Lord Jesus was born to day, or
baptized to day, a different opinion is carried about in the world, and
according to the variety of traditions, is the sentence diverse. In this
authors judgment, whoever he was, it was uncertain what day the blessed
Nativity of Christ fell out on. The Learned Casaubon Exercit. ad apparat. Bar.
annal. number. 68. tells us, there were of old diverse opinions in the Church about
Christ's Nativity. Some writing, that he was born on the sixth of January,
others, on the nineteenth of April, others, on the nineteenth of May, some in
the month of September, most on the twenty fifth of December. Now these diverse
opinions about these feasts, which are taken for chief ones, do teach us, that
they were ordained by no law of the Apostles: otherwise in their writings
without doubt we should have met with a direct assigning of the time to be set
aside for keeping them in Memory, as it is observed of the Lords day, which yet
it is plain no where can be found.

Moreover, if their ordination had been It is uncertain which of the Anniversary
derived from the Apostles, they had either all been equal among themselves, or
it had been known some way to the Church, Feasts do excel.
which amongst them had been of greater authority and right. But the contrary
appears from the most grave Fathers, which differ from one another about this
thing: and therefore one is sometimes preferred before another of them.
Chrysostom calls the Feast of Christ's Nativity the Mother of all Feasts. Orat.
de Philognio. Orat. pro Basilio.
Gregory Nyssen calls it, the holy of holies, and feast of feasts Orat. 42. in
Pasch.
Gregory Nazianzen judges it to be preferred far before all others that are
Christ's, and are celebrated in honor of him. Since therefore it is not agreed
on amongst the Fathers of the Church of the first institution of these
Festivals, and their prerogatives, none will doubt that their institution was
not received from the Apostles: Which things being supposed, it can be inferred
by no necessary consequence, that these are to be compared, much less to be
preferred to the Lords day.

From all which, it appears, that the observation of the Lords day was far
different from that of the Sabbath, and other days: because the Sabbath day
amongst Christians had on it no cessation from worldly labors, neither was it
observed with such solemnity of the whole Church, as was the Lords day: yea,
the Sabbath is not read to be observed of the whole Church: whenas yet the
premises do evince that the Lords day was ever solemnized from the very
Apostles age in the Church dispersed through all Nations, and we have observed
that other Festivals of Christ's are not to be compared with, much less to be
equallized, or preferred to the Lords Day.

CHAP. IV.
The chief of the Fathers make mention of the Lords Day: its authority depends
not on the Constitutions of Emperors, when it was at first ordained that
Judges should cease from hearing Lawsuits on that day: the Christians were
punished for observing it: What it is Dominicum agere.

BEtter to manifest the celebrity of the Lords Festival, I will moreover
Mention of observing the Lords day may be me^ with in the chief of the Fathers
bend my mind to two things: by which, in the first place, I will demonstrate,
that the Lords Day all along in the Church, from the very Apostles age, was
consecrated to perform religious exercises on: Secondly, that on all that day
the Church was wont to be vacant from all worldly matters: which two things
will clearly enough show its solemnity above all other days (to which these
things agree not) amongst men that relish the truth.

In demonstrating the first of these, we will prove that the Lords day was
always celebrated, and will briefly open both the reasons of its solemnity,
and its names, which we meet with amongst the ancients. Let it be sufficient to
illustrate the first, that there is none of any note in the ancient Church, who
does not give an ample testimony to this its solemnity. Amongst the renowned
witnesses of this truth, let St. Ignatius Epist. ad Magnes. an. 111.
come forth, who thus charges us: Let every lover of Christ celebrate the Lords
day, which was consecrated to the Lords Resurrection, as the Qneen and Prince (
i. the chief day, as Constantine the Great in Eusebius. de vit. ejus, lib. 4. cap.
18.) of all other days.

Justin Martyr in the end of his second An. 150.
Apology confesses, that on that day which they call Sunday, were holden
solemn assemblies of all that lived both in villages and cities: and he tells
us more at large what was An. 170.
done in those assemblies, of which afterward we shall hear more* Dionysius
Bishop of Corinth, when he mentions Clements Epistle to the Corinthians in Eus.
Hist. l. 4. c. 22.
Eusebius, says, he kept holy the Lords day. Tertullian Ann. 200 de Idol. c.
14.
reckons the Lords day (which he calls the eighth, namely from the Creation)
amongst the Christians solemnities. The same does An. 261. an. 320.
Origin (although otherwise he was not at one with himself about the times for
performing Religious exercises) lib. 8. contra Celsum. Eusebius, Hist. l. 3. c.
21. an. ^492.
when he speaks of the Ebionites, whom he reports did observe the Lords days,
after the same manner as the Church did, in remembrance of the Lords
Resurrection, does make mention of this day: whence it is collected, that the
Church did celebrate the Lords day, otherwise Eusebius had not affirmed that
the Ebionites had done it after the same manner as the Church did. And the
testimonies which follow teach us the same.

Epist. 59. an. 380.
Cyprian mentions this day, which he calls the first after the Sabbath.
Basilius M. says, the Church standing up, made their supplications on the
first day of the week, which he calls, the beginning of days. De Sp. Sanct. c.
27. Sermon. de ^leemasyn. an. 380.
Chrysostom says, on the first day of the week, or the Lords day, the
Christians ceased from all labor: that by their relaxation, and holy days,
the minds of the offerers might become more cheerful. l. 5. Ep. 33.
Ambrose on the Lords day, after the readings, and treating of the Creed,
communicated [Baptism] to the Competentes ( i. to those, who being instructed
in the Christian faith, sought Baptism. Aug. Retract. lib. 1. chapter 17. and libro
de Fide and operibus cap. 6.) at the Fonts of the Church. We meet with frequent
mention of this day in St. Austin Ep. 119. An. 430.
c. 13. and in the end of those Books, De Civit. Dei, lib. 22. c. 30. also
Sermon. 15. de verbis Apostoli, and many times elsewhere. Hilary says, the
Church does joyfully celebrate a Festival on the eighth day, which is also it
self the first of a perfect week. Prol. in Psalmos. Amongst the Holy Days
confirmed by the laws of the Emperors, Valens, Theodosius, and Arcadius, the
Sundays, which An. 440.
their Ancestors rightly called the Lords-dayes, were reckoned.

Leo also and Athenius ordain, the Lords Cod. l. 3. Tit 12. de feriis lege^
septima. a Leo Constit. 54.
day to be always venerable and honored. a Leo in the same place, by his
eleventh law, ordains, that all should cease from their labors on the Lords
days.

I can also bring forth many more testimonies for confirming the truth of this
solemnity, yea, of all that have flourished in the Church of Christ to this
very day. But I will add no more, lest I should seem to lend light to the Sun:
and those that have been cited hitherto do abundantly enough declare, that the
Lords day was always solemnly kept of the Church: because the holy Fathers
acknowledge it for the chief, yea, for an holy day. On it the Church ceased
from their labors, on it solemn assemblies were kept, or they rejoiced in the
festival of the Sabbath perfected; on it the Scriptures were handled, the
Sacraments were administered, on it the Church made supplications: and therefore
it is numbered amongst the chief solemnities of the Christians, and is provided
for by the laws of godly Emperors, that studied all they could to promote the
Worship of God, that the holy solemnity of that day should not be defiled by
labors, or any pleasures.

But although those most Religious Emperors The authority of the Lords day
depends not on the determination of Emperors.
ordained the Lords day, as was fitting, to be celebrated, it would be
ridiculous from thence to conclude that the Lords Festival was not celebrated
in the Church before they came to the Empire. The Christians, as has appeared
from the premises, attended to celebrate this Festival, when as yet there were
no Magistrates Christian (on whose authority the ordination of the Lords day
does not depend) even over the whole world, when the preaching of the Gospel
came. For which cause, as we shall by and by hear, diverse under Dioclesians
Reign were punished: But when the Emperors became Christian, they ordained
that the solemnity which was before observed of the Christians by Christ's
authority, should also by their own laws be celebrated, and took care that
others should not defile it by worldly businesses, or the pleasures of the
Flesh; but they did not institute it at the first. Constantine the Great, the
first of the Christian Emperors, having got the whole Roman Empire, by public
Edict commanded his Subjects, that they should observe the Christian Religion,
as witnesses l. 1. c. 7.
Sozomen: yet no man well in his wits will thence inse^r, that the Christian
Religion was then first known to the world: although the free exercise of it
was not safe, before he was set happily over the Government of the Empire: So
must we think of the Lords solemnity, which the Church of God observed not
without great danger, before the Emperors embraced the Christian Faith: but
after that the Emperors became nursing-fathers of the Christian Religion, they
did it freely, a Law being made of the Emperors for this end.

Moreover, let none be offended, that before (...) Lawsuits on the Lords day.
the times of Constantine, public Judges did attend the hearing of Lawsuits
on the Lords day, which to do, was [declared] unlawful in his Reign: as though
if the Lords day had been formerly known to the World, Magistrates had been
forbidden the exercise of public judicatures on that day: that most godly
Emperor greatly contended by all means that he could to promote our Religion,
and for the greater solemnity of this Festival, provided that all Court clamor
should on that day cease. Before his most auspicious Government, the public
Magistrates did attend Judicatures, even on the Lords day: and no wonder; for
before he got the stern of Government, the Judges were not Christian, but under
his Reign the Christians began to bear almost all the Offices of the Roman
Empire: Sozom. 1. c. 8.
most whereof he dignified with authority, some with the Senators office, many
also with the Consular dignity. Eusebius. de vit. Constant. l. 4. c. 1.
But after the Judges embraced the Christian truth, they submitted themselves
to this law of celebrating the Lords day with greatest good will: and did rest
the parties from their controversies in honor of that day. I might also add
this. It was needful, that one law being made for observing the Lords day, by
another he should interdict the Judges from the cognizance of causes on that
day. For it was provided by the Roman Laws, ^od. de feriis, l. 4. tit. 12.
That no Judge should presume on his own authority to make any holy days. He
therefore made this Law in favor of the Judges, who might know on what days
they should attend the Office which the Emperor committed to them, and on what
they should keep holy days [free] from the same. These things thus being
weighed in an equal scale* it appears, that the Law for not hearing Lawsuits
on the Lords day does detract nothing from the honor of its solemnity, but
rather much conduce to favor it.

That I may at length put an end to this Christians were punished for observing
the Lords day.
Chapter, We have seen how the Fathers have piously admonished the Church to
celebrate the Lords day, and the Emperors by their Laws made for this purpose,
very carefully provided, that the Christian people should obey their
admonitions: so also we may find it observable, from the Writers of those
times, that the Christians did celebrate this day's solemnity, with as much
devotion of Religion as they could: and therefore while they prayed on that day
toward the East, they fell into a suspicion of worshipping the Sun Tertul. ap.
advers. genesis c. 16.
, with the Heathen, amongst whom they lived, that hated the Christian name. Yet
could they by no punishments be deterred from celebrating the same: but when
they were by the Heathens carried to punishment, they demanded of the
Christians, whether they had kept the Lords day? as we may see in the Acts of
the Martyrs, by Baronius. An. 303. n. 35, etc.
As sometimes the bloody Papists, when other arguments failed, wherewith they
might stop the Protestants mouths, who with singular dexterity, and great
acuteness of wit, being happily illuminated with a notable light of the
Scripture, did refute their dotages, at length setting upon them with this
Question, would fish out what their opinion was of the Sacrament of the Altar
(as they speak incongruously) whereupon then as they desired they might have a
pretense to pronounce them guilty of death, according to the cruel laws enacted
by them: so the Heathens asked of the Christians, whether [they had been at
their] Collect, and kept the Lords day? and when they confessed they had been
at the Collect, and celebrated the Lords day, with a congruous devotion of
Religion, (as St. Dativus) then had they whereupon to threaten the sentence of
cruel death against them, inasmuch as having done against the Emperors
command. Yet the Martyrs answered to this Question, with an unanimous consent,
that they could not intermit the Lords day, because they were Christians; and
the Law (namely of God, as the Martyrs themselves expound it, number. 51. not of
the Church, as is noted by Baronius, in the margin, number. 48.) had warned them
to keep it. So the Martyrs.

But it will be for the Readers profit here What it is Dominicum agere.
more thoroughly to weigh what it is Dominicum agere, or celebrare: especially
for the sake of Baronius's candor in rehearsing the An. 303. number. 39.
Acts of these Martyrs: he contendeth, that by Collecta, Collectio, and
Dominicus, in the Acts of the Martyrs, must always be understood the sacrifice
of the Mass: but whoever shall look more narrowly into their acts, will easily
perceive that Baronius's Gloss deceives the Reader. Dominicum agere, and
Dominicum celebrare, in the acts of the Martyrs, are both one: and this is,
that I may use Hieroms words, the same, as if they should say, they celebrate
the Lords day, having received the Lords body: lib. 2. ^^ Gal.
or according to Tertullian; it is to celebrate the Lords solemnities: which by
the succeeding Church De fuge^ vet.
were called Solemnities appointed by God. So in Council. Tarraconensi, Can. 4.
And those were celebrated of the Church, being gathered together ( Tertullian
witnessing it in the place forecited) and were all the exercises of Religion
(which Baronius foolishly following the use of his age, comprehends under the
name of the Mass, altogether unknown to the Church of that age) dedicated to
Divine Worship, and performed on the Lords day; in whose number the
administration of the Lords Supper is reckoned: which in those first times was
oftentimes celebrated every Lords day, but never without other public duties
of Christian Religion: of which solemnities more hereafter, by the Grace of
God, when we treat of the Sanctification of this day. Let this for the present
suffice the Reader, that the Martyrs being asked by the Proconsul de Dominico,
answer, se Dominicum egisse; and we meet with Dominicum in the African Writers,
for the Lords day. Cyprian, Ep. 33. says of Aurelius, an ordained Reader,
Dominico legit, where without doubt, he means the Lords day. It is sometimes
put for the place that is set aside for the Church to meet in: come thou in
Dominicum without a sacrifice? says Cyprian, de opere and eleemosynis Sect. 14.
. Sometimes also for the Symboles of the Lords Supper; Numquid, says Cyprian,
Dominicum post coenam celebrare debemus? ^^. 63.
In the foresaid Acts of the Martyrs, the word Dominicum is taken in all its
significations: whenas therefore they answer, se Collectam Dominicam egisse,
what can it be else, but as they add, that se ad Scripturas Dominicas legendas
in Dominicum. (i. e. there was a public meeting for the Church, although, for
the Persecution they met in private houses, because, as they answer, they were
all present and aderat prebyter) convenisse, or ex more Dominica Sacramenta
celebrasse? Number. 36. Bar. an. 303. n. 36.
that is, all the Mysteries of Christian Religion at that time prohibited of
the Heathen Emperors, were faithfully performed on the Lords Days in the
assemblies of the Christians. For when any thing is opposed to a negative
command, we must consider it from the nature of the thing forbidden; therefore
the genuine sense of this phrase, Dominicum agere, Dominicum celebrare, in
Dominicum convenire, etc. in the Acts of the Martyrs, cannot better be
demonstrated, than from the very words of the Emperors edict; in which Bar.
an. 303. n. 35.
charge is given for burning the Scriptures, destroying the Temples, and
prohibiting the Christians meetings which they celebrated on the Lords day.
Saturninus, because he gathered together the Martyrs against the Emperors
Mandates, was brought to punishment n. 45.
. When therefore the Proconsul demands of them, Why Dominicum egissent, etc? it
is the same as if he should ask, Why they kept their meetings, (as the
Proconsul himself expresses it) or Dominicam Collectam egissent n. 51. and 45.
n. 39.
? in which the duties of piety were observed. And when were such sort of
meetings kept, but at that time whereon the congregations of the common people
were made? (as Austin of the same Martyrs, in breviculo Collationis tert. diei,
cap. 4.) that is, but upon the Lords days, according to the command of Christ,
and the custom of the Church founded upon this command; and in those meetings
of the Martyrs, they did perform all the rites and offices of their Religion
entirely: for which cause, as I said, they were aceused; namely, because (...).
39.
Collectam Dominciam celebrarunt ( i. e. they met, or synaxes egerunt, in the
Lords name, to celebrate the Lord on the Lords day) Dominicum, (i. e. the
offices of the Christian Liturgy, which were prohibited by the Imperial edict,
under the name of a meeting, as they expound it after^^^d) cum fratribus
celebrarunt, (...) 43.
; namely, ad Scripturas Dominicas legendas in Dominicum convenerunt, (...) 51.
and Dominica Sacramenta ex more celebranda, (...) ^6.
idque ex authoritate legis Dei (...) 51.
. These are the excellent offices of Piety, which were performed of them with
the greatest devotion (...) Religion, although they were interdicted by the
Emperor; for whose sake as I said, they were complained of by the Proconsul.
From which things, it is plain to any, that Dominicum agere, or celebrare, is
the same amongst the Martyrs, that Dominica solemnia celebrare, was to their
Countryman Tertullian, (whose Phrase does in a Parallel answer to this of the
Martyrs) or to perform solemnities for the honor of God, on the Lords day. By
what has been said it is also manifest, that the authority of the Lords Day
was great in the Church, because the Christians would not intermit the
celebrating of it according to the law prescribed them by God (although they
were straightly forbidden of the Emperors, upon great danger of life.)

CHAP. V.
The Reason of observing the Lords Day, was the Resurrection of Christ on that
day: it is called the first day of the week, by the Evangelists and Fathers,
and Lords day, and Sunday also; and why the Sabbath, and Christian Sabbath,
whereupon the Fathers did rarely use the name of Sabbath; what the word Synaxis
may signify with the ancients.

THe things that are observed thus far have taught us, that the Lords day was
always solemnized in the Church of Christ, from his Resurrection: now let us
enter both upon opening the reasons for which the Primitive Christians were
induced to this, and also the names by which they usually called this day.

First, one and the same reason of this days solemnity, is assigned every where
in the Fathers: then it is pointed out by the self-same names of them all,
though far remote from one another: and the testimonies observed in the former
Chapter do witness both these. The Fathers plainly affirm, that the Lords day
was sacred with the Christians, by reason Christ's Resurrection the cause of
this solemnity.
of the Lords Resurrection, and that he had a festival ever since that time,.
So Ignatius, Justin Martyr, Constant. Mag. Augustine, etc. in the places
forecited. But we meet with the reason of this Festival no where more
accurately, and to the life, as they say, painted out, than in Athanasius de
Sabb. and Circumcis. Of which place this is the sum, (to which, because it is
large, I referr the Reader.) There Athanasius mentions a double world, to the
former whereof, he tells us the saving Passion of Christ, at which the Sun
appeared not, put an end, and the beginning of a new creation came after it,
which took its beginning in our Savior.

The Church relying on this reason (which all the other Fathers acknowledge)
has hitherto always from the Resurrection of Christ, had in reverence the
Lords day, namely, because of the Lords Resurrection: now the Resurrection
presupposes Christ's Nativity and Death, or the Resurrection is as it were the
consummation of our Redemption: therefore when the Apostles office is described
of Luke, Acts 1. 22. they are called witnesses of the Resurrection; not because
they testified of the Resurrection alone; but since the Resurrection (without
which, the Faith of Christians would be vain, the great Apostle being witness,
1 Cor. 15.) is the chief article of the Gospel, when they are said to give
testimony of the Resurrection, iqis as much as if they bore witness of the
whole Gospel. Hence it was that the ancients preferred the Passovers solemnity
to all other Festivals. Greg. Nazianzen calls it, the festival of festivals, a
solemnity of solemnities, which, says he, does so far excel all the other,
not only the humane and earthly, but those also of Christ himself, and are
celebrated for his sake, as the Sun excels the Stars: because if he had not
risen again, neither had his Nativity, nor Baptism, nor the other Mysteries of
Christ been confirmed, nor made us believe them. Therefore Gregory Nazianzen
thinks the honor of that festival is far to be preferred to the solemnities of
others, as his interpreter Nicetas thinks. Therefore, while the Fathers
consess, that the Lords day was consecrated in memory of the Resurrection, it is
the same as if they had said, in memory of our Redemption: which Resurrection
is the chief point of the Gospel; to hear and handle which, on that day, the
Church is sequestered from Worldly affairs.

Some assign other reasons, but this former is omitted by none, although to it
other are added by others.

Nor is there less harmonious consent Lords day is prima Sabbati.
amongst the ancient Fathers of the Church, in the Name of this Festival, than
in assigning its reason: and in its appellation they follow the Evangelists,
agreeing amongst themselves, who were the Holy Ghosts amanuenses: in whom it is
called by two names. First, it is called by the Evangelists (...), Mat. 28. Mar.
16. Luke 24. Joh. 20. So Acts 20. 7. and 1 Cor. 16. 2. as we have observed in
the second Chapter. In which places una Sabbatoruni must be expounded by the
Lords day, says Chrysostom Hom. 4^. in 1 Cor.
. Whose interpretation Hierom follows, and expounds the reason thereof, Ad
Hebidam, Quest. 4. Because, says he, every week is divided into the Sabbath,
and into the first, and second, and third, and fourth, and fifth, and sixth
day; which the Heathens called by the names of their Idols and Elements: and
therefore in those Fathers opinion una Sabbatorum (by Enallage of the plural
number for the singular; for its seldom read in the singular number in the Old
Testament, which manner the Writers of the New Testament do imitate) and prima
Sabbatorum are all one: for the name of Sabbath among the ancients denotes not
only the last day in the week, but the whole week also, which from finishing
[the creation] and the day of rest, is called the Sabbath, for its excellent
dignity, as Theophylact in Luc. 18. 2. that is to say, for the reverence of
this day, the Hebrews called the whole week the Sabbath. And in this sense is
the Pharisee to be understood about the Sabbath, when, being puffed up with
extreme Pride, amongst other things, he glories of Fasting Luke 18. 12.
, (...), quasi, twice a Sabbath. There by Sabbath we must of necessity
understand the whole Week by an Hebraism, and not the last day thereof. For the
Pharisees, (as the most learned searchers of Hebrew antiquity, have often
observed, which thing also Epiphanius puts us in mind of) instituted two Fasts
every week, namely, on Monday and Thursday Contr. Haer. l. 1. c. 10.
: therefore the Lords day was called (...), or una Sabbatorum, as in the
Evangelists and Apostles, so in the Writers of the following age: he that will
look into their writings, shall find examples enough.

And this for the first name of this day in the Scriptures. The second is
extant in Rev. 1. 10. where, that which was before Why called the Lords day.
called of all the Evangelists (...), John calls it denominative, with an
article, (...), or the Lords Day; and is hitherto called by that agnomination
amongst the most ancient Fathers, both Greek and Latin, since the Apostles
age: which he that will consult them, shall not deny. So Ignatius Epist. ad
Magnes. Eusebius when he speaks of the Ebionites, Hist. l. 3. c. 21. and de
Dionysio Corinthiaco, Hist. l. 4. c. 22. Cyp. Ep. 59, etc. after the name of
our Savior, Constantine the Great says, it is called Dominicum Eusebius. de vit.
Constable. l. 4. c. 18.
: because, as Austin, the Lord made it q. ex utroque, q. 106.
: This reason perhaps will be of no great weight with some, since the Lord made
all other days: but he seems to have made this day after a special manner;
namely, by his Resurrection (the commemoration of which benefit succeeds the
memory of the Creation) from the dead, whereby he perfected our Salvation: or
else because it was then destinated for worshipping our Lord Jesus Christ,
Austin assigns both these reasons, when he says, De verbis Apostoli Sermon 15.
the Lords Resurrection has consecrated for us the Lords day, and it seems
properly to belong to the Lord. It is therefore called the Lords, because the
Lord has instituted its solemnity, as the Lords Prayer is so called, because
the Lord endited it, or the Lords Supper, because Christ instituted it: or else
because it was chiefly instituted for the Lord, and his worship, while the Lord
Christ is worshipped upon it: but some others contend it is so called, because
that by the Lords Resurrection a way is opened to an eternal Sabbath: but the
former is more common, and received of most.

Justin Martyr calls it (...), It Is called Sunday.
or Sunday, about the beginning of his second Apology: and his follower,
Tertullian, Ap. adv. Gent. c. 16.
writes, that he and the Church gave themselves to rejoice on the Sunday. But
in this they agree with the Heathen, who use this word; to whom they both
directed their Apologies, in which it is so named, and to whom the names used
by the Church were unknown. For they distinguished the names of the seven days
in the week by the names of the Planets; yet in the Church it was called the
Lords day (so Justin disputing against Dial. ad Tryphon.
Trypho a Jew, uses a name accommodated to the man, and calls the Lords day
(...). Tertullian also when he deals with the Christians, uses the name Lords
day, as in his Book de Corona, cap. 3. and lib. de Idol. c. 14.) and very
seldom Sunday. Hierom, although spurious, yet very Hieron. in Ps. 117. T. 4.
willingly confesses, that it may be called Sunday, because on it light arose
to the world, and the Sun of righteousness with healing in his wings. A speech
also which is reckoned amongst Ambros. Sermon. 61.
Ambrose's, says, that the day which is called the Lords day in the Church, by
the men of the world is called Sunday: where the name is set down by which it
was called both by the Church and others. In other Authors it is also called
Sunday, but Austin shows us, that the Manichees rather than the Christians
called it so Aug. contra Faust. Man. l. 18. c. 5.
. Ye, says he to the Manichees, worship the Sun on that day which they call
Sunday: as we call the same the Lords day, because on it we reverence not the
Sun, but the Lords Resurrection: And elsewhere he is earnest that Christians
should not call days by Heathen names Aug. imp. in e^^rr. in Ps. 93.
. for the Church manner of speaking comes better from a Christian mouth.

Moreover also, I am not ignorant, that other of the Fathers do sometime
express this day otherwise, Ep. 59. de Idol. cap. Conc. 1. de Lazaro. 1. 5. p.
257.
Cyprian sometimes calls it the eighth, because it is the eighth from the
beginning of the Creation, sometimes the first after the Sabbath, So
Tertullian. Of Basil it is called the only, the first, the eighth, de Sp.
Sanct. c. 27. By Hilary the eighth, and first; in his Prol. to the Expos. of
the Psalms. So Aug. Epist. 119. c. 13. While Chrysostom nippeth the Jews for
abusing the Sabbath to idleness, he sharply taxes others also that indulged
their vices on festival days (under the name of the Sabbath.) The Feasts of
Christians are called Sabbaths by in Ps. 47.
Ruffinus: the enemies, says he, do deride our Sabbaths. Ruffinus speaks there
of the Christian, not Jewish Sabbaths. Athanasius says, that he observed the
Sabbath day, not as it Athan. de Sab. and circum. Hom. 23. in number.
was prima aetate, in the beginning of the world. The Lords day with Origin is
the Sabbath, and the Christian Sabbath. Where, without doubt, Origin speaks of
the Lords day, otherwise men must cease all the days of their life from
worldly affairs, which is required on the Christian Sabbath, ibidem. In the
Council of Friuli Can. 13. the Sabbath is called Dedicatum Domini, i. e.
Dedicated to the Lord.

But although the ancients have sometimes Why the Lords day is seldom called
the Sabbath by the ancients.
called the Lords day the Sabbath, from its parent, as it were the Jewish
Sabbath, as in the Scriptures the Holy Ghost calls Baptism Circumcision: yet
it is certain they very rarely do note this day by the name of the Sabbath:
especially because they opposed the Jews that gloried in the Sabbaths solemnity
(whose observation they judged necessary to obtain eternal life, as appears
from Trypho in Justin Martyr) and Dial. cum^ Tryphone.
that contemned the Gospel. And like as the Christians had nothing to do with
the Jews in celebrating the Feast of the Passover, because they abhorred to
keep it with them at the same time, as witnesses Socrates, lib. 5. cap. 22. so
they abstained from names of Feasts in use with the Jews, lest (as St. Austin,
Ep. 200.
when he enquires, whether a true Christian be to be called a Jew or
Israelite?) for the ambiguity of the word, which usual speech discerns not,
that might seem to be uttered which is an enemy to the Christian name: we ought
not to confound the custom of man's speech by foolish loquacity; for this
reason we meet with the name of Sabbath rarely amongst the ancients. This is
also to be added, because while the first Fathers were alive, both the Sabbath
and Lords day were observed of the Church, although not in the same manner, as
we have before showed out of the Fathers. While therefore they spoke of the
Lords day, they were forced to abstain from the word Sabbath, that they might
distinguish the Lords day from it: and that difference they have also observed
strictly in other things. Like as what Collecta is with the Latins, with the
Greeks it is Synaxis, namely, a meeting of the Church, as the word means. And
although it be derived (...), whence also the word Synagogue; yet the first
Christians (which the learned Exercit. 16. ad Bar.
Casaubon observes) for the nonce have abstained from the word Synagogue, that
they might discriminate the Christian meetings from the Jewish Synagogues:
therefore they called their assemblies Synaxes, not Synagogues: and by Synaxin
is meant the meeting of the Church it is plain from l. 5. c. 22.
Socrates, speaking of the Alexandrians administering all things pertaining ad
Synaxin (...), i. e. besides the celebration of the Mysteries; where he plainly
distinguishes between Synaxin and Eucharistiae administrationem. So not once
in Chrysostom, the name of Synaxis is general, which comprizeth all things that
were wont to be done in the Christian assemblies, and is distinguished from
their oblation, Hom. 18. in Act. Ap. where he teaches, that in the Churches of
Villages and Towns, the Sacrament was wont to be celebrated only on Lords
days, but Prayers, and hymns, and Synaxes every day. But this by the bye, that
it may appear to us, how it was ordinary with Christians to abstain from words
in use with the Jews; therefore they are read seldom to have used the word
Sabbath: but as once part. 3. qu. 32.
Alexander Hales, because the Sabbath day taken in determinately, is called the
day of rest, or vacation to God, after this manner the Lords day may be called
the Sabbath day, without any prejudice of the Christian name, or scandal of
Christians.

More names of this day do also occurr in other of the Fathers, who only
obiter, and ex re nata, have so named that day: but when they speak of it
properly, then they call it the Lords day, which cannot but appear to him that
vieweth their writings. And thus far of the reason of observing this solemnity,
and of its names.

CHAP. VI.
The whole Lords day is to be sanctified to God, and not only some part of it.

THus far these notes, although scribled with an hasty pen, have told us, that
Christians must keep holy the Lords day, and that they largely enough show was
done from the very Apostles age. The second Question which I have propounded
follows; namely, Whether the Church must keep the whole Lords day holy? Some
there are who grant, that the Lords day must be sanctified, yet contend that
the whole and entire day is not to be celebrated in the religious devotion of
Piety: in whose judgment, as much as this solemnity requires is done, if only
some, although but some small part thereof be dedicated to Divine Worship;
neither do they judge otherwise of the Lords day, (always to be counted dear
amongst Christians) than the Heathens anciently did of those days amongst them
called Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 16.
intercisi; which were common to the Gods and men: for at some hours of them it
was lawful to sit in judgment, and in some not. But who, well in his wits,
shall judge, that a day in this manner is to be dedicated to the Good and Great
God? The Lord has not reckoned the other days of the week thus for our use:
neither will he suffer willingly his day to be sanctified of us by halves.

It was provided under the Law, that if any had by vow Lev. 27.
consecrated a thing to God, and he afterward repented of his vow, and would
not suffer that thing to be sold, or prized openly but determined to keep it to
himself; then was he to be fined in a fifth part over and besides the ordinary
estimation of the thing, for his levities sake. If nothing must be diminished
of those things that are dedicated to God, although once they were in our own
power; much less will it be safe to detract any thing from the time consecrated
to God, but rather add something to it of our own: for what is consecrated to
God, must not be be converted to another use. Therefore they that compare the
Jews inhabiting Tiberias, with others that dwell in the Mountains, do judge
those, and deservedly, far to be preferred to these: for it was a familiar
thing with them who had the shorter day, to add something of the profane to the
sacred; but these that were sited in the Mountains, who had the longer day,
added to the profane, taking something from the sacred. If it be better in
those men's judgment, to add of the profane to the sacred, than to take from the
sacred and add to the profane? in what case are they to be reckoned, who are
not afraid to steal a great part of time from the Lords day, consecrated of the
Lord by his Apostles to sacred uses, and apply it to profane? Yet although some
here impatient of true Piety, do seek a knot in a bulrush, as the Proverb is,
yet by these men's leave I will say, He that will follow the wholesome counsel of
Irenaeus, shall indeed find it is no Gordian Knot. Irenaeus l. 3. c. 4.
gives pious counsel; in any question, when a disputation does arise, we must
have recourse to the most ancient Churches, from whom may be learned what we
must judge of the present question. Indeed if we would but here follow the
advice of this Reverend Prelate, it will be an easy thing to untie that knot
by the authorities of the ancients.

In the first place, when the Fathers speak The whole day to be sanctified to
God.
of sanctifying a day, they make mention, not of some small portion thereof,
but of a whole day: and to what end should not a day consist of the same terms
with us, as it did with the ancients? Since Austin piously De Civit. Dei. l.
15. c. 13.
teaches us, that in the equality of all modern years and days (which have
terminated in the same space of time in former ages, as have now) being
determined within the diurnal and nocturnal course of twenty four hours, there
is the same space of time with the former. And for what he adds of the forty
days, ( whereon continual great rain is mentioned) which were not determined
in the space of two hours or little more; the same we may safely conclude of
the Sanctification of the Lords day; since it consists of the same term of
hours, that other days in the week do, the manner of its solemnity is not to
be judged by the space of two or three hours.

Nor does Austin think otherwise, (if that Sermon may be reckoned among his
genuine Sermon. de Temp. 251.
writings) who judges, that on the Lords days we must attend Divine worship
only, and exhorts, to celebrate the Lords day with a religious solemnity, as
the ancients were commanded about the Sabbath; yea, and not without
indignation, does he reprove those that refused to follow the custom of the
Church in this thing, who, as he speaks, Ibid.
reckon one point of this day to the service of God, and the remaining space of
the day, together with the night, to their pleasures. According to the grave
judgment of this Author, (whoever he was) the entire day, and not some small
part of it, is to be assigned to the service of God, and that according to the
custom of the Church: and though he differ from some others in defining the
period of time, at which the sanctification of this day should begin, (namely,
from Evening) yet has he others agreeing with him in the continuance of this
sanctification: for before him, Hom. 2. in numer.
Origin upbraids some that reckoned one or two hours of the whole day to God,
and came to Church to Prayer, or heard the word of God in transitu: but spent
their chief care about this world, and their belly. The same thing does St.
Chrysostom require, who thinks that the whole day must be sanctified. I think,
says he, that one of these seven days, and that of right, is to be spent in
the worship and service of the God of us all. Hom. 3. in Joh. Chrysostom shows,
that a day must be sanctified; and he, his own best interpreter, will teach us,
what he understands by the name of a day. From the beginning, says he, God
insinuated this Doctrine to us, teaching us, that in the compass of a week one
whole day is to be set apart, and reserved for our spiritual work. Hom. 10. in
Genes. From his authority it also appears, that a whole day, and not some
small portion thereof, is to be set apart from other affairs, to perform the
duties of piety thereon, in a spiritual manner. The same author more plainly,
does seriously contend with his Auditors in another place, for sanctifying the
whole day. Hom. 5. in Math.

The Sabbaths (according to l. 4. c. 30.
Irenaeus) did teach persevering to serve God the whole day; what other thing
does perseverantiam totius diei mean, but that a whole day must be reserved (as
Chrysostom before) to spiritual work? As afterward the Fathers in an. 813.
cap. 40.
Conc. Turonensi, do speak; being sequestered from servile work, to persevere in
praising God, and giving of thanks. No otherwise then as anciently among the
Romans Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 3.
, the daily sacrifices were continued from the beginning of the day, to the
middle of the following night. But I will not weary the Reader, by rehearsing
apart the testimonies of the several Fathers, in a matter so clear, whose
writings he that will but lightly look into, shall grant, that a whole day,
according to their opinion, must be assigned to perform religious exercises
upon: which will better appear from those rules that occurr in their writings,
for the sanctification of this day: three whereof I will not refuse to reckon.

First, they exhort the Church to regard on that day the things that pertain to
their souls salvation: where Hierom in Is. 56.
Hierom accommodates, as he shows in the following words, what the Prophet
speaks of the Sabbath to those whom Christ has made free. And if any have a
mind to see what it is to regard the things that pertain to the souls
salvation, the fourth Canon Conc. Tarraconensis, will An. 517.
inform him: namely, that men on the Lords day only perform to God the
appointed solemnities: and what should be done on them, we have formerly heard
ex Turonensi Council. namely, that they should abstain from servile work, and
persevere to the evening in giving of thanks. An. 40. Conc. Tur. 3 Nothing but
the works of piety is to be done on the Lords day.


But lest any one should grant, that those exercises of Piety are to be done on
that day, whenas yet he might deny that the whole day were to be spent in them,
therefore the Fathers add,

Secondly, That excepting those things that pertain to the fouls salvation,
nothing else at all must be done on that day. So Hierom, Austin, Conc.
Tarracon. in the forecited Con. Foro. ejuti. Can. 13. An. 791. An. 829.
places: with whom agree also the Fathers in the Council of Friuli, who ordain,
that on the Lords day the vacation must be to no other purpose, but for Prayer,
and other offices of piety. And in the Council of Paris, it is ordained, that
it is convenient Can. 50.
for those that are redeemed by the grace of Christ, to abstain on that day
whereon the Author of Life rose again, and gave them hope of a Resurrection,
from these things that are forementioned ( i. e. from this worlds pleasures
and their own, and rural works, as there they speak) and be filled only with
spiritual joys, and busily vacant with all their heart in restless praises.
The same particle of restriction is added in Conc. Triburiensi, An. 895.
Can. 35. where they ordain, that it is the peoples part on the Lords days only
to labor in the holy service of God. And afterward they add, that they must
only attend on God on the Lords days. Greg. Mag. shows also Ep. l. 11. c. 3.
indict. 6.
they were wholly to be employed in prayers on the Lords days.

Thirdly, they do not only think that this (...) must be religiously kept, and
wholly ^^ployed in the worship of God on it; but ^hey farther do define the
term of time which they must spend in the work thereof, namely, a whole day; So
Chrysostom. Hom. 10. in Genesis and Hom. 5. in Math. Let your eyes An. 558.
and hands be spread out to God all that whole day. Council. Maliscon. 2. cap.
1. apud Zenoad.
This is to persevere in performing its services until the evening. Council.
Turon. 3. cap. 40. Or as in Conc. Trull. cap. 90. From the evenings ingress to
the Altar on the Sabbath, till the following evening on the Lords day.

Now if in the mouth of two or three witnesses 2 Cor* 13. 1^
every word shall be established, the premises do evidently enough show, that
the sanctification of all the day is required; since that not only the Fathers
do determinate, that we must cease from our worldly matters, and attend on God,
but moreover, that nothing must be done but a work of Piety on all that day,
that is, from the beginning to the end thereof.

Neither do I think good to confirm the truth in this matter by reasons, over
and besides these testimonies, that are not to be contemned: although they be
not to seek wherewith to stop the mouths of dissenters, if they be angry: and
the entire sanctification of the whole day, may be vindicated against the too
earnest seekers of a profane liberty.

First, As, if the day be commanded to be 1.
held holy, by common sense it follows, that a day, not some hours, is to be
sanctified. So Aug. Sermon. 251. de Temp.

Secondly, Moreover, if there were any 2.
term of that days holiness, before the day it self were determined, then such
a term would appear either from the Scriptures, or from some of the Fathers,
piously interpreting them, but what no where is extant, he that can show it, --
Erit Mihi Magnus Apollo.


The Ancients, who thought good to fast on the Sabbath, sometimes continued
their fasts to the ninth hour, which being past, they were not afraid to relaxe
their fast, and refresh their strength with meat. Socrat. Hist. l. 5. c. 22.
And sometimes till the Cock-crow of the Lords day, growing light, as in the
Sabbath of the great week, as Epiphanius teaches in Panario. When therefore
they judged that they must simply fast on the Sabbath, then they added nothing
of the terms of the fast, before the Sabbath it self ended: but because some
judged that they must not abstain on all Sabbaths, for a whole day from meats,
therefore they signified how long their fast was to last. We may say the same
of the Lords day's duration: if the Church must not keep holy day by a
Religious solemnity, from worldly affairs, for a whole day, then the term
(without whose knowledge the Church-would be ignorant how long the day were to
be sanctified, and the minds of men would stick pendulous) of this solemnity
would some way be known to us from the Scriptures; nor would the Holy Ghost
have passed it by untouched; and formerly we have observed from their writings,
that the Fathers would determine nothing to be done on this whole day, that is,
from the Sunrising to the setting, but what relates to Piety: who being
excited with an holy zeal, have exploded the half sanctification of the Lords
Day.

Thirdly, If the glory of the Jewish Sabbath 3.
be translated to the Lords day, (which is not denied of the Fathers) I do not
see why we should not interpret this day in the same manner, as it was
prescribed about the Sabbath, to the worshippers of God in old time: for to the
Jews, and that by Divine authority, it was given in command, that they, being
sequestered from all worldly business, through the whole Sabbath should attend
Divine Worship alone. With what face therefore, and upon what authority
relying, can Christians bestow their Lords day, or any part thereof in worldly
affairs, setting aside the worship of God, let them look to it, that have a care
of their salvation. This reason has the most pious Leo approved Leo Constable. 54.
with his judgment and authority; for, says he, if they that did observe a
certain shadow and figure, did so greatly reverence the Sabbath Day, that they
wholly abstained from all work: how is it not fitting that those should
reverence that day, that is honored of God, who love the light of grace, and
the truth it self?

4. Lastly, the rule of equity and justice 4.
requires the same, if we look at what time the Lord has indulged us for our
uses: whose large benevolence has allowed us six whole days, to overcome the
labors of this world, and dispatch our own business with. Why should it
therefore be tedious to us, weighing this in an equal balance, for to set
apart one whole day for his praise, and sincere worship: Neither can any one
think this an absurd form of arguing, who shall but observe Chrysostom arguing
in Hom. 2. in Joan.
this matter from the duty of servants toward us, to our observance toward
God: he judges it ridiculous, if we would have our servants always employed
in our business, and and we give no service to God. And we likewise, contending
for the sanctifying of the whole day, do say, that it is much more ridiculous,
if we should reckon those days for whole ones, which are allowed us to
dispatch the affairs of this life in for our use, and interpret a day set aside
for Gods worship, by Divine authority, not an entire one, but a small part
thereof to be dedicated to Divine worship. It would be ridiculous, yea, plainly
impious, to arrogate to our selves, and our affairs, what we refuse to bestow
on God. Chrysostom judges it an irreligious Hom. 5. in Matthew.
thing to consume six days in carnal, and be unwilling to spend one in
spiritual matters. So also Leo in the foresaid place, How is it not the part of
a wholly dissolute Religion, whereas one of the seven days is consecrated to
the honor of God, not to preserve it inviolate to God, but to make it common?

But we must not contend with reasons, but testimonies (for the prejudices of
some men who condemn the truth in this matter as novelty) and he that shall
undervalue the foresaid testimonies of greatest authority, will esteem at
little reasons, although every way valid (like the Leviathan Job 41* 27.
that esteems iron as straw, and brass as rotten wood*) And therefore I will
put an end to this labor.

And thus far being furnished with the authorities of the ancients, I have
taught you, that they have stood for sanctifying of the whole day, which they
have judged necessary for the Church: How the sacred Exercises of Divine
worship performed on that day, were so disposed, that in performing thereof,
the whole day was spent by the ancients, when I shall speak of the sanctifying
of the Lords Day, then by the grace of God shall be made manifest.

CHAP. VII.
The Ordinance of the Lords day is not to be reckoned amongst unwritten
Traditions: It was instituted of Christ by the Apostles: The Apostles
prerogatives above other Ministers of the Church: Things ordained of the
Apostles are Divine.

WHen the Jews had observed John to use another form of Doctrine, than was
commonly received, and to begin a new Ceremony of Baptism, they ask who he
was? i. e. by what authority he did set upon these new things, and unheard of
in former ages? that being informed in that thing, they might in time consider
what they should do. So, since that we have found out of Scriptures and
Fathers, that the Lords day was solemnized by the Church under the Gospel,
insomuch that men's minds are to be masculously applied to the duties of Piety,
not on the last, (as under the Law) but first day of the week; a question is
made, by what authority Gods Holy Church does this thing. For it was not so
kept holy from the beginning, from whence even till the happy Resurrection of
our Savior, the Lord commanded that the Seventh day in every week should be
held holy; and for sanctifying the first day of every week, diverse men seek for
a command, which they confidently enough cry out is not extant in all the holy
Scriptures: and diverse more other wise Divines of great note, do greatly toil
in heaping up arguments whereby to enervate the Divine Authority of this day.

It is an ordinary thing with sundry of the Papists (although some amongst
them, especially of the Schoolmen, do think otherwise) who strenuously contend
for unwritten Traditions, (on whose weak authority, as on a solid foundation,
many of their dotages are grounded) to reckon up the observation of the Lords
Day among this sort of Traditions; which cannot be, fince the mention thereof
does so often occurr in the Sacred Word of God. Whilst the most learned Dr.
Whitaker does study soberly to prevent, as his manner is, this error of the
Papists, he is scourged of Gretser. Yet the learned Vedelius in his notes upon
Ignatius, does strongly defend Whitaker against the vain fooleries of Gretser.

Others contend, that the Lords day should be held solemn, ^ure divino.

Lastly, Others do acknowledge it received from Apostolical ordination. We
will, by Gods assistance show, that solemn celebration of the Lords day was
instituted of God by the Apostles.

The Holy Scriptures do testify, that the Christ's instituting of the Lords Day
by the Apostles.
Lords day was observed of the Church, while the Apostles were yet alive, nor
is there much doubt of this observation: This is the only thing (as I said) of
which the question is, Whether this solemnity was instituted of the Apostles,
or of the Church, according to that power allowed them by the Lord? And if it
be ascribed to the Holy Apostles, Whether they of themselves, and by their own
authority, or by Divine command, have prescribed it to the Church? since the
observation of the Lords day grew in use with the Church of Christ, while the
Apostles were yet alive, it seems equitable, and agreeable to sound reason, to
take them for the authors of this observation: because The Apostles
prerogatives, 1 Cor. 3. 10.
the chief care of Ecclesiastical Government was by God devolved upon them:
every one whereof, as a wise master builder, laid a foundation, upon which
their successors builded: and all other modern Doctors of the Church, how great
soever they were, gave place unto them. Ignatius for that reason, says of
himself, Epist. ad Tralle^^^.
I do not command as an Apostle. And elsewhere, in an Epistle Ad
Philadelphienses, he does not challenge Apostolical authority to himself.
Neither would Ambrose claim Ofi^. l. 1. c. ^.
Apostolical glory to himself, which he acknowledges is by right due to them
whom the Son of God has chosen: and he affirms, that by how much we are
inferior to the Apostles in time, we are so much inferior to them in merit.
Sermon. 20.
Chrysostom also confesses, that he is far from the Apostles dignity; neither
does he account himself worthy to be called their shadow: Hom (...) in Math.
Mark 3. 14.
and Christ has deservedly joined them to him, as individual companions, out
of the number of all his Disciples; or, that I may speak with Tertullian,
Ad^res. (...)
lateri suo adlegavit. i. made themselves Legates a latere.

Secondly, He has sent them out furnished with special authority to gather the
Church ( to lay (...).
whose foundations belong to the Apostolical dignity) out of the promiscuous
multitude of all nations: and so they were sent out by Christ to all Nations,
without any exception; for which cause, when a Church was planted in any part
of the world, whither they came, they fixed not, but removed some other way.

Thirdly, They were endued with that abundance of Grace of the Holy Ghost, for
the Ministry committed to them by the Lord, that they preached the truth of the
Gospel infallibly: I know, says Hierom, Epist. ad Theophil.
how to esteem of the Apostles in one manner, of other Doctors after another;
that those always taught the truth, these in some things did err as men.
Whence the Doctrine commended to the Church by the Apostles, was always
accounted for the rule, and Canon of all Christian Religion.

Fourthly, The Apostles, at the beginning of the Church, by the visible sign of
imposition of hands, conferred the gifts of the Holy Ghost upon others, that
were instructed of them in the Doctrine of the Gospel: and they were endued
with diverse other gifts of Miracles (by which their call was rendered clear both
to themselves and others) Matthew. 10. 8. And these are the signs by which the
blessed Apostle teaches us, that he had executed the office of a true Apostle
in the Church of Corinth. 1 Cor. 12. 2.

Deservedly, for these causes, were they that were elected to the honorable
state of Apostolical dignity, preferred to other Ministers of the Church, not
only in the chief eminency of Order, but of Power: and hence it was, that all
questions respecting the affairs of the whole Church, were propounded to be
discussed by the Apostles, (whom all the Churches consulted in doubtful cases)
as may be seen, Acts 15. 2. 1 Cor. 7. 1. and whatever they determined, the
whole Church every where embraced; which made a conscience of departing a
fingers breadth from those things that were committed to them by the Apostles.

If therefore the solemnity of the Lords Day was celebrated while the Apostles
were living, (which the Scriptures testify was done, as we have seen, chap.
2.) it must of right chiefly be imputed to their ordination: otherwise, without
doubt, the Universal Church had not followed it. Baronius (...). 58. ^. ^^.
thinks, that all who are well in their wi^^ will say, that since it is found
that it was done in the Apostles times, it could not be ordained, and commanded
to be kept of any other but of themselves. Neither is any thing worthy
consideration brought to the contrary; except it be because the Blessed
Apostles have left no singular command with the Church for the observation of
this day: although he that shall attend their practice, may lawfully deny this,
since their example and practice has the force of a precept. But who will
deny, that some things were instituted of the Apostles in the Church, whose
use, while they were alive, (I pass not for Traditions introduced into the
Church when the Apostles were dead) was grown out with the primitive
Christians? of whose first institution, or necessary continuation afterward,
no precept is extant in the Scriptures: yet who will be bold to extenuate the
authority of these commands? or will affirm, that the Church at this day is not
obliged to observe them? because their observation being mentioned in
Scripture, is as it were a command, by virtue whereof the Church is bound to
continue them. The thing will be more plain by examples. The Apostles ordained
Deacons, Act. 6. and Elders in every Church* Act. 14. 23. In the Ordinations of
all Ministers, imposition of hands was used, but where is there extant an
express comman^ from Christ for perpetuating the ordination of those, the
institution of these, or for the use of this ceremony? yet none doubts, but
that the Apostles in performing of these, were acted by a Divine instinct of
the Spirit, and that the Church at this day is bound to them by virtue of
Apostolical institution.

But that I may briefly show, that the blessed Apostles, and no others, were
the authors of this solemnity, that which follows may suffice. If it were
observed while they were yet living, (which the Scriptures do evidently enough
manifest) it is deservedly to be ascribed to their ordaining it: for it was
either instituted by them, and their authority, or by some other Doctors of the
Church, without their consent; a third way is not given; the latter whereof is
absurd, and never to be admitted of any exercised in the Christian Faith:
because the Apostolical authority (as formerly we have abundantly enough shown)
was supreme in the Church: it belonged to them to declare to the Christian
flock what was best to be done in all things: and not to the Church, to
prescribe them Statutes and Laws. Why therefore did it not appertain to the
Apostles, the faithful founders of the Church, amongst other things, to commend
this also to the Church, and not to the Church to prescribe it the blessed
Apostles?

Moreover, the general consent of all Churches, in celebrating this festival,
evinceth the same: otherwise they had dissented from one another, as in other
observations (not received from the Apostles, but observed for a time by the
succeeding Church) as in the Feast of the Passover, in observing Fasts, etc. so
doubtless it would have happened in celebrating the Lords Day, if by Divine
authority received from the Apostles its observation had not been used amongst
the Christians.

Thirdly, if the Christian Church had ordained that day to be celebrated,
without the advice of the Apostles, either those that turned Christians from
Jews or Gentiles, had done this; but not those, to whom the cessation of their
old Sabbath was not known, but by the Apostles; much less would they attempt to
do this by themselves, or on their own authority. Neither will any wise man
think, that those whom the Apostles invited from Heathenism, to embrace the
Christian faith, were the authors of this Festival, because it is not usual
with them to Sabbatize after the manner of the Church, unless so far as they
were instructed to it by the Apostles.

Fourthly, if the Holy Apostles, by authority committed to them from Christ,
had not instituted the Lords Day, but had left its observation free to the
judgment of the Church, then we might on good reason have called the Church the
Queen of the Sabbath: which yet is a very clear argument of Christ's Divinity,
(as the Learned Dr. Paraeus piously) for none is Lord of the Sabbath, but he
that has instituted the Sabbath, etc. The Sabbath is of the Lord they God.

Lastly, if its authority did depend upon the Churches institution, then it may
by it be again abolished, when it shall think good: but this was never
hitherto, since Christ's ascension, attempted, because the Lords day being taken
away, the public worship of God must of necessity fall.

Since, therefore, the observation of the Lords day was used while the Apostles
were living, it must altogether be ascribed to them as the first founders of
the Church.

Moreover, if it should be granted, that Whatever is ordained by the Apostle:,
is Divine.
this solemnity was instituted of the Apostles, others ask, Whether therefore
does this Ordination lean upon a Divine right? We, passing by this rather
curious, than sound Disputation, Whether the Ordinance of the Lords day be an
institution of God or his Apostles? discussed by some doltish, and drowsy men,
do acknowledge with all willingness, as the ancients did, that it was
introduced by Divine authority. And although its authority should be granted to
be of Apostolical institution, it would not thence follow, that it is not
Divine; unless something be ordained in the Church by the Apostles, which the
Holy Ghost did not inspire them with: which will not easily be admitted of any
that is in his senses: because the postles in all matters delivered those
things to the Churches, which they received from Christ, as St. Paul
witnesses, 1 Cor. 11. 23. and according to Christ's precept, taught men that
embraced the Gospel, to observe those things which Christ had commanded them,
Matthew. 28. 20. De prascripti adv. haer. c. 6.
So judges Tertullian. The Apostles, says he, chose nothing which they
brought in at their own pleasure, but faithfully appointed to the nations that
discipline they received from Christ. And why should I believe that the
Apostles were less acted with the Divine Spirit in their Sacred Institutions,
(which they imposed upon the Churches) than in promulgating the Doctrine of the
Gospel? For there is nothing Ep. Wi^t^niensis in resp. ad Epist 1. Petri
Motinaei.
Apostolical, done by a right that is not Apostolical; i. e. Divine: and
nothing done by them but the Holy Ghost endites it to them: and therefore what
they did, they did by Divine right, and that their facts (which are certain)
and not only their saying, or writings are of Divine right cannot be denied.
The Apostle shows it necessary, that he that is a Prophet, or spiritual man,
must acknowledge, that they are the Lords Precepts, which he has written to
the Churches, 2 Cor. 14. 37. Surely, nothing was enjoined the Church by the
Apostles, which was not first prescribed by the Lord; because the Apostles were
to teach what they learned of Christ: which thing they performed with great
faithfulness: neither will any one, who savours the things of the spirit, deny
this; and yet I acknowledge, that some things were instituted of them for a
time; inasmuch as whose occasions were singular, and not to be continued,
wherefore those ordinations were mutable: which yet cannot be affirmed of the
Lords Day.

If there be any of the Fathers therefore, who think that the institution of
the Lords day was made by the Apostles, they are not so to be understood, as if
they acknowledged it not for Divine, but Humane: because the same Fathers
elsewhere are not afraid to ascribe it to God and Christ: and they acknowledge
that the blessed Apostles were not the authors of this solemnity, but the Holy
Ghosts amanuenses, (i. e. as Leo interprets it, who Leo Constitut. 54.
writ their Decrees by virtue of a Divine authority) in propounding it to the
Church. For which cause, the most pious Leo has ordained abstinence from
labors on Ubi supra.
the Lords Day, because this seemed good to the Holy Ghost; and the Apostles
instituted thereby: and confesses, that that day was abundantly honored by
the Lord.

The Lords Day therefore was instituted of the Apostles, as the faithful
Architects of the Christian Church, by extraordinary power, which continues not
now in the Church, and by inspiration of the Holy Ghost; that Christians might
be obliged not by Humane, but by Divine authority, to keep holy Convocations,
and to celebrate the private exercises of godliness on that day. Apostolical
grace, says Ambrose, has raised up the dead, which, Hexa. l. 4. c. 4.
although it was not the grace of the Apostles, but of Christ, as the Apostles
themselves confess, Acts 3. 12. 16. is called Apostolical, because it was
poured out upon them, and by his help they raised up the dead: So here the
Lords day is called an Apostolical Institution, not because it is a mere
ordinance of the Apostles, as they were Christians, but because it was
instituted of Christ, by those who were endowed with extraordinary power.

But, as I have said, this is the only thing that vexes them, that call in
question the authority of this institution; that there is no place extant in
Scripture, in which, by Divine authority, the solemn observation of this day
seems to be enjoined. These are men of subtle wits, who, as the Proverb goes,
cannot see the wood for trees. Whose opinion, when I consider, that in the
Author Hom. 44.
Oper. Imperf. in Matthae, comes into my mind, where the Priests of old that
railed upon the people that paid not their tithes, are sharply reproved for not
reproving those that sinned against God. If any of the people, faith he, offer
not his tithes, the Priests did so reprove him, as if he had committed some
great fault, because he had not offered the tenth part of any thing, though
never so little: but if any of the people had sinned against God, or injured
any one, or done any such thing, none cared for reproving him, as though he had
committed no fault, who had sinned against God; and very careful they were of
their own gain, but careless of the glory of God, and salvation of men. Whose
fault in this thing, he accommodates to the Bishops, Elders, and Deacons of the
Church, as guilty of this crime. Even so must we judge of these men. With what
heat of mind, and earnestness, do the very authors of this doubt contend for
tithes, which they cry out, that the Lord has indulged to the Church under the
Gospel, by a Divine right, whenas yet they cannot produce one plain testimony
out of the New Testament, for their bestowing on the Ministers of the Gospel?
but about the Lords Day (whose being observed more than once by the Christian
Church, is plain enough in the Scriptures) their faith is wavering; nor can
they be persuaded to believe, that its authority can be demonstrated out of the
Word of God. Let others judge, whether they be worthy Tenths, who deny Sevenths
(if I may say so) to God. But for their sakes, admitting the Law about Tithes,
I would ask this, Whether it is likely, that the most good, great, and wise God
(who has put the seasons of times in his own power, Act. 1. 7.) would
determine any thing certain of a Salary, to be bestowed on the administrators
of his Worship, when yet he left nothing certain in the Church, of the time in
which his worship should be performed? It Is a wise man's part, first to
determine the work, and a fit time to do it in, and then the wages, where with
they that under went it, are to be rewarded. The Parable, Math. 20. relates,
how the householder hired Laborers; but first he signified what he would have
them do, and then he agreed with them for a penny a day. If therefore they
assert, that Tithes are allowed by God for the use of the Ministers of the
Church, they must of necessity grant, that God has appointed a time, in which
they must attend his worship (to whom, in their opinion, he has granted
Tithes) because it is the same authority that must both define the Worship, and
a fit time for performing of that Worship.

Now for establishing the Divine institution of this day, we must not have
recourse to that spurious scroul, that, (as it is reported in the third tome of
p. 1448.
Councils) was sent down from Heaven to Jerusalem; because that what things
the Holy Ghost has revealed to us in Scripture, they do demonstrate it to all
to be Divine, of those that embrace the truth: and for the fabulous fooleries
about this matter, we leave them to the Papists (whose Kingdom had long since
fallen without their support) and we will briefly, according to our manner,
examine what light may be brought out of the New Testament, to manifest the
truth in this matter. Here three things come to be examined.

First, Whether in the compass of every week, must the Church keep holy a
certain day, by Gods institution?

Secondly, Whether the Jewish Sabbath be abrogated?

Thirdly, What can be brought out of the books of the New Testament to confirm
the keeping holy the first day in the week?

The first of these is more obscure, the other two may plainly enough be
observed out of the Holy Scriptures, and Fathers, and one of them depends upon
another. Of the last many things have been observed out of the Scriptures, in
our second, third, etc. Chapters; but the truth about the two former Questions
being made manifest by the testimonies of the ancients, it will appear with
little ado, what is to be enquired into in the third place.

CHAP. VIII.
Within the compass of a week, one day was sanctified, from the beginning of
the world: this is affirmed both by Jews and Christians. How Adam had need of
the Sabbath. The mention of observing the seventh day amongst the Heathens. The
authorities are weighed, wherein the observation of the Sabbath among the
Patriarchs is denied. Why the Heathens are not upbraided with the abuse of the
Sabbath.

AS to the first Question, namely, That in the compass of seven days, one is
to be set apart for spiritual operation (as says Chrysostom) why should I fear
to affirm it? Hom. 10. in Genesis
Especially, since this opinion is approved by the suffrage of the greatest
Divines, and clearly enough taught by the manifest testimonies of the ancients.
We shall see that the Church of God, since the History of the Creation was
known, did always set apart one day of the weekly systeme, for his worship:
the verity of which thing may be observed in the three Epocha's, or junctures
of years; the first whereof is from the Creation to Moses: the second from
Moses till the Gospel was preached by the Apostles: the third follows to be
considered from that time, till the end of the world: in all which we shall
find, that one of the seven was always set apart for the public worshipping
of God. We read, it was so done from the beginning of the world till Moses;
from Moses till the Resurrection of Christ; from thence to this very day. The
controversy at this day, is chiefly about the first and last Epoch, none
doubts of the second.

In demonstrating the first, that the Sabbath The Sabbath was observed from the
beginning of the world.
was observed before Moses, yea, from the first beginning of the world, both
the Holy Scriptures, and the Reverend Fathers, their faithful Interpreters, do
attest it: to prove the truth whereof, we will first bring the authority of
Moses, which is had Genesis 2. 2, 3. of which places, diverse have given the
genuine sense, and especially the Learned Rivet, in Genesis and does Orthodoxly
enough defend his Exposition against those that think otherwise, in his
dissertation de Sabbato, chap. 2. and removes a Prolepsis that is devised by
the modern, in commenting upon Moses's Text: for Moses in the foresaid place,
does not relate what God did, when he writ the History of the Creation; but
what God did, after that the stupendous work of Creation was finished: namely,
that he ceased from creating any new work, and ordained by a Law promulgated,
that the seventh day should be set apart by men, to his worship, in memorial of
the Creation. This is related by Moses. Neither was that fore mentioned
prolepsis, which the best amongst the Christians allow not, known to the Jews.
And if we follow the simple and literal sense of Moses his words, they all make
for us. For, how unjust is it, when all the Verbs are of the same Mood and
Tense, Vajecol, Vaijsboth, Vajebarech; and be finished, and ceased, and
blessed, to restrain the two former to the present, and to extend the latter,
as some do, to a time to come two thousand years after; this would be too harsh
a construction of the words.

But let us see how the Jews understood this place. Tertullian tells us of
them, that (...) Jud. c. 4.
they affirm, that God from the beginning did sanctify the seventh day, by
resting on it from all the works that he made: and thereupon Moses said to the
People, Remember to keep holy the Sabbath day, etc. Where Tertullian delivers
the Jews opinion of the Sabbaths observation from the beginning of the world:
and then he affirms, that according to the Jews, the Command in the Decalogue
for keeping it, respects the original observation of the Sabbath; namely,
because God at the Creation sanctified the seventh day. This was the opinion
retained amongst the Jews in Tertullians age, which he produces, when he
disputes against them: and no where does Tertullian deny that the seventh day
was sanctified from the beginning.

Neither do the Jews themselves deny this. The title of Ps. 92. apud Jonath.
who translated the Bible into the Chaldee, is thus; A Praise and Song which the
first man spoke for the Sabbath day. From which inscription it appears, that
the ancient Jews, even before the first coming of Christ, thought that Adam
observed the Sabbath. For. Jonathan lived, according to Galatinus, forty two
years before Christ's Nativity. Josephus, l. 1. ^. 3.
a very learned Jew, acknowledges, that God rested on the seventh day, and
ceased from his works, and for that cause do the Jews celebrate a vacation on
this day, which they call the Sabbath. Josephus therefore confesses, that the
Jews ceased from their works on the Sabbath, because the Lord ceased from the
Creation on the seventh day. Of the same opinion is Philo, the Apostles
contemporary, De mundi ^pificio.
After, says he, that nature was perfected in six days, the Father added
honor to the seventh day following; which, when he praised, he vouchsafed to
call it holy. Also, de vita Mosis, lib. 3. he confesses, that the Sabbath day
had a privilege by nature, since the birth day of the world. And a little
before, in the same book, he says, Moses thought it sitting that all those who
were enrolled in this City, should, following the law of Nature, celebrate the
Sabbath. He grants then, that the Sabbaths observation was according to the law
of Nature, that is, that it was constituted by God at the Creation of Nature.
St. Austin says also, that the Jews acknowledge, Tr^ct. 20. in Joh.
that God sanctified a day, since which he began as it were to rest from his
labors. So Solomon Iarchi, in Genesis 26. By whom is cited R. Simson, in Is. 58.
Aben Ezra in Exodus 20. Da. Kimchi. Manasses Ben-Israel, in Deuteronomy. 5. and all the
Doctors of the Jews, excepting Maimonides.

These things show, that the Jews had knowledge that the Sabbath was observed
from the Creation, from whom the observation of the Sabbath was very well known
to the inhabitants of the whole World.

Of the Christians also, diverse, both ancient and modern, were of this opinion;
a few of whose testimonies we will lightly touch.

Theophilus Antiochenus, lib. 2. ad Antolicum, says, An. 170. Biblioth. Pal.
T. 2. l. 2.
That God finished the work that he made, on the seventh day, and blessed the
seventh day, and sanctified it; because on it he rested from every work he
made, etc. He says not, that God did consecrate the seventh day, that
afterward only it might be sanctified of the Israelitish Church; but so soon
as the work of Creation was consummate, the seventh day was of God both blessed
and sanctified. Afterward he acknowledges, that the seventh day was solemnized
amongst all men, which the Hebrews call the Sabbath, and Greeks the seventh
day, although most know not the cause of that name. And what cause was unknown
to the most? namely, the holy resting of God on that day, and its
sanctification, whereof Theophilus made mention a little before An. 200. Contr.
Marcion. l. 4. c. 12. An. 250.
.

Tertullian says, that Christ fulfilled the Law, while he made the Sabbath
day, which was holy from the beginning, by the blessing of the Father, more
holy by his own doing good on it.

Cyprian De Spiritu S. sect. 8. an. 309.
confesses, that the Seventh day Holy day from the Creation of the world,
obtained authority, because in six days Gods works were finished, and the
seventh consecrated to rest, as holy, and sanctifying, honored with a
solemnity of vacation, and entitled to the sanctifying Spirit.

Lactantius is of the same opinion, l. 7. de div. praem. c. 14. an. 180.
God finished the world, and this admirable work of the Creation, in six days
space, and then ordained the seventh day, whereon he rested from his works.
This is the Sabbath day. Lactantius therefore fetches the sanctification of
the Sabbath from the Creation, and not from the History of Manna.

St. Athanasius D^ Sab. and ^ircum.
says, that God rested when he had finished the former Creation, and therefore
the men of that generation observed the Sabbath on the seventh day. Where he
acknowledges, that the Sabbath was observed from the Creation till Christ; for
he says, that all men of that generation did observe the Sabbath; where he
speaks of the whole time, from the beginning of the world till Christ.

Greg. Nyssen, De Resur. Ch^isti, o^at. 1.
Lo* here is for thee, the Sabhath blessed from the beginning of the world:
mark it by that Sabbath, this Sabbath, the day of rest, which God has blessed
above other days.

Chrysostom. Hom 10. in Genesis
God has blessed and sanctified that day. What is it that he has sanctified
it? he has set it apart from other days. After, when he tells us the cause
why he has sanctified it, he adds, because on that he rested from all his
works, which God began to make. Now God intimates to us this Doctrine from the
beginning, teaching us, that within the compass of a week, one whole day is to
be set apart, and spent in spiritual work. Therefore, according to Chrysostom,
the Sabbath Day, since the Creation, was set apart from other days, and
plainly it appears, that for that ordination the world is bound to dedicate one
whole day of the week to the worship of God.

Aug. ult. cap. postrem. lib. de Civitate Dei, An. 410.
while he is describing that everlasting Sabbath which the Saints shall enjoy
in heaven, he referrs the institution of the Sabbath to the resting of God from
the work of creation.

He does the like in Epist. ad Casulanum, Ep. 86.
where he says, that God sanctified the seventh day, when he rested on it from
all his works, and afterward gave command about its observation to the Hebrew
people. Augustine therefore does acknowledge, that the use of the Sabbath was
amongst the ancients, before it grew common amongst the Hebrews; namely, first,
at the beginning, before Moses, and afterward in the Church of the Jews.

Theodoret. Quaest. 21. in Genesis
He has bestowed a blessing An. 430.
on the seventh day, instead of creating, les^ that day only, above others,
should want its ho^ nour: and he has put [Hallowed it] for [set it apart.] And
afterward; In blessing the seventh day, he has shown, that he thought it not
an unprofitable and superfluous day, but has ordained it to be applied to
rest. Who does not see, that in Theodorets opinion, from the beginning the
Sabbath was set apart for the worship of God from other days? So when he
answers the question, why he commanded Quest. 43: in Exodus
not the Sabbath to be celebrated on another day? because the God of all has
created every thing in six days; but on the seventh day he made nothing, but
honored this day with a blessing: as it is added, in six days the Lord thy
God made Heaven and Earth, and rested the seventh: wherein he teaches us, that
even then this day was consecrated of God to rest and sanctification from the
beginning of the world.

Alexander Hales Part. 3. quast. 39. fol. 128.
affirms, that the Sabbath An. 1240.
before the Law, was observed of the Fathers; and of the same opinion are
diverse of the Schoolmen.

Now if any have a mind to reckon up the grave opinions of the aforesaid
Fathers, he will not deny, that the Sabbath day was solemnly kept from the very
beginning of the world: because, by the judgment of them all, the Sabbath was
sanctified by God; nor do the Fathers speak of the purpose of God, as though it
was not then really set apart for the worship of God: but according to his
purpose, it was only destined for this, that after two thousand years it should
be set apart for this end: for, say they, when God had finished his work of
Creation, the Sabbath was sanctified, from the beginning, or from the creation
of the world, when he had rested from his works, from the Creation till Christ,
etc. -- and therefore they acknowledge, that the Sabbath day was solemnized
amongst all men or all men of the former generation, that is, from the
beginning of the world till Christ, a long time before its use was established
amongst the Jews. All these things are affirmed in round words by the Fathers.
Out of which it clearly appears, that one day of the week was always set apart
to the worshipping of God publicly.

And as the best of the ancients were of this opinion; so the chief of our late
writers, that have flourished in the Reformed Churches, do affirm, that God did
from the beginning of the world, sanctify the seventh day for his worship
amongst men.

Wallaeus and Rivet have clearly taught this; The former whereof, in his third
Chapter of the fourth Command, does teach this: proving it by the grave
testimonies of Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, Beza, Peter Martyr, Bullinger,
Zanchy, Ursin, Gualter, Aretius, Bonaventure, Bertram, Merrer, Antonius Faius,
Junius, Paraeus, Zepperus, Martinius, and Alstedius. To which the famous Rivet,
in his Dissertation de Sabbatho, cap 1. adds, the authorities of Lambertus
Danaeus, Rod. Hospinianus, Martinus Chemnitius, ^oh. Gerhardus, Conradus
P^eilen, Henricus Butingus, Bartasius, Gonlartius, Tilenus (while yet he warred
with us in our tents) Marloratus, and Fequernehianus.

Th^se two very learned Divines having deserved well of the Christian
Commonwealth, being compassed about with such a cloud of witnesses of great
authority, have made it evident to all, that the observation of the Sabbath
has always been used in the Church of God, before Moses; from whose judgment,
no man of reason will easily suffer himself to be persuaded to recede, although
one or two of the modern writers go contrary thereunto.

Touching which opinion, after these men to say any more, although it may be
thought the part of a man that is diligent in vain, yet since this opinion,
being supported by the testimonies of so many famous Divines, is weakened both
by some reasons, and also by the authorities of the ancients, a few things more
ar^ to be added. These which follow are the chief of those reasons wherewith
they do oppose the truth received of so many learned men. In the first place,
Before the lamentable fall of Adam, there was no need of the Sabbath, on which
his strength, being spent with labors, it was to be repaired. Secondly,
Nothing is read in Scripture of the Patriarchs keeping the Sabbath. Thirdly, If
the Sabbath had been observed from the Creation, the Heathens had been obliged
to observe it, and somewhere in the Scriptures they would have been accused by
God for the neglect of the Sabbath, which yet is no where read in H. Records.
These are the reasons which bear the greatest show of probability, for which
they assert, there was no use of the Sabbath before Moses in the world. To the
two first whereof, the famous Wallaeus answers solidly. To whose Ubi supra Adam
had need of the Sabbath.
answer, I only add this. Since Adam could not conveniently attend at one and
the same time, two businesses of a diverse nature, it seems not unreasonable,
that God assigned him a stated time for doing both in conveniently; to the end
he might both till the 1.
Garden freely, and also solemnly celebrate the public worship of God.
Moreover, 2.
since we believe that the night was assigned to him in his happy condition of
innocence, wherein he might rest; why should not also 3.
the day be appointed for a Divine contemplation of the works of God? Lastly,
whereas the Saints themselves in that blessed Kingdom of Heaven, do enjoy a
perpetual Sabbath, it will not be thought incongruous, or disagreeable to the
condition of Adam, if the Sabbath were assigned to him in Paradise, to worship
God on; although we T^^ Sabbath observed, though no mention of its observation
occurr.
read not that he did keep the Sabbath. Some institutions are expressed in
Scripture, whose observation does not constantly occurr in the same. Neh. 18.
8. Those that returned from the captivity are read to make themselves
tabernacles, in which they abode: which was not done before, even from the
times of Joshua, to that very day; although it was provided for in the Law,
Lev. 23. 40. And after the Law given by Moses, about the Sabbath, there is made
no mention of its observation in the whole book of Judges, etc. yet none will
thence conclude, that the Sabbath was not instituted at that time, because we
meet with no footsteps of its festivity being observed.

Nor do we read that Sampson, Deborah, or Joshua did keep the Sabbath: yet do
we not deny upon that account, that the Sabbath was instituted. So also might
it happen before the Law was given in the Mount. And what if we say, that the
Egyptians would not suffer the Israelites, while they were their slaves, to be
idle on the seventh day? Perhaps they gave place to necessity; which Josephus
tells us, fell out also in the De bello Juda c^, l. 7. c. ^1.
time of Antiochus. When, says he, the Jews were interdicted upon most severe
punishments the observation of the seventh day, within a very short time, not
only in Antioch, but in the neighboring regions, the Sabbath was neglected.
Moreover, it is read no where, that Adam worshipped God publicly, which yet we
must conclude for certain he did. We may judge the like of the Sabbath's not
being observed of him: because if he had the mode of worship prescribed him of
God, surely, that a time was defined of God to exercise it in, cannot rightly
be denied: although we read nothing of the express time: for it is most
agreeable to natural equity, that as well the time for performance of the
worship, as the worship it self should be defined.

As to the third reason, brought from the Heathens; Some think, if the Sabbath
had been observed from the Creation, then the Gentiles had been bound to
celebrate its solemnity. But this they deny for a double reason. First, because
no footsteps of the seventh day's observation are found amongst them. Secondly,
they are not reproved of God for neglecting the Sabbath.

To the first, the learned VVallaeus answers, loc. praedicto: that though it
should be granted, that the mentioning of it was obliterated amongst the
Heathens, it does not thence follow, that the use of the Sabbath remained not
amongst the posterity of Adam, or Noah: so VVallaeus. The searchers out of
Hebrew antiquities, tell us out of Maimonides, that a corrupt religion grew up
from the beginning of the world, and so far received augmentations, till at
length the Divine Religion was almost turned upside down; yet that great Rabbi
has excepted Enoch, Melchisedech, Noah, Shem, etc. who worshipped the true
God, with a pure heart: the truth of whose relation, being bottomed on
Scripture authority, who will question? If therefore the true Religion, and
that which was instituted of God, and put into the minds of men, has ceased
amongst the posterity of the Heathen in other chief points, what wonder if
amongst them also the observation of the Sabbath was not continued: which yet
was always observed by the Church of God?

That the seventh day was celebrated The 7th day celebrated amongst the
Heathens.
amongst the Gentiles, and that they observed it with a certain solemn
devotion, (either from the instinct of nature, or by a tradition received from
the Ancestors, from whom they descended, or from a general knowledge of the
Creation it self) their very writings in express words do show: in which,
whoever will look into them, he may easily find clear footsteps of a Sabbatical
solemnity. That the seventh day is sacred, not only the Hebrews, but also the
Greeks know; on which the universe of things animate and inanimate is turned
about, -- says Clemens Alexandrinus Stroncat lib. 5.
, which he proves by the testimonies of Hesiod, Homer, Callimachus, and other
Heathens, which I think needless to rehearse here, because if any will not
believe my relation, the aforesaid testimonies of the Poets in Clemens, may
make the incredulous to believe l. 13. c. 7.
. Eusebius. de praepar. Erang. says, that God having finished his works, allowed
us a day for rest from our labors. This he confirms by the authorities of
diverse Poets. And the learned Rivet, in dissertat. de Sabbato, cap. 5. proves,
that these testimonies are to be understood of the seventh day of every week.

While Suetonius describes the moderation Sueton. in Tiber.
of Tiberius, exhibited even toward his inferiors, he tells us, amongst other
things, that Diogenes, a certain Grammarian, being wont to dispute on the
Sabbath days at Rhodes, would not admit Tiberius to hear him, out of his
order, but by his servant put him off till the seventh day. Whence it appears,
that the seventh day was known to Diogenes, although the learned Casaubon, on
that place of Suetonius, thinks, that the observation of weeks, which holds
at this day, used among the Greeks, was not commonly received before the times
of Tiberius. Yet the learned Rivet, loc. citato, proves by diverse testimonies,
that it was in use amongst the Latins, so to distinguish their days.
Lampridius in Alexand. Severo, tells us, that when he was in the City, he went
up to the Capitol on the seventh day, and frequented the Temples.

We meet with more testimonies to this purpose in the learned Amesius, of pious
memory, in Medul. Theolog. lib. 2. cap. 15. sect. 10. And now I will conclude
with the testimony of Josephus against Appion, l. 2. That there is no nation,
either of Greeks, or Barbarians, or any where else, amongst whom the custom of
the seventh day, which the Jews used to keep holy, was not grown common. With
whom, as we have seen, agrees Clemens Alexandrinus.

That the custom therefore of celebrating the seventh day, was common amongst
the Heathens, can be doubted by none; whether, as I said, from the instinct of
nature, or by the ordination of God, which came by tradition to the posterity
of Adam. However, if we may credit the forementioned Authors, it is certain,
that the Festival of this solemnity was known to the whole world, although most
know not the cause of this solemnity: which Philo de vita Mosis, lib. 3.
observes, and Theophilus Antiochenus in the forecited place. Theophilus says,
that all men call the seventh day the Sabbath, but most know not the cause of
its appellation. Now that cause which most knew not, was Gods resting on it,
when he had finished in six days that stupendous work of Creation; which was
obliterated amongst the Heathens, by a long tract of time, although they
observed the day, as appears by the mentioned testimonies. This Irenaeus
teaches more at large, in the end of the thirtieth chapter of his fourth book,
whither I send the Reader.

In the last place, I will satisfy the second Why the beathen are not
upbraided with the abuse of the Sabbath.
Question, viz* If the Gentiles were obliged to observe the Sabbath, and the
custom of observing it was grown common amongst them, why are they never in
Scripture reproved of God for profaning the Sabbath? who can deny that the
Gentiles as well as the Jews, were obliged by the instinct of nature, to
worship God their great Creator? Besides, diverse of the Heathen had got the
knowledge of God, the Creation, and Sabbath, as Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius,
etc. Ubi supra
have plainly taught us. Furthermore, let him tell us who can, why they, as
well as other men, should not be obliged to observe the Sabbath, by the Divine
Law: for we know, that a determined time to perform a certain worship, is no
less necessary to them than others. But many reasons there were for which God
might reprove the Heathen, and yet move no controversy against them, about the
Sabbath; either because its institution was grown obsolete amongst many of the
Gentiles, (though not all) or because they had violated the whole worship of
God: for which cause he reprehends them: yet he reproves them not for the
Sabbath by name, as being the time of worship: because the Sabbath was only
ordained for performing the true worship of the true God: now the Gentiles
worshipped not God, but Idols; therefore God accuses them of Idolatry, and not
for neglecting the Sabbath: and in vain would they have had regard of the
Sabbath, while on the Sabbath they worshipped Idols, and not God, the author of
the Sabbath. I might also add here, that it is not manifest, that all the sins
committed by the Heathens were reprehended in Scripture particularly. But the
famous Rivet does answer this objection more at large: Dissert. de Sab. c. 9.
in whose learned answers, they that do not abhor the truth, cannot but
acquiesce. And thus much for the reasons against the opinion of the Sabbath
being observed from the beginning of the world.

Now to the authorities by which others The authorities are weighed which deny
that the Patriarchs kept the Sabbath.
busy themselves, to infringe this opinion: these are in number three. The
first whereof is that of Irenaeus, who lib. 4. cap. 30. tells us, that Abraham
believed God without Circumcision, and without the Sabbath. The second is, of
Justin Martyr, in his Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, in whom it is read, that
Abel and Enoch were just, without the observation of the Sabbath; and after
them, Abraham and his posterity, until Moses pleased God. And after he adds,
Before Moses there was no need of celebrating the Sabbath. In the third place,
Advers. Jud. c. 2. etc. 4.
Tertullian is produced, in whom they read, that neither Adam nor his
offspring, Abel, or Noah, or Enoch, did keep the Sabbath. These are the chief
places which are brought against the contrary opinion; to which, before I
answer, I might say, that the Judgments of other Fathers that affirm it, might
be opposed to the authorities of them that deny it. But, lest by so saying, I
should seem to set together the grave Fathers amongst themselves, I answer,
first, He that equally weighs the foresaid testimonies, shall easily observe,
that the Fathers intention in the foresaid places, was this; that they might
teach, that men were not justified by observing of the Jewish Sabbath. This at
the first blush will appear to him that views the places.

Irenaeus he speaks of the multitude of Ubi prius.
them that were just before Abraham, the Patriarchs, and Moses, and were
justified without these, (namely, without Circumcision and the Sabbath.) It was
therefore Irenaeus his purpose, to prove that the Sabbath, or Circumcision were
not the perfecting of righteousness: neither does Irenaeus simply speak of the
observation of the Sabbath, but of its observation in order to justification;
which thing his words do declare And Justin Martyr had the same meaning, who
disputed against Trypho the Jew, propounding to himself means by which mercy
might befall him from God, (as Trypho speaks) amongst which he reckons the
Sabbath and Circumcision, that he might have some hope of salvation. Whilst the
blessed Martyr opposes himself to this man's purpose, he affirms, that all
the foresaid Fathers who kept the Sabbath, pleased not God. Yet does he not
affirm, that the observation of the Sabbath was unknown to them: but he grants,
that the Fathers were not justified by it: which they also confess, who hold
fast the foresaid opinion, confirmed to be true by a long series of authorities.

It was not therefore the purpose of the Reverend Fathers, to define, whether
the Sabbath was simply observed of the Patriarchs, or not? Only they affirm,
that by its observation they obtained not righteousness before God, nor for
that cause did they observe it: as the Jews did contend in this question, with
whom the Fathers had to do.

And Tertullian is not to be expounded otherwise, who attended this also, that
he might show against the Jews, that the Fathers were not justified by
Circumcision, the Sabbath, or the works of the Law. His words do testify this.
For he says, advers. Jud. c. 2. He that contendeth, that the Sabbath is yet to
be observed, as a medicine of salvation, must teach, that those who observed
the Sabbath formerly are just, etc. and thereupon what were formerly objected
do follow: which in this manner being understood, according to the scope of the
Author, without any injury to the words, do make nothing against the
observation of the Sabbath from the Creation: especially whereas Tertullian
himself, as formerly we observed, has asserted, that the Jews do confess, Adv.
Jud. c. 4.
that Gods resting on it, did from the beginning sanctify the seventh day. The
truth of which assertion, Tertullian no where calls into question: for if he
had not taken it for true, then he would not have granted it without a reproof
in any wise, for their sakes; but would have used one or other interpretation,
either to avoid, or clear that place, out of Genesis 2. 2, 3. which yet he no
where does. The sanctification therefore of the seventh day from the Creation,
for which the Jews stood, is granted by Tertullian: out of whom it is fetched,
that there was the use of the Sabbath before the Mosaical Law, which also
Tertullian grants must continue when that cease.

Therefore, in the second place, I answer, that these, and the like places, if
any be, amongst the Fathers, which seem to intimate, that the Sabbath was not
observed before Moses, are not so much to be understood of the Sabbath it self,
or the observation of the seventh day, as of the Jewish observation thereof,
and its abuse to Justification before God: for they contend, either that for
its observation eternal life befell not the Patriarchs, or that it was not
observed before Moses, according to the Ceremonies, wherewith it was afterward
celebrated of the Jews; neither ought it to be observed after the coming of
Christ: which things are affirmed by none at all.

Thirdly, In the foresaid testimonies, the Fathers had to do with the Jews, who
obtruded the Jewish Sabbath on the Christians: for which cause, when the
Fathers mention the Sabbath, they speak of it somewhat dishonourably, if we
look at the Name and Ceremonies of the Sabbath: but if we understand the thing
it self, i. e. the Lords day, they have extolled the Sabbath with wonderful
praises: therefore, when they plead against the Jewish Sabbath, they altogether
reject it, but when they appoint it to be celebrated in the Christian manner,
they greatly honor it.

Fourthly, The Critics, which are well exercised in the writings of the
Fathers, teach us, that it is an usual thing with the Fathers, while with all
their might they decline one error, they oftentimes do either fall into
another, or seem in a certain sort to fall into it: like Husbandmen, (as
prettily the learned Rivet, in Prolegom. in Crit. sa^r. cap. 11.) who laboring
to straiten a crooked stick, do sometimes exceed measure, and bend the plant
into a contrary and diverse form: so they know it very often falls out with the
most grave Fathers, who peruse their disputations with their adversaries: for
while they contend with their enemies, out of an earnest desire to smite them,
they have sometimes even struck their own companions. St. Austins heat against
the Manichees, carried him from the explication of the Text, and those things
which he purposed to assert. This thing, Austin himself, when he had finished
his Treatise, signified to Possidonius, and others that dined with him. So
Possidonius relates it in the Life of Austin, chapter 15. And as the truth of
this thing has appeared in other questions, so in this of the Sabbath. For
while Tertullian, and before him, Justin Martyr, have declared the foresaid
opinions about the Sabbath, their work was with the Jews, who, as we said,
obtruded the Sabbath on the Christians, as though without its observation, none
could obtain eternal life. Which error, while the grave Fathers studied to
shun, they declare this opinion of the Sabbath, (if in the testimonies cited
this was their meaning) being observed all that time, from the Creation until
Moses: in expounding of which opinion, although they thought to smite the Jews,
yet considered they not, how unwarily they wounded their own companions, who,
to their power, were diligent to defend the contrary: whose opinions we have
formerly recited in this Chapter.

Lastly, None that is but meanly conversant in the writings of the Fathers, can
be ignorant, that some more hard sayings do often occurr in them; which, unless
they be expounded by other places in them, are not easily to be admitted.
Chrysostom says, in his later Sermon De utilitate ex obscuritate prophetiarum,
in Savils Edition, Before Christ's coming, faith in Christ was not required of
the Jews: which words, without a candid interpretation, are not to be admitted:
for if they be taken absolutely, they agree not with the Holy Scriptures, as
appears from Hebr. 11. in which it is related, that the Saints before the
former coming of Christ, did rely upon him by Faith, and for their Faith are
commended: therefore the genuine sense of this place is to be found out of
another place in his former Sermon, page 652. where, of the Jews, he says,
they looked for the Lamb of God to come; that should take away the sins of the
world: of which the later place affords no small light to the Interpretation
of the former. In like manner are we to judge in examining the foresaid
testimonies of the Fathers, wherein the Sabbath is denied to be observed from
the beginning of the world: whose meaning is to be expounded from those Fathers
in other places, or from others that were their contemporaries. If any
therefore have a mind to find out Tertullians mind Adv. Jud. cap. 2. let him
compare him with Tertullian adv. Mercion. lib. 4. cap. 12. where he shall find
him acknowledging, that the Sabbath was holy from the beginning. We may judge
the same of the other authorities which are cited, whose sense is to be sought
out either by other places of those authors, or by other writers that were
contemporaries with them. The words of Irenaeus and Justin Martyr, do roundly
enough expound their scope, as before we have heard by them, both which do only
contend for this, that they may teach, that the ancient Fathers were not
justified by the Sabbath and Circumcision, and add no more.

CHAP. IX.
That one day in a week is under the Gospel also to be sanctified. The Morality
of the fourth Command, which is perpetual, requires this. Christ has not
abolished the Law. How the Sabbath may be said to be a sign between God and the
Church.

THus far of the first Epoch, in which we have found, that from the beginning
of the world, one day in the weekly compass was to be set apart for the solemn
performing of the worship of God: and for the second, from Moses to Christ's
resurrection, none doubts, therefore I Will add nothing of it: and will come to
the third Epoch, of which is the greatest controversy, namely, Whether under
the Gospel, in the compass of a week, one day be to be sanctified? Some men of
great name do deny this, and some do strongly affirm it: which later opinion
being grounded upon so many testimonies and reasons of the ancients, and the
continual practice of the Christian Church, I freely embrace: for this is
neither a new, nor an unheard of assertion, but by several Divines of a well
exercised judgment, is sufficiently manifested to all pious souls, and prone to
the fear of God: in demonstrating whereof, they have recourse to the morality
of the fourth Command in the Decalogue, whose moral part is perpetual: for it
is one of the ten words of God, engraven by his own hand in Tables of Stone,
Exodus 35. 28. Deuteronomy. 4. 13. out of which number, if the Sabbath should be
expunged, there would only nine remain. Now the Moral part of the Decalogue (
which remains also in the new Law, Bonavent. l. 3. q. 37. p. 781.) as
Alexander Hales qu. 32. fol. 134.
once wittily, is said to be so two manner of ways, one way which is of the
very essence of the Decalogue, according to the primary intention, and so
vacation to a time indeterminately is moral in the Decalogue: another way it is
said to be moral, in the Decalogue, which is to determine the Decalogue, and
according to this vacation on the Lords day, is moral in the Decalogue, in the
time of grace, as the seventh day in the time of the Law, and that is moral by
discipline, i. e. by Divine institution: and therefore, even by the sole
instinct of nature, it must needs be granted, that man at some time must attend
upon God: yea, nature it self dictates, that sufficient days be set apart to
perform his worship. And who is to determine those days, but him, whose the
day and night are? Psalm. 74. 15. So Alexander Hales. The observance of a day
indeterminately, that at some time we should attend on God, is moral in nature,
and immutable; but the observance of a determinate time, is moral by
discipline, by the adding of Divine institution. Afterward he says, when that
time ought to be, is not for man to determine, but God: because it is his part
to define the certain time for worship, whose it is to prescribe the worship it
self: it pertains not to inferiors, whose part it is to perform offices to
others, to determine of a fit time to perform them in: Superiors, to whom they
are to be exhibited, do prescribe others, when, ex officio, they ought to
attend these.

Nor can it be otherwise, because if the way of setting apart the time for
worshipping God in should not depend upon Divine institution, the mind of man
would hang pendulous in this business: neither would it appear to us, what
days would be sufficient: since, if we look at Gods benefits conferred upon
us, it would not be sufficient to consecrate the whole course of our life to
this work: and if we look at our covetousness, and sloth, how many of us would
suffer the very least part of our time (says the famous Mr. D. G.) to be cut
off either from our labor or rest? A certain time is therefore to be defined
of God, at least for their sakes* who attend more* upon this world than God, in
Gal. 4.
as Hierom: and left the conscience of men should stick in doubt, or God be
defrauded of his due worship, very reason it self seems to require, that a
certain day should be assigned by the most Blessed and Almighty God;
especially, when, as in sent. 3* distinc. 37: q. unica.
Scotus says, in Gal. 4.
man is bound to no act pro tempore indeterminato, to which he is not bound pro
aliquo signato: because, if then worship be not to be exhibited to God, by like
reason not now, and by the same reason of every other time.

Besides, he that will not think much to compare the reason of the present age,
with the times of Adam, the Patriarchs, and the Jews, he shall see it equal and
just to set apart in every seven days, one whole one for the worship of God.
For why should the Lord indulge a further liberty to the men of our age, in his
service, than he granted them? especially when God, since he has repealed his
Gospel, is more propitious to us, than to them. Farther, if we weigh the nature
of our present men, we shall find for certain, that no less time is required to
the instructing of them, than of the ancients. And to conclude, relaxation from
labor is no less necessary in this age, to servants, and those that live under
other men's government, than to men in former ages. He that without prejudice
weighs these things, cannot deny, that one day in seven is as well to be set
apart for the public worship of God by Christians, as men of the former age. I
will add nothing of the nature of the Decalogue, never abrogated by the blessed
coming of Christ. Faith in Christ makes not void the Law, the matter of which,
all men acknowledge to be written in men's hearts from the Creation, the great
Apostle being witness: although we acknowledge with the same Apostle, Gal. 4.
and Col. 2. that the ceremonial and typical observation thereof, being
fulfilled by Christ's coming in the flesh, be now ceased. This does also
Irenaeus witness, adv. haeres. l. 4. c. 31. who affirms, that God spoke the
words of the Decalogue immediately by himself, and thereupon they remain
permanent, and fixed with us, admitting of extension and augmentation, but no
dissolution by the coming of Christ in the flesh. So St. Austin in Psalm 32.
Fulfill the Law, says he, which the Lord thy God came not to dissolve, but to
fulfill.

And certainly, no body that thoroughly weighs with himself the morality of that
precept, will doubt, that the solemnity of the Lords day grew up by virtue of
the fourth Command in the Decalogue: For it is granted of all, that the
substance of the Command, included in these words, ( Remember to keep holy the
Sabbath day, i. e. the day of rest, not as the seventh day) is moral, and to be
continued for ever. But if the Lords day festivity be not bottomed upon the
authority of this command, then that morality does plainly perish: when now
there is not any other weekly Sabbath, besides the Lords day; without which, as
I said, the Moral part of the Sabbath in the New Testament would not remain. By
right therefore, as Alexander Hales has it, the vacation of the Lords day is
the Moral part of the Decalogue in the time of grace, as the seventh day in the
time of the Law.

Moreover, some may with great reason doubt, why the Jewish Sabbath should be
translated to the Lords day, (which yet we see has been done for above one
thousand six hundred years) if so be that Christians be not obliged to observe
the fourth Command, as it is moral: whenas otherwise there would be no need of
any festival to succeed in place of the ancient Sabbath: But because that Law
does perpetually bind all the worshippers of God to the observation of the
Sabbath, it necessarily follows, that the day on which the Sabbath is to be
observed, must be determined by some positive Law, and is designed by God for
this purpose, to be the seventh day in the Old Covenant, and the the first in
the New. For it is not for man, says Alexander Hales, quaest. 32. fol. 128. to
determine, but God, when that time is, etc. It Is in Gods power only, to define
a fit time for performing his worship.

But we read this question of the Morality of the fourth Command, discussed at
large by diverse: amongst whom, the famous Wallaeus does it most excellently,
who, to the great fruit of the Church, has copiously taught us, what is
Ceremonial, and what Moral, in writing of that Command of the Sabbath. I will
not therefore add any more about this question, but do send the Reader to the
learned labors of others, in which this question is examined. I will only add
this one thing for a conclusion, out of the observations of this Learned
Divine, namely an explication of the Sabbath's being a sign between God and men.

Since, says he, it is in bred by nature, How the Sabbath is a sign between
God and the Church.
in all Nations, that in the external worship of that Deity which they take for
supreme, they should have some Symbol of Document, which may show to others,
whom they take for God: as may be observed in the sacrifices of Bacchus: and
therefore in the Revelation, they that worshipped God and the Lamb, are read to
have the mark of God in their foreheads, Rev. 14. 1. and they that worshipped
the Beast, received his mark in their forehead, or hand, Rev. 14. 9. which were
nothing else but external tokens, by which they would plainly signify, that
they worshipped either God or the Beast: So of old we read that the Sabbath was
instituted of God, that it might be a symbol or sign, to manifest to all the
world who was the God of the Jews. So Ezekiel. 20. 20. the Sabbaths are said to be
signs between God and them, that it might be known that the Lord was their God.
Now what it was that was shown by that sign, Moses tells us in diverse places;
especially in Exodus chapter 31. 16, 17. Therefore the children of Israel shall
observe the Sabbath, throughout their generations, for a perpetual Covenant. It
is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever; (he speaks of the
Sabbath) for in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, and on the seventh
day he rested, and was refreshed. As if he should say, the pious observation of
the Sabbath amongst them, when every seventh day returns, does intimate, that
the Almighty Creator of Heaven and Earth is their God. In this sense,
Athanasius de Sabbatho and Circumcisione, says, The Sabbath is a sign, whereby
the day might be known on which the Creation was finished: which being known,
they might ascend to the knowledge of the Creator. And by observing the
Sabbath, they attained unto that two manner of ways. First, inasmuch as one
day of the seven was solemn, or because after they had ended their labors in
the six days, they must rest on the seventh. Secondly, by determining that
rest on the last day of the weekly compass: both ways the Jews signified,
that they worshipped none other, than God the Creator of Heaven and Earth:
because, whereas they sanctified the seventh day, after the six days labors
were ended, they openly professed, that they were worshippers of that God, who
created Heaven and Earth, and having finished his labor, in beautifying that
stupendous work, on the seventh day he ceased from working: for which cause,
he enjoined them the observation of the seventh day; that they might follow his
foregoing example, both in working and in resting. He has commanded, says
Philo, de Decalogo, that whosoever received these Institutions, as in other
things, so in this also, they should follow God, in working six days, and
resting the seventh, and attending on the contemplation of things, and study of
VVisdome, etc. Afterward, Follow God, thou have Gods example and prescript in
working six days.

And farther, they set apart no other day in the weekly course, but the
seventh, for the exercises of piety, that they might profess they were the
servants of that God, which redeemed the Israelites out of the Land of Egypt,
and brought them out of the house of bondage: which is collected from the
repetition of the Decalogue, Deuteronom. 5. 15. where Moses, omitting the
argument taken from the Creation, which he had used in the Decalogue, does
excite them to sanctify the Sabbath, from their being freed out of the Land of
Egypt; namely, because whenas they served in the Land of Egypt, the Lord their
God brought them out thence, with a strong hand, and stretched out arm: and
therefore he commanded them, that they should observe the very day of the
Sabbath, (in whose morning watch they came out of Egypt, as the Learned Junius
observes in his notes on Deuteronom. 5. out of Exodus 12. 15.) This seems to
have been the cause of appointing this day, rather than any other. And thus
much of the Jews Sabbath, whereby, as by a manifest document, they professed to
worship the Lord, the Creator of this universe, and their mighty Redeemer out
of Egypt, for which cause the Sabbath was had for a sign between God and them.

CHAP. X.
A day in every week is to be sanctified under the Gospel, which is not the
seventh, but first: the celebrating of the Jewish Sabbath, Col. 2. 16. and Gal.
4. 10. examined: the places whereon the observation of the Lords Day in the New
Testament is bottomed. The Fathers acknowledge its Divine authority: neither
can the Church change that day, and substitute another in its place.

A Stated Day in every Week being granted, to perform Gods Worship on, it
remains now farther to find out what day is determined by God for his
worship, since the Light of the Gospel was up and down dispersed. And whereas
thus far we have spoken of the Jews Sabbath, it remains, in the second place,
to be considered, Whether Christians, or no, be bound by the Fourth Command in
the Decalogue, to sanctify one day weekly? Amongst equal estimates of things
(says the foresaid Learned Divine) it cannot but be without controversy, that
it is as well for Christians as Jews, having finished their labors on the six
days, to sanctify the seventh, that with the Jews they acknowledge that they
worship the most blessed and Almighty God, the Maker of Heaven and Earth. But
although in this both Jew and Christian do agree, that when they have spent six
days in their labors, on the seventh they should rest: yet they differ
amongst themselves in the determination, or designation of the day destined to
this holy rest. For the Christians keep holy that day, which to the Jews was
the first in the week, and call it the Lords day, that they might prove
themselves the servants of God, who, in the dawning of that day subdued the
Devil, that spiritual Pharaoh, and redeemed his people from a spiritual
servitude, by raising up Jesus Christ our Lord from the dead: who has
regenerated the Christian Church, not unto a sublunary Canaan, but unto a
lively hope of an immortal inheritance, preserved for us in the Heavens. And,
that I may dispatch in a word, The Christian, by sanctifying the Lords day,
does prosess that he is a Christian; that is, as St. Peter interprets 1 Pet. 1.
^1.
it, believes in hin^ that raised up Christ from the dead. Hence it easily
appears, that both Jews and Christians (though the same day be not solemnized
amongst them both) were led by the same reason to sanctify the seventh day:
which, to the Jews, might call to mind their liberty restored from Egypt, and
servitude of a worldly Pharaoh; and to Christians, from a spiritual Egypt and
Pharaoh.

But, lest any one should object unto me, Christians might profess this, by
sanctifying the last day in the week: I add moreover, they could not do so by
right: for if the Christians should keep holy day after the manner of the Jews,
then they would declare, that their spiritual Redemption was not yet perfected,
but yet did look for it: especially whenas the Redemption of Israel out of
Egypt by the Ministry of Moses, was a type and pledge of our future and
spiritual liberty by Christ: and the inheritance of the earthly Canaan, which
those that were freed from Egyptian bondage, did seek after, prefigured a
celestial inheritance, (which the redeemed by the holy Blood of Christ, did
look for.) Since therefore the shadow vanished when the body was present, we
must not believe in God foretelling future things by types and shadows: but in
him that has most faithfully accomplished the truth, according to the
prophecies foretold by him. So lib. (...) c. ^
Austin against Faustus the Manichee. It is not, says he, a diverse doctrine,
but a different time; it was one thing for these things that they must be
foretold by figurative prophecies, and another thing, that they must now be
fulfilled by the truth made manifest and accomplished. As by an apt similitude
Mr. D. G. illustrateth it. There is, says he, in all Nations, the same law of
all the Stars, and the same motion, although a great variety may arise from the
difference of the Horizon: whereupon it may be our day, when it is night with
our Antipodes: so the law of Nature is the same with us and the Jews; yet in
some things it admits of some mutation, from the difference of the Horizon,
as I may say, whilst they inhabited the old world, and we the new: that is, the
Sun of Righteousness, on the seventh day, came to their Meridian by Creation;
to ours, on the eighth day, by Christ's Resurrection; whence that which was a
festival to them, to us is none.

Although the Sabbath be translated to the Lords day, yet for that reason its
being a sign between God and his people, is not taken away, but translated to
another day: Neither is the thing changed, that was signified by that sign; but
only the manner and circumstance of time, and clearness of signification. I
will hasten therefore to demonstrate the cessation of celebrating the Sabbath
after the Jewish manner, and substitution of the Lords Day into its place, both
out of Scriptures and Fathers.

The holy writings of the Apostles do The cessation of the Jewish Sabbath, Col.
2. 16.
testify, that the observation of the Jewish Sabbath, as well as other
festivals in use amongst them, is removed from off the Christians shoulders. So
St. Paul, Col. 2. 16. Let no man therefore judge you in meat or in drink, or in
respect of an holy day, or of the new moon, or of the Sabbath days. In that
Chapter, while the Apostle mentions various corruptions of the Sacred Religion*
which he teaches will be profitable for the Church, diligently to shun, he
reckons up three sorts of them: the first whereof, by false teachers, was drawn
from Philosophy, the second from humane traditions, the third from the
rudiments of the world. Now by the rudiments of the world, he means, the
pedagogy of Moses: out of which, ver. 16. he brings forth two corruptions, to
wit, of the choice of meats prohibited by the Law, and sanctifying of Festivals
observed under the same. Amongst the Jews there were diverse Feasts, some of
great name and authorty, celebrated yearly, namely, of the Passover, Pentecost,
and Tabernacles: and then, besides these, they celebrated their New Moons every
Month, and their Sabbath every week: the Apostle affirms, that all these
Festivals (which after a manner, were the shadow of Christ to come, and Christ
their truth and body, that is, they did portend what afterward, were truly
exhibited of Christ) had their end, when Christ was once come: for when the
body is come, the shadow vanishes. Even as in the Emperors absence his image
Ambros. in. Col. 2.
has authority, but when he is present has not: so these things also, before
the coming of the Lord, in their time were to be observed, but when he is come,
do want authority. And therefore they that contend for observing the Sabbath,
after the Jewish manner, do, deny that Christ is come; witness the blessed
Apostle: for gaping at the shadow, they embrace not the body. There was a time
when they were to be trained up by the shadow, but he that follows the shadow,
when the body is present, is deceived. Therefore from that place of the
Apostle, we must believe, that the Jewish Sabbath (of which he speaks, under
the number of a Multitude, Sabbaths, because it was celebrated every week, and
seldom do we meet with it in the singular number, as before was observed) is
ceased by the coming of Christ, or that Christ is not yet come.

The same Apostle sharply taxes the Galatians for observing of days, that
having rejected the wholesome Doctrine of the Gospel, they returned to the same
beggarly Elements, (that is, legal observations) Gal. 4. 10. Ye observe, says
he, days, and months, and times, and years. Where (according to Tertullian
contra Marcion, lib. 1. c. 20. Chrysostom, Theodoret, Primasius, etc. in Gal.
4.) by days the Apostle understands the Sabbaths of the Jews, and by the
names of Months, New moons; by years, the computing of years according to the
Jews. The false Apostles did urge the Sabbath, New moons, and the other Feast
days of the Jews, because they were legal observations: but the Apostle,
having pious bowels rolling within him, does seasonably admonish the Galatians,
that they should not yield to them in this business, and so his labor in
promulging the Gospel be in vain. And to any that considers the circumstances
of the Text, it is a thing without controversy, that the Apostle properly does
reprehend the Galatians, because that after they had acknowledged, and received
the Doctrine of the Gospel, in a Jewish manner, (to whom not only the day for
the worship, but also the celebration in its rest was of it self religious)
they had observed Feast days; as if such a kind of observation were so
necessary to the worship of God, that by its neglect their salvation was in
hazard. Neither are the words of the Apostle so to be taken, as if he only
reprehended the Galatians, for observing days [on this ground] that they might
make a guess of the success of their actions, as the Heathens did; as St.
Austin would have it, Epist. ad Januarium. Epist. 119. c. 7.
(although in another place he interprets this place doubtfully. Austin in
Epist. ad Call. expounds it, first of the Heathens custom, ^. 4.
and then of the Jews.) Also the Commentaries in Gal. attributed to Ambrose, do
interpret the place of the Apostle in the same manner: but because the
observation of days, which was rejected of the Apostle, was done according to
those weak and beggarly elements, Gal. 4. 9. i. e. as we said, legal
observations, which the Galatians did seriously sue for, being so taught of the
false Apostles. The sense of the Apostles words cannot be expounded according
to the foresaid Fathers.

These sacred testimonies of the blessed Apostle do show, that the Jewish
Sabbath was abrogated by Christ's coming. Nor do I dissent from the gravest
Lights in the Churh, in teaching the cessation thereof; for, with an-unanimous
consent, they do teach, that the observation of the Jewish Sabbath, is not to
be imposed on Christians. So Athanas. Hom. de semente, and Homil. de Sab. and
Circumcis. Ep. 59. ad Fidum.
Cyprian would have the eighth day to be to the Christians, what the Sabbath
was; which, as he says, is, as it were, the Image of the Lords day. August.
Ep. 118. c. 12. Ambros. in Ephesians. 2. Chrysostom. in Call. 1. Ep. adv. Jud. c. 6.
Tertullian calls the Sabbath, temporal, which in time should cease. Chrysostom
confesses the same, Hom. 12. ad Pop. Aug. l. 6. c. 4. contr. Faust. Manich. and
de Genesis ad literam. lib. 4. c. 13. Hither also are to be referred other
forecited testimonies of the Fathers, which yield a testimony evident enough
for the cessation of the Jewish Sabbath.

Now since these holy Fathers do assert, The Father^ affirm not simply that the
Sabbath is abrogated.
that the precept of the Sabbath is not to be observed of Christians, whether
do they simply contend for abrogating the observation of the weekly Sabbath, or
only that it must not be kept on that manner, and on the seventh day, as the
Sabbath was commanded the Jews? Which is very worthy our consideration; and the
later seems to be intimated by the following examples.

Whereas the name is put upon the seventh day, and the observation thereof
ordained, yet we, Hill. prolog. in Psalm. exposit.
says Hilary, do rejoice on the eighth which is also the first, the festival
of the Sabbath being finished. Therefore Hilary affirms not a simple
abrogation, but change of the Sabbath (whose name we often meet with, and the
observation prescribed.) because he confesses, that Christians did observe the
festival of the Sabbath, though on the Sabbath day; i. e. the seventh day from
the Creation, it was not done.

Tertullian, while he disputes that the Patriarchs did not acknowledge the use
of the Jewish Sabbath, yet he grants the Sabbath, which he calls eternal,
that is, it was before the Law, and must last when it cease; for no where
does Tertullian deny the sanctification of the seventh day from the Creation,
which the Jews do assert.

St. Austin ^. 16. c. 28.
contr. Faust. Manich. whilst he teaches, that the Sabbath and Circumcision
were figures, says, it is no diverse doctrine (namely, ours, from that of the
Jews, about the observation of the Sabbath) but a different time, it was one
thing for these things, that they must be foretold by figurative prophecies,
and another thing that they now must be fulfilled by the truth made manifest
and accomplished. Where Augustine confesses, that both the Jews and Christians
observation of the Sabbath is grounded upon the same foundations of Doctrine,
though the same consideration of time be had amongst both. Yea, in Tract. 4. in
Joh. and de december chordis. c. 3.
another place he acknowledges, that the command of the Sabbaths observation
was more enjoined to us, than the Jews. The 251 Sermon in August. de tempore,
says also, that the glory of the Sabbath is transferred upon the Lords day:
that is, the positive determination of the seventh day is changed, which yet he
affirms not is abolished. For where there is only a mutation of a thing,
there is not an utter destruction of it. Therefore, according to the author of
that Sermon, the Law of the Sabbath is not vanished, and made void, so that by
it we are not obliged to observe any Sabbath.

Origin grants, Hom. 232 in Number.
that every holy and just man ought to observe the Sabbath's festival: and he
shows how this must be done: neither does he yet speak of that spiritual
Sabbath, of which we meet with frequent mention in the Fathers, but of the
Christian Sabbath, which now is succeeded into place of the former Sabbath;
which he shows by the works that are to be done on that day. Leaving therefore,
says he, the Judaical observations of the Sabbath, let us see how the
Christian ought to observe the Sabbath. On the Sabbath day, (he speaks of the
Lords day under that name) he ought not to work any of all the worlds actions.
If therefore thou ceasest from all thy secular works, and do no worldly
thing, but attendest on spiritual works, go to the Church, hear godly
Lectures and Treatises, look not after present and visible things, but at
invisible, and things future, this is the observation of the Christian Sabbath.
This shows that Origin speaks of the Sabbath, as it is to be observed of
Christians, and not of the spiritual Sabbath: or else Christians all their
days, ought not to be troubled with their secular labors; which Origin never
thought on.

De Sab. and Circumcis.
Athanasius says, that he observed the Sabbath day, not as they in the first
age. Now what else means the observation of the Sabbath in Athanasius, but
keeping it holy day by virtue of the command in the Decalogue about the Sabbath?

Ep. 59.
The image of the Lords day, according to Cyprian, went before in the Sabbath.
Whereby he infinuateth, that the Lords day is to us what the Sabbath was to the
Jews, whose place it now supplieth in the Church, when the image is removed.

in Ps. 32.
Ruffinus contendeth for observing the Sabbath, though not carnally, or in
Jewish delights. To these let be added, a place in Constit. Apost. lib. 7. cap.
37. which tells us, that the Lords day supplies the room of the Sabbath.

All these things argue, that the pious Fathers did not under the Gospel
explode that precept in the Decalogue about the Sabbath: and therefore
sometimes under the name of the Sabbath, which to them the Lords day is
signified, as we have seen chap. 3. For they yield, that Christ fulfilled, and
not destroyed the Law by his coming; and that Christians are to rejoice on the
Sabbaths festival, and that the solemnity of this festival is grounded on the
Command in the Decologue: and seem only to stand for this, that now it should
not be in that manner celebrated of Christians, that the Sabbath was amongst
the Jews. They celebrated the Sabbath on the seventh day, and flinging off the
weighty care of godliness, gave themselves up to idleness, and delights of this
world; but the Fathers taught, that Christians ought not so to keep the
Sabbath, who should keep the first day of the week holy, not carnally, but
spiritually. For they judged it far better under the light of purer
Christianity (as after shall appear) to labor on the Sabbath, than to attend
on the alluring pleasures of the world.

But though they abhorred the Jewish manner of observing the Sabbath, yet they
always ordained one day of the seven (as Chrysostom speaks) to be bestowed in
the Hom. 2. in Joh.
worship and service of the common Lord of us all. And therefore passing by the
abrogating of observing the Sabbath, in the Jewish manner, being confirmed by
testimonies both of Scriptures and Fathers; Thirdly, it remains to be
considered, what may be brought from the same fountains to assert the authority
of observing the Lords day. For it is most sure, that the Apostle (although The
ordaining of the Lords day is gathered from Scripture.
he call back in the foresaid places the Church from observing the festival of
the Sabbath in the Jewish manner) does not forbid Christians all observing of
every day: otherwise the Apostle himself had given an offense to the Church, in
keeping the Lords day with a Church, (which it appears he did, Act. 20.) which
to think of him, the candor of a Christian mind will not admit. Therefore we
doubt not, but by the Apostle's sentence (whom we believe did not ordain it by
that ordinary power which yet continues in the Church) a certain day is to be
employed about spiritual labor: otherwise the Church had not met at a stated
time in the days of the Apostles.

And whereas a certain day is appointed, whereon weekly Divine worship is to be
attended only, that neither diminishes, nor abolisheth Christian liberty; it
only directs Christians, that their minds fluctuate not in observing it:
which is not to destroy Christian liberty, but rightly to instruct Christians
in the use thereof, the better, that they miss it not in performing service to
their God. Now for the weekly conventions of the Christian Church, no day was
deputed of the Apostles but the Lords day: the first mention whereof in their
writings, we meet with, is, Rev. 1. 10. where John Rev. 1. 10.
says, that he was in the spirit on the Lords day. And although that be the
first time that it is mentioned in the Scriptures under that appellation, yet
might it, before John writ the Revelation, be known in the Church by that name.
No Evangelist before St. John called Christ (...), i. e. the Word, yet the same
author being witness In the beginning was the word, Joh. 1. 1. So that day
doubtless was called (...), the Lords day, before; not as by some new
institution, which lately was established in the Church, but as a thing well
known to the Church: otherwise he would not so have named that day, without
farther explication, but that he knew for certain it was named in the Church by
that agnomination. Which shows, that the Lords day was celebrated in the
Church, before that John was in the Spirit. Neither could the Lords day be so
solemn, throughout all Churches in John's time, but that all the Apostles
before him had dispersed abroad this Doctrine.

Secondly, it appears from Scripture also, that this day was by Apostolical
ordination destined to the collecting of alms, 1 Cor. 1 Cor. 16. 2.
16. 2. Where he gives order, that upon the first day of the week every one
should lay by him in store the Collection for the Saints, of which he had
spoken in the former verse. The primary intention indeed of that place is, to
give order about the collections made for relieving the necessity of the poor;
but since he orders, that they may be made on the Lords day, there is no doubt
but he changes them to celebrate the day it self. For whenas he requires the
end, why should he not also prescribe the means directly conducing to that end?
without doubt the effect, which was on that day to be performed, presupposes
the day it self: and in commanding the end, the command of the means is always
included, without which we obtain not the end.

To Chrysostom* that searches out the causes Hom. 43. in Corin.
of this Apostolical ordination, that time seems, very commodious to exercise
mercy on* First, because the mind being free from labors, it is more easily
persuaded to commi^eration: And secondly, because the communicating of
celestial holy things, being had on that day, will strongly provoke men to the
duties of mercy.

Tertullian, and Justin Martyr, do testify, Ubi supra
that alms were collected on that day (doubtless by authority of the aforesaid
Apostolical ordination) which they had laid by them in store till this day, as
we have seen in the second chapter. These collections were by the Christian
people observed of their own accord, as pledges of piety, as Tertullian: Ap.
adv* genesis c. 39.
which Justin Martyr affirms, in his second Apology, were on the Sunday
deposited with the President, out of which provision was made for pupils,
widows, and those who were in want, through sickness, or any other cause.

Thirdly, it also appears by the Scripture, that on that day assemblies were
held, for hearing the Word, and administering the Eucharist: which are chiefly
to be counted amongst the sacred offices of holy days. St. Paul, as in the
second Chapter, although he abode seven days at Troas, we read Act. 20.
not that the Disciples met to break bread but on the first day of the week.
Whence it is collected conveniently, that even then the Church had on that day
solemn conventions, to perform the sacred exercises of Religion on, in the
preaching of the Word, and administration of the Sacraments: neither did this
custom grow out of use with the succeeding Church (as after, when we shall
treat of sanctifying the Lords day, we will show) but the devout preaching of
Gods Word being happily begun on that day by the Apostles, Acts 2. 1. was ever
after continued at the same time to the honor of God, and profit of the Church.

From the three foresaid places of the New in 4 praec. c. 7.
Testament, and testimonies of various Divines, and Versions of the Scripture,
the learned Wallaeus concludes, that the use of the Lords day is to be referred
to the Apostles. And whatever is brought of some in their Expositions to the
contrary, is solidly by him weighed and refuted.

Lastly, We have shown in the second chapter of this Treatise, that the Lords
day was ordinarily solemnized by the Church, while the Apostles were living,
and the pre-eminence of it above other days, which the succeeding Church has
consecrated to Gods worship, in the third Chapter.

Since therefore the Holy Scriptures do Its institution is divine.
plainly bear witness of the name and use of this day, (for the name which the
Church ever after used, is by St. John expressed, Rev. 1. 10.) and since it is
by the Apostles charge destined to the sacred assemblies of the Church, and
gathering of alms, 1 Cor. 16. And lastly, since at the same assemblies the
Apostle and Church spent it in hearing the word of God, and communicating the
Eucharist, Act. 20. what man is there that can rightly deny that its authority
in the Church was established by the testimony of Holy Scripture (of which in
the third place we have undertaken to enquire in chapter 7th.)? since it is
bottomed upon the ordination and practice of the blessed Apostles, which are
recorded in the Scriptures; amongst un-written traditions, it cannot be
reckoned. I deservedly therefore affirm, that its observation is commended to
us in the Scriptures. Because we so often read in the Scriptures, that the
Apostles, and the whole Church of Christ did unanimously hold their assemblies
on that day, to whom will it not be thought a needless thing to dispute the
authority of its institution? especially since we read this was done of the
Church, while the Apostles were alive. For it is dangerous Epis. Winton. resp.
ad 3 Ep. Petri M^*linaei*
either to say or write, that the Apostles in some things used a divine
inspiration, and in others their own prudence, and that in those things which
are found written. If the Apostles in Scripture admonish Christians, that they
receive no opinion from those to whom they have given no Commandment, Act. 15.
24. if they ordained in all Churches what they received from the Lord, 1 Cor.
7. 7. if Christians must imitate the Apostles, 2 These. 3. 7. and withdraw
themselves from every one that walks not after the tradition received of the
Apostles, 2 These. 3. 6. Surely it seems just to think, that the Christian
Church in all Nations would not yield to those that obtrude the Lords solemnity
upon them, unless they knew for certain, that this burden was imposed on them
of God by the Apostles. Lastly, if those things be to be done by the Church,
which it has learned and heard of the Apostles, Phil. 4. 9. why should it not
keep holy the Lords Day, since the Apostolical Church kept its meetings on that
day? and who will say, that the Apostles do not command us to imitate them,
when in holy records their example is represented unto us?

And these are the things with which I am persuaded to believe, that the
Sabbaths festival, by Divine authority (which proceeded from God by the
Apostles) was translated to the Lords day: for he only who is* Lord of the
Sabbath, can change the Sabbath day, Mar. 2. 28. Besides this, all men know,
that that is grounded on the word of God, which is either expressed in so many
words in Scripture, or else by virtue of necessary consequence, is drawn out
from thence: and in this later way, the best of our Divines affirm, that we
meet with in Scripture the institution of the Lords day, as at large, and
pithily the famous Mr. D. G. De Die Dominicae determ.
First, says he, in the Old Testament, a parallel precept occurrs, as all
know, in the Decalogue, from which any may know, that it seemed just and good
to the Divine Majesty, to set apart a whole day of the seven, for the worship
of God. Secondly, Apostolical practice is a sign of Gods will in this business:
they observed this day, and commended it to be observed by others: and if their
practice in this particular had been doubtful, the perpetual and constant
custom of the Church, from the Apostles age (which illustrates their practice
in doubtfuls, and confirms it in plain things) does most evidently demonstrate
this. For although we reject ^n vritten traditions, yet may the inviolate
custom of all Churches, from the Apostles times, interpret to us their
writings. If we could have the interpretation of some place of Paul, allowed of
in the judgment of all his auditors, who would not prefer this far to the
Commentaries of all others? deeds do as well speak as sayings. Since therefore
we see this a confirmed practice of all Christians, we should be too unjust and
hard, if we should deny our belief.

With these same arguments does that famous and learned Divine teach the Church
to defend the truth against its adversaries. As in the point of
Infant Baptism, we suppress Infantbaptisme justified.
the bawling Anabaptists with these weapons, whom we cannot smite with clear
testimonies. First, from a parallel precept about Circumcision. Secondly,
Apostolical practice: which since it is somewhat more dark, we add the custom
of the whole Church, from the primitive and heroical times. Which things,
although they will not move the obstinate Anabaptists, yet will they prevail
with prudent, obedient, and equal estimators of things. The Church always
ordained, that sacred Baptism is not Baptism not to be repeated.
to be repeated: touching which prohibition we meet with nothing in the sacred
Records: but because Circumcision (into whose place Baptism succeeded) was not
repeated: because it is agreeable with reason that regeneration, no less than
generation, should be but once: because in the Scriptures examples of once
sprinkling only do occurr: and lastly, because the Orthodox Church of God has
hitherto abhorred Anabaptisme, therefore all grant that Baptism is not to be
repeated. I will add no more. What has been said, declares to them that
despise not truth, that the Lord made the Ps. 118. 22.
day, on which the Stone which the builders refused, was made the head stone of
the corner, that on it we should rejoice. But since it is not my purpose to
handle any questions on this subject, but leave them to others to be discussed,
I will return to my undertaken task; namely, to enumerate the testimonies of
the ancients on this particular: by which it will be made manifest, that the
Fathers were of no other mind: because they contended, that this day was
religiously to be observed, and fetched the Doctrine, wherein they asserted
this, out of the holy Scriptures. To the truth of which thing, we will first
bring Athanasius, Homil. de semente. In time past, with the ancients, the
Sabbath was of great account: which solemnity the Lord translated to the Lords
day: neither do we set light of the Sabbath, by our selves. Where, first, he
with the finger points at the author of the Lords Festival, namely, Christ;
whom he tells us, translated the Sabbath day into the Lords: and then denies,
that the Church of her self, or by her own authority, did ordain that
translation: for, says he, we set, not light by the Sabbath of our selves.
Therefore Athanasius Sabb. Circum.
being Judge, it appears, that the Church does not of her self, but by the
authority of Christ; whereby the Lords day was ordained, observe its solemnity,
and honor it, as he else where speaks. And let it move no Obj.
body, that while he expresses the honor wherewith the Church honors it,
he does not speak in that manner of its institution, as of the Sabbath; of
which, when he speaks, he says, (...), as God has commanded; but when he
mentions the Lords day* he only says, (...), we hnour the Lords day. Nor does
he say that this honor is given Resp.
of the Church to the Lords day, by authority of any Divine precept. Let this,
I say, move no body; as if Athanasius had acknowledged the institution of this
solemnity, to be received from the Churches ordination, and not Christ's: for if
this grave Prelate had so meant it, he would have contradicted himself, as
appears out of the place forecited, Homil, de sement. in which he plainly
acknowledges not the Church, but the Lord, to be the author of the Lords day:
neither can any thing else be inferred from that later phrase which Athanasius
uses. When Subjects do openly profess that they with all honor do honor
their own Kings and Magistrates, shall not I therefore conclude, that they are
not obliged by Divine authority to this duty? No verily: but the Subjects
perform this to their Princes, with a most ready will, because by Divine Law
and authority they are bound to perform this duty: So Christians honor the
Lords day, because the Divine institution of this Festival by Christ (which
Athanasius makes mention of in the same place) requires this by right of them.

Chrysostom Hom. in Genesis
in the often forecited place, acknowledges God to be the author of
instituting one day in the week to be set apart for spiritual work.

When Eus. orat. de laudibus constant. circa finem.
Eusebius gathers diverse arguments to demonstrate the Divine power of Christ
above all the Heroes of the Heathens; amongst the rest he adds this. Who, says
he, (meaning what God of the Heathen, or Heroes) has prescribed to all the
inhabitants of the whole world, whether they be on land or sea, that meeting
weekly on one day, they should celebrate the Lords Festival, and ordain, that
as they fed their bodies with food, so they should refresh their Souls with
divine instructions? Therefore, in Eusebius's judgment, the solemnity of this
day is ascribed to Christ's institution. And Constit. 54.
Leo acknowledges this solemnity to be received from the Holy Ghost, and
Apostles ordained by him.

Augustine Decivit. Dei, l. 22. c. 30.
confesses, that the Lords day was consecrated by Christ's Resurrection; where
he intimates, that the Church did not only take occasion from the Resurrection
of Christ, to celebrate this solemnity on that day, but that the very
Resurrection of Christ did administer it unto Christians: and if the
Resurrection of Christ has consecrated the Lords day, (which he confesses as
well in this place, as elsewhere, Sermon. 15. de verbis Apostoli) then Christ and
no other, is to be reputed for the author of its institution: for his
Resurrection has consecrated that day, Aug. Ep. ^ 19. c. 13.
and since that time he began to have his festival.

Moreover, if Augustine had not believed that God was the author of this
Festival, by what right could he have derided Urbicus, speaking after this
manner, as if there were one Lord of the Sabbath, and another of the Lords day?
Ep. 86.
if he had not esteemed him for the author of the Lords day, who was author of
the Sabbath; the contrary whereof, he thought Urbicus judged, Augustine would
never have blamed him for that: which yet the premises do testify he did, And
he that shall look over that Epistle, shall see that he in round words does
acknowledge, that there is one Lord of the Sabbath and Lords day. page 389. He
adds, It was made the Lords Day through Christ. page 383. And while that
Learned Father renders a reason why it is called the Lords day, quast. ex
utr^que mix^. cap. 106.
he assigns this, because, says he, the Lord made it. And how, since he is the
author of all days, yet may be said especially to make that, we have before,
chap. 4. out of Augustine himself explained. And after Augustine the Fathers in
Can. 13.
Council. Forojubensi, have also explained this, The Lord has sanctified it by
the glorious Resurrection of Jesus Christ.

What needs more? It Is enough to point at briefly the Divine institution of
this day, and these things manifest enough do suffice in a matter smelling of
Piety. Therefore as Basil the Great sometime concluded his Sermon of the
perpetual virginity of the blessed Virgin, Hom. de human. Chr. gener.
These reasons, says he, we think are sufficient, because Christian ears
cannot endure the contrary: so also, we being content with these testimonies,
(which, although few in number, are yet, we trust, of great authority with
equal estimators of things) we will add no more. Diverse badges of the Lords day.
And though many badges of this day have thus far been observed, as that Christ
rose again on that day, Luke 24. 6. on that oftener than once he appeared to
his Disciples, Joh. 20. 19, 26. on that day the Apostles taught, and
administered the Sacraments. Act. 20. 7. on that day John received a Divine
Revelation, Rev. 1. 10. I could also reckon up others, mentioned by diverse, Leo
Ep. 81. ^. 1.
as on this day the world received its beginning, on this, by the Resurrection
of Christ, both death received its destruction, and life its beginning; on this
the Apostles took up thetrumpet of the Gospel, to preach to all nations; on
this, lastly, the Holy Ghost came down from the Lord on the Apostles. More
badges are also extant in Austin of the Lords Day. Sermon. 154. de Tempore. And
others relate, that other Miracles were done on that day. These are indeed
great badges; but because amongst certain, some of these are reckoned for
uncertain, they are not proper enough in their judgment to demonstrate the
truth: only whereas at every perfect period of time the very Heathens do
testify, that certain festival days were to be celebrated, for some eminent
benefits of God conserred upon us, and when any thing eminent was ordained of
God, it was done in honor of this day, (the reason of whose observation arises
not from the foresaid prerogatives, but is founded in the authority of God the
institutor.) I am more easily induced to believe with the ancients, its
solemnity was instituted of God.

Here I could, out of the Fathers, tell you, the punishments of some that
violated the solemnity of the Lords Day. In Council. Parisiensi so we read; Many
Can. 50.
of us, by the sight of our own country men, and many of us by the relation of
others, have been informed, that certain men exercising on this day their rural
works, have been slain with Lightning, others punished with contraction of
their limbs, others having their bodies and bones also consumed in an instant
by visible fire* and on a sudden resolved into ashes, have died in great
torment; as many other terrible judgments have been, and to this day are; by
which it is declared, that God is offended at the dishonor of so great a day.
These tremendous judgments of God do show, that God, the avenger of all sin, is
angry, (as the Fathers speak) at the impious violators of this solemnity. But
if the holy festival of the Lords Day were not Gods own ordinance, his severe
anger would not be so hot upon those that are guilty of the violation thereof.

We therefore of right do esteem the Lords Day above other days, and that by
reason of its solemnity: because it was by a positive determination of Christ
by the Apostles set apart from other days in the week, that it might supply the
room of the ancient Sabbath; that it might preserve Religion, and the external
Worship of God, both public, lest the disorderly congregating of the people,
Hier. in Gal.
should diminish their faith in Christ: and also private, that all might be
obliged to attend meditations, and pious exercises on a certain stated day;
which otherwise would seldom or never be done by men, attending on the world
rather than God: therefore is the Lords day ordained, that they being at
liberty from worldly things, might give up themselves wholly to Divine matters.

Lastly, It only remains, that this The Church cannot change the Lords day to
another.
question may sufficiently be satisfied, Whether it be in the Churches power to
abrogate the Lords Day, and substitute another in its room? Surely he that
says, that so innocent a custom, so long received of the Church, and that
through authority of God by the Apostles, caught not to be troubled with a
change, seems to be in the right: unless any think, that now greater authority
does reside in the Church, than the Apostles were endued with: wherewith it
being endued, it can change those things which were ordained of the Apostles:
or unless some greater occasion than the Resurrection of Christ do occurr, than
which, the world never saw a greater miracle. And Chrysostom calls the Lords
day, or the first day of the week, (Hom. 2. Tom. 6.) because of Christ's
Resurrection, the birth day of the whole humane nature. Lastly, if the custom
of the Church, (from which arguments are not once fetched by the Apostle, as 1
Cor. 11. 26.) grounded on the word of God, be of any right amongst Christians:
I see not why the Lords Festival, celebrared first by them of Jerusalem,
secondly, by them of Troas, thirdly, by the Galatians and Corinthians,
fourthly, by them of the Isles, Rev. 1. fifthly, by the Greeks and Latins, and
lastly, by the whole Churh through the world, professing Christ's name; I say,
why this innocent custom (which is attended with no incommodity, but much
profit) happily continued from the very Apostles age hitherto, should not be by
us derived to our posterity?

Whilst Julius blames the preposterous irruption of Georgius the Arrian into
the Bishopric of Athanasius, he uses this argument, It is not fitting, that
this new manner Athan. Apol. 2.
of canons should be brought into the Church: for where is there such an
Ecclesiastical Canon, or such an Apostolical tradition? so we say here, It is
by no means fitting, that a new custom should be introduced against an
innocent order, so long received by the Church: which is neither supported by
the Canons of the Church, or tradition received from the Apostles. None in this
found mind can grant, that things ordained by the Apostles, can be changed of
the Church. I confess, all the ordinances of the Apostles were not of the same
kind: for some of them pertained to Doctrine, some to rites, as Wallaeus
observes, chap. 7. those are perpetual, neither any ways obnoxious to change:
he must be anathematized, that preaches any other Gospel than what we have
received from the Apostles, Gal. 1. 8. but these which respect the rites or
circumstances of Divine worship, are of a double nature: for either their
causes were singular, and such as perpetually should not have place in the
Church: therefore these ordinances were to be varied, because when the cause
was taken away, the ordinances themselves ceased: but other ordinances
respecting rites, were not to be changed, whose occasions perpetually continued
in the Church; such was the laying on of hands in the ordinations of Ministers:
and therefore, when the causes of ordinances made by the Apostles, are changed,
the ordinations themselves are to be changed, but while the cause remains, the
ordinances also remain unmoved. Which things being considered, it is easy to
see, that the ordinance about the Lords day is not to be varied: because no
greater cause than what it is bottomed on, can ever occurr, for whose sake it
should be changed: neither has the Church ever thus far since the Apostles
age, once attempted this. Therefore the foresaid question is, superfluous, that
I may say no worse, and altogether unworthy a farther answer; especially,
whenas we know, that many privileges necessary for a Church to be founded,
were granted by God to the Apostles, which were not derived from them to the
Doctors of the Church founded: for they were personal, and could not lawfully
be challenged by others: which is shown more at large in the seventh chapter.

CHAP. XI.
In what things the sanctification of the Lords day does consist. Where about
resting from gainful labors, which the Fathers carefully cautioned against,
that they should not be used on that day. A place of Chrysostom, Gregory, and
the Council of Laodicea, is explained: also a Canon of the Council of Matiscon.

WE have seen by the judgment of the Fathers, that the Lords Day is to be
sanctified, and that by Divine authority. Now it remains, (which we undertook
in the third place to be proved) to find out in what the solemn observation
thereof consists. The Fathers think, that to Christians the Lords day
succeeded in place of the old Sabbath, and therefore, as Hilary speaks, is to
be celebrated with the Prolog* in Psalmos.
festivity of the Sabbath, that is, as August. Sermon. de Temp. 251. even as the
ancients observed the Sabbath. Now it appears by the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, that the observation of the Jewish Sabbath consisted first in the
rest, and secondly, in the sanctification of this rest: and in the observation
of these things, their records will inform us, that the Lords day was
solemnized by the ancients.

As for the rest, the Church of Christ has How far we must rest from labor on
the Lords day.
used it, not as necessary of it self to the worship of God, but only as an
help thereto; without which, the worship commanded of God could not
conveniently be performed of the people For, while men are entangled in the
affairs of this world, they cannot religiously attend, as is fitting, on the
things that pertain to God, and his worship. The Sabbath was not allowed for
idleness, but that men being withdrawn from the cares of temporal things, its
rest should be spent in spirituals: as Chrisostom. Hom. 1. de Lazaro.
Athanasius of the same judgment, de Sabbat. and Circumcis. for he says, the
end of the Sabbath was the knowledge of the creation, and not idleness: that
men keeping holy that day, they might know God, who rested on that day, having
finished the work of Creation. In the third Council of Orleans. it is provided,
that men abstain from rural labor, Can. 27.
and they show the end of this abstinence, that they might go more easily to
Church to pray. Therefore, by the very dictates of nature, Macrob. Saturn. l.
2. c. 16.
the Priests affirmed, that Holy days were polluted if any work was done upon
their proclaimed and moveable Feasts. Numa Pompilius ordained, Plut. in Number.
Pom.
that always on the Priests Festivals the Cryers should go before them through
the city, who should give charge, that men should rest, and cease from their
works. He thought it was fit, that he who worshipped the Gods should be freed
from other things: and in worshipping of the Gods,* to apply the mind, as to a
thing greatly conducing to piety. Therefore the minds of men, without a
cessation from worldly things, cannot be applied in a holy devotion to Divine
Worship. Handy labor, says Cyril, Lib. 8. c. 1. in Joan.
is forbidden on a Feast day, that you may exercise your selves more entirely
in Divine matters.

The ancients thus ordained, that we must cease on a Festival day, from all
secular works, and no worldly thing is to be done on that day, which may hinder
its sanctification. Now in worldly matters men are intent either upon gain or
pleasure, but here must be a cessation from both.

First and foremost, the observation of We must rest from gainful labor.
the Lords day is not to be profaned by gainful labor: for which cause it was
provided for by the ancients, that Christians should wholly abstain from all
things whereby the body is either wearied, or the mind alienated from divine,
to humane things. Which clearly enough shows, that they were not of that
opinion, which De Civit. Dei. ^. 6. c. 11.
Austin reports Seneca sometimes was. Seneca derided the Jews, especially for
their Sabbaths, that lost the seventh part of their life time in idleness, and
did not many urgent affairs in their season. Christians were not so intent upon
their labor for profit, as not to be pulled from it, to attend Religion. They
would not give themselves up to their commodities, when the season called for
obedience. A^^^* cont. gentes l. ^.


When Hom 23. in Number.
Origin describes how a Christian ought to observe the Sabbath, he concludes,
nothing of worldly actions must be done, and he must abstain from all secular
works, as we have observed before in Chap. 10. where we cited a place, in which
there is a truly golden and pious image of the Christian Sabbath, which Origin,
divinely inspired, has happily drawn to the life, as they say, and in which
are elegantly described what things are on that day by Christians to be
followed, and what to be fled: while he teaches us, that leaving earthly works
on the Lords day, we must attend on Divine: which, that it may be done with
greater advantage, we must go to the Church, in which he exhorts us to attend
on the things of Religion: and if men shall faithfully do this, they will make
it evident to all, that they have a greater care of their hope for the future
inheritance reserved in Heaven, than of the profits of this present life.

Chrysostom Hom. 43. in 1 Cor. Tom. 5. hom. 14.
confesses, that the Lords day is free from business and labors, and has a
rest appointed for it; and elsewhere, ( Hom. against those that run to plays)
he accuses those that meddle with worldly cares on that day, although they may
pretend poverty, necessity of getting food, and other urgent occasions.

But although Chrysostom seems manifestly ^o think, that gainful labor is not
on the Lords day to be undertaken by Christians: yet some make a question,
whether, according to Chrysostom, all the day, or only so long as the public
assemblies of the Church are held, there ought to be an abstinence from
labors? especially whenas he does indulge his hearers, when they are returned
from the Church-assembly, if they shall repeat the Scriptures, and discourse of
that which they have once heard, then go to look after the things which are
necessary for this life. But I will set down the very words A place of
Chrysostom in hom. 5. ^^ Matthew. (...).
of the Father, lest I should either keep in suspense the well-minded Reader,
or seem to darken the truth. You must not, says he, when you are returned from
the Church-meeting, entangle your selves in businesses contrary to this
exercise: but returning home straightway repeat the holy Scriptures, and call*
your wife and children together to confer of those things that have been
spoken; and these things being fixed more deeply and thoroughly in their mind,
than to go and look after the things which are necessary for this life, etc. it
never came into St. Chrysostom's mind (who asserts that the Lords day should be
free from labor, and does not so much as grant any on the Lords day to labor
for getting food, or avoiding poverty) to give any liberty, that they should
freely attend any worldly affairs, which hinder piety. And he that says thus,
will do Chrysostom no wrong; but rather he who affirms, that he indulges men to
use these kind of labors on that day, (which he often finds fault with) will
fasten the lie on him. And I fear not to say this of them that so assert, that
by their crooked interpretation they do apply the words of that grave Father,
to quite another sense than Chrysostom thought of. This will be evident with a
small ado, to him that observes the cited place, and compares him with other
places that do occurr in him: in which it is Chrysostoms purpose to check them,
who though in the Church they did attentively enough hear what was said, yet
being departed, and forth with mingling themselves with their secular affairs,
do extinguish the fire of devotion, which the Word praeach'd had kindled in
them. For this evil he prescribes this remedy, that so soon as they are
returned home, they read the holy Scripture, and commune amongst themselves
about those things that were spoken: which things being deeply fixed in their
mind, then to go and look after those things that they judge necessary for this
life, they may freely for him; (as afterward Centur. Magdeb. 8. c. 6. de Cerem.
Bed^ relates; after the exercises of piety are finished, there was liberty to
take care to refresh the flesh) but to care for any other secular businesses,
than those that pertained to their sustenance, he gave them no liberty. Which
also we read was done by Gunteramnus, Baron. 588. 26. Because first the very
phrase of Chrysostom [(...)] may in a sense commodious enough be expounded of
things pertaining to life; (so Arrianus translates the words of Chrysostom,
even Trapezuntius, one of Greece approving it) for (...) does properly signify
life, to which death is opposed, or sustenance: and (...) in its native
signification, does plainly signify any thing belonging to sustain life, and
getting sustenance, or any thing for the use of this life; whence Strom. 1. 7.
Clem. Alexand. (...), is administering necessaries for this life: also in the
same man it occurrs, (...). Page 500.
all necessity pertaining to life. But amongst Divines (as Stephanus observes)
when it is spoken of a man, then (...) is secular, or one that is addicted to
the affairs of this secular life. And so it often occurrs in Chrysostom, as
Hom. 9. in Col. (...), etc. and Hom. 3. de Lazaro, etc. In the same sense, in
Justin Martyr, (...) Resp. ad qu. 19.
is opposed (...), where he that lives in common life, is distinguished from
him that lives in solitariness, [a Monk.] Therefore, according to the native
signification of Chrysostoms words, by (...) are denoted things that pertain to
life and sustenance: from the sober use whereof, no Christian is debarred on
the Lords day.

How little those things conduce to the defense of secular businesses being
undertaken on that day, they know who look into Chrysostom. We will omit any
disputation about the propriety and use of the word, because it pertains to the
Grammarian, and ought to be left to others: we will produce the rest, which
Chrysostom himself helps us to.

Secondly, we entreat the Reader to consider that Chrysostom. in the aforesaid place
is displeased with those that after they are returned from the Church-meeting,
are entangled in businesses which are contrary to the exercise (as he speaks)
which is held in the Church-assembly. Surely, if in Chrysostoms judgment
worldly matters might safely be meddled with on the Lords day, he would never
have reproved those that looked after them: which yet his very words show that
he sharply did.

Thirdly, he thinks it is too much, yea, altogether extreme indevotion, to
spend five or 6 days in wordly matters, and not to employ one in spirituals. He
that weighs this, will easily grant, that Chrysostom would never have any part
of that day consecrated to affairs that smell not of piety. And he that abuses
the authority of this holy Father, to palliate the using of labor on that day,
although I scruple to accuse him of too much indevotion, yet I am troubled that
he has no more religious a care of the Lords festival.

Fourthly, this he lays as a law upon his Ubi supra.
Auditors in the same place, that they bestow that only day of the whole week,
on which they meet to hear, all of it in the meditation of those things that
are delivered. He that requires that the rest of the day, which remains
after hearing the Word in the public Church meetings, should be spent about
meditation and conference of the things they have heard, will allow no liberty
after the aforesaid meetings are ended, to dispatch worldly affairs, by which
pious meditation may be hindered. If therefore, Chrysostom. being judge, no other
exercises be to be meddled with on the Lords day out of the Church-assembly,
which are contrary to the duties of piety, performed in those assemblies: if by
his grave judgment it be thought a very irreligious thing not to spend one
whole day in the exercises of piety; yea, if he earnestly require it from his
Auditors, that they consecrate that whole day to their devotion; of all which
he tells us his judgment in these very words, then surely it was far from
Chrysostoms mind, to give liberty for ordinary labors on the Lords Day.
Lastly, if his words, which make mention of (...), be stretched to that sense,
(because sometimes in Chrysostom (...) is a secular person) Chrysostom. did that
which Gregory the Great in an other sense did, whom the custom of the Laityes
seasting on the Lords day usually vexed, yet thought they were not to be
punished by law, lest that being made against them, they should become worse;
and Distinct. 5. cap denique
therefore to avoid the danger of schism, left them to themselves, so that
what he approved not, being constrained through the necessity of the time, he
permitted; So here, whatever Chrysostom indulged the people in, he did it
against his will, for their sakes, whose minds were not so easily called back
from earthly things; to whom yielding in some things, he did gradually bring
them on to higher exercises of piety; and indulged them that, which he did not
approve, lest any thing worse should happen, he, as it were unwilling, willed
it. But as for his part, he judged, that a whole day should be consecrated to
the exercises of Religion, any part whareof, as we have seen, he would not have
employed in worldly affairs. And thus we have seen St. Chrysostom vindicating
himself from some men's foolish gloss: nor is there any body, whose senses
either stupour or phlegmatickness has not dulled, which will think otherwise.

Origin also takes it ill, that some do but assign Hom. 2. in Number.
an hour or two of the whole day to God, and come to prayer in the Church,
while they spend the rest of the day about the world and their belly: but if
Christians were at liberty when their assemblies are ended, to betake
themselves to their worldly occasions, then this reproof of his had been
unjust; against which they might truly answer, that the custom of the Church
was to define the sanctification of the day within the terms of two or three
hours.

Gregory the Great's Ep. lib. 11. c. 3.
judgment is also for The place of Gregory weighed.
ceasing from earthly labor, on the Lords day. Indeed in the beginning of that
Epistle, he tells us, that Antichrist will make both the Sabbath and Lords day
to be kept free from all labor. But lest any one should unwarily deceive
himself, by not well considering the phrase, as if Gregory had judged that
Antichrist would forbid labor on the Lords day, it is to be noted, that he
intimates this, that Antichrist will have an equal regard of the Sabbath, as of
the Lords day, because, as Gregory thinks, Antichrist would call back the
observation of the Sabbath; and directs the style of the former part of his
Epistle against those that forbid the working of any thing on the Sabbath day.
Nor can the sense of those words of his be otherwise expounded, who thought
that labor was to be undertaken on the Sabbath, from which yet we ought to
abstain on the Lords day; but i^ never came into Gregory's mind, to reckon rest
from labor on the Lords day, for an interdiction of Antichrist, since Gregory
himself does plainly condemn labor undertaken on that day.

Augustine, Sermon. de Temp. 251.
It is therefore called the Lords day, that we abstaining on it from earthly
works, and worldly pleasures, should only attend on Divine worship; giving
honor and reverence to this day, for the hope of our resurrection, which we
have in it. Augustine, or whoever was the author of that Sermon, does plainly
prohibit Christians attending their labors on that day, and thinks it is to be
honored with Divine Worship: for the day which is called the Lords day, is by
right to be dedicated to the Lord.

Constantine the Great, about the year 300, Eus. de vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 10.
ordained, that all the Subjects of the Roman Empire should on those days
called by our Saviors name, (...), i. e. rest from all work. So Sozomen, lib.
1. cap. 8.

Diverse passages occurr amongst the ancients, which show, that no earthly
labor for the sake of gain, is to be undertaken on that day; which would be
needless to run over severally, since the premises demonstrate the truth to
all, that reject it not.

But lest any should be deceived in Can. The sense of 29 Can. of the Counc. of
Laodicea considered.
29. of the Council of Laodicea, held before Constantines time, I will add
something to illustrate the true meaning thereof. In which Christians are
commanded (...). i. e. that honoring the Lords day, they should rest (if they
can) as Christians. By which exception ( if they can) Zonaras, on Can. 29.
Conc. Laodic. thinks, that labor on the Lords day was prohibited all
Christians, (...), except the Husbandmans works, to whom the civil Law grants
an indulgence. Whose opinion the patrons of laboring on that day do follow;
But in this doubtless Zonaras derives them, and they others, who adhere to his
gloss.

For first, the very words of the Canon show, that Christians, as Christians,
ought on that day (...), to rest: whence it appears, that labor on the Lords
day is unlawful to Christians. Now the exception which the Canon mentions
((...)) if they can, ought rather to be understood with a respect had to the
time in which the Council was gathered, than to performing (namely of harvest)
labors. For the Council was assembled before Constantine the Great entered upon
the Empire, at what time the inseriour sort of Christians were compelled by
their heathen Lords, to whom they were subject, and not of their own minds, to
perform worldly works on that day, as on others: as a long time after that
Council was congregated, the Christians were forced to sit and see the plays:
for remedy whereof, the Africans Carthag. Council. Can. 67. ap. Zonar.
ordain, (...), that no Christian should be forced to those plays. For their
sakes therefore, who were forced to labor by others, was that exception added
by the Laodicean Fathers: not that labors used on that day were approved by
them, but because of those that were in bondage to others, and by their severe
authority or impetuousness, compelled to undergo them on the Lords days; I
say, for the comfort of these, they put in this exception, if any contrary to
their minds were forced by others to do so. Although diverse that were stronger
in the faith, rather died for it, than that they would any ways violate the
Lords day: as formerly we heard out of Baronius, under the reign of Dioclesian.
And that this, which we have brought, is the genuine sense of the Laodicean
Canon, diverse authorities of Fathers before the Council of Laodicea (wherein
Christians are prohibited earthly labors) do show: neither can there from
thence any in this our age (in which all, God be thanked, have given up their
name to Christ) take a pretense to defend the using of worldly labor on the
Lords day, since now it is the fashion as well of Masters, as servants, to rest
from their labors on that day.

And secondly, that Civil Law, on whose authority Zonaras exposition depends,
was made by Constantine (of which briefly anon) wherein the country men had
liberty freely to attend their country labors on the Lords day. Now the
Laodicean Fathers being gathered before the first Council of Nice, could have
no respect unto a law made some time after the meeting of their Council: but
are to be understood, as I said, according to the condition of that age, in
which the Christians, although they of themselves rested from labors, were by
others compelled, that had not yet embraced the Christian faith, to undergo
them.

In the second Council of Matiscon, Can. 1. Conc. Matisc. 2. Can. 1. is
explained.
about the year 588. it is ordained, that none give themselves to labors, as
on private days, as they speak; for this is in a rash manner to give up the
Lords day to contempt. But the words of the Canon come a little more narrowly
to be examined, lest, at the first sight, the Reader be imposed upon through
some men's perverse interpretation of them.

First, the Fathers ordain, that if any have a Church near him, that he betake
himself thither: These words are not so to be expounded, as if none were bound
to be present at Church-meetings, but those that had neighboring Churches at
hand, from which, they that lived farther off, might at their pleasure be
absent. He that will attentively read the beginning of that Canon, will not
say, that this was the sense of the Bishops in that Council: who had it put
upon them by King Guntheramnus's command, that by all means they could, they
look to, that the Christian people should not in a rash manner give up the
Lords day to contempt: and therefore the Bishops admonished all Christians in
this matter, from which admonition they neither exempt Lawyers nor Country
men, nor the Clergy, or Monks, as the words of the Canon do show. And when
Guntheramnus Gunt. Ep. ad Episc. p. 704.
required it of them, that the body of all the people should assemble on that
day, to exercise their devotion, he decrees, that those who set at naught this
admonition, should by right be corrected with canonical severity, or the
punishment of the Law. If therefore he, by his own authority, according to the
vigor of the Bishops decree, allowed none a liberty to be absent from Church
assemblies, none can interpret the aforesaid words of the Canon, as if only
those that are near to Churches, were bound to be present at them; since all,
as well near as far off, are bound by one and the same law: when therefore they
say, if any have a Church near him, it is the same with, Let all go to the
Church: as afterward in Council. Foroju. Can. 13.

Secondly, Let none wonder, that the Matiscon Fathers, reciting the exercises
of the L. Day, in that Canon, do there only make mention of Prayers and Hymns,
as if there were no other exercises of piety, besides Prayers and singing of
Psalms, to attend on that day: for afterward, in the same Council, they have
ordained something of the Sacraments, Can. 6. And Guntheramnus does faithfully
charge his Bishops, that by frequent preaching they study to amend the people,
by Gods providence committed to their charge. Therefore they declare, that no
offices of piety be pretermitted on that day. Nor do they define those things
only for the exercises of Hymns or Prayers, but peradventure they mention hymns
and prayers, because they direct the Canon to the people, whose part it was, to
attend these offices, and celebrate the same, and not to preach the Word.

Thirdly, The Fathers in the same place, say, The Lord does not require of us
to celebrate the Lords day by corporal abstinence; Nor are these words so to be
taken, as if we were not by virtue of a Divine precept, obliged to rest from
worldly affairs, and that vacation from worldly labors on that day were not a
Divine, but humane ordinance. For the Fathers are intent on this, to teach
them, that corporal abstinence, as they speak, is not on the Lords day only
required of us, but that God also seeks for that obedience, through which
treading under foot all earthly actions, he may in his mercy advance us to
Heaven. In that phrase therefore, there is an Ellipsis, as appears from the
premises, which the Holy Ghost often uses in both the Testaments. As Genesis 32.
28. Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel; that is, thou shall not
only be called Jacob, but also Israel. 1. Sam. 8. 7. They have not despised
thee, but me; that is, not only thee. 1 Cor. 1. 17. Christ sent me not to
baptize, but to preach the Gospel; that is, he was not only, or chiefly intent
on baptizing those that had embraced the Christian faith. So here, they grant,
that God requires the body to rest from labor, but they affirm, that he does
not only require that: and they certify all, if they disesteem their wholesome
counsel, that they should be punished of God; yet no vengeance of God would
pursue them, where they transgressed a command prescribed of him. It appears
therefore, from the punishment, with which, according to these Fathers, the
violation of this rest is attended by God, that God requires of all to rest on
the Lords day: otherwise his anger would not wax hot against those that pollute
the holiness of this Festival, by worldly labors, or slothful idleness. And
now these things do evidently enough show, that gainful labor is to be avoided
on the Lords day.

CHAP. XII.
How far forth on the Lords day we may attend labors, namely of necessity, and
piety: Country men are bound to sanctify the Lords day: the indulgence granted
to Country men by Constantine the Great is examined, and revoked: the fact of
Paula, and practice of the Coenobita [or Monasticks] in Hierom, is weighed:
Also the sense of a Canon in the Council of Orleans. Manumissions, and certain
transactions lawful on the Lords Day.

ALthough the Ancients thought that labor tending to gain, was on the Lords
day by no means to be undertaken of Christians: yet do they not require a
cessation from all labor generally; but according to the Scriptures, do permit
that, which men moved by necessity do undertake. Mat. 12. 11. where Christ
teaches us, that a sheep which is on the Sabbath day fallen into a pit, may
lawfully be laid hold on, lift up, and drawn out: for no laws are appointed to
necessity, which defends whatever it enforces.

It is ordained in the Council of Narbo, that every man, as well freeborn, as
servant, Goth, Roman, Syrian, Greek, or Jew, should do no work on the Lords
day, nor yoke oxen, except there be a necessity [murando] for walling
[otherwise in metendo] for fetching in corn. Can. 4. They therefore allow
labor undertaken for necessity. Of which nature there are diverse reserved
cases, of which frequent mention is made in the Decretals. In which number, is
the taking of Fishes, which, unless they be then taken, cannot be taken at
another time. This appears in the catching of Herrings, which do appear
seldom, or but upon certain days, to catch which (although some think it no
case of present necessity) there is liberty granted whenever they appear.
Decret. Greg. l. 2. de feriis, Tit. 9. cap. licet. and Gregorius Ep. l. 11.
cap. 3. Although he denies that the body is to be washed on the Lords day, out
of luxury of mind, or for pleasuresake, yet he condemns it not, necessity so
requiring: whereby it appears, that under the name of baths, all things done
out of necessity to the body are allowed.

Neither does any one find fault with that bour that is bestowed in the
exercises of piety: as being that which directly tends to the worship and glory
of God, and does promote Maetth. 12. 5.
it. Of ancient time says Tertullian, the law of the Sabbath forbad humane
labors, not divine Ad ^^* ^. 2. c. 21.
The Heathens allowed a liberty to labor about both these. Macrob. Saturn. l.
1. c. 16. in whose judgment, works undertaken for religious devotion sake, or
any necessity, were lawful amongst them, even on a Festival day.

In another case also, there is by some a certain indulging of labor yielded.
By Constantine the Great the Country men were permitted to attend on the
tilling their ground on that day: But I will set down the words of that
indulgence. Cod. li. 3. Tit. 12. de feriis, leg. 3. ^
Let all Judges and people in cities, and all crafts-men rest upon the
honorable Sunday. Yet let those that live in the country, freely, and at
their liberty, serve husbandry: because it frequently falls out, that on
another day the corn and vines cannot so conveniently be committed to the
furrows; and so by missing of that advantage, the profit yielded by the
heavenly providence perish.

Now if any one, because of that indulgence Country men are bound to sanctify
the Lords Day.
granted to to country men, to work on the Lords day, think, that they are not
at all obliged to sanctify this solemnity; especially whereas the Fathers of
the Church about the year 305. in 1 Eliber. Council. appointing a Canon about
celebrating the Lords day, do only make mention of those that live in Cities,
when they say, Can. 21.
If any dwelling in the Cities shall not for three Lords days come to the
Church, let him abstain for a while, that he may be thought as one rebuked. If,
I say, any will interpret these words so, as if attending this Festivals
solemnity, belonged only to Citizens, and that Country men were left at
liberty on that, to bestow their labor in their trades and affairs, setting
aside all care of Religion: as if the Lords day were like those Holy days
which among the Romans were proper to some Families, which they observed
according to the use of their household celebrity: or like those Feriae
Imperativae, Macrob. Saturn. l. 1. c. 16.
which the Consuls or Praetors proclaimed by the freedom of their power: as if
it were for Princes and Magistrates to determine by their power to whom it
belongs to celebrate the Lords day: they that so think, neither do reach the
sense of the Law made by Constantine, nor of the Eliberitan Canon: because a
long while before Constantine of blessed memory, by the grace of God came to
the Empire, there was meeting of all in the same place, on the Sunday, whether
they lived in City or Country, as Just. Martyr witnesses, Ap. 2. And Hom. 29.
in Number.
Origin persuades all, that on the Christian Sabbath, they would come to
Church, and there hearken to holy Lectures and Treatises. These are the duties
which Christians are to attend, from which none, no not Country men are
exempted; but as well they in the Country, as they in City, were obliged to be
present at Churchassemblies. Which things being considered, I see not to what
purpose any should conclude out of the Elib. Council. that they which live in
the Country are not to attend on the Lords Festival: although in the Canon
there be express mention of those who live in Cities: because the Bishops and
Presbyters (to whom it belonged to go before the other members of the Church in
celebrating the Lords day) did dwell in the Cities; and in that age, there was
not every where a supply of them afforded for the Villages: therefore the
Fathers of that Synod, by name did express these, who were supplied with them
that labored in the Word. And a long time after the Eliberitan Council was
gathered, diverse Villages were not furnished with Churches: witness Chrysostom,
Hom. 18. in Act.

Besides, when it is plain, that the unlearned, and unbelievers were admitted
into the Church-assembly in the Apostles days, 1 Cor. 14. 23. why should not
the Country men, after the Apostles death, be bound to be present at the
assemblies of the Church, as if they who had bestowed their pains in tilling
the earth, had forthwith forsworn their barbarity? And because they who live in
the Country, are as well Members of Christ as Citizens; why should not Christ
impart his communion as well to these as those in the exercises of Religion, on
the Lords days? It is expressly commanded in l. 8. c. 33.
the Constitutions which they call the Apostles, that on the Lords day servants
attend in the Church to hear the Doctrine of Religion. And l. 7. c. 19.
Sozomen tells us, that amongst the Arabians and Cyprians he found ordained
Bishops in Villages. If at that time Bishops were set over some Villages, then
certes, they who inhabited them were instructed by the Bishops in the Doctrine
of Christ, on all, especially the Lords days, as the custom of the Church
was. De praepar. Evan. l. 1. c. 13.
Eusebius also confesses, that men and women, old men and children, bond and
free, noble and ignoble, learned, and unlearned, did almost daily assemble
together in every place, wherever the men lived, to receive the discipline of
Christ, from the rising of the Sun to the setting thereof. If all men of
whatever condition or quality, were daily intent upon the Doctrine of Christ,
then they that lived in the Country did not refuse it on the Lords day. Yea,
the same Author, Orat. de laud. Constable.
as formerly we have seen, affirms, that Christ has prescribed all the
inhabitants of the world, whether at land or sea, to celebrate the Lords day.
Eusebius therefore acknowledges not that it is only for Noble men, and others of
great name, to be present at Church Assemblies, from which, servants, and those
of inferior condition, should be excluded; but says, that the Lord himself
has otherwise commanded. Also in Theodoret Hist. l. 5. c. 17.
that pious Emperor Theodosius witnesses, that the doors into the holy Temple
are open for servants and beggars: and therefore in this age, they were present
with other Christians in the Church-assembly, and were not excluded from the
same.

But let us return to examine that indulgence The indulgence granted by
Constantine the Great, is examined,
granted by the Emperor Constantine to Country men, for working their labors
on the Lords day. Where first, we may make a question, with the learned Divine,
Mr. S. A. Whether any such was ever granted of him for the country men's sakes
or no? since Eusebius (who was Constantius's contemporary, and who well enough
knew all things that the Emperor did) speaking of the Law he made about
observing the Lords day, makes no mention of this indulgence, Eusebius. de vita
Constantin. l. 4. c. 18. but only relates, how the Emperor commanded that all
should rest from their works. In the same manner, Sozomen recites the same law,
although lib. 1. c. 18. and in both there be a deep silence about excepting
country labors. Which things being considered, it may justly be doubted,
whether ever such an indulgence were granted by that Emperor of blessed
memory: But come on: and granting this indulgence for the authority of the Book
relating it, let us seek out the reason and sense thereof. This was the true
reason of that liberty, if there was any granted: Because Constantine subjected
all the subjects of the Roman Empire, (whether they had embraced the Christian
faith, or had not yet tasted it) to the law of observing the Lords day; De vita
Constable. l. 4. c. 19.
witness Eusebius. Which, though it could be known by no other argument, might
be judged of by this, that he calls not that day in the Church manner (as An.
321. n. 12.
Baronius) The Lords day, but by the Heathen manner, Sunday. Thence, I say, may
it be gathered, that the same Law was not prescribed by him to Christians only,
but Heathens also, for whose sake he uses an appellation peculiar to them.
Since therefore the Gentiles also were to rest from their labors, by virtue of
the Law made by ^stantine; therefore he granted them a liberty to look after
their country labors. Whereas he knew that those who were not turned
Christians, could not easily be brought in to be bound by the Christians laws,
he yielded something for these men's sakes: and Constantine was sufficiently
hated by them, for neglecting their idolatry: and therefore by little and
little he studied to draw them to the true worship of God; as Eusebius, ubi
supra.

Moreover, the liberty of meddling with country labors on the Lords day, was
granted to country men only in case of necessity, which thing the very words
of the indulgence do declare: lest through occasion of a moment, the profit
yielded by the heavenly providence perish: by the occasion of one moment, the
profit of fruits might perish; therefore, in gathering in the fruits, sometimes
a regard of a moment may be had; no labors are therefore permitted, but to
undergo which, they were induced by a certain necessity, lest the fruits should
perish; in which case also we have observed worldly labor is permitted.

That exception therefore of Constantine, This indulgence revoked.
cannot be brought to patronize labor used upon no necessity: because he
indulged this liberty for the sake of the Heathen only, whom he with all lenity
studied as far as he could to persuade them to embrace the Christian faith, and
in case of necessity: which being afterward continued a while, Leo declares
void, by a new law set forth to the contrary, and calls that indulgence a
decree differing from the Apostles.

But because Leo does very aptly answer the reason of this indulgence assigned
by Constantine, I will set down his very words for the Readers sake. Because,
says he, it is apparent that another law does contradict that law which
commands all to reverence the day of the Lords Resurrection, by a cessation
from labors, which determines, that all generally are not prohibited working,
and others have a liberty to work, (for it says, Let all Judges, etc. as above
in the Law of Constantine) the cause of which profaning that day is grounded on
no reason; (for although the preservation of fruits may be pretended, yet that
is of no weight, and in very deed is foolish: since not the diligence of
husbandry, but the virtue of the Sun, when it seems good to the bestower of
fruits, does afford the abundance of fruits;) because, I say, such a law is
come forth, as vilisies the Lords worship, and is a decree differing from those
that by the Holy Ghost have gotten the victory against all their adversaries;
we ordain also, which seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and the Apostles
instituted of him, that all persons cease from labor that day, whereon our
innocence was restored (he speaks of the Lords day) and let neither husbandmen,
nor any others, go about any unlawful work on that day. For if they who
observed but a certain shadow and figure, did so greatly reverence the Sabbath
day, that they wholly abstained from all labor; how is it not reasonable for
those who honor the light of grace, and the truth it self, to reverence that
day, which is of God enriched with honor, and on which deliverance from
shameful destruction was wrought for us? Thus Leo, Novel. 54. Leon. And so
(according to that common Proverb, The later day is scholar to the former) what
by too much facility, which suited not with the Lords solemnity, was formerly
granted by them that followed, who saw the inconvenience of the former liberty,
was afterward amended.

In diverse Councils also it was ordained, that no rural labors should be
exercised on that day: as about the year 413. in one An. 413.
and the same year, all servile and rural labors, and markets are forbidden,
Council. Aceratensi 14. Can. 16. in Turonensi, Can. 40. in Moguntino, Can. 37.
in Rhemensi, Can. 35. and in Conc. Aurelianensi, 3. where they An. 540.
think fit to determine of rural work, that is, concerning husbandry, or the
vineyard, or pruning, or reaping, winnowing, or cutting hedge, that coming to
the Church, they moght more easily attend upon prayer. Can. 27. Also in Conc.
Narbonensi, cap. 4. it is ordained, An. 589.
that they should not yoke oxen. In Council. Antisiodorensi, Can. 16. It is not
lawful to An. 590.
yoke oxen on the Lords day, or to exercise other labors. Also in Council.
Calibonensi, An. 664.
Can. 18. We define that none at all presume to work any rural labors on the
Lords day; that is, to plow, to reap, make sale, or any thing that pertains to
husbandry.

But although these things do very abundantly Paula her fact in Hierom is
examined.
show, that on the Lords days we are not to employ our work for gainful
labor, since as well they were to be punished by the supreme authority of the
Prince, as by the censure of the Church, who did the contrary: yet there are
some, who (having no respect either to the worship of God, or to the promoting
men's salvation) do affirm, that Christians may on the Lords day safely attend
any labors, when the duties of the public service are ended: to establish
which opinion, they first wrest the authority of Hierom, and them of the third
Council of Orleans. Hierom. in Epitaphio Paulae ad Eustochium, tells us, that
the women returning from the Church, on the Lords day, with Paula, were busy
about their task, and either made clothes for themselves or others. In the
Council of Orleans they determine, that on Can. 27.
the Lords day that to be lawful, which was lawful before to be done: only
rural labors excepted. Hence some gather, that men are to cease from their
labors no lo^^^r on the Lords days, than while Make Prayer.
collectam faciunt, (as Hierom there speaks.)

But first let the Reader well weigh, whether Hierom in that place may seem to
speak of women's labor, which they bestowed about their works on other than the
Lords days, and whether revertentes ab Ecclesia, in him, be the same as if he
had said, when they are not present at Church, they are busy at work. Nor does
this sense of Hierom's words want reason* especially because Hierom says, they
went only to the Church on the Lords day. And in another place, Hierom Hier. in
Tes. 50.
contends, that on the Sabbath (he speaks to those whom Christ had made free,
not the Jews) men should only do those things which pertain to the salvation of
the soul. Now if those women had on that day plied their labors, they would
have done somewhat that had not pertained to the souls salvation: which, by
Hierom's judgment, they should not have done. And of others Hierom speaks, who
on the Lords days did only attend on Prayer and reading. Epist. ad Eustochium
de custodia virginit. But Hierom says not this, as if on the Lords day to
attend the duties of piety, had been only appropriated to the They that lived
in a Monastery together.
Coenobitae, (of whom he speaks: and other Christians on that day had employed
their work o^^^daily labors, from which the Coenobitae ceased: No, by no
means. But the Holy Father does distinguish the works undertaken by the
Coenobitae, on the Lords day, from others which they undertook on the other
days of the week: on which they fell about stated works, (as he speaks) and
those being ended, they attended on Prayer, and reading also: which thing they
also did every day when they had ended their labors: but on the Lords day they
were intent on nothing else but the duties of piety.

Secondly, If it should be granted, that those women did attend their ordinary
works on the Lords day, it was proper to them only: and then what we must
think of that fact appears out of St. Cyprian; who, Epst. 63.
while he affirms that the Aquarians did bottom on no author or will of Christ,
insinuates this Doctrine to us, namely, that the custom of some men is not to
be followed, unless first we enquire whom they followed: whose grave authority
we may very fitly accommodate to the aforesaid women. We are to consider not
only what those women did, but upon what authority they did it. If they
attended on the Lords day their daily works and labors, they were invited
thereunto neither by the authorities of Christ, nor his holy Apostles, nor the
lawful practice of the Church (which restrained Christians from those works.)
And I believe no body of a sound mind will impose as a law on other men's
shoulders, a certain singular custom, confirmed by no law, or authority, but
contrary to the general practice of the whole Church: especially when Hierom
himself, and other grave Fathers do conclude that nothing but the works of
piety, or of some emergent necessity is to be done on that day, as formerly
from their writings has been observed. We do with St. Austin, commend Epist.
ad^ Casulanum*
a custom, which is known to usurp nothing against the Catholic faith.

Thirdly, Charles the Great in his Constitutions Cent. 8. c. 6. de moribus
Christianorum*
ordains, that on the Lords day women sow not their clothes. Now we prefer
justly the religious ordinance of a pious Emperor, depending upon various
authorities of Ecclesiastical Canons, to a custom of women, confirmed by no
antiquity.

Lastly, I Will only add this, What if those silly women believed it to be a work
of charity by the example of Dorcas?

Now I must answer to the authority of Canon Conc. Aurel. is considered.
the Council of Orleans (which was but a Provincial, and consisted only of
twenty five Bishops) for performing all labors on that day, excepting rural,
in the same manner as sometimes Hierom Ep. ad Euagr.
Hierom to Euagrius, while he was showing what difference there was between a
Bishop, Elder, and Deacon, he would not have the custom (in some sort contrary
to his opinion) of one City (namely Rome) to be brought out against him, for,
he being judge, the authority of the world was greater than the Citie's. And so
I must say here. If an indulgence for them had grown into use with the rest of
the Church, or had been supported by reason, or any authority; then the
sentence of this (though Provincial) Council had been of some weight: but in
this their custom being rejected of the Church up and down dispersed, is not
to be obtruded as a law upon all.

Then secondly, the Bishops being congregated in that Council, purposed to
obviate (as they speak) the Jewish observation of the Sabbath. And they yield
these things, lest they should rather seem to set up a Jewish institution, than
Christian liberty: and the very words of the Canon do intimate, that the people
were persuaded that these things ought not to be done. I Will add nothing of the
corrupting that place (which Binius judges to be depraved) only let others
judge what authority is to be given to it: it suffices us, that the Fathers
with one consent do interdict all Christians earthly affairs, and worldly works
on Lords days, although some, abounding in their sense, do seem to think
otherwise.

Lastly, that I may put an end to this Chapter, two things now remain to be
considered in the Emperors Laws, made about the Lords Day, which, according to
some, do mightily prejudice its solemnity: the first of these is considered in
their Manumissions, and the second in some certain transactions to be done on
the Lords day: and since both of these are a civil office, some think that
certain worldly things for that cause were to be done on that day, which were
not works of piety. To add somewhat of both these offices, will not be far from
our purpose.

The indulgence for making free and manumitting, Manumissions performed on the
Lords day.
granted by the Christian Emperors, and to be done on the Lords day, could not
hinder its religious solemnity; which, that it may appear, the reason of that
institution is a little better to be enquired into. Constantine, of blessed
memory, studied by laws, and all other means to promote the worship of God:
amongst other things, he granted liberty to the Church, by law, that whoever
were made free, the Priests being witnesses, they should be enrolled into the
number of the Roman Citizens: So Nicephorus Hist. l. 7. c. 46. and Sozomen
Hist. l. 1. c. 8. And if any desire to see the form of these Manumissions, it
is extant in the fragments Conc. Toleran. and Conc. T. 3. p. 566.
in the learned Instellus his notes in Canones Africanos, Can. 64. whither I
refer the Reader: because it is only my purpose to touch something of the time
wherein these Manumissions were done; which, by Historians, and the Emperors
laws, we see fall out to be on the Lords day: and that especially for the
honor of the Church, and increase of Christian Religion: while they by the
Bishops were performed in the Church, the Bishops were had in greater esteem
among the people: till (as the learned Instellus very well observes) as
formerly servants were manumitted in the Temple of the Goddess Feronia, so
afterward, by the Emperors Constitutions, together with their liberty, they
obtained to be Roman Denizens in the Church: No otherwise then as among the
Egyptians, the cubit wherewith the inundation of Nilus was wont to be marked,
was no more brought, as the custom was, to the Temples of the Heathen, but
from that time to the Churches of the Christians, Sozomen 1. c. 8. After this
manner the Emperor did earnestly regard the worship of God in making his laws;
to increase which, he also established that about Manumissions to be made on
the Lords day in the Church.

Moreover, servants, those for the most part whom their Masters discharged
against their will, obtained their freedom, not without great difficulty, as
Sozom. therefore the servants (as says Zonaras in Can. 88. Carthagin.) fled to
the Church; and if the Bishop determined equally, they were manumitted.
Thereupon the Emperor ordains, Soz. l. 9.
that all who were by the Priests testimony set at liberty in Churches, should
be made Denizons of the Roman Commonwealth. And afterward, in process of time,
the Fathers of the Synod thought good to advise the Emperor that this might be
done, Conc. Carth. Can. 88. Ap. Zon^ram.
Now the benefit of liberty (of which the Emperor was desirous, as tending to
the glory of God) was very acceptable to God; and for charity sake on that day
(whose holiness works of charity do not dishonor) was also to be performed.

I could also name another cause, assigned in the fragments Conc. Toletan. Some
thought that they did a thing very acceptable to God, and profitable* to their
own souls, if in the Church of some Saint, in the presence of the Bishop, or
the Priests there standing, or the noble Laity, before the horn of the Altar of
that Church, send out their servants free by a charter of absolution and
freedom from all bonds of servitude: But these superstitious Manumissions for
remedy of the soul, as they speak, were observed about the four hundredth year
after Christ: but that formerly mentioned by Zonaras, Sozomen, and Nicephorus,
was the true cause why first the pious Emperors looked to that these
Manumissions were performed on the Lords day: which we do not see hindered the
Lords solemnity.

As Manumissions do not obscure this solemnity, so certain transactions are
lawful on the Lords day. Nor can this hinder it, that Leo, a most earnest
defender of the Lords festival, did indulge those that were at odds Cod. l. 3,
tit. 12. leg. 11.
amongst themselves, leave to meet on the Lords day, vicaria poenitudine,
whereon they might conferr of their bargains, and speak of their transactions.
These which were offices of charity could not destroy the Lords solemnity. For
that holy man Leo would have adversaries freely, and without fear, to meet
together, and vicaria poenitudine, (which the interpreter of the Law expounds
by repentance, which ought to return by course, that is, on the Lords days: or
vicaria poenitudo is that which one expects from the other by turn) be
reconciled to one another; to effect which reconciliation, they might be at
their liberty to confer of their bargains, and speak of their transactions. But
all these things were granted by the Emperor, not for any worldly end, but for
renewing their lost friendship, which could not obscure the honor of the
festival, on which the things that pertained to peace and concord were
permitted; for they then, as it were leaving their gift before the Altar, went
their way, that they first might be reconciled to one another, and then come
and offer their gift; Mat. 5. 24.
which reconciliation could not be made without mention of their bargains and
transactions, upon whose account they were at difference. And thus much for
avoiding worldly affairs, and especially gainful labors, on the Lords day.

CHAP. XIII.
The Lords Day not to be profaned by surfeiting: Servants not to be called off
from sanctifying the Lords day: we ought not fast on the Lords Day: whether
Ambrose was wont to banquet on that day?

EVen as the solemn observation of this day is not to be profaned by labor
tending to our profit: so neither is it for us to give our selves to the
pleasures or delights of the world on it. We do not (says Primasius in Gal.
4.) celebrate festival days in luxury and banquettings: and that justly: Cyril
lib. 8. in Joh. c. 5.
for if a work be for bidden on a feast day, that by the body may be exercised
for necessity of life, that we may more entirely attend on Divine matters: are
not those things by better right prohibited, which cannot be done without sin,
and grievous offending of God? It Is for Christians therefore neither by
sur^eiting, nor sports, to defile the religious observation of this day. In
celebrating festivals, diverse of the Fathers do to their power reprove rioting
and drunkenness.

Greg. Naz. Orat. 48, in Julian. 2.
when he describes the manner how Christian festivals are to be celebrated,
admonishes, that we rejoice not with the varnish of the body, nor change of
garments, and their gorgeousness, not in rioting and drunkenness, whose fruit,
you have learned, chambering and wantonness are: nor let us crown our streets
with flowers, nor our tables with the deformity of ointments: neither let us
adorn our porches, nor let our houses shine with a visible light, nor sound
with a concord and shouting of Minstrels: for this is the manner of Heathens
celebrating their festivals, etc. when he judges all kind of luxury is to be
removed from Christians in their festivals, not only because the body being
stuffed with meat, and overcharged with wine, easily falls into wantonness;
but because amongst the Heathens (with whom the Church in celebrating festivals
ought to have nothing common) this was an usual thing.

Festivals are not to be celebrated in drinking off cups of wine, but in
renewing the spirit of the mind, and purging the heart: for he that facrificeth
to the belly and Bacchus, does more stir up to anger the Lord of the celebrity.
Scholion 5. in Johannis Chinac^ gradum decimum quartum de Gula.

It grieved Cyril, that so many amongst Ubi supra.
the Christians did on festival days, give up themselves either to honest
sports, surfeiting, dances, or other vanities of the world: and he affirms,
that these rites tend to no other end than the derision of Gods name, and
slighting of the day: and they that follow these things, do grievously sin, the
rather, that they go about these things at a more holy time: for surely, they
that give the reins to the belly and pleasures, cannot celebrate a festival day.

St. Chrysostom by two arguments of great Hom. de Eleemos. 2. l. 5. p. 819.
weight and authority, does persuade his hearers, spiritually to observe the
Lords day. In the first place, from the various good things which we do enjoy
on that day: and secondly, from our happy freedom from evils: and at length
descends to remove those means, whereby that spiritual honor is wont to be
hindered, not by banqueting, not by pouring out wine, nor attending on
drunkenness: in his judgment such wicked deeds as these do no little detract
from the honor of the Lords day. Yet many Servants not to be called off from
sanctifying the Lords day.
in this our age, (especially the richer sort) for these causes cannot avoid a
just reprehension: who above measure on the Lords day filling themselves with
surfeit, keep their servants at home to prepare meat finer than ordinary to
satisfy their insatiable luxury: and think much to give them leave to go to
Church to feed their souls with the holy bread of life.

It once grieved Ambrose, that a certain Ser. 33.
Christian in the time of a fast, did draw with him to an hunting, some
servants that were accidentally hasting to the Church, because thereby he
heaped others sins on his own pleasures, not knowing that he would be both
guilty of his own offense, and the perdition of the servants. And why should
not we as well grieve, when we see diverse professing themselves Christians to
the world, not to be more careful for promoting the salvation of their
Christian servants, whilst they hinder them from the public assemblies of the
Church on the Lords day, that they may serve their lust? Especially while, as
says Ambrose, they do Ubi supra.
not consider, that although they be servants in condition, yet are they
brethren by grace; for they have as well put on Christ, partake of the same
Sacraments, and have the same God for their father which their Masters have.

St. Paul would eat no flesh whilst the world stood, rather than that his
eating should make his brother to offend. 1 Cor. 8. 13. David scrupled the very
once tasting of the water which was drawn out of the well of Bethlem by his
Worthies, with the great peril of their lives, 2 Samuel 23. With how more heinous
a spot do they brand themselves therefore, who do expose the souls of their
servants (whom they detain at home from the public meeting of the Church, to
serve their vanities) unto so great a danger? a wickedness it is rather
beseeming those that sacrifice to Bacchus, than those that keep a festival to
God.

In the Council of Paris, this very same Can. 50.
wickedness grieved the Fathers, for though the Lords day seemed to be kept in
some reverent manner, by certain Masters, yet was it found very seldom to be
observed with due honor of their servants under subjection. I wish that the
Christian Religion, even defiled with the blot of this wickedness, in our age,
were not ill spoken of amongst diverse! At least, I beseech in Christ, those
that are the cause of others absence from the public exercises of piety, that
they would, with their servants which they keep at home, be pleased to do that
which Chrysostom requires Hom. 10. in Genesis
of his hearers; namely, to discourse of what they heard, with them that were
absent, by which means, they might hear and learn from them, what they lost
themselves in preparing of corporal food, being held from spiritual, Let them
consider this, who cause those that are under them to be hindered of spiritual
food, that they may prepare corporal meat for their use.

Gregory Did. 5. cap. deui^*
allowed not at all the custom of Laics; feasting ordinarily on Lords days,
from which they could not easily be moved.

In the mean while, I am not ignorant, We ough^ not to fast on the Lords day
that in the old Church diverse Canons are extant, of not keeping fasts on the
Lords day. Although they condemned not a Fast of it self, and in the general,
as a work contrary to Gods command, or that is repugnant to his Word: because
diverse illustrious examples thereof are afforded in the rules both of Old and
New Testament; yet did they judge, that Fasts on that day were to be relaxed.

To the Africans, he that fasteth on the Lords day is no Catholic; to Ep. ad
Phil. An. 324.
Ignatius, he is (...), a killer of Christ. Yea, in Council. Gangren. Can. 18.
an anathema is denounced against the observers of this fast; and prohibitions
of this nature are frequent amongst the ancients; the cause whereof Zonaras In
Can. 52. Conc. in Tralla.
seems to teach, while he says, the time of fasting is appointed for sorrow;
but a festival celebrity for mirth and joy. He teaches the same in Can. 18.
Concilii Gangrensis. Therefore, because the Lords day, being consecrated by
Christ's Resurrection from the dead, it is a day of joy to the Aug. Ep. 86.
Church: thereupon, the rejoicing Christians gave thanks on that day to God,
and relaxed their fasting, and abstained from every right that might infer any
sorrow. They were stirred up to this also by the pranks of Heretics, who
denied the Resurrection of Christ; amongst whom the Manichees acted with a
Diabolical spirit, and studying to diffuse this error, that they might
extinguish the joy of Christians for the saving Resurrection of Christ, have
prescribed Fasts on the Lords day to their followers: whose errors, and others
which held the same, that the Orthodox might prevent, they have looked to it,
that on overy Lords day the Fast should be relaxed.

But although we reject not the Canons set out by the Church in detestation of
Heretics, yet we affirm, that provision was made in them about this matter,
was ordained by the Fathers, and not by the Apostles. Otherwise St. Austin had
missed it, Ep. 86.
when he said, It is not defined by our Lords command, or of the Apostles, on
what days we ought not, and on what to fast. And if this had been a true
Apostolical ordinance, it had been lawful for the Church to fast on the Lords
day, when no occasion was offered. But Hierom thinks otherwise, while he a Ep.
ad Lucin.
wishes that we might fast at every season (he excepts not the Lords day) and
says, that Paul, and the faithful with him, fasted on the Lords day, yet does
he not accuse them of the Manichean Heresy. And because we read not that the
aforesaid Canons were ordained by the Apostles, therefore they are grown out of
use in the Church: because, like as the impious madness of Heretics,
adulterating the Christian faith, has given the Church occasion to ordain
diverse ceremonies in the external worship of God, by which they might both
extinguish their poison, and better confirm the minds of Christians in the
truth once received, which, as before those Herefies did put up the head, were
not in use; so those being extinct, they grew into disuse again.

Therefore, whatever we meet with in the ancients, of prohibiting Fasts on the
Lords day, does not at all enervate my opinion of avoiding surfeit on that day,
which is confirmed with the gravest sayings of the approved Fathers; neither do
they make any thing against me: to fast and surfeit do differ far enough:
between which extremes, a third thing is given; namely, a sober and moderate
dinner: the use whereof, none will deny to Christians on the Lords day, unless
any think with Urbicus, Aug. Ep. 86.
that not to fast is to be drunk. Austin, who used a sparing and frugal table,
tells us, that he entertained at dinner with him, a man miraculously restored
to his former health on the Lords day De Civ. Dei, lib. 22. cap. 8.
, Possid. de vita Aug. c. 22.
because he showed hospitality, as Possidonius.

Arbogastes being entertained at a feast by the King of France, and asked,
Whether he knew Paulin. de vit. Amb.
Ambrose? answered, that he knew the man, and was beloved of him, and often was
wont to feast with him. Some interpret this, as if St. Ambrose fared delicately
on the Lords day (on which day, and the Sabbath, and when the birth-dayes of
Martyrs were celebrated, Paulinus reports he was wont to dine) because on that
day Noble men were entertained by him: but Paulinus relates not that Ambrose
did entertain to a Feast Count Arbogastes on the Lords day. Arbogastes boasts
in Paulinus, that he often feasted with Ambrose, but whether he spoke the truth
in this, is a question, although An. 375. n. 24.
Baronius reports it for a truth, who yet mentions not the day on which he
held this feast. Arbogastes also glories, that he was beloved of Ambrose; but
it is easy to conjecture, that there was but small friendship between Ambrose
and Count Arbogastes, whenas Ambrose so hated his sacrilege: for which cause
Arbogastes being incensed, vowed that he would make a stable of the Church Idem.
of Millain, and would try how the Clergy could fight. Therefore it is not
certain, whether what he spoke of the feast was true. He might perhaps
insinuate to the King, who highly esteemed Ambrose the Bishop of Millain, that
he was prized by him somewhat, that he might be more highly regarded of the
King. However it was, when Ambrose himself would never be present at a feast
Possid de vita Aug. cap. 27.
in his own country, being invited; it may be judged, whether it is likely that
he would invite others to a feast on the Lords day, who refused to be present
at other men's feasts himself.

Lastly, if it were granted that Ambrose did entreat Count Arbogastes at a
Feast, whether will any believe it, who considers the austere life of Ambrose,
chastizing his body with that discipline (as Paulinus ibidem) that he observed
a daily Fast, that he would distain himself with feasts on the Lords day, which
hindered the exercises of Religion, either public or private? Nay, truly. He
might perhaps dine on the Lords day, as the custom of the Church required: but
we must not believe that the grave Father did fare so daintily on that day, as
that he could not attend the duties of piety: concerning which nature of
feasts, we are here speaking: in which number that is to reckoned, which
Baronius mentions out of Gregor. Turonens. An. 484. n. 142.
who tells us of a certain Presbyter, invading the Bishopric of Avergue, after
the death of Sidonius Apollinaris, who, when the Lords day came, having
prepared a banquet, commanded that all the Citizens should be invited into the
Church: a wickedness indeed beseeming the author, that he who had ambitiously
invaded the Bishops See, against the Canons of the Church, should violate the
Lords solemnity by his feast, that hindered the duties of Divine worship: which
unlawful example, I hope no body that relisheth any thing of Christ will
follow. And now I will conclude with St. Austin, Ep. 86. ibidem.
that none can rightly deny, that a Christian may on the Lords day be refreshed
with a moderate and sober dinner, and also will affirm with that grave Father,
that those who fear God must not riot on the Lords Day.

CHAP. XIV.
Sports are not at all to be held on the Lords Day, by the judgment of diverse
Fathers, and Emperors. Four kinds of shows condemned by the Fathers, and not
to be acted on the Lords Day: and that not only while the sacred meetings are
kept.

THey that are cloyed with luxurious banquets, drunken feasts, and lewd
drunkenness, cannot devoutly consecrate the Lords day to God: so they that
delighting in luxury, do give up themselves to pleasures, are unfit for the
sanctifying thereof, because with their pleasures they defile the Hierom in Is.
58.
Lords holy day: pleasure is the individual companion of drunkenness, and
intemperance in many, becomes a cause of lasciviousness, as we say in the
Proverb, When the belly is well filled, then follow dances; we read that these
have been condemned with great fervor of mind, and most holy zeal, with the
old friends of sincere piety: which Chrysostom, Hom. de Eleemosyna, would not
have any attend on: and no wonder, for all such worldly spectacles with
Chrysostom are called Satan's Festivals, from which he exhorts Hom. 32. in Joh.
his hearers to abstain: and sharply reproves Parents, that bring their Hom.
3. in Johan.
children to spectacles, and exhort them not to Doctrine.

Cyril was sorry, as we have seen in the former Chapter, l. 8. in Jo. c. 5.
that Christians should on feast days run to plays, pageants, and dancings,
because in his judgment, these things cannot be done without mocking of Gods
name, and violation of the day: for the holiness of festivals is miserably
distained by petulant dancings: therefore Leo and Authemius, those good
Emperors, ordain, that festivals ^ Cod. l. 3. tit. 12. de feriis. l. 11.
being dedicated to the most High Majesty, are by no pleasures (which
afterward in detestation of them they call obscene) to be defiled. They say
also, We decree the Lords day always to be so honorable and reverent, that it
be excused from all executions, etc. And after, Nor* yet do we, relaxing the
rest of this holy day, suffer any one to be witholden by obscene pleasures. Let
the scene of the Theater, or the fights in the Cirque, or the doleful sights of
wild beasts, challenge nothing to themselves on that day: and if any solemnity
fall out to be celebrated on our Birthday, let it be deferred. If any one
shall ever be present at ^^ghts on this Feast Day, he shall sustain the loss of
his command in the Militia, and the sale of his patrimony; and likewise the
Sergeant of every Judge, that under pretense of either public or private
business, does believe that these things which are ordained in this law are to
be violated.

The Fathers in the Council C^^. 67.
of Carthage were of the same mind, who provided, that no sights should be
showed on the Lords day, or any other of the festivals. Yea, even in the
thickest darkness of Popery, so solemn was the splendor of this day, that the
Cimmerian darkness of Antichristianism could never overcome it. Therefore it
was provided, Can. 10. part. 9. of the Provincial Council Circa An. 1556.
of Colen, that there should be an abstinence from these. Wherefore (say they)
it is our mind, that on these days (they speak of Festivals) Fairs be
prohibited, Taverns be shut, Riot, Drunkenness, Expenses, Strifes, wicked
Sports, Dances full of madness, evil Communication, Bawdy Songs, be avoided:
briefly, all Luxury: for by these, and the blasphemies and perjuries which
usually attend these, the name of God is profaned, and the Sabbath (which
admonishes us to cease from doing perversely, and learn to do well) is defiled.

In the third Council also of Millain, they An. 15 3.
decree, Let the Bishop carefully prohibit, and see to it that it be done, that
not only no leapings and dancings, but no riot, plays in honor of the Saints,
and other profane actions, unmeet for the worship of those festival days, and
pious institutions, be any ways publicly acted on these days, or brought in
under pretense or occasion of them.

If men brought up in the Cimmerian darkness of Antichristianism, declining the
pure light of the Gospel, like Owls, yet could not, through the splendor of
truth, but bear an illustrious testimony to the Lords festival: and thereupon
condemned what was opposite to its sanctification, as dances, which they call
full of madness, and wicked sports, by which the Sabbath, on which Christians
are to cease from doing evil, is violated: if by no means, under any pretense,
they permit leapings and danings to be acted: to how tremendous a judgment do
the ill-employed Libertines of this age expose themselves? who now having the
face of the Church happily discovered, by the sacred Light of the Gospel, are
not afraid to tread under foot the holiness of this day, by giving the reins to
pleasures, and dances, running out into folly, so often condemned by the
Fathers? As if they made haste to pass over into the heretical tents of the
Heicetae, Damasc de Haeic.
who in other things following the Churches authority, in their Monasteries, by
a company of Monks praised God, using tripudiations, and dances thereunto. A
wickedness indeed more becoming Heretics than Christians. What once the
learned Morton in his Catholic. Apolog, lib. 2. cap. 14. related of Tollet, we
will apposirely apply to the Patrons of dancing on the Lords day. Tollet
affirms, that a man is bound, under a mortal sin, to sanctify a Festival, but
he is not bound to SANCTIFY IT WELL. On the other side, Morton cries out, and
that justly, What (the foul ill!) what a sanctifying is this, that wants Well,
without which, no action can be acceptable to God? So these men's sanctifying of
this day, (while they grant the Lords day must be sanctified, but labor not to
sanctify it Well) is rather to be reckoned a profanation, than sanctification
thereof. Alas! Are these fruits beseeming so long a preaching of the holy
Gospel? while men do on the Lords day so profusely serve the pleasures of the
flesh. The primitive Christians, whose souls are now in rest, celebrated not so
the Lords day, who made conscience of intermitting its solemnity upon any
occasion.

If on holy days we must abstain from lawful, and necessary labors, must we
therefore attend upon unlawful, vain, and unhonest works? God forbid. The women
of the Jews had better on the Sabbath day spin, than dance on their New Moons,
as Augustine judges. And on Psalm. 39. It is better to dig, than dance on the
Sabbath.

But these things are not so to be expounded, as if St. Austin had commended
the undertaking of gainful labor on that day: but that grave Father does
praise the scope of those men rather, who do apply their just and lawful
labor, than their unlawful vanities: as otherwhere he relates of Socrates,
Aug. devera rel. c. 2.
that swore by flesh, a stone, or any thing that was at hand to swear by: not
that he approved Socrates's fact, but by this means he would instruct his
hearers, that although neither be agreeable to reason, yet it is better to
transferr Gods honor to Gods workmanship, than to the works of men's hands. So,
although we must not attend on the Lords day, on labor undertaken for
gainsake, but only on Divine worship; yet the good Father judged it better on
that day, to employ our pains about labors lawful on other days, than about
vanities, always unlawful, and severely condemned of God; although neither
will very well agree with the solemnity of that day.

If any one till his ground on the Lords day, he violates the holy rest, but if
the refore, he, leaving his husbandry, be drunk, or commit whoredom, shall he
not be thought to profane the holiness of the Lords Day? If all profaneness,
and carnal delight ought to be banished from the Church, then especially it
should, when man does peculiarly apply himself to the worship of God. If
Tertullian thought it an uncomely thing, and altogether alien from the Religion
of public joy, to celebrate those days which were dedicated to the Nativities
of the Emperors, with that vanity, which the Heathens abused in such kind of
Festivals, whereas Tert. adv. Genesis c. 35.
what was acted on the solemn birth-dayes of Princes, would not be thought
comely on other days: with what spirit are they acted, to whom unchaste
dancings, obscene sports, and mad tripudiations shall seem lawful, on the Day
dedicated to our Lords honor? Shall the licentiousness of evil manners be
piety? an occasion of Luxury be reckoned Religion? We must rather say with
Tertullian, That it is for men of the true Religion, to celebrate both the
Emperors solemnities, and the Lords day, out of conscience rather than
licentiousness. And if any like dancing, I earnestly ask it of him, that he
would apply his mind to those spiritual dances, which Chrysostom mentions: in
which there is much Hom. 1. de Laz t. 5. p. 220.
comeliness and modesty, with which Christians must dance, not to the measures
of harp and pipe, for they themselves ought to be both harp and pipe to the
Holy Ghost: and when others lead the dance to the Devil, these being in the
Church, offer themselves the organs and vessels to the Spirit, and afford their
souls, as musical instruments which the Holy Ghost should play upon, and move;
and they give their hearts as Organs, into which he may inspire his grace.
These are those dances of the Angels, Basil. Ep. 1. ad S. Gregor.
( and what can be more blessed, than upon the earth to imitate the dance of
Angels?) approved by the Holy Ghost, and worthy the Christian name: in which,
he that on the Lords day shall diligently be busied, will not bend his mind to
those immodest leapings or dancings, (which Chrysostom calls Diabolical, Hom.
55. in Genesis because where this wanton dancing is, there the Devil is, Chrysostom.
Hom. 49. in Math.) so often condemned; but will refresh his soul, wearied with
the sad burden of his fins, by the spiritual joy of these dances: and prepare
himself the better to celebrate that eternal Sabbath in the Heavens, which must
be observed for ever with all the Saints. And that this is the solemnity which
beseems the Feasts of Christians, Gregory Nazianzen shows at large, and
Orat. 48. in Jul. 2. (...)
exhorts us, to take hymns for timbrels, singing Psalms, for filthy and ribald
songs, a clapping of hands when we give thanks, for clapping the hands in the
Theater; gravity for laughter, prudent speech for drunkenness, comeliness and
honesty for delicious pleasures. And if it be convenient for thee, when thou
celebratest a Festival merrily, to dance, then dance, yet not the dance of
Herodias, but of David, when he danced for the resting of the Ark: by which I
think mystically is meant, the nimbleness and volubility of our holy
journeying, and that which is pleasing to God. Thus he.

Ephrem Syrus gives the same counsel, Sermon. de cruce Dom.
whose testimony deserves to be added here. Let us honor, says he, the Lords
Festivals divinely, not in a worldly manner, but spiritually, not after the
custom of the Heathens, but Christians: let us not lead dances, nor effeminate
our ears with pipes and harps. -- You, both small and great, men and women, let
us in a Christian manner celebrate the Lords Festivals, in Psalms, and Hymns,
in spiritual Songs, and Angelical melody. That blessed Soul uttered this, about
the Lords Festivity, Hom. 26. in 1 Cor.
the reason of all which, is extant in Chrysostom. There is, says he, a time
for Prayers, not for drunkenness, and that always, and especially at
solemnities. For a solemnity is therefore instituted, not to live filthily, nor
to abound in sin, but to extol present things.

These and many other testimonies of the Ancients, do show, that all carnal
following of worldly delights, (whereby the sparks of the Holy Ghost being
stirred up in the Lords day holy exercises of piety are choked) by which
either Divine worship may be hindered, or the fruit thereof prevented, ought far
to be banished from the Christian Church. For it is as sure as can be, as
sometimes in Ps. 45.
Ruffinus, that when we are idle and negligent, when we lift not up our mind in
heavenly desires, when we grow cold in the love of our Lord, when we spend the
day in fables, and wicked cogitations, then we more attend upon the Devil than
God. And after; The enemy derides our Sabbaths, when they see us to be at
leisure for the idleness and vanities of the evil spirit.

If Sympos. l. 4. q. 5.
Plutarch thought that the Jews did worship Bacchus on their Sabbath, because
they then strove at their cups and riotings, and gave themselves wholly to
drunkenness, (and for that cause called the Sabbath (...), which signifies
Bacchus, or the son of Bacchus) how much more truly might he at this day say it
of many in the Church, if he observed how they are given to Bacchus, Venus,
sports, and mad dances? and yet these sins do rage all abroad, without danger
of punishment, to the great ignominy of the Christian name: for there is no
wickedness so heinous, which is not most of all committed on the Lords holy
day: Polid. Vir. de invent. rerum, l. 6. c. 8.
While the greatest part of men do daily more and more spend the rest of
Festival days not in praying, not in hearing the Scriptures, for which cause
the rest was given, but for all manner of increasing the corruption of good
manners: saying, that they do it for their mind sake, as if they were
altogether of Plato's mind, who said, that for that very purpose did God
institute such holy Festivals. And he repeats the same complaint, in his
Exposition of the Lords Prayer, when he explains the fourth Petition, and thus
laments; At this day, no time is usually more spent in all manner of sports, in
dances, wanton love, company-keeping, dicing, bargains, and fairs.

These do abundantly show, that dancings, sports, and sights, were both
forbidden of the Emperors and Fathers, that they should not at all be kept on
the Lords day: which, he that views the sacred Decrees of the one, and the
grave Records of the other, will not deny. Yet when all is done, lest some
think ( Tert. de specta. 29.
whom the Doctrine of the ^e delights, and those who release their minds to
pleasure, more than is fitting) that not all, but some kinds of those sports,
were forbidden, and that only while the Church Assemblies were held, as though
the Christian people were at their liberty, to use certain kinds of dances and
sights, even upon the Lords day, when the public Church Assemblies were
finished; to whom it seems, Tertul. de spectac. c. 1.
such extrinsecal solaces of the eyes and ears, do nothing interrupt the
Religion in their mind and conscience: as though God could not be offended with
the delight of man; which, without any prejudice to Gods fear and honor, to
enjoy in fit time and place is no sin: lest any one here should think so, I
will over and above add something, that may make more for illustrating the
genuine sense of the aforesaid prohibitions.

And in the first place, this is worth our Four kinds of sights anciently.
knowing, that sights, plays, and conflicts, were amongst the ancients under
the same kind: and in Tertullian there are reckoned Ap. adv. Gent. c. 38.
four kinds of sights; namely, 1. Circi insania, [ i. the folly of the Cirque.]
2. Theatri impudiciti^, [ i. the wantonness of the Theater.] 3. Arenae
atrocitas, [the cruelty of the Sand.] 4. Xysti vanitas, [ i. the vanity of the
Xyst, or wrastling-gallery.] In the Cirque, four horses run striving one with
another; In the Theaters were acted Stageplayes, and immodest Interludes were
recited; In the Sand, were setting together wild Beasts, and Fencers; Lastly,
in the Wrestling galleries, there were the praeludia of these Games, while the
Wrastlers were exercised in their Schools, and the swiftness of the runners was
tried. Whence, the same Tertullian calls the founders and orderers of these
sights, Tert. de spect. c. 22.
Quadrigiarios, Scenicos, Xysticos, and Arenarios. Whatever we meet with to be
observed about them, by the searchers of antiquity, it is to be referred to
these kinds of sights. And all these are disallowed by the ancients, especially
by Tertullian and Cyprian, in their books which they have set out purposely de
spectaculis. In which their Idolatrous original (because at first amongst other
superstitious rites, they were instituted under the name of Religion) and
diverse obscene provocations of lust flowing from them, are recited and
condemned.

But when the Emperors had embraced the Christian Faith, it seems all other
acts but the sights in the Cirque, and Theater were ceased: and hence it was,
that the It is not for Christians to be present at sights.
grave Fathers, being haters of Games, when they write against sights, do not
so much make mention of others, as of these two: and against them, from which
they judge, that all Christians should withdraw, they direct a sharp style
enough; neither by their good will, would they have any members of the Church
at any time, much less on the Lords day, to be present at them. This the books
above cited, de spectaculis, do without me saying any thing, abundantly
testify.

The holy, and general Synod in Trulle, Can. 51.
forbids those Jesters, as they are called, and the sights of them: and then
the seeing of huntings, and those dances that are acted in the Scene. Neither
is the time named by them, on which they are prohibited, but they say, that the
Synod, (...), forbids altogether: and what is forbidden altogether, is to be
done at no time. For (as Zonaras expounds the Canon) the Faithful are to lead
their life by the prescript of Evangelical discipline, and not remissly, (...),
i. as becomes Saints. All those things therefore, by which the mind cannot be
released, by a necessary remission, and whereupon immoderate laughters are
provoked, are by the decree of this Canon forbidden.

Now, if in their judgment, we must not at any time see the actions of Jesters,
or Scenical dancings, much less must we on the Lords day, which is expressly
ordained by the Africanes in the Council of Carthage. Can. 67. ap. Zona.
St. Chrysostom, Cyril, Ephrem Syrus, Greg. Naz. and diverse other Fathers, have
taught the same. The sacred Emperors, Leo, Anthemius, and others, have decreed
the same, whose testimonies are formerly recited in this Chapter.

But although the truth of this be largely demonstrated, Cypr. de spectac.
yet so far is the vigor of Ecclesiastical discipline enervated, and by the
languishing whereof, we are thrown down into so bad a condition, that now not
only an excuse, but authority is given to vice. Whereupon, No worldly pleasures
to be used on the Lords day.
the same falls out in our age, which did sometime in Cyprians, there are not
wanting fawning assertors, and indulgent patrons of vices, who give authority
to vice. These do, as we said, batter with a double Ram, the aforesaid truth,
confirmed by so many illustrious testimonies of the ancients. And they contend,
that worldly shows were forbidden of the Fathers, only for two causes, either
because they were obscene in themselves, and of their own nature, and therefore
never lawful; or else because they were held at such a time, as the public
meetings of the Church were celebrated: according to them, honest and sober
dances, as they speak, notwithstanding the aforesaid Canons and Statutes,
especially after the Church-meetings are ended, may safely be used. How wise
does disputing arrogance think it self, especially when it fears losing any
thing of worldy joys! says Tertullian. This subtle wit, if any De spec. c. 2.
where, appears in this weak refuge. Shall they who decree (as Leo, and
Anthemius) that days dedicated to the most High Majesty, be occupied in no
pleasures, be believed Ubi prius.
that they would assign any place to them? and although these pleasures
afterward, in the same law, be called obscene; yet by virtue of what
consequence can it be inferred, that therefore some pleasures there are not
obscene, which are not prohibited by that decree? This new, and unheard of
distinction, of forbidden pleasures, is to be left to the authors of it, which
was unknown to Leo and Anthemius, when they decreed, that the holiness of the
day was to be violated by no pleasures: and which Octavius, in Minuc. Felice,
confesses, the Church was ignorant of, while he answers Caecilius, blaming the
Christians, for abstaining from sights and pomps, which Caecilius, then a
heathen, called honest pleasures: Octavius confesses, that Christians abstained
from them: Octavius, a Christian, takes those for evil pleasures, which
Caecilius a Heathen called honest. This is to all men an argument, that the
Christians (whose cause Octavius pleads against Caecilius) did repute the
pleasures of sights and pomps, as evil: and that for good cause, since (as the
Greeks have a Proverb, An ape is an ape, although clad in purple) by the
pleasures of sights, with what painting soever they be whited, the Lords day is
not to be violated. Any may see, that the pleasures of pomps or shows, in the
forementioned decree of the Emperors, are called obscene from the effect. For
they that follow them, do usually fall into obscene manners: And the word
Obscenity is added by the Emperors, not for the distinction, but detestation
of pleasures: as when the Apostle, 1 Pet. 4. 3. calls Idolatry abominable, or
if any one else should call Drunkenness detestable; will any wise man thence
conclude, that there is a certain lawful use of Images, or that some
Drunkenness is not to be detested? Nothing less St. Chrysostom Hom. 38. in
Matthew.
wished, that games and dances might altogether be left off: of which he never
speaks, without highly detesting them in his mind, and boldly condemns the very
art of dancing: which he that exercises, if he be asked, why, omitting other
arts, he is employed in this? Chrysostom Hom. 41. in Ioh.
he could not deny it to be dishonest and unjust. If therefore Conscience
dictate, as Chrysostom thinks, that the very art of this pleasure be dishonest
and unjust, let them who commend them to the Church, see, where those sober and
modest dances, which they speak of, can find any place: and to those that
expound choreas ducere, only of lascivious dances, we will in a form of speech
commodious enough, interpret these dances to be meant of all dancings
whatsoever: otherwise St. Cyprian had not affirmed, that David De spec. Ser. 2.
danced before God, unless any should think, that the Bl. Martyr (which never
came into his mind) would brand the Royal Prophet with a mark of lascivious,
and obscene dancing. And if there be any that think, that dancing be sober and
modest, they are at their liberty for me to abound in their own sense: at
least, with Octavius, that good defender of the Christian Religion, and other
lights of Reformed Christianity, it seems meet for me to repute them as
obscene, and evil pleasures. Lastly, let the patrons of those dances, which
they call sober, bring forth any testimony out of approved Authors, whereby any
dances on the Lords Days can be defended, and then we will believe them, that
such dances were not prohibited by the Fathers: which, till it be done, we will
with the ancients say, we ought not to lead dances, or effeminate our ears with
pipes and harps. The ancients cursed those kinds of pleasures, which then were
in use. If the things which at this day are highly esteemed by the world, and
are reckoned as sober, had in their age put up the head, doubtless they would
have condemned them, with the same zeal, and holy fervor of spirit, as being
contrary to the Lords solemnity, and which hindered the sanctification thereof.
In the mean while, since we see that sports and dances by St. Cyril; all
pleasures by Leo and Anthemius; sports and dances, by the Fathers of Colen;
dancings, by the Council of Millain, to be condemned; the pleasures of shows
to be reckoned evil, of Octavius and Chrysostom; to reprehend dances, as
leading to the Devil; we affirm, that these worldly shows (which are the very
fomes of pleasures, and whose art, witness Chrysostom, is dishonest, and
unbeseeming the Christian name) are not to be kept on the Lords day.

Moreover, neither are the forementioned No dancing after Churchmeetings.
prohibitions so to be expounded, as if dances and shows were only forbidden,
while the sacred exercises of piety were held on the Lords day in the public
assemblies; which being finished, who will may lawfully be employed in them:
for that indeed would be nothing else but Tertul. de spec. 11. sect: 25.
to go straight out of Gods Church into the Devils. But God grant that such a
desire of destructive pleasure be prevented from his people. We have in the
fifth Chapter declared, that Christians must keep all the whole day holy, and
afterward, God willing, will teach what duties of piety are to be done by
Christians, when Church-meetings are ended.

And thus from the premises we find, that the Lords Day is to be violated by no
pleasures: Chrysostom. Hom. 2. T. 6.
For we must honor this day with a spiritual honor, not in feasting, and
drinking, not in drunkenness and dances, etc.

The End of the First Book.
THE Lord's Day.
THE SECOND BOOK.
In Which It Is showed at large, out of the Records of the ancients, what things
are required to the sanctification of the Lords Day.

CHAP. I.
The Lords Day ordinary duties were both public and private: public
Church Assemblies on the Lords Day: the mention of which, we oftener meet with
in the following, than in the former Church: Nightmeetings; and why abolished:
Meetings before day, and on the day, in the morning, and in the evening.

WHat we have recited in the foregoing Book, do show, that the Lords day was
always solemnized by the Church, and what things they were which did
ordinarily hinder the solemnity thereof, amongst the men of this world: now we
come to those things, in which the solemn sanctification thereof consists:
for we must not only abstain from labors and pleasures on that day, but also
we must attend upon Divine worship: neither is the rest commanded on the Lords
day, to be dedicated to our affections, sports, pleasures, or sins, but to the
Worship of God alone: which the pious practice of the Apostles* and of the
Church following them, does declare.

Among the ancients, there were Lords day solemnities, [or ordinary duties]
Tertul. de Anima, c. 9. Lords day solemnities
which were performed in the Church; and what they were, the same author
explains in the same Chapter; namely, reading of the Scriptures, singing of
Psalms, Adlocutiones, [ q. d. speakings unto] and Prayers. By those
Adlocutiones which were uttered in the Church assembly, the Battologies (as
Pamelius on that place would have it) frequently repeated in the Mass (as
Dominus vobiscum, [ The Lord be with you,] Pax vobiscum [ Peace be to you]
Oremus, [ Let us pray] Gratias agamus Domino, [ Let us give thanks to God,]
etc. which are in the Mass offices repeated ad nauseam) are not to be
understood: but by adlocutiones in Tertullian, are meant the Ministers Sermons
to the people, after the Scriptures were read in the assembly. For those that
expounded the Scriptures, spoke to the people by exhortations, admonitions,
etc. as afterward will appear. And in this sense of ours, we meet with the
word adlocutio, in Cyprian de Lapsis, sect. prima.

Those offices also to be performed on the Lords day, are extant in Clemens,
Constit. p. 2. c. 59.

The Lords day solemnities, wherewith they honored this day, are the duties
that appertain to godliness: whereof some were of a public, others of a
private right: those were to be performed by every Church, in the public
assemblies, and these of the faithful members of the Church, when they were
returned home, the public assembly being ended. This place therefore
requires, that something be added about the public meetings of the Church,
being held on the Lords days. In describing whereof, we will first teach, that
they were in use with the Church of God, even from the Apostles age. Secondly,
we will enquire what was done in them by the Church. Thirdly, we will add
something of the places wherein they were held.

Although the ancients (as we have seen Public assemblies on the L. Day.
in the former book, chapter 5.) did destinate the whole Lords day, or the first
day of the week, to the exercises of Divine Worship; yet did they hold their
public assemblies at certain hours, and what time remained besides, they spent
it also privately in holy duties. Whence we may easily observe, that there was
a solemn, and religious observation of the Lords day, both public and private:
the public was performed in the public conventions of the Church; and that
Christians, in what part of the world soever they lived, so often as they could
for persecution, were wont to meet together in one place, to handle the duties
of piety, is so clear from diverse places of the New Testament, that it wants
no testimony. These assemblies could not be held without a stated time every
week, and a fit place: now we find that the Lords day was destined to keep them
on, and that while the Apostles were living, and faithfully discharging the
ministry committed to them of the Lord. For, on no day was there wont to be a
more solemn and frequented convention of the people in the Church, to hear
Sermons, and partake of the holy Communion, than on the Lords day: and this we
have proved in the two first chapters of the precedent book, to be a very
ancient custom.

The Church therefore, as says Isychius, In Lev. l. c. c. 9. They met oftener
in the following, than in the former Church
has sequestered the Lords day for Divine conventions: in which the Worship of
God was religiously celebrated: for the dispatching whereof, the Christians met
together, as often as they could commodiously. Yet this must be marked of him
that observes the meetings of the Church, that there is a rehearsal made of
more meetings which were kept by the later, than the former Church, on the
Lords day, by Historians and others that treat of them: not because the former
Church, if it could, for the daily persecutions it met with, did not so often
hold their meeting; especially whenas we see that the first Christians did
sharply contend (in Book 1. chapter 5.) about sanctifying the whole day: but
because it being hindered with the cruel flames of persecutions, did meet as
often as occasion did occurr: but the following Christians were at liberty to
meet oftener under the Christian Emperors; and therefore we read, that they met
twice The Church met twice on the Lords day.
upon the Lords day: in the former meeting whereof, they begun the day, and
with the other they ended the day; and upon that reason, they afterward called
the one their Matins, and the other their Vespers. But what, and how many hours
were spent at both of these conventions, is not well known: because there was
not the same manner of meeting every where, but according to the necessity and
profit of the Church, they held their meetings on the night and day.

The Apostle taught the Ephesians both Meetings in the night.
night and day, Act. 20. 32. At Troas he continued his Sermon till midnight,
Act. 20. The Corinthians met in the evening, 2 Cor. 11. for about supper time,
or after, they were gathered together. But, as I said, necessity commanded
their night-meetings: because the Christians being moved with the fear of
Tyrants, could not safely meet on the day time.

The Christians of the following age, retaining their night-meetings, (as also
many other things, out of which an huge heap of superstitious rites flowed, by
which the clear face of truth breaking out of darkness, was filthily darkened)
called them Vigils; Vigils.
and turned them into the Fasts of the night which went before the Holy day: in
which, In Math. 25.
sometimes they continued till midnight; witness Hierom in Parab. Virgin. And
sometimes they began their meeting at midnight. So it appears out of Basil,
who performed Bas. in 114 Ps. T. 1.
an office in another Church, before he came to some other that were met at
midnight, and waited for his coming. But at this day, because of the
wickedness committed in these nocturnal Vigils, Bellarmine thinks they are
justly abrogated. Bellarm. de cultu sanctorum, lib. 3. cap. ult.

Tertullian, amongst others, makes mention of night-meetings, lib. 2. ad
uxorem, c. 4. at which, he says, that an Heathen husband did not willingly
suffer his Christian wife to be present. Soldiers, at the command of
Constantine the Arrian Emperor, came to apprehend St. Athanasius, while the
people were keeping a meeting in the night with him. Theodor. Hist. l. 2. c. 13.

There are testimonies also extant of meetings before day (which are to be
reckoned with them of the night) Tertul. de corona milit. cap. 3. and the
Epistle of Plinius Secundus ad Trajan. mentions them, apud Tertull. Ap. adv.
Genesis c. 2.


Passing by the meetings which were in Certain hours appointed for public
meeting^.
the night, and before day, we will enquire of those that were kept on the day:
where, as soon as the Church had obtained peace by the authority of the great
Emperors, we shall find that they held their ordinary meetings for the
exercise of Gods worship, on the day time: and for that end some certain hours
of the day were destined for performance of the public offices of Religion.
For the religious Fathers did with great care provide, that they should neither
weary themselves, nor the people committed to their care, with continual
labors, in setting all care of refreshing themselves aside. And they judged it
more advised, to teach often than long: they therefore selected some hours out
of the whole day for public assemblies.

Julian the Apostate is reported, that he ordered the Greeks to live after the
same manner as did the Christians: and therefore, amongst other things, he
ordains, that certain prayers, for certain hours and days, after the custom
of the Church, should be selected. Niceph. Hist. 10. c. 21. which he would
never have done, if it had not been a familiar thing with the Church (after
whose rule he labored to regulate the Heathen) to select certain hours of the
day for this peculiar use. But on what days, or what hours of the day,
prayers were made by the Church unto God, Nicephorus adds not; only he tells
us, that certain hours were select for this office. Ath. Ap. 1.
Athanasius witnesses, that the Arrians, who raged against the Orthodox, even
as they were met on the Lords day, being guarded with a company of Soldiers,
found but a few together; for many of them were gone home for the hour of the
day; that is, after the assembly was ended, which the Church observed at stated
hours: or as De anima, c. 9.
Tertullian speaks, after the solemnities were done, and the people dismissed.
But neither Athanasius nor Tertullian do assign the hours at which the Church
met.

Ambrose mentions the morning hours, at Meetings in the morning.
which the people met, lib. 5. Ep. 33. where, what was read ont of Psalm. 78.
The Gentiles are come into Gods inheritance, he afterward calls his hearers to
mind for the morning hours. Zeno also Bishop of Majuma, although he was well
struck in age, yet was he always present at Nic. 12. 47.
the morning hymns, and the other holy service, or (...), unless hindered by
sickness. The Eucharist was administered at their morning meetings; which
appears out of Ep. 63.
Cyprian, while he disallows the custom of those that in the morning only
offered water, lest they should smell of wine: for which cause, he calls that
the morning sacrifice, In their morning assemblies, they sung the 63 Psalm to
God. Witness Clement, Constitut. Apost. lib. 2. cap. 59.

The morning meetings were kept about nine of the clock. Therefore, in Conc.
Laodic. Can. 18. apud. Zon.
it is ordained, that the public service should be performed at nine of the
clock, and at their Vespers. And these solemn assemblies broke up about noon,
as witnesses Chrysostom. Orat. de Philogonio.

The Church also met in the Evening. Meetings in the vening.
For they had hymns appointed as well for the evening, as morning meetings,
Niceph. Hist. l. 12. c. 47. Clemen. Constitut. Apost. lib. 20. c. 59. The
Bishops and Presbyters of Socr. Hist. l. 5. c. 22.
Gaesaria, Cappadocia, and in Cyprus, did interpret the Holy Scriptures on the
Lords day, (...), always about evening. Neither can it be thought
inconvenient, Chrysostom being judge, if the Church hold an assembly in the
afternoon: yea, he being witness, then especially should we meet, and then our
bodily food being received, a spiritual banquet ought to be set before us; lest
after satiety of bodily food, the soul beginning to be drowsy, it feel some
hurt thereby. So Chrysostom. in the end of the 10* Hom. in Genesis He does the same in
the 9th Hom. ad Populum Antiochen. And elsewhere he commends those that when
they have dined come to Church, Hom. 10. ad pop. Antioch. Lastly, he does often
reprove those that are absent from afternoon meetings, Hom. 10. in Genesis Many of
the ancients do bear witness to afternoon meetings, which, when we speak of the
time assigned to the Treating of the Scriptures, shall, God willing, be made
manifest.

For the present it is enough to advertise the Reader, that those, if there be
any such, do deceive both themselves and others, who do deny that there were
held any meetings in the evening of the Church, before the Council of Arragon,
that is in the year of Christ 370. The Constitutions of Clement, which are held
ancient by all, do make mention of them. Cyprian, as we Ep. 63.
have seen, took it heavily, that morning Suppers were despised of some
delicate persons, that would not smell the savor of Wine, but not evening
Suppers: they, says he, offered in the morning water only, yet when they came
to Supper, they offered a mixed cup: whereupon the learned Goulartius
judiciously acknowledges, that Pamelius does confess, that some in Cyprians
age, were wont to offer twice a day: although ^amelius does corruptly referr
this to private Masses in use amongst the Papists. In the Council of Laodicea
(which was held before the first Council of Nice) there is mention made as well
of the evening, as morning Liturgy, (the Fathers speak of the public service
in the Churchmeeting.) Hilary acknowledges for a In Ps. 64.
great sign of mercy, the pleasures (while the day begins in Prayers to God,
and ends in his Praises) of Matins, and Evening-service in the Church. Diverse
Treatises also of the Fathers, in the afternoon, which we shall afterward
mention, will teach us, that the Church met in the Evening. But the primitive
Christians, as we said, met oftener on the night time in that age which
abounded with Persecutions, and being hindered by the wicked devises of the
adversaries, could seldom keep a meeting on the day time, as Basil. Ep. 63.
Tertull. de Fuga, ult. cap. teach us. Thence therefore, I think, it came to
pass, that we meet with seldom mention of a twofold meeting amongst the
Christians of the former Church.

And these things do testify, that the Church of Christ kept public meetings,
to those that shut not their eyes against the truth. But since sundry in our
age do so easily bite with the tooth of detraction, that scarce any thing can
be written (though never so elaborate, and studiously composed, which at first
by the envy of malevolent persons, may not be depraved, and at last contemned:
therefore, I only add this, lest perhaps some might object, that those things
which I have observed concerning assemblies, are to be applied not only to
meetings kept on Sabbath days, of which I shall speak hereafter, but also to
those which were kept on other days, besides the Lords days, which I deny
not. I at least wise affirm this: if they had it in their mind to meet on other
days after noon, for Religions sake; much more are they to be thought to have
done it on the Lords day, which was set apart for this end. And diverse
forecited testimonies do make mention of meetings being held on that day.
Lastly, what is said to be done in the meetings which were kept on other days,
we read that the same was done in the Lords Days meetings: although all things
which were done every where in these, were not done in those meetings: as has
been observed in the first Book, and third Chapter.

CHAP. II.
What was done in the public Church-meetings. Reading of Scriptures: What
Scriptures were went to be read: Humane writings were read in the
Church-assembly. The order of reading the Scriptures. The readers of the
Scriptures were ordinarily Deacons. Who they were that were anciently called
Audientes. The readers of the Scriptures stood in the sight of the whole people.

HAving observed the public meetings of the Church, let us in the second place
see what was done in them. In them the Church was only intent upon the
exercises of piety, diverse whereof are ^ound in Tertull. lib. de anima, cap. 9.
Ap. 2.
Justin Martyr, and others. Sermon. in ^es qui in feris tantum con^
Chrysostom says, there was in those holy meetings, a convention of the
Brethren, holy Doctrine, Prayers, an hearing of the Divine Law, or a
Communication with God, and discourse with men. Hesychius says, (...) in L^.
c. ^^.
There was devout Prayer, devout reading of Gods Word, and hearing of the
interpretation All things, that I may speak briefly, were devout, which are
said or done in the Churches of God according to his Law. And all these things
may be referred to the Ministry of the Word, public invocation of Gods name,
and administration of the Sacraments. So it is evident to us, out of the Holy
Scripture, and more pure Christianity, in what things the offices of almost all
the worship of God were performed. These are reckoned up, Act. 2. 40. although
the order in which they were performed be not declared. St. Paul being brought
to Troas, some peculiar things fell out, in the description whereof, St. Luke
is very diligently conversant; and above all, amongst the rest, an example of a
Church-meeting, with all its circumstances, is recorded, Act. 20. In which
convention, Paul first preached, which exercise he continued till midnight,
and when that was ended, then the Lords Supper was performed. And we must
suppose, that the Apostles never preached the Word, or administered the
Sacraments, without solemn invocation of God.

When the Apostles were dead, these same things were observed by the following
Church, on the Lords day, which, by and by, I will in brief show. Therefore,
not without reason, have I concluded the public offices of piety on that day
to be performed under these three.

In describing whereof, first, that Divine office of piety does occurr, The
Ministry of the Word (a word familiar enough to our age) without which, the
things of Religion cannot happily be dispatched. Neither were other duties
which tended to piety, done without it in the ancient Church. Therefore, in
delineating the public offices of piety, we will first speak of it. Now under
the Ministry of the Word to be had on the Lords Day, are understood both the
reading of the Word, and the explaining thereof.

First, as often as the Church was gathered Reading of Scripture.
together, the Holy Scriptures were read. In describing of which argument, I
will point at three things; namely, first, I will show what Scriptures were
read in the Church-assembly; secondly, whose office it was to do this; thirdly,
I will add something of the place out of which the Scriptures were read in the
Church-assembly.

It is evident out of diverse authors, that those Scriptures were read, Tert. ad
ux. l. 2. c. 6.
by whose reading faith was nourished. And that is thought by diverse men of
great name, in imitation of the Jews: by whom, it was an ordinary thing to read
Moses and the Prophets in the What Scripture was read in the Apostles age.
Synagogues, every Sabbath day, Acts 13. 15. and 15. 21. This custom of the
Jews, omitting ceremonials, was not only profitable to the Apostles, who upon
that occasion every where preached Christ in the Synagogues, out of Moses and
the Prophets, Act. 13. 15. and 17. 2, 3. but also was commended by the Apostles
to Christians, as often as the Church met: namely, that the writings of the old
Prophets should be read and expounded by the modern Prophets* 1 Cor. 14. 29.
Origin also witnesses (although he be deceived in giving the cause, for which
this was enjoined the Church, of the Apostles) that the Apostles ordained, that
the books of Jewish Histories should be read in Churches by the Disciples of
Christ. So he, initio Hom. 15. in Josh.

Moreover, there be some that gather out of 2 Cor. 8. 18. where the Apostle
says of Luke, With Titus we have sent our brother, whose praise is in the
Gospel, throughout all the Churches* that not only the Scriptures of the Old
Testament, were wont to be read, while the Apostles were alive, but also of the
Evangelists, about the History and Sermons of Christ. Where, according to them,
we may not unfitly observe, that even at that time the Gospel of Luke was wont
to be read in Churches. Paul is not afraid to adjure the Thessalonians, that
when that Epistle to them was finished, it should be read to all the holy
brethren, 1 These. 5. 27. and he requires the Colossians, that they read the
Epistle written from Laodicea: and that they should cause that which he sent
unto them, to be read in the Church of the Laodiceans, Col. 4. 16. And
Eusebius, out of Clement, relates, that Peter ordained, that the Gospel of Mark
was to be read in Churches. So Eusebius. Hist. l. 2. c. 4. and the same author our
Eusebius. Hist. 5. c. 8.
of Irenaeus, asserteth, that Matthew set forth his Gospel for the Hebrews, in
their own tongue, while Paul and Peter preached the Word at Rome.

After the Apostles death, the writings, not only of the Prophets and
Evangelists, but of the Apostles themselves, were read in the
Church Assemblies, as I have said from 1 These. 5. and Col. 4.

Justin Martyr Cap. 2.
says, that the writings of the Prophets and Apostles were read on Sunday in
their assemblies. Others afterward confess the same thing. Hom. 23. in Number.
Origin, when he reckons up the works to be performed on the Christian Sabbath,
he mentions the sacred reading in their assemblies; where also he speaks of
Reading and Treatises: and in Ex. Hom. 7. he says, The Lord always rains down
from Heaven (namely, when the holy Oracles were read, as he afterward explains
it) Manna on our Lords day; whence he concludes, that the Christians Lords day
is to be preferred to the Jewish Sabbath. Tertullian Ap. adv. gent. c. 39.
confesses, that the Church assembled for to remember those Divine things that
were read. And elsewhere, amongst the Lords day solemnities, he affirms, that
the sacred Scriptures were read; de Anima, c. 9. Cyprian mentions this reading,
Ep. 33. in which he writes to the Clergy and people, of one Aurelius, that was
ordained a Reader of him, to read the Gospel in the Church, etc. De praep.
Evangel. l. 4. c. 1.
Eusebius acknowledges, that both the Old and New Testament was read in
Churches, Ambros. in Epist. ad Soror. Ep. 33. Aug. de Civitate Dei, lib. 22.
cap. 8.

These things show, that the Scriptures both of the Old and New Testaments were
read, and in the fifty ninth Canon of the Council of Laodicea, it is ordained,
that only the Canonical books should be read; and in the sixtieth Canon, they
reckon up the names and order of Canonical Books of both Testaments. The same
provision is made in the 27th Canon of the Council of Carthage, apud Zonar.
That beside the Canonical Scriptures, nothing be read in the Church under the
name of Divine Scripture. Only they add the Books of Tobit, Judith, and Esther.

Yet this must not be concealed, not only Humane writings read in the Church.
the writings of the Apostles, and Prophets, but of diverse others, (who were
famous for piety, and of great authority in the Church) were anciently read in
the Church Assemblies. Dionysius Corinthiacus apud Eusebius. l. 4. c. 23.
reports, that Clements Epistle ad Corinth. was read on the Lords day. Hierom.
in Cat. Script. Ecclesiast. witnesses, that Effraemus Deacon of the Church at
Edissa, came to such renown, that after the reading of the Scriptures, his
writings were publicly read in some Churches. The sufferings of the Martyrs
were also read upon their Feasts. Council. Carthag. Can. 50. But the
Commentaries, in which the Martyrs conflicts were described, were only read
over on those days, whereon their memory was annually celebrated; witness
Zonaras in Council. Carthag. Can. 50. And such humane writings as were read in
the Church, are to be understood chiefly of the Psalms and Songs which were
devised of them, to praise God by. Eusebius mentions these, lib. 5. cap. 28.
and lib. 2. 17. Afterward, through the Devils subtilty, tares sprung up in the
Church, and under pretense of these writings, Heretics sowed their false
Doctrines, which the Fathers in Trull. Can. 2. observe, in the Constitutions
ascribed to Clement, to which, some things sorged, and some things repugnant to
Faith, are annexed: which evil, that the Fathers might feasonably prevent, they
frequently ordained, that no Books should be read in the public
Church-assembly, but the Holy Scriptures: much less, that it ever should be
safe through them, that many dreams which they babled out with a rash attempt,
like old wife's dotages) of vaintalking men, should be read among the Holy
Scriptures, as afterward, by use, it fell out; because, as we have seen, they
ordained, that nothing but the Scriptures should be read in Churches.

Now for the order, according to whose rule, all reading of the Scriptures
among the ancients was disposed, we meet with a few things to be observed out
of their Records. Whether, namely, in the primitive Church, there were selected
parts of the Scriptures which they read; or (as it was familiar with the Jews
on their Sabbathdayes) they read the Scripture in order, as the Lords days
returned, till they had finished that work; this, I say, is not certainly
known: only what parts of Scripture they read, they explained the same for the
peoples use, as the necessity of the present times did require. Tertul. apo. c.
39. Ambr. l. 5. ep. 33.

But afterward it does appear, that there was an order observed in reading the
Scriptures. St. Austin mentions the order observed by himself, in handling his
Lectures upon Scripture, in prooemio Epistolae Johannis. And he adds, Tract.
6. in Joh.
that the book of the Acts of the Apostles was every year read at an
anniversary solemnity, after the Lords Passion. He reports also, that Ps. 21.
was wont to be read every year, in the last week before the Passion-day of
Christ, all the people being attentive. Tract. 13. in Joh. Moreover also, when
there were diverse Feasts constituted in the Church, some certain and peculiar
lessons of Scripture were read every Feast Day, which were annually so
carefully observed, that no others could be more. Aug. in prooem. Epist. Jo.
The same appears from a Sermon of Chrysostom, against those that only met upon
Feast-dayes: who thinks it unseasonable at the solemnity of Pentecost, to
continue the Text formerly begun on, and omit the commemoration of the benefits
conserred on the Church at that time; and after Pentecost he prosecutes the
Text he was on before.

I will add no more testimonies for reading lessons out of the Holy Scripture,
in the Church-assembly, in a case that is plain enough, lest by repeating many
things, I cause weariness in the Reader. I will now relate the second thing
which I intended, for the candid Readers sake; namely, forasmuch as the
ancients judged the H. Scripture should be read in their conventions, therefore
they designed certain persons for to do that particular office, whom they
called Readers. Cyprian ordained one Ep. 24.
Saturus a Reader in the Church. He tells the Clergy and people, that Aurelius
a Confessor, was ordained a Reader by him, Ep. 34. and he designed the office
of a Reader to Celerinus. Ep. ead.

Now although this office was offered to Deacons read the Scriptures.
some, yet usually it was the Deacons work to read the Scripture in the holy
Church-assembly. Hierom reproved Sabinianus, because, after he had solicited a
Virgin to whoredom, Ep. ad Sabin.
he, as a Deacon read the Gospel. Sozomen, l. 7. c. 19. and Niceph. l. 12. c.
34. do witness, that this office amongst diverse, was translated to the Deacons:
and the Deacons An. 529.
are judged worthy to read what Christ spoke in the Gospel. Conc. Vasens. 2. c.
2. And thereupon Optatus, a Subdeacon, in Cyprian, Ep. 24. is called, Doctor
audientium, i. e. the teacher of them that hear. The Audientes, of whom more
afterward, were called those Who the Audientes were.
that were lately admitted, as if one should say, the tyro's [or new beginners]
in the Christian faith, so called, ab audiendo, from hearing; who, though they
were not admitted to the holy Eucharist, yet might be present at the reading of
the Scriptures; and therefore the Readers to them were called Doctors, [or
teachers.]

In diverse Churches also, only the Priests, and upon solemn days, the Bishops
performed this office, as Sozomen Hist. l. 7. c. 19.

Lastly, they that read the Scripture, stood Readers stood in sight of the
people.
in a pulpit, or tribunal of the Church, as Cyprian, Ep. 34. i. e. in some
higher place than the rest, from whence the lessons were read; and Cypr. calls
that place a tribunal metaphorically; for the tribunal was an high place, out
of which Judgment was given to the tribes [or wards.] So that he who performed
publicly the offices of Religion in the Church-assembly, was not severed from
the presence of the people, into an angle of the Church, there secretly to
celebrate the offices of Divine Worship, like some Conjurer, that mutters to
himself what he says, (as now it is the practice in Popish Churches:) but in
the sight of all he uttered what he had to say, or read with a loud voice,
which all that were present might understand: as once the holy man Ezra stood
in a pulpit of wood, which he had made for the purpose, that he might speak
freely in the face of the congregation. Neh. 8. So in Cyprian's age, he that
read the Law, and the Gospel of our Lord, being raised up with the advantage of
an higher Cyp* Ep. 34.
place, was seen of all the people; that the reading of the Scriptures might
better be observed of the hearers, and the reader being set on high, might be
seen of the people that stood about him. Eusebius confesses, that the
Scriptures were so publicly read in the Temples, that through the world were
erected to God, that they might be heard of all. De praepar. Evang. l. 5. c. 1.
and Constable. Ap. l. 2. c. 57. it is appointed, that the Reader should read out of
an high place.

That was also a token of reverence to the Scriptures, as once it was amongst
the Jews, Neh. 8. 5. and therefore, because a Bishop at Alexandria rose not up
when the Gospel was read, it is recited as an unusual fact in the Church.
Sozom. 7. 19.

And thus much for the public reading of the Scriptures every day, especially
on the Lords days, in use among the ancients.

CHAP. III.
Explaining of Scriptures on the Lords days, which was called Tractatus [or
treating upon, or handling a place.] Whose office it was to do this. Who the
Clerici were among the ancients. Bishops, q. Watchers, Overseers,
Superintendents. The Bishops interpreted the Scriptures: the Presbyters,
Deacons, Catechists, and sometimes also private men did the same.

SInce the Sabbath was given for understanding the Creator, and not for
Idleness sake, as Athanasius de Sabb. and Circumcis. therefore the ancients
have to the uttermost of their power endeavored, that by what means they
could, they might augment the Churches knowledge, by their labors on that day.
For this end, the Church being assembled, the Holy Scriptures (from whence the
knowledge of Divine things flows) were distinctly read: after the reading
whereof, followed their explication. This was used in the Church while the
Apostle was alive. While he prescribes the manner to those that prophecy in the
Church, he charges them to look to, that what they speak, they may promote men
in the study of piety, while to that work they either make make use of
exhortation, or comfort, 1 Cor. 14. 3. Neither was the use of prophesying left
off in the following Church; as may every where easily be observed in the
Fathers.

After the Apostles and Prophets writings, The Scripture being read, was
interpreted.
the Minister made an Oration, wherein he instructed the people, and exhorted
them to the imitation of such excellent things Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
. Ambrose Ep. 33. l. 5.
interpreted the appointed Lessons, and did apply them to the peoples present
use. Origin says, the Christians in their readings, and the explication of
them, did exhort the people to piety toward the blessed and great God, and to
other virtues, the inseparable companions of piety. Contra Celsum, l. 3. After
the ordinary Scriptures were read, De Civit. Der, l. 22. c. ^.
says Austin, I came to my Sermon. The same appears every where out of the
Fathers Treatises.

This explication of the Scriptures, with us is called* Sermon, but with the
ancients a Treatise. Origin exhorts to reading the Scripture, and Treating.
Hom. 23. in Number. Ambrose l. 5. ep. 33. and Cyprian de bono pudicitiae. And they
that explained the Scriptures, were called Tractatores [Treatisers, or
Treaters.] Hieronym. adv. errores Joh. Hierosolymitan. says, he esteems of
Apostles after one sort, and of other Treaters after another. And Ep. ad
August. he calls those Treaters, that did interpret the Holy Scriptures. Aug.
Ep. 11.

In explicating this Section about Treatises upon Scriptures, first, we will
consider whose office it was to interpret them. Secondly, the manner which they
used in explaining of them. In the third place, something shall be added about
the time, at which the ancients did attend these.

In the first place, we will speak of the Treaters themselves. Those to whom
the administration of the Word was committed by God, in the Scriptures, they
were by a name familiar enough to the Fathers, called Clerici, [the Clergy] or
in Clerum Clerici, whence se so called.
ascripti [admitted into the Clergy] either because Matthias was chosen by lot,
who was the first that we read of that was ordained by the Apostles (so Augu.
in Psalm. 67.) or because they are the Lords lot, (...) should possess him for
their lot and inheritance, with the children of Levi for ever. So Austin, in
Prolog. Ad Nepoti.
in Psalm. if that Preface be Austins. Hierom gives almost the same reason, who
fatih, they are the Lords lot, and because the Lord himself is the lot, that
is, the portion of the Clergy. The Apostle comprehends all to whom any public
charge in the Church of the Philippians was committed, under Bishops and
Deacons, Philip. 1. 1. Where, under the name of Bishops, he understands all
that especially executed the office of teaching: and under the name of Deacons,
he intimates others that ministered.

The name of Bishop is a general appellation, The name of Bishop.
signifying all those that labor in the Word of God, and attend upon the cure
of souls. Whence the office of an Apostle is called (...), [a Bishoprick] Act.
1. 20. and by the word (...), are elegantly described men that administer the
Word according to the Scriptures. For it signifies both indulgently to attend,
as shepherds their flocks (as Jacob, Genesis 32. 38, 39, 40.) that they may drive
away wild beasts from the sheep; and to watch like watchmen, Ezekiel. 3. 17. I
have made thee a watchman to the house of Israel; namely, that thine
adversaries come not near thee, who threaten thee destruction. So Heb. 13. 17.
the teachers of the Gospel are said to watch for the souls of the Church. The
Holy Scripture Prosper. de v. 1. co^ l. 2. c. 2.
calls these watchmen, who watch the actions of all men, and with an aim of
religious curiosity, spy out, how every one lives with his household in his
house, how with the Citizens in a City. Where the duties of Bishops, or
Watchmen is excellently set out. Ambrose interprets Bishops, super inspectores,
[overseers] lib. de dignitate sacerdotali, cap. 6. Hierom contends, that they
are most truly In Job 20.
called Superintendentes, because they are to look diligently over [or
superintend] every one in their flock: and Ep. ad Evagrium, he renders the
Greek word (...), by superintendentes. These words therefore, do not signify
any perfunctory inspection, which only is undertaken for knowledge sake; but a
diligent and accurate watchfulness, that ought to be Bishops, that they might
make provision of necessary means to feed their flocks, and instruct them to
live piously. As Alipius was, whom Austin Ep. 35. acknowledges to be a Pastor
carefully governing the Lords pasture sheep.

Under the title of Bishop, both Bishops and Presbyters are comprehended. And
though there be some that distinguish not a Presbyter from a Bishop, yet I do
with Austin, who expounds the words Oration, Precatio, and Postulatio, choose to
understand that by these words, which all. or almost all the Church does often
use. Ep. 59. Therefore, since according to the custom of the Church, or
according to the words of honor Aug. Ep.
which the Church uses, the office of a Bishop is greater than that of a
Presbyter: the highest Ministry in the Church is now signified under the title
of Bishop. The Bishops work was especially to interpret the Holy Scriptures,
when the Church was gathered together: and therefore I think their power was of
the Ancients signified in the name Cathedra, (because chiefly it consisted in
teaching.) Optatus l. 2.
says, the first gift of the Church was Cathedra, whereby is signified, that
the Churches power is instructive; and for this cause, Aug. in Ps. 36. conc. 3.
de 3 part Ps. circa finem.
confesses, that Christ's Chair [or cathedram] succeeded Moses chair. i. e. the
Apostles of Christ succeeded the Interpreters of Moses and the Prophets.

The Bishops duty therefore is, to instruct the people commended to their care:
and Hierom thinks Adv. Jovinianum, lib. 1.
this ability to be so necessary for them, that it can profit a Bishop nothing
at all to have the testimony of his virtues in his own mind, except he be able
to instruct the people committed to him. And Lib. 6. de Trinit. non procul ab
initio.
Hilary acknowledges, that by the necessary virtue of his office, he is bound
to serve the Church in preaching the Gospel. And therefore Ep. ad Dracontium.
Athanasius excited Dracontius to take upon him a Bishopric (to which he was
elected) with this reason, because the people by whom he was made Bishop, did
expect that he would bring them meat out of the Doctrine of Scripture. Neither
did the greatest Bishops decline that charge, but rather for a Bishop to
abstain from preaching, seemed to Ep. l. 1. ep. 24.
Gregory the Great a foul shame, and wicked act, and he says, that he is dead
that walks without the sound of preaching. ibid.

Since therefore the principal duty of Bishops is terminated in Doctrine, (to
which, by necessity of office they are obliged, and without which, although
they otherwise live a pious life, they are not to be adorned with the title of
Bishops) their first and principal charge was, to interpret the Word of God
(the only subject for all doctrine of Ministers in the Church, Luke 24. 27.)
when the Church was assembled for hearing the same; that the most vigilant
Bishops of old did this with great praise, and for the great fruit of the
Church, their most learned Treatises, which are extant among their works do
testify.

But to explain the Holy Scripture, in the Presbyters explained the Scriptures.
Churches public assembly, did not only lie upon Bishops, but upon Presbyters
also, and that ex officio. So 1 Pet. 5. 2. Therefore the second chair in the
Church was assigned them by the Fathers. So Clem. Alexand. Strom. l. 6. Origin
says, Tract. 24. (...) Math.
that some Deacons in his age, did seek after the first chairs of them who are
called Presbyters. If the chair was assigned to them, then it was their duty to
instruct the people in the doctrine of the Gospel: if it had not been their
duty to feed the Church with the food of the Word and Sacraments, why should
St. Paul charge them to take heed Act. 20. 17. 18.
unto themselves, and to all the flock, over the which the Holy Ghost had made
them overseers, to feed the Church of God? Augustine being Possid. de vit. Aug.
c. 5.
yet a Presbyter, while Valerius was alive, edified the Church with the Word
and Sacraments. It was the custom at Alexandria, that (although one was set
over all) the Presbyters kept their Churches apart, and gathered the people
committed to them into assemblies, Sozom. Hist. l. 1. c. 14. and taught them so
gathered together, as an assembly. Niceph. l. 8. c. 11. Neither was this power
of teaching the people taken away from the Presbyters of Alexandria, until
Arius, a Presbyter, disputing about his doctrine, introduced a new one. Sozom.
7. 19. Socrates tells us, that the Presbyters, as well as the Bishops of
Caesaria, Cappadocia, and in Cyprus, did interpret the Scriptures, l. 5. c. 22.
In Conc. Vasens. Au. 529.
secund. Not only in Cities, but in all Parishes, the power of preaching was
given to Presbyters. Can. 2. Yea, this they were to do in the presence of the
Bishop. Constit. Ap. l. 2. c. 57.

The dispencing therefore of the Mysteries of God, was committed to Presbyters,
as well as to Bishops, for they are over the Church of Christ, and in breaking
of the Lords body and blood are partakers with Bishops, and likewise in
teaching of the people, and in the office of preaching. Conc. Aquisgrav. 1. An.
816.
c. 8. These, and many other things, do show, that with the ancients the
public preaching of the Word was committed to Presbyters, and for this cause,
it is determined by the Apostles sentence, that double honor is due to 1 Timothy
5. 17.
them.

In the third place, sometimes this office of Deacons also expounded Scriptures.
treating out of the Scriptures, was committed to Deacons. For although at
first they saw to the collections, and distributing of alms, yet afterward
they performed other offices: in their hands was the care of preserving all
order in the holy Church assembly: wherefore a Deacon is said to be
consecrated, not to the Priesthood, but to the Ministry. Conc. Carth. 4. c. 4.

But it is certain, that other offices than those that were committed to them
from the beginning, fell to Deacons; yea, in Scripture they begun to use
Stephen and Philip, to take off some part of the Ministry, as the Church
increased. We read that the Deacons discoursed out of Scripture, and preached
the Gospel, Act. 7. and 8. and that Philip was one of the seven Deacons, Act.
21. 8. So Austin thinks too. Who, ex utroque Quaest. in 101. and Can. 2. Conc.
Ancyrani, are said, (...), i. to preach; which power they are deprived of, by
the authority of that Council, if through cowardice they had sacrificed in the
torments.

Fourthly, We read that Catechists had Catechists did the same.
sometimes liberty to teach publicly in the Church. Origin, who had not yet
attained to the degree of a Presbyter, was asked by Alexander Bishop of
Jerusalem, and Theoctistus, Bishop of the Church in the same Caesaria, that he
would open the Scriptures, in the public assembly of the Church at Caesaria in
Palestine. Also Euelpis was asked by Leo Bishop of Laranda, Paulinus, by Celsus
Bishop of Iconium, and Theodorus, by Atticus Bishop of Synada. We read these
things in Eusebius Hist. l. 6. c. 20. Nicephorus also relates, that Origin did
interpret the Scriptures amongst them of Alexandria, l. 12. c. 34. And no
wonder, when private men were sometimes permitted to preach the Word of God;
namely, when there were none deputed to that office, who might perform it, nor
could be used any means of faith any other way. This did Aedesius and
Frumentius Theodoret l. 1. c. 23.
among the Indians, to their great commendation, and the no small profit of the
Church; where there were none executing any Ecclesiastical function, to call
together public assemblies, and perform the Divine Mysteries. Theodoret also
records, that a woman converted the Iberi to the truth of Christian Religion,
Hist. l. 1. c. 24. But none doubts, but that this was done extraordinarily,
because this charge was not committed to them, according to the order which is
to be observed in the Church: although Bishops were wont sometimes to exhort
those whom they knew to be fit among the Laity, that they might thereby
something profit the people by expounding the Scriptures, and preaching, to
exercise this charge, even in their presence. So Eusebius, ubi supra.

CHAP. IV.
The manner of expounding Scriptures in use among the ancients. Treating begun
with Prayer. Texts of the Treatises. Scriptures being read, were applied to the
peoples use. The Treaters did sometimes stand, and sometimes sit: after
Treating followed Prayers: after those were ended, a Psalm was sung to [praise]
God.

THese are they to whom the expounding of Scripture was committed among the
ancients: which things being declared, somewhat remains to be spoken of the
manner which was observed by them in there Expositions.

In the first place, when they were to treat out of Scripture, they saluted the
people. So Optatus contra Parmenianum, libro vet. And what kind of salutation
that was, is taught in Constable. Ap. l. 8 c. 5. Chrysostom. also in Hom. 3. in
Coloss. namely, the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God the
Father, and the communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all, etc. But
afterward it was usual with the Bishops to salute the people in another manner
than the Presbyters; which was prohibited in Conc. Bracarensi T. 2. Conc.
1. Can. 21.

This salutation being premised, whether without further prayer to God, they
set upon their Treating, is doubted by some. But if the Love Feasts in use
among Christians, were not performed without the office of Prayer; (for before
they sat down, they Tertull. adv. Gent. Apolic. 39.
first took a taste of Prayer to God, and when the Supper was finished, Prayer
determined the Feast;) if, I say, their banquets were never The study both of
Praying and teaching is commended to the Ministers of the Word from the Apostle
in Act. 6. 4.
celebrated but with Prayer to God, much less durst they set upon the
expounding of the Holy Scriptures, without the invocation of Gods name being
premised. But this I will advertise the Reader of, that the industry of
Antiquity has so carelessly touched this part of holy things, that there is but
a very little which at this day we can find delivered in the Records of the
ancients, about this matter. And neither is it to be wondered at, nor is it
unusual. There are in this age diverse Sermons of very learned Divines,
published, which are not uttered but with Prayer to God first made, and yet
none of those Prayers are prefixed to the printed Copies. We may conjecture the
same of the Ancients Treatises, without any injury to the truth: which,
doubtless, the pious Fathers never entered upon without Prayers to God first
premised; which thing I will now manifest by some testimonies.

The godly Prayer of a certain holy man is extant in Hom. 10. in Coloss.
Chrysostom. I know, says St. Chrysostom, a certain godly man that prayed
thus; Before these words, he said nothing, namely, We give thanks to thee for
all thy benefits, which have been conferred on us unworthy wretches, from the
first to this present day; for those we know, and those we know not: for those
that are manifest, and those that are not manifest: for what have been done in
work or word: for what have been done voluntarily, and unvoluntarily: for all
things that have been made for us unworthy creatures, for afflictions, for
recreations, for Hell, for punishment, for the Kingdom of Heaven. We pray thee
preserve our soul holy, having a pure conscience, and to make our end worthy
thy clemency. Thou that have so loved us, as to give us thy only begotten son;
vouchsafe us to be worthy thy love. Give us wisdom in thy word, and in thy
fear. O only begotten Christ, inspire us with thy fortitude. Then that have
given for us thy only begotten, and sent forth thy Holy Spirit for the
remission of our sins; if we have willingly, or against our will sinned, pardon
it, and impute it not to us. Remember all them that call upon thy name in
truth. Remember all that wish us well and ill. For we are all of us men. And
then having added a Prayer of the faithful, as it were for a certain conclusion
and winding up for all persons, he having made this Prayer, here he ended. And
thus he.

The aforesaid Prayer was rehearsed in Chrisostom's presence, but where, or
when, it is not evident out of the forecited place. It seems to me, without
prejudicing others, to have been recited by one that was entering upon a
Treating out of the Word of God; especially since he calls him, by whom it was
used (...), i. e. a holy man. And secondly, he used this Prayer when he begun
to speak: for before it he said nothing. Thirdly, Chrysostom speaks of his
frequent using it, when he himself was also present: but Laics had never
liberty to pray frequently, when any of the Clergy were by; much less when St.
Chrysostom was present: who yet confesses, that he heard him, (...), i. so to
pray. Fourthly, the whole form of the Prayer shows plain enough, that it was
used publicly: for whetherfoever he give thanks, or petition God in it, he
pleads not only his own cause, but others, and always speaks in the plural
number. Fifthly, he seems to speak it with respect had to the Word; for he begs
for wisdom in the word. Lastly; he said nothing before he used it, (...). But
it is not credible, that the men of that age did in their ordinary discourses
burn with such an ardency of zeal toward God, as that they would not begin
them without premising Prayer to God. These things persuade me to believe, that
the aforesaid Prayer was used publicly, at the Treating upon the Word: but let
the wise judge.

Basilius M. shows, that Prayers were wont to be said by the whole assembly,
after that the President went up into the Pulpit to teach, or expound any thing
out of the Scriptures; for he makes this the beginning of his Sermon: I need
the Prayers of them that love the Lord, that by the grace of the good God and
his Christ, the holy and good Spirit may admonish and teach us, those things it
has heard from the Lord, and may direct our mind into the way of peace, and
into found words to the edifying of faith. Basil. de Baptism. Austin uses the
same preface, when he begins his fifteenth Sermon, De verbis Apostoli. De bono
pudicitiae.
Cyprian spoke not only the words which came from the fountains of the
Scripture, but with the words he joined Prayers, and requests to God, that both
for himself and his auditors he might both open the treasures of his
Sacraments, and also that he would give strength to supply them with what they
should know. These things show, that the Blessed Martyr at his Treating out of
the Scripture, did pour out Prayers to God, that what he said might be useful
both to himself and his hearers; for without Gods mercy, all the watchfulness
of a Pastor is in vain. Therefore did Cyprian adjoyn Prayer to his Treatises,
to implore the mercy of God, that what was heard might turn into deeds. Yea,
Austin judges, that Prayer is so necessary to him that is to treat upon the
Scripture, before he begin that work, De doctrine. Christiana l. 4. c. 15. etc.
30.
that none, in his opinion, ought to teach them before he pray, and that at the
same time, before he let loose his tongue to preach, he lift up his thirsty
soul to God, that he may cast up that which he has drunk in. And afterward,
cap. 30. Let him that is to speak to the people, pray that God would give good
words into his mouth, etc. And what Augustine required of other Doctors, with
great devotion he performed himself, in that he earnestly begged of God, when
he spoke to the people, that he De verbis Domini, Sermon. 51.
might utter what was true, and suitable in his Sermon, and what the hearers
might understand, and what they might believe.

2. When the Prayer was ended, they entered upon the Treatise: and they were
usually Texts of their Treatises.
wont to preach to the hearers out of the Lessons of Scripture which were then
read. Tertullian Ap c. 39.
says, that the Lessons of Scripture were rehearsed in the assembly, as the
quality of the times required, either to forewarn, or to call to remembrance:
that is, they applied the Scriptures that were read, to the quality of the
times. So says Justin Martyr, the President instructed the People with his
oration, to imitate those things which were read in the Records of the prophets
and Apostles, ap. 2. Ambrose applied the L. 5. Ep. 33.
History of Job, and prophecy of Jonas, as he read them, to the use of his
hearers. August. Tract. in Joh. c. 12. and 13. and the same appears every
where from those Treatises. Origin says, that he intended briefly to admonish
his hearers, of those things that had been read, Hom. 8. in Levit. Athanasius
says, in the beginning of his Oration De Semente, We have heard now how Jesus
went through the corn fields, and how he healed the withered hand; wherefore ^
think it convenient, if we discourse a little upon the Lesson in the Gospel.

Sometimes they also did interpret that place of Scripture, which the people
were greatly desirous should be explained unto them: which the words of Basil
M. who De Baptis.
was about to make a Sermon to the People on Christ's Baptism, do testify. For
he says, that he entertained with a ready mind, their pious admonition in
Christ, about the most glorious baptism of Christ: and acknowledges, that he
will be very ready to speak of it according to his ability.

Thirdly, in their Treatises they looked to Scripture was to be applied to the
peoples use.
this, that what was read should be applied to the peoples use. So Tertull. ap.
c. 39. Justin Martyr, Apol. 2. says, that the President did exhort the hearers
to the imitation of what was read: and not without reason; for to preach, is,
according to Isychius, in Levit. lib. 2. c. 9. to exhort the people. Origin
contra Celsum, lib. 3. affirms, that the Christians expounded the Scriptures as
they read them, that they might exhort the people to piety toward God, and
unto other virtues. Ambrose also accommodated the Scriptures, as they were
read, to the present use and edification of the people, partly, by teaching,
and partly, by reproving. See the beginning of Sermon. 5. The same he does in
lib. 5. Ep. 33. And Chrysostom confesses, that he fulfilled that charge, by
convincing, rebuking, and admonishing. Sermon. ad eos qui in festis tantum
convenient. t. 8. p. 8. Treaters sometimes stood, and sometimes sat.


Moreover, these Treaters, as they expounded the Scriptures, did sometimes
stand, 1 Cor. 14. and sometimes they sat. For the Bishops seat (whose office
it was chiefly to treat out of Scripture) was set in the midst of the Church,
on either side whereof the Presbyters sat. Constit. Ap. lib. 2. cap. 57. When
Chrysostom preached unto the people, he sat in the pulpit, or chair, as his
manner was. Niceph. lib. 13. c. 4. Chrysostom himself confesses, that he sat
in the pulpit and taught. Hom. de non contemnenda Ecclesia, t. 7. p. 891. All
sat when they taught the people, in Optatus his time; although Hierom taxes
the superciliousness of some Hierom. in Gal. 4.
Bishops, smelling of the pride of this world, who, being set as in a
watchtower, will scarcely vouchsafe to look upon mortal men, and otherwise
their fellow servants. And the Epistle of the Council of Antioch reckons this
amongst the portentous manners of Samosatenus, that he, being not content with
a mean one, as a Disciple of Christ, has erected himself an ascent in the
Church, and a chair of state, like one of the Princes of this world. Eusebius.
Hist. 7. c. 24. Gregory Nazianzen Or. 26. in plagam grandinis.
also nippeth the pride of Ministers, who fit upon high thrones, and that lift
up their superciliousness higher than the Theaters themselves.

Fourthly, As they begun their Treatises They conclude the Treatise with prayer
with Prayer, so when they were ended, they stirred up the people to call upon
God. This did Athanasius, when he ended his Sermon de Semente. But because,
says he, our discourse has proceeded far enough, let us arise and stretch
forth holy hands, that having called upon the God of all things, we may enjoy
his assistance, through Christ our Lord. The same did Basil, as appears from
the end of Hom. 7. Hexaemer. When the Minister, says Justin Martyr, has
finished his Sermon, we all rise up, and pour out our Prayers, Ap. 2. After
exposition, the Priests by appointment lift up their hands to Heaven. Isychius
in Levit. lib. 2. c. 9.

The Prayer of St. Austin, which he used after all his Sermons and Treatises,
is extant in the end of his Commentaries upon the Psalms, in these words; We,
being converted to the Lord God, our omnipotent Father, let us with a pure
heart give him, so far as our weakness is able, great and unfeigned thanks,
praying with our whole mind, for his singular meekness, that in his good
pleasure he would vouchsafe to hear our Prayers: and that by his power he would
expel the enemy from our actions and thoughts; multiply our faith, rule our
mind, afford us spiritual cogitations, and bring us to his blessedness, Through
Jesus Christ his Son, and our Lord, who lives and reigns with him, being
God, in the unity of the Holy Ghost, through all ages. Amen. This very same
Prayer is extant also Sermon. 30. de verbis Domini.

Lastly, when Prayers were ended, they After Treateng they sung Psalms.
sung Hymns [or psalms] to God. It is ordained, Council. Toletan. 4. Can. 11.
circ. ann. 671. that not before, but after the Gospel be preached, Hymns be
sung. So Basil* Ep. 63. ad Neo Caesari.
Neither did they begin to sing Psalms, before their having made confession to
God, they rose up from Prayer. Chrysostom teaches the same from the example of
Christ. Hom. 83. in Matthew.

CHAP. V.
Whether the bare reading of Scriptures in the Church-assembly be properly
preaching? and how the reading of Scripture may be called preaching?

THese are the things which are chiefly to be observed touching the great
labors which the Fathers took in their continual Treatises upon the Holy
Scriptures: whom, he that shall seriously observe, will evidently find, with a
small ado, that the pious and laborious Fathers in instructing the people, were
not of that mind, as if the naked reading of Scripture were sufficient to
instruct the Christian people in the understanding of them, without undertaking
any farther explication of them to the peoples use: which diverse Treaters of
this age are not ashamed to urge. They that assert this, do either not excel
in any faculty to interpret the Scriptures, or the Holy Ghost has endued them
with no meet gifts to undergo that office, (to which they are wanting, through
their carelessness) with dexterity, and to the Churches great profit. And that
such should stand for the bare reading of Scripture, and decline painful
treating out of the same, I no more wonder at them, than at the Fox, (as it is
in the fable) that had his own tail cut off, the want of which he thought
himself truly disgraced by) who persuaded the other Foxes also to cut off their
^ayles, (as if they were both a burden and blemish to them:) So these men,
being unfit to expound Scripture themselves, could not envy others this
ability. If these men's eye ( Mat. 20. 15.) be not evil, out of which in due
time it would be convenient to pluck their beam, let them consider.

As for those that judge they may safely forbear labor in expounding the
Scriptures, although they be of God endued with a tolerable ability to undergo
that burden* I cannot without grief of mind consider, and admire their
slothfulness, and yet they contend for the Scriptures, as if to them nothing
was more dear than reading of the Scriptures, which they glory of before
others, that they highly value. When the learned Divine. Mr. S. A. seriously
weighed the temper of these men with himself, it came into his mind, how
Aurelius Fuscus blamed Livy, for commending Thucydides writings: for he praised
Thucydides writings; not for Thucydides sake, but because he thought that he
could the more easily overcome Sallustius, if he preferred Thucydides first: so
any man, though of no fine judgment, may here smell out these men's disposition:
they commend the bare reading of the Scriptures to the Church, not because they
are delighted therein, but that under this pretense they may oppose their
necessary explication; in which, while they give up themselves to idleness,
they observe others, not without some stomaching, carnestly to bestow their
pains.

There is no body so shameless, as to deny, How reading may be called preaching.
that the reading of Scripture in the Churchassembly, is necessary for
increasing both the faith, and knowledge of the people: and he that reads
Scripture, does after a manner preach them, I deny not: since any may either by
hand or writing, evangelize. i. e. declare abroad. But this word Preaching is
here more strictly to be taken: under which, after reading of the Scriptures,
(always in use and esteem in the Church of God, as formerly has been shown)
both their interpretation, and application to the Hearers, are comprehended,
which the Fathers used, when the reading of Scripture was ended, as the
testimonies cited in the foregoing Chapter do manifest. Nor do the Scriptures
say otherwise: for it is said, Act. 15. 21. that Moses was preached, Act. 15. 21.
when he was read every Sabbath day: because it was a custom of the Jews to
interpret the Scriptures as they were read, Neh. 8. 4, 7, 8. The Elders of the
Levites interpreted the Law, when it was read unto the people. Philo Judaeus
makes mention of this custom, who was coetaneous to the Apostles, in Eusebius. de
praeparat. Evang. lib. 8. c. 2. When the Priest, says he, or one of the Elders
reads the Law, (...), he expounds it severally, (we use that word, when we
bring a more full exposition, and rehearsal of a thing) and that through the
whole seventh day. And if no more than a naked reading of Scripture had been
required to constitute a fit Minister of the New Testament, St. Paul having
obtained an Embassy from the Lord to preach the Gospel, had not dealt seriously
with God, when he would have an open mouth, and free to preach the same
granted, which yet he did with all his heart, Col. 4. 3. where he is to be
thought to ask for something more than a faculty to read the Scriptures. And
when the Lord taxes the watchmens blindness in Isaiah, Is. 56. 10. whom he
calls greedy dogs, feeding themselves, that are ignorant, does he only brand
them for being ignorant of reading Scripture? Moreover, if nothing were
required by a Minister of the Gospel than reading of the Scripture, then he
that once shall read them in the sacred Churchassembly, must straightway be
said to preach them, as though he had abundantly fulfilled the part of a
gallant Treater; and so at length he that being called before a tribunal into
judgment, for being guilty of some smaller crime, and shall, according to the
custom of some Kingdoms bottomed upon obsolete Canons, distinctly read some
part of the Holy Scripture, which the Judge offers him, that he, having some
milder punishment inflicted, may escape with his life, for his skill in
reading; I see not why such a watchman should not be judged acute, and fit
enough, because he reads as a Clergyman: and (...), i. e. to divide the Word
of truth aright (to undergo which task, if we ask Paul, he will answer, (...),
i. who is sufficient? 2 Cor. 2. 16.) will according to them be nothing else but
to read the word of truth distinctly: and at last it will come to this, that
the religious education of youth in the Universities, that they may make
themselves better furnished to undergo the charge of preaching the Gospel, will
be in vain.

How little the defenders of this opinion do differ from the Gnosimachi, let
them look to it. Damascen witnesses, that they were De Here Is.
such adversaries to the knowledge of Christians, that they said, that it was a
vain, and less necessary labor in them, who sought for any knowledge in the
Divine Scriptures.

But who will there be found desirous of Divine knowledge, that will not be
weary of these fooleries? and what to judge of the premises, viz. Whether a
Reader of Scripture may deservedly, and properly in the Church of God be called
a Preacher of them? let the wise judge of it. Since Preaching cannot univocally
be predicated of simple reading of the Scriptures, and their interpretation and
application. For Preaching has reading previous to it, but reading of
Scriptures does not contain in it their explication. I will add nothing of the
difference in the words, (...).

CHAP. VI.
The time assigned to the Treatises of the ancients; namely, how long they
continued their Treatises, were not long, usually about an hour: but they were
not tied to an hour: None was to go out before the Treatise was ended.

FOr the fuller discovery of these Treatises out of Holy Scripture, something
is in the third place to be added, of the time assigned by the ancients to
their Treatises: touching which, a double question does occurr: first, how long
their Treatises lasted, secondly, how often treated they in the week.

For the continuance of their Treatises, Their Treatises were not long.
the Fathers troubled themselves but a little: and therefore they continued
their Sermons an hour, and sometimes longer: and that they were not long in
their Treatises, may be observed from Origen's, and all the other Fathers (who
drew not out their Sermons to any long time with the people) their manner of
Treating. For they thought it to be much more advised to teach often, than
long: and those who Treated out of the Scripture, looked to that, of which once
Hierom admonished Augustine; namely, Aug. Ep. 11.
lest the Sermon being drawn out too long, could not be understood; for they
knew well enough, that a satiety in a Sermon was no less an enemy to the ears,
than too much meat to the body, as Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 42. therefore, lest
their unpleasant prolixity should beget in the Hearers a loathing of the
Sermon, they were cautious for this respect. Basilius M. Hexam. Hom. 8.
being moved with this consideration, ended his morning Sermon [the sooner]
lest he should make his auditors more dull against the evening assembly.

Besides, they judged, that holy Doctrine was to be instilled by little and
little, for defect of understanding in the people: which Hom. 3. de Lazaro, 1.
5. p. 242.
Chrysostom. declares by a similitude from a Mother that makes way to bring a
sucking infant to solid meat: she does not pour much at once into the mouth of
a mere infant, lest, what was poured in, be forthwith cast up again of the
child: therefore the mother does pour in by little and little, and so what is
given, is presently by the child sent through him without any trouble. After
this manner, the Fathers propounded not many things to their hearers, at one
and the same time, lest what they had proposed, should slip out of their
Auditors minds; and therefore they chose rather to propound what they had to
say, at distinct times. Chrysostom also, Hom. 15. in Genesis assigns this very
reason; namely, that they might better consider with themselves what they had
heard.

But although they did not protract their Sermons very long, yet was there a
time set for the doctrine of the Sermon, that neither the Teachers should weary
themselves with the multitude of words, nor the hearers. Chrysostom. Hom. 2. de
verbis Isaiae, t. 5. p. 13^.
And he that shall say, that the time of a whole Sermon was determined within
the space of about an hour, will not much miss it: as appears from Basil's
second Sermon in Psalm. 14. where he says, that he could not finish yesterday
his Sermon with them, under an hours space, and what remained, he deferred
till the following day. Hom. 2. in Number.
Origin reproved some men that rather followed their worldly, than spiritual
affairs; because they assigned one or two hours of a whole day to God, and come
to prayer in the Church; but spend their principal care about the regard of the
world and their belly. From which, it is given to understand, how long they were
present at the Churchassembly; namely, one or two hours.

Austin confesses, that he carefully avoided speaking in his Sermons to the
people, of the abominable sin against the Holy Ghost, because he could not
finish this question, which of all he judged the greatest, Ser. 11. de verb.
Dom.
within the space of an hour. (namely, at the publick-assembly.) The same
appears out of Chrysostom, when he reproves those that forsook the Communion,
and Congregation of the Saints; especially, because, whereas the week having an
hundred sixty eight hours, God has set apart one for himself, and they would
spend this about secular, and ridiculous matters. Hom. de Euchar. And
elsewhere, Hom. de non contemnenda Eccles. t. 7. p. 891. he makes mention of
two hours in which the Church is to attend spiritual affairs. idem, t. 5. p.
523.

But they were not so tied to an Treatises not tied to an hour^^.
hours space, as that upon any necessary occasion emerging, they might not
continue their Sermon longer to the people. What Austin Ep. 86.
answers to Urbicus, about the continuance of Fasts, may be referred hither; he
thought that if any necessity arose, a dinner was not to be preferred to a more
urgent action. Which he confirms by the example of the Church, Act. 20. which
thought it not much to hear St. Paul continuing his Sermon till midnight. To
judge the same of Treatises (which upon some urgent necessity, may be longer
continued than ordinary) who will judge it to be alien from the Christian Faith?

Yet whether their Treatises were long No going out before the Treatise ended.
or short, he that went out of the Auditory, before the Treater had finished
his Sermon, was obnoxious to the Churches censure. Chrysostom, for this cause,
does Hom. 83. in Matthew.
severely pinch some that waited not for the last sentence of the mystery. And
elsewhere he requires it of all, that none go out of the Church before they be
dismissed. For if any went out before the dismission, he was, as a fugitive,
required his reason. Homil. de non contemnenda Eccles. In the fourth Council of
Carthage, Canon 24. it is provided, that he that goes forth while the Priest is
speaking, shall be noted with the terrible censure of Excommunication. See the
twenty eighth Canon Council. Aurelian. 1. ann. 507. Also Can. 27. Council.
Agathensis, ann. 306.

Lastly, Because the Auditors were not to go out of the Church-assembly till
the end of the Treatise, the Treaters, when they had ended their Treatises,
conferred their help in pouring out their Prayers; as formerly has been shown
in the fourth Chapter. I only add this, that Chrysostom commends his hearers
that received his admonitions with great cheerfulness, and that they were not
offended with their prolixity, but preserved a continual desire of hearing,
with an extreme setledness of vigor, even to the end. In princip. Homil. 15.
in Genesin.

CHAP. VII.
The ancients Treated every day out of Scripture: and did not prohibit those
that taught others diligently, from that their diligence in teaching.

IN the second place, it will not be unprofitable to find out, how often we
read that this was done by the ancients, within a weeks compass, or how often
the Fathers were wont to treat out of the Scripture to the people. To which
question I answer briefly, and say, that they buckled themselves to this work
every day, (as occasion offered) but especially on Lords Days, on which they
were not wanting twice to sustain this labor, when they had liberty for
persecution.

But because this, through some men's prejudice, may seem a thing hard to
believe, we will plead with the very testimonies of the gravest authors, and
will teach both, by the grace of God, out of their records.

In the first place, they used to preach to The ancients Treated out of
Scriptures every day.
the people every day, which will appear to him that looks into their
Treatises. For how often do we meet with this phrase in the beginning of their
Treatises, Yesterday's Sermon? -- Ambr. de Sacramentis, l. 5. c. 1. Also l, 3.
c. 1. also Sermon. 92. which he begins in the same manner.

Chrysostom thinks it necessary that a Bishop should preach every day; and he
shows the fruit of this diligence, that by continuance in teaching, the
auditors minds might retain the Sermon. Chrysostom. de sacerdotio, lib. 6. And what
burden the grave Father imposed upon other men's shoulders in this business, yet
he declined it not himself through a Pharisaical austerity, though it were hard
to be born, which his Sermons show.

Ye made yesterday, which had been the Devils Festival, to be the Spirits
Feast Day, because ye received what we said to you, with a great desire of
mind, etc. Hom. de Lazar.

Hom. 34. in Genesis he says, Ye learned yesterday the excellent modesty of the
Patriarch

Hom. 22. in Genesis thus he begins; The relics of yesterdayes table, I set
before you to day. Such prefaces as these do frequently occurr in his Homilies.

Hom. 5. ad Populum. Although I have spoken to you of this matter, yesterday,
and the day before yesterday, yet shall I not persuade you to it to day, nor to
norrow, nor the next day after to morrow, etc.

Hom. 13. ad Populum. With the same beginning, and like prefaces, with which I
begun yesterday, and the day before yesterday, I will also begin to day.

These, and many others, that may be observed in him, do plainly show, that he
performed the office of Treating out of Scripture every day to the people.
Greg. Nyss. Orat. 2. de 40 Martyribus, makes mention of the things he had
spoken the day before to the people; and in an Oration next after that, he
calls to their remembrance what he had declared yesterday.

Austin thus begins his second Sermon in Psalm 68. The later part of the Psalm
upon which we spoke yesterday to your charity, remains to be explained by me to
day. Tract. 16. in Joh. he mentions, Yesterdays labor, and yesterdayes lesson.
Tract. 18. in Johan. and Tract. 21. He begins Tractat. 22. after this manner,
This days lesson out of the Gospel follows the Sermons that I repeated to you,
yesterday, and the day before yesterday, etc.

Cyprian by his daily Treating out of the Gospels, endeavored to increase the
says and knowledge of his hearers. Nicephorus affirms, that Alexander
comforted the Church daily, with his Divine instructions. Hist. l. 8. c. 5.

And thus much for the daily labors of the Doctors of the Church, which they
spent in the explication of Scripture: whose diligence was so great, over their
flocks commended to their charge, to feed them saithfully with the bread of
life, that they would not abstain from the continual labors of Treating. They
became not at that time lookers after their secular affairs, relicta cathedra
[i. leaving the chair] (which thing was a grief to Cyprian, De Lapsis, sect.
4.) as afterward they were; or did they grow too rank with excessive stipends:
but, as their chief charge was bounded in Doctrine, so they thought not much to
bestow their most diligent labor in this office, though very toylsome: and the
more frequently and officiously they executed the charge of preaching to the
people, the greater honor had they from all good men, according to the
Apostles Canon, 1 Timothy 5. 17. which Theodosius junior did piously observe.
Socr. l. 7. c. 22.

Nor do I remember that I have read any where in the ancients, that any man was
interdicted (who being not deprived of the faculty of preaching, by the Church,
or was not subject to its censure) that he should not, so often as conveniently
he could, instruct the people committed to him in the knowledge of the
Scriptures. Cyprian asked the Presbyters, in his absence, that they would
seriously execute both their own, and his part, in the instructing the Church
of Christ, Ep. 5. and he commends the Presbyters that did corroborate every one
with their daily exhortations, Ep. 40. The Roman Clergy exhorted the Clergy of
Carthage, to constancy in executing their office, and to encourage the
Christians to persevere in the confession of Faith, and detestation of
idolatry, by arguments drawn out of the Holy Scriptures, Cypr. Ep. 3. But
neither Cyprian, nor the Romans, did prohibit the Presbyters of Carthage from
the diligent function of this office: but provoked them forward to perform it
upon every occasion that was offered. This St. Chrysostom teaches elegantly
and pithily Homil. 15. in 2 Timothy while he exciteth all the Doctors of the
Church (whom he contends ought so to be called, because they teach) to labor
in the Word and Doctrine, and stingeth some, that say, that there is no need of
the Word and Doctrine: because, in his judgment, it tends no little to the
edification of the Church, if those that are over the Church excel in the
grace of teaching: without which, many things in the Churchdiscipline will
perish. He does not therefore greatly reprove those that applied themselves to
Doctrine, but shows, they are to be greatly honored.

CHAP. VIII.
On the Lords Days they were wont to Treat twice out of the Holy Scriptures.

THat the ancients, when a fit occasion was offered, did treat out of the
Scripture every day, their own records do teach us: but, as I said in the
former Chapter, they especially buckled themselves to this work on the Lords
day: Ca^. 19. Council. in Trullo.
For it be^oveth those that are set over Churches, on all days, but especially
Lords days, to teach all the Clergy and people the oracles of piety, and the
right Religion.

And as they took pains to explain the Scripture every day, so they judged,
that all times of the day were fit for a spiritual discourse, Chrysostom. Hom. 10.
in Genesis Yea, though night gr^w on, himself being judge, it prejudiced not
spiritual Doctrine. And hence it was, that we read, that the ancients explained
the Scriptures not only in the morning, but evening (for at both times the
Church assembled, as is shown in the first Chapter;) This their very words will
tell us.

It appears from the beginning of Basils Two Treatises on the Lords day.
second Hom. that one of those Sermons was had in the morning, and the other
after noon: for he says, We took time in a few words from the first dawning of
the day, etc. Hexaem. Hom. 2. and he kept the second Hom. about the evening.
While on it he interpreted the evening Hom. of the first day, he says, These
our discourses of that evening, being now occupied from this evening, do here
put an end to our Oration. Hexaem. Hom. secun. circa finem. And he says in the
beginning of his third Hom. that one part of these Homilies brought morning
aliment, and the other evening joy to his hearers.

In the end of his seventh Hom. he admonishes his hearers to give thanks, and
to talk among themselves of those things which both early, and in the evening,
his Oration yesterday had offered them.

In the conclusion of the eighth Hom, he puts an end to the morning feast, lest
the exuberant satiety of speech make his auditors more dull to receive his
evening banquets.

In the beginning of the following Hom. Hom. 9.
had upon the same day, he says, that his Oration had set a banquet before his
auditors in the morning, and that Oration was had about the evening: for he
concludes it in this manner, Behold, the Evening time commands us silence, the
Sun being now set a pretty while since, here therefore we think it meet, that
this our Oration should bring us to our bed, or rest. All these to testify
that Basil the Great held a double Treatise out of the Scriptures the same day.
For he makes mention both of his evening and morning labor undertaken in
performing that office by him.

Neither did Great Chrysostom give place to Basil, although he was called
Magnus, in the diligent treating out of Scripture, who says, What we have said
to day, is very like to ^. 5. p. 362.
that which we yet have determined to speak to day. Hom. oportet haereses esse.
That place does show evidently enough, that Chrysostom preached twice on one
and the same day; and if the Church were but to meet once a day to hear the
word of God, with what face could Chrysostom have reproved those his auditors
that refused to come after their carnal table to a spiritual banquet? which
thing we find him to have done not once. So Hom. 10. in Genesis and Hom. 9. ad
Populum. Contrariwise, he commends those that obeyed this admonition, because
when they had dined they met in the Church. Hom. 10. ad populum.

In the beginning of 67 Oration, T. 6. of the Greek Edition, (...), etc. he
says, that he, being wearied with the labors of the morning Sermon, reserved
the rest, (namely, till afternoon) and was wonderfully refreshed with the
presence of Flavianus. This testifies, that he preached twice that day,
otherwise Bishop Flavianus had not been present to hear him in the afternoon.

He that shall look into the beginning of the second Sermon of Austins in Ps.
88. will grant, that Austin did the same. For he commands his auditors to bend
their mind to the rest of the Psalm, of which he had been speaking in the
morning.

Being content with these authorities of the Fathers, (although we meet with
much more in them) we will add no more. And he that shall weigh these in an
equal balance, will with a little ado find, that these grave Authors did
endure the labor of Treating twice a day out of the Scriptures. Now, if any
one (whose palate nau^^ating Clj.
the old path that leads straight to the eternal salvation of the soul, and
seeking a new one, the premises do not please) shall object to me, that from
the aforesaid testimonies it is not evident, that the Fathers did undergo those
labors, in interpreting and treating out of the Scripture twice on the Lords
day, which I should have proved: Answ.
Surely, he that shall say so, will not work me much trouble, nor will he
enervate my opinion of the Fathers labors declared in this sense; unless he
shall first demonstrate, that the Church did on all days besides the Lords,
keep evening assemblies (on which they had these Sermons) and that they
labored to sanctify other days more than the Lords Days; which thing, I
suppose, he will demonstrate from their grave writings, about the time of later
Lammas.

Moreover, if on other days, on which the Church was permitted to attend on
worldly labors, they took pains in so often interpreting of Scripture, who
will be so far a stranger to right reason, as that he should believe, that they
would not bestow so much labor for this business, on the Lords days, (on
which they, abstaining from all others, were only intent on Divine worship)?
much rather, and better should they say, in my judgment, if on other days they
Treated twice out of Scripture, they would, if occasion served, much oftener
give themselves to this labor on the Lords day. As sometimes Sisinnius being
Socr. 6. 20.
asked, why he would wash himself twice every day in the public bath, being a
Bishop? he answered, because I cannot wash thrice. So the ancient Bishops of
the Church were seriously intent twice on the Lords days, on the explication
of Scripture. And if they could get any just occasion to do more than this,
they would not avoid the labor of doing it the third or fourth time; as may be
seen by that Sermon in Austin; when he, whoever he was that was the author of
that Sermon, had twice performed the office of explaining Scripture, when a new
occasion was offered, (which was an extraordinary one) on the same day, he did
the same the third time. For thus he begins, Wonder not, dear brethren, if I to
day this third time, by Gods assistance, preach unto you. Sermon. 33. ad fratres
in eremo.

We have formerly seen some of Basils, both morning and evening Sermons; we
read also, that he preached twice before noon. In the beginning of his Hom. in
Psalm. 114. he excuses himself, that he came somewhat late to some that had
waited on him from midnight, and gives the reason, because before he came to
them, he had preached in another Church: yet those Vigils were only continued
from midnight to midday.

And thus these things show, that the Fathers did oftener than once treat out
of the Scripture, on one and the same day.

CHAP. IX.
Both in Old and New Testament, in celebrating the Sabbaths solemnity, after
reading of the Scriptures followed the interpretation of them. It Is considered,
whether before the Babylonish captivity the interpretating of the Law was in
use among the Jews on their Sabbath days?

THere are some, who being not content with the aforesaid testimonies, do
further demand an example to be shown either in the Old or New Testament: of
any Pastor laboring in preaching of the Word, who bestowed his labor in this
work twice on the Sabbath days. I cannot enough wonder at these men's wit, who
will not be removed from the opinion they have espoused, and rather would pluck
out their their own eyes, than see what, will they, nill they, they are
enforced to see. But come on, i^ there be any satisfying of these men's
expectation, and let us consider what light may be setch'd from the fountains
of Scripture to answer this question.

From both Testaments it is evident, that in the public assemblies of the
Church, after reading of Scripture, there followed the interpretation of the
same. This we have shown in Chap. 3. So Neh. 8. 5, 6, 7, 8. they did not only
read plainly the Law of God in the public assembly, but they also expounded
the sense of it: and therefore the naked reading of Scripture was not thought
sufficient by the Levites to give the people understanding: otherwise they
would have abstained from expounding them from day to noon. So in the Jews
assemblies which are mentioned in the New Testament, always after reading of
Scripture, followed their explication: see Luke 4. 20. Act. 13. 15. The sacred
books being read, they that excelled in Doctrine, did afterward interpret
them. So Acts 15. 21. we read, that Moses had in every Town those that preached
him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath day; the sense of which
Scripture we have declared out of Philo Judaeus. And these things, show that
the Scriptures were both read, and by interpretation illustrated in the Jewish
Church.

But some there are, that they may elude It is considered whether interpreting
of the Law wus in use before the Babylonish captivity.
this answer, who contend, that this manner of interpreting Scripture on
Sabbath days, was not in use under the former Temple, that is, before the
Babylonish captivity: because in the writings of Moses, in which is extant the
institution of the Sabbath, before they were returned out of Babylon Object.
into the Land of Canaan, we meet with no mention thereof: neither, as they
think, is there any command extant, by virtue whereof the Priests are obliged
to interpret the Law on Sabbath days, successively returning: which opinion is
entertained by some with applause.

Now if it be true, which they say, then Answ.
the whole manner of the Jews keeping holy Sanctifying of the Sabbath, not in
mere idle. ^ess.
the Sabbath, consisted in mere idleness, or a cessation from labors by Gods
command, which yet none will easily admit: since not only in the old Sabbath
God enjoined the rest to the people of the Jews, but also required holiness in
those that ceased from their labors; otherwise he had not determined the day,
on which we are to rest, to be sanctified, which yet he did. Observe, Deuteronomy. 5^
12.
says Moses, the Sabbath day, to sanctify it, as the Lord thy God has
commanded thee. The rest commanded by God on the Sabbath day, was not a part
properly called, but an help to its sanctification, as we have taught out of
the Fathers, Book 1. chap. 11. The Sabbath, says Chrysostom, is given, Hom.
1. de Lazar. t. 5. p. 227,
not for idleness, but that men being withdrawn from the care of temporal
things, they might spend the rest of it in spiritual matters.

Yea, he says in the same place, that the Jews were to attend the hearing of
Divine Sermons. So also Origin confesses, that the Hom. 23. in Number.
Reader, or Doctor of the Law, did not cease on Sabbath days from his work,
and yet did not break the Sabbath. Now what was the work of the Reader or
Doctor of the Law, on which they did attend, but to instruct the people in the
understanding thereof. Athanasius also says, The Sabbath De Sabb. and Circum
signifies, or intimates not idleness, but the knowledge of the author. The
Sabbath was given for knowledge, and not for idleness, because knowledge is
more necessary than idleness. He blamed those who were idle on the Sabbath,
because they had not that which was proper for the Sabbath, that is to say,
knowledge of the truth. The Sabbath therefore according to St. Athanasius, was
given men, that they, ceasing from worldly businesses, might freely apply their
minds to the means by which they might attain some knowledge of God. And what
those means are, we have shown from Chrysostom and Origin.

St. Austin thought, that the Jews women might better spin wool, and their men
dig the ground, as formerly we have observed out of him, than that they,
ceasing from labor, should spend their time in plays: according to whom,
something else was required to the sanctification of the Sabbath, than mere
rest; namely, the sanctifying of the rest, or the consecration of the rest to
the public exercise of Gods Worship: which, in what things can it better be
observed, than in reading of Gods Law, and explaining the sense of its words,
prayers, and other exercises of piety?

On the Sabbath, says iu Ps. 19.
Theodoret, we are commanded to rest, but it is not any kind of rest; since the
Holy Ghost has multiplied our work: and what that work of the Spirit is that
is multiplied on the Sabbath, he afterward expounds, when he says, he has
commanded us to labor in Prayers and Psalms. These things show, that something
more than rest was required of the people on the Sabbath day.

Secondly, if the Bible had not been publicly On the Sabbath a Holy
Convocation.
read, and its sense expounded on Sabbath-dayes, then none besides the Priests
and Levites, and some others that offered Sacrifices to the Priests, had been
bound to be present on Sabbath days, in the place destined by God to sacrifice
in: for what need was there, that they should only be present with them that
sacrificed? But the contrary appears from the very Text, Lev. 23. 3. where the
solemnity of the Sabbath is shown. God appoints, that there shall be an holy
convocation. Now if a Convocation were by God required on the Sabbath days,
then it concerned the people, as well as the Priests, to be present at the
common assembly? which being finished, that solemn benediction was pronounced
by the Priest to the people assembled. Number. 6. 23.

Thirdly, if there had been no reading of The Levites were to teach the Law.
the Law, and explaining thereof, in use among the Jews, under the former
Temple, then the Priests had been bound to nothing else, but to serve for
offering sacrifices. But the Scripture testifies, that the Levites were to
teach Israel the Judgments, and Law of God, as well as to put incense upon the
altar. Deuteronomy. 33. 10. where two offices are assigned to the Levites. In the
first place, that they teach the people in the Law and judgments of God: and
secondly, that they put incense upon the altar. But if they had not instructed
the people in the Law, then they had bestowed their chief care upon the less
principal, the other, which was the principal duty, being neglected. And unless
the people had been instructed in the meaning of the Law, they had wholly been
ignorant of the use for which the Sacrifices were ordained of God. But Aaron
and his sons were separated from others by God, to teach the children of Israel
the statutes of God, Lev. 10. 11. Which they faithfully performed, both
privately (as often as any consulted them upon any emergent question, Deuteronomy. 17.
9, 10.) and publicly, for they instructed all Israel in the Word of God, 2 Chronicles. 35. 3. And that charge did, ex officio, lie upon the Levites, as well
before, as after the captivity, to be endued with the knowledge of all things,
that the Law might be sought for at their mouth, M.al. 2. 7. But when could
they with greater fruit draw out the knowledge of Gods Law to the peoples
edification, than in the public assembly of the Church, being gathered
together on S. Days? since Mat. 21. Mar. 12. 13. Luke 22. Joh. 5. 7, 8, 18.
on other days, on which they were to attend their labors, they could not do
this. Christ when he began his Ministry once, did frequently teach in the
Temple. Why did the people wait for Zacharias, when he was offering Sacrifice,
if it were not an usual thing for them to hear some short Sermon Luke 1. 8, 9,
10.
and benediction from him, before they went out? Christ sat in the Temple in
the midst of the Doctors, hearing and asking them questions: which shows, that
it was the custom of a Doctor to teach the multitude in the Temple. If
therefore the Law of God was not on the Sabbath days expounded for the peoples
use, and no other exercises of piety but sacrifices, were required of the
people, in what thing was the Sabbath ennobled above other days? for
sacrifices were offered on other besides the Sabbath days: yea, two Lambs were
day by day offered for a continual burnt-offering, Numb. 28. Therefore the
Sabbath was not made remarkable by the only worship of Sacrifices, above other
days, on which they attended sacrifices: but besides the sacrifices, were
superadded the interpreting of the Law, and a serious and pious exercising
themselves therein, and other duties of piety: upon which account, the Sabbath
day was reckoned more holy than other days of the week, and the ninety second
Psalm was for this end written, that the people might sing it in the Church on
the Sabbath day, whereon a holy Convocation was held.

Fourthly, the question propounded by the husband of the Shunamitess does
evince the same, 2 Kin. 4. 23. He asks his wife why she would go to the Prophet
that day, since it was neither new moon nor Sabbath? which were the ordinary
days to consult God upon, and to hear his word, according to the famous
Junius. Lyra says also the same on that place, He spoke this, says he,
because men went more frequently on those days to the Prophets, to hear Gods
word: because the Prophets were not to attend Sacrifices, therefore they that
went to the Prophets, did it, that they might be instructed in the Law and will
of God by them: but when could this be better done than on the Sabbath? The
famous Cunaeus, upon the authority of Rabbi Aben Ezra, affirms, that Oracles
were consulted on Sabbath days. De Rep. Hebraeorum, l. 2. c. 24.

Fifthly, if reading of Scriptures, and a clear interpreting of them, had not
been prescribed of God, then Christ, and after him his Apostles, who were
faithfully diligent in expounding the Law on Sabbath days, are to be taxed for
Will Worship; because they offered God a worship on the Sabbath, which he had
not commanded them.

Lastly, that the use of Synagogues was Use of Synagogues before the Babylonish
captivity.
among the Jews before the Babylonish captivity, may be collected from Moses,
Lev. 26. 31. where the Hebrews by Sanctuaries do understand Synagogues, in
which the people met weekly on Sabbath days: of whose ruin and vastation the
Church expostulateth with God, Psalm. 74. 7, 8. the inscription of which Psalm
shows, that that Psalm was penned when David governed the Kingdom: for the
Inscription is for Asaph. It was therefore either penned by Asaph, (who writ
some of the Psalms as well as David, 2 Chronicles. 29. 30.) or was commended to his
care; who, together with his sons, is recited among those who sung holy songs,
1 Chr. 25. 2. If therefore, while Asaph survived, then were Synagogues long in
use before the captivity. But for what end were they instituted? in which
sacrifices (which it was lawful to offer no where else but at Jerusalem when
the Temple was built) were not offered: but in them was the people instructed
in the Law of God by the Levites, who were dispersed up and down Israel, and by
others who were delegated of God to that charge and office.

Which things being considered, let others judge what to say of their uncertain
conjecture, who contend, that there was no other interpreting of the law, used
under the former Temple, besides that which the Prophets, being extraordinarily
called, undertook. Which opinion, being once admitted, it will not be easy to
avoid the aforesaid incommodities, as to any one it will appear, by a more
narrow search into them. Unto whose conjecture, we will, with their good-leave,
oppose the authorities both of Jews and Christians in that particular, being
bottomed upon the Holy Scripture.

Flavius Josephus (whom according to Cunaeus, we are to believe next to the
Penmen De Rep. Hebr. l. 3. c. 1.
of Holy Writ) pleading the Cause of the Jews against Appion, in his Apology
(which in the famous Cunaeus opinion is learned to a miracle) in express words
affirms, l. 2. contra Appion.
that Moses would have us hear the Law not once, or twice, or oftener, but he
commands all men, leaving their other works, to meet together to hear the Law,
and perfectly to learn it, etc. Thus he. And if this Ordinance of a weekly
meeting to hear and learn the Law was in force in Moses age, then was it long
before the Babylonish Captivity.

While Philo Judaeus contends, that the De vitae Mosis, l. 3.
Plays, and ridiculous spectacles of Fools and Dancers ought to be put away;
he says, that it was the manner to study Philosophy on Sabbath days, the
Prince going before, and teaching, what was needful to be done or spoken, the
rest giving ear. Whereupon he also affirms, that they now should play the
Philosophers upon Sabbath days, more patrio, in their country manner* and he
acknowledges, that Oratories in Cities were for Schools of Virtue* More credit
therefore is deservedly to be given to the Jews, relating their country
customs, than to other men's conjectures of them.

Among the Christians, diverse very learned men treating of the Hebrews
Commonwealth, have taught the same. Amongst whom* Carolus Sigonius de Rep.
Hebraeorum, l. 5. c. 10. and Cornelius Bertramus, p. 96. The famous Cunaeus (to
whom the Christian Church is much beholden for his labors in explaining the
antiquities of the Hebrews) says, that the right observation of De Rep. Hebr.
l. 2. c. 24.
Sabbaths consisted in the holiness of all their words and deeds, and in Divine
worship and Prayers. All which does plainly evidence, that they used to read
the Law, and interpret it to the peoples capacity, on the Sabbath days:
otherwise neither their words nor deeds had been noted for holiness: or how
else could the minds of the Jews have been furnished piously to conceive
Prayers on Sabbath days, without the explaining of the Scripture? Yea, the
Learned Cunaeus confesses, that the Levites in the Synagogues did deliver to
the people in the Towns of Judaea, the chief knowledge of all Laws, both of
Humane and Divine things: and when could the Levites do this with greater
profit, than on the Sabbath days? In a word, although we deny that at that
time the Talmudical interpretation of Scripture was grown in use, which* we
confess the ancient Church of the Jews knew nothing of: yet we cannot affirm
this of the vocal interpretation of the Scriptures by the Levites.

But to return to our purpose; We find that under the Old Testament the
Scriptures were read and opened in the Jews assembly, even the Holy Ghost
being witness, although some doubt of the period of time, at which their
interpretation on Sabbath days began.

As for the Churches in the New Testament, planted by the Apostles, they could
not, so long as their Peace was disturbed with a storm of Persecutions, meet
together without very great difficulty: for which cause, as we said Chap. 1.
they had their meetings sometime on the night, and sometimes on the day;
neither again was it safe for them to hold a meeting all the day. For which
cause De fuga in persecution. c. ult.
Tertullian judges, that it was best for Christians, if the Lords days
solemnities could not be celebrated on the day time, (for persecutions whereof
he speaks) then ought they to keep them on the night, if not with every one of
them, yet at least with three. These things teach us, that the Church was not
permitted in that age with safety, and as often as they list, to meet together
on the day time, to perform the exercises of piety. He therefore that requires
of us some one example for expounding Scripture twice (while the fire of
Persecution raged, with which that age abounded) I desire him to tell me,
whether the Christians did, during that Persecution, twice every Lords day keep
their meetings? For if it were safe for them to meet, why may they not as well
be believed to me^t for interpreting of Scripture, and Prayer to God, (since
these duties are joined by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. and observed by Sect. 1. De
bono pudiciti^.
Cyprian, as he faithfully expounded the Scriptures)? Especially when it was
the custom of the Church, so often as Scripture was read, to interpret the
same. This we have largely enough shown out of Justin, Origin, Tertullian,
Ambrose, Augustine, and other Fathers of great authority, chap. 4.

Since therefore in the Jewish, Apostolical, and other Churches succeeding the
Apostles, there followed after the reading of the Scriptures, an exposition of
them, it seems necessarily to follow, that if they had liberty to meet on Lords
days, then they used to treat twice out of Scripture: of which there is
frequent mention in their assemblies. And it is certainly evident, from the
continual practi^^ of the Church, that from the very Apostles times, prayers
and reading were reckoned both together, which were celebrated both morning and
evening. No man therefore can judge it unreasonable to say, that there followed
an interpretation of those things which were read: because reading was used to
instruct the people. But how could the people be instructed in the Scripture
read, without an interpretation? The Eunuc^ answered, Acts 8. 31. that he could
not understand what he read, except some one should guide him. Yea, they were
wont to Treat out of the Reading [or Lesson] as was formerly said.

The calamitous condition also of those times, wherein so many cruel
persecutions were stirred up, required the same. Daily exhortations were very
needful to the Christians, for to bear the Cross of the Gospel patiently.
Neither must we think that these skilful Pastors who were set over the Church
by the Apostles, and Apostolical men, did not endeavor, as often as they
could, to instruct the People committed to them in the matters of Faith. St.
Cyprian, Ep. 40. professes, that he was sore troubled, when he could not go to,
and exhort every one, as the Lords, and his Gospel Ministry required, while he
was in his banishment. If it were a grief to this vigilant Bishop, that because
being hindered by his exile, he could not provoke all who were commended to his
inspection and care, by his holy Exhortations, to piety and patience;
certainly, when he was with his people, if he took care that by a Reader the
bare reading of the Gospel was recited to them, although he stirred not them up
by his Exhortations to practice what they had heard read, he would never in
very deed have thought, that he had showed himself a faithful Bishop.
Whereupon, it deservedly seems an absurd thing to Mr. S. A. a man of ripe
judgment, to think, that the primitive Bishops faithfully fulfilling their
Ministry, were content with a naked reading of the Scriptures, without any
explaining of them to the People: which, if the Bishop had not performed,
although he might live innocently and without scandal, yet that conversation
without preaching, would do hurt by silence, although he might do good by
Example, as Hierom shows, Ep. ad Oceanum. Therefore the diligent Overseers of
Churches would never intermit this, unless they were hindered by some urgent
necessity: and therefore, amongst them, after reading of Scriptures, there
followed an explication of them, as often as the Church met.

CHAP. X.
The Church used Prayers on the Lords Day: Conventicles for Churches. Prayers
only to God: the Praeses began them: he prepares the people to pour them out.
Sursum corda, at prayer the voice of all who were present was one: they prayed
as the Holy Ghost suggested to them* How this custom was changed. For what the
Church prayed. Prayer in a known tongue. The posture of the body in prayer. The
word Amen.

THus far of the Ministry of the Word, whereby was made a solemn observation of
the Lords Day: the second Office performed by the Church on that day follows;
this consists in Prayer: and the Scripture witnesses, that the Church prayed
in their Assemblies together to God. St. Paul commands, that supplications,
prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made in Churches, 1 Timothy 2. 1.
The Apostles and Christians are said to continue with one accord in prayer and
supplication, Act. 1. 14. We read, that the Church gathered at Jerusalem did
continue in the Apostles doctrine, and fellowship, and in breaking of bread,
and prayers, Act. 2. 42.

Prayers also are every where reckoned by Prayers had by the Church assembled.
the Fathers amongst the offices of Piety celebrated on that day. When the
people were congregated to perform the Lords days solemnities, the Scriptures
were not only read, but also Petitions were sent away, viz. to God. Tertullian
de anima, c. 9. also Apol. c. 39, he says, that the Church assembled into a
company, that we praying may by our prayers as it were beset God about with a
company made up; that is, that the Prayers of all being gathered together, we
may as it were in a certain spiritual host, go unto God with one humble
assault, and make him propitious to us and others, as the renowned Zanchius
expounds it. When the writings of the Prophets and Apostles were read in the
Church-assembly, and the same explained by the Praeses, all rose up, and poured
out their Prayers to God, in Justins age Ap. 2.
.

When Julian studied to accommodate the Greeks manners to the Orders of the
Church, among other things he ordained, Niceph. 10. 21.
that after the manner of the Church, there should be certain Prayers for
certain hours and days. Arnobius affirms, that the Christians used Prayers in
their Conventicles. lib. 4. contr. Gent.

In which place, Arnobius calls the places Conventitula what.
which were assigned to the public assemblies of Christians for interpreting of
Gods Word, prayer to God, and administering the H. Eucharist, Conventicula. As
^. 5. c. 11.
Lactantius, while he makes mention of a certain man's cruelty in Phrygia, who
burnt all the people together with the Conventicle. Where he speaks of the
place where the Church performed the exercises of Religion in their assemblies.

Arnobius also elsewhere mentions these Prayers, lib. 1. where he says, that
the Christians with joint Prayers worshipped Christ, and begged of him things
just, honest, and such as he may well hear. Cyril acknowledges, that Christians
ought on Feast-dayes, to frequent the Temples of God, and among other duties of
Religion, to insist upon prayers. lib. 8. in Joh. c. 5.

All these things show, that Prayers were used by the Church in their public
assemblies. But Christians, when they were assembled, were not intent only
upon Prayers, as Zonaras would have it, in Can. 16. Conc. Laodic. For in the
foregoing Chapter we have observed out of Church-records, that in the public
assembly of the Church, the Scriptures were both read and interpreted by the
Bishops, and those that were delegated to this office in the Churches.

In rehearsing of these Prayers, eight Prayer only to God.
things come especially to be spoken of, which are not unworthy our knowledge.
In the first place, the primitive Christians made all their Prayers to God,
because they knew Tert. ap. c. 30.
they could not obtain what they prayed for, of any one else, therefore in
Prayers they had respect to God, as being one who alone could answer their
petitions. And it is a point of great folly to ask of those who are no Gods, as
if they were Gods. Clem. Alexandr. Strom. l. 7.

The Christians therefore at that time worshipped God alone: and the Martyrs
they honored as the Disciples and followers of the Lord. Eus. Hist. l. 4. c.
14. neither had the Idolatrous worship of Saints crept then into the Church;
which our Learned Divines (for all the anger of the Papists) have copiously
enough taught: and therefore I will add no more of that.

Secondly, Prayers made in the Churchassembly, The Praefectus begun Prayer.
were begun by him who was set over the rest, which he put up as well as he
could, says Justin Martyr; for which reason, Proterius Bishop of Alexandria,
is called by Niceph. Hist. l. 15. c. 17. (...), * Ap. 2.
the Mediator of God and Men: (althhough Augustine ^. 2. cont. Parmen. Ep. c 8.
affirms, that none of the good and faithful Christians could bear Parmenianus,
that made a Bishop the Mediator between God and the people.) And Greg. Naz.
reckons this as a praise to Bishops, Orat. 21
that they undertake the care and government of souls, and do the part of
Mediators between God and men. Apol. pro ^uga. Which yet I think is only to
be affirmed of those, who with Moses stand in the gap, to turn away the wrath
of God, lest he destroy the People, Psalm. 105. 23. The Emperors themselves do
confess, in their Epistle to the Asian Diocese, Theod. 4. 7.
that by Bishops Prayers wars are ended, invasions of Angels kept off, and
hurtful spirits repelled. All these things are ascribed to them, not that they
procured them, but because they seriously pleaded with God in Prayers, that he
would avert these evils from the Churches committed to their care: to whose
Prayers God in his infinite Mercy gave an answer. So thinks Chrysostom, who
tells us, that it is the part of a Bishop, as an Ambassador, to intercede for
a whole City, yea, for the whole world, and deprecate God, that he may be
propitious to men.

And when the Praepositus prepared to pray The Praefectus prepared the people
to prayer.
with the people, before he begun, he prepared the people with a previous
speech. For Ambrose thought it necessary Exhort. ad Virgins.
that the preparation of the mind go before Prayer, lest he that prays to God
seem to tempt him, which men led even by the only instinct of nature know: as
we may see in the Pythagoreans, not suffering men to worship the immortal Gods
Plut. in Numa Pomp.
per transitum, but persuading them to undertake that with a prepared mind. And
therefore when the Emperor was conversant about sooth-saying, and sacrifices,
some cried aloud, Hoc age, i. e. be attentive, or set thy mind on this thing
only: which saying did prepare as many as were present at sacrifices to attend
them with a devout mind: for in sacred things we must not labor in transcursu,
quasi, lightly, as it were, and passing by.

But those whose minds are illuminated with the happy light of Scripture, have
more perspicuously observed the truth in this point, therefore the people of
Christ are persuaded to attend Prayer with the whole heart, having cast aside
all carnal and worldly cogitations, and that the mind should Cypr. de Orat. Dom*
think of nothing at that time but what it prayed for only: and for this end,
the Priest, having premised a Preface to the Prayer, did prepare the minds of
the Brethren, by saying, SURSUM CORDA, [ i. up with your hearts] and when the
people answered, HABEMUS AD DOMINUM, [i. have up, or we have them for the Lord]
they were put in mind that they ought to think of nothing else but the Lord.
And this was the general preparation wherewith the minds of the people were
excited to all the duties of Religion, and by hearing thereof, they were
prepared to more ardent Prayer.

In the third place, the peoples minds being O^e voice of all in Prayer.
thus excited to pray, this is worth our consideration, that of all those who
were present together, there was (...), i. one common Prayer, which they
uttered with one mind, and sincere faith in Jesus. So Ignatius, in his Epistle
ad Magnesianos. Strom. 7
Clemens Alexandrinus also says, the multitude of them that prayed had as it
were one common voice, and one mind. Athanasius wished for this, Apol. ad
Imperatorem Constantium, that all might make one and the same voice, without a
discord.

Cyprian, de Oratione Dominica, acknowledges, that in the Church there was a
common and public prayer. He adds, that the Apostles, Acts 1. 14. continued
with one accord in Prayer, when they declared the instancy and concord of their
prayer. For Prayer being conceived of more, the more easy entrance is made
unto God, according to that of Matthew. 18. 19.

Nor need any to wonder that there was one and the same Prayer of the whole
Church being assembled, since there ought to be but one voice in the Church, he
that reads speaks alone, and he that is the Bishop sits silent in the
mean time, and he that sings, sings alone, and when all sing together, the
voice is uttered as by one mouth, and he that preaches to the people, preaches
alone, says Chrysostom. Also Homi^l. 18. in 2 Cor. he says, Hom. 36. in 1 Cor.
Common Prayers were made by the Priest, and others, and all made one Prayer.

Fourthly, they prayed as the Holy Ghost suggested to them, Tert. ap. 30.
Prayers suggested by the Holy Ghost.
sive m^^itore, quia de pectore orabant; i. they prayed without a monitor,
because out of their heart; that is to say, the Holy Ghost showed them the way
to conceive Prayers in a pious manner, and by his instinct they prayed without
any other monitor. After the offering of bread and wine allayed with water, the
Praefectus put up prayers, and giving of thanks Pro virin.
(...), i. as well as he could. If he prayed as well as he could for his might,
then it seems he did not read prescribed forms of Prayer, to the bare reading
whereof, there was no need of such a labor. Justin Martyr, ap. 2.

Neither could it be otherwise, because upon a new occasion offered, forth with
new Prayers were required, answering to that occasion; and for this cause they
could not be always the same. Tertullian, as his manner is, teaches this
elegantly. There De Orat. c. 9.
are, says he, some things which may be prayed for according to the
circumstance of every one, first premising the lawful and ordinary Prayer (he
speaks of the Lords Prayer) as a foundation. A liberty of accidents; a liberty
for desires to be put out into occasional prayers. Christians have liberty in
Tertullians opinion to put up Prayers to God pro re nata, which are formed
according to the form of Prayer prescribed by Christ. So St. Austin, Ep. 121.
ad Probam, says, that we may beg for the same things in these or other words,
but we are not to pray for other things; that is to say, Men may use other
words in Prayer, than what Christ used in the Prayer which he prescribed the
Church; but the mind ought not to be intent in praying for other things than
what Christ has declared to us in that Prayer.

Moreover, the Bishops were sometimes to commend to God in Prayer Aug de Eccl
dogm. c. 30.
those things which the people desired them, and for this cause they could not
always use the same Prayers, because new occasions, as I aid, required new
Prayers. Especially since t was for them, De Sac. 1 dot 1. 6.
Chrysostom being witness, to pray unto God, that he might divert the evils
that hung over every one. And therefore since the same evils did not always
occurr, the Bishops always prayed, as the state of the people commended to
their cure did require.

In the first place therefore, Prayers were How this custom was changed.
used according to the quality of the time, men having their minds disposed by
the Holy Ghost to pray devoutly. But afterward (when through the Devils
subtilty diverse errors in Religion crept in) in process of time it sell out,
that prayers were by some brought in contrary to the Faith, (or as St. Austin
speaks, some spoke in their Prayers De Bapt. contra Do ^tat. lib. 6. c. 25.
contrary to the rule of Faith) the Church providing for this error, used a
threefold remedy; and in the first place they provided, that it should be
lawful for none to compose Forms of Prayer at their pleasure, which they used
in the public assemblies, but the same (as Zonaras interprets it, those that
were daily used) should be retained in every meeting. So Conc. Laodic. Can. 18.

Secondly, it was ordained, that they A^. 397.
should conferr with the more able Brethren about the Prayers which they used
in their Assemblies. It was so provided in the third Council of Carthage, Can
23.

^ (...) it was defined, that no requests or A^. 416.
prayers should be used in the Church, but those which were approved by a
Synod. (Conc. Milevit. 2. Can. 12.) lest any thing should be composed against
the Faith, either through ignorance, or less care. We meet with mention of both
remedies; namely, the second and third in Concilio Africano, Can. 70. T. 1.

But it is a question, whether in the aforesaid Can. 23.
African Canons, the Reverend Fathers do speak of set Forms of Prayers in
public Liturgies, or of the Prayers which he that was to treat out of
Scripture (which was a common thing with Treaters, as Can. 40. we have heard
out of the Fathers) did conceive at that time he came forth to speak at. Some
men of great account think, that they meant the former rather than the later;
because the cited words of the Canons do ordain what forms of prayer they
should use, whose office it was to perform acts of Religion, when they stood at
the altar. So Conc. Carthag. where they that were to Treat stood not: the
Bishops seat who did interpret the Scripture, was in the midst of the Church,
as we have formerly shown. This therefore was ordained by the Fathers, lest as
Heretics increased, and spread their Heterodox opinions, the Christian people
who did not well enough attend their practice, should be imposed upon by
Heretics. Canons were established, because in that age especially, every
faction did spread abroad certain forms of Prayers and Psalms, by which, when
they were met together, they might allure unto them men that were not well
enough exercised in the faith, but unwarily embraced their dreams: as
Historians report it fell out in Chrysostoms age, not long after the aforesaid
Councils were held. Soer. l. 6. c. 8. Nic. l. 13. c. 8.
That, I say, these men's endeavors should be prevented, lest Heretics should
spread abroad Forms of Liturgies not agreeing with the Doctrine received from
the Apostles; it was ordained, that in public Liturgies (which were not to be
prescribed by any one man) none should have liberty to use any forms of
Prayers, but what were either formerly in use (namely, before the mists of
Heterodoxisme had obscured the shining face of truth) or had been approved by
the most judicious brethren; or lastly, confirmed by the authority of some
Synod. The very words of the cited Canon do declare, that the Mileritan Fathers
do speak of such Prayers. Let the place be seen, it is extant in the first Tome
of the Councils, page 600.

Moreover, it appears that this was the cause of those Canons, by the condition
of the times in which they were ordained. For at that time the Church was
grievously sick of the wounds both of Arrianism and Pelagianism. And reason it
self persuades not to restrain the cited Canons to the Prayers which were
conceived by him that Treated to the people. For those were to be conceived
always, as the necessity of the Church did require (as formerly Tertullian
taught us) for which cause they could not always be the same: but were to be
varied pro re nata, and as the necessity of the people for whom the Treater was
to offer the sacrifice of the lips to God, required.

On the contrary, if the Canons speak of the Treaters prayers, then this is
worthy observing, that the Grave Fathers in those sanctions did not intend to
prescribe laws for all and every Treater, in the Prayers he was to conceive:
but only for those who were not well instructed in Religion; for they speak of
some who name the Father for the son, or the son for the Father: and who had
written out Prayers to themselves from some other. So Conc. Carth. where above
they ordain, lest the less exercised in Religion should be imposed upon through
the fraud and deceit of others, that they conferr with their wiser brethren
about the Prayers they had written out, before they uttered them to the people.

The same is also to be said to the Mileritan Canon, wherein it is provided,
that nothing be composed against the Faith, either through ignorance or less
care. And yet by those sanctions the more instructed of the brethren are not
restrained to Forms of Prayer, unless they be approved by others. We read that
certain prayers were prescribed by Constantine the Great to his Guard, Eusebius.
de vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 18.
which they used on the Lords day; yet none will thence conclude, that other
Christians were to put up no Prayers to God, but what were commanded. The cited
Canons are therefore to be understood either of Liturgy Prayers, or of the
Prayers of the Treater, unfit through ignorance to conceive Prayers, and of no
others.

Fifthly, in their Prayers conceived after For what the Church prayed.
this manner they prayed to God for things just, honest, and meet to be heard.
Arnob. cont. Gent. lib. 1. And these they asked for all men's sakes; not only
for familiars, but enemies; for Emperors and Subjects, and in their prayers
they seriously pleaded with God for all others; so Arnobius, lib. 4. For
themselves, and all every where, as Justin Martyr. Ap. sec. For the Emperors
health, as Tertull. apol. cap. 30. For their offices, for their worldly state
and peace; Tertull. ibid. And especially for the Church, because the whole
people of Christ are one. Cypr. de Orat. Dom.

Sixthly, these Prayers were conceived in Prayer in a known tongue.
a known tongue. Origin instead of all, will teach us this, who writes against
Celsus, a froward adversary of the Christian name, Contr. Celsum. l. 8. where
he lets all know, that the right Christians did not in their prayers make use
of the usual names of God in Holy Writ, but the Greeks prayed in the Greek, and
the Romans in the Roman, and every one in his own Language, and praised God
according to their might: and the Lord of all Languages heard them pray in all
Languages, understanding them as well when they spoke in diverse, as if they all
agreed in one Language, that I may say so, and as men of one voice. Where he
teaches us, that Christians, in what place soever they lived, did in their
Prayers use no other than their vulgar idiom.

Seventhly, it will not be far from our purpose, to add something of the
posture of the body in conceiving of prayer. Where, in the first place, it will
be worth our noting, what Austin excellently observed, there is Lib. 2. ad
Simp. q. 4.
no prescript posture how the body should be ordered in Prayer, only that the
Soul being present before God, that it perform its devotion. And he adds,
that some prayed standing, some kneeling, and some lying prostrate. Justin
Martyr relates, that they prayed standing, Apol. 2. When we stand, says
Cyprian, De Orat. Dom.
we ought with watchfulness, and with all our hearts, to apply our selves to
prayer. But we read, that Prayer was used to be made to God upon the knees more
frequently; and it appears, that this posture, or rite in Prayer, was most
ancient, and common in all ages. Clem. Alexand. Strom. 7. says, that they fell
down upon the earth when they paryed. The Christian soldiers are said kneeling
on the ground (as it is usual with Christians when they pray) to compose
themselves to offer up Prayers to God, in Eusebius. Hist. 5. c. 5. Arnobius also
affirms, that Cont. Genesis l. 1.
Christians, when with joint Prayers they worshipped God, they were prostrate:
or as afterward, when they prayed, they fell upon their bended knee. The
Church, says Epiphanius in fine Panarii, commands Prayers to be made with
all diligence, and with kneeling, on set days.

But on the Lords day, in memorial of the Lords Resurrection, they worshipped
not on their knees, and anciently they rejoiced in that immunity, from the
Passover till Pentecost. So Tertullian De c^rona militum.
. Just. Mart. q. 115. Which custom being in some places decayed, the 20th
Canon of the first Council of Nice has ordained to be kept every where;
although St. Paul prayed kneeling on the shore of Tyrus in that time which
passed between the Passover and Pentecost, Act. 21. 5. for after the days of
unleavened bread, he sailed from Philippi, Acts 20. 6. and he hastened to keep
Pentecost at Jerusalem, Act. 20. 16. and he came to Tire in his journey to
Jerusalem, where, with others, he prayed on his knees.

They were, I say, careful in Prayer, that Of praying with the face to the East.
the whole body should be composed with the greatest reverence, and whether we
are to pray with the face turned to the South, or the other coasts of the
Heaven, Basil says, Basil. de Sp. Sanct. c. 27.
it is determined by no authority of Scripture, although the ancients being
moved with light arguments thereto, prayed with their face turned to the East.
As because the East is more excellent than other parts of the Creation; namely,
in men's opinion, Just. Martyr, q. 118. Or, because the light of knowing the
truth, arose in the east, even as the Sun does. Clem. Alexand. Strom. 7. Or,
because we seek for our ancient country, namely, Paradise, which God
consecrated in the East. Basil. de Sp. Sancto. c. 27. etc. But of See other
reasons of the same weight, in Damascen de orthodfide. l. 4. c. 13.
what account these goodly reasons are, it is not for me to determine; let the
Church judge. From the premises it appears, that the Christians prayed unto God
with their faces toward the East. And for that reason the Heathens did accuse
the Christians who prayed unto God toward the East, as if they worshipped the
Sun. Tertull. ap. 16. But there is no such command from God in the Scripture
extant for Christians. This was a tradition which one age received from
another: and yet it was no tradition of Faith, but only of a rite or custom:
and it is certainly evident, that God will nevertheless hear those that pray to
the South or West, than those that pray toward the East.

Lastly, when prayers were done, the Amen.
whole congregation of people cried together, Amen. Just. Mart. ap. 2. Athanas.
ad Imp. Constable. Amen rung again like Thunder, says Hierom, (which is to be
understood of Lib. 2. ad Galat.
the multitude of those who were present at the holy mysteries.)

These are the most observables of prayers, whether conceived on Lords days,
or other days, which we meet with among the ancients.

CHAP. XI.
Of Psalms and Hymns sung on the Lords Day. The use of Hymns was but of late
time in the Western Churches, although Baronius think otherwise. Whence the
matter of Hymns was taken.

UNder Prayers, of which hitherto, Sacred Hymns also always used by the Church
are comprehended. For the custom of rehearsing Psalms in the Church, is a kind
of deprecating God. (...). Zon. in Can. 75. Conc. Trull.

St. Paul oftener than once, mentions Hymns sung in the^ Church-Assembly.
Psalms, Hymns, and Spiritual Songs, with which the faithful sung with Grace in
their heart to the Lord. Col. 3. 16. and Ephesians. 5. 19. although in both places
the Apostle seems to some not to speak of public hymns sung in the Church, but
of private; yet it is without controversy, that the Church had her hymns in
the public assembly: which Paul himself witnesses, 1 Cor. 14. 26. when he
says. When ye come together, every one of you has a Psalm, etc. there
doubtless the Apostle speaks of Psalms recited in the sacred assemblies of the
Church. Therefore St. Austin thinks, that the Church has our Ep. 119. c. 18.
Lords, and his Apostles, both documents, examples, and precepts, for singing
Hymns and Psalms.

Eusebius mentions Hymns out of Philo, which he affirms were recited by the
Church, Hist. l. 2. 17. Nepos has recorded diverse, which the Brethren used in
the time of Dionysius. Euseh. 7. c. 24. Tertullian witnesses, that in his age
there were Psalms and Hymns sung in the public assemblies, Ap. c. 39. and
elsewhere, when he reckons up the Lords days solemnities, he says Psalms were
sung, De Anima, c. 9. And in the words of Plinius secundus to Trajan, who lived
more than an age before Tertullian, he acknowledges, that the Christians
Tertull. Apol c. 2.
had their meetings before day for singing to Christ, and God. Now in the time
of Trajan, John the Apostle returned to Ephesus, who was banished into the Isle
Pathmos, when Domitian was Emperor.

In the time of Ephraemus, Sermon. de cruce Domini.
they honored their festivals with a Christian dignity in singing Psalms,
Hymns, and Spiritual songs. When Gregor. Nazianz. teaches, how the Feasts of
Christians are to be celebrated, he commands us, Ora. 18.
to take hymns for timbrels, singing of Psalms, for bawdy and wicked songs, etc.

Chrysostom devised nocturnal hymns, to Socr. 6. 8.
suppress the Arrian opinion, and to confirm his hearers in the faith. And
Niceph. confesses, that the Catholic Church used holy songs, the beginning of
singing Psalms and hymns being taken from thence. lib. 13. c. 8. Hom. post
redit. Chrysostomi, witnesses, that the Church used hymns in his age. Basil
going through the Cities of Pontus, taught the people to meet together, and
attend upon Hymns, Psalms, and Prayers. Ruffin. Hist. Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 9.
and Basil. Ep. ad Neocaesar. 63.

From which it appears, that the custom of singing was observed even since the
Apostles, especially in the Eastern Church: and the more the Church grew, the
more the use of singing grew also.

The Western Churches received singing more lately, although Baronius deny it,
anno sexagesimo, sect. 33. who thinks that Damasus received not the rite of
singing, which he says did from the very beginning of instituting the Sea grow
up in the R. Church, but the Psalter of the 72 Interpreters translation out of
the East, from Hierom, who then lived at Jerusalem. But the very words of
Damasus will show, that Baronius being deceived in this, does colourably
beguile the Reader. Although Baronius doubts of the truth of this Epistle,
which yet the Pontifical book Conc. T. 1. p. 496. gives credit to. The Epistle
of Damasus ^o* Hierom desires, that he would send to him* Graecorum
Psallentiam, i. the singing of the Greeks, (not Psalterium, i* the Psalter of
the 72 Interpreters, as Baronius would have it) especially because the manner
of singers was not used amongst them, nor the grace of an hymn was known in
their mouth. Damas. Ep. ad Hierom. The Pontifical also says, that Conc. T. 1.
p. 496.
Damasus ordained, that Psalms should be sung, both on the day and night by the
Clergy. If the singing of Psalms grew up in that Church, from the first
instituting of the Roman See, (as Baronius would have it) with what face will
the Pontifical affirm, that Damasus ordained, that Psalms should be sung, which
Baronius cries out, was done long before Damasus? which yet the Pontifical
ascribes to Damasus his constitution.

Austin relates, that Ambrose Bishop of Conf. l. 9. c. 7.
Millain, did first appoint the singing of Hymns and Psalms amongst the Western
people. Nor does this disagree with their opinion, who ascribe this to Damasus:
for they were contemporaries: and what was begun by one, might be confirmed by
the others help. So Polyd. Virgil. l. 6. c. 2. However, it is plain, that that
manner of singing was in force with the Millainoys; For when Justina persecuted
Ambrose, the people watched in the Church, and then it was appointed, that
Psalms and hymns should be sung, according to the custom of the Oriental
countries, lest the people should pine away with the tediousness of sorrow, and
from that day to this day it is retained, many, and now almost all
congregations in the whole world imitating it. Paulinus witnesses also, in the
life of Ambrose, that in the time of Justina hymns began to be sung in the
Church of Millain, and he relates, that the devotion of this celebrity was not
only used in that Church, but had spread over almost all provinces in the West.

In explaining the hymns which were anciently sung of the Church, we will first
search into the matter of the hymns, and The matter of hymns.
then into the manner of singing. As for the hymns themselves, the Divine
Oracles being sung with a sweet voice, did animate their sounds, and therefore
they sung sometimes David's Psalter. Aug. Conf. l. 10 c. 33. So Theodoret
says, that Flavianus and Diodorus did teach, that David's Psalms were to be
sung. Hist. l. 2. c. 24. Hom. de verb. Is^ae 1. l 5. p 128.
Chrysostom, when he reproves some that sung uncomelily, mentions the very
words of David's Psalms, which were uttered in the singing. Austin glories,
that the divine Songs of the Prophets, were sung soberly in the Church. Ep.
119. c. 18.

Tertullian says, that in the assemblies of Christians, after the This
Manualis aqua was for washing the hands with, to distinguish it from their
baths, which they used before Supper.
Manualis aqua, every one was called forth to sing to God, either out of the
Holy Scriptures, or of his own invention. Apol. cap. 39.

Sometimes also Psalms were sung in the Church-assembly, which were written-by
the Doctors of the Church. Socrates mentions some Psalms that were written by
Chrysostom. lib. 6. cap. 8. Eusebius, by Nepos. Hist. lib. 7. c. 24.

Conc. Laod. Can. 59. it is prohibited, that no private Psalms be uttered in
the Church. Therefore St. Austin in the aforesaid place does blame the
Donatists, for leaving David's Psalms, and singing Hymns which were invented by
themselves.

CHAP. XII.
The manner of singing in the Church, was, according to the vulgars capacity,
modest and sober: the incommodities of a sweeter voice in singing. The profit
of a well moderated singing. Hymns were sometimes sung of one, sometimes of
diverse. Antiphones, Organs. How none were to sing in the Church, but those that
were chosen to this purpose. Broken Music disallowed. A censure of that Music
which is used among the Papists.

IN the second place, this is to be observed Singing to the vulgars capacity.
of the manner of singing used by Christians in their assemblies, although
singing was every where used, yet the same manner of singing was not used by
all. At least, the ancients did chiefly regard that their singing might be
understood of the people, lest through the sweetness of the voice in singing,
without the pious affections of the heart, they should be deceived. The
Corinthians, excelling in the gift of tongues, sung commonly in an unknown
tongue, but Paul abrogated that error, and commanded them to use a known
tongue, that the people might say, Amen. 2 Cor. 14. 15. Neither could they that
sung to the Lord in their heart, any otherwise stir up themselves by Psalms,
hymns, and spiritual songs. Which yet was enjoined the Church by the Apostles
Canon, Col. 3. 16. Ephesians. 5. 19. which do teach, that all the art of singing in
the Church, ought by the Apostles sentence, to be ordered into the vulgars
capacity.

So was is also used in the following Church. St. Athanasius made the Reader of
the Psalm to sound it sorth with so little a changing of the voice, that he was
likelier to one that pronounced it, than sung it, witness Austin, Confess. l.
10. c. 33. St. Hierom Hier. Ep. ad Rustic.
being bold upon the testimony of St. Paul (2 Cor. 14. 15. where the Apostle
says, I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with understanding also)
teaches us, that in singing a Psalm, not the sweetness of the voice, but the
affection of the mind is to be observed. For it is better to worship God in
praises and hymns that are tuned in a pure mind, which God only looks at,
than those that are sung with a loud and shrill voice: as sometime Philo de
Plantatione Noe. The Africans did soberly sing their Divine songs of the
Prophets Aug. Ep. 119. c. 18.
in the Church, whereas the Donatists sung their immodest roarings, like songs
composed by man's wit, as if they were sounding a trumpet to battle. Where
Austin finds fault with them for two things. First, because they betook
themselves to sing hymns, which they devised by their own invention, leaving
the holy songs of the Prophets. And secondly, because they sung them not
soberly, as the Church did, but as puffed up with pride. Austin blames them for
both. Quaestiones ad Justinum Mariyrem, acknowledge simple singing in the
Church. Qu. 107.

Austin relates the incommodities of a The inconveniency of a sweet voice in*
singing.
sweeter concord in singing: who was some time more moved with the singing,
than the thing which was sung: for which cause, he acknowledges, that he
sinned grievously, and had rather that he had not heard when Conf. l. 10. c. 33.
he sang: for the contentment of his flesh beguiled him, and he gave more
respect to Musical delights in the Church, than was seemly.

For avoiding these inconveniences, it is ordained in Conc. in Trullo, Can. 75.
that those who sing, (...), i. should neither use disorderly shoutings, nor
strain nature to clamor. Nor is the reason of this Canon assigned by Zonaras,
contrary to religion, or right reason. Singing of Psalms, says he, is a kind
of deprecating God, wherein, by suppliant prayers, we beg the pardon of sins.
Now it is fit that supplicants go in humble habit, but clamours and rude
shoutings are no argument of humility and modesty, but of a mind rashly
vaunting, and carried away with presumption. Thus Zonaras.

Hierom is clearly of the same opinion, who thinks, that our singing must be to
God, not with the voice, but the heart; Nor are we like Tragedians, to anoint
our throat and mouth with sweet modulation, that our Theatrical tunes and songs
may be heard in the Church, but we are to sing with reverence, indeed, and in
knowledge of the Scripture.

None does better than Chrysostom reprove Chrysostom. hom. 1. de verb. Isaiae, t. 5.
p. 128.
that unseemly manner of singing, borrowed from the Theaters, that signify no
certainty to us by their clamours. It is a notable place, which, though it be
large, I will set down for the Readers sake. There are some men, says he, who,
contemning God, and reckoning the Oracles of the Spirit, for common and
profane, do utter disordered voices, carrying themselves no better than those
that are mad, ruffling and rolling with the whole body, and showing manners far
off from a spiritual stability. O wretched and unhappy man! thou ought with
trembling and reverence to resound the angelical glorification, and with
terror to make confession to thy Creator, and by this to beg the pardon of
sins. And here thou bring in the fashions of Mimicks and Dancers, while thou
throwest the hands undecently, and jumpest with the feet, and turnest about
with the whole body. And how is it, that thou fear not, nor tremblest to
hear of these things against such Oracles? do thou not think that God is
invisibly present here, who measures the motion of every man, and has a
consideration of the conscience? do thou not think, that the Angels do stand
by this stupendous table, and with reverence compass it about? but thou do
not think on these things, because the things which are heard and seen in the
Theaters have darkened thy mind; and therefore do thou bring in that to be
used in the Church, which is done there? therefore do thou discover a
disordered mind, in clamours that signify nothing certain? how therefore will thou beg the pardon of thy sins? how will thou receive the Lord into thy house,
who do so contemptuously offer him a prayer? Thou say, Have mercy on me, O
God, and declarest, that thy manners are far from mercy. Thou criest out, Save
me, and expressest an outward show far from salvation. Why are thy hands spread
out to pray, which are always thrown aloft, and turned about in an unseemly
manner. Which, through the importunate impulse of a vehement and violent
spirit, make a sound which signifies nothing certain? are not those examples
partly of silly women, that exercise whorish tricks in the streets, and partly
of them that bawl in the Theaters? etc. These are the words wherein that grave
Father taxes those rude voices in singing of hymns, which signify nothing
certain; as being such as rather become Theaters, than the Church of God;
because they were borrowed from thence, and are unseemly for the Church of God:
in which all things are to be done with reverence, because of the tremendous
presence of God, who observes the motion of every one in the Church, yea, he
reckons those rude voices in singing, for tokens of an uncomposed mind; which
do declare, that men are rather mad, than humbly confessing their sins to God,
and lowly begging pardon of God for them.

But if there be any one that desires to The good use of a well moderated
singing.
hear the commodity of a moderated singing, consisting of a clear voice, and
convenient moderation therein, let him read Austins tenth Book of Confessions,
and chap. 33. When I call to mind, says he, the tears I shed at the hearing of
the Church-songs, in the beginning of my recovered faith, yea, and at this very
time, whenas I am moved, not with the singing, but with the thing sung; I then
acknowledged the great good use of this institution.

And elsewhere, Confess. lib. 9. c. 6. he says, How abundantly did I weep
before God, to hear these Hymns of thine, being touched to the very quick by the
voices of thy sweet Church-song! the voices flowed into my ears, and thy truth
pleasingly distilled into my heart, which caused the affections of my devotion
to overflow, and my tears to run over, and happy did I find my self therein.
This shows, that Austin did approve that sort of singing in the Church, which
tended to edification: by the help whereof, the hearers mind was more lift up
to God (such was the manner of singing used at Millain, of which Austin here
speaks) not that which only pleased the ears, nor that which suffered the
words, when they were uttered in singing, to be heard or understood. This kind
of singing, which is delicately pronounced with a certain allurement of the
voice, is a delight to unregenerate ears (for there follows the contempt of
the flesh, unto which, it was not fit to give Aug. Conf. l. 10. T. 33.
over the soul to be effeminated) but will be of no advantage to move the mind,
from whence the calm affections of religion should be excited.

Then again, we must observe also, in the manner of singing then used by the
Church, that Psalms were sung sometimes of one, sometimes by the Quire,
sometimes of all together.

At first they sung all at once. So Chrysostom. Hom. 36. in 1 Cor. 14.
who says, they had all one voice, and one heart. He adds also in the same
place, he that sings, sings above, (that is, rehearses the words of the Hymn to
be sung, and goes first before the rest in singing, as shortly after the words
of Basil will tell us) and when all sung after him, the voice came as it were
out of one mouth.

When Ep. ad Neo Caes. 63.
Basil describes the manner of singing of Psalms in his age, he says, now when
they sing, they are divided into two parts, and sing after one another by
course, then this charge being committed to one of these persons, to begin
before the rest in singing, then the rest sung after him; (but he says, this
variety of singing Psalms was ordained, that now and then prayers being mixed
also, they might pass the night with less wearisomness) when day appeared, they
all offered up a Psalm to God, as with one mouth, and one heart.

The custom of Anthemns [or Antiphones] that is, of singing verses alternately
by way of answer, not only at Antioch, but in other Churches, the writers of
Ecclesiastical history do derive from Ignatius, whom they report did first
institute Anthemns. So Socrates, Hist. 6. 8. and Niceph. 13. 8. although this
seems improbable to diverse men of no mean judgment, because Responsory Hymns or
Anthemns are not so much worth, as for their sake there must needs Angels come
down from Heaven, and appear to sing before others (which the aforesaid
writers, searching out the reason of Anthemns, do affirm) whereas the Church at
that time wanted not Psalms and Hymns; which the Epistle of Plinius Secundus to
Trajan witnesses; for Ignatius suffered Martyrdom when Trajan was Emperor.
And after Ignatius, for a long time, there was one voice of all in the Church,
while they prayed to God, one prayer of all, when they sung hymns: the voice
was uttered as out of one mouth, as formerly we heard out of Chrysostom Chrysostom.
Hom. 36. in 1 Cor. The author of harmonious tuning.


The invention of harmonious tuning among the Syrians, they attribute to
Ephraimus Syrus, Soz. 3. 15. but Theodoret acknowledges it received from
Flavianus and Diodorus: who having divided the Quire into two parties, gave
them David's Psalms to be sung by course. They followed the manner of Antioch,
which, Theodoret says, spread afterward to the uttermost parts of the earth,
Lib. 2. 24.

In the Western Churches, Platina In vita Damas.
ascribes this to Pope Damasus; whose opinion agrees with Damasus his Epistle
to Hierom, and with the Pontifical, as we have formerly mentioned.

Platina in his Life relates, that Vitalianus Organs.
the first Pope of Rome, did ordain singing, using Organs (as some would have
it) for harmony. But the author of those answers, whoever he was, ad
Orthodoxos, which are added to Justin Martyr, says, that the custom Just.
Mart. q. 107.
of singing by inanimate instruments in the Church, was taken away in his time,
and upon that account simple Prayers were retained, because songs, rattles, and
organs, are fitter for children and fools than the Church.

Leo the second brought Hymns to a better concord. Plat. in vita Leonis.

It was provided by the fifteenth Canon How none but a few should sing in the
Church.
Conc. Laod. that none should sing in the Church, besides certain that were
chosen for singing: the reason of which Canon is assigned by Baronius An. 60.
n. 28.
to be this; Because, says he, when the people and Clergy sung promiscuously,
through the unskilfulness of the singers, it often fell out, that by the
disordered sound of voices, the diversity marred that harmonious singing, which
was congruous to the Churches dignity; therefore it was prohibited the people
in the Church, that none should sing but those unto whom this work was
assigned. To confirm this conjecture, he has recourse to Chrysostom: the same
does Binius, Conc. T. 1. in Notis Conc. Laodic.

To me it is not manifest what was the true reason of ordaining the Laodicean
Canon. After the Laodicean Council, the foreobserved testimonies have showed
us, that it was an usual thing for the Christian people to sing with others in
the Church: but as for the place in Chrysostom, cited by Baronius, it brings no
help at all to establish the conjecture of Baronius. For in that place (of
which we have formerly heard in this Chapter) St. Chrysostom. only blames Hom. 1.
de verb. Isa.
that unseemly manner of singing, which was borrowed from the Theaters,
Mimicks, and Dancers, and confisted of clamours which signified no certainty.
But he hinders not the people from the liberty of singing in the Church. This
none will deny, that looks into the place of Chrysostom, cited by Baronius.
When all is done, says he, we forbid not jubilation (the contrary whereto is
affirmed by Baronius, and his follower Binius) but a voice that signifies
nothing; not the voice of praise, but a rude voice of absurdity, the vain and
rash throwing up of the hands into the air, stamping with the feet, unseemly
and effeminate songs, which are the plays of them that sit idle in the
Theaters, and at Horse-races. Thus Chrysostom: which is far from the sense for
which Baronius brought it. Which does also more evidently appear, from the end
of that Homily, in which he speaks to his hearers, that they would come to God
with a calm and repressed voice, and not lift up their hands in disorderly
motions, but present them to God both together. Which things being well
observed, with what face can the Papists allege Chrysostom, for denying the
people a liberty to sing in the Church?

Now from the premises it may easily be The Church could not endure broken
music.
observed, that the Fathers approved not of that, which they call Broken
Music, that consists rather in the noise of the voice, than the fervor of the
spirit; as if from such Music God neither got any praise, or the Church
profit. Therefore passing over that, they prescribed the Church simple singing.
It displeased Gregory the Great, Li. 4. ep. 44.
that those who were chosen to office of preaching, and the holy Ministry,
should, having that charge, betake themselves to singing: in a Synod at Rome,
held in the time of Mauritius. Gregory would not have so much time taken up in
singing, and almost In Can. 22. Conc. Lao.
no place left for preaching. Zonaras also teaches, that Readers in the Church
ought rather to attend the care of singing, than the reading of holy books.

To conclude, I leave it for others to A censure of the music among the Papists
judge, what to think of that Popish singing, which is fitted to the exact
measures of all kind of Music; since Cornelius Agrippa, one of their own
profession, has copiously enough painted out the liberty of Music, which they
allow for setting out of hymns. There is, says he, at this day, such a
licentiousness of Music in Churches, that even a deal of bawdy songs on the
Organs, have equal place with the Canon of the Mass; and they chaunt the Divine
offices, holy mysteries, and prayers, having hired a company of wanton
Musicians with a great sum of money, not to the Hearers understanding, not to
the Elevation of the Spirit, (hearken here, you Papists, that number your
Psalms, but love to bray them out like Asses, without understanding them) but
for lecherous tickling, not with men's voices, but belluine clamours, while the
boys whine the descant, others bellow the tenor, others bark the counterpoint,
others roar the treble, others grunt the base, and they make that many sounds
may be heard, but no words or sentences be understood, but the authority of
judgment is taken away, both from the ears and mind. Thus he who wars with you
in your tents, De vanitate Scientiarum, in the end of the sixteenth chapter: in
which he does paint out to the life, as they say, the bawdry of Roman Music,
in their holy mysteries, (well enough befitting the Babylonish whore) and the
incommodities thereof, little agreeing to the holy worship of God. And the like
does Polydor Virgil, De inventione rerum, lib. 6. c. 2.

And these are the things which I had to mention of the two exercises of
Religion, comprehended under the Ministry of the Word, and Prayer, that were to
be performed upon the Lords Day.

CHAP. XIII.
Administration of the Sacraments on the Lords Day.

THe third thing among the public exercises of Religion, wherein the
observation of the Lords day was solemnized among the ancients, follows; viz.
the administration of the Sacraments. Which (although not tied to the Lords
day) were administered on the Lords day, the Scriptures bearing witness, Acts
20. 7. the Disciples being gathered together on the first day of the week, to
break bread, Paul preached to them, etc. where breaking of bread is not to be
expounded of a domestic feast, but of the H. Supper, as we have shown Book 1.
chap. 2. For having continued his speech until midnight, St. Paul took bread
(the comparing of ver. 7. with 11. evinces this:) now the Disciples met not at
that time of night to break their daily bread. But we must make account, that
there was a solemn day proclaimed amongst them, for celebrating the Holy
Supper; which should be more commodious than all the other: and that was the
first day in the week, on which that place does evidently enough conclude, that
the Church met together. And the Apostle teaches, that it met in the same place
to eat the Lords Supper. 1 Cor. 11. 20.

Justin, in the place above so often cited, Ap. 2.
does witness, that the Eucharist (or as Tertull. lib. 2. ad Ux. cap. 4. the
Lords Feast) was wont to be administered by the Church on the Lords day. So
Chrysostom. Hom. 18. in Act. Ap.

Ambrose delivered to the Catechumeni Ep. lib. 5. ep. 33.
(whom he calls Competentes, that is, those that were instructed in the
Christian faith, suing for Baptism) on the Lords day, after the reading and
Treatise, the Symbol of the Church in the fonts (which we understand of
Baptism, without which none were admitted to the Eucharist.)

That the Sacraments were administered on the Lords day, none doubts; concerning
the administration whereof, I leave the prolix narration to be drawn out of the
learned Commentaries of Divines (of whom this age by the grace of God reapeth a
fruitful crop) who professedly handle common places of Divinity: lest I should
lose my labor, with the Reader that is well exercised in these things, and
after Homer write an Iliad, as the Proverb goes.

CHAP. XIV.
Who was to be present at all the offices of the Liturgy, and who not. The
Catechumeni, Audientes, Competentes, Poenitentes, and their sundry degrees:
namely, some Lugentes, others Audientes, others Substrati, others Consistentes,
others Eucharistiae participantes. At what offices these were to be present,
and what not.

HAving recited the offices which were performed in the Churches public
assemblies, it will be a thing worth the labor, to advertise the Reader, that
all the members of the Church were not all at once to be present always at all
these offices: which we will now show from a more narrow observation of the
persons, of which the Church consisted; the observation of which thing, because
it is not obvious to all men's eyes, we think it not altogether good to pass by
in silence.

The whole Christian people in the Church were anciently distinguished into
thr^^ degrees. For there were the (...), the Catechumens, Faithful, and
Penitents; and to men as they were constituted in all those degrees, there were
certain offices of the Liturgy appropriated, to which they being admitted, were
excluded from the rest: while, in the mean time, the faithful were present at
all the rest.

The Catechumeni were they who first desired to become Christians; whom Origin
Contra Celsum, l. 3.
calls, them that lately were admitted, but had not obtained the Symbol of
lustration. They are called Catechumeni, because, while they were in this
Class, they were by the voice instructed of others in the principles of the
Christian Faith. (...). i. no believing without catechizing, says Clemens
Alexand. Even those that p. 576.
were to be brought to the Faith, were first to be instructed in the Doctrine
of the Catechism: (...) i. Clem. Al. paed. t. 1.
Catechizing leads to the faith. Now the points wherein the Catechumeni were
instructed, are extant in Constable. Ap. lib. 7* c. 40. They were instructed,
namely, in the tremendous mystery of the Holy Trinity, in the stupendous work
of Creation, and Gods provid^^^e, and especially that about mankind, and ^^ the
general judgment to come, etc. all which are compendiously recited by
Augustine, lib. de Fide and Operibus, cap. 6. where he exhorts the
Catechumeni, to hear how they ought to become, and live as the Faithful.
Afterward, that they hear what Faith is, and what the life of a Christian
ought to be. Those that were to be baptized therefore, were to be instructed in
these before they desired Baptism.

They that taught the persons of this order In Catal. Eccl. Scr. in Clem.
in the principles of the Christian Faith, were called by St. Hierom, the
Masters of Catechizing, among whom were numbered Origin, Eusebius. Hist. l 6. c. 8.
Hierom, in Catal. Eccles. script. in Origin. Also Pantaenus, Eus. l. 5. c. 10.
Hierom confesses, that he had Apol. ad Damien*
Greg. Nazianz. and Didymus for his Catechists in the Holy Scripture.

Now if any desire to know to what offices of the public Liturgy the
Catechumeni were admitted, this cannot be observed with a distinction of them,
of which mention is made amongst the ancients in diverse places. Of the
Catechumeni, some were called Audientes, and some Competentes. Those had their
name from hearing the Word; because they were newly admitted only, as tiroes,
or candidates of the Christian Faith: and therefore they were reckoned inter
auditorum Lib. d^ Poenit. c. 6.
tyrocinia, as Tertnllian speaks, while being not admitted into the auditory,
they stood (...), i. without the compass of the Temple, as Dionys. Areop. de
Hierarch. libro, c. 3. that is, as Zonaras interprets it, (...) i. without the
Temple, in the Porch; where the Consistentes, according to the custom of the
Church, only heard the tune of the Psalms, and reading of Scripture in the
Church (for Conc. ^4: Carthag: Can. 84.
none, whether he were Gentile, or Jew, or Heretic, was excluded from hearing
of the Word) or the Bishops Sermon to the people, for instructing them. (
Zonar. in Can. 19. Laodic.) Neither were they admitted to the holy things,
which afterward followed in the Church-assembly. So Dyonys. Areop. Eccles.
Hierarch. lib. p. 94. and 96. Behold, says Augustine, after Sermon, missa fit
Catechumenis Sermon. de Temp. 137.
( i. e. the Catechumeni were dismissed) and the Faithful remained.

The Audientes then were to come at no holy office, but the reading of the
Scriptures: which being ended, before the Church went to prayer, or
administering the Eucharist, they were dismissed. And because they had liberty
granted to be present at reading the Scripture in the public assembly of the
Church, therefore the Readers were called their Doctors [or Teachers.] So
Optatus, in Cyprian, is called Doctor Audientium; because, Ep. 24.
that after he was an ordained Reader, he was to read the Scripture in the
Churchassemblies.

The Catechumeni, who were Competentes, being well instructed in the Christian
says, sued for Baptism, Aug. Retr. lib. 1. c. 17.
and were sometimes distinguished from the Catechumeni, in Ambrose, lib. 5. ep.
33. Having dismissed, says he, the Catechumeni, (that is, those whom they call
Audientes) to some I gave the Symbol in the Fonts. Because, as I said, they
being well instructed in the Christian faith, as firm therein, they sued for
Baptism. Aug. Sermon. de tempore 116.

When the Audientes were admitted, a Prayer was rehearsed by a Deacon, to the
Catechumi Competentes, who were fallen on their knees, Conc. Neocaes. Can. 5.
and then when that ((...), i. let the Catechumeni go out) was pronounced, they
went forth, the Faithful preparing themselves to the Holy Eucharist, as Zonar.
in Can. Conc. Neocaesar.

The words of an excellent Oration, uttered An Oration over the Catechumeni.
to the Competentes, together with a perspicuous explication of them, by St.
Chrysostom, are extant in Chrysostom, Hom. 2. in 2 ad Cor. where the Deacon
admonishes all to pray for the Catechumeni, while he says, Let us stand
honestly, let us pray earnestly, that the most merciful and compassionate God
would hear their Prayers, would open the ears of their hearts: that they may
hear what the eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has entered into the heart
of man, and that he would instill into them the word of truth; that he would
sow his fear in them, and confirm his faith in their minds; that he would
reveal to them the Gospel of righteousness, that he would give them a divine
mind, chaste thoughts, a life joined with truth: continually to think of his
things, to relish his things, to meditate of his things, to delight themselves
in his Law day and night. Let us moreover pray for them more intensly, that he
would deliver them from all evil, and dishonest matter, from every sin of the
Devil, and all snares of the adversary: that he would vouchsafe them in due
time the laver of regeneration, and remission of sins: that he would bless
their comings in, and going out, all their life, their houses and habitations.
Let us pray, that thou would increase and bless their children, and instruct
them, when they are come to age, with wisdom: that thou would direct all
their purposes to profit. Pray ye Catechumeni, to the Angel of peace, that all
your purposes may be peaceable to you, beg, that this may be a peaceable day,
and all the days of your life. Commend Christians, your purposes, what is
honest, and profitable, your selves to the living God, and his Christ, etc.
Which being pronounced, the Deacon bids them rise up, and dismisses them,
having instructed them with sundry Precepts.

And these are the offices of the Liturgy, at which the Catechumeni were
allowed to be present. The second degree of them that were in the Church,
follows, namely, the Faithful; who were present at all the parts of the
Liturgy performed in that order they were recited in the precedent Chapters.
Neither could any one of this degree depart out of the Church-assembly, before
all those offices were finished, as we have observed formerly, chap. 6. of this
Book, and therefore I need to add no more of them.

The third degree of them, was those who were called (...), or Penitents. These
being instructed in the Doctrine of Christian Religion, and once baptized in
the holy laver of baptism, they recorded their names in the Church catalogue.
But falling into some manifest sin (by which they lost the common privileges
of the Faithful) they were bound of the Church with spiritual bonds, till they
had declared sufficient signs of their repentance.

There were sundry classes of these, during the time (which was defined by the
Bishops judgment: Can. 7. Council. Ancyran.) of their public repentance, and
sundry places were assigned to them in the Church. Without whose observation,
it will not be easy to show what offices of the Church-Liturgy they had
liberty to be at, and what not. For, during the repentance which was prescribed
them by the Bishops, they had not the liberty of all offices with the body of
the Church.

We meet with five kinds, or classes of The degrees of Penitents.
Penitents, in the ancients. Some were Lugentes, some Audientes, some
Substrati, some Subsistentes, and then some that were perfectly admitted to
partake of the Lords Body and Blood. Zonaras reckons three degrees of these, in
Can. 8. Conc. Ancyran. And the same Author adds a fourth, in Can. 4. of the
same Council. But all the degrees of Penitents, are extant together in
Baronius, an. 263. number. 29. with the Centur. Magdeb. 2. c. 6. also. These
degrees are reckoned up by the forementioned Historians, out of the Canon, or
the canonical Epistle, as the Greeks call it, of Gregorius Neocaesariensis,
surnamed Thaumaturgus (if it be that Gregory, as some think not.)

The first degree of these was (...), or Weepers, in which the Lugentes [or
Weepers] having committed a sin, stood without the Church, Zonar. in Can. 5.
Conc. Neocaesar. Where they asked them that entered in, with sorrow and tears,
that they would draw out the bountiful mercy of God for them. Weeping, says
Thaumaturgus in Baronius, or sorrow, is without the gate of the Oratory, where
the offender, as he stands, must ask the Faithful as they enter in, to pray for
them. Let the offender, says St. Ambrose, De Paenit. lib. 1. c. 16.
beg pardon with tears, beg with sighs, beg that he may be pardoned at the
weeping of all the people. These are said by Tertullian, libro de Poenitentia,
cap. 9. to kneel to the Presbyters, and charis Dei, [i. the dear servants of
God.]

But here I will give the Reader this advertisement, that it is well observed by
Pamelius, in his notes upon this place of Tertullian, that this place in some
editions is faulty. For, some have it, Presbyteris and aris Dei adgeniculari.
i. they kneeled to the Presbyters and altars of God. Which reading some
catching at, as agreeing to their dotage, are busily diligent to desend bowing
to altars, upon this testimony. So Bell. d^ Missa. l. 2. c. 10.
Bellarmine, and others of his opinion. Now their exposition, how likely
soever, is not worth a rush. For it is clearer than the noonday, that in this
they are deceived, through ignorance of the Church custom. For how could the
Penitents kneel at Gods altars, when at that time they were not permitted to
come within the rails of the Clergy, as is well enough known to all that are
any whit seen in Church antiquity) much less to the altar: but being placed
without the auditory, as formerly we have heard out of Thaumaturgus and
Ambrose, and falling down at the feet of them that entered in, they seriously
entreated them with tears, that they would beseech God for them. The Lugentes
therefore were wont to kneel down to the dear servants of God, both Presbyters
and others, that went into the Church; for Ambros. de Poenit. l. 2. c. 10.
they sued to them, besought them, fell on their knees, kissed their footsteps.
Afterward, they required the patronage of the holy people to God for them. For
in this business Fabiola Epitaphi Fabiolae*
will be to us an example: who is by Hierom recorded to have opened her wound
to all, while she had her sides ripped open, her head bare, her mouth shut,
neither did she enter into the Church of the Lord, but sat saparate without
the tents, with Myriam, Moses's sister. This she did, while she stood in the
order of Penitents before Easter, in the Lateran Cathedral, all the City of
Rome beholding her, the Bishops, Presbyters, and all the people weeping for
her, as Hierom, ibid.

Dionysius Areopagita reproves Demophilus, Epist. ad Demoph.
(because he had kicked with his foot a Presbyter, for gently receiving a man
that had fallen at a Priests feet.) Eu^ebius also relates, lib. 5. cap. ult.
That Natalius, a confessor of the truth, being sometime ^educed, but at length
returned to the Church, did in hair cloth, and sackcloth, cast himself down at
the feet of Pope Zephirinas, with great sorrow, and tears, and fell not only
at the feet of the Clergy, but Laity; so that the Church of our merciful Christ
having mercy on him, lamented with him.

From which it appears, that the Penitents of this degree did communicate with
the body of the Church in no offices of the Liturgy; and much less went up to
the altar (forsooth) to bow. But this by the bye.

Moreover, some make a doubt, whether this degree of repentance was prescribed
the Penitents by the Primitive Church, or was taken up by them of their own
accord; in whose judgment that degree of repentance, which was voluntary in the
first age, was in the third age after enjoined the Penitents by the Church.
Howbeit, every one of these degrees was a certain disposition to prepare the
Penitent for a farther. But in explaining of these degrees, we will follow
Thaumaturgus.

The second degree of Penitents was The Penitents called Audientes.
(...), or Hearers. These stood within the gate, in a place which they call
(...), or the porch of the Temple; hearing the Scripture, (that is, the reading
of the Law, Prophets, and Gospel, Constit. Apost. l. 2. c. 39.) and the
doctrines that were raised out of the Scriptures: yet were they judged unworthy
to be present at the Prayers of the Church. Baron. ubi prius. So Zonaras in
Can. 11. Conc. Nic.

The third degree of these was (...); Substrati.
or the Prostrate: when they that had repented stood within the compass of the
Church, behind the Pulpit (separate from the place of the Faithful, yet within
their ^ight) where they were present at none of the holy offices, save the
reading of the Holy Scripture, expounding of the Gospel, and prayer, that was
rehearsed for them, and the perfect Catechumeni, that is, the Competentes, and
a little while after the going out of the Catechumeni, having made Prayers for
them* they went out. Can. 19. Conc. Laodic. Baron. ibid. Zonar. in Can. 4. and
5. Conc. Anoyrani.

Here the Penitents stood sorrowful, and being not yet made partakers of the
Eucharist, since the commission of their sin, for which they were bound of the
Church with spiritual bonds, they threw themselves down on the earth with
weeping and lamentation: and for this prostration, the word (...) was assigned
to this degree. Then on the other side, the Bishop running to him lamenting,
falls likewise upon the ground with pitiful lamentation; and last of all, the
whole multitude of the Church falls a weeping too. After this, the Bishop rises
^^ first, and raises them that were fallen down, and having for a convenient
time prayed for sinners that repented, he dismisses them. Thus Sozomen, de
Ecclesiae Romanae consuetudine, lib. 7. cap. 16. where it is manifest he speaks
of the Penitents called ^ubstrati. The form of prayer used for them (after the
Deacon had admonished the Church to pray for them) by the Bishop, is extant
Constit. Apost. l. 8. c. 8, and 9. which being ended, they went out of the
Church-assembly.

The fourth degree was (...), when ^ubsist^^tes.
they that had repented were called (...); because they stood with the
Faithful, and went not out with the Catechumeni, or the Penitents called
Substrati, Baron. ibid. These were with the Faithful present at Prayers, but
were not admitted to the Holy Eucharist, Conc. 1. Nic. Can. 11. they are said
to partake of Prayers with the people, but without oblation. So Can. 12. ibid.
Zonaras in Can. 4. and 5. Council. Ancyr. for which cause, St. Ambrose said he
could not offer, if Theodosius would stand by. Ambr. Ep. 28.

The last degree of Penitents, was of them, who, having fulfilled the time of
repentance prescribed them by the Church, were by her perfectly received; and
after the aforesaid offices of the Liturgy, at which the Subsistentes were
present, they were admitted also to participate of the Lords Body and Blood,
with the body of the Faithful. Of which Zonaras Can. 4. and 8. Council. Ancyran.
There are some that distinguish not the fourth degree of Penitents from the
fifth. But the Subsistentes are distinguished from these, Can. 11. 1. Conc.
Nic. where, (...): ^. they, were partakers of Prayer with the people, without
offering. And so those that were placed in the last degree, were superior to
those Penitents of the fourth degree, because they were admitted together with
the Faithful, to partake of the mysteries. Yet, that I may ingeniously confess
the truth, the finishing of the repentance, rather than the degree of
Penitents, is in this to be attended.

Now he that will apply his mind to weigh the aforesaid records of antiquity
more narrowly, shall easily observe, who were to be present at all the
exercises of Religion, and who were excluded from the same, or some of them by
the custom of the Church, while in the mean time, the assembly of the Faithful,
after they were gathered into one, performed all the aforesaid offices piously,
and with great devotion of mind. But to speak of these a little in transitu is
enough.

CHAP. XV.
Of places in which the Churches public assemblies were held.

WE have observed, that meetings were gathered by the Church, to perform the
duties of Religion: and we have seen what was done in them. In the third place,
something remains to be added of the places in which these meetings were kept.
For a place is required where the people of God being gathered together, may
exercise themselves in the things that pertain to his public worship. And that
some places designed to Divine Worship, are necessary, I trust no body will
doubt: for without them, the public assemblies of the Faithful (the use of
which is formerly shown) to worship God, could not without inconvenience be
held. Therefore this place requires, that something be added of their names,
situation, and use, and other circumstances that declare these places. But I
will spare the labor of putting these things in writing, lest I, gaggling like
a Goose amongst the Swans, seem to stammer upon a subject which has been
happily treated on by other judicious men. Others have managed the charge of
describing this argument with great commendation. Especially the Learned
Hospinian, a man of profound Learning, and various Reading, in his learned
Treatise De Templis. In which is described what is necessary to be known of
places that are destined to the public meetings of the Church, which to me at
this time is enough to point at.

And thus much for the public exercises of Religion, that were observed by the
Church on the Lords Day.

CHAP. XVI.
Private Duties of Religion to be performed on the Lords Day. Where first is
considered, the examination of what was heard. Conferring upon the same.
Meditation of the life to come: and gathering of Alms for the use of the poor.

THus far of the Sacred Exercises of Religion (wherein the observation of this
day was solemnized) which were performed in the public assemblies of the
Church; now follow the private. Those were observed of sundry members of the
Church, being assembled together, but these were devoutly performed by them,
when they were dismissed from the public assembly. For although they met
publicly, Hier. in Gal. 4.
lest the disorderly meeting of the people should diminish their faith in
Christ, and to procure the greater gladness amongst them, by a mutual seeing
one another; yet their public Church meetings did not determine the
sanctification of the Lords Day: because public conventions were held at
certain hours, and the Lords Day i^ to be celebrated in memorial of that happy
Resurrection of our Savior, on a perfect and entire day, as we have shown in
the first Book, and fifth Chapter. Some things then remain to be done by
Christians after the Church meetings are ended, and these are various. Some
whereof I will mention for the godlies sake (who make conscience of sanctifying
the Lords Day.)

First of all, they that preached the After the public Treatises followed
examination of what was beard.
Word of God in the public assemblies, when those were ended, they did
sometimes examine the people of what they had heard: Which we read the Ancients
did perform with great industry. And for this cause, Prosper, De vita contempt.
lib. 2. cap. 2. contends it is, that Bishops are called Watchmen. Because they
watch the actions of all men, and with an aim of religious curiosity, spy out,
how every one lives with his household in his house, how with his Citizens in
the City: what good men they approve, they confirm by honoring them; whom they
observe to be vicious, they amend by reproving them. St. Prosper judged it to
be the Bishops duty, whom the Lord has appointed to be the Watchmen of his
Church, not only to attend preaching of the Word in the Church assembly, but
also when that was ended, and the people dismissed, diligently to observe the
manners and conversation of the people, that they might promote godliness, if
by any means they could, while they excited those, whom they saw to walk
according to what they heard in public, to a farther progress in godliness,
and sharply admonished those that turned not what they heard into works. Which
office, if ever, we believe they did faithfully perform on the Lords Day: which
we may see in St. Chrysostom, who, when he observed any not to be attentive
enough to his public Treatises, promised, that he would, when he had finished
his Treating, by interrogatories make trial, whether they retained what they
had heard. Homil. 4. in Hebr. Yea, he tells them, that when the assembly was
dismissed, he would discourse some time with his Auditors about what they had
heard; in the conclusion of Hom. 6. ad Pop. Antioch. And elsewhere he declares
the reason of his diligence, Hom. 9. ad Pop. For, says he, if it be no
reproach for a Physician to ask his patient how it is with him; neither is it
amiss in us to be still inquiring about our Hearers salvation; for we being
thus advertised what to do, and what to leave undone, shall apply remedies
according to congruous discipline. And this diligence he calls a solicitude,
not of curiosity, but provision: where, by an argument from the less to the
greater, he illustrates the necessity of the aforesaid industry. For if a
Physician, who attends the cure of a frail body, does diligently enquire of the
state of his patients health, after he has administered his medicines: why does
it not much more lie upon Bishops, (to whom the inspection of souls is
committed) ex officio, to observe whether their people lead their life
according to what they have heard, after that they have prescribed unto them
wholesome admonitions, and exhortations? whereby on every emergent occasion they
may prescribe necessary remedies. Chrysostom himself Conferring of what they
heard.
confesses, that he undertook private labors in teaching some of his Hearers,
while he inculcated some things to them, who entered communication with him
privately. Thus he speaks of himself, Hom. prim. de Lazaro.

It grieved St. Cyprian to the heart, while he was in exile, that he could not
have liberty to go to every one that was committed to his care, and to exhort
them cording to the Ministry of the Lord and of his Gospel. He commends the
Presbyters and Deacons, that supplied his place, for strengthening all by their
daily exhortations. Ep. 40. If therefore Cyprian set upon all that were
commended to his care with his exhortations, and commended others that did the
like, he thought that something more, after the Church-meetings were ended, in
which he could not go to them severally, was to be done by him.

Possidonius in the Life of Austin, chapter 12. mentions his private labors,
that he frequently undertook in instructing, and exhorting the Catholic
people. All these vigilant Fathers did not only propound the Word in Church
meetings, but also showed us by their own example, that it is privately to be
inculcated upon the minds of the Hearers; and their own testimonies teach us,
that this was done by them daily.

Secondly, he that shall consult the Fathers touching the observation of the
Lords Day, will observe, that they did frequently stir up their hearers to a
religious meditation and discoursing of what they had heard in the public
assembly. Chrysostom more than once does, labor what he can to persuade his
hearers, that after they are returned home from the Church, friends among
themselves, parents with their children, masters with their servants, meditate
and strive how they may do what they are taught. Homil. 5. ad Pap. Antioch.
which he elegantly explains by diverse similitudes. Even as, says he, many that
depart out of a meadow, do take a Rose or Violet, or some such flower, and
carrying it about a while in their fingers, do depart: and others returning
home out of an Orchard, do carry the boughs of trees that bear fruit; others
again, bring to their kinsfolks, fragments of the table from sumptuous suppers;
so also thou, when thou depart'st, carry back an admonition to thy children,
wife, and all thy kindred. For this admonition is of more use than a meadow, an
orchard, and a table. These roses never wither, this fruit never falls off,
these dishes never are marred. Afterward; Think what a thing it is, setting
aside all other things, both public and private, to be always discoursing of
Gods Laws, at table, and in the market, and in other Conventicles, etc. Homil.
6. ad Populum. Where, by an induction of diverse similitudes, he declares what
Christians are to do, after they be returned home from the public assembly;
namely, that they conferr at home of what they heard in the Church. In the
beginning also of the second Homil. on John, he requires of his hearers, that
they talk not only with one another publicly, but at home, of what they had
heard: and when he reproves those that went out of the Church, who did not well
remember what they had heard, he prescribes this remedy for that malady;
namely, that when they are returned home, they Hom. 5. in Math.
read the Holy Scriptures, and call their wife and children together, to confer
of those things that were spoken. It Is an excellent place which the Reader
shall find lib. 5. chap. 12. We wish, says Origin, that you would Hom. 9. in
Levit.
study what you have heard; not only hear the Word of God in the Church, but
in your houses be exercised, and meditate in the Law of the Lord day and night:
for Christ is there, and every where present to them that seek him.

From the forementioned testimonies, it appears, that the Fathers treated
seriously with their people, to conferr among themselves Object.
of what they had heard. Now if any one think, that they meant conferring of
what they had heard on other days than the Lords Days; I doubt not but he is
deceived, that persuades himself of this. For Answ.
if they require of their Hearers to confer^ of the Word heard on other days,
(which he will not deny they did, that looks into their writings) do they
therefore judge that the Word of God which was handled on the Lords Day, must
be forgotten? Nothing less; especially when elsewhere they counsel their
hearers to conferr with those that were absent, of what they heard in public,
after they were departed from the public assembly. So Chrysostom, Hom. 10. in
Genesis And he sharply taxes those that did not thus, Hom. 32. in Joh. whom, when
they are gone home, he affirms, they set upon no work beseeming a Christian,
Whilst they do not search out the sense of the Scriptures, which they heard in
the assembly: And at length requires them, that when they are gone home, they
endeavor the doing of what they are commanded, etc. Hom. 3. in Joh.

Bafil was of the same mind, who seriously Hom. 7. Hexaem.
wished, that what they had heard at both morning and evening assembly, all
that might be the table talk to the hearers; that is, when they sat down to
table, they should talk of what they heard.

St. Austin counsels his hearers, to conferr with those that were absent, of
what they heard; and so their memory would be as his voice. Praef. in Psalm. 50.
And in the end of the interpretation of that Psalm, he says, As it belongs
to us to speak in the Church to you, so it belongs to you to speak of it in
your houses.

Thirdly, Because the Lords Day is Meditation of the life to come.
not only ordained for a pious celebration of the memory of Christ's
Resurrection, but also, Basil the Great being witness, is an image of the world
to come, although it be no type of the rest and happiness in the life to come,
yet, as after he explaines it, that in this daily commotion we neglect not to
provide viands for a removal into that life that never will have end. Basil de
Spiritu Sancto, cap. 27. Such viands shall he provide, that on that day, while
he has leisure from external things, shall seriously think with himself, that
this is not his Country, but he an Exile; and at length he must remove hence
into Heaven, the Country of all the faithful.

Augustine, or whoever it was else, affirms, in the Book De december chordis, cap.
3. that a Christian is commanded to observe the Sabbath spiritually, in hope of
the future rest, which the Lord promises. And elsewhere, The Lords Day being
consecrated by the Resurrection of Christ, does not only prefigure the eternal
rest of the Spirit, but body also. Aug. de Civitate Dei, lib. 22. cap. 30.
Christians therefore are on this day principally to think of this eternal rest,
taking an occasion from the rest of the Lords Day; although, as I said, it be
not properly instituted to signify this rest, as a type of that thing.

What Ignatius, Epist. ad Magnes. delivers of the manner of observing the
Sabbath, may fitly be applied to the celebration of the Lords Day: He would
have every one to keep a Sabbath in a spiritual manner, in meditating of the
Law, not in refreshing and releasing of the body, and admiring the works of
God: which especially do agree to the solemnity of a Christian Sabbath: on
which Christians are to bend their care hither, to recollect themselves, and
feed their souls with the pious thoughts of that eternal rest (of which the
Lords Days rest is an image, according to Basil) in the world to come, by what
means they can. Therefore, when the public meeting was ended, there followed
also a pious meditation, which very well agrees to the sanctification of the
Lords Day, when the minds of men by hearing of the Word, public Prayers, and
other public Offices of Religion performed on that day, are inflamed with
exceeding love to desire heavenly things. And that the Ancients were of that
mind, the testimonies cited Book 1. Chap. 5. without me saying ought, do bear
witness. For the Fathers, as we have seen, do acknowledge, that the Lords Day
was dedicated to Divine Worship, and judged that naught was to be done on that
day by Christians, whether in their assemblies, or after they were dismissed
from them, but what tended to the salvation of the soul. This, Origin alone,
for all, will manifest, Hom. 23. in Number. who, while he shows in what things the
observation of the Christian Sabbath consists, bids in, among other things,
to think of heavenly things, to be careful about the future hope, to have
before our eyes the Judgment to come, and not to look at present and visible
things, but at invisible and future. These things do show, that pious
meditation is of necessity to be had on the Lords Day: by help whereof, the
minds of Christians may be carried up from earthly, to heavenly things; to the
end; that their conversation may be in heaven, from whence they look for the
Savior, Phil. 3. 20. even while they live on earth.

Chrysostom is earnest with his hearers, Hom. 15. in Genesis that they would
remember what was spoken in the Auditory, and that they would weigh all things
with themselves, that what they had heard might settle in their thoughts. Nor
does he ask this only of them, but does also earnestly request it of God, that
not only while they were present in the Auditory, they would remember what he
had said, but that they would weigh them at home by themselves, and in the
market, and wheresoever they did abide. Hom. 5. ad Pop.

Now if a Religious meditation on the Lords Day of what we have heard, be a way
to the eternal observation of a Sabbath in the Heavens for Christians, (for
whom there (...), remains a Sabbatism, Heb. 4. 9.) if they are to have before
their eyes the future hope, and the tremendous judgment on that day, and to
exhilerate their minds with the thoughts of a future life; if they are to
hearken to what is said with an attentive mind, not only while they are
present in the Auditory, but after their their departure thence, wherever
they abide, they be to call to mind what they have heard.

Lastly, if those vigilant Fathers were earnest with God, that their Auditors
minds might be persuaded to do this, all which are manifest by the cited
testimonies: then, not without cause, have we affirmed, that when the public
assemblies are ended, Meditation upon what we have heard is of necessity
required of Christians.

Fourthly, we read that Gifts, which Alms gathered.
afterward they called Collects, were given on the Lords Day, for the use of
the poor. So St. Paul gave order, 1 Cor. 16. 2. That upon the first day of the
week every one of you lay by you in store as God has prospered him, etc. The
Apostle did very fitly make choice of a day of a sacred assembly for gathering
Alms on. That the minds of Christians might, by hearing the Word, public
Prayers, and holy Lessons had on that Day, be the better inflamed to best^^
them upon the poors use.

Add also the consent of the ancient Church. Justin Martyr, Ap. 2. says, that
when the Church was met on the Sunday, there was a larger contribution, as
their ability would bear, and what they so gathered, they committed to him that
was the Praepositus, to be bestowed for the use of all that were poor.

Tertullian also mentions this custom, in Apol. and others that flourished
after him in the Church. Which is so manifest, that I suppose none will make
doubt of the same.

These are some of sundry things, wherein the ancients, after the public
assemblies were ended in the Church, bestowed their principal pains. Which
things, whoever considerately weighs, he will easily grant, that the private
observation of the Lords Day was not unknown to the Fathers; because their
hearers were sometime examined of what they had heard, when the assemblies were
ended; and the Bishops admonished them to conferr one among another of those
things; and they required them to refresh their minds with Divine Meditations
out of the Word, which they heard in the public assembly; and carefully
bestowed several things that conduced to the comfort of the poor.

And let these things briefly suffice to be spoken about the public and
private celebration of the Lords Day Festival.

CHAP. XVII.
THE CONCLUSION.
HE that will not refuse to weigh seriously with himself the testimonies of
Scripture, and the Holy Fathers, thus far mentioned, shall not deny, that the
Lords Day was solemnized by the Church, in the very Apostles age, and
successively. He cannot but acknowledge, that its holy observation was
instituted of God. He will easily perceive what hinders its solemnity, and in
what things its solemn sanctification, whether public or private does consist.

In asserting whereof, though I entered into a certain Sea of Disputations, yet
have I sailed it through by the Grace of God, in a short course. And I have
affirmed nothing without the perspicuous testimony of notable authority: but we
have missed it sometimes, lest any should believe, that we (silly men of
inferior note, betaking our selves to what is plain) do undertake an exquisite
piece of work: who indeed have thrust out into the world nothing but our
tumultuary commentations, and intended only to stir up the Wits of others.
Now if there be any that is rather desirous of a worldly liberty, or carnal
rest, than of Divine truth; who relisheth not what has been said, I will take
my leave of him with that grave sentence of St. Austin, If he have any thing
more to say, for my Aug. in Ps. 21.
part, I know it not, let him wrangle with the Scriptures, and the Fathers that
piously interpret them, not with us. And I humbly beg it of the Lord, who is
the author of this solemnity, that he would govern the Church with his Spirit,
and stir up the minds of men boldly to exercise piety, that what God has
cleansed, they call not common.

Whatever my blear-eyes have observed to be laid up in the deep records of
honorable antiquity, (which they that love the truth, cannot but highly prize)
upon this holy Subject, I have brought it out to light; that it may be
manifested to all who truly ^avour of godliness, how much honor, not only
reason it self* but the consent of all good men, and learned, do attribute to
so solemn a Festival.

And if I have mistaken any thing here, I do not withdraw my self from the
censure of the Orthodox Church, but submit my self very willingly to its
sentence. Since with all godly and modest men, I heartily desire to remember
that of the Comedian, Humanum est* errare. i. It Is a point of man's frailty to
mistake. Neither is there here, as Gregory Nyssen, a pronouncing of sentence,
but an exercitation, and disputation. I, having by the conduct of the most
ancient Fathers, like them who are half* blind, entered a Wood, have brought
into this bundle what I thought to be most congruous for declaring the
exercises of this holy solemnity. Whilst that I observed sometimes the Fathers
did not altogether agree among themselves, I have embraced that, which was
observed by men of more sound judgment, and more congruous to the practice of
the universal Church.

If any one blame me, for not demonstrating the Holy practice of the Church, in
these questions, more copiously, and with more testimonies of the Ancients; I
hope in this to find pardon from the courteous; since I purposed to do in this
business, what Isychius, in Levit. l. 2. cap. 9. relates of Image-makers and
Painters: who, when they begin of any thing their art requires, do at first
set out some rough draughts of an Image or picture* only shadowed out in its
lineaments, which afterward, in process of the work, are perfected, by adding
of the several parts, and are, as it were, brought to their (...) In like
manner have I also given only some testimonies upon this holy subject, for a
taste, that all in a sort may understand, that the chief Fathers of the ancient
Church did embrace and religiously retain the very same practice of piety in
sanctifying of the Lords Day, which at this day is maintained by a perpetual
observation, with all the friends of sincere religion (some whereof, to the
great dolor of my mind, I see to be wavering about this question, and am
troubled at others that indulge the liberty of the flesh too much) in the
Catholic Church. But I commend in the name of God this office to others, who
are well exercised in observing the monuments of the purer Church, that for the
ability granted to them by the Lord, for profiting the Church, they would not
refuse to bring to light those things which may conduce to the glory of God, in
observing the solemnity of his day. Indeed, I judge, they would in this do a
thing very acceptable to God, the author of the Lords Day solemnity; profitable
to the Church, the faithful observer of this solemnity, and very well becoming
the Christian Religion, of which this solemnity was always a token.

I silly man have here, so far as the labors of my charge would bear,
according to my weakness, of which I am very well conscious, done in a sort, as
some Dyers, who prepare a cloth to receive a color, and commit it to the
labor and art of others, to put upon it the gloss.

And this I believe I have done through the grace of God* by the consummation
of these testimonies, that now with little ado the friendly Reader, careful of
this solemnity, may observe, whether they who endeavor to adorn the Lords Day
Festival, fetch the truth out of its fountains, or they who delight to subvert
it, that they may seek novelty (as sometime Optatus said of the Donatists, lib.
6.) in the bowels of antiquity? He that views the premises, without a
prejudiced mind, will find this. I have therefore been careful to produce the
very testimonies of the Fathers themselves, that to their words, and not my
relation, or conclusions inferred from their words by me, credit might be given.

In the mean time, God grant that of his infinite mercy he would cure the
exulcerated manners of this age, which are impatient of sound Doctrine.

Through Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom, with the Father, and the Holy Ghost,
the Author of the Lords day solemnity, be glory for ever.

Amen.
August. de Trinit. ^. 4. c. 16. No sober man will hold an opinion against
reason; no Christian man against Scripture; no peaceable man against the
Church.

FINIS.

