A Speech spoken by Sir Simonds D'Ewes, (so near as it could be collected
together) touching the privilege of Parliament in causes criminal and civil.
At a Committee of the House of Commons in the Guild Hall in London on the sixth
day of January 1641.
SIR;
I Perceive that the maine doubt upon the late questioning of some of the
Members of the House of Commons as whither or no there be any privilege of
Parliament in matter of Vide Rot. (...)ar. de An (...)1. and 32. (...). 6. n.
27.
Treason or other capital offenses, in which I cannot deny but that there is a
common saying (and yet not more common then erroneous) That privilege of
Parliament does not extend to Felony and Treason; For there is a double
privilege of Parliament, the one final, and the other temporary. Our final
privilege extends to all civil causes and Suites in Law, and that continues
during the Parliament. The other privilege that is temporary extends to all
Capital causes, as Treason or the like, in which the persons and goods of the
members of both Houses are freed from seizure till the said Houses be first
satisfied of their crimes, and so do deliver their bodies up to be committed
to safe custody; and the reason of it is evident because their crime must
either be committed, within the same houses or without them; as for example if
any member of the House of Commons be accused for treasonable actions or words
committed or spoken within the walls of the same house then there is a
necessity that not only the matter of fact, but the matter of crime also, must
be adjudged by that house; for it can appear to no other Court what was there
done in respect that it were the highest treachery and breach of privilege for
any Member of that House, to witness or reveal what was there done or spoken
without the leave and direction of the same House. And if it be for treason
committed out of the House, yet still the House must be first satisfied with
the matter of fact; before they part with their members, for else all
privilege of Parliament must of necessity be destroyed, and by the same
reason that they accuse one of the said Members they may accuse forty, or
fifty, upon imaginary and false Treasons, and so commit them to custody and
deprive the house of their Members; whereas on the contra^y side the House of
Commons has ever been so just as to part with such Members when they have
been discovered. As in the Parliament de Anno 27. of Queen Elizabeth. Doctor
Parry being a Member of the House of Commons, had no Articles of Treason
preferred against him till the House had discomposed him from being one of
their members, and that the chief heads and branches of his said Treason had
been made known unto the House partly by his own confession, and partly by
other proofs; and yet if ever Treason required a speedy trial that did, for
it concerned no less then the murder and assassination of the Queen her
self, [See the origininall Journall book of the House of Commons, de Anno 27.
Regin. Eliz. page 85 and page 103.] And so likewise in Master Copleys case in
the Parliament in the last year of Queen Mary, who spoke very dangerous words
against the said Queen; yet it was tried in the House of Commons as apeeares
in the original Journall book of the same House, and the said Queen at their
entreaty did afterward remit it. But for the case of these Gentlemen that are
now in question it does not yet appear to us whether it be for a crime done
within the Walls of the House of Commons or without, so as for ought we know
the whole judicature thereof must first pass with us, for the LORDS did make
an Act Declaratory in the Parliament, Roll de An. 4. E. 3. Number. 6. that the
judgments of Peers only did properly belong to them, so as I hold it somewhat
clear, that these Gentlemen cannot be condemned but by such a judgment only
as wherein the Lords may join with the Commons, and that must be by Bill; and
the same privilege is to the members of the Lords House, for we must not
think that if a private person should come there and accuse any of them of
Treason that they will at all part with that member, or commit him to safe
custody till the matter of fact be first proved before them.

It Is true indeed that upon the empeachment of the House of Commons for Treason
or other capital crimes, they do Immediately commit their members to safe
custody, because it is first admitted that we accuse not till we are satisfied
in the matter of fact, and secondly, it is also supposed in Law that such an
aggregate body as the House of Commons is will do nothing, ex livore, vel ex
odio, seeing they are entrusted by the whole Commons of England with their
estates and fortunes. So as upon the whole matter, I conclude that the
proceedings against these five Gentlemen have been hitherto illegal and
against the privilege of Parliament.

FINIS.

