Practica Plutarche the excellent Philosopher,



Practica of the Philosopher Plutarche, upon the Health of the body of man.


A preseruacion of health for all the parts of the body. and how to order them.
IN this my great friend Plutarche gives me council to have always the hands
warm, and that by no means he suffer them to be cold. Also that an Ague or
fever, causes the utter parts of the body, customably to be cold, when he
constrayneth heat all to fle inwardely. Again if those things which be
outward, and stretche to the highest parts do bring and disperse matter
through all the body, that then it is wholesome. Moreover if we labor with out
hands, that then by the mocion of that part, heat is wyllyngly moved to be
in all the parts of our body, but if we do no such thing, then we must
provide that no cold take the upper parts. And this was one of the matters
which he was displeased with. The other except I be deceived was of meats to
be mynistred to a pacyent, he does command that the pacyent shall taste and
take his meat long or he be taken because we being in health may accustom
ourselves therewith lest that when the syckenes is come we should abhor and
cast our mind against it, as chyldri^ do, but let it be customably given by
little, lest that when the fyt takes us we be grieved with meats, as we be
with medycynes and lest that we may scarsely bear it, when we must needs take
some meats that besod and unsavory, wherefore sometime it is not to be refused
to take meats with vnwasshed hands, neither to drink water, neither to
drink warm drink in somer. But let these sophysticall crakes pass, as to
abstain from such things, which appear to be done under a pretense of
temperaunce And let us so use our stomaske by little and little, that without
grefe it may give place to that which is profitable, and let us put out of our
mind ye superstycious and scrupelous care of such things in our diseases
lest that we repent with the^ that fall from great and merry pleasures, in to a
base and fylthy state of living, whereof this was excellently spoken, Chose the
best state of life.

Here follows Electuaryes to avoid color.
How will I write of them that avoid colors, and first of the electuary
called Diaprunis, it is called so because it stands most by Prunes, and it
voydeth color fro the stomach. and fro the liver. Electuary of the iuce of
Roses, that is properly against the hot gowte and purges the reed color. And
it is good for syckenes in the joints of color. Also for them that be right
sick in the Fever tercian.

How thou shall know to give the quantyte of Medycyne.
MEdycynes before yt they be compounded together they be diverse in the making
as some of more, and some of less, as of Scamony and of other veymy moystynges
and vyolent, as Turbyt Elebre, Agryt Ensorbie, Colo Bloe and of all other like
these, so that the taking of Irapigra shall be.iij. dra^mes, the weight of a
dra^me is two pens halfepenye.

Ieraphini but two dra^mes, for that is more compounded with venymus medycynes,
and vyolence than Irapigra, therefore the less shall be taken thereof.

Also of Benedicta: may be.iii. drammes.

Also blanca.iii. drammes.

Also of Pilularu^, Archiarum should be taken.iii. drammes.

Also of Pilule Aure.iii. dra^mes

Also of Pulularu^ de Euforbie.iii. drammes.

Also of Pulularu^ Fetidum and of Stomaticum laxatiuum.ii. drammes,

Also of Electuarium dulce.ii drammes.

Also of Theodoricon ana^ cardiu^.iii. dra^mes.

Now I have showed you of the gyuynge of quantyte of medycynes, and the
dyuersyte of the^ how they avoid superfluyte of fleume or color.

Here begins the quantytes to avoid Melancoly.
AS it is said of Ieraphy, ny so we shall say of Diacene, and the gyuyuge of
the quantite shall be an ounce. Hoc auicena. Also of Trifera sarasenica the
receyte of it is.iiij. dra^mes.

Also of Theodoricon eupisticon.ii. drammes.

Also the receyte of Ieralododion.ii. drammes.

Also of Caterica imperiale one dram.

Now it shall be said of the quantytes of Medycynes.
TO avoid Color as of Diaprunis.ii. dra^mmes.

Also the receyte of succa Rosarum be.iii. drammes. These be the most gyuynge
of medycynes compounded.

Now the medycynes that will avoid cold humors.
MEdicines that avoid cold humors of the breest, and of his me^brs, and
veins the first is pallynu^ that must be sharped with.iii. drammes of Agryl,
repressed with a dram of the iuce of Lycoryse.

Medycynes that should purge cold humors of the stomach, and of the liver,
should be sharpened with two drammes of Turbit, and repressed with a dram of
the powder of peper, or Mirabolanus Iudiis ^ebuly, as their quantytes be said
before, or with Esule open as is said before.

How hot humors should be purged and sharped.
Now hot humors should be purged and and sharped with Mirabolanus Citemys,
or with Rubarba, or with Cassia fistula asania, or with Ta^maridis, or Scamion,
and there be any dropsy of old time fastened on the liver, the medycy may not
be sharped with scamony, for that would take of the skyn of ye liver, therefore
take Esula, or Rubarba, and do to the medicines, as is before written.

Here follows his Powders for dysseases.
A Powdre for delycate men for to comfort dygestion and to amend the sight,
take Ca^nell; cardamoi^, piperis, saturei, maiorane, crucautes, calamynte, of
each half an ounce, nutmuges pompatadyse foli^ of each an ounce, that is to
say, of each.vi. penny weight, salge^me half an ounce ferthynges well tempered
together make powdre of these and use them.

A powdre against the quartane.
A Powdre against the quartane and vice of the spleen, take Coriandre, carin,
seria combusti of each of them a penny weight Aneilanes yclensed.

Against flux of blood.
A Powdre against the flux of blood of the nosethrylles, take encense, mastyke,
sauge dragons nigh of each three penny weight, bren the^ in a shel over the fire
and move them till they wax black, and make thereof sotyl powdre and cast
therein.

A powdre against the Cardyacle, and against to much feebleness, take camphore,
musk, of each three halfpeny weyte, shauynges of yuery, of gold, and silver of
each three penny weyte.

Finis.
Imprynted by me Robert Wyer.


