A DISCOVRSE CONCERNING PRAYER Ex tempore, OR, By pretense of the Spirit.

In justification of Authorized and Set-formes of LYTURGIE.

1 COR. 14. 32.

(...).

And the spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.

For God is not the author of confusion, but of peace, as in all Churches of
the Saints.

Printed in the Year, MDCXLVI.

A Discourse concerning PRAYER Ex tempore, etc.
I Have read over this book which the Assembly of Divines is pleased to call
The Directory for Prayer, I confess I came to it with much expectation, and
was in some measure confident, I should have found it an exact and unblameable
model of Devotion, free from all those objections which men of their own
persuasion had obtruded against the public Liturgy of the Church of England;
or at least, it should have been composed with so much artifice and finenesse,
that it might have been to all the world, an argument of their learning and
excellency of spirit, if not of the goodness and integrity of their religion
and purposes. I shall give no other character of the whole, but that the
public disrelish which I find amongst persons of great piety, of all
qualities, not only of great, but even of ordinary understandings, is to me
some argument that it lies so open to the objections even of common spirits,
that the compilers of it did intend more to prevail by the success of their
Armies, then the strength of reason, and the proper grounds of persuasion,
which yet most wise and good man believe to be the more Christian way of the
two. But Sir you have engaged me to say something in particular to satisfy
your conscience. In which also I desire I may reserve a leave to my self to
conceal much, if I may in little do you satisfaction.

England and all Christendom. If the thing were good and pious, I should
learn to submit to the imposition, and never quarrel at the incompetency of
his authority that engaged me to do pious and holy things. And it may be when
I am a little more used to it, I shall not wonder at a Synod, in which not one
Bishop sits (in the capacity of a Bishop) though I am most certain this is the
first, example in England, since it was first Christened. But for the present it
seems something hard to digest it, because I know so well that all Assemblyes
of the Church have admitted Priests to consultation and dispute, but never to
authority and decision, till the Pope-enlarging the phylacteries of the
Archimandrites and Abbots, did sometimes by way of privilege and dispensation
give to some of them decisive voices in public Counsels. But this was one of
the things in which he did innovate and invade against the public resolutions
of Christendom, though he durst not do it often, and when he did it, it was
in very small and inconsiderate numbers.

Zelum Dei, but whether secundum scientiam, according to knowledge or no, must
be judged by them who consider the matter and the form.

But because the matter is of so great variety and minute ex tempore forms do
succeed in room of the established and determined services, I shall give you my
judgment of it, without any sharpness or bitterness of spirit, for I am
resolved not to be angry with any men of another persuasion, as knowing that I
differ just as much from them as they do from me.

And first I consider that the true state of the Question

And here I have the advice and council of a very Solomon. Eccles. 5. 2. Be
not rash with thy mouth, and let not thy heart be hasty to utter any thing
before God, for God is in heaven and thou upon earth, therefore let thy words be
few. The consideration of the vast distance between God and us, heaven and
earth, should create such apprehensions in us, that the very best and choycest
of our offertoryes are not acceptable but by Gods gracious vouchsafeing and
condescension: and therefore since we are so much indebted to God for accepting
our best it is not safe venturing to present him with a dowbaked sacrifice, and
put him off with that which in nature and humane consideration is absolutely
the worst, for such is all the crude and imperfect utterance of our more
imperfect conceptions. But let Solomon's reason be what it will, good we are
sure it is. Let us consider who keeps the precept best; He that deliberates or
he that considers not but when he speaks: What man in the world is hasty to
offer any thing before God, if he be not who prays ex tempore? And then add
to it but the weight of Solomon's reason, and let any man answer me if he
thinks it can well stand with that reverence we owe to the Immense, the
infinite, and to the eternal God, the God of wisdom, to offer him a sacrifice
which we durst not present to a Prince, or a prudent Governor in reseria, such
as our prayers ought to be.

Go and offer this to thy Prince, See if he will accept it: Implying, that the
best person is to have the best present; and what the Prince will slight as
truly unworthy of him, much more is it unfit for God. For God accepts not of
any thing we give or do, as if he were betterd by it: for therefore its
estimate is not taken by its relation or natural complacency to him, it is all
alike to him, for in it self it is to him as nothing. But God accepts it by
its proportion and commensuration to us. That which we call our best, and is
truly so in humane estimate, that pleases God, for it declares that if we had
better, we would give it him. But to reserve the best, says too plainly, that
we think anything is good enough for him. As therefore God in the Law would not
be served by that which was imperfect in genere naturae: so neither now nor
ever will that please him which is imperfect in genere morum, or materia
intellectuali, when we can give a better.

Well then, in the nature of the thing, ex tempore forms Et nescit tarda
m^limina spiritus sancti gratia. Gods Spirit (if he pleases) can do his work
as well in an instant, as in long premeditation. And to this purpose are
pretended those places of Scripture which speak of the assistance of Gods
Spirit in our prayers. Zeth. 12. 10. And I will pour upon the house of David,
and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplication. But
especially Romans 8. 2^. Likewise the Spirit also helps our infirmities, for we
know not what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes
intercession for us with groanings that cannot be uttered, etc. From whence the
Conclusion that is inferred is in the words of Saint Paul, That we must pray
with the spirit, therefore not with set forms, therefore ex tempore.

The Collection is somewhat wild, for there is great

It is one of the privileges of the Gospel, and the benefit and helps of our
natural faculties, of our art and industry, not extraordinary, miraculous, and
immediate infusions of habits and gifts. That without Gods Spirit we cannot
pray aright; that our infirmities need his help; that we know not what to ask
of our selves, is most true: and if ever any Heretic was more confident of
his own naturals, or did ever more undervalue Gods grace then ever the
Pelagian did, yet he denies not this. But what then? Therefore without study,
without art, without premeditation, without learning, the spirit gives the gift
of prayer, and it is his grace that without any natural or artificial help
makes us pray extempore? No such thing: The Objection proves nothing of this.

Here therefore we will join issue, whether the gifts and helps of the Spirit,
be immediate infusions of the Faculties, and powers, and perfect abilityes: Or
that he does assist us only by his aids external and internal, in the use
of such means which God and nature has given to man, to ennoble his soul,
better his Faculties, and to improve his understanding? That the aids of the
holy Ghost are only assistances to us in the use of natural and artificial
means I will undertake to prove, and from thence it will evidently follow,
that labor, and hard study, and premeditation will soonest purchase the gift
of prayer, and ascertain us of the assistance of the spirit, and therefore set
forms of prayer, studied and considerd of are in a true and proper sense, and
without enthusiasme, the fruits of the spirit.

1. Gods Spirit did assist the Apostles by wayes^ extraordinary, and fit for
the first institution of Christianity: but does assist us now by the expresses
of those first assistances which he gave to them immediately. So that the holy
Ghost is the author of our faith, and we believe with the spirit (it is Saint
Paul's expression) and yet our belief comes by hearing and reading the holy
Scriptures and their interpretations. Now reconcile these two together, Faith
comes by hearing, and yet is the gift of the Spirit, and it says, that the
gifts of the Spirit are not ecstasies, and immediate infusions of habits, but
helps from God to enable us upon the use of the means of his own appointment
to believe, to speak, to understand, to prophecy, and to pray.

2. And that these are for this reason called gifts, and a speaking by the
Spirit, Vid. Act. 19. 21 Act. 16. 7, 8, 9, 10.
1 Cor. 12. 8. No man can say that Jesus is the Lord, but by the holy Ghost.
For if the holy Ghost supplies us with materials, and fundamentals for our
building, it is then enough to denominate the whole edifice to be of him,
although the labor and the workmanship be ours, upon another stock. And this
is it which the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 2. 13. Which things also we speak, not
in the words which man's wisdom teaches, but which the holy Ghost teaches,
comparing spiritual things with spiritual. The holy Ghost teaches, yet it is
upon our cooperation, our study and endeavor, while we compare spiritual
things with spiritual; the holy Ghost is said to teach us, because these
spirituals were of his suggestion and revelation.

3. For it is a rule of the School, and there is much Habitus infusi
infunduntur per modum acquisitorum, whatsoever is infused into us, is in the
same manner infused as other things are acquired, that is, step by step, by
humane means and cooperation, and grace does not give us new faculties, and
create another nature, but meliorates and improves our own. And what S. Paul
said in the Resurrection, is also true in this Question, That is not first
which is spiritual, but that which is natural, and then that which is
spiritual. The graces and gifts of the Spirit are postnate, and are additions
to art and nature. God directs our councels, opens our understandings,
regulates our will, orders our affections, supplies us with objects, and
arguments, and opportunities, and revelations in scriptis, and then most when
we most employ our own endeavors, God loving to bless all the means, and
instruments of his service, whether they be natural or acquisite.

Paul calls it, 2. Cor. 4. 13.) acquired by humane means using divine aids?
that is, by our endeavors in hearing, reading, Catechizing, desires to obey,
and all this blessed and promoted by God, this produces faith. And if the
spirit of Prayer be of greater consequence, and has a promise of a special
prerogative, let the first be proved and the second but shown in any good
record, and then I will believe it too.

those are faith (in which I before instanced) and charity. Epist. Iud. ver.
20. But ye (beloved) building up your selves in your most holy Faith, praying
in the holy Ghost, keep your selves in the love of God. All of the same
consideration, Faith, and Prayer, and Charity, all gifts of the Spirit, and yet
build up your selves in faith, and keep your selves in love, and therefore by a
parity of reason, improve your selves in the spirit of prayer, that is, God by
his spirit having supplied us with matter, let our industry and cooperations
per modum naturae, improve these gifts, and build upon this foundation.

So that in effect praying in the holy Ghost or with viz. Eucharisticall or
thanksgiving, that is, prayers or songs which are spiritual in materia. And if
they be called spiritual for the efficient cause too, the holy Ghost being the
author of them, it comes all to one, for therefore he is the cause and giver of
them, because he has in his word revealed, what things we are to pray for, and
there also has taught us the manner.

And this is exactly the Doctrine I plainly gather Paul, (The spirit helps
our infirmities) How so? it follows immediately, For we know not what we
should pray for as we ought: So that therefore he is the spirit of supplication
and prayer, because he teaches us what to ask, and how to pray, so he helps our
infirmities, (...), it is in the Greek Collaborantem adjuvat. It is an
ingeminate expression of helping us in our labors together with him. Now he
that shall say this is not sufficiently done by Gods spirit in scripture by
Prayers, and Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs, and precepts concerning
prayer, set down in that holy repository of truth and devotion, undervalues
that inestimable treasure of the spirit; and if it be sufficiently done there,
he that will multiply his hopes farther, then what is sufficient, may possibly
deceive himself, but never deceive God, and make him multiply and continue
miracles, to justify his fancy.

Ephesians. 6. 17, 18. Take the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God.
Praying always with all prayer and supplication in the spirit. The Word of God
is the sword of the Spirit; praying in the Spirit is one way of using it,
indeed the only way that he here specifies. Praying in the Spirit then being
the using of this Sword, and this Sword being the Word of God, it follows
evidently, that praying in the Spirit, is praying in, or according to the Word
of God, that is, in the direrections, rules, and expresses of the Word of God,
that is, of the holy Scriptures.



from conference, from humane Arts and Sciences, and from whatsoever else God
and good Laws provoke us to by proposition of rewards: But if, Yea, (as most
certainly God will best crown the best endeavors) then the spirit of Prayer is
greatest in him, who (supposing the like capacities and opportunities) studies
hardest, reads most, practices most religiously, deliberates most prudently;
and then by how much want of means, is worse then the use of means, by so much
ex tempore Prayers are worse then deliberate and studied. Excellent therefore
is the counsel of S. Peter, 1 Ep. Chap. 4. ver. 11. If any man speak, let him
speak as the Oracles of God, (not lightly then and inconsiderately) If any man
minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives: (great reason then
to put all his abilities and faculties to it) and whether of the two does most
likely do that, he that takes pains, and considers, and discusses, and so
approves and practices a form, or he that never considers what he says, till
he says it, needs not much deliberation to pass a sentence.

7. Lastly, did not the Penmen of the Scripture, write spoke as they were moved
by the holy Ghost, says Saint Peter. And certainly they were moved by a more
immediate motion, and a motion nearer to an Enthusiasme, then now adays in the
gift and spirit of Prayer. And yet in the midst of those great assistances and
motions they did use study, art, industry, and humane abilities. This is more
then probable in the different styles of the several Books, some being of
admirable art, others lower and plain. The words were their own at least
sometimes, not the holy Ghosts. And if the Fathers and Grammarians were not
deceived by ^alse Copies, but that they truly did observe, sometimes to be
propriety of expression in the language, sometimes not true Greek, who will
think those errors or imperfections in Grammar, were (in respect of the words I
say precisely) immediate inspirations and dictates of the holy Ghost, and not
rather their own productions of industry and humanity. But clearly some of
their words were the words of Aratus, some of Epimenides, some of Menander,
some of S. Paul, [This speak I, not the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.] and yet because the
holy Ghost renewed their memory, improved their understanding, supplied to some
their want of humane learning, and so assisted them that they should not commit
an error in fact or opinion, neither in the narrative nor dogmaticall parts,
therefore they writ by the Spirit. Since then we cannot pretend upon any
grounds of probability to an inspiration so immediate as theirs, and yet their
assistances which they had from the Spirit did not exclude humane arts, and
industry, but that the ablest Scholar did write the best, much rather is this
true in the gifts and assistances we receive, and particularly in the gift of
Prayer, it is not an ex tempore and an inspired faculty, but the faculties of
nature and the abilities of art and industry are improved and ennobled by the
supervening assistances of the Spirit.

ex tempore, I suppose his thoughts go a little before his tongue; I demand
then, Whether cannot this man, when it is once come into his head, hold his
tongue, and write down what he has conceived? If his first conceptions were
of God, and Gods Spirit, then they are so still, even when they are written. Or
is the Spirit departed from him, upon the sight of a pen and Ink-horne? It did
use to be otherwise among the old and new Prophets, whether they were Prophets
of Prediction, or of ordinary Ministry. But if his conception may be writt^n,
and being writt^n is still a production of the Spirit, then it follows that
set forms of Prayer deliberate and described, may as well be a praying with the
Spirit, as sudden forms and ex tempore out-lets.

Now the case being thus put, I would feign know ex tempore Prayers, save only
that in these there is less consideration and prudence; for that the other are
(at least as much as them) the productions of the Spirit, is evident in the
very case put in this very argument: and whether to consider and to weigh them,
be any disadvantage to our devotions, I leave it to all wise men to determine.
So that in effect, since after the pretended assistance of the Spirit in our
Prayers, we may write them down, consider them, try the spirits, and ponder
the manner, the reason and the religion of the address, let the world judge
whether this sudden utterance and ex tempore forms be any thing else, but a
direct resolution not to consider beforehand what we speak.

But let us look a little further into the mystery, and praying with the
spirit. In what sense the holy Ghost is called the spirit of prayer, I have
already shown, viz. by the same reason, as he is the spirit of faith, of
prudence, of knowledge, of understanding, and the like. But praying with the
spirit has besides this other senses also in Scripture. I find in one place,
that then we pray with the Spirit, when the holy Ghost does actually excite us
to desires and earnest tendencies to the obtaining our holy purposes, when he
gives us zeal and devotion, charity and fervor, spiritual violence and holy
importunity. This sense is also in the latter part of the objected words of
Saint Paul, Romans 8. The spirit it self makes intercession for us with
groanings, etc. Indeed this is truly a praying in the spirit, but this will do
our reverend Brethren of the Assembly little advantage as to the present
Question. For this spirit is not a spirit of utterance; not at all clamorous in
the ears of the people, but cries loud in the ears of God with [ gr^anes
unutterable,] so it follows, and only [ He that searches the heart, he
understands the meaning of the spirit.] This is the spirit of the Son,
which God has sen^ into our hearts, (not into our tongues) whereby we cry,
Abba, Father, Gal. 4. 6. And this is the great (...) for mental Prayer, which
is properly and truly praying by the Spirit.

Paul, from whence this expression is taken, and commonly used, I will pray
with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also. Here they are
opposed, or at least declared to be things several and disparate: where by the
way observe, that praying with the spirit, even in sense of Scripture, is not
always most to edification of the people. Not always with understanding. And
when these two are separated, S. Paul prefers five words with understanding,
before ten thousand in the spirit. For this praying with the spirit was indeed
then a gift extraordinary and miraculous, like as prophesying with the spirit,
and expired with it. But while it did last, it was the lowest of gifts, Inter
dona linguarum, it was but a gift of the tongue, and not to be the benefit of
the Church rectly or immediately.

Paul did so undervalue the praying with the Spirit, that he preferred edifying
the Church a thousand degrees beyond it. I suppose he would have been of the
sam^ mind, if this Question had been between praying wi^h the Spirit and
obeying our superiors, as he was when it was between praying with the Spirit
and edification of the Church, because (it I be not mistaken) it is matter of
great concernment toward the edication of the Church to obey our superiors,
not to innovate in public forms of worship, especially with the scandal and
offense of very wise and learned men, and to the disgrace of the dead Martyrs,
who sealed our Liturgy with their blood.

But to return. In this place praying with the Spirit, is Paul joins them as
terms identicall, and expressive one of another meaning, as you may please to
read ver. 14. and 15. 1 Cor. 14. I will pray with the Spirit, and my Spirit
truly prays. It is the act of our inner man, praying holy and spiritual
Prayers. But then indeed at that time there was something extraordianary joined,
for it was in an unknown tongue, the practice of which Saint Paul there
dislikes. This also will be to none of their purposes. For whether it were
Extempore, or by premeditation, is not here expressed, or if it had, yet that
assistance extraordinary in prayer, if there was any beside the gift of tongues
(which I much doubt) is no more transmitted to us, then the speaking tongues in
the spirit, or prophesying Extempore and by the spirit.

But I would add also one experiment which S. Paul ex tempore, then so is
singing too. For they are expressed in the same place, in the same manner, to
the same end, and I know no reason why these should be differing senses put
upon them to ^erve p^rposes. And now let us have some Church-musicke too,
though the Organs be pulled down, and let any the ^est P^alm^st of them all,
compose a hymn in ^etricall form, and sing it to a new tune with perfect and
true music, and all this extempore. For all this the holy Ghost can do if he
pleases. But if it be said that the Cor^nthian Christians composed their songs
and hymns according to art and rules of music, by study and industry, and
that to this they were assisted by the Spirit; and that this together wi^h the
devotion of their spirit, was singing with the spirit, then say I, so composing
set forms of Liturgy by skill and prudence, and humane industry, may be as much
praying with the spirit as the other is singing with the spirit. Plainly
enough. In all the senses of praying with the spirit, and in all its
acceptations in Scripture, to pray or sing with the spirit, neither of them of
necessity implies extempore.

Collecta of the premises is this, Praying with the spirit, is either when the
spirit stirs up our desires to pray, Per motionem actualis auxilii, or when
the spirit teaches us what, or how to pray, telling us the matter, and manner
of our prayers. Or lastly, dictating the very words of our prayers. There is no
other way in the world to pray with the spirit, or in the holy Ghost, that is
pertinent to this Question. And of this last manner the Scripture determines
nothing, nor speaks any thing expressly of it, and yet suppose it had, we are
certain the holy Ghost has supplied us with all these, and yet in set forms
of prayer best of all, I mean there where a difference can be. For as for the
desires, and actual motions or incitements to pray, they are indifferent to
one or the other, to set forms or to extempore, a. But as to the matter and
manner of prayer, it is clearly contained in the expresses, and set forms of
Scriptures, and it is supplied to us by the spirit, for he is the great
D^ctator of it.

Now th^n for the very words. No man can assure me ex tempore prayer are the
words of the holy Spirit: it is not ^eason nor modesty to expect such immediate
assistances to so little purpose, he having supplied us with abilities more
then enough to express our desires aliunde, otherwise then by immediate
dictate. But if we will take David's Psalter, or the other hymns of holy
Scripture, or any of the Prayers which are respersed over the Bible, we are
sure enough that they are the words of Gods Spirit, mediately or immediately,
by way of infusion or ecstasy, by vision, or at least by ordinary assistance.
And now then, what greater confidence can any man have for the excellency of
his Prayer, and the probability of their being accepted, then when he prays
his Psalter, or the Lords prayer, or another office which he finds consigned in
Scripture? When Gods Spirit stirs us up to an actual devotion, and then we use
the matter he has described and taught, and the very words which Christ, and
Christ's Spirit, and the Apostles, and other persons full of the holy Ghost did
use; if in the world there be any praying with the Spirit, (I mean in vocal
prayer) this is it.

And thus I have examined the entire and full scope of this Question, and
ri^^ed their Objection. Now I shall proceed to some few arguments which are
more extrinsecall to the nature of the thing.

It is a practice prevailing among those of our Brethren ex tempore prayers, to
pray their Sermons over, to reduce their doctrine into Devotion and Lyturgie. I
mislike it not for the thing it ^el^e, if it were done regularly for the
manner, and the matter were always pious and true. But who shall assure me
when the preacher has disputed, or rather dogmatically decreed a point of
predestination, or of prescience, of contingency, or of liberty, or any of the
most mysterious parts of Divinity, and then prays his Sermon over, that he
then prays with the Spirit? Unless I be sure that he also preached with the
Spirit, I cannot be sure that he prays with the spirit, for all he prays
extempore. Nay if I hear a Protestant preach in the morning, and an Anabaptist
in the afternoon, to day a Presbyterian, to morrow an Independent, am I most
sure that when they have preached Contradictoryes, and all of them pray their
Sermons over, that they do not all pray with the spirit? More then one in this
case cannot pray with the spirit, possibly all may pray against him.

inconveniences are avoided in set forms of Liturgy. For we know before hand
the conditions of our Communion, and to what we are to say Amen, to which if we
like it we may repair; if not, there is no harm done, your devotion shall not
be surprised, nor your Communion invaded, as it may be and often is in your
extempore prayers. And this things has another collateral inconvenience,
which is of great consideration, for upon what confidence can we solicit any
Recusants to come to our Church, where we cannot promise them that the
devotions there to be used, shall be innocent, nor can we put him into a
condition to judge for himself? If he will venture he may, but we can use no
argument to make him choose our Churches, though he should quit his own.

3. But again, let us consider with sobriety. Are not ex^tempore or by study
make better? Who dares pretend that he has a better spirit then David had, or
then the Apostles and Prophets, and other holy persons in Scripture, whose
Prayers and Psalms are by Gods Spirit consigned to the use of the Church for
ever? Or will it be denied but that they also are excellent directories and
patterns for prayer? And if patterns, the nearer we draw to our example, are
not the imitations and representments the better? And what then if we took the
samplers themselves, is there any imperfection in them, and can we mend them
and correct Magnificat?

In a just proportion and commensuration, I argue so service, which are
composed according to those so excellent patterns, which if they had remained
pure as in their first institution, or had always been as they have been
reformed by the Church of England, they would against all defiance put in for
the next place to those forms of Liturgy which Mutatis mutandis are nothing
but the words of Scripture. But I am resolved at this present not to enter into
Question concerning the matter of prayers. But for the form this I say further.

Prior and potior in promissis, she has a greater and prior title to the
spirit. And why the Church has not the spirit of prayer in her compositions as
well as any of her children, I desire once for all to be satisfied upon true
grounds either of reason or revelation.

5. Or if the Church shall be admitted to have the extempore forms the spirit
of Christ teaches them. So much then as certainties are better then
uncertainties, and God above man, so much is this set form (besides the
infinite advantages in the matter) better than their extempore forms in the
form it self.

6. If I should descend to minates and particulars, I Moses a set form of
prayer and benediction to be used when he did bless the people. 7. That Moses
composed a song or hymn for the children of Israel to use to all their
generations. 8. That David composed many for the service of the tabernacle. 9.
That Solomon and the holy Kings of Judah brought them in and con^inued them in
the ministration of the temple. 10. That all Scripture is written for our
learning, and since all these and many more set forms of prayer left there upon
record, it is more then probable that they were left there for our use and
devotion. 11. That S. John Baptist taught his Diciples a form of prayer. 12.
And that Christ's Disciples begged the same favor, and it was granted as they
desired it. 13. And that Christ gave it not only inmassa materiae, but in
forma verborum; not in a confused heap of matter, but in an exact composure of
words, it makes it evident, he intended it not only proregula petendorum, for
a direction of what things we are to ask, but also proforma orationis, for a
set form of Prayer, In which also I am most certainly confirmed (besides the
universal testimony of Gods Church so attesting it) in the precept which
Christ added, When ye pray, pray after this manner: and indeed it points not
the matter only of our prayers, but the form of it, the manner and the matter
of the address both. But in the repetition of it by Saint Luke, the preceptive
words seem to limit us, and direct us to this very form of words, When ye
pray, say, Our Father, etc. 14. I could also add the example of all the Jews,
and by consequence of our blessed Savior, who sung a great part of David's
Psalter in their Feast of Passover, which part is called by the Jews the
great Hallelu-jah, it begins at the 113. Psalm, and ends at the 118.
inclusively. And the Scripture mentions it as part of our blessed Saviors
devotion, and of his Disciples, that they sung a Psalm. 15. That this
afterward became a Precept Evangelical, that we should praise God in Hymns,
Psalms, and spiritual songs, which is a form of Lyturgie, in which we sing
with the spirit, but yet cannot make our Hymns ex tempore, (it would be wild
^tuffe if we should go about it.) 16. And lastly, that a set-forme of worship
and address to God was recorded by Saint John, Apoc. 15.
and sung in heaven, and it was composed out of the songs of Moses, (Exodus 15.)
of David, (Psalm. 145.) and of Jeremy, (Chap. 10. 6, 7.) which certainly is a
very good precedent for us to imitate, although but revealed to Saint John by
way of vision and ecstasy. All which and many more are to me^as so many
arguments of the use, excellency, and necessity of set-formes of Prayer for
public Lyturgies, as and of greatest conveniences, even for private devotions.

17. And so the Church of God in all Ages did understand Augustine calls it,
Lib. 3. de Trinit. c. 4.) which all Churches (and themselves said it was by
Ordinance Apostolical) used in the Consecration of the blessed Sacrament. But
all of them used the Lords Prayer in the Canon, and office of Consecration, and
other prayers taken from Scripture, (so Justin Martyr testifies, that the
Consecration is made per preces verbi Dei, by the prayers taken from the Word
of God) and the whole Canon was short determined and mysterious.

Who desires to be further satisfied in this particular, Walafridus Strabo,
Aymonius, Cassander, Flacius Illyricus, Josephus Vicecomes, and the other
Ritualists, and in the old offices themselves. So that I need not put you in
mind of that famous doxologie of the Gloria Patri, etc. nor the Trisagion, nor
any of those memorable hymns used in the ancient Church, so knownly and
frequently, that the beginning of them came to be their name, and they were
known more by their own words, then the Authors inscription.

At last when some men that thought themselves better gifted would be venturing
at conceived forms of their own, there was a timely restraint made in the
Council of Milevis in Africa, Placuit ut preces quae proba^ae fuerint in
Co^cili^ ab omnibus celebrentur, nec aliae omnino dican^ur in Ecclesia, nisi
quae a prudentioribus fa^tae fuerint in Synodo. That Is the restraint and
prohibition, public prayers must be such as are publicly appointed, and
prescribed by our superiors; and no private forms of our conceiving must be
used in the Church. The reason follows, Ne forte aliquid contra ^idem, vel per
ign^rantia^, vel per minus studium ^it compositum: Lest through ignorance or
want of deliberation any thing be spoken in our prayers against faith [and good
manners.] The reason is good, and they are eare-witnesses o^ it that hear the
variety of prayers before and after Sermons, there, where the Directory is
practiced, where (to speak most modestly) not only their private opinions, but
also humane interests, and their own personal concernments, and wild fancies,
borne perhaps not two days before, are made the objects of the peoples hopes,
of their desires, and their prayers, and all in the mean time pretend to the
holy Spirit.

ex tempore forms of prayer, where the gift of the man is more then the
devotion of the man: nor will I consider that then his gift is best, when his
prayer is longest: and if he take a compl^cency in his gift (as who is not apt
to do it?) he will be sure to extend his prayer, till a suspicious and
scrupulous man would be apt to say, his prayer pressed hard upon that which our
blessed Savior reprehended in the Pharisees, who thought to be heard for their
much babbling. But these things are accidental to the nature of the thing. And
therefore though they are too certainly consequent to the person, yet I will
not be too severe, but preserve my self on the surer side of charitable
construction, which truly I desire to keep, not only to their persons whom I
much reverence, but also to their actions. But yet I durst not do the same
thing, even for these last reasons, though I had no other.

But it is objected, that in set forms of Prayer, we restrain

I answer, either their conceived forms (I use their ex tempore. If they be
premeditate and described, then the Spirit is as much limited in their
conceived forms, as in the Churches conceived forms. For as to this
particular, it is all one who describes and limits the form, whether the
Church, or a single man does it, still the Spirit is in constraint and limit.
So that in this case they are not angry at set forms of Prayer, but that they
do not make them. And if it be replied, that if a single person composes a set
form, he may alter it if he please, and so his spirit is at liberty. I answer,
so may the Church, if she see cause for it: and unless there be cause, the
single person will not alter it, unless he do things unreasonable, and
without cause. So that it will be an unequal and a peevish quarrel to allow
of set forms of prayer made by private persons, and not of set forms made by
the public spirit of the Church. It is evident, that the Spirit is limited in
both alike.

But if by [ Conceived formes] in this objection they mean ex tempore prayers
(for so they most generally practice it) and that in the use of these the
liberty of the spirit is best preserved. To this I answer, that the being ex
tempore or premedita^e will be wholly impertinent to this Question of limiting
the spirit. For there may be great liberty in set forms, even when there is
much variety; and there may be great restraint in ex tempore prayers, even then
when it shall be called unlawful to use set forms. That the spirit is
restrained, or that it is free in either, is accidental to them both; for it
may be either free or not free in both as it may happen.



Where the spirit of God is, there must be liberty.

3. If the spirit must be at liberty, who shall assure

4. Does not the Directory that thing which is here Palladium that is contended
for, and a prin^ely liberty that they leave unto the Spirit, to be free only
in the supplying the place of a Vocabulary and a Copia V^rborum? For as for the
matter, it is all there described and appointed, and to those determined senses
the spirit must assist or not at all, only for the words he shall take his
choice. Now I desire it may be considered sadly and seriously: Is it not as
much injury to the spirit to restrain his mat^er, as to appoint his words?
Which is the more considerable of the two, sense or Language, Matter or Words?
I mean when they are taken singly and separately. For so they may very well be
(for as if men prescribe the matter only, the spirit may cover it with
several words and expressions, so if the spirit prescribe the words, I may
sti^l abound in variety of sense, and preserve the liberty of my meaning; we
see that true in the various interpretations of the same words of Scripture.)
So that in the greater of the two, the Spirit is restrained when his matter is
appointed, and to make him amends for not trusting him with the matter without
our directions and limitations, we trust him to say what he pleases, so it be
to our sense, to our purposes. A goodly compensation surely!

Pray this, or Pray thus, Pray these words, or Pray after this manner? or
though it had been less then either, and been only a Directory for the
matter, still it is a thing which our Brethren in all other cases of the same
nature are resolved perpetually to call a restraint; Certainly then this
pretended restraint, is not such formidable thing. These men themselves do it
by directing all the matter, and much of the manner, and Christ himself did
it, by prescribing both the matter, and the words too.

Paul to the Corinthians, when he prescribed orders for public proph^cying,
and interpretation, and speaking with tongues. The spirit of some he so
restr^ined, that he bound them to hold their peace, he permitted but two or
three to speak at one meeting, the rest were to keep silence, though possibly
six or seven might at that time have the Spirit.

7. Is it not a restraint of the Spirit to sing a Psalm in

8. And now after all this strife, what harm is there

For Divinity never knew any other vi^ious restraining In materia speciale, the
second is ^yrannicall and Antichristian. And to it persecution of true religion
is to be reduced. But as for this pretended limiting or r^straining the spirit,
viz. by appointing a regular form of prayer, it is so very a C^imera, that it
has no footing or foundation upon any ground where a wise man may build his
confidence.

Paul, by saying The spirits of the prophets must be subject to the Prophets?
What greater restraint then subjection? if subjected, then they must be ruled,
if ruled, then limited, prescribed unto, and as much under restraint as the
spirits of the superior Prophets shall judge convenient. I suppose by this
time this objection will trouble us no more. But perhaps another will.



however is not partner of the sin, as in the other case, the people possibly
may be.

2. It is more fit a liberty be left in preaching than But being crafty I
caught you, says Saint Paul to the Corinthians] and discourses and arguments
ad hominem, upon their particular principles and practices may more move them
than the most polite and accurate that do not comply and wind about their
fancies and affections. S. Paul from the absurd practice of being baptized for
the dead, made an excellent argument to convince the Corinthians of the
Resurrection. But this reason also ceases in our prayers. For God understands
what we say sure enough, he has no prejudices to be removed, no infirmities to
be wrought upon, and a fine figure of Rhetoric, a pleasant cadence, and a
curious expression move not him at all; no other twinings and complyances
stir him, but charity, and humility, and zeal, and importunity, which all
are things internal and spiritual. And therefore of necessity there is to be
great variety of discourses to the people, and permissions accordingly, but not
so to God, with whom a Deus miserere prevails as soon as the great office of
40. hours not long since invented the Church of Rome, or any other prayers
spun out to a length beyond the extension of the office of a Pharisee.

3. I fear it cannot stand with our reverence to God, to be bold with the
people then with God, if the persons be not so ^it. In that there may be
indiscretion, but there may be impiety and irreligion in this. The people may
better excuse and pardon an indiscretion or a rudeness (if any such should
happen) then we may venture to offer it to God.



Vulgus Cleri, should instruct the people out of the fountains of the Church,
and upon the public stock, till by so long exercise and discipline in the
schools of the Prophets, they may also be entrusted to minister of their own
un^o the people. This I am sure was the practice of the Primi^ive Church when
preaching was as ably and religiously performed as now it is, But in this
prescribe nothing. But truly I think the reverent. Divines of the Assemby are
many of my mind in this particular, and that they observe a liberty indulged to
some persons to preach, which I think they had rather should hold their peace,
and yet think the Church better edified in your silence than, their Sermons.

6. But yet me thinks the argument objected, if it Why shall no^ the same
liberty be allowed in praying as in preaching] it were better to substitute
this. If they can pr^y with the spirit, why also do they not preach with the
spirit? and if praying with the spirit be praying extempore, why shall they not
preach extempore too, or else contesse that they preach without the spirit, or
that they have not the gift o^ preaching? For to say that the gift of prayer,
is a gift ex tempore, but the gift of preaching is with study and deliberation,
is to become vain and impertinent. Quis enim discrevit? Who has made them of
a different consideration? I mean as to this particular, as to their efficient
cause. Nor reason, nor revelation, nor God, nor man.

To sum up all. If any man has a mind to exercise England, so apparent need,
that the Papists have made it an objection against us) and this his gift of
Prayer will be to edification. But otherwise, I understand it is more fit for
ostentation, then any spiritual advantage. For God hears us not the sooner
for our ex tempore, long, or conceived prayers, possibly they may become a
hindrance, as in the cases before i^stanced. And I am sure if the people be
intelligent, and can discern they are hindered in their devotion, for they dare
not say Amen till they have considered, and many such cases will occur in ex
tempore prayers, that need much considering before we attest them. But if the
people be not intelligent, they are apt to swallow all the inconveniences
which may multiply in so great a license; and therefore it were well that the
Governors of the Church who are to answer for their souls, should judge for
them, before they say Amen, which judgment cannot be without set forms of
Lyturgie. My sentence therefore is, (...), Let us be as we are already. Few
changes are for the better.

England, which was composed with much art and judgment by a Church that has
as much reason to be confident she has the Spirit and gifts of Prayer, as any
single person has, and each learned man that was at its first composition, can
as much prove, that he had the Spirit, as the objectors now adays: (and he
that boasts most, certainly has the least.) If I say it be pretended, there
are many errors and inconveniences both in the order and the matter of the
Common. Prayer boo^e, made by such men, with so much industry: How much more,
and wi^h how much greater reason may we all dread the inconveniences and
di^orders of ex tempore prayers? where there is neither conjunction of heads,
nor premeditation, nor industry, nor method, nor art, nor any of those things
(or at least not in the same degree) which were likely to have exempted the
Common-Prayer^ book from errors and disorders. If these things be in the
green tree, what will be done in the dry?

ex tempore and conceived prayers will be secured from error by the Directory,
because that chalkes them out the matter. I answer, it is not sufficient,
because if when men study both the matter and the words too, they may be (and
it is pretended are actually) much more may they when the matter is left much
more at liberty, and the words under no restraint at all. And no man can avoid
the pressure and the weight of this, unless the Compilers of the Directory
were infallible, and that all their followers are so too, of the certainty of
which I am not yet fully satisfied.

And after all this I would feign know, what benefit and advantages shall the
Church of England in her united capacity, and every particular in the diffused
capacity received by this new device? for the public it is clear, that
whether the Ministers pray before they Study, or Study before they pray, there
must needs be infinite difformity in the public worship, and all the benefits
which were before the consequents of conformity and unity, will be lost, and if
they be not valuable, I leave it to all them to consider, who know the
inconveniences of public disunion, and the public disun^on that is certainly
consequent to them who do not communicate in any common forms of worship. And
to think that the Directory will bring comformity, is as if one should say,
that all who are under the same Hemisphere are joined in Communi patria, and
will love like countrymen, for under the Directory there will be as different
religions, and as different desires, and as differing forms as there are
several varietyes of men and manners under the one half of heaven, who yet
breath under the same half of the Globe. But I ask again, what benefit can the
public receive by this form, or this no form, for I know not whether to
call it. Shall the matter of prayers be better in all Churches? Shall God be
better served? Shall the word of God and the best pat^ernes of prayers be
always exactly followed? It is well if it be, but there is security given us
by the Directory, for the matter is left at every man's dispose for all that,
and we must depend upon the honesty of every particular for it; and if any man
proves a Heretic, or a Knave, then he may introduce what impiety he please,
into the public forms of Gods worship; and there is no law made to prevent
it, and it must be cured afterward if it can; but beforehand it is not
prevented at all by the Directory, which trusts every man. But I observe, that
all the benefit which is pretended, is, that it will make an able Ministry,
which I confess I am very much from believing, and so will every man be that
considers what kind of men they are that have been most zealous for that way of
conceived Prayer. I am sure that very few of the learned, very many
ignorants, most those who have made least abode in the Scooles of the Prophets.
And that I may di^grace no man's person, we see Tradesmen of the most illiberall
arts, and women pretend to it, and do it with as many words (and that is the
maine thing) with as much confidence, and speciousn^sse, and spirit, as the
best among them. And it is but a small portion of learning that will serve a man
to make conceived forms of prayer, which they may have easily upon the stock
of other men, or upon their own fancy, or upon any thing in which no learning
is required. He that knows not this, knows nothing of the craf^ that may be
in the Preachers trade. But what? Is God b^tter served? I would feign see any
authority, or any reason, or any probability for that. I am sure ignorant men
offer him none of the best sacrifices ex tempore, and learned men will be sure
to deliberate, and know, God is then better served, when he is served by a
public, then when by a private spirit. I cannot imagine what accruements will
hence come to the public: It may be some advantages may be to the private
interests of men. For there are a sort of men whom our blessed Savior noted,
who do devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayers. They make
prayers, and they make them long, by this means they receive double
advantages, for they get reputation to their ability, and to their piety. And
although the Common^Prayer-booke in the Preface to the Directory be charged
with unnecessary length, yet we see that most of these men, they that are most
eminent or would be so, make their prayers longer, and will not lose the
benefits which their credit gets, and they by their credit, for making their
prayers.

Add to this that there is no promise in Scripture, that he who prays ex
tempore shall be heard the better, or that he shall be assisted at all to such
purposes, and therefore to innovate in so high a matter without a warrant to
command us, or a promise to warrant us, is no better then vanity in the thing,
and presumption in the person. He therefore that considers that this way of
prayer is without all manner of precedent in the primitive Church, against the
example of all famous Churches in all Christendom in the whole descent of 15.
ages, without all Command and warrant of Scripture, that it is unreasonable in
the nature of the things against prudence and the best wisdom of humanity,
because it is without deliberation, that it is innovation in a high degree
without that authority, which is truly and by inherent and ancient right, to
command and prescribe to us in external forms of worship, that it is much to
the disgrace of the first reformers, of our religion, that it gives
encouragement to the Papists, to quarrel with some reason and more pretense
against our Reformation, as being by the Directory confessed to have been done
in much blindness, and therefore might err in the excess as well as in the
defect, in the throwing out too much, as casting off too little, which is the
more likely, because they wanted zeal to carry him far enough. He that
considers the universal difformity of public worship, and the no means of
union, no Symbol of public communion being publicly consigned, that all
heresies may with the same authority be brought into our prayers, and offered
to God in behalf of the people, with the same authority that any truth may, all
the matter of our prayers being left to the choice of all men, of all
persuasions, and then observes that actually there are in many places, heresy,
and blasphemy, and impertinency, and illiterate rudenesses put into the
devotions of the most Solemn days, and the most public meetings, and then
lastly, that there are diverse parts of Liturgy, for which no provisions at all
is made in the Directory, and the very administration of the Sacraments left so
loosely, that if there be any thing essential in the forms of Sacraments, the
Sacrament may become ineffectuall by want of due words, and due ministartion. I
say he that considers all these things (and many more he may consider) will
find that partticular men are not fit to be entrusted to offer in public with
their private spirit, to God, for the people, in such solemnities, in matters
of so great concernment, where the honor of God, the benefit of the people,
the interest of Kingdoms, the being of a Church, the unity of minds, the
^onformity of practice, the truth of persuasions, and the salvation of souls,
are so very much concerned, as they^ are in the public prayers of a whole
National Church: An unlearned man is not to be trusted, and a wise man dare
not trust himself; he that is ignorant cannot, he that is knowing will not.

FINIS.

