THE VINDICATION OF SR. JOHN STAWELLS REMONSTRANCE, AGAINST A Scurrilous
PAMPHLET written by Mr. John Ash; Entitled an ANSWER to diverse Scandalls
mentioned in the humble REMONSTRANCE of Sr. John Stawell. AS ALSO An ANSWER to
a Petition of William Lawrence of Edinburgh, Esquire Whereunto certain Reasons are
annexed, directed to the Honorable the Referrees of his Highness most
Honorable COUNCIL. With a Conclusion humbly offered unto his HIGHNESS The
LORD PROTECTOR. Written by Sr. JOHN STAWELL. Whereunto are annexed, A Letter of
Sir Anthony Irbyes, AND A short reply of Sr. David Watkins relating unto some
parts of the said PAMPHLET.

LONDON, Printed by T. R. for Henry Twyford, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Vine-Court Middle Temple, An. Dom. 1655.

THE Vindication of Sir JOHN STAWELLS Remonstrance, against a Scurrilous
Pamphlet written by Mr. John Ash, etc.
I HAVE in my Remonstrance formerly made a Profession to fix my self upon
that truth which should be avowed upon The Faith of a Christian, and Honor of
a Gentleman, and I can with much confidence affirm, that I have not been
wanting in the least point to that profession; And I engage my self again, to
follow the same course in the ensuing Narrative, wherein, when I shall have
demonstrated by clear proofs, and arguments, the wicked, and malicious
Practices which Mr. John Ash has used against me, thereby, involving me in
those great Calamities, and miseries which I have undergone for many years,
violating that private tie of Freindship which he pretends, and duty of a
person publicly entrusted by the Parliament, I doubt not but the Reader will
believe, I had more cause to have expected that Mr. Ash, would rather have
acknowledged by his thankfulness the moderation I used in the relating of those
passages, wherein he was concerned in my Remonstrance, then have endeavored (as
he has lately done) by a scurrilous Pamphlet published in his name, to asperse
me with the Writing of many fashoods in several Pages of it, and by a feigned
discourse, as Void of Truth, as of Civility, persuade the Reader. First, That I
never had any intention to compound upon my Articles. And Secondly, That he had
always studiously performed the Office of a Faithful Friend unto me.

Now these two points have been already cleared by solemn Judgments in two
great and honorable Courts, constituted by Authority of Parliament; who having
both of them declared, that I submitted to a Composition according to my
Articles, and performed al things which were on my part requisite toward my
obtaining the benefit of them, have therein also by a necessary consequence
resolved, that Mr. Ash (by whom I was refused to be admitted to my Composition
when I first tendered it) had not performed either the Office of a Friend, or
duty of a public person toward me, so that it may appear superfluous to give
a further Answer to it, which was the cause I had at first some thought to let
it pass, as being a thing which deserved not the trouble of an answer; yet
afterward having more seriously weighed what ill impressions so many
Shameless and notorious Falsehoods might make in those, who are but strangers
unto the former proceedings in my Cause, if they perceived them pass in
silence without an Answer; to the great prejudice of Truth, and of the Justice
of those two honorable Courts who have already cleared them by their
Judgments, I have thought fit upon these grounds, and for my own vindication
from those scandalls, wherewith the Author of that Pamphlet has therein Falsely
and maliciously aspersed me, to publish an exact Narrative of all his Actings
in relation to my business, from the 15th. of July 1646. (which was the day of
my first coming to London upon the Articles of Exeter) until this time, that
so it may appear how shamelesly he has endeavored to abuse the Reader by that
most false and scandalous Pamphlet.

And therefore I shall in the first place represent clearly the condition
wherein I stood at my first coming hither after the granting of those Articles,
being briefly thus.

Upon the rendering of Exeter to the Lord General Fairfax, there were some
Articles agreed upon between his Lordship, and the Governor, dated the 8th. of
April, 1646. which were upon the 6th. of May following, read and approved of
by the House of Commons, and afterward by both the Houses on the 4th. of
November 1647. the 12. 13. and 21. of which Articles, together with the Votes
and Orders made in confirmation of them, do follow in these words.

The Articles of Exeter with their Confirmations.
12. That no Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Clergymen, Chaplains (excepting those
who are by name excepted by Parliament from Pardon, and Composition) Officers,
Citizens, and Soldiers, and all other persons comprised in these Articles,
shall be questioned or accomptable for any Act past by them done (or by any
other done by their procurement) relating unto the unhappy differences betwixt
his Majesty and the Parliament, they Submitting themselves to reasonable and
moderate Composition for their Estates, which the General Sir Thomas Fairfax
shall really endeavor with the Parliament, that it shall not exceed two years
value of any man's real Estate respectively, and for personal, according to
the ordinary rule, not exceeding the Proportion aforesaid. Which Composition
being made, they shall have indemnity of their persons, and enjoy their
Estates, and all other immunities, without payment of 5. or 20. part or any
other Taxes, or Impositions, except what shall be hereafter charged upon them
in Common with other Subjects of this Kingdom by Authority of Parliament.

13. That all Lords, Knights, Gentlemen Clergymen, and Chaplains, excepted in
the next precedent Article, shall have Liberty to go unto any of the Kings
Garrisons, and to have a safe Conduct for themselves and servants, to go unto
the Parliament to obtain their Composition for their Estates, and Indemnity for
their persons, which though it prove uneffectuall, yet nevertheless they shall
have four Months time next after the date of these Articles to endeavor their
peace, or to go beyond the Seas, and shall have Passes for that purpose.

21. That no Oath, Covenant, Protestation, or Subscription relating thereunto,
shall be imposed upon any person whatsoever, comprised within these Articles,
but only such, as shall bind all persons aforesaid not to bear Arms against
the Parliament of England, now sitting at Westminster, nor wilfully do any Act
prejudicial unto their affairs, whilst they remain in their Quarters, except
the persons aforesaid shall first render themselves to the Parliament, who
shall cause them to be secured, if they think fit.

Die Mercurij 6. Maij, 1646.
THe Articles made and agreed upon between Sir Thomas Fairfax, General, and Sir
John Berkley, Governor of Exeter, upon the rendition of the said City, etc. to
his Excellency Sir Thomas Fairfax, were all this day read, and upon the
Question approved.

H: Elsynge, Cler: Par: D: Com.
Die Iovis 4. November. 1647.
THe Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, do approve of the Articles of
Exeter, and order this approbation to be published, to the end all people
concerned may take notice thereof; And that the Committees, Judges, Officers,
and other persons concerned therein, do take notice thereof and observe the same,
any Orders or Ordinances to the contrary notwithstanding.

John Brown Cler: Parliamentor. H: Elsynge Cler. Parl: D: Com.
THe Reader may observe that a distinction is made upon the granting of these
Articles between such as were then Excepted by Parliament from Pardon and
Composition, and all other persons comprised in them, Those of the first sort (
being the excepted persons) were to enjoy no other benefit by the Articles, but
liberty to go unto any of the Kings Garrisons, and safe conduct for them to
repair unto the Parliament, there to apply themselves for their admission to
Composition and Indemnity, and if they failed therein, were however to have four
months after the date of them, to endeavor their peace, or go beyond Sea, to
which purpose, Passes were to be granted to them; All the rest were not to be
accountable or questioned for any Act done by them, or their procurement:
Relating to the War, they submitting to Composition, which his Lordship engaged
himself, should not exceed two years value; and that being once made, they were
to have Indemnity for their persons, and enjoy their Estates, and all other
Immunities, so as all these were absolutely admitted to their Compositions
without any limitation, or circumscription of time wherein they should submit
unto it.

The Articles further providing that no Oath, Covenant Protestation, or
Subscription relating thereunto should be imposed on them, but only such as
should oblige them not to bear Arms against the Parliament, nor wilfully do
any thing prejudicial to their Affairs whilst they remained in their Quarters.

I was comprised within these Articles, and accordingly the Lord General on the
fourth day of April, 1646. gave a Certificate under his hand and Seal, thereby
signifying, that I was in the said City at the surrender thereof, and was to
have the benefit of those Articles which were then agreed upon, which
Certificate I forbear to insert here, because it is recited in my
Remonstrance, and has been proved upon my several Trials in the High-Court of
Justice, and the Court of Articles. And consequently (not being excepted from
Pardon or Composition by the Parliament) was absolutely admitted to compound
without any limitation of time, wherein to make a tender of it.

But having upon due consideration resolved to submit unto the Parliament,
accept the benefit intended to me by those Articles, and spend the residue of
my days in peaceable obedience unto the Government established, I thought it
best to put this speedily in execution, and after some time spent in the
Country, to fit my selve for such a Journey, I came to London on the 15th. day
of July, 1646.

I was no sooner come, but Mr. Ash (taking it seems notice of my arrival) came
the next day being the 16th. day of July 1646. early in the morning, whilst I
was a bed to welcome me to the Town, and to bestow a Visit on his good Master
(for by that name he pleased to call me.)

And here begin the Series of those Untruths, which he has framed and
published as an Answer to my Remonstrance in the said fictitious Pamphlet,
wherein he does (by way of Introduction) assure the Reader, that he has written
an exact Narrative of all proceedings and passages in my Cause, from the time
of my first coming to London, unto the time I was arraigned at the High-Court
of Justice, and this, he says, he wrote upon the first sight of my
Remonstrance, but then forboreto publish it upon some reasons which he pretends
did hinder him from setting out that large discourse.

First, in regard that he had answered all the particulars which did concern
him before the High Court of Justice to their satisfaction and my confusion.

Secondly, because the scandalls he pretends, were mentioned in my
Remonstrance, were so apparently false, that every one might easily perceive
therein a confutation of those things were charged upon him.

And thirdly, Because in his respect unto my family he was willing to be
silent, least otherwise in giving answer unto the scandalls, wherewith he does
pretend himself to be aspersed (by saying he did clandestinely obstruct my
composition) he might do that which he does now conceive himself obliged unto;
viz. Prove that I never intended to compound, but resolved the contrary,
flattering my self with hopes of seeing the late King restored unto his power
and greatness, from whom I might receive not only my whole Estate, but also a
great reward for my suffering, in owning and defending his cause beyond any of
his party.

But notwithstanding these reasons, since he has heard that a Committee was
appointed to examine the matter of Fact in my Petition, he is so set upon the
working of my ruin, that he is now resolved to add falsehood and impudence
unto his malice, by publishing this Fiction of his own, in answer to the
Scandals which he pretends were fixed on him by my Remonstrance, least
otherwise his testimony against me might be impeached, and he should be
misrepresented to those who were strangers to his Actions.

Now in regard I have resolved in this Discourse to render an exact Narrative
of Mr. Ash his carriage and actings in relation to my business, whereby the
many falsehoods contained in that his Pamphlet will be made evident, I hold my
self obliged before examination of them, to show the falsehood, frivilousness,
and vanity of those his Reasons.

Now as to the first of them, The Answer unto the reasons
I cannot but admire the boldness of this affirmation, which is not only
contrary to truth, but also to the very Judgment of the High-Court of Justice,
in the sole point examined by them: For being brought to trial for my life
before that Court, I had no other matter to allege for preservation of it, but
that I was comprised within the Articles of Exeter, and had performed all that
on my part was required for Intituling my self unto the benefit of them; That
all my troubles had their rise from Mr. Ash, who contrary to justice and his
duty refused my Petition to compound, when I first tendered it according to my
Articles, and afterward caused me to fall into the Parliaments displeasure, by
the undue practices hereafter mentioned (which are the Subject of the ensuing
Narrative) To prove the contrary whereof Mr. Ash was produced a Witness on the
Commonwealths behalf, and did with great malice and virulency, endeavor to
have justified his own proceedings, by proving that I had forfeited the benefit
of my Articles: But the Court having upon full hearing declared the contrary,
did consequently and by implication adjudge his Answer no way satisfactory as
to the clearing of himself from those hardships toward me, wherewith I charged
him upon my defense, and this point also has been since decreed by solemn
Judgment of the Court of Articles; So as this first reason is a notorious
untruth, declared to be so by two honorable Courts, and is besides injurious
to them, since they could not in justice have acquitted me, without censuring
the proceedings of Mr. Ash against me, as unjust, and tending to the violation
of the said Articles.

As for his second Reason, it is, besides the falsehood of it, so vain and
frivolous, that I can see nothing of reason in it, but the name, for if those
things wherewith I charged him be true (as I shall evidently show they are) then
the improbability of them is a Chymera only of his own brain, which can no
where have a subsistence, except it be in his fictitious Pamphlet, the worthy
Issue of such a Parent.

And for his third Reason, who sees not the absurdity thereof, for if he truly
had any respect unto my Family (which he has ruined) and had for that
consideration forborne to publish that, whereby it might appear I never had
intention to have compounded (as he surmiseth:) This motive of respect unto
them would have been much more powerful with him, when upon my Petition to the
late Parliament, he saw that a Committee was appointed for the re-examining of
my Cause (on the success whereof depended their fairest hopes) then whilst they
could not be prejudiced by that discovery: (The High-Court of Justice and the
Court of Articles having resolved in my Case, that I had really submitted unto
a Composition according to the Articles of Exeter.) Therefore sor this man to do
this unasked or called for, merely to preserve himself in a capacity to be a
Witness against me, and thereby the better to be enabled to ruin and destroy
them, is a kindness so suitable unto the truth of all his other Allegations,
that I must leave it to the Reader to determine, whether he has in these three
Reasons given a larger testimony of his Ingenuity, or of his respects unto my
family.

His three reasons being thus answered, I shall now proceed in my relation
which upon that occasion was interrupted, and shall inform the reader of what
passed between us upon our first meeting.

Mr. Ash his first visit.
This first visit from Mr. Ash (who was in those days a man of power and
usually Chairman of the Comittee at Goldsmiths Hall, (with whom I was to make
my Composition) gave me an apprehension that I might by his favor reap some
considerable advantage in the perfecting of it, and therefore after words of
civility and congratulation had passed between us (such as are usual amongst
friends upon their meeting after a long absence) I failed not to acquaint him
with my business, letting him know that I was come to London, with an intention
to compound for my Estate upon the Articles of Exeter, and did desire his
furtherance in the doing of it, which he did very freely promise, assuring me
that he would employ his best interest to serve me in all things.

And now having thus happily (as I thought) gotten a friend, The Objection
answered, made by Mr. Ash, touching Dean and Chapters Lands.
who could better then any other assist me in the prosecution of my business, I
did then upon further discourse, acquaint him with a difficulty, I apprehended,
in being able to raise money for payment of my Composition, telling him, I had
heard in the Country, that Deans and Chapters Lands were by the Parliament
appointed to be sold at ten years purchase, and therefore it was probable the
price of other Lands would fall on that occasion; whereby the two years value,
which by my Articles I was to pay for my Composition, would be intruth the same
to me as four years value, because I should for raising of it, be forced to
sell Fee-simple Lands at ten years purchase, which at another time would sell
for twenty.

This was in truth a Report mistaken in the Country, for although Bishops Lands
were about that time appointed to be sold (which was the occasion thereof) yet
Deans and Chapters Lands were not exposed to sale till some years after: But it
is certain, that I had heard so in the Country, and did accordingly upon this
ground relate the same to Mr. Ash, who (though he could have rectified my
error in this particular) forbore to do it, because having (as since appeared)
some covetous design on my Estate, he thought whilst I continued in that Error,
I might be drawn to sell my Land a better penny worth then otherwise I should
have done.

And that his thoughts were then projecting some such thing, appears clearly by
his after actings and discourse to me, when being sent for by the House of
Commons, I was (as I have mentioned formerly in my Remonstrance) put into the
little dark corner upon the left hand of the entering in of the outermost door
of the House, whereof I shall hereafter have occasion to speak more largely.

But whatsoever Mr. Ashes thoughts then were, My subscription as Guild Hall.
I (who had then a thought on nothing more then the perfecting of my
Composition) having upon inquiry heard, that all persons comprised within
Articles, who should repair unto the Cities of London and Westminster, should
within four days after their coming, repair to Guild Hall London, and there
produce their Passes, and according to their Articles engage themselves not to
bear Arms against the Parliament; or wilfully do any Act prejudicial to their
Affairs, whilst they remained in their Quarters) I did according to the said
Order make such subscription and promise on the 17th. of July, 1646. (being
within the time therein limited) as appears by the said Order of Parliament)
which together with the said Certificate touching my subscription, hereafter
follow.

2. July, 1646.
The Order and the Subscription thereupon.
IN order to the safety of the Parliament and City, It is ordered by the Commons
in Parliament assembled, that all such persons of what degree or quality
soever, comprised within the Articles of Oxon, Exon, and all other Garrisons,
that are already come to the Cities of London and Westminster, and places
within the lines of communication, shall before Thursday next, being the nineth
day of this instant month of July, repair to Guild Hall London, and shall
there, in the presence of any three of the Committee of the Militia of the City
of London, produce their Passes, and shall according to their Articles engage
themselves by promise, not to bear Arms against the Parliament, nor wilfully
do any Act prejudicial to their Affairs, so long as they remain in their
Quarters: And that all persons of what degree or quality soever, comprised
within any of the said Articles, as shall hereafter come within the said Cities
and Lines of Communication, shall within four days after their coming repair
to Guild Hall, London, and shall there likewise produce their Passes, and make
the like Engagement. And the Committee of the Militia, or any three of them,
are hereby authorized to receive the said Engagement, and take the respective
Subscriptions of the persons, and for this purpose are to sit constantly three
days in the week; viz. Mondaies, Wednesdaies, and Frydaies, between the hours
of three and seven in the afternoon.

And lastly it is ordered, That such of the persons comprised within any of the
said Articles, as shall neglect or refuse to observe this Order, or do any
thing contrary to the said Articles, shall forfeit the benefit of the said
Articles. And this to be printed, and published by sound of Trumpet and beat of
Drum; and the Committee of the Militia of London is desired to take care that
this be so published accordingly.

Hen: Scobell Cler: Parliamenti.
The Subscription is thus certified.
I Am commanded by the Committee of the Militia of London, to certify, That
Sir John Stawell, Knight of the Bath, did promise before the said Committee,
that he would not bear Arms against the Parliament, nor wilfully do any Act
prejudicial to their Affairs, while he remains in their Quarters, and thereunto
subscribed his name, according to the Order of Parliament in that behalf,

dated at Guild Hall, London, the 18th. of July, 1646. Adam Banks Clerk to the
said Committee.

Having thus performed what by the Order of Parliament I was directed to do,
The visit I gave Mr. Ash.
I did a day or two before I presented my Petition to the Committee at
Goldsmiths Hall (where Mr. Ash was Chairman) wait upon him at his Brothers
house in Fanchurch Street, and acquainted him with my purpose to petition,
desiring his furtherance therein, which he promised, and then informed me of the
day that the Committee sat, at which time he would not sail to be there
himself, and would in all friendly manner further my business, and upon my
return from him that night, I drew up my Petition, which Mr. Stonehouse my
Kinsman, who was then with me, and wrote a better hand then my self, did me the
favor to transcribe for me, which Petition follows in these words.

For the Honorable the Committee for Compositions sitting at Goldsmiths Hall.

The humble Petition of Sir John Stawell.
Shows,
THat your Petitioners Estate has been for a long time sequestered, My Petition
to compound.
and himself reduced to very great wants, which being supplied by the help of
his friends, has added much to his former Debts and Engagements.

He humbly prays, that you will be pleased to admit him to his Composition,
according to the Articles of Exeter, and Sir Thomas Fairfax his Certificate,
which renders him capable of that Agreement.

And your Petitioner shall, etc.

THe next day being the 24th. of July, Mr. Stonehouse did me the favor to
accompany me to Goldsmiths Hall, The time I preferred my Petition to compound.
and coming to the door where the Committee sat, I desired the Doorkeeper to
acquaint Mr. Ash that I was without, and had a Petition to present, who
brought me word that as soon as Sir Henry Berkleyes business was over, I should
be next, and accordingly about half an hour after I was called for, and none of
those who were without admitted to come in with me.

Being come in, I tendered my Petition to the Committee, and delivered it into
Mr. Ashes hands, who having read it, threw it down upon the Table, saying, it
was a Remonstrance and not a Petition, and put it from him toward me as far as
he could reach for me to receive again, whereupon I told him, I had brought that
for him, and had a Copy of it for my self, and so left it upon the Table.

He told me, I must confess my Delinquency, before I could be admitted to
Composition, and I replied that I came thither to compound for my Estate
according to my Articles which did not require me to confess my Delinquency,
and withal told him that I had born Arms for the King, and that I did so by
his command; and I said ( by his command) not that I stood upon my
justification) but to entitle my self to the Articles of Exeter) which did
excuse me for Acts done relating unto the unhappy differences.

He then asked me if I had taken the Negative Oath and Covenant, and I
answering that I had not, he told me that before I could be admitted to
Composition I must take them both.

J replied, that by my Articles, J was freed from taking any Oaths; And J do
well remember, that (as J have set it down formerly in my Remonstrance) he
pressing me to take those Oaths, and to acknowledge my Delinquency, J did at
last make him this answer; Mr. Ash, J have known you long, and my good friend,
and do desire to preserve you so, and for these Gentlemen that are of the
Parliament (for J did not then know but that they had been so) there was very
great reason that my Judgment and Opinion should subscribe to theirs; but as
for my Estate it was my Servant, and J had a power to command it, but my
Conscience was my Master, and had power to command me, and therefore J must
yield obedience to it; And since these Oaths you offer me are contrary to my
Articles, and repugnant to those J have already taken, J desire you will excuse
me, if J refuse them.

Hereupon Mr. Ash willed me to withdraw, and being called for in again, Mr. Ash
told me J was but lately come to Town, and therefore they would allow me some
time to consider of the Negative Oath and Covenant, of which, it might be, I
had not yet taken notice.

But unto this my Answer was, that I did not desire any time to consider of
what was a right which did belong unto me by my Articles, and of which if I
should accept, and make them the same Answer as now, they might conceive that
by the acceptance of time, I had abused their expectations which I was unwilling
to do.

Hereupon I was again willed to withdraw, and attended without, till the
Committee rose, not knowing whether they might have any thing more to say unto
me; but having not then heard any more from them, after they were risen I
departed home unto my lodging.

I have set down this conference at large though I have formerly related it in
my Remonstrance because the Reader may observe by it, that I did never in the
least kind declare that I had no intention to compound, as Mr. Ash has with
great Impudence and false hood suggested; but on the contrary did apply my self
to the Commit, and desire to be admitted to my Composition upon the terms
prescribed by my Articles; unto which if Mr. Ash and the Committee had given
way without enforcing Oaths, and Covenants upon me, from which I was to be
exempted by my Articles, I had then perfected the same, and thereby had been
free from all those Miseries and Calamities, which I have for many years
suffered: for he having (as I formerly related) understood from me at my first
coming that I intended to compound, did thereupon prefer a Petition to the
house thereby desiring that my Composition money together with the Compositions
of Mr. Coventry and Sir. Edward Moseley might be granted to him, Mr: Ash
procures by his Petition the benefit of my Composition.
for the discharge of some disbursements of his own wherein he stood bound with
Colonel Allexander Popham, Col. Nathaniel Fines, Col. Hollis and and other
Gentlemen of the County of Somerset for the service of the Parliament amounting
in all with the Interest unto 10920 l. and that the overplus of our
Compositions might be allowed unto him for the Loss, and Damages which he
pretended to have suffered by the War, if the Parliament should so think fit,
and this accordingly was granted unto him by order of the House upon his
Petition the 17th. day of July 1646. which was the day after he had been with
me at my lodging; which Petition and the Order thereupon do follow in these
words.

The humble Petition and desires of John Ash a member of this House craving
your assistance for satisfaction, and repayment of such sums of money as he
has disbursed for your service, and by Bond has engaged to pay for you.
INprimis, Mr. Ashes petition to the House and the Order thereupon:
That when the Parliameut first raised their Army he did then in the House
publicly engage to pay ten pounds per week for the maintenance of that Army,
which money he paid into the Treasury at Guild Hall for the space of twenty
weeks, and also two hundred Pounds more which he borrowed of his father.

2. That he raised, armed, and for many weeks paid a Troop of horse, a Company
of Foot, and a Company of Dragoons for the service of the West-Country, before
the Contributions, or any way settled, for the payment of Soldiers in those
parts, which were commanded by Captain John Barnard, Captain Nathaniel
Barnard, Captain Samuel Ash, and paid for Powder, Match, and Bullet, expended
by them, all which cost him above three thousand pounds.

3. That at the same time he raised, armed, and paid Dragooneirs and
Musqueteirs which he sent into Wiltshire for the assistance of Sir Edw.
Hungerford, and safty of that County which cost 200 l.

4. That he assisted Sir. William Waller and Mr. Nathaniel Fines when they were
in the West, both with his purse and credit for very great sums, and that
there is still owing upon Mr. Fines account for money disbursed by him, and
others, for which Colonel Nathaniel Fines, and himself stand yet engaged for
payment, and is 2200 l.

That upon the advance of the first 50000 l. sent into Scotland he lent and
paid in at Gouldsmiths Hall 1100 l. and has since engaged his bond for many
thousands more there, and although he has been an Instrument for the raising
of above 300000 l. at that Committee, yet did never allow himself any part
thereof, nor any consideration for the forbearance but have lent the same for
near three years time.

That when the Earl of Bedford came into the West he became bound with some
others members of this House Mr. Denzill Hollis and Mr. Alexander Popham for
the repayment of 2500 l. unto Sir. John Horner, Alderman Cuning, Mr. Woodward,
and Mr. Young, Citizens of Bristol, all which moneys is yet unpaid and he daily
called upon for the payment thereof, which moneys were borrowed then for your
service. All which loan, Disbursments and Engagments amount unto 9400l.
principal money and the Consideration allowed for so much thereof as was lent
upon your Ordinances (which promises that allowance) makes the sum to be
10920 l.

In Consideration of the Premises, and because your many Ordinances and
Declarations have assured the repayment of all those disbursments and
engagments aforementioned, out of the Estates, and Compositions of Delinquents,
and many men have obtained the same Justice from you already, as also somewhat
toward the repair of their Losses and Damages sustained by the Enemy, your
Petitioner having lost the greatest part of his personal Estate, and three
whole years Revenew of his Lands, by the Plunder and cruelty of the said Enemy.

May it therefore please you to order, that the several Fines and Compositions
of Mr. John Coventry, Sir Edward Moseley, and Sir John Stawell Knight, be
allowed and assigned unto your Petitioner, for the re-payment and satisfaction
of those Disbursements and Engagements aforesaid, amounting to 10920 l. And
that if any overplus happen to be, when the said Fines and Compositions are
ascertained, and the monyes secured, the same be reported to this House, and
applied toward the repair of your Petitioners Losses and Damages or other
wise disposed of as this House shall think fit and appoint.

Hen: Scobell, Clerk of the Parliament.
Die Veneris 17. Julij 1646.
ORdered by the Commons assembled in Parliament, That the several Fines and
Compositions of Sir Edward Mosely Sir John Stawell and Mr. John Coventry, shall
be allowed and are Assigned unto Mr. John Ash a member of this House, for the
satisfaction, and discharge of the several Disbursments and Ingagments for the
service of the State, and now presented unto the House, amounting to the sum
of 10920. and the moneys lent by himself, and others for the Service of the
State, for which Mr. Holles, Mr. Fines, and Mr. Alex: Popham, together with Mr.
Ash stand engaged, shall be paid with the first, and the Engagements
Discharged. And when the said Fines, and Compositions shall be ascertained and
the moneys secured, if any overplus happen to be, after all the said
Disbursments and Engagements be satisfied and discharged, that then the same
shall be reported to this House, and if the House think fit, applied for, and
toward the repair of Mr. Ashes Losses and Damages, or otherwise disposed of
as this House upon the said report shall order and appoint, and the Treasurers
of Goldsmiths-Hall are hereby ordered to pay the said monyes to Mr. John Ash
accordingly, whose acquittance shall be their sufficient discharge for the same.

Hen: Scobel Cler: Parliamenti.
NOw Mr. Ash having thus begged my Composition, together with that of those
other gentlemen, which were set sometime before, This appears by Mr. Baylies
certificate.
and amounted unto the sum of 8000 l. and being to receive the overplus that
should arise upon the whole in respect of his pretended Losses, being willing
(as it seems) to improve this grant of theirs unto the best advantage he could
possibly make of it, and therefore knowing, that if I were admitted to my
Composition upon the Articles of Exeter, my fine was not to exceed 2. years
value (which holding not a proportion with his covetous desires) takes a
resolution, contrary unto his former professions of freindship toward me, and
duty to the Parliament who had entrusted him with making Compositions upon
Articles, to obstruct mine when I should tender it, and (being Chairman of the
Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall) cause me to be so represented to the Parliament,
that if I were returned by them to make a Composition with the said Committee,
I should be ordered to make it, for some crime which he resolved to fasten on
me, as well as in relation to my Articles at two years value, and if this
project took not, then to bring me to a trial for my life, either as a spy by
martial Law, or otherwise for Acts by me done, relating to the unhappy
differences between the late King and the Parliament; and for which, by my
Articles I was no ways accountable, that so upon the loss of my life, and
confiscation of my Estate upon which my Composition would rest) he might in
liew thereof be his own carver.

In pursuance of this design, Mr. Ash having notice by me of the time, when I
intended to prefer my Petition to be admitted to my Composition,
notwithstanding his professions of befreinding me therein, takes occasion to
misinforme the Committee, (before he caused me to be called before them) that I
was a great enemy, had raised Arms against the Parlaimt and drawn the first
blood in the West of England, that my Petition was not valid, that I
acknowledged no delinquency, and had not taken the negative Oath, and Covenant,
whereby in stead of furthering my business (as he had undertaken, and I expected)
he so exasperated the Committee against me, before I had Presented my self
before them, that they were resolved to show me no favor but give me time
until my Articles were out, that so they might deal with me the better: all
which appears by the examinations of Sir Anthony Irby, and Sir David Watkins,
both of them persons of Honor, and quality, who were then members of the said
Committee, which Examinations were taken before a Committee of the late
Parliament and follow in these words:

The Examination of Sir Anthony Irby Knight, taken the 16th. of November 1654.
before the Committee of Parliament, to whom the Lord Cravens Petition is
referred being produced as a witness on the behalf of Sir John Stawell, whose
Petition is referred by the Parliament to this Committee.
The examinations of Sir Anth. Irby and Sir David Watkins:
WHo says, that he was one of the Committee for Compounding sitting at
Goldsmiths-Hall, and was present there when Sir John Stawell did prefer his
Petition to compound, and says, that the same was so preferred within the time
limited by the Articles of Exeter, as appeared by the pass of Sir Thomas
Fairfax, and says, that the said Petition was read at the board, but something
therein was disliked; for Sir John Stawell did not acknowledge his delinquency,
nor would he take the Covenant, and Negative Oath; And further says, that Sir
John Stawell did not behave himself misbecomingly, as this Deponent conceives,
only did insist upon the Articles of Exeter, and said that by them he was to
be admitted to Composition, and he this Examinant took no exceptions at his
carriage. And says, that in those times there was want of money, and it was
his opinion, that Sir John Stawell ought to compound.

And further says, that at that time this Examinant did not know of any body
that was about to buy any part of Sir John Stawells Estate. but says that
about two, or three years ago (as he remembers) he was at Sir Abraham Williams
his house, being about the time of Sir John Stawells trial for his life, or
presently after, (as he remembers) and there he met Sir Edward Baynton, and
enquired of him the reason of the prosecution of Sir John Stawell, and Sir Edw:
Baynton then told this Examinant that there was a Gentleman who would have
bought a Manor of Sir John Stawells in Somersetshire or Wiltshire ( he cannot
tell whether) and that he the said Sir Edward Baynton had some interest in part
of it, and had offerred, if Sir John Stawell would sell his part, he also would
sell his other part; but said that afterward he was sorry for that offer,
because he conceithat was the Original of Sir John Stawells troubles.

And this Examinant further says that, Sir John Stawell came punctually within
the time limited by his Articles; for that the Committee for compounding gave
him a time to appear after the date of the time given by the said Articles, on
purpose that the Committee might show him no favor when the time given by the
Articles was out. And says, that Sir Edward Baynton told him this Examinant
that the person who would buy the said Manor was Mr. John Ash.

And this Examinant further says, that one of the members of that Committee
being the Chairman, told the Committee that Sir John Stawell was without with
a Petition, but said, the same was failing in many Circumstances. And says,
that after the case then in debate was ended ( which was one Berkleys as this
Deponent now remembers) Sir John Stawell was called in, and this Examinant
being now demanded whether Sir John Stawell had subscribed not to bear Arms
against the Parliament, as was required by his Articles; this Examinant says
that there was a Committee who sat in Goldsmiths-Hall to take subscriptions,
without which (as he remembers) Delinquents were not to stay within the Lines
of Communication, but says, that he does not remember that ever he saw any
Certificate that Sir John Stawell had subscribed, not to bear Arms, nor did he
ever see the Certificate of any other person to that purpose that came to
Compound; and this Examinant further says, that the Committee had an Order of
Parliament not to Compound with any that did not take the Covenant and Negative
Oath, which latter the Committee had power to Administer and the same was
tendered to Sir John Stawell, but he refused to take it, and said, he was
excused by his Articles: And this Examinant further says, that it was not then
objected against Sir John Stawell, that he had not subscribed the Engagment,
not to bear Arms against the Parliament.

Being Cross Examined on the behalf of the Commonwealth, he says.

THat he does not remember that Sir John Stawell said, the Committee were
Traitors or Delinquents, that to his remembrance, They had no Order of
Parliament that persons should acknowledge their Delinquency, before they were
admitted to Compound; but the Committee made such an Agreement amongst
themselves: and says, That some of the Committee did say, that Sir John
Stawells Petition was rather a Remonstrance then a Petition: and says, That
there was no particular of his Estate annexed to his Petition, nor was it
ordinary so to do, but the particular was usually delivered after admission to
a Composition: and says, That Sir John Stawell did refuse the Covenant, and
Negative Oath upon account of his Articles; and that the subscription not to
bear Arms was not to be made before them, but in another place before they
came to them. And says, that he was near Sir John Stawell when he was with the
Committee, but did not hear any particular ill language given by him to the
Committee, as he remembers; but says, that his Carriage was then as it was
usually, not very pleasant, or Courtly.

Sir David Watkins examined at the same time on Sir John Stawells part.

Says,

THat he was of the Committee for compounding, and was there, when Sir John
Stawell came and presented his Petition to the Committee, which was within four
months from the eighth of April, and says, that he came in a civil manner,
but did not acknowledge his Delinquency, nor would take the Negative Oath, and
was refused to be admitted upon that account, and says, that he does not
remember any Order of Parliament that did forbid them to compound with persons,
that did not acknowledge themselves Delinquents, but such as had not taken the
Negative Oath and Covenant, and says, that he saw the Lord Fairfax his Pass,
dated in April, and that he does account four months, after the rate of 28
days to the month, and says, that he does not know, that any Certificate was
brought to them touching subscription not to bear arms, either in this, or any
case of persons compounding upon those Articles, and says, that Sir John
Stawells not subscribing, was not objected against him at that time.

Being cross examined on the behalf of the Commonwealth, says.

THat some did say, that Sir John Stawells Petition, was rather a Remonstrance
than a Petition; but the title was a Petition, but he had not acknowledged his
Delinquency, nor taken the Negative Oath and Covenant, and for that reason, he
conceives, it was called a Remonstrance. That the Committee were informed, he
had subscribed not to bear arms against the Parliament.

Sir Anthony Irby being Called in, after the company were withdrawn, and asked
whether there were any private discourse at the Committee, to Sir John Stawells
prejudice.

HE says, that Sir John Stawell being without the door, the Chairman went out,
and on his return told this Examinant, that Sir John Stawell was a great enemy,
had raised Arms against the Parliament, drew the first blood in the West of
England, that his Petition was not valid, he acknowledged no Delinquency, had
not taken the Negative Oath, and says that the Committee pressed him to it,
and upon refusal gave him time, till his Articles were out, because then they
knew how to deal with him, and says that the Committee did not meddle with
subscriptions, for that was to be done by a particular Committee separated from
them, because that (concerned Delinquents stay in town: but only to see that
they did take the Negative Oath and Covenant; and further says, that the
second day that Sir John Stawell appeared, Mr. Stephens was in the Chair, as he
remembers.

My Composition being thus foiled when I first tendered it, and the Committee
disaffected to me by the misinformation, and covert practices of Mr. Ash, I who
was ignorant of his designs, (and took him for my friend, as he professed
himself to me in public) expected that the Committee, after they had
considered that I was by my Articles excused from taking the Negative Oath and
Covenant (which was the only cause for which they had refused me:) when they
had better considered of the Articles, would again have called for m^ and given
me leave to prosecute the same; and I was herein the more confirmed, because I
saw that by the Articles I was not limited to any time wherein I was to make my
Composition, but was to be admitted thereunto when I should tender it, and
therefore I did hold my self assured, that the Committee who had perceived my
readiness to Compound by the early tender of my Petition, would not have looked
upon me as a refractory person, or have made use of any power to enforce me
thereunto.

And that I did not herein go upon mistaken grounds, will appear plainly by a
solemn Judgment and decree in the Court of Articles given in Mr. Newcourts
Case, wherein, the Court, upon consideration of a Certificate made unto them by
the Commissioners for Compounding, and of the Articles of Exeter, resolved,
that he was to be suffered to make his Composition upon those Articles, though
he had not tendered the same till near 3. years after the date of them, and
that the limitation of four months did concern only the excepted persons,
whereof I was none: The Copy of which Certificate, together with the Judgment
and Decree of the said Court, follow in these words.

From the Commissioners for Compounding etc. the 10 th. of November 1652. Gent.
IN pursuance of your Order of the 27 th. of October last, in the Case of
Richard Newcourt of Somerton in the County of Somerset, The Certificate and
judgment in Mr. Newcourts Case:
upon search made in the Books and papers touching Compositions, it appears,

That a Petition was Exhibited the 14 th. of April 1649. in the name of the
said Richard Newcourt, confessing that he adhered unto, and assisted the forces
raised against the Parliament, for which his Delinquency his Estate was
sequestered, and desired to be admitted to Composition, according to the
Particular of his Estate annexed to the said Petition. And a Certificate and
estimate of his Estate was returned from the late Committee of Somerset the 15
th. of May following, upon all which a Report (according to the usual manner)
was drawn up, and the Fine set at a sixth, one hundred and twenty pounds,
fifteen shillings, no mention being made in the Petition, or any other Paper
touching Exeter Articles. But on the 26th. of March, 1651. the said Richard
Newcourt having obtained your Order of Reference hither, the 26th. of November,
1649. he again Petitioned, desiring to be admitted to his Composition upon the
said Articles, alleging that he was comprised in them, and that one Mr. Smith
his Solicitor, entered his former composition, without mentioning the said
Articles contrary to his knowledge. Upon hearing of which Petition the result
was, that no Order could be given here in the case. And the Fine being still
unpaid, the Estate continues under Sequestration, as by Copies of the said
several proceedings hereunto annexed appears.

Jo: Leech Regist.
A true Copy Tracy Pauncefote Regist.

Exchecquer Chamber Westminster, Wednesday the 22 th. of December 1652.
By the Commissioners for releif, upon Articles of War.

UPon full hearing of the Cause depending in this Court upon the Petition of
Ri: Newcourt of Somerton in the County of Somerset Gent. in presence of the
Council for the Commonwealth, who were also fully heard therein: And upon
consideration of the matter of complaint of the said Richard Newcourt, and of
the Evidence produced on his behalf. It appearing unto this Court, that the
said Richard Newcourt was comprised in the Articles made at the Surrender of
the Garrison of Exeter, and confirmed by Parliament: By virtue whereof all
persons included therein, and not excepted, were to be admitted to Composition,
according to the rates and proportions therein set down, without any limitation
of time; And there being no proof before this Court, nor any suggestion thereof,
that the said Richard Newcourt had taken up Arms, or otherwise engaged himself
in open hostility or secret counsel against the Parliament, since the said
Articles granted, whereby he might have lost or forfeited the benefit thereof.
The Court upon full debate of the whole matter, and upon consideration of the
Acts of Parliament, by which they are constituted, and of the power and trust
thereby committed to them; Do award, order and adjudge that the said Richard
Newcourt be admitted to compound for his Estate Real and Personal, according
to the said Articles of Exeter. And the Commissioners authorized by Parliament
to compound with Delinquents, are desired to take notice hereof, and to admit
the said Richard Newcourt to his Composition according to the said Articles.

A true Copy.

T. Pauncefote Regist.
But whilst (upon the consideration of the right which belonged unto me) I
spent some days in London, Mr Ash upon the 30th. of July following, acquaints
the Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall with the Order which (as I formerly related)
was given by the House for his receipt of my fine together with that of Sir
Edward Mosely's, and Mr. Coventry's and procures from them an Order unto the
Treasurers to pay the same accordingly, in pursuance whereof he received 10434
l. in satisfaction of those Disbursments and Engagements mentioned in his
afore-recited Petition, and in his Pamphlet declared not to be fully satisfied,
but that himself, together with the other Gentlemen before mentioned, have and
will suffer very much, in case the Parliament do not discharge those
Obligations still in force. The particular of which Receipts is evidenced by
the Order of that Committee, and the account of the then Treasurers of
Goldsmiths-Hall hereafter following.

Goldsmiths Hall London. At the Committee for compounding with Delinquents, the
30 th of July, 1646.
ACcording to an Order of the House of Commons assembled in Parliament, of the
seventeenth of this instant July, directed to this Committee, whereby the
several Fines and Compositions of Sir Edward Mosely, Sir John Stawel, and Mr.
John Coventry, are allowed and assigned unto Mr. John Ash, The Order of the
Committee for Mr. Ash his receipt of the Fines.
a Member of the House of Commons, for the satisfaction and discharge of the
several disbursments and engagements for the service of the State, amounting
to the sum of ten thousand nine hundred and twenty pound, and the moneys lent
by him for the Service of the State; for which Mr. Hollis, Mr. Fines, and Mr.
Alexander Popham, together with Mr. Ash, stand engaged, and by the said Order
are to be paid with the first, and the engagements discharged. It is this day
ordered, that Mr. Richard Waring, and Mr. Michael Herring, Treasurers of this
Committee are hereby desired, and by the said Order of the House of Commons
ordered, to pay the said moneys unto the said Mr. John Ash out of the moneys
that shall come into the treasury for the said several Fines, and these
together with Mr. Ash his acquittance, shall be to the said Treasurers, a
sufficient discharge.

David Watkins. Richard Bateman. Ier. Alexander. Anthony Irby. Samuel Moyer.
Chapter Pack.


REceived of the Treasurers within mentioned this 7th of October, 1646. the
sum of two thousand pounds, The Treasurers account.
being the moity of Mr. John Couentry, his Composition, and in Pursuance of
this within written Order, I say received in part, 2000. l.

John Ash.

Received more in pursuance of this within written Order, this 16th of
November, 1646. two thousand four hundred pounds, 2400 l.

John Ash.

Received this 12th of November 1647. in further payment, one thousand pounds,
I say received 1000 l.

John Ash.

Received of the Treasurers, this 4th of March 1647. in further payment of this
within written Order, the sum of two thousand pounds, I say, 2000 l.

John Ash.

Received this 8th of October 1648. in further payment of this within written
Order, two thousand eight hundred thirty five pounds, I say, 2835 l.

John Ash.

Received this 9th. of November, 1648. in further payment, one hundred ninety
nine pounds, 0199./10434 l.

John Ash.

The before written, are true Copies of the Original Order and Receipts thereon
Endorsed. And in pursuance of which said Order, we Richard Waringe and Michael
Herring, late Treasurers at Goldsmiths-Hall, have toward the within mentioned
sum of ten thousand nine hundred and twenty pounds, only paid as before
appears, the sum of ten thousand four hundred thirty four pounds, so there
remains unpaid by us the sum of four hundred eighty six pounds. In testimony
whereof we have hereunto set our hands this sixth of January, 1654.

Examined by John Bateman. Richard Waringe. Michaell Herring.

Now Mr. Ash having, as it appears, received so great a sum of money upon
these Orders of the Parliament and the Committee, I shall here make a short
digression, and pray the Reader to observe.

Moneys demanded by Mr. Ash, which he never paid.
First, the falseness of his demands made of the moneys pretended by him to be
lent and paid toward the Service of the Commonwealth, which was the ground of
his Receipt thereof, which thus appears.

The charge brought in by him does rest on several particulars, some of which
are to be taken only on his own Credit, being of moneys he pretends to have
expended in the Service of the Parliament, and others which he alleges were
by him lent and paid in at the Guild Hall and Goldsmiths-Hall.

The truth of those which depend upon his own word, cannot be here examined by
me; in regard they are put down generally in a gross sum, not descending to
particulars, and it is a maxim, Dolosus versatur in generalibus.

But we may guess how justly he has dealt in that part of his Charge, by what
appears touching the sums pretended, to have been lent, and paid in by him
unto the Treasurers of Guild Hall, and Gold-Smiths-Hall, which are, First, To
the Guild Hall by ten pounds per week, for twenty weeks 200 l. and by money
borrowed of his father 200 l. in all 400 l. and into Goldsmiths-Hall, upon the
coming in of the Scots, 1100 l. these sums being 1500 l. principal debt,
together with the use of them, are cast up in the total of the debt demanded
by him; whereas in truth, he never lent or paid in of these, more than 70 l.
for seven weeks of the 200 l. for twenty weeks demanded, and 50 l. of the 2^0
l. more demanded, as money borrowed from his father, amounting unto 120. l. and
500 l. uopn the Scots coming in, for which he demands 1100 l. principal, as
appears by these two Certificates, from the several Officers there, which
follow in these words.

Joh. Ash of Freshford, Esquire, a member of the House of Commons.

BY money received of him, 50 l. 0.s. 0.d. 1642. 13. July.
By money received of him for seven weeks, ending the 28. October, 70.l. 0.s.
0.d. 1642. November 2^
Entered in libro primo Mo. Fol. 4. 120. l. 0. s. ^d.
Examined Jos. Watmough.

UPon Search made in the general account Book of moneys paid into the Treasury
at Gold Smiths-Hall London, for advance of the Scots Army, under the Command of
the Earl of Leven; I find that John Ash Esquire, paid into the Treasury
aforesaid, the 24th day of October, 1643. the sum of 500 l. (and no more)
toward the moneys appointed by Ordinance of Parliament, to be raised by way of
Loan, for maintenance of the Scots Army aforesaid, which at the request of
Edward Toll is certified this 14th day of April 1655. by 500. l. only paid,

Joh. Bateman, Clerk to M. Rich. Waring and Mr. Mich. Herring, late Treasurers
at Goldsmiths Hall.
By these it is most manifest, that Mr. Ash has brought in an Overcharge more
then he disbursed for the Commonwealths use the sum of 820 l. principal,
besides the interest which was allowed for these debts, since the time he
pretends they were first lent; and certainly, if Mr. Ash has had the boldness
to cheat the Parliament so grossly in the sums which rested of Record upon the
Treasurers Accounts; we may conclude, he has in probability abused them much
more shamefully in those wherein he was his own Carver, and could not be
disproved by any, because he gave not in the Particulars, or Vouchers for them.

And Secondly, how dishonestly, unjustly, and injuriously he has dealt with
the Parliament, these Gentlemen, and my self in the receiving and disposing of
it; and First, as for the Parliament, he was authorized by their warrant, to
receive the sums arising by our Compositions, when they should be ascertained
and paid in, but Mr. Ash has by the color of that Order received not only
8000 l. which was the sum to which the Compositions of Mr. Coventry, and Sir
Edward Moseley did amount unto, but also 2434 l. more toward my Composition,
whereas he hindered me himself from making of it, and by this mean^ he did
unwarrantably possess himself, and very unhandsomly borrow so much money
belonging to the public, contrary to their intention and his Duty.

Thirdly, The Parliament was moved to grant our Compositions to Mr. Ash,
principally for the discharge of those Engagements, wherein he was entered into,
together with Colonel Nathaniel Fines, Colonel Alexander Popham, Colonel
Hollis, and others. These Gentlemen were then Members of the House, and
expecting to be freed by the assigning of these moneys to him, did surely very
much assist him in the procuring of that Order, by themselves and by their
friends, when his Petition was read, and these Engagements were by the Order
appointed to be paid out of the First moneys that should come unto his hands,
but Mr. Ash took so little Care to observe common Honesty and Justice toward
the Parliament, or those Gentlemen, that notwithstanding those Engagements, as
appears by his Petition, amounted but unto 4700 l. and that he has received
(as I have showed already) above 10000 l. upon this account; being much more
then was due unto him for the discharge, not only of those Engagements, but
also of all other sums, which he had really lent and paid in unto the public
use, yet he has not discharged those Obligations, but they remain still in
force against those Gentlemen, as it appears both by his own Confession, in his
Pamphlet, and a late Petition preferred against him by Colonel Popham, which
follows in these words.

To his Highness the Lord Protector of the Common Wealth of England, Scotland,
and Ireland,The Humble Petition of Col. Alexander Popham.
Shows,

Colonel Popham's Petition.
THat by an Order of Parliament, made the 17th. of July 1646. the several Fines
and Compositions of Sir Edward Moseley, Sir John Stawell, and Mr. John Coventry
were assigned unto Mr. John Ash, a Member of the late Parliament, for several
Engagements for the Service of the State, heretofore presented to the House,
amounting to 10920 l. lent by himself and others, and secured by Mr. Hollis,
Mr. Nathaniel Fines, your Petitioner, and the said Mr. Ash, which said sum of
10920 l. was by that Order to be first paid, and the Engagements discharged, as
thereby appears.

That Mr. Ash has received 10434 l. appears under the hand of Mr Michael
Herring, a Receiver at Goldsmiths Hall, and yet your Petitioner has paid part
of the Debts, for satisfaction of which, the said 10434 l. was received, and
the said Mr. Ash forbeareth to re-imburse to your Petitioner, or to account for
the said money by him received, and your Petitioner with others, is also sued
for 1000 l. more, borrowed for the Service of the State of one Mr. Chetwind,
then Chamberlain of the City of Bristoll.

Wherefore your Petitioner humbly prays, that in regard the money in question
was borrowed for the Service of the State, and the matters have been transacted
by Orders of Parliament hereunto annexed, whereof (being now dissolved) your
Petitioner can have no fruit, your Highness would please to order Mr. Ash to
declare what payments he has made out of the said sum by him received, when,
and to whom, and what remains in his hands, and that out of such Remainder (if
any be) your Petitioners disbursments may be satisfied, or he with the others
discharged from the trouble and prosecutions under which they now suffer, by
such other means of satisfaction of the said debts, as to your Highness in
Equity and Justice shall seem meet.

And your Petitioner shall pray.
So that herein he has very much falsified the Trust the Parliament reposed in
him, in relation to their honor, in not discharging those Obligations, having
received money to perform it with a great overplus; and much abused and
prejudiced those Honorable persons, whose Indemnity and discharge, the
Parliament did principally respect, and made his request for so much as
concerned himself much the easier.

And Fourthly, He has been very injurious to me, denying to admit me to my
Composition, notwithstanding, that upon his own Petition, the Parliament had
ordered me to make it. And that he has received no less than 2434 l. upon the
account of my Composition, his Order not extending unto the same.

Having made this Observation by the way, I shall now proceed, and let the
Reader know Mr. Ashes further progress in the wrongs wherewith I charge him.

Having thus settled his interest in my Composition, Here begins the relation
of the false Record entered the 4th. of August.
he took notice of an Ordinance of Parliament, of the 13th of November 1645.
whereby all persons, who should come out of the enemies Quarters, were required
to make their appearance before a Committee appointed to enter their names, and
take an account of their abode, and condition, upon pain of being proceeded
against, as spies by martial Law (which Committee did also sit at
GoldSmiths-Hall, but were a distinct Committee, from those who were appointed
to Compound with Delinquents) Mr. Ash (not considering that this Ordinance
extended not to such, as came in upon the Articles of Exeter, who were only to
appear and make their subscriptions before the Committee at the Guild Hall,
who were by the Ordinance of the second of July, 1646 before recited
particularly appointed to receive them, but finding I had not appeared before
the Committee at Gold smiths-Hall, according to the Ordinance of the 13 th of
November 1645. an Order or warrant was entered, and made a Record by Mr. Leech
then Clark to the Committee for compounding, This is certified by Mr. Bailey.
Mr. Ash being then present, without the knowledge or consent of diverse Members
of that Committee, thereby suggesting that I had not appeared either before the
said Committee, or any other Committee of Parliament, notwithstanding the time
appointed by the Articles of Exeter, to which I pretended, was expired,
commanding me on Thursday following to appear before them to answer my
contempt, which warrant or Order follows in these words.

Gold Smiths-Hall, London. At the Committee for Compounding, 4. Aug. 1646.
The Record of the 4th of August.
WHereas by Ordinance of Parliament, of the 13th of November, there was a
Committee appointed to enter the names of all such persons as should come out
of the Enemies Quarters, and to take an account of their condition, and abode,
and by the same Ordinance all such persons were required to make their
appearance before the said Committee accordingly. Now forasmuch as you have
neglected to make your appearance to the said Committee, or to any other
Committee of Parliament, notwithstanding the time allowed by the Articles of
Exon. (upon which you pretend to come in) expired. These are to require you to
attend, this Committee on Thursday next, at four of the clock, there to answer
your contempt, and give an account of what you have done in obedience to the
said Ordinance, or in pursuance of those Articles, and hereof you are not to
fail at your peril.

To Sir John Stawell Knight.
A true Copy, Sept. 6. 1654. T. Bailey.

THis Record being entered (Mr. Ash before whom, as he very well knows I had
formerly appeared, and to whom I had delivered my Petition to compound as
aforesaid, and who was besides informed, that I had made my Subscription as
appears by the Examination of Sir David Watkins) was never served upon me, but
kept to lie as a convincing proof against me, when I should be after called to
question, either for my life, as a spy, or otherwise that I had never tendered
my Petition to be admitted unto Composition before the Committee at Goldsmiths
Hall, nor performed any thing required of me in pursuance of my Articles, and
accordingly this use was made of it upon my Trial at the High Court of
Justice, where I had been Infallibly condemned upon it, had not God blessed me
with the presence and Testimony of Sir Henry Berkley, whose business was the
next before mine, and who (contrary to the usual course) was by accident
permitted (whilst his Mittimus was making) to remain in the room where the
Committee sat when I presented my Petition, to prove the falsehood of that
Record, whereof I shall hereafter take occasion to write more largely.

I was not then acquainted with the entering of that Record, but on the twelfth
of Aug. following, I received a Ticket sent unto me by a Messenger, whereby I
was required to appear at Goldsmiths Hal the next day, being the thirteenth, at
two of the Clock in the afternoon, at which time I appeared accordingly: My
second appearance upon Summons.
And well remember, that when I came into the Room where the Committee sat,
Mr. Ash had left the Chair to Mr. John Stephens, and then told Mr. Stephens
that I had been formerly before them, and preferred a Petition, desiring to be
admitted unto my Composition, but that I refused both to confess my Delinquency
by my Petition, and to take the Negative Oath and Covenant; And that the
Committee had given me time till then to consider of it: Whereupon Mr. Stephens
asked me what I did say to it; I made him this answer, That there was nothing
in what Mr. Ash had deliverd, which had the nature of a Question to me, but was
spoken to inform him who was not there the day before: Whereunto Mr. Stephens
replied, Say you so, then, Sir, by your leave I will put you a short Question;
Will you take the Negative Oath and Covenant, or no? To which I answered, That
usually, Sir, to a short Question I do return a short Answer, but, Sir, I shall
not do so unto you, but make you the same answer which I made unto the
Committee the last time I was here: That I have the benefit of the Articles of
Exeter, which do exempt me from taking of Oaths, and in regard they are not
agreeable to such Oaths as I have formerly taken, I desire to be excused. And
this was all that did at that time pass betwixt us: And hereupon they willed me
to withdraw; and about half an hour after, two of their Messengers came to me,
as I was sitting without the door, and showed me a Mittimus directed to the
Sergeant at Arms, which follows in these words.

By the Committee for compounding with Delinquents, etc. 13. Aug. 1646.
Whereas Sir John Stawell, Knight of the Bath, The Mittimus to Ely house.
was summoned to appear before this Committee, and there demanded whether he
would take the Covenant and Negative Oath, and he absolutely refused to take
either of them. These are therefore by virtue of the Ordinances of Parliament of
the fifth of April, 1645. and of the first of November, 1645. to require you to
take into your Custody the person of the said Sir John Stawell for his said
refusal, and him safely to keep, till he conform himself thereunto, and for so
doing this shall be your Warrant.

To the Sergeant of the House of Commons, or his Deputy.

After I had seen and read the Mittimus and found my self a Prisoner, I desired
to speak again with the Committee, and one of the Messengers signifying so much
unto them, I was admitted, and spoke unto them to this effect.

Gentlemen, I find by your Mittimus that you have made me a Prisoner, I had
very little before left me but my liberty, my real Estate having been under
Sequestration for a long time, and my personal, little more then what you see:
As long as I had my liberty, I did communicate my wants unto my Friends, and I
have been helped and releived by them. But now that yon have taken my liberty
from me, I desire you to consider of some maintenance that may be necessary for
me. Unto which Mr. Stephens made answer, that my request was very just and
reasonable, and that there should be consideration had of it: And Mr. Ash told
me, that though Mr. Stephens should forget it, he would not; and so with my
thanks unto them for that promise I left them: At which several times both of
my first and second coming before them, my behavior was no otherwise then
might beeome a modest man, and persons of their place and quality, as is before
testified by Sir Anthony Irby and Sir David Watkins, Gentlemen of honor and
worth of the same Committee: Notwithstanding the Committee made this Order.

At the Committee for compounding, etc. 13. of Aug. 1646.

Goldsmiths Hall.
The Order for the report:
SIR John Stawell appeared and refused to take the Negative Oath and Covenant:

Ordered, that Mr. Stephens report his carriage to the House, and that he be
committed to the Sergeant at Arms, and Mr. Stephens to report his desire for
an allowance of maintenance.

John Leech.

So certified by Mr. Bayley.
This being the truth of all that passed in Fact, or that is entered upon Record
with the Committee touching my Cause: Yet Mr. Stephens, who (as himself
confesses) was not present when I first appeared before the Committee at
Goldsmiths Hall, in short time after makes his report, and therein (without
ground of truth or Warrant from the Committee) informs the House that I had
slighted and contemned the Authority of the Parliament, and forfeited their
mercy contained in the Articles of Exeter: And this it is most probable he did
according to the Instructions of Mr. Ash, as may be easily inferred by Mr.
Ashes words to me, when I first tendered my Petition in Mr. Stephens his
absence; And the words of his report as they are expressed in Mr. Ashes
testimony given to the High Court of Justice under his hand, and is, for so
much as concerns this point, as follows.

Mr Ashes testimony.
That I do not remember the precise words contained in that Paper, which Sir
John Stawell then presented to the Committee for his Petition: but I do
remember that the Committee did reject the said Paper, telling Sir John Stawell
that it was a Remonstrance, not a Petition, wherein he rejected the Parliaments
mercy offered him in the Articles, and did put a contempt upon the Authority of
the Parliament.

That in short time after Mr. Stephens a Member of that Committee, did report
the same unto the House of Commons, and in that Report informed the House that
the opinion of that Committee was, that Sir John Stawell had slighted and
contemned the Authority of the present Parliament, and forfeited their mercy
contained in the Articles of Exeter.

John Ash:

This is a true Copy Tracy Pauncefote Regist.

So as it is most clear, that all my wrongs have had their rise from hence:
That Mr. Ash by a wilful mistake interpreted my Petition to be admitted unto a
Composition, to be a Remonstrance, contrary uuto the sense and title of it. And
Mr. Stephens (by his Instructions) re-ported to the House, that my desiring to
be excused from the Negative Oath and Covenant, according to my Articles (which
at that very time were approved by the House of Commons) was a refusing of the
Parliaments Mercy contained in those Articles, a contempt of their Authority,
and a forfeiture of the benefit of the said Articles.

I have here given a true relation of what was acted in my Business until my
first Commitment to Ely House by that Committee; And therefore shall desire the
Reader to observe how far from truth or probability those particulars are,
which Mr. Ash alleges to the contrary, and does premise as fully cleared in a
large discourse, which he pretends was written by him, Videlicet,

That although I appeared at Goldsmiths Hall, The things premised by Mr. Ash
yet I never intended to compound, and did often declare my resolution to the
contrary.

That I did wholly depend upon the late Kings being restored to his power, and
upon this confidence neglected my Composition, and refused the benefit of
Exeter Articles.

That himself did never hinder my Composition, but did with all reality and
faithfulness endeavor to persuade me unto it; yet I refused to follow his
advice.

And that all those things I have mentioned in my Remonstrance, touching him,
are mere fictions and never heard of, till the Parliament had ordered I should
be tried at the High Court of Justice, and that he should attend there as a
witness against me.

For can it fall into the heart of any reasonable man to think, The answer
thereunto.
that I who (notwithstanding all his uncivil censures) had (by his own
confession) studiously endeavored to gain the reputation of a stout and
prudent man, after a resolution taken not to compound, but to depend upon the
late Kings being restored unto his power, for the re-gaining of my Estate, and
after the avowing of this Resolution to Mr. Ash, would on the next day after
(not being forced unto it by any necessity, because my tendering of a
Composition was not limited (as I have showed before) to four months time, and
without any ground or motive which might induce me unto the alteration of that
design) qnit the party for whom I professed so highly, and engage my self by a
Subscription not to act any thing which might be prejudicial to the
Parliament, and within seven days after would tender my Petition at Goldsmiths
Hall, to be admitted to a Composition for my Estate, according to the Articles
in a voluntary way? Must not the levity and inconstancy of these Actions have
made me necessarily forfeit that Reputation, which Mr. Ash acknowledges I had
with so much study labored to acquire in all my Actions? And what opinion
soever was had of me, can it be thought that Mr. Ash, who conceives himself
much injured, if we imagine he should do any thing but what befits a wise
judicious man, would on the very next day after his conference with me, have
become a Suitor unto the Parliament, to grant him my Composition toward the
satisfaction of the Debts wherein he stood engaged, and reparation of his losses
by the War; if I had then assured him that I intended not at all to make it,
whereby those Debts, Disbursements and Engagements, must rest unsatisfied, and
he for his particular should loose 5000 l. as he affirms he has done by my
not compounding?

Is it not certain that he would by making such a suit, have justly merited the
censure of a wilful madness, wherewith he does endeavor to asperse me by his
Pamphlet, which is an Error, whereof he does desire the Reader to esteem he
is no way capable? And therefore since I have demonstrated that all those
things were really performed by both of us in pursuance of the discourse he had
with me at that first visit he was pleased to make me, the Reader must
conclude, if he conceive us to be reasonable men, that all the goodly things
which he pretends to be fully proved, are mere Fables contrived by Mr. Ash
himself, who has employed the Height of Malice to invent them, and an Excess
of Impudence to publish them. Whereas it is in Truth most evident, that Mr. Ash
having understood from me the resolution I had to compound for my Estate, and
finding that I conceived the price of Lands were like to fall, by reason of the
sale of Dean and Chapters Lands, which I had in the Country heard, were to be
sold at ten years purchase; Did thereupon put my name into his Petition, and
desired the Grant of my Composition, together with that of those other
Gentlemen whom I have formerly named for satisfaction of his Engagements and
Losses. And this being granted unto him by the Parliament, he took a Resolution
to put me off from the right of Composition for his greater benefit, as I have
formerly related, and by wicked and foul practices, expose me unto the eminent
danger of loosing both my life and my Estate together; For can it be imagined,
that Mr. Ash who had made me a visit, and received one from me, and had at both
those times engaged himself to befreind me what he could in making my
Composition, who had acquainted me when the Committee sat, and promised me his
presence to that purpose, would (notwithstanding his Professions of freindship
to me, if he had intended to assist me in it, as he pretends he did with all
reality) before I had appeared or presented my Petition to the Committee, have
spoken to my Disadvantage, and given such a Character of me, that the Committee
were all of them inflamed against me before they saw me? and after when I had
admittance, could any man have taken the Petition which I delivered into his
hands, the Copy whereof you have already read, to be a Remonstrance, and not a
Petition, when there was nothing in it but a Request that I might be admitted
to compound according to my Articles which is the only Formal and Essential
thing of a Petition, unless he had resolved to obstruct my Composition upon the
Articles? And is it not most evident that he was much in liking with this
design, when, for the carrying on of it, he took the boldness to cause the
Order, or Warrant of the 4. of August to be entered upon Record as an Act of the
Committee, without the knowledge or privity of all, or the most part of those
of the Committee who were then present, as will be testified by Sir Anthony
Irby, and Sir David Watkins, persons of honor and quality, who were both of
them Members of the Committee, and are suggested to have been present at the
granting of that Order? Especially since the matter of it was, to the knowledge
of the Committee, an apparent falsehood: And howsoever, could not by possibility
have judicially appeared before them, because the Committee appointed to take
Subscriptions, was a distinct Committee from them particularly appointed for
that purpose, as appears by the examination of Sir Anthony Irby. And since in
making of it, they took upon themselves, and did exercise a Jurisdiction no way
belonging unto them, they being entrusted by the Parliament to compound with
all Delinquents, and were not to enquire who did neglect to make their
appearance before them, or any other Committee of Parliament, with whose
actions they had no power to intermeddle. And lastly, Since there was no
present use made of it, the same not being then, nor at any time after served
upon me, but only entered to remain there upon Record, that it might serve as
evidence against me, if I were questioned upon the Ordinance of the 13. of
Novem: (which that relates to) as a Spy by Martial Law, or else in any other
manner, and thereby either fright me out of part of my Estate for preservation
of my life, or deprive me of the whole, whenever he should please to question
me; And if he had (as he pretends) given me time to consider whether I would
take the Negative Oath and Covenant; in favor of me, would he have signed the
Warrant for my Commitment the 12 of August (as Mr. Leech in his examination
before the High Court of Justice has sworn) when my appearance before the
Committee at Goldsmiths Hall upon their Summons, Mr. Leeches testimony taken in
short hand by order of the High Court of Justice.
was not to be until the next day after: And when at last I was committed only
for refusing to take the Negative Oath and Covenant, which the Committee would
have enforced upon me, and I desired to be excused from taking, as a benefit
allowed unto me by my Articles: Is it not some thing more then probable, that a
desire of compliance with Mr. Ash his private Interest, caused Mr. Stephens in
his report unto the House to represent, that my insisting to have the benefit
of my Articles allowed unto me (which at that very time the House of Commons
had by Vote approved) was a forfeiture of those very Articles whereof I craved
the benefit, and a contempt of that Authority which gave a confirmation to
them? And to conclude, is it not plain, that Mr. Ash declared sufficiently what
his drift was, in these his covert practices against me; When being brought to
the Lobby about nine of the Clock in the morning, I was put into a dark corner
by the outermost door, where my two Keepers attending, permitted none to come
unto me, but Mr. Ash, who during my stay there, which was betwixt nine, and
three in the afternoon, was with me four or five several times, expecting that
the apprehension I should have of my approaching danger, would have made me
propose the parting with my Land unto him, to free my self from further
trouble. And at his last coming, perceiving that I did not mention it to him,
he did himself propose it, and offered to help me to a Chapman who should give
4000 l. for Aubury, being not half the money it had cost me, as I have formerly
related in my Remonstrance: To which if I would then have condescended, it is
most probable, according to the manner of my close keeping: that I had not been
brought unto the Bar, as may be necessarily inferred by what he spoke unto Sir
Anthony Irby, to whom he came several times after his coming from me, and told
him, that he could not bring me to conformity, and therefore must be brought
unto the Bar, which notwithstanding Mr. Ashes confident avowing of the contrary
in his Pamphlet, will be testified by Sir Anthony against him.

Who sees not, that all this machination against me is a Chain of Actions,
wherein Self-interest, Malice, and breach of Trust are by their complication
raised to so high a pitch of wickedness, that they can scarce be matched by any
thing; But the dissimulation and craft he used to cheat me out of my Petition
at Newgate, when I had nothing else remaining to save either my life, or my
Estate from utter ruin and destruction.

But in regard this discourse which passed in private between our selves, being
one of those two things which Mr. Ash has undertaken to answer in his
Pamphlet, is denied by him, and therefore only rests for proof upon our single
disagreeing testimonies, I shall desire the Reader to suspend his Judgment
touching the truth of our two several Allegations, until he has read my
answer unto the other, and then I doubt not but he will perceive how little
credit is to be given to Mr. Ashes affirmations, upon which terms I quit the
further discussion of this point, observing only these three things to the
judicious Reader.

Observations in answer to Mr. Ashes particuars mentioned in his Pamphlet, page
4. and 5.
First, That the general answer he pretends to give in this particular, for
proof whereof he does affirm so boldly, that he has more then one hundred
witnesses, is altogether false. As I shall evidence, when I have given you the
substance of that Romance which he so formally delivers, being this.

That when I was brought to the High Court of Justice, Mr. Ash being then
present as a Witness, Mr. Attorney General was pleased to acquaint the Court,
that at my first appearance there, I had cast out some words reflecting upon
Mr. Ash, and I had filled the Town with talk of the great matters I would
charge him withal, if he appeared in the Court, and therefore Mr. Attorney
prayed, that since he was there present, I might openly declare what it was
wherewith I meaned to charge him; That the Court liked the motion, and willed me
to speak that which I had to say against him; That I condescended thereunto, and
then related some headless Stories, and that when I had done, Mr. Attorney told
the Court that I had sure much more to say, in regard that which I had now
spoken did not reflect at all on Mr. Ash, nor answer the reports about the
Town, and therefore pressed me again and again to speak all that I had to say;
and when J replied that J had spoken all, the Lord President spoke, letting me
know, the Court had with much patience heard me tell a long story, though no
way pertinent to the matter before them; the substance being that Mr. Ash
advised me to sell my Farm at Aubury, and with that money to pay my Composition.
But the Lord President demanded whether he, or any for him, treated with me for
buying of it, or whether he discovered a desire to buy the Farm at Aubury: That
J answered his Lordship he did not, and thereupon the Lord President demanding
how the Story could then reflect upon Mr. Ash? J answered, that J believed Mr.
Ash intended to buy the Farm, because he had advised me to sell it.

This is in short the substance of his relation, if at least that may be said
to have a substance, which is nothing, only an invention of his own: But Mr.
Ash is very just in this particular, and has not only performed, but is
according to the Proverb, better then his word. For having assured me (when I
reproached him with his covetousness in the da^k corner) that he would deny all
that discourse, if I should charge him with it. He has not only made this
good, but has invented also this formal Story to give a countenance to his
denial; And this J shall most clearly prove, not by the boldness of an
affirmation (as he has done) but by the undeniable Evidence of the Proceedings
in the High Court, where, whatsoever was read or spoken, was taken at first in
shorthand by Mr. Pococke, a person authorized thereunto, and afterward written
at large for information of that Court; And is by Authority of the Court of
Articles, and by consent of Mr. Attorney General and my Counsel, admitted as
indifferent Evidence.

By this it does appear, that Mr. Attorney General upon the first sitting of
the Court, acquainted them that Mr. Ash and Mr. Stephens did both of them
appear that day, being the first time that they came to be examined as
witnesses in my Cause, and without mentioning any thing in the least kind of
what is here affirmed by Mr Ash, desired they might be sworn to give their
Evidence, and they were sworn accordingly, and did deliver what they had to say
before J spoke at all concerning Mr. Ash his carriage: But when upon my answer
to their Evidence, J had in part laid open these his practices against me; Mr.
Attorney General was then so far from taking notice to the Court that what J
spoke did not at all answer to the reports about the Town, as that he appealed
unto the Court, whether that so much as a word concerning Mr. Ash was spoken
before, that he was then present in the Court and gave his Evidence. For proof
whereof J shall insert here what was spoken by Mr. Attorney at the first entering
into the business of the day, and what he after urged when they had given their
Evidence, and I had made an answer to them, which follows as it is in the
aforesaid Record Verbatim thus expressed. The Record in the shorthand Book.


Wednesday 22. of January 1650.
THe Cause of meeting this day, my Lord, was, the Parliament on the trial of
Sir John Stawell had especially appointed that Mr. John Ash should be examined
in this Cause, Mr. Attor: Genesis
he was sent to, but it pleased the Lord to lay his hand upon him that he could
not appear; Mr. Stephens likewise, that was a member of the House was then out
of Town you were pleased to appoint this day upon this occasion, and Sir John
Stawell had timely notice of it, it is upon the special Plea, we have done with
that of not guilty.

I desire if you please that Mr. Ash and Mr. Stephens may have their Oaths
given to them, that they may give in their Evidence what they know of this
business of Sir John Stawell.

Mr. John Ash and Mr. John Stephens are sworn.

Mr. Attor. Genesis
My Lord if you please J will begin with Mr. Ash.

If you please Mr. Attorney, Let his Plea be read.

Lord President.
The Clark reads Sir John Stawells Plea.

1. That he is not liable to the charge now read against him by the Act
appointing his Trial, being a person admitted to Composition.

2. That by the Articles of Exeter confirmed by Parliament, he ought not to be
Questioned for the offenses laid to his charge.

Mr. Ash and Mr. Stephens did after this, give in their Evidence against me, to
which J answered, and having touched upon this passage together with some other
things concerning Mr. Ash his practices against me, Mr. Attorney General did
then apply himself to the Court and spoke as follows.

Mr. Attor. Genesis
My Lord, I thought that Sir John Stawells own Judgment would have made use of
the liberty given him in a fair way, I appeal to your memories whether any one
word of this of Mr. Ash was said before: Now Mr. Ash is here and speaks, that
Sir John Stawell thinks goes to the quick, now it is time to revile and
scandalize. And therefore having fully cleared by this Record, how grossly he
has erred in his relation, I leave it to the Readers judgment, what credit is
to be given unto him touching discourses passed in private betwixt us, who has
the Impudence to forge and publish this as a thing that passed in public in
the Court; And that he had for proof thereof a hundred Witnesses, when as unto a
thing that is so evident, there is no doubt but every one of all those
Witnesses will upon the reading hereof assent unto the truth of it.

Secondly, That Mr. Ash notwithstanding his impudence to deny the truth, does
yet confess that he did move me to sell Aubury for payment of my Fine, and
though he does deny that he had an intention to buy it, yet it appears by Sir
Edward Bayntons discourse unto Sir Anthony Irby mentioned in his Examination
aforesaid, that Mr. Ash himself was the person who was to be the Purchaser of
that Manor, which is the substance of that wherewith J charge him.

And thirdly, That he does not so much as once allege among his good advises
to me, that he persuaded me unto a Composition according to the Articles of
Exeter (that being the thing whereof I was desirous) but to acknowledge my
miscarriage at Goldsmiths Hall, where I have showed already, that I had not at
all offended, and therefore could not acknowledge this, or crave the pardon of
the House (as Mr. Ash advised me) without confessing of a Crime, whereof I was
not guilty, and subjecting my self unto the censure of the House, as a person
who had affronted the Committee employed under them. So as if I had been
remitted to Goldsmiths Hall to make a Composition; they must have needs
according unto Justice ordered the Committee to have received a Fine from me,
not only in relation to my Articles, but also for that pretended contempt of
their Authority, which Mr. Ash had a desire I should confess for his own
private benefit, for having formerly begged my Composition, he was in hope that
this might have been super-added unto it, so as this being one of the main
things wherewith I charge Mr. Ash, is here acknowledged by him.

But two continue the Naration which I have upon this occasion interrupted: Mr.
Ash, after the proposition which he made for purchase of my Land at Aubury, was
not above a quarter of an hour gone from me, but I was brought to the Bar where
being commanded to kneel, I desired, that before I received any mark of their
displeasure, I might know my Offense, whereupon I was committed to Newgate, and
these following Resolves, and Orders passed against me.

Die Martis 18. Augusti 1646.
Sir John Stawell being brought by the Sergeant to the Bar, Resolves, and
votes of the House.
and by Mr. Speaker Commanded to kneel, refused, desiring first to be informed
what was his Offense, he was thereupon Commanded presently to withdraw.

Resolved, That Sir John Stawell be forthwith committed Prisoner to Newgate for
high Treason, for levying War against the Parliament: Ordered that the Sheriffs
of London and Middlesex be required to take special care, that Sir John
Stawell committed by warrant of this House, Prisoner to Newgate for high
Treason, for levying War against the Parliament, be kept in sure and safe
custody.

Upon which Order a Mittimus was drawn up under the Speakers hand, which
follows in these words.

BY virtue of an Order of the House of Commons, These are to require you to
receive from the Sergeant at Arms, or his Deputy, the body of Sir John
Stawell, Knight of the Bath, into the Prison of Newgate in London, and him
there to detain in safe custody as your Prisoner, until the pleasure of the
House be signified to you to the contrary; He being committed for High Treason,
for levying War against the Parliament: And for so doing this shall be your
Warrant, dated 18. Augusti 1646. William Lenthall Speaker.

To the Keeper of the Prison of Newgate in London.
ORdered, That Mr. Palmer. Mr. Walker, Mr. Harrington, Mr. Searl, Sir Thomas
Wroth, Mr. Blague, and Colonel Popham, or any two of them do take care that
there be a prosecution, and an Indictment prepared against Sir John Stawell at
the next Assizes to be holden for the County of Somerset for high Treason, for
his levying War against the King, Parliament, and Kingdom of England.


Die Lune 28. Feb. 1647.
ORdered, That Mr. Maynard and Mr. Hill do take care of the Indictment against
Sir John Stawell at the next Assizes for Somerset:


Die Mercurij 14. Martij 1648.
REsolved by the Parliament, that Sir John Stawell Knight be proceeded against
for life in the Vpper-Bench.

Hen. Scobell Cler. Parliamenti.

The manner how he cheated me out of my Petition.
And now having nothing left me to save either Life or Estate, but by way of
Petition to make my case known unto the Parliament: And having told Mr. Ash
when I came out from the Bar, that I hoped, that in regard they did not admit
me to speak, they would not be displeased at my Address by Petition: Upon this
hint of my purpose, Mr. Ash came unto me three or four days (as I remember)
after my Commitment to Newgate: And after that he had expressed, seemingly, a
great deal of sorrow and trouble, that his good Master (for so he called me)
was in so sad a Condition, he offered me his service to do what possibly lay in
his power; and sithence there was nothing more seasonable for me then good
advice, he did earnestly desire me to apply my self very humbly to the
Parliament by Petition, I told him that his Advice and my own Resolutions, did
very well agree, and that I did intend to do so. Whereupon he told me that he
had a very earnest request unto me, and prayed me that I would not deny it,
which was, that he might have the honor to prefer my Petition for me; and if
it were so that I would trust him with it, if he did not give me a very speedy
account thereof, and that if he did not use his utmost endeavors to accomplish
so much as I should therein desire, he would give me leave wheresoevr I saw him,
or spoke of him, to say, My servant Ash was an arrant Knave, I told him; that
although I did intend to deliver a Petition, yet it was not my purpose to have
troubled him with it; but since he had so freindly invited me thereunto, he
should have it, he prayed me speedily to draw it, I told him that I would, he
told me then he would come the next morning to me for it, and accordingly he
did so; but not liking the Petition, for that I had expressed therein, that I
had the benefit of the Articles of Exeter, and that I had accordingly submitted
unto my Composition, and that I was refused only for denying to take the
Negative Oath and Covenant, and therefore did pray that I might be referred unto
my Composition, and restored to my Liberty, he told me that this Petition did
too much expostulate with the Parliament (for so he termed it) that was highly
displeased with me; and that I should not Petition in that way but draw up an
humble Petition, that should show that I was very sorry that I had incurred
their displeasures in refusing to kneel when they Commanded me, and to excuse
that offense in the best manner that I could, and to beg their pardon for the
same, and this he told me would be sufficient to take off the prosecution of my
Indictments which was the first thing in order to be done, the Assizes being so
near at hand in the Country. Whereupon I sent another Petition to him; which by
his Letter written to me he seemed very well to approve of; but yet though I
did very often solicit him by my Wife and Friends, to put him in mind to
prefer the same, he never delivered it to this day, nor did ever come near me
after that time, which Petition follows in these words.

To the Right Honorable, the Commons assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petititon of Sir John Stawell, Prisoner in Newgate.
WHereas your Petitioner by Command lately attended this Honorable House, and
being brought to the Bar, was enjoined to kneel, which your Petitioner forbore
to do, not out of any will to lessen the great respect and Reverence due to
that Honorable Assembly, but conceiving he might first have spoken.

But now finding that he has committed an Error, for which he holds himself
obliged to make an humble acknowledgment, and by this Petition to crave a
favorable interpretation of his offense.

Your Petitioner humbly begs your pardon, being very sorry he has given you
so just cause of displeasure, and shall account it (in these his sad
misfortunes) a very great happiness to be restored to a capacity of your
favors, and that you would not look back upon what he prays may be
forgotten, but be pleased in the midst of Judgment to remember mercy.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc. John Stawell.

This is verbatim what I have published in my Remonstrance, touching Mr. Ash
his receipt, and keeping back of my Petition, and this is the main thing at
which he takes exceptions in his Pamphlet, where with a more than ordinary
confidence, he does affirm, that there is not one line of truth in my relation,
and that he has himself several Witnesses to prove the falsehood of it; and
therefore I shall here set down the story he has framed in answer unto this
particular, and shall by undeniable proofs and arguments show it to be a mere
falsehood of his own contrivance and invention, the same being in effect thus.

Mr. Ash his relation touching the Petition.
That about three or four days after my Committall to Newgate, my wife came to
the house of Mr: Edward Ash about nine or ten of the clock at night, and
desired to speak with him from me, entreating him to come unto me, and that at
length not without great importunity and solicitation on her part, she did
prevail with him to go thither.

That when he came, I desired of him to deliver a Petition or make a motion
unto the Parliament in my behalf, that I might be removed to another Prison,
and that he would nominate the Tower for that purpose, that he desired to be
excused in that; but councelled me to prefer a petition to the Parliament
wherein I should acknowledge my That my Fine which he begged, might be
increased above what my Articles required upon my remittall to Goldsmiths Hall.
miscarryages (as he is pleased to term them) at Goldsmiths-Hall, and at the
Parliament, and crave pardon for the same, and that the prayer of my Peon
should be, to be remitted to Goldsmiths-Hall, and receive the benefit of Exeter
Articles.

That I refused this advice, and only prayed him to present a short Petition to
the Parliament for my removal out of Newgate, and that I undertook the danger
of this Petition my self, since it would be my fault, not his.

That he at ast undertook the delivery of this short Petition, so as he might
have a sight of the foul Copy to correct, which J sent him the next day; but
he disliked it, and was enforced with his own pen to correct the greatest part
of it, but J not liking that, sent him another Petition of my own drawing,
which he likewise disliked, but after several amendments took, and attended
several days to deliver, but being forced to go into the Country about his
occasions, some sixteen days after he had received my Petition, He got his own
Petition answered the first day it was offered.
for so long, and no longer, he says, he had my Petition in his Custody, sent
his Letter to me to give me notice of it, and desiring my directions into whose
hands he should put it, whilst he was absent,

That having sent this Letter to me in Newgate, I returned my thanks for his
care, wishing him a good journey into the Country, and directed him to leave
it in the hands of Mr. Denzell Hollis, or Sir Phillp Stapleton.

That the next morning he went something early to the House, where he met
happily with Mr. Hollis, who was in private discourse with another Gentleman,
but Mr. Ash something uncivilly interrupted him, told him that I presented my
respects to him, and had sent him a Petition, which I desired might by his hand
be presented unto the House, which Mr. Hollis took, and put into his pocket,
and promised to take care of it; and Mr. Ash says, That at his coming home, he
wrote unto me to inform me of this, and advised me to employ some friend to
Mr. Hollis to mind him of it, unto which Letter I returned him an answer by one
of mine, Pray let this be compared with his Letter that follows.
thanking him for having lodged my Petition in so worthy a hand, promising to
observe his advice, and wishing him a happy journey into the Country, and a
safe Return.

That he went into the Country, and returned again about three weeks after,
and when he met with Mr. Hollis, asked him what he had done with my Petition,
Pray compare this with Mr. Hollis his Letter, and my Petition proved by Mr.
Basset hereafter mentioned.
That Mr. Hollis told him it was such a one, as would, if it had been
delivered, have more incensed the House against me, in regard I desired nothing
by it, but my removal to a better prison, and Mr. Ash asking where the
Petition was, Mr. Hollis told him, he had sent it back to me with this
direction, that I should draw another, humbly acknowledging my miscarriages,
craving pardon for them, and desiring to be remitted unto Goldsmiths Hall to
make my Composition, and to receive the benefit of Exeter Articles, and further
letting me know, that if I would send him such a Petition, he would not only
deliver it himself, but engage all his friends, that my desires should be
granted: That Mr. Ash demanding of him whether I had taken his advice, He
replied no, adding withal, that I was certainly either mad, or had lost my
wits, I was so obstinate; upon which Mr. Ash said, that had been also his
advice, and of some others of his friends, but I rejected their Councills, and
he concludes with an affirmation that he never received other Petition from
me, then that which he has mentioned.

This is the substance of the Narrative, which Mr. Ash has in his Pamphlet
published, as an answer to this passage in my Remonstrance and this he does
affirm, The answer to Mr. Ashes Relation touching the Petition.
the Witnesses (if called) will make good; so as upon the Truth hereof, he
builds the Credit he would have the Reader give unto those other things which
passed in private discourse between my self, and Mr. Ash. I shall therefore
examine the Truth of all these Allegations, and having showed the Manifest
Untruth and Falsehood of them, I doubt not but the Reader will find great cause
to wonder at his confidence, in publishing this story of his own invention, the
falsehood whereof is not only notoriously known to himself, but will be also
clearly evidenced unto the Reader by that, which follows.

And first, whereas he does allege that he came to me upon the earnest desire,
and solicitation of my wife at nine or ten a Clock at night; I shall desire the
Reader to observe the want of Ingenuity there is in Mr. Ashes relation,
notwithstanding his profession of an exact truth and plainess; For I affirm
with confidence, that Mr. Ash did, as I have before alleged, come of himself
unsent for by me, about three a Clock in the afternoon, within three or four
days after I was committed to Newgate, and did Officiously, ( or debasedly as
he would have it by his Pamphlet) Court me to have the honor (as I have said
in my Remonstrance) to prefer my Petition for me: And this passage which he
relates with so much Circumstance, as the first time when he came to me, was
not till some time after he had been with me, received my Petition, and
pretended to wait an opportunity for the presenting of it; Now the occasion
upon which Mr. Ash was by my wife desired, to come into the Prison to me at
that late hour, was only this; My eldest Son John Stawell, lay then sick in
Bathe, and being in Arrear for his expenses in Diet and Physic, she had
received a Letter from Mr Boyse at whose house he lay, whereby he let her know,
that unless 50. or 60 l. (as I remember) were speedily sent unto him for
discharge of those scores, he would not entertain him longer, but would remove
him thence into the Country, where he could not have that convenience for such
remedies to recover him as were then used about him: Now my Wife having
received this Letter, unwilling to loose time, did with the tender care of a
Mother on behalf of her Son, importune Mr. Ash to come unto me, without
acquainting either me, or Mr. Ash with the occasion, for which she desired his
coming to confer with me, until she brought us both together, and then she did
acquaint us with the Letter which Mr. Ash did read as well as my self, and
earnestly desired the furtherance and assistance of Mr. Ash for the procuring
of that Sum from the Parliament by his means, upon this urgent and extreme
necessity: My Estate being then, and long before totally sequestered, nothing
let us, and no allowance at that time set forth either to wife or Children: I
joined with her in this request, and Mr. Ash did promise us to use his best
endeavor in it: But whether it were that he did move in it and could not
prevail, or that he never stirred in it according to his promise; The success
was, that the money being not procured in time, he was removed thence into the
Country, to the great prejudice of his health, considering his weak and
languishing condition; And this was the only business, which at that time was
treated of between us: So as I cannot but admire his boldness in framing and
divulging of this Story to mislead the Reader, by making him believe it was
then, that J engaged him to undertake the presenting of my Petition, which,
before that time he had received from me, contrary to truth and his own
knowledge.

Now, whereas he pretends that the Petition which I sent him, was only for my
removal unto a better Prison, and that he did himself amend the first I drew
in many places with his Pen, this is so impudent a falsehood, that it is
wonderful with what face he can allege it. I have the individual paper in my
custody, not corrected or interlined at all by him, or any other, and that was
drawn according to my own sense, it being to inform the House, that I was
comprised within the Articles of Exeter, and to desire my enlargement, and to
be remitted to Goldsmiths Hall to make my Composition there, according to my
Articles: The Copy whereof follows in these words.

To the Honorable the Commons Assembled in Parliament, The Humble Petition of
Sir John Stawel,
Shows,
THat your Petitioner being comprised within the Articles of Exeter, The copy
of my Petition that Mr. Ash disliked.
has, according to your Order of the second of July last, subscribed before
the Committee of the Militia of London, not to bear Arms, or act against you,
remaining in your Quarters, and as by the said Articles is required.

That he has preferred his Petition to the Committee of Goldsmiths-hall to be
admitted to his Composition, but was rejected, for that he refused to take the
negative Oath and Covenant, from both which by his said Articles he is expressly
exempted.

It is his humble suit, That you will be pleased to grant him his Liberty,
having some time patiently undergone the sense of your displeasures in Newgate;
And that he may be remitted to prosecute his Composition, to which he has
formerly submitted, without taking of Oaths, or other Impositions not agreeable
to his Articles.

And your Petitioner shall ever pray, etc.
But Mr. Ash coming unto me when I had drawn it (as I have said before)
disliked with this Petition, and would have had me make one to acknowledge my
miscarriages at Goldsmiths-Hall, indeed, because he would by my confession,
have justified his own Miscarriage there, in denying me the benefit of my
Articles; And unto this I could not condescend, without incurring the just
displeasure of the House, in acknowledging a Crime, whereof I was not guilty,
contrary to truth, and the benefit allowed unto me by my Articles. His next
advice was, as I have set down before, to desire their excuse for my not
kneeling, which I did by the Petition, whereof I have before set down the copy,
and that was well approved by Mr. Ash, as appears by his Letter sent unto me
upon the receipt thereof, which Letter follows in these words,

Worthy Sir,
I Have now received yours, Mr. Ashes first Letter.
and the enclosed, which I cannot dislike, as to the matter for which it is
intended; my endeavors shall not be wanting to do you service; and the House
shall check the greatest impudency that ever possessed me, if it be not to
morrow presented to their view; If I fail in my intentions, and frustrate both
your and my expectations, do not blame me but my fate; for I shall struggle
hard before I receive a denial. I shall meet Sir John Bamfield this evening, at
Supper in the Temple, with Mr. Prideux, to whom I shall communicate your
commands. I expect a fair draught of this at my Lodging this evening, or at the
House to morrow by eight of the clock in the morning, signed with your name,
that so I may avow it to be yours. You may impart the business to all your
friends, that so they may be ready to welcome your Petition when it shall be to
morrow presented by

Your loving Servant, John Ash.


Fanchurch-street Monday 12 at noon. To the honored, my noble Friend, Sir John
Stawel, Knight of the Bath,
these present. Newgate.


And that this is a true copy of that Petition he received to prefent on my
behalf, appears by the Deposition of Mr. Basset, whom I desired, according to
the counsel given me in Mr. Ashes Letter, to show the same unto several
Members of Parliament, praying their favor when it should be presented by him,
which Deposition is as follows,

To the Right Honorable the Commons assembled in Parliament, The humble
Petition of Sir John Stawel, Prisoner in Newgate.
The Petition and Mr. Bassets Affidavit proving the same.
WHereas your Petitioner, by command, lately attended this Honorable House, and
being brought to the Bar, was enjoined to kneel, which your Petitioner forbore
to do, not out of a will to lessen the great respect and reverence due to this
Honorable Assembly, but conceiving he might first have spoken; and now finding
that he has committed an Error, for which he holds himself obliged to make an
humble acknowldgement, and by this Petition to crave a favorable interpretation
of his Offense;

Your Petitioner humbly begs your pardon, being very sorry he has so justly
incurred your displeasure, and shall account it, in these his sad Misfortunes,
a very great happiness to be restored to a capacity of your Favors; And that
you would not look back upon what he prays may be forgotten, but be pleased in
the midst of Judgment to remember Mercy.

And your Petitioner shall pray, etc.
Pray observe how this was done in persuance of Mr. Ashes directions mentioned
in his Letter.
THis is a true copy of the Petition remaining in my hands, which Sir John
Stawel delivered me in Newgate within few days after his Commitment thither,
to show unto several Members of Parliament ( videlicet) Mr. Hollis, Sir Philip
Stapleton, Sir John Holland, and Mr. John Crewes, with Letters unto them
directed from the said Sir John Stawel, praying their favors and assistance in
seconding the original, when it should be presented unto the House.

The 11. of December. 1654. Will Basset. William Basset Esquire sworn December.
15.1654. Tho. Benet.



And now having lodged my Petition in Mr. Ashes hands, which, notwithstanding
his denial of it, appears to be not a Petition for my removal to a better
prison, but such a one as was approved of by Mr. Ash himself, and is the very
same that I have printed formerly in my Remonstrance; I shall desire the Reader
to observe what truth there is in that Account he gives of the disposing of it.
And here he has related so many particulars, that it can hardly be imagined
but some of them will be made good to prove the story which he so formally
delivers; As First, his care in coming early to the House, his earnestness in
the uncivil interrupting of Mr. Hollis to deliver the Petition to him, his
solicitude in the enquiry after it from Mr. Hollis as soon as he returned, and
the affection he expressed in consulting with Mr. Hollis how to do me good, by
whom (it seems) all his advices were approved, and I condemned for madness and
obstinacy; and yet it is most certain, that this Narration, with all its
circumstances, is an invention of his own brain, disavowed by Mr. Hollis, and
contradicted by himself, in a Letter which he sent unto me upon his going out
of Town, to give me an account of the disposal of my Petition, both which
Letters follow in these words.

Worthy Sir,
HAd I time to visit you, I would not have now written, nor have been so long
from you; Mr Ashes second Letter.
I pray excuse me, for I promised your Lady the last night to come this morning
to see you. She taking notice of my going out of Town this morning, came to me
the last night, and Mr. Merefield, and they both were earnest with me to
acquaint them how I had left your business, whilst I should be absent; and
having informed them, they were desirous that I should let you know either as
much by word of mouth (if possible) or by Letter. Sir, As to your business, it
is so, That since I saw you last, I have waited every day with your Petition in
my hand, hoping to meet with an opportunity wherein I might present it for your
advantage; I have now commended the care of it, and you, to my worthy Friends
Mr. Hollis, Sir Philip Stapleton, and Sir William Lewis, to whom I have written
yesterday with all earnestness to do their best for you. I am confident of
their care and faithfulness to attend it in my absence, which will not, I hope,
be long; I am going this morning with Mr. Prideux, and some other good company
into the West, as far as Bristol, I shall hasten my return with all convenient
speed, I hope that in the mean time, my friends will procure a releasement for
you from that Nasty Cabben, which is the earnest desire of

Your humble servant, John Ash


Wednesday morning Septem. 9. 1646. To the Right Worshipful Sir John Stawel,
Knight of the Bath, these deliver, Newgate. SIR,
Mr. Hollis his Letter.
I Cannot call to remembrance that ever I saw any Petition of yours to the
Parliament, less, that it ever was in my hand to present it; if Mr. Ash be
very certain of it, I know not what to say to it, only this I dare affirm, it
must have been for a very short time, and that there was no possibility of
getting it read; for I was too sensible of any Gentleman's sufferings, to omit
any opportunity of serving him: but I rather believe he is mistaken, and that
he gave it to one of the other two Gentlemen, whom he mentions, and who, I am
confident, were as careful to have delivered it, as I should have been; but
what might hinder it, I do not know, so long since may very well be out of
memory. Sir, I am sorry I can do you no service in this particular; in any
thing else, that shall lie in my power, I shall be ready to show my self,

Sir, Your very affectionate and humble servant, Denzel Hollis.


Cerne October. 30. 1654. To my much Honored Friend Sir John Stawel.
By these it does appear, That all the formal story, published with so large a
dress of circumstances by Mr. Ash, is a mere fiction invented by himself; for
he confesses in his letter, That he did not deliver it himself to Mr. Hollis,
Pray observe how different this is from Mr. Ashe's affirmation in his Pamphlet.
but recommended it unto him by a Letter that very day, on which he now
alleges that he had given it into the hands of Mr. Hollis, in the morning
before the sitting of the House.

And if he did at all commend it to him by a Letter, it was committed to the
trust of such a Messenger, as never yet delivered it to Mr. Hollis, who
consequently could not, nor did at all return it to me with his friendly
counsel, nor could there be occasion ministered for the discourse invented by
Mr. Ash, and published him as a thing that passed between them two, wherein he
has suggested, Mr. Hollis did concur with him in censuring of me.

Why should I longer dwell upon this passage, having already proved by
Witnesses, by Arguments, by his own Letters, that notwithstanding the strange
boldness which he has used in publishing this fiction, there is not one true
word throughout the whole contexture of it; so as by grounding the credit which
he would have given to his other allegations, upon the proof he pretends to
make of this particular, he leaves the Reader to admire his confidence in the
avowing of a slander, without the least ground of truth, or probability for the
maintaining of it; and therefore I must needs conclude this point, as I did
formerly at the High Court of Justice, That Mr. Ash, by the professions of
love and kindness which he made to his good Master (for so he called me) got
the possession of my Petition, and did engage himself to deliver the same unto
the Parliament, but did maliciously and wilfully fail in performing his
engagement: By which failer, and breach of Trust, he did (according to Mr.
Ashe's inference) Iudas-like betray his Master.

And certainly, the consequences of this breach of Trust fell heavily upon me;
for I was shortly afterward Indicted, first at Taunton Assizes, where the Bill
of High Treason was found; next at the Sessions at Bridgewater, where there was
an Ignoramus; and last of all at Charde, where three Indictments were found,
one for High Treason, and two for Murder, for killing of Osborn at Marshals
Elm, and for execution of Viccary, when I was Governor of Taunton, many of the
Grand Jury being the Inhabitants of Taunton, and such who had recovered
Judgments for great sums of money against me, and have since purchased a good
part of my estate, which Indictments were afterward removed by Certiorari into
the then Kings Bench, where the 12. and 13. of May, 1649. I was arraigned upon
the Indictment of High Treason, in levying War against the King, upon the
Statute of the 25. of Edward the Third, and upon my moving to plead specially,
the Court ordered accordingly, That I should bring in my special Pleading the
first day of the next Term, and did assign me Counsel for that purpose, but I
was never brought to plead further to that Indictment.

The 18. of June 1649. an Act was printed and published, entitled, An Act for
relief of all such persons, as have been, are, or shall be sued, molested, or
any way damnified, contrary to Articles, or Conditions granted in time of War.
In which Act Commissioners were nominated to hear, and determine Cases
concerning Articles, according to the powers of the said Act.

Whereupon I did address my self by Petition unto that Court to be relieved
upon my Articles, which Petition was read the 10. of July 1649. and is verbatim
printed in my Remonstrance, and therefore I spare here to insert it.

But upon this Petition, no proceedings were made by the said Court, whose
Authority determining with the said Act, was on the 10. of June 1650. renewed
for six months, by Act of Parliament; and then ended by expiration only.

And here, before I mention any thing of the proceedings against me at the High
Court of Justice, which happened more then a year after, I shall desire the
Reader to observe the falsehood of Mr. Ash his Pamphlet in two particulars
which he suggesteth, viz.

That I did not upon any Trial at the then Kings Bench Bar, claim the benefit
of the Articles of Exeter, Mr. Ashe's Objections.
and did not at any other time after challenge the benefit of them by Petition
to the Parliament, nor any Committee from them.

As to the first of these; The falsehood of it is apparent; for that upon my
motion to plead specially, My Answer to them.
the Court allowed it to me, and ordered me to bring in my special Plea on the
first day of the next Term, and did assign me Counsel for that purpose; but I
was never called upon to plead further to that Indictment; so as it is
impossible for Mr. Ash to know what I would have pleaded had I been called;
and I can with much confidence affirm, That albeit my Counsel might advise me,
to offer in the first place to that Court such matters in Law as were more
proper for them to judge upon, yet I was resolved, both according to my own
sense, and the opinion of my Counsel, not to plead any Plea, which might
deprive me of the benefit of my Articles, as being resolved to insist upon
them, whenever my Counsel should advise me it was seasonable to demand the
allowance of them.

And for the second; It appears manifestly false by the Petition before
mentioned, which I preferred unto the Commissioners appointed by the
Parliament, for relieving persons upon Articles, before the 10. of July 1649.
which was at least seventeen months before that I was brought unto the Bar at
the High Court of Justice, and was as soon as the House had appointed any Court
to relieve such as were agrieved upon Articles; and that I did not make any
application to the Parliament upon my first Committal, was no default in me,
but in himself, who having then persuaded me to alter my Petition to them, and
after kept it either by fraud, or malice from their sight, does now charge that
upon me as a crime, whereof himself is only guilty.

But that I may conclude this long Narration, The power of those Commissioners
being (as I have said before) expired, upon the 26. of March following, the
High Court of Justice was established, and on the 9. of July next after, an Act
was published for the trial of me, My Trial before the High Court of Justice.
and of some others for our lives before them. The 20. of the same month, I was
by order of the said High Court removed in order to my trial from Newgate to
the Tower of London; And on the 17. of December following, I was brought unto
the Bar of the said High Court, there to abide a Trial for my life.

And certainly, there is no man, who had but the least spark of generosity, or
humanity, but would be moved with some compassion, and afford his just
assistance unto a person reduced to that extreme degree of danger wherein I
stood. That very Judas (to whom he does with so much scorn fancy himself to be
resembled) when he saw his Master voted guilty by the Jews, and that he was to
be presented before Pilate, there to receive his last Trial, felt some remorse,
and coming to the Princes and the Elders, confessed his Treachery in the
betraying of him; But Mr. Ash, in this sad exigent whereunto I had been
brought by him, was so far from doing right unto me by his testimony, that
concealing my appearance before the Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall, and the
presenting of my Petition there, which I had put into his hands, he came to
justice that most false Record entered in his presence the 4th. of August,
which proved, that I had not appeared either before the Committee at
Goldsmiths-Hall, or any other Committee at the time when that Record was
entered. And to the end it might not be inferred that I had claimed the benefit
of Exeter Articles before them by that clause of the Record, which says, That
I pretended to come in upon those Articles, In the Book of Shorthand taken by
order of the High Court of justice.
the same was totally left out in the Copy produced before the High Court of
Justice, and notwithstanding sworn as a true copy of the whole Record.

This evidence was much insisted on, and strongly urged against me during the
greatest part of my Trial; and it was in vain that I produced persons of
quality and honor, Sir James Thin, and Mr. A^^i^^ Paulet as witnesses for me,
to prove the tender of my Petition, for they could only swear, that I was
there with them in July; that I had a Petition in my hand, which I told them I
did intend to present unto the Committee, and that I was called in a while
after into the Room where the Committee sat, staid there some time, and at my
coming out told them I had delivered my Petition to the Committee; but in
regard they were not suffered to come in when I was called, they were not able
to swear that I had given my Petition into the hands of Mr. Ash, as I
alleged, and therefore this being no concluding Evidence for the delivery
thereof, it was pressed, that my Averment in this case was not to be received
against the said Record, which did positively affirm that I had not on the 4th.
of August, or any time before, appeared before them.

And certainly, that High Court, notwithstanding their Depositions, would have
condemned me by their Justice, had it not pleased God in his infinite
Providence and mercy to me, to put into my mind, that Sir Henry Berkley (whose
business was heard immediately before mine) had by mere accident, contrary unto
the usual course, staid in the Room whilst his Mittimus was making, and whilst
I tendered my Petition to Mr. Ash; I made this known unto the Court, and they
were honorably pleased to give me time for the producing of him, at which time
of Sir Henry Berklies appearance, that individual Petition, formerly delivered
to Mr. Ash (the tender whereof was so stiffly denied) was then, and not before,
produced in Court, and Mr. Ash appearing the same time. used his utmost skill
to incense the Court against me, plainly showing the intention of entering that
false Record was, to deprive me of my life whenever I should be called to
Trial for it, as a person who had neglected my time, and thereby forfeited my
Articles.

The book of Shorthand proves this.
This foul practice in a person so highly trusted by the Parliament, together
with Mr. Leeches Oath, which did expressly aver the Record of the fourth of
August to be entered by the Committees appointment, was surely ill resented by
the Court, although they made no mention thereof in their Proceedings, because
it never came judicially before them; But in my Case, after mature advice, and
several Debates, they all resolved, and did accordingly certify unto the
Parliament, That I was comprised in the said Articles of Exeter, did personally
appear within four months, according to truth (although my Articles, as I have
formerly said, required not the same) and presented a Petition to the Committee
at Goldsmiths-Hall, for a Composition, in relation to the said Articles, which
they resolved was a submission to Composition, according to the said Articles
of Exeter, Thereby implicitly condemning M. Ash of Injustice, in denying to
admit my Composition tendered with all due circumstances, which on my part I was
to do, and of a foul conspiracy against my life, in countenancing a false
Record unduely entered, to stand against me as an Evidence, and be a ground for
the condemning of me, contrary to the truth, and his own knowledge.

My Life being thus, by the blessing of Almighty God, and the Justice of that
honorable Court, preserved, my Estate was notwithstanding on the 16th. of July
following, adjudged by Act of Parliament to be sold, and accordingly was
purchased by several persons from the Trustees at Drury-house.

Upon the 29th. day of September 1652. the House was pleased to pass an Act for
reviveing of the former Act made for relief of persons upon Articles, and
nominated Commissioners for that purpose, rejecting two Provisoes tendered to
the Act on the 28. and 29. days of September, before the passing of it, which
tended to the limitation of that benefit which the House was honorably pleased
to grant and allow unto such persons as should claim relief by Articles;
requiring, that the Judgment and Orders of the said Commissioners be obeyed
and observed by all Courts, Committees, Officers, and other persons concerned,
any Law, Order, or Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding.

The 14th. of October following, I exhibited my Petition to the said Court,
craving relief upon my Articles, where, after witnesses examined, publication
granted, and a full hearing of all parties, the Commissioners did solemnly
declare and adjudge that I was fully capable of the relief intended upon the
said Acts of Parliament, constituting that Court, and that I ought to be
admitted to compound for my whole estate, according to the Tenor of my said
Articles, as appears by the Judgment, and Proceedings in that Court, mentioned
at large in my Remonstrance, which Judgment I forbear in this place to insert,
because I shall hereafter have occasion to mention it. Neither are they
questioned at all by Mr. Ash, who notwithstanding he has been formerly
examined against me in the High Court of Justice, and that testimony of his,
taken in the Book of Shorthand, was afterward read and made use of in the
Court of Articles upon the hearing of my Cause, according to the said Order,
allowing the Book of Shorthand to be made use of as indifferent evidence on
both sides, and notwithstanding the solemn Judgment of those two Honorable
Courts who have plainly declared the refusal of my Petition for a Composition
when I tendered it, to be a violation of my Articles, is yet so passionately
pressed against me, that without all regard to truth and modesty, he has
divulged this scandalous and scurrilous Pamphlet to asperse me only (as himself
professes) that he might be received as a Witness to swear against me, before
a Committee appointed to examine my Petition by the late Parliament, whom he
had hoped to have misled, by his false allegations, whereby he has occasioned
all my miseries and losses.

And for the better countenancing of his Fables, there is with it come out, in
the name of the Purchasers of my estate, a Re-examination of all the matters
formerly moved, heard, and determined in my former hearings, which for that
reason, I forbear to answer, as deeming it unfit to submit the things already
cleared, and judged by two such Honorable Courts, as it were unto another Trial
and Examination, to satisfy the fancies and pleasures of I know not whom.


Reader, I have here given a true and an exact account of all that Mr. Ash
has acted in my business, from my first coming to London after the surrender
of Exeter, until the sentence given for me in the Court of Articles, by which
it appears plainly, that my Remonstrance is not only true in all those passages
touching Mr. Ash, which I have there set down, but also that I have therein,
out of a Christian respect, and charity (whereof he has made me but an ill
requital) forborne to publish that foul practice he has used to take away my
life, and my estate, the which I had not now divulged, were I not compelled to
do it for my own vindication, against those false and malicious slanders, which
he has sought to fix upon me, by his shameless Pamphlet, which was most
maliciously published at the very time when by my Petition ( which made no
mention of him) I sued unto the Parliament for my relief.

I have most clearly proved, not by a feigned Utopian Discourse, but by
undoubted evidence, the testimony of witnesses, persons of Honor and integrity,
by his own Letters, by Records, and by the solemn Judgments of two great and
Honorable Courts, that Mr. Ash has herein broken all those ties that are most
sacred, as being the foundation, Mr. Ash is here considered in a twofold
capacity.
wherein does rest as well the private, as the public conversation of men, not
to be violated, without the general confusion of all Laws Divine and Humane;
For if you shall consider Mr. Ash as a private person, you will find him a man
pretending friendship, who having promised assistance to his friend in those
indearing terms that might beget a mutual confidence, As a private person.
and being the sole man who was relied upon for favor, did afterward, without
offense, or provocation, for his own private benefit, inveigh against the
person that trusted in him, whom he presented to the Committee (who were his
Judges) under so foul a Character, that before they saw him, they began their
knowledge of him by the hatred of his pretensions, and person; You see him
afterward publicly obstruct that Composition he had promised to further with
his best assistance, and when by breach of that public trust which was reposed
in him by Parliament, he had procured unto me their displeasure, you see him
then resume the person of a friend, that he might cheat me of my Petition, when
I had nothing else remaining to preserve either my life, or estate; and having
gotten the possession of it, to keep it by him, and neither offer it himself
unto the House, or put it into the hands of any other, as he pretended to have
done, upon his going into the Country, after which time he never more came near
me, as I have formerly said in my Remonstrance. What can be added unto the
malice and perfidiousness of this, being all acted under the color, and
pretense of love and friendship?

As a public person.
But if we look upon him as a public person, then this miscarriage appears in
him much fouler; for we must then consider Mr. Ash as a man most highly
trusted by his Country, when they returned him to serve them as a Member of
Parliament, and most particularly favored by that great Assembly, by
nominating him a Member of the Committee, who were entrusted to dispense their
Justice granted in the Articles of War made by their Armies, unto the strict
performance whereof, the public faith and honor of the Armies, the Parliament,
and the whole Nation in general, were by the Law of God and Nations, engaged in
a most eminent and particular manner; and upon this depended the lives and
fortunes of a considerable number of their fellow subjects, who were engaged
for the late King in those unhappy differences, whom they were to admit to
Composition upon the terms prescribed unto them by their several Articles, so
as they were appointed Judges over things which are above all other of the
highest consequence and most concernment, to wit, The public Faith and Honor,
the Estates, the Lives and Liberties of their Countrymen and Fellow Subjects;
And among all these persons, there was more than ordinary confidence reposed in
Mr. Ash, who was the Chairman of the said Committee; Wherefore for such a
man, thus qualified, advanced, and trusted, first to obtain the Grant of a Fine
unto his own particular use, which was to be assessed before himself; For the
obtaining whereof he exhibited unto the Parliament, a cheating false Account,
claiming Sums which he not at all disbursed, as I have formerly expressed; To
play the Orator, and falsely to calumniate a person to his fellow Judges, who
was a stranger to them, and did appear before them an humble Petitioner to
obtain the benefit intended to him by his Articles, having engaged himself to
favor his Petition; To obtrude Oaths and Covenants upon him, from which he was
to be exempted by his Articles, and for that reason to deny this Composition
when it was tendered. To be present and assistant unto the entry of a Record,
the Contents whereof were false, to his own knowledge, and did no way belong to
his Cognizance, or Jurisdiction; To give direction for the making of a Report
unto the House of Commons, as from the whole Committee (without their Warrant
or Directions) That I had contemned the Parliaments authority, and forfeited my
Articles; And lastly, To appear, and by his Testimony to countenance that false
Record when it was urged against me at my Trial, thereby to take away my Life
and Estate together; All these are, in a public Officer, crimes of so high a
nature and concernment, that if we find not presidents touching the punishments
due to them, we must conclude, it is because himself was the first man that
ever had presumption to commit them.

But although our Histories have not examples of the like miscarriage in an
Officer so immediately entrusted by the High Court of Parliament, as Mr. Ash,
yet notwithstanding our Laws are very clear and positive in the inflicting of
great and exemplary punishments on persons trusted with the execution of the
Law, and public Justice of the Land, if they shall violate their trust, in
matters of far less concernment, than what was recommended to Mr. Ash.

If a Judge of Record sworn to decide the private Controversies between man and
man, L. Cook 3d part of his Instit p. 223. Sir Will. Thorps Case. Cook 3d part
of his Instit. p. 22, and 23 Triseilians Case.
shall, through corruption or interest, wilfully give a Judgment contrary unto
the known Law, and his own Conscience, our Ancestors have thought this crime
worthy of death, and have accordingly inflicted it upon the offenders, as is
apparent in our Histories.

If a Jury who are the Judges in all matters of fact, which come in issue
before the Judges in the Courts of Common Law, give a false Verdict contrary to
their evidence, this is a crime so odious in the eye of the Law, that being
attainted of it they shall suffer the VILLAINOUS JUDGMENT. L. Cook. 3d. part of
his Instit. p. 222.
And the same Judgment is also given in a Conspiracy, upon the false
conspiring to deprive a man of life, by an Indictment at the Common Law, which
Judgment is declared by my Lord Cook to consist in five several punishments.

First, That their bodies shall be imprisoned in the common Gaol.

Secondly, Their Wives and Children amoved out of their Houses.

Thirdly, That all their Houses and Lands shall be seized into the Kings hands,
and their Houses wasted, and their Trees extirpated.

Fourthly, All their Goods and Chattles forfeited to the King.

Fifthly, That they for ever shall loose the Freedom and Franchizes of the Law
(that is) First, They shall never be of any Juries, or Recognitors of Assizes.
Secondly, Nor never be received as Witnesses in any Cause. Thirdly, That they
shall never come into any of the Kings Courts, but make Attorneys, if they have
any thing to do there.

And this is called a VILLAINOUS JUDGMENT, because of the villainy and infamy
which they deserve against whom it is given. And all is inflicted by the common
Law, for that the Offenders by false conspiracy, under the pretext of Law, Nota.
by Indictment of Treason, or Felony, and legal proceedings thereupon, sought
to do the greatest Injustice, by false conspiracy to shed his blood, who
afterward is thereof Legitimo modo acquietatus.

But if these crimes are singly punished with so much rigor by the Laws in our
inferior Magistrates and persons; what shall we say of Mr. Ashes guilt, who
has himself taken the boldness to commit them all?

In acting the several parts, First, Of a malicious, unjust Judge, when I first
tendered my Petition to him.

Secondly, Of a corrupt Iuror, in his direction for the report against me to
the House.

And thirdly, Of a false Conspirator, by countenancing the entry of that
pernicious Record, which was produced and sworn against me at my Trial;
especially, being in breach of an immediate Trust committed to him by Authority
of Parliament (the supreme Court of Law and Justice, whereof the others are but
Rivulets) and who have in all ages punished the want of Truth in all those
Informations which were brought unto them, with so much rigor, that by the
Statute of 37. E. 3. cap. 18. 37 E. 3. cap. 18.
It is Enacted, That those who shall make false Suggestions against any one
before the King and his Council (who were then the Supreme Power) shall prove
their suggestions, or else in our the same pain the other should, in case he
were attainted.

And certainly, if they have punished with this great severity those who
presumed to mis-inform them by Petition or Suggestion, whereby the person
against whom complaint is made receives no other prejudice but only to be
brought unto an answer, we cannot well conceive the greatness of that
punishment, which they would in their Justice have inflicted on any person that
should dare to have abused the power and trust they had committed to him (as
Mr. Ash has done) by acts of high injustice in his judgment, and extreme
falsehood in the informations he has directed to be made unto them. But I
forbear to heighten his offense, because I have in writing this Discourse
intended my own Vindication, not his Punishment.

I had here given a conclusion to this Discourse concerning Mr. Ash, did not
the Artifice which he has in his Pamphlet used, to avoid the Testimonies of
Sir Anthony Irby, and Sir David Watkins, persons of honor and quality, whose
Depositions you have already read, and that great want of Civility and respect
he has showed to them, enforce me to say some thing in answer to it.

The thing which Mr. Ash does first except against, and undertakes to answer,
is, Answers to the Objections against Sir Anthony Irbys, and Sir David Watkins
Testimonies.
The relation Sir Anthony Irby has given of my Deportment, at both those times
I appeared before the Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall, which he declares to have
been such, as that he for his part took no offense at it, nor does he think
there could be any justly taken. This is confirmed, not only by Sir Anthony,
but also by the concurring Testimony of Sir David Watkins.

In answer unto this, it is alleged by Mr. Ash, that Sir Anthony Irby was the
principal man of the Committee that took exceptions at my Petition, and moved
that it might be rejected, and that it was he principally who pressed the
making of the Report against me.

Here is a flat denial of the Testimonies of two concurring Witnesses, persons
of great integrity and worth; but if we look for proof of his Assertions, he
can produce no other but his own affirmation; and therefore we must take it as
a slander cast upon those worthy Gentlemen, in the inventing whereof he shows
great Impudence, and in the publishing, much weakness, to think that his bare
word should pass as proof against them, being produced as indifferent persons,
to testify their knowledge before a Committee of Parliament, in my case:
Especially considering, that Mr. Ash (among the Questions which he sets down,
and which he moved the Committee he might ask Sir Anthony Irby) had a care not
to question any thing touching my carriage, because Sir Anthony both could and
would have proved the falseness of his Allegations.

But in regard it is pretended by Mr. Ash, that in the Answers made to these
three questions, Sir Anthony Irby had some way contradicted what he had
formerly delivered, I will set down the Questions and the Answers, that so it
may appear how truly he infers out of them.

First, Whether Sir Anthony were present the first and second time that I
appeared before the Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall? To which he answered, he was
present. And Mr. Ash might well have spared the labor of that Question,
because it is one of the first things affirmed by him in his Letter, and in his
Examination before the Committee of Parliament.

The second, Whether the Committee (taking offense at my behavior and language)
did order Mr. Stephens to report the same to the Parliament; this Sir Anthony
acknowledges, and this is not the thing Mr. Ash insists on.

But on the third Whether Sir Anthony himself consented, and gave his Vote in
the affirmative, for making of the said Report; And hereunto Sir Anthony
answered, he did, after some pause, wherein it is supposed by Mr. Ash he
contradicted what he had formerly said in the justification of my civil
language and fair deportment.

What ground or reason Mr. Ash can have for this his supposition, I shall
refer unto the Readers judgment, when I have only stated the matter of Fact,
as it appears out of the Letter of Sir Anthony, which he pretends to answer,
and his Examinations before the Committee, being this. When I first tendered my
Petition to the Committee to be admitted unto my Composition, which was
disliked and rejected, as you have heard, Sir Anthony Irby took no exception at
my carriage, nor did he think justly there could be any, and then declared his
opinion, That I ought to compound, there being want of money, The House of
Commons having confirmed the Articles of Exeter, by which I was exempted from
the taking of Oaths. At my second appearance before them, he was also of the
same opinion; But seeing others were not of his mind, but heightened my offense,
and took exceptions at my carriage and language, and would have it reported to
the House, he gave way to it, and passed his Vote in the affirmative, That the
whole matter should be reported to the House.

And now I shall desire the Reader to observe, if any thing herein do
contradict in the least kind what has been formerly said by Sir Anthony Irby
in justification of my deportment.

So certified by Mr. Baily.
For admit (although in truth no question was put, and consequently no Vote
could pass, as appears by Mr. Baylies Certificate, who keeps the Records of
that Committee, which makes it more then probable that Mr. Ash very much
mistakes in this Relation) Sir Anthony had given his Vote, That my denial of
the Negative Oath and Covenant (which I refused by virtue of my Articles) and
my carriage (which he conceived was fair and civil) should be reported to the
House, That they might thereupon declare their pleasures, whether I should be
continued under restraint for refusing the Negative Oath and Covenant, or be
admitted to Composition without taking them (notwithstanding his opinion, That
the House had by the granting of these Articles dispensed with the taking of
them;) which was the only thing; then in dispute amongst them, as appears by
their Order then entered, and was as much as Mr. Stephens had in direction to
report unto the House.

Can any man suppose Sir Anthony Irby, by passing his vote in the affirmative
for this end, did give consent, that it should be reported to the House, I had
rejected, or forfeited the benefit of my Articles, and contemned the Authority
of the House, which confirmed them? Or was there any Warrant for Mr. Stephens,
by this order, to report as he has done, by the directions of Mr. Ash, That I
had fleighted and contemned the Authority of the present Parliament, and
forfeited their mercy contained in the Articles of Exeter; And in the close of
his Report to say, THAT IF THE PARLIAMENT DID NOT MAKE SIR JOHN STAWELL A
TRAITOR, SIR JOHN STAWELL HAD MADE THEM TRAITORS, as Mr. Ash, in the
conclusion of his Pamphlet, affirms he did? which was a most false, bold, and
malicious inference, and could not be collected from any thing that I had
spoken, or he, by the Committees Order, was Authorized to deliver; and this
without stating the matter truly unto the House, and desiring their opinion and
direction therein, which was the final end, for which that Order was made.

Who sees not, that this same is quite another thing, from what, by Order of
the Committee, Mr. Stephens was to have performed? so as if Sir Anthony Irby
did make some pause before he gave an Answer to this Question, it was, for that
he made some doubt within himself, whether he should not, before he answered
thereunto, inform the Committee, in the Star Chamber, of the whole truth, as I
have now expressed it, or leave it (as it seems he did) unto their further
Examination.

And surely Mr. Ash was very cautious what questions he proposed unto Sir
Anthony, for fear his practices might have more clearly been brought to light,
or otherwise (being so much my friend as he pretends) he would have then denied
the ill offices he did me, unto the Committee, before I was called in before
them, wherewith Sir Anthony had charged him, and he would also have sought to
clear himself touching the entry of that false Record of the fourth of August,
which is suggested to have been made when that Sir Anthony Irby was present at
the Committee, though Sir Anthony was altogether ignorant of the making of it:
But Mr. Ash having declined the asking of these questions, did plainly show
these charges were so clearly true against him, that though he sought a color
for the rest, yet he could find out nothing to palliate his guilt in these, and
therefore sought to pass them over in silence, without making any mention of
them.

The thing which Mr. Ash did next except at, is the relation given by Sir
Anthony Irby touching his intention to buy a Manor of me, which lay near him,
and this Sir Anthony Irby in his Examination before the Committee of Parliament
sets forth was told unto him by Sir Edward Bainton, who did acquaint him, That
Mr. Ash was he that would have bought the Manor.

Here Mr. Ash puts in a Note, and would persuade the Reader to believe that I
had invented this story, and published it at the High Court of Justice, which
coming to Sir Edward Baintons hearing, he told it Sir Anthony Irby, who now
makes use of it to justify what he had written, whereas if Mr. Ash his
passion had not deprived him of his judgment, he would have easily observed,
that Sir Edward Bainton gave a relation to Sir Anthony Irby, not of a thing
which he had heard after my Trial at the High Court of Justice, but of a matter
treated with him before I fell into my troubles, for the relation he made was,
That a Gentleman ( whom he declared to be Mr. Ash) would have bought a Manor
of me, wherein he had some interest, and he had offered, That if I would sell
my part, he also would sell his, for which Sir Edward Bainton after said that
he was sorry, as conceiving it to be the original of all my troubles; so as
you see Sir Edward Bainton declares that Proposition to have been made unto him
before I was refused to be admitted to Composition, or else it could not have
been the original of all my troubles, and consequently, it could not be a thing
which he had heard only after my Trial, as Mr. Ash would (without any ground
but his own impudence) persuade the Reader.

In the last place it is observed by Mr. Ash, that what Sir Anthony Irby has
called a Manor, and said, it lay near him, I call a Farm, and lay in Abury,
about sixteen miles (as he allegeth) from his dwelling, and thereupon
(according to his breeding and discretion) he blames Sir Anthony Irby's memory,
which he conceives must here have failed him.

I shall desire the Reader to observe, that Sir Anthony Irby does here make a
relation of what was told him in discourse, and therefore we must judge of it
according to the usual way of speaking, and not to the construction of the Law.
I have already showed, that Farm at Abury cost me about 9000 l. and certainly
whether it were a Manor, or a Farm, it was notwithstanding such a proportion
of land as is in usual discourse styled by the appellation of a Manor, and it
is no way considerable, as to the matter, whether it were the one, or the
other: And although we shall admit that Land to lie sixteen miles from his
dwelling in the Country, yet certainly, according to the common way of
speaking, he must be said to be a neighbor to it; so as in these Exceptions,
it appears, That Mr. Ash has declared only his own want of Civility toward
Sir Anthony Irby, and his indiscretion in urging things so weak and senseless,
to avoid his testimony.

As for the Certificate of Sir David Watkings, he urges no new thing against
it, only to show his wit, without any part of his judgment, he does suppose,
that in regard it was in the heat of Summer, when I first came to
Goldsmiths-hall, he being an old Gentleman, might then be nodding, or that his
memory through age does fail him, it being near eight years since these
transactions were at Goldsmiths-Hall. This surely is an ending extremely
suitable to all the other parts of that his Pamphlet, which being begun through
malice unto me, and continued with great impudence and falsehood, could not
more properly conclude then with a scoff at old age, declared venerable by the
opinion of all Nations, how fierce and barbarous soever; Promised by God, as a
Reward to those that shall observe his Law, in giving due obedience to their
Parents; Which Sir David Watkins enjoyes, with health, strength convenient, and
a perfect sense and memory, as a blessing sent him by God, the plentiful
bestower of all good gifts; whilst Mr. Ash (perhaps for a punishment of this,
and of his other crimes) is subject to those pains, sickness, and diseases, now
in the vigor of his age, from which Sir David Watkins, notwithstanding his
great years, is still exempted.

I am now at the end of Mr. Ash his Pamphlet, The Justification of Mr.
Stephens his Report, answered.
where he takes notice, that it might be expected he should give answer to that
wherewith I seem to charge him in my Remonstrance, viz. That the Report made by
Mr. Stephens unto the Parliament, of my behavior before the Committee at
Goldsmiths-Hall, was no other then what he had received from Mr. Ash; which I
collect from this, because the Report which Mr Stephens made to the Parliament
is the same with Mr. Ash his Testimony given at the High Court of Justice, and
Mr. Ash by way of answer, does with his usual confidence deny it, affirming,
that Mr. Stephens Reported nothing to the Parliament, touching my ill behavior,
but what he heard from my own mouth, which was so much as moved him to make
that cloze to his Report, I before mentioned, viz. That if the Parliament did
not make Sir John Stawell a Traitor, Sir John Stawell had made them Traitors.

Here Mr. Ash might have informed the Reader truly, and let him have known the
reason, why I gathered Mr. Stephens had received Instructions from Mr. Ash for
making his Report, was not only by the testimony of Mr. Ash under his hand,
agreeing with the Report, but also more especially by the Deposition of Mr.
Stephens taken in the High Court of Justice, Mr. Stephens his examination in
the High Court of Justice, 18. of Ian. 1650.
wherein he does confess, he was not present when I first appeared before the
Committee at Goldsmiths-hall, and consequently he could not report any thing
which was transacted in his absence, but by order of the Committee, or by the
relation of some other, who did inform him, whom I collected to be Mr. Ash,
because his Deposition agrees in substance with the Report of Mr. Stephens, and
is grounded upon what Mr. Ash ( though falsely) affirms to have been the
opinion of the Committee at my first appearance before them, when I tendered my
Petition, there being no such thing at all voted or spoken by the Committee at
my last coming before them, when Mr. Stephens was in the chair; which appears
plainly, if we consider in the first place, What the Report was according unto
Mr. Ash his Testimony, before recited, which says, that Mr. Stephens, in his
Report, informed the House, that the opinion of the Committee was, I had
slighted and contemned the Authority of the present Parliament, and forfeited
their mercy contained in the Articles of Exeter.

Now it is evident, that Mr. Stephens had no direction from the Committee, at
his being there, to report that unto the House, as their opinion, by the Order
before recited, which was no more, but that he should report unto the House my
refusing the Negative Oath and Covenant, my committal for it, my carriage, and
my desire for an allowance of maintenance; But they declared no opinion at all
touching my carriage, nor did ever put it to the Question. So as I must now
leave it to the Readers judgment, whether of us two speaks truth, and whether
this be an idle aspersion (as the worthy Gentleman is pleased to style it.)
Either Mr. Stephens, who was not present the first day of my appearance (as Mr.
Ash and himself acknowledge) and consequently could not know what was then
spoken, but as he was informed, must have his Instructions from the Committee,
or from Mr. Ash the Chairman: But from the Committee he had no such
Instructions to report, That Sir John Stawel had slighted and contemned the
Authority of the present Parliament, and forfeited their mercy contained in the
Articles of Exeter, as appears by their Order, and from thence to infer, That
if the Parliament did not make Sir John Stawel a Traitor, Sir John Stawel had
made them Traitors. Therefore this must needs proceed from Mr. Ash, who (as it
seems by what is said before) did put his own words into Mr. Stephens his
mouth, or otherwise Mr. Stephens must have spoken what he did, without any
ground or authority whatsoever; And this I suppose Mr. Ash will be very
unwilling to acknowledge of his good friend, who has so faithfully served him,
to my ruin and destruction.

Reader, Here I conclude this Vindication of my self, and my Remonstrance,
against that false and scurrillous Pamphlet, published by Mr. John Ash, to
justify himself, and asperse me.

I have most clearly proved, that all his actings in my business have proceeded
out of malice, self-interest, perfidiousness toward me, and breach of Trust
toward the public. That all his Allegations in his Pamphlet, published for
his excuse, are full of impudence and falsehood.

I will not take much pains to justify my self, or trouble the Reader with
that Quaere which he has frivolously inserted in the Margent of his Pamphlet,
as though I had got Lands from Mris. Basset by a cheat, but give this short
Answer.

Either my Wife had a power to dispose of her Fathers Estate, or she had not.

If she had, What wrong could it be to Mris. Basset for her Mother to dispose
of what was properly her own?

If not, Then surely, what my Wife has done, is a great benefit to Mris.
Basset, who has received 3000 l. above twenty years since, as a portion from
me, her Right (if any) being still preserved.

But this is only the foul mouth of Mr. Ash, who has abandoned all regard of
Modesty or Truth, that he might fix some stain upon me; Yet I forbear to follow
my just Resentments, in decrying his falsehoods, and shall (notwithstanding the
high provocations which he has given me) wish him a due sense of his most
wicked practices, and a sincere repentance for them.

Mr. Lawrence's Petition and Reasons examined, and answered.
THere is, together with the Pamphlet of Mr. Ash, in Answer whereunto I have
published this Vindication of my Remonstrance, printed a Petition, To the
Honorable the Referrees of his Highness most Honorable Council, in the cause
between me and the Purchasers, by William Lawrence of Edinburgh Esquire to which
some reasons are annexed, why the Petitioners Purchase ought not to be
questioned by me; Wherein, because the Petitioner ( giving full scope to his
passion) has in the Reasons annexed written many things injurious to the
Honorable Members of the Court of Articles, who have pronounced their Sentence
in my behalf, ungratefully scandalous against me, and prejudicial to the Honor
of the Parliament, by whom the Court of Articles was first erected, and
empowered; I hold my self obliged to give an Answer, with all brevity and
clearness possible, unto such of the Reasons as have not been already Answered
in the preceding parts of this Discourse.

The first of these Verbatim, is, Your Petitioner says, That such Members of
the Committee of Articles as have acted for the said Sir John Stawel, against
Purchasers, are Parties, and not Judges, and their Orders and Certificates
ought to have no credit or authority; And your Petitioner says, they have
mis-stated the Case; transgressed the Duty of an inferior Jurisdiction; and
presumed on Acts of sovereign power; they have wrongfully indebted the
Commonwealth in vast sums of money to the said Sir John Stawell; they have
occasioned false scandal on it, of infringing his Articles, and have not been
indifferent or equal in their proceedings, either as to public or private
Rights; all which your Petitioner shall be ready to prove.

How precipitatly rash this Gentleman has been in passing so severe a censure
upon those Honorable persons who gave the Judgment for me in the Court of
Articles, will appear fully, when I have laid before his eyes the power
committed to them by the Act of Parliament, and that great care, justice, and
integrity they have used in the pursuance of it.

The Act of Parliament by which the Court of Articles was constituted, The
first Act constituting the Court of Articles.
bears date the 18 th. of June, 1649. wherein the Parliament takes notice of
diverse complaints touching the breach of Articles granted in time of War, and
taking into their consideration the faith, of their Armies and Forces engaged
for performance of the same, and how much it concerns themselves in Justice and
Honor that the same be made good, and no violation thereof permitted, Do Enact
and Ordain, by Authority of Parliament, that the persons therein nominated
should be constituted and appointed Commissioners, for the ends and purposes
expressed in that Act; They are thereby authorized to hear and determine the
complaints of all and every such person or persons as do or shall pretend to be
sued, molested, or in any ways damnified, contrary to any Articles granted, or
made, to or with any such person or persons, in time of War, which have been
approved of by Parliament.

They are to determine whether the persons complaining were truly comprised in
such Articles, and also to judge, and determine whether the parties so
complaining, have by their own default forfeited or lost the benefit of the
said Articles.

Where there shall appear any right due to the party complaining, by virtue of
such Articles, and yet denied and not duly performed, or any violation thereof
made against him or them; they are in every such case authorized to award, and
give unto the party complaining, relief and redress, so far as in justice they
ought to have by the said Articles, by staying proceedings in Law or Equity,
discharging Judgments, Executions, or Decrees, or by restitution in specie, or
in value, of what has been taken, recovered, or withheld, but without charging
any costs, or further damages against the Commonwealth, or against any person
or persons against whom the Complaint is made.

And it is thereby further Enacted, That upon all such Complaints, in all such
Cases, the Certificates, Orders, and Awards of the said Commissioners, or any
nine, or more of them, being produced to any Court of Justice, Committee,
Commissioner, Magistrate, Officer, or other person or persons whatsoever,
before, or with whom, any Matter, Question, or Thing, which such Complaint
concerns, does, or shall any ways rest, or depend respectively, shall in every
such Matter, Question, or Thing, be binding and conclusive unto, and obeyed,
and observed by all, and every such Courts, Committees, Commissioners,
Magistrates, Officers, person and persons, who are by virtue of the said Act
enjoined, and required to take notice of, and observe the same, any Law, Order,
or Ordinance to the contrary notwithstanding.

A Proviso is added in the bottom of the said Act, That nothing therein
contained, A Proviso in the first Act.
should be construed to control an Order or Ordinance of the Lords and
Commons, bearing date the 9. of December 1643. or any other Order or Ordinance
of Parliament concerning the Town of Kings-Linne, and the Articles agreed unto
by the Earl of Manchester, upon the rendering up of the said Town, but that the
said Order or Ordinance, and all proceedings thereupon had, should be as good
and effectual in Law, as if that Act had not been made, any thing therein
contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

This Act of Parliament being made to continue only until the 20. day of June
1650. and no longer, ended by expiration; The second Act reviving the former.
After which upon the 29. of September 1652. another Act was made for renewing
the said former Act for relief of persons upon Articles. The Parliament therein
takes notice, that the said former Act is expired, and yet many complaints
concerning breach of Articles remain still undetermined. And therefore, by
Authority of Parliament, they do Enact, That the said Act, and every clause,
Article, and sentence therein contained, shall be in force from the 28. of
Septem. 1652. till the 28. of September 1655.

It is thereby further Enacted, That the Commissioners therein nominated, or
any seven of them, should be Authorized, and appointed Commissioners, to put in
execution all the Powers expressed in the said former Act.

It is also further Enacted, That the Commissioners therein nominated, or any
seven of them, shall be thereby Authorized to give relief according to the
powers mentioned in the said former Act, to all such persons, who were, or
should be arrested, sued, impleaded, imprisoned or sequestered, contrary to any
Articles given, or granted, by any Commission-Officer, not under the degree of
a Captain, entrusted upon the place as Commander in chief, by Land or Sea, in
England, Scotland, or Ireland.

Provisoes inserted in the Act.
Unto this Act, four Provisoes are added:

First, That the persons clayming benefit of Articles, have not forfeited the
same by breach, or nonperformance of what was on their part to be done, since
the Articles were granted.

Secondly, That such persons have not been ayding to the late King, or Charles
Stuart his Son, in open Hostility, or secret Counsels, since the 30. of Ian.
1648.

Thirdly, That no person shall have benefit of the Act, unless he shall put in
his claim to such Articles before the Commissioners, within the times therein
limited, viz. For Articles in England before the first of Feb. 1652. and in all
other places before the first of July, 1653.

And fourthly, That where any Question shall arise before them, upon Articles,
whereof relief is by that Act intended, which have not been confirmed by
Parliament, The Commissioners shall resort unto the Parliament, for their
Resolutions touching the said Articles, before they the Commissioners proceed
therein, further than to stay proceedings at Law against any person, or
persons, concerned in such Articles, or sale of their Estates.

Unto this Act, before the passing of it, two Provisoes were tendered.
Provisoes offered and rejected


The first, on the 28. of Sept. 1652. to this effect, Provided, that this Act,
nor any thing therein contained, should not extend, nor be construed to extend,
to prejudice, alter, or make void any Resolutions, Votes, or Judgments, given
in Parliament, touching any the Articles aforesaid, or any persons clayming
thereby.

The other, on the 29. of Septem. 1652. to this effect, Provided, that no real,
or personal estate, which has been settled, conveyed, or assured, to any person
or persons, by virtue of any Act, Ordinance, or Order of this present
Parliament, shall be made null, vacated, or otherwise determined or disposed of
by the Commissioners named in this Act, or by their Authority, but if they see
cause of restitution by virtue of Articles subject to their Cognizance, not in
specie against the particular person, or persons, upon whom such estate, or
estates be settled, conveyed, or ass^red, but in value, by such other Lands or
Revenue, as the Parliament shall direct, any thing in this Act, or the former
hereby revived, to the contrary notwithstandiinng.

But these Provisoes, which tended to the limitation of the benefit most
honorably granted by the House, to persons claiming benefit by Articles, were
both rejected, and upon the Question, resolved in the Negative.

This power being granted to the said Honorable Commissioners without
limitation or restriction, gave them Authority to hear and determine my
Complaint before them, as being a person imprisoned, sequestered, and indamaged,
contrary to Articles given unto me by the Lord Fairfax, late Lord General,
confirmed by Parliament, so as I was a person capable of relief, according to
their Judgment and Determination, by the express Letter of both the Acts, and
accordingly I exhibited my Petition to the said Court on the 14. of October
following (which was within the time limited by the Proviso in the said latter
Act) where, the same, after many proceedings, which are at large mentioned in
my Remonstrance, coming to be heard the 15. of August 1653. the said
Commissioners did solemnly give their Judgment as follows.

Monday the 15 of August, 1653. By the Commissioners constituted by Act of
Parliament for relief of persons upon Articles, Conditions and Engagements made
in time of War, sitting in the Exchequer-Chamber, Westminster.

The Judgment of the Court of Articles.
WHereas Sir John Stawell has exhibited his Petition into this Court, thereby
(amongst other things) setting forth, That he is comprised in the Articles made
upon the surrender of the City and Garrison of Exeter, bearing date the eighth
of April, 1646. and afterward confirmed by Parliament; By the twelfth of which
said Articles it was agreed, That no person therein comprised should be
questioned or accountable for any act past by them done, or any other done by
their procurement, relating unto the unhappy Differences betwixt the late King
and the Parliament, they submitting themselves to reasonable and moderate
Composition for their Estates, which the then General Sir Thomas Fairfax was
really to endeavor with the Parliament, that it should not exceed two years
value of any man's real Estate respectively, and for personal, according to the
ordinary Rules, not exceeding the proportion aforesaid: Which Composition being
made, they should have Indemnity for their persons, and enjoy their Estates,
and all other Immunities, without payment of fifth or twentieth part, or any
other Taxes or Impositions, except what should hereafter be charged upon them
in common with other Subjects, by Authority of Parliament. And by the 21
Article it was further agreed, That no Oath, Covenant, Protestation, or
Subscription relating thereunto, shall be imposed upon any person whatsoever
comprised within the said Articles, but only such as should bind all persons
aforesaid, not to bear Arms against the Parliament of England sitting at
Westminster, nor wilfully do any act prejudicial to their Affairs, whilst they
remain in their Quarters. That he had a Certificate under the Hand and Seal of
the then General, dated the 14. of April 1646. signifying, that he was to have
the benefit of the said Articles. That the 15. of July 1646. he came to London
to make his Composition, and according to an Order of Parliament of the second
of July 1646. and within the time thereby limited, undertook by a subscription
under his hand, not to bear Arms against the Parliament, according to the
intention of the said Order, and 21 Article. And upon the 24. of the same July,
1646. he preferred his Petition in person to the Committee at Goldsmiths-hall
for compounding with Delinquents, desiring to compound according to the said
Articles; But was not admitted, because he refused to take the Negative Oath
and Covenant: And was the 13 of August, 1646. for such his refusal only,
committed first to Ely-House, afterward by Order of the then House of Commons,
to Newgate, for High Treason, in levying war against the Parliament, where he
continued almost four years, and in that time was several times Indicted for
Treason, and twice arraigned for his life at the then Kings Bench Bar: And that
Judgments are obtained against him in personal Actions for seven thousand
pounds in Damages; And all this for acts relating to the Differences between
the late King and the Parliament, and before the Date of the said Articles.
That in July, 1650. he was by Order of the High Court of Justice removed from
Newgate to the Tower, and there kept in close custody; and the seventeenth of
December, 1650. and diverse days after, tried for his life before the said High
Court, who after many days trial, examination of Witnesses, and strict inquiry
into his actions, and the performance of the Articles on his part, did not
proceed to sentence, but certified their proceedings to the Parliament; a copy
of which Certificate was annexed to this Petition: That ever since the said
Trial he was a prisoner, and from the Date of the said Articles his Estate
sequestered, by which, together with his Debts, and felling his Woods and
Timber, he has lost near Thirty thousand pounds in his Estate, besides his
imprisonment, and hazard of his life. That his Estate, by an Act of the 16 of
July, 1651. is (amongst others) declared forfeited for Treason, and has been
since sold accordingly. That neither he, nor his Sons, or Servants, have
engaged against the Parliament in any act of hostility since the said Articles,
nor has he lost the benefit thereof, by any default of his; and therefore
prays, That the said Certificate of the High Court of Justice may be
considered, and the liberty of his person, and the possession of his Estate,
may be granted to him, discharged of such Judgments, Executions, Sales and
Encumbrances, as are contrary to the meaning of the said Articles, and free
from Composition, in regard the profits of his Estate for seven years have been
received to the use of the Commonwealth. Unto which Petition several Pleas and
Demurrers were put in, by Mr. Attorney General, on the behalf of the
Commonwealth of England, and by the Council for the Trustees for sale of
Estates forfeited for Treason, on the behalf of the same Trustees; the effect
whereof was, It appearing that the Parliament had interposed in the case of the
Petitioner, both in respect of his imprisonment, and in appointing Trials for
his life, and the selling of his Estate, as by them adjudged to be confiscated
for Treason; Therefore, that as to his Imprisonment, and possession of his
Estate, the Court could not take cognizance of the complaint, or examine or
give any relief thereupon, as by the said Pleas and Demurrers, reference
thereunto being had, may more at large appear: Which Petition, Pleas, and
Demurrers coming regularly to hearing before this Court, after long debate and
mature deliberation had of and upon the same, this Court upon the 31. of
December last past, declared their opinion; That the said Pleas and Demurrers
(which for the present admitted the state of the Fact to be such as is set
forth in the said Petition) did not contain in themselves sufficient matter to
preclude this Court from proceeding upon the said Petition, and did therefore
resolve and adjudge the same to be overruled, and set aside; and appointed the
Solicitor for the State, attending the Court, to acquaint the Council for the
Commonwealth, and the said Trustees, with this Resolution, to the end they
might set forth such other cause as they had to allege (if there were any) on
the States behalf, by way of Plea, or Answer to the said Petition: And the
Court also, at the prayer of the Petitioner, issued forth summons to such
persons as were by the Petitioner named Defendants, and certified by the
Trustees aforesaid to have been Purchasers of the Lands and Estate of the
Petitioner, to plead or answer to the Complaint of the said Petitioner.
Hereupon the Council for the Commonwealth put in an Answer, wherein they say,
they know not that the Petitioner was comprised in Articles, nor that he was in
the City of Exeter at the surrender, nor an Inhabitant there seven Months
before the said Articles; and that if he were comprised, he knew not that the
said Petitioner did submit unto, or make Composition for his Estate, acording
to the true meaning of the said Articles, and as he ought to have done; and
avers, that the Petitioner had not performed such of the said Articles as on
his part were to be performed, but had wilfully broken and infringed the same.
That he has been engaged in secret counsels since the said Articles, against
the Parliament, and committed other acts since the Articles, whereby he has
forfeited the benefit of the same Articles, through his own default: And by way
of Answer, further also sets forth the same matters of Law formerly insisted
upon in his said Plea and Demurrer, whereupon this Court had formerly delivered
their Judgments as aforesaid. The said Trustees also put in their Answer, and
say, That by the said Act of the 16. of July, 1651. the Petitioners Estate was
settled in them upon Trust, to convey the same as the said Act directed; and
that in pursuance thereof they have sold to several persons all the said
Estate, and do believe that a great part of the purchase-Mony is paid; and
claim no other interest in the said Estate, than as persons entrusted as
aforesaid; neither know, nor are concerned, why the Parliament have enacted the
Petitioners Estate to be sold.

Several persons, named Defendants by the said Petitioner, did also appear, and
put in Answers to the said Petition: In particular Matthew Coker of
Lincolns-Inne, Gent. says, That he has purchased from the said Trustees part
of the Manor of Priestley, being parcel of the Lands of the said Petitioner,
and hopes to have back his money and charges before he surrender: and then he
says he shall be always ready to do the same. John War and John Borradale
say, That they have jointly contracted with the said Trustees for the Demeasnes
of Bewley in the County of Somerset, part of the estate of the said Petitioner.
That how far the Petitioner is concerned in the pretended breach of the
Articles of Exon, concerns not them to look at, the Parliament having, as they
conceive, sufficiently weighed and determined the interest of the said
Petitioner in the said Articles before they exposed his Lands to sale. Nicholas
Battely, John Farewell, Edward Bushel, and John Gorges, by their several
Answers severally say, That they have contracted for the Lands respectively
mentioned in the subscription of the Petitioner to the Order of this Court of
Summons of the eighth of December last, with those who they conceive had
authority to do the same; and each of them freely offers to submit to what
Authority shall do therein. Unto which Answers of the Council for the
Commonwealth, and the said Trustees, and of the said other Defendants, the
Petitioner Sir John Stawell replied, avering the truth of his said Petition;
and the cause being at perfect issue, Witnesses were examined, and their
Depositions published, and by the consent both of Mr. Attorney General, and of
the Council for the Petitioner, the whole evidence taken before the late High
Court of Justice, upon the Trial of the said Petitioner before them, was agreed
to be made use of by either party at the hearing of the cause. The Court having
also received the Answer of the present Commissioners for compounding, etc.
sitting at Habberdashers-Hall, London, certifying, That they have no further
matter against the Petitioner, than what has been already signified to the
said High Court upon his Trial, by virtue of their Order in that behalf, did
appoint this day for the hearing of the whole cause. Now upon full hearing of
Mr. Latch, Mr. Harrison, and Mr. Amhurst, on the behalf of the said Petitioner,
and of Mr. Attorney General, Mr. Attorney Hall, and Mr. Hurst, on behalf of the
Commonwealth, together with Mr. Graves on the behalf of the said Trustees; and
upon reading of the said Answers of the said other Defendants, purchasers of
part of the Petitioners said Estate, they, nor any of them appearing, nor any
for them, although due notice had been given unto each of them of the time
appointed for the hearing of this cause (whereof Oath is made) the Court
proceeded therein; and upon the hearing of the Evidences and Witnesses,
produced on the behalf of the said Petitioner, and of the Commonwealth, and
consideration had of what stands admitted and proved before this Court; they do
find, and are clearly of opinion, That Sir John Stawel is within the Articles
of Exeter confirmed by Parliament; by which no persons therein comprised, and
submitting to reasonable Composition for their Estates, are to be accountable
or questioned for any act past by them done, relating unto the unhappy
Differences between the late King, and the Parliament; That the Petitioner
personally appeared before the Committee of the Militia of London, and
subscribed according to an Order in Parliament of the second of July, 1646. not
to bear Arms against the Parliament, nor wilfully do any act prejudicial to
their affairs, whilst he remained in their quarters; which we find to be
agreeable to the 21. of the said Articles. That he also personally appeared the
24. of July, 1646. being within four months after the said Articles, and
presented a Petition to the Committee of Goldsmiths-Hall for Compositions,
mentioning therein his Estate to be sequestered, and humbly praying they would
please to admit him to Composition, according to the said Articles, and the
then Generals Certificate, rendering him capable of that agreement, but his
said Petition was rejected. That Sir John Stawel's tender of that Petition in
the manner proved before this Court, was a submission to Composition according
to the said Articles of Exeter. That he was afterward by Warrant of the said
Committee of the 13. of August, 1646. committed to Ely-house, for refusing to
take the Negative Oath and Covenant, enjoined by the Ordinances of Parliament
of the fifth of April, 1645. and first of November, 1645. That since that
Commitment he has been continued prisoner in several Gaols, and during that
restraint, has been several times indicted, and brought in question for his
life, for acts relating to the unhappy Differences, supposed by him to be done
before the granting of the said Articles. That it appears not to this Court,
that he has by any act or default of his, lost, or forfeited the benefit of
his said Articles, which we find to be approved by the then House of Commons
the sixth of May, 1646. and by both Houses of Parliament the fourth of Novem.
1647. who Ordered that Approbation of theirs to be published, and all
Committees, Judges, Officers, and other persons concerned, to take notice
thereof, and observe the same, any Orders or Ordinances to the contrary
notwithstanding. That since his said submitting to compound, the profits
received forth of his Estate being ever since until the late sale under
Sequestration, and the Damages thereby by him sustained, appear to amount to
above 25000 l. That by the Trustees Answer in this case, it appears they have
sold all his Estate, by reason of the Act for Sale wherein he is included: And
the Defendants, Matthew Coker, John War, John Borradale, Edward Bushel, John
Farwell, Nicholas Batteley, and John Gorges, acknowledge they have bought of
them the said Trustees several parcels of the said Estate. That the said
Petitioner Sir John Stawel, being tried for his life before the late High Court
of Justice sitting in the years 1650, and 1651. that Court finding him within
the said Articles, and that he had submitted to Composition, thought not fit to
proceed to sentence, but to certify his Case to the Parliament: Upon which
Articles this Court finds not any Judgment to be since given, but discern
themselves empowered, authorized, and required by Parliament, to give relief to
persons wronged through breach of Articles, in such sort as is expressed by the
Acts made in that behalf. All which this Court having taken into their serious
consideration, and how far the Faith of the Army, and Honor and Justice of the
Parliament and Nation are concerned in this, and the like cases, that right be
done, and no violation of Articles permitted, after many debates, and mature
deliberation had thereupon; and being satisfied in their judgments and
consciences, that the Petitioner Sir John Stawell is fully capable of the
Relief intended to persons within Articles, by the Acts directing and
authorizing the same, and constituting this Court; Do in order thereto, and in
pursuance of the power and trust to them committed in that behalf, Resolve,
Declare, and Adjudge, That the Petitioner Sir John Stawell has good right, and
by his said Articles ought to be admitted to compound for his whole Estate,
real and personal, according to the tenor of the same Articles, notwithstanding
any the Settlements, Sales, or Contracts beforementioned, at such rates, and
in such manner, as others comprised within the said Articles have done; and the
Commissioners for compounding with Delinquents, are hereby enabled, authorized,
and required, to permit the said Sir John Stawell to compound for his whole
Estate, as aforesaid: And in respect of those great Losses and extreme Damages
which the said Petitioner has sustained by the Sequestration and Detention of
his Estate, and the profits received out of the same for above seven years last
past, and by the felling of his Woods and Timber, and otherwise, for want of
being admitted to a timely Composition; This Court does order and direct, That
the said Commissioners for compounding do cause an exact account to be made of
the Rents, Issues, and profits, received for, or out of the Petitioners Estate,
since he first submitted to Composition, and was not admitted thereunto, and do
recommend to their consideration the proofs thereof already taken in this
Cause, Copies whereof, attested by the Register of this Court, are for that
purpose to be presented to them: And if the said Commissioners shall find the
same to amount unto, or exceed the Fine or Composition which the said
Petitioner ought to pay, according to the rates prescribed, and allowed by the
said Articles of Exeter, That then the same be allowed, accepted, and taken in
lieu, and full satisfaction of such Fine or Composition so imposed upon, or to
be satisfied by the said Petitioner Sir John Stawell, according to his
Articles; otherwise the defect (if any happen to be) is to be supplied by him
the said Petitioner: And if any surplusage or overplus remain, the said
Commissioners for compounding are hereby ordered and desired to certify the
same unto this Court. And upon such computation, and satisfaction made as
aforesaid, the said Commissioners are hereby directed and authorized to give
their Order for such acceptance of the Petitioners Fine and Composition, and to
give the Petitioner a Discharge accordingly: and they are desired to give him
all fitting expedition in the premises. And it is further ordered, adjudged,
and declared by this Court, That after the making of the said Composition as
aforesaid, the said Petitioner Sir John Stawell shall have the Liberty and
Indemnity of his person free from any further restraint or imprisonment,
according to the true meaning of his said Articles: and that all Bayl, or other
security, entered into by the said Petitioner, or any other person with or for
him, touching his true imprisonment, be thereupon delivered up to the said
Petitioner, and vacated and discharged; and that he be in the mean time
permitted, upon the Bayl already by him given, to prosecute and attend the
perfecting of his said Composition, without let or molestation. And that the
said Petitioner Sir John Stawell, from and after such Composition as aforesaid,
shall have the possession of his Estate, freed and discharged from all
Sequestrations and Seizures whatsoever, and shall enjoy the same, without any
claim, demand, impediment or molestation of the said Trustees, or of the
Survivors and Survivor of them, their or any of their Heirs. And this Court
does further award, order, and judge, That the Trustees for sale of Lands and
Estates forfeited to the Commonwealth for Treason, do upon sight of this Order
and Award, stay and forbear all further proceedings in the Sale or Disposal of
any the Lands and Estate of the said Petitioner Sir John Stawell, remaining
unsold (if any such be,) and if any part of the Moneys remain unpaid, for any
Lands belonging to the Petitioner, already contracted for and sold, that they
likewise forbear to demand or receive the same, or to make any further
proceedings touching the same, or intermeddle any further therewith.

And it appearing unto this Court, by the answers of the said several
Defendants, Matthew Coker, John War, John Borradale, Nicholas Battely, John
Farewell, Edward Bushel, and John Gorges, that they have contracted for, and
purchased some parts and parcels of the Petitioners Lands and Estate, mentioned
and referred to, in and by the Answers before mentioned, the detention whereof
is to the prejudice, and tending to the disherison of the said Petitioner, and
contrary to his said Articles; This Court do order and adjudge, That from and
after the perfecting of the Composition aforesaid, and notice given thereof,
and of this Order and Judgment, the said Matthew Coker, John War, John
Borradale, Nicholas Batteley, John Farewell, Edward Bushel, and John Gorges, do
forthwith restore unto the said Petitioner Sir John Stawell, and his Heirs, the
full and peaceable possession of all and every the premises by them purchased,
as aforesaid; and that after the making of the said Composition, the said
Petitioner and his Heirs, shall and may peaceably and quietly hold and enjoy
the same Hereditaments, with their and every of their members and
appurtenances, freed and discharged of and from all claims, charges, and
encumbrances, in any wise occasioned by or under them the said Defendants,
Purchasers respectively; And the said Trustees, and the Survivors or Survivor
of them, or any of them, their, or any of their Heirs, or any person or
persons, claiming by, from, or under them, or any of them, in as free and ample
manner, as if the said last mentioned premises had not been sequestered, or
vested, or settled in the said Trustees and Purchasers, or any of them; and as
if no such Settlements, Contracts, or Sales, had been had or made. And the said
Trustees at Drury-House, and also the said Matthew Coker, John War, John
Borradale, Nicholas Batteley, John Farewell, Edward Bushel, and John Gorges,
and every of them, and all others, who are or may be any way herein concerned,
are upon notice hereof, to give their observance hereunto accordingly. And it
is lastly Ordered and Declared, That the Petitioners bringing the present cause
to hearing against the aforenamed Defendants, shall be no bar to him to proceed
further upon his said Petition against other Defendants already named, or who
shall be hereafter made Defendants to the said Petition; but that he may
prosecute such persons upon the ground of his said Complaint, so far as he
shall see occasion, and be advised; and upon the same Petition, if cause be,
bring those causes also to Issue and Judgment, in order to his just Relief;
The now Award and Judgment given in this Cause, or any other matter or thing
herein contained to the contrary, notwithstanding.

This is a true Copy, Tracy Pauncefote, Regist.

Io. Bradshaw Edw. Whalley Edward Cook William Bosvile Anthony Samwell Owen
Row John Hayes Clem. Oxenbridge

NOw that they have in the proceedings of my Cause used all diligence, The
Judgment proved to have been given by the Court in pursuance of their Trust
and Power.
and precaution needful and possible for the discovering of the truth, appears
by the Decree it self, wherein the same are briefly mentioned, and that in the
relief they have thereby been honorably pleased to afford unto me, they have
pursued the Power and Trust committed to them, appears by the said Acts of
Parliament, before recited, whereby when there shall appear any right due to
the party complaining by virtue of such Articles, and yet denied, and not duly
performed, or any violation thereof made, they are in every such case
authorized to give unto the party complaining, relief and redress, so far as in
Justice they ought to have by the said Articles, by restitution in specie of
what has been taken, recovered, or withheld, but without charging any further
costs or damages against the Commonwealth, or against any person or persons
against whom the Complaint is made: And it is thereby further Enacted, That
their Certificates, Orders, and Awards, shall be binding and conclusive unto,
and be obeyed and observed by all Courts, Committees, Commissioners,
Magistrates, Officers, person and persons, who are by the said Act enjoined and
required to observe the same, any Law, Order, or Ordinance to the contrary in
any wise notwithstanding,

These are the express words of this Act, whereby the said Commissioners have
power, when it appears unto them that the party had right, to give redress so
far as in Justice he ought to have by the said Articles; and by them I was to
be admitted to my Composition at two years value, and upon making of it, to
have Indemnity for my person, and enjoy my Estate, and all other Immunities,
which is a benefit my Articles allow unto me: It appears plainly they were by
the words of the said Act empowered to decree this unto me, by restitution in
specie, as they have honorably and justly been pleased to do; Which Judgment
and Order of theirs is by the Authority of the said Act binding and conclusive
unto, and ought to be obeyed by all Courts, Commissioners, Committees, and
persons, any Law, Order or Ordinance (and consequently, the said Act for sale
of my Estate, which is a Law) to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding.

You see by this, that the said Commissioners for giving relief upon Articles,
have, in giving their Judgment and Decree before recited, strictly pursued the
Power and Trust committed to them by the said Acts.

But this will yet appear more plainly, if we consider what was the intention
of the House, who where the makers of them, by those Provisoes
beforementioned, which were inserted into, and rejected out of the said
several Acts, according to that general maxim, Exceptio firmat regulam in non
exceptis,


And first to begin with the Provisoes inserted into the said Acts; By that
which is added in the bottom of the said first Act; It is provided, that
nothing therein contained should be construed to control an Order or Ordinance
dated the 9. of December, 1643. touching Lin Regis, and the Articles agreed to
at the rendering thereof; But that the said Order or Ordinance should be as good
and effectual in Law, as if that Act had not been made.

Is it not clear by this Proviso, That the House conceived the said
Commissioners had power to control and make void that Ordinance (which had the
same vigor as a Law, at least whilst the said Parliament was sitting) and
therefore put in this Proviso to restrain their power in this particular?
Thereby, according to the said Maxim, confirming it unto them in all other
cases. Nay, is it not as clear, that by the latter words of that Proviso,
whereby they do provide, That Ordinance, and the proceedings thereupon, should
be as good and effectual in the Law, as if the Act had not been made, they did
sufficiently declare their Intentions to be, That by the same Act, they did
themselves revoke all Acts and Ordinances made to the prejudice of any persons
that were comprised in Articles, and the Commissioners by their Decrees were
only to apply that remedy to the particular persons who were capable of the
relief which was most honorably granted by the Parliament, unto all persons who
had right unto it, by repealing all the Laws, Ordinances, and Orders made to
the contrary? Whereby it will then follow, that the Act made for sale of my
Estate, the 16. of July, 1651. is by the said Act of the 29 of September, 1652.
repealed and void, as unto me, and in my Case.

Is it not also plain by the last Proviso in the said Act of the 29. of
September, which provideth, That where a question rises before them upon
Articles not confirmed by Parliament, the Commissioners shall resort to the
Parliament, for their Resolution, before they proceed therein, further than to
stay proceedings at Law, or stop the sale of their Estates; That in all other
cases where the Articles are confirmed by Parliament, the said Commissioners
have power, not only to stop the sale of their Estates, but also to vacate the
sale of them, and award restitution in specie unto the party claiming relief
upon the Articles, according to the express words of the Act? Especially
considering the House rejected the said two Provisoes tendered to restain them
in this particular Case, and did thereby sufficiently declare their intentions
to be, that they should put that power in execution where they saw cause.

It being therefore evident, that the Commissioners have in their proceedings
and sentence given for me, pursued the Trust and Power committed to them by the
Parliament, it must then follow of necessity, That Mr. Lawrence, by saying they
are parties, and not Judges; That their Orders and Certificates ought to have
no Authority or credit, that they mis-stated the Case, and have not been
indifferent or equal in their proceedings, with other scandals therein
mentioned, has been mis-guided by his passion, and has, instead of a Reason,
published a false, malicious, and scandalous Libel against those Honorable and
worthy persons, who are Magistrates, trusted and employed in this and other
weighty Affairs, which are of great concernment to the public, whose just,
equal, and indifferent proceedings he does therein traduce, seeking petulantly
for his own private interest, to weaken the authority of their proceedings, by
the defaming of their persons.

I pass over many of his Reasons, wherein he does allege only those things
that were in issue, and have been judged already in the High Court of Justice,
and the Court of Articles, where I have proved them to be only surmises and
scandals cast upon me. But I esteem my self obliged to give an answer unto the
slanders which he himself has first invented, and now endeavors with great
ingratitude to fix upon me by those Reasons; Wherein he has suggested, That I
received from his Father more for a Lease of what he purchased, than the
inheritance was worth; That he was totally ignorant of my pretending to the
benefit of Articles, though he requested me to give him notice and directions;
That I have miserably and totally depopulated the whole parish of Cotheleston
in Somerset, and by force, fraud, and terror expelled them, their Wives,
Children and Families, to swim through their own tears to new plantations; That
to restore me, would be to sacrifice unto my rage and revenge all the
well-affected people of fifteen or sixteen great Manors whom I would totally
extirpate.

These charges are very high and heinous in themselves, and therefore it would
surely have been just and fitting, this Gentleman should not have vented his
spleen and malice in such a public way against me, without producing some
proof of what he has so confidently written; But I intend not to return an
Answer to him by a bare denial, but I shall desire the Reader to observe how
little cause there was for him to publish this false invective, when he has
first perused the Certificate of two substantial, grave, and conscientious
Gentlemen, Uncles to Mr. Lawrence, signed by them, and intended to be presented
to the Committee of Parliament, but came a few days too late.

To the Honorable, the Committee appointed by Order of Parliament, in the case
of Sir John Stawell,
We whose names are here under written, Uncles to William Lawrence of
Edenborough Esquire and Brothers to his deceased Father, having seen a printed
paper Entitled, Mr. Lawrences Petition, together with Reasons thereunto
annexed, why the Petitioners Purchase ought not to be questioned by Sir John
Stawell, do, at the request of Sir John Stawell, and in favor of truth, thus
humbly certify your Honors.

THat our Father was Tenant, The Certificate of Mr. Lawrence his Uncles:
and many years a Servant unto Sir John Stawells Grandfather, who throughout
all his time was never other than a kind and loving Master unto him, and did
entrust him with the management of his Estate and Lands in Dorset. where he
lived, and was a very great support unto him, being a Father of many children,
and to whose Name and Posterity we cannot but pay all thankful
acknowledgements; We do also acknowledge, That we are not a little troubled at
those mis-representations which our Nephew Mr. Lawrence has made in the
beforementioned Petition; having known Sir John Stawell, that now is, from a
Child, and how kind and friendly he has been to our Name and kindred, who are
many of us his Tenants, and have ever found him in an especial manner regardful
of us. And in particular, I Robert Lawrence do testify, that I was entrusted,
with others, in the managing of Sir John Stawells Estate diverse years, during
his minority, by the power of his Grandfathers Will, and since was his Servant
and Officer, until his Estate first fell under Sequestration. And whereas it
is by the Petition suggested, That my Brother, the Petitioners Father, gave far
more for an Estate by Lease unto Sir John Stawell, than the whole Inheritance
is worth; The Petitioner in those days was young, and it seems not acquainted
with the truth of things: But I well remember that the Petitioners Father did
purchase of one Dunning, part of a Farm called Wraxal Farm, being the
Inheritance of Sir John Stawell, which the said Dunning held for certain years,
determinable upon his own life, being then, I believe, about forty years of
age, for which he paid 300 l. And the same is now valued and esteemed to be
worth threescore and ten pounds by the year above the Rent; and did within few
years after purchase of one Mr. Anthony Stawell a Farm called Rampisham Park,
adjoining to the aforesaid Farm called Wraxal Farm, wherein the said Anthony
Stawell had then an Estate for ninety nine years, determinable upon three
lives, which were then all living (being the Inheritance also of the said Sir
John Stawell) which Farm is esteemed to be worth by the year two hundred and
twenty pounds at the least besides the rent, for which he paid Thirteen hundred
pounds; and being so settled in the said two Farms, after Sir John Stawell came
to the age of one and twenty years (for he was in minority when these bargains
were made) the said Petitioners Father being married, and having a Wife and
Children, became an earnest Suter unto the said Sir John Stawel, to exchange
those Estates by which he held those two Farms, and to settle them upon his own
lives, concerning which there were diverse parlies between them, and my self did
endeavor to gain it for him, and the Bargain was concluded, that for Seven
hundred pounds, and surrendering the former Estates, he should have both Farms
granted unto him upon one Lease for Ninety nine years, if three lives named by
him should live so long, which was performed accordingly; whereas I believe he
would have given Eight hundred pounds for it, rather than he would have left
it; and by this Bargain the Lease then granted is enjoyed by the Petitioner.
This was no hard bargain.
And so upon the whole matter it cost the Petitioners Father, but Two thousand
three hundred pounds to have this Estate of near Three hundred pounds by the
year thus settled. And as touching Depopulations made by Sir John Stawell in
the parish of Cothelestone, mentioned in the aforesaid Petition; I well know
(having been the most part of my time a near neighbor unto that place) that
Sir John Stawell did give full satisfaction to all such Tenants whose Estates
he redeemed, being for the enlargement principally of his Courts, Orchards, and
Gardens about his House, and for such as wanted houses, and had no other
dwellings, he either bought or gave them houses in other places to their full
content, who were better pleased with their Bargains, and such Exchanges, then
with their former Estates; And that the Depopulations complained of, may the
better be understood, pray give me leave to inform you, that there were but
five small Tenements which were so compounded for, worth about thirty pounds by
the year in the whole, and there are yet remaining in the said Parish ten
several Tenements and Cottages, which are enjoyed by estates by him granted,
which are worth above one hundred pounds by the year, and the Demeasns of
Cothelestone lying within that Parish were never known to be less worth then
Two hundred and seventy pounds by the year, and with those additions complained
of, they are not now worth (as is conceived) above three hundred pounds by the
year, as they are annexed to Sir John's principal House. Besides this, there
has been four hundred Acres of land by estimation, divided into thirty Acre
Tenements by Sir John Stawell, and are annexed unto the Manor of Cothelestone,
upon many of which Tenements, houses are built, and Familes do live, which in
former times had not a house standing upon it, and inlargeth that Manor much
more than it was before.

And whereas in the said Petition it is thus expressed, that it would be a very
great cruelty and injustice, by not making good public Sales, to sacrifise to
his Rage and Revenge all the well-affected people of fifteen or sixteen great
Manors: I cannot conceive any reason of this expression; For Sir John's Tenants
are so well affected unto him, as I have not heard (five only excepted, whereof
the Petitioner is one) that any have bought a greater interest in his Lands,
then what has been of his own granting; and I suppose, it will be conceived a
great mercy unto them to be restored to him, who has ever been a good
Landlord unto them, and stands obliged to the making good of their former
Estates.

And I John Lawrence do likewise say to that part of the Petition that avers,
That the Petitioner was totally ignorant of the Articles of Exeter, or any
pretense of the said Sir John Stawell to the same, he is very much mistaken,
for that I my self told the Petitioner, That Sir John Stawell had right to the
Articles of Exeter, and that the truth thereof was known to most men by the
public Trial he had received for his life at the High Court of Justice, where
his Articles were pleaded, allowed, and his life thereupon preserved, and did
advise him not to proceed further in his Purchase intended.

Wherefore we the Petitioners Uncles, do humbly conceive, That his Petition in
many things wants a good foundation, That it affords no right to the memory
of his deceased Father, and sets forth great unthankfulness unto Sir John
Stawell, who has been always kind to our Name and Kindred.

Robert Lawrence, John Lawrence.
November 24. 1654.

The relation and dependence, which the Grandfather, Father, and Family of Mr.
Lawrence have always had upon my Predecessors, and my self; And those good
offices we have formerly received from them, in the occasions wherein we have
from time to time employed them, joined to the just acknowledgement of those
advantages received from us, which is according unto Truth and Justice now
publicly declared by his Uncles, are a sufficient motive to me not to reproach
the now Petitioner with his ingratitude and falsehood toward a Family and
person to whom he ows the Fortune he now possesses; Besides, I have a hope,
that the just reprehension of two Uncles, the Elders of his Family, and who may
challenge a respect and duty from him, will make him sensible of that foul
Error he has committed, in seeking by indirect means our Ruin and
Destruction, as he has done, which is the cause I leave the further handling
of this point, and pass unto the next, wherein, Mr. Lawrence is not more truly
informed touching the Condition, Mr. Lawrence his mistake in representing my
condition.
in which he pretends I am, than in those other slanders, wherein I have
already showed how grossly he is mistaken: For neither has my Wife purchased my
principal place of Residence, or any other part of my Estate for the use of me,
or my children, or fifteen hundred pounds per annum mo^e, by her Assigns and
Friends, as Mr. Lawrence does suggest: Nor have I since the time that my Estate
was first sequestered, received any the least profit, or subsistence, by
allowance, out of it. And what opinion soever he has of my Right and Title;
Truly, I would not give consent, that any Friend of mine employed by me, should
put so mean a value upon the Public Faith and Honor of the Parliament, Armies,
and the whole Nation engaged for the performance of my Articles, as to become
Purchasers of any part thereof at ten years Purchase, considering, That I am to
be restored unto it upon the payment of two years value by my Articles: The
performance whereof Mr. Lawrence has surely no just reason to oppose, with so
much Passion, Falsehood, and Ingratitude, as he has done, that he might keep
unto himself a part of my Inheritance; Unless he has some ways abused the
Commonwealth in the said Purchase, and is therefore loath to receive a
satisfaction in value from them, which could be no prejudice at all unto him,
if he has given a full consideration for the same.

The objection touching the Act of confirmation answered.
The last thing, and which is most insisted on by Mr. Lawrence, is, the Act of
the 13. of October, 1653. made by the Little Parliament, for confirming and
establishing the sales made of my estate, or goods, in the possession of the
Purchasers: And for the better strengthing of it, many reasons are therein
offered of profit to the State, and of convenience unto the Purchasers, why the
Purchase made by the Petitioner, and others, of my Estate, should not be
questioned: Unto all which I give this Answer.

First, That the Act before mentioned is merely void in it self.

And secondly, The same is Repealed and Declared absolutely void by the
Fortieth Article of the present Government: Of both which points, I shall speak
briefly as they lie in order.

First, It is a Case adjudged, and reported by the Lord Cook, L. Cook 8. Rep.
Dr. Bonhams Case.
That where an Act of Parliament is contrary to common Righr and Justice, The
Common Law does in that Case control an Act, and makes it void; whereof many
examples are there mentioned. Now this Act made by the Parliament (a body
Politic) who by the confirming of my Articles, were parties to them, is
contrary to common Right and Justice, because by confirming the sale of my
Estate unto the Purchasers (which according to the Articles of Exeter, the
Parliament were in Honor and Justice engaged to restore unto me upon a
Composition) They overthrow all Articles, whose very Essence and Being consists
in this, That they are binding, and conclusive to both parties, which cannot
be avoided, but by a mutual consent, and consequently they have therein
opposed Common Right, and Justice, upon which the mutual bond of Articles is
grounded, whereby their Act, according to the said Judgment, reported by my
Lord Cook, is merely void.

And secondly, The same is void, because the right of Articles is a Contract
grounded upon the Law of Nations, which being a Law Paramount and Superior to
that of any particular Country or Nation, controles all Laws, and Ordinances
made in opposition to it.

But if the said Act be not for these Reasons void in it self (as I do in some
cleerness conceive it is) Yet nothwithstanding it is absolutely void by the
fortieth Article of the present Government; Whereby it is Provided and
Declared, That the Articles given to, or made with the Enemy, and afterward
confirmed by Parliament, shall be performed, ^^d made good to the persons
concerned therein; Any thing in the said Writing, or otherwise to the contrary
nothwithstanding; So as this Act is repealed, and made absolutely void by the
express words of the said Instrument; the Basis and Foundation of the present
Government, which his Highness has by his Oath promised to observe without any
violation: And unto which, Mr. Lawrence is surely not well advised, to oppose
this Act, being an Officer, who in his present employment does act by virtue
of, and in obedience unto the form of Government which has repealed it; as may
appear by a Certificate of the Commissioners for relief upon Articles of War,
returned by them in an Answet to a Reference unto them from his Highness of the
25. of January, 1653. Which Certificate follows in these words;

To his Highness Oliver Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging.
May it please your Highness,
IN pursuance of several Acts of Parliament, authorizing us to give relief to
persons within Articles, The Certificate of the Court of Articles.
We did the 14. day of October, 1652. receive the Petition of Sir John Stawell;
And after many solemn, and deliberate Debates, and upon hearing as well what
could be alleged by some of the Defendants to his Complaint, and Purchasers of
part of his Estate; as also by Mr. Attorney General, and the rest of the
Council on the behalf of the Commonwealth; We did upon the 15. day of August
last past, deliver our Judgment in the cause, and did declare therein, that
the benefit of the Articles of Exeter did justly and properly belong unto the
said Sir John Stawell, as by the Decree and Judgment of this Court, relation
thereunto being had, may more at large appear, wherewith Your Highness will, by
the Petitioner, be attended, when it shall be your pleasure to peruse the same.

Now upon your Highness Reference made to us, the five and twentieth day of
January last past, relating to the Petition of the said Sir John Stawell, and
authorizing us to give the Petitioner speedy relief, or otherwise to certify
to your Highness the obstructions we found therein; We have, in observance
thereof, and upon the Petition and Motion on Sir. John's behalf, reviewed our
former Judgment; and upon hearing his Council, who informed the Court, That
the Petitioner in pursuance of our Judgment, had made application to the
Commissioners for compounding with Delinquents, desiring to be admitted to a
Composition for his whole Estate, according to the Articles of Exeter, and our
said Judgment thereupon, but could not obtain their admission thereunto; By
reason whereof, the said Articles, as to him, and our said Judgment, were
rendered fruitless, and ineffectual, in regard the benefits and privileges
allowed by the said Articles and Judgment, were to operate after Composition
made and perfected; The Court taking consideration thereof, thought fit to be
informed from the said Commissioners for compounding, upon what grounds their
said Judgment given in this cause was not observed, and the Petitioner
admitted to composition accordingly; For which purpose they directed an Order
to them the 8. day of this instant March, to which, the 10th. following they
returned an Answer under their hands, to this purpose, That Sir John Stawell
had Petitioned to compound the first of September, 1653. according to Exeter
Articles, which Petition they referred to their Council to state his case in
order to a Composition; But before the Fine came to be set, viz. The 15. of
September, 1653. The Parliament resolved, that the Purchasors of Sir John
Stawells Estate, should quietly possess and enjoy the same according to the
several Contracts made with the Trustees; and upon the 13. of October
following, an Act was passed for confirmation of the sale of the Lands and
Estate of Sir John Stawell, by which Resolve and Act, the said Commissioners
conceived themselves tied up from Composition with the Petitioner, for any
Estate, save for what is unsold, which they declare themselves ready to do. And
the said Commissioners do also insist upon an Ordinance made by your Highness
and Council the 10. of February, 1653. by which they say they are not empowered
to compound with any Delinquents, save only with the persons named in the last
additional Act for sale, and with such Delinquents as shall discover any part
of their Estates not being under Sequestration. Upon serious consideration and
debate whereof, this Court being satisfied that by the Fortieth Article of the
present Government produced in Court, confirming Articles of War made with, or
granted to the Enemy, and afterward confirmed by Parliament, any thing in that
writing, or otherwise, to the contrary nothwithstanding; That objection of the
Act made in October last is removed; Do nevertheless find, that for want of due
power in the said Commissioners for compounding, being so limited as
aforesaid, the Petitioner Sir John Stawell cannot attain the relief meant and
intended him by his Articles, by the Parliament confirming the same, by the
Acts constituting this Court, by the Judgment of the same Court, and as they
conceive by your Highness also; which being the sole impediment, and only at
present, as we apprehend, removeable by Your Highness and Council, in the
further communication of power to the said Commissiioners, wherein also we find
diverse other Petitioners before us, in like manner concerned; This Court much
resenting and commiserating the Petitioners pressures and grievances through
want of effectual Justice, humbly submit the premises to your Highnesse's
consideration and judgment, to do and direct further herein as to your Wisdom
and Justice shall seem meet,

Io. Bradshaw Will. Underwood Matthew. Sheppard John Ireton John Hayes Edw.
Whalley Clem. Oxenbridge William Bosvile Tho. Mytton.

Queens-Court Westminster, 15 March, 1653.

This is a true Copy, Exam. Tracy Pauncefote, Regist.

THe right I have to my Estate upon a Composition according to my Articles,
notwithstanding the said Act of confirmation, appears clearly by this
Certificate; and the restoring of it unto me will not be so destructive to Mr.
Lawrence, as he pretends, (satisfaction being made unto him of what he has
disbursed) because upon the restoring of my Estate, his Lease also is revived,
and the forfeiture by Feoffments, or otherwise (if any were) is purged, neither
can he be prejudiced by any penal Covenants, and Bonds to warranty, in regard
the disability to perform them, will in this Case proceed from the Law, not his
Laeches, or default.

THere now remains nothing for me to answer, but the Reasons therein mentioned
for the establishment of public Sale; Authorities and Reasons why public
sales made contrary to Articles should be va^^ted.
unto all which I give this general Answer; That they proceed upon false and
mistaken grounds, proposing Profit, Security, Advantage, and convenience unto
the State, and private Purchasers, as the chief end, which they prefer before
those great and sacred ties of Honor, Faith, and Justice, recommended unto us
by the Word of God, and most religiously observed in all ages, by the most
famous Commonwealths, and renowned Generals, who have upon occasion always
preferred the bond of Honesty, and in particular the punctual observance of
their Promises unto an Enemy, before those things that were of highest
consequence and advantage to them.

Plutarch in the life of Aristides
THemistocles did once propose to the Athenians (a famous Commonwealth among
the Grecians) that he had a design to render them the Masters of all Greece,
the effecting whereof was most infallible and easy, but might not be imparted
to the people, and did therefore desire their consent, and Orders for it; The
Athenians, before they would give their consent, commanded him to propose it to
Aristides, who was then renowned for his great Valor, as a worthy General, but
much more famous for his love to Justice; The design being communicated by him
to Aristides, he let the people know, that what Themistocles proposed would be
indeed of very great advantage to them, and was in the performance of it easy,
but that withal, it was not honest to be done, being to fire the Spartans
Fleet, which lay in all security upon their Coast, trusting unto a Truce
between them; The Athenians, upon the hearing of this report, forthwith
rejected the Propositions of Themistocles, preferring the considerations of
Honesty and Justice, before all those of Profit and Advantage.

Sir Walter Raleighs History of the World 1 part 5 Book.
ATtilius Regulus, a Roman Consul, in the first Punick War, chose rather to
expose himself unto, and suffer death by an extremity of torments, than violate
his Faith given to the Enemy.

Plutarch in the life of Mar^ Anthony.
SExtus, Son to the great Pompey, refused to consent unto the breach of
Articles made with Mark Anthony, and Augustus Caesar, although he might thereby
have been with ease the Master of the then known world, only by cutting of a
Cable, and carrying away with him to Sea those famous Generals, who doubted not
to put themselves under his power, relying for their security only upon the
sacred tie of Articles.

There may be multitudes of these Examples found out in History among the
Pagans, who had no other rule to guide them, but the Law of Nature, and the
sense of Honor; But among Christians, the practice of it is strictly
recommended to us by the Law of God, and our own Country can furnish us with
many presidents upon this subject.

THe Protestants in France, during those Civil Wars which happened there,
Davilae's History of the Civil Wars 1 part and 3 Book.
about the fifth year of Queen Elizabeth, delivered into her hands the strong
Town of New Haven in Normandy, into which she put a Garrison of 3000 men,
commanded by the Earl of Warwick, a person of great Honor and gallantry. All
France takes an Alarm at their arrival, as being very sensible of their known
valor, and just pretension to that Province, and a great army is presently
drawn round about it to the siedge thereof; the English scorn their Attempts,
and the great valor of the noble Earl had rendered all their expectations
frustrate, had not a fatal and sudden Plague fallen among the Soldiers, which
in a few days consumed the greatest part of the besiedged, and forced him to
capitulate for rendering of the Town unto the French, which he could by no means
have longer kept; Scarce were the Articles agreed upon, and fully perfected,
but that the English Fleet consisting of sixty sail of ships, well furnished
with men, and all provisions needful, appeared in sight of the Town; but the
noble Earl, who had already passed his Faith for rendering of the Town unto the
French, judging it to be dishonorable to break his word (although to continue
our possession in France) gave notice to the Admiral, of what had past, and
quitted it unto the French, giving thereby a great example of his Faith and
Justice, whereby he merited a favorable reception from that noble Princess, and
found an honorable place in history,

THe Case of Sir John Scudamore is directly the same with mine, in all its
circumstances; Rot, Parl. 1^ E. 4. Menbr. 22. Nu. 31.
he commanded for King Henry the Sixth, the Castle of Pembrook, when Edward the
Fourth having defeated him recovered his Right, and was acknowledged King of
England; the Lord Herbert was employed by the new King to reduce that Castle
held by Sir John Scudamore, who surrendered it to the Lord Herbert, upon
Articles to have his life and his estate preserved unto him; notwithstanding
which Articles, he was by the malicious practice of some enemies put into the
Bill of Attainder past in the Parliament of the first year of that King, for
the attaining of the Servants and party of the late King Henry the Sixth, and
his Estate was thereby confiscate, with a Proviso, that it should not extend to
deprive him of his life, on the possession of his Goods and Chattles. His Lands
by virtue of that Act of Parliament were seized into the Kings hands, and
diverse of them granted over unto others; Sir John Scudamore at the next
Parliament preferred his Petition, setting forth his Case, and prayed relief
upon his Articles, and upon proof thereof made, and by producing the
Certificate of the Lord Herbert (whereby it did appear such Articles were
granted to him) The Bill for his Attainder was reversed, the Grants of the
Estate ^acated, and he restored to the possession of it; Which is my very Case,
without any difference at all, save only this, That he was by that Judgment
settled again in his estate, which I am yet in expectation of, by virtue of the
sentence given for me in the Court of Articles.

I will conclude this Point with one example drawn from the Word of God, which
is the best Authority, and ought to be the guide of all our actions.

Josh chap. 9.
WE read in Joshua, That God himself by his Decree (infinitely more just and
binding, than any Act of Parliament) had appointed all those Nations who dwelt
within the Land of Promise to be destroyed root and branch, and given their
Lands unto the Israelites; Joshua was sent by God, to put this his Decree in
execution, with an Army; The Gibeonites (who were one of those Nations that
were to be extirpated) sent their Ambassadors, and by a cunning slight (which
in the Scripture is expressed at large) deceived Joshua, and procured Articles
by surprise from him, for preservation of their lives, which Saul after some
hundreds of years infringed, by killing many of them for the accommodation of
the Israelites; 2 Samuel 21.
God was pleased himself to take in hand their Quarrel, and punished the whole
Land with a great Famine for that offense, which did not cease until that
breach was expiated by the execution of seven male persons of his Family.

Here we are taught by a divine example, how strictly he requires from us the
due performance of all Articles, since God himself (who is above all Laws) was
well contented to dispense with his immediate command, rather than to permit a
violation of them, that we might thereby know by his proceedings, that the
breach of Articles is a foul crime, which cannot be advised without impiety,
nor put in execution without punishment.

THese great and weighty considerations of Honor, Public Faith, and Justice
(whereof perhaps the narrow heart of Mr. Lawrence is not capable) induced the
Noble Army in their Petition to the late Parliament of August 12. 1652. to make
it one of the weighty Clauses of their Request, That the Articles of War made
unto the Enemy, might be made good according to the intent of them; Which
Petition by order of the Council of War was presented by six Honorable Officers
of the Army, and had a very favorable and gracious Answer. And upon these
motives it was that the late Parliament was pleased to pass those Acts, whereby
the Court of Articles was constituted and empowered to give relief to all that
should be damnified, or molested, contrary to Articles, who in pursuance
thereof, have by their just and honorable sentence adjudged that I should be
admitted to Composition, and be restored to my estate, which has been also
since confirmed by the Fortieth Article of the present Government, and promised
by his Highness, who has obliged himself to the observance of the same; The
benefit whereof, I do with all humility and confidence expect, notwithstanding
the perfidiousness of Mr. Ash, and the ingratitude and passion of Mr. Lawrence.

The Conclusion to His Highness the Lord Protector.
May it please your Highness,
I Have not dedicated this Vindication of my Remonstrance unto you, because I
neither hoped, nor thought it necessary, That it should be presented to your
view. I have in writing of it had no design, but only to clear my self of those
Slanders, which the Passion, and private ends of some particular interested
persons would fix upon me; and that in doing of it, I might declare unto the
world how just and equitable the proceedings were of those two great and
Honorable Courts, who by the blessing of God, have preserved my life, and
adjudged me capable of my Estate, upon a Composition at two years value,
according to my Articles. It is by their two sentences, that I conceive my
Innocence is evidenced sufficiently to your Justice, and it is only from your
Goodness, that I expect to reap the fruit of their Judgments, when you shall
be graciously pleased to empower the Commissioners sitting at
Haberdashers-Hall, to receive me to Composition, which being denied unto me by
the Committee at Goldsmiths-Hall, when I first tendered it, I am now, by Decree
of the Court of Articles, enabled to make before them.

The sum of my humble Petition to your Highness (now lying before your
Council) is, not that you would exercise a Legislative power in favor of me,
by repealing the Act of Parliament made for the sale of my Estate, or of that
Act which after past for the confirming of the Purchasers Estates (in respect
the first of them is already declared void by the solemn Judgment of the Court
of Articles, and the objection touching the latter of them, is removed by their
Certificate formerly presented to your Highness, grounded upon the Fortieth
Article of the present Government, confirming Articles of War, made with, or
granted to the Enemy, and afterward confirmed by Parliament, any thing in that
Writing, or otherwise, to the contrary notwithstanding) but that you would be
pleased by you Order or Direction, to Authorize those Commissioners to compound
with me for a Fine now belonging to your Highness, by the form of Government,
and to the making of which, I am to be received according to my Articles, and
the Judgment given thereupon (to the strict observation of which, your
Highness has sufficiently declared your Honorable intentions, in taking a
solemn Oath to observe that Instrument without violation, into which this
Article is inserted) leaving me for further relief, to the said Court,
according to your former Reference.

Your Highness will in doing this, not only follow the bent of your own
inclinations, but also exercise an act of highest charity and goodness, toward
an oppressed miserable person: And certainly, among those actions which our
humanity is capable to execute, there can be none that carries in it self a
stamp of the Divinity so perfect, as when an eminent person imployes the full
extent of his whole power in relieving graciously the miseries of humane kind:
How great and weighty soever your Highnesses occasions may be at present, I
doubt not but some small time will be found out for this, when you shall
consider how conformable this action will be unto his goodness, who does in a
peculiar manner appropriate unto himself the name of being God of the
afflicted, and who vouchsafes to look down from his high Sanctuary upon the
earth, That he may hear the mourning of the prisoner, and deliver the children
appointed unto death.

Wherefore, I shall with great assurance hope, that your Highness will not
abandon me, and mine for ever in the shades of death, but imitate so great and
glorious an example, by giving an end to all our sufferings; That being
declared capable of my Estate, by Judgment of the Court of Articles, I may
obtain the actual possession of it by the assistance of your Favor and Justice.

FINIS.
SIR,
UNderstanding by you the other day, when I met with you accidentally in the
Temple, This Letter of Sir Anthony Irbies, and reply of Sir David Watkins, came
not so timely unto me as to be inserted in a proper place.
that you had an intention shortly to publish something to vindicate your
Remonstrance against a Pamphlet written by Mr. John Ash, and finding that he
has also therein made me a co-partner with you in his displeasures; I shall
acquaint you with an Answer to so much as concerns my self, and all men else if
you think fit to publish it; Although I regard not much what such men as
himself do either say or write in their own Cases; especially, having done such
acts, which if he did not endeavor to make good by writing (which is too common
now adays) being the least he can do to boulster out his Cause, would
undoubtedly lie very heavy upon his Credit.

In the Pamphlet Entitled, An Answer of the Purchasers of the Lands late of
Sir John Stawel, etc. page 53. and 54, is related the Testimony I gave to the
Committee sitting in the Star Chamber, with my Answer to the cross
Examinations, I think truly related, which I do avow to be truth, and will
maintain to be so on any ground in the three Nations.

Upon which, in page 56. they are pleased to make some Observations; First,
That if Sir Anthony means the Calender time, he says true, for Sir John Stawel
appearing first the sixth of August, came within the time limited.

First, I do aver that Sir John Stawel petitioned the Committee sitting at
Goldsmiths-Hall, in July, 1646. and so his first coming was before the sixth of
August, and so my Testimony is true, wherein I say, that he came within the
time limited by his Articles; Which Sir David Watkins also testifies, and
streightens it to a lunary month, which I had no reason to do, being a thing
so long passed, and might have slipped out of a better memory than mine; Neither
does Mr. Michael Herring, in his Examination, in page 38, and 39, affirm any
thing to the contrary; so there is no Gens contra Gentem, as is falsely
alleged in page 56.

But for the allegations in page 66. That Sir John Stawel did not appear until
the sixth of August, there lies a foul treachery under that, which Mr. John
Ash can never wipe off, which plainly demonstrates his early intentions to
ruin you; And that was, in a Clandestine Order or Warrant (as I may justly call
it) made the fourth of August, 1646. expressed in p. 26. of the same Book,
which there says in the body of that Order or Warrant, (Now forasmuch as you
have neglected to make your appearance to the said Committee, or to any other
Committee of Parliament, notwithstanding the time allowed by the Articles of
Exon, upon which you pretend you come in, are expired:) Now consider, the
malice and falsehood of this Order or Warrant; I do believe, few or none of the
Committee knew of it; I have spoken with several of them, since the publishing
of the aforesaid Pamphlet, and they deny the knowledge of it, and I protest so
do I, best known to Sir John Stawels great friend, and framed by him out of the
love and tender respect he did bear to his old Master.

False it must needs be; for how could it say, that Sir John Stawel had
neglected to appear before this, or any other Committee, when Sir John Stawel
had appeared at, and petitioned to the same Committee the week before?

And further, how could it truly say, that Sir John had forfeited the benefit
of his Articles for not appearing before the fourth of August, when in the page
56. it is acknowledged, That the sixth of August, (which was two days after
according to the Calender account) was within the time of his Articles? I have
heard this Order or Warrant was like to have cost you dear at your Trial; But
this was the Child of your loving Servants brain, the man who most favored you
at the Committee, and I, the violentest man of all against you, knew nothing of
it; And therefore again, Sir Anthony Irby disownes the Order or Warrant of the
fourth of August, as not true, and so by this, Sir Anthony Irby the
Commissioner, and Sir Anthony Irby the Witness, agrees very well, and full
together, though most falsely otherwise related in page 56.

And whereas in the same page afterward, they say in their observations upon
Sir Anthony Irbyes Letter or Testimony, wherein is expressed, We gave him
eight, or ten days, or a fortnights time, that by that time, the time given him
by his Articles would be out, that we might deal with him the better; They
charge Sir Anthony to be too severe in his Justice, or rather unjust, neither
can he be excused of casting snares in Sir John's way, to satisfy his passion
(Sir Anthony being the violentest man of all against him) though to the breach
of the Faith of the Army and Nation.

For Answer to which, I say, First, It is only their bare affirmation, that I
was the violentest man against Sir John Stawel, and no proof at all, and
therefore my No, is as good as their Yea.

Secondly, Why should that be imputed or charged upon me, more than upon the
rest of the Committee? why might not I believe Sir John Stawel (having so good
an Estate to compound for) might within that time submit to that they
propounded, and so compound for his Estate, or in that time the House of Lords
might pass the Articles of Exon, and so might without any scruple be admitted
to Composition, without taking the Oath or Covenant, or the Negative Oath? But
Sir Anthony Irby admireth, that Mr. Ash, or any other should charge severity
or injustice upon him as aforesaid, that framed or consented to that Order or
Warrant (term it what you will) of the fourth of August, 1646. expressed in
page 26. There you have an habemus reum confitentem, and Sir Anthony Irbies
Testimony touching Sir John Stawels carriage at the Committee, sufficiently
confined; there you have him violating of the Faith of the Army and Nation, and
so mutato nomine de se narratur fabula.

Now Sir, to Answer that which that honest Gentleman Mr. John Ash says, in a
book written, annexed to the former Book, p. 17. where his Justice deals with
me as formerly concerning that part of my Testimony wherein I mention what
passed betwixt Sir Edward Bainton and my self at Sir Abraham Williams his
house; That I should call that a Manor, which he says is but a Farm; I
confess I might be mistaken in that; for truly in our poor Country, you shall
scarce meet with a Farm of near that value; and I dare say, many a considerable
Manor would be bought with that money in our parts; for (if I be not mistaken)
it cost 9 or 10000 l. But the Ash is grown so great now, as things of 9 or
10000 l. are but Farms with him; My gains have been such (after all my
service) that I can show no such Farms bought, or offered to be bought by me,
though I have been as serviceable as he has been.

Sir, About a week or ten days after my Depositions were taken before the
Committee of Parliament, I was sent for to set my hand to what I had testified
there; accordingly I did attend them, and was called in; and as soon as I came
in, Mr. Ash made a Speech to the Committee (being one of them himself). and
informed them how well he affected Sir John Stawel, and what friendship and
love there was betwixt them; That Sir John called him Servant, and he Sir John,
Master, what care he had of Sir John when he came to London, and how that I was
the only bitter man Sir John Stawel had at the Committee, with much more to
the like effect.

To which in brief I made answer ( I am sure the Committee present will affirm
as much) That I came thither by their Order, to set my hand to my Depositions,
and not to make a reply to Mr. Ash, for it was but his Yea, and it would be my
No; That I had not so forfeited my Credit with them or any body else, but that
it stood as clear, and my words were to be believed as well as Mr. Ashes; That
what I had testified before them was truth, which I would justify by setting
my hand to it, and if they had power to administer, I would willingly take my
Oath of it, or otherwise justify it upon any English ground; and thereupon I
came and set my hand to my Depositions.

As I was going away, Mr. Ash desired that he might ask me a Question or two,
which the Committee gave leave unto.

The first was, Whether I was not present at Goldsmiths-Hal the first and
second time Sir John Stawel appeared there? I answered, I was, page 16.

The second was, Whether the Committee did order Mr. Stephens to make a Report
to the Parliament? I Answered, there was such an Order, but those words in his
Pamphlet, p. 16. inserted in the body of this Question, in a Parenthesis, viz.
( Taking offense at Sir John Stawells language and mis-behavior there) was no
part of the Question to me, but falsely put into his Book, as he entered the
Warrant of the fourth of August, and done here with the same malice both to Sir
John his Master, and to me his Friend.

The third Question was, Whether to the making of the Order for Mr. Stephens
his Report, I did give my Vote in the affirmative?

My Answer was, There was no negative, for in truth, there was no Question put;
and that was the reason of my Answer.

And wereas Mr. John Ash in page 16. says, I might have written the whole
Truth, for that I knew that the House of Lords had not approved of the Articles
of Exon. Mr. Ash did then very well know that the House of Commons, for
several weeks, if not for some months before, had approved of the aforesaid
Articles, and that at that time the Committee wholly consisted of Commoners
(the Lords not then being joined with us, to my best remembrance.)

And if Mr. John Ash had had so great a respect to his old Master, as he would
have the world to believe, he might have proceeded in Sir John Stawells
Compositions; for the House, whereof he was a Member, could take no exceptions,
they having approved of the Articles.

Sir, With as much shortness as I conld, I have made a true and faithful
Relation and answer to such things as I judge material, for the rest I value
not; My Credit not standing upon any man's sayings, but my own Actions. I rest,

Your Servant, ANTHONY IRBY.
12 May, 1655.
To my Honorable Sir John Stawell Knight of the Bath, these.
Sir David Watkins his short Reply to a Passage in Mr. John Ash his angry
Replication to Sir John Stawells Remonstrance.
I Cannot but much admire that Mr. John Ash should be so sensible, and
displeased at my just Certificate made concerning Sir John Stawel Knight of the
Bath, which I did out of my desire to promote that Common Justice which I owe
to all men, not aiming at my own particular, nor intending thereby to lay my
hand on Mr. Ash his tender side, or to discover any design of his.

For my Old Age, which Mr. Ash accounts a blemish, I esteem a blessing from
God, and can justify, I have not served the State drowsely; And if I were at
any time nodding (as Mr. Ash would have it) then certainly it must have been
on the 4th of August, 1646. when that mistaken Order for summoning Sir John
Stawell to answer a supposed Contempt, was made and entered, mentioned in page
26. of the Pamphlet, set forth by the Purchasers of Sir John Stawells Estate,
of which Order or Summons I conceive, most, if not all of the Committee (
except Mr. Ash) were, as my self, unknowing thereof; although both they and I
acted therein with faithful, and unbyassed zeal; And for my own particular, I
doubt not but the world is satisfied, in all my Actings therein, I have kept my
Eye free from Coveting the Estates of other men, my Hands from Bribery, and my
Body from Nocturnal and other pains, the Concomitants of Riot, and that other
Vice; which is all I have at present to say to Mr. Ash his Pamphlet. p. 17.

David Watkins.
11. May 1655.

