A TRUE NARRATIVE OF THE POPISH-PLOT AGAINST King CHARLES I. AND THE Protestant
Religion: As it was Discovered by Andreas ab Habernfeld to Sir William Boswel
Ambassador at the Hague, and by him Transmitted to Archbishop Laud, who
Communicated it to the King. The whole Discovery being found amongst the
Archbishops Papers, when a Prisoner in the Tower, by Mr. Prynn (who was ordered
to search them by a Committee of the then Parliament) on Wednesday, May 31.
1643.

WITH Some HISTORICAL REMARKS on the JESUITS, and a Vindication of the
Protestant Dissenters from Disloyalty.

ALSO A Complete HISTORY of the Papists late Presbyterian PLOT DISCOVERED BY
Mr. DANGERFIELD, Wherein an Account is given of some late Transactions of Sir
ROBERT PEYTON.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Harford at the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal
Exchange: M. DC. LXXX.

THE PREFACE.
IT may appear strange to some, that this Conspiracy against King Charles I.
was never divulged till found by Mr. Prynn in 1643. seeing it was known both to
the King and Archbishop in 1640. But if they do but reflect upon the Actions of
those Times, the Wonder will cease: For these Romish Traitors having by their
Devilish Cunning raised a Rebellion in Scotland, and fomented the Divisions
between His Majesty and Parliament to that height, as soon after brake forth
into a most bloody and unnatural War between Prince and People: His Majesty (as
they designed) was sufficiently Diverted for the present; and afterward (the
Devil of Discontent raised by these wicked Incendiaries of Rome, proving too
Headstrong for them, and threatening their ruin) the Conspirators were so
disperss'd, that it would have been a difficult thing for His Majesty (if he
had been free from the Rebellious Clamours of Be-Jesuited Men) to have brought
them to Conviction.

The Person who had the greatest Opportunity of Advancing this Design, was Sir
F. W. a Man in all outward appearance a Protestant, and verily believed to be
so by the Archbishop, whose Interest with the King made him Secretary of State;
as we find it set down by the Archbishop in the Journal of his Life, in these
words, June 25. 1631. Mr. Fr. Windebank, my old Friend, was Sworn Secretary of
State, which Place I obtained for him of my Gracious Master KING CHARLES. How
Industrious this Secretary was in carrying on the PLOT, may partly appear by
the Charge against him in Parliament, Novem. 12. and December. 1. 1640. viz.
Seventy four Letters of Grace to Recusants in Four Years, Sixty four Priests
discharged by his Warrants, Twenty nine by his Verbal Order, and Twenty three
by his Authority under Read's Hand: But he prevented the the necessity of
Answering to this or any other Charge by his Flight into France, where he was
Generously Entertained by Cardinal Richelieu, (no doubt for the good Service he
had done the Catholic Cause in England) and lived and died a professed Papist.
His Son went to Rome, where he was received with the like Kindness by Cardinal
Barbarino, the chief Contriver of this POPISH PLOT.

As for Read, he was an Actor in this Plot, much in the same nature as Coleman
was in that lately discoved by Doctor Oats, and others; and because he was a
professed Papist, the Secretary abovementioned, (to whom I think he appertained
as Clerk) procured for him the following Protection, which for his greater
Immunity was Recorded in the Crown-Office, and in the Clerk of the Peace his
Book for Middlesex in open Sessions.

BY THE KING.

WHEREAS We have received good Testimony of the Loyalty and Duty of our Trusty
and Wellbeloved Captain John Read, and because he may be subject to the Laws
for Recusancy; These are to signify, That We are Graciously pleased to extend
our Special Grace toward him: And do hereby Command, That no Indictment,
Presentment, Information, or Suit in Our Name, or in the Name of any other, be
henceforth Commenced, Prosecuted, or accepted against him, by any of our
Officers or Subjects whatsoever, for or concerning Recusancy: And if any such
shall happen, then Our Will and Pleasure is, That upon sight hereof, the same
shall be discharged and made void, or otherwise not prejudicial to him.

Given under Our Signet at Our Court at Theobalds, the Thirteenth Day of July,
in the Tenth Year of Our Reign. To all and singular Our Judges of Assize,
Justices of the Peace, etc. whom it does or may concern, and to every of them.
Thus was that good King so far abused (by having a Traitor represented to him
as a Loyal Subject) as to grant a Protection to this Read, who intended to make
no other use of it, than thereby to destroy with the more safety his ROYAL
PROTECTOR.

This Plot against King Charles the First, was buried in a Bloody Civil War,
but raised again against King Charles the Second, in time of Peace, by the
Bloodthirsty Jesuits; the Discovery whereof has been sufficiently made known by
the Trial and Execution of several of them, as well as by the Printed
Narratives thereof. To get up their Reputation again, they plotted to throw
their Guilt upon the Dissenting Protestants; but the All-seeing Eye of God
prevented their Villainous Designs by a timely Discovery: The Design and
Discovery whereof, you will find particularly related at the End of this BOOK.

A TRUE RELATION OF THE POPISH-PLOT AGAINST King CHARLES I. AND THE Protestant
Religion.
IF there be any professing the Protestant Religion within His Majesty's
Dominions, who are yet so wilfully blinded, as not to believe the Reality of
the late Conspiracies, or that it has not been a long time carrying on to
extirpate the Protestant Religion, reestablish Popery, and inthral the People
in all the Three Kingdoms, let them but advisedly fix their Eyes and Minds,
upon the Ensuing Letters and Discoveries, and they will easily find Papistical
Plots have been no new things in this Nation. To omit their attempts upon King
Edward, Queen Elizabeth, and King James, these Papists make it evidently out,
that the same Design, and the same Contrivances were on foot in the Reign of
our late Sovereign Charles the First, of Blessed Memory; a True Narrative
whereof these Sheets contain, as they were found in the Archbishop of
Canterbury's Study in the Tower, May 31. 1643.

The first who discovered it, was an Actor in it, sent hither from Rome, by
Cardinal Barbarini, to assist Con, the Pope's Legate, in the pursuit of it, and
privy to all the particulars; who being touched with remorse of Conscience, for
being guilty of so detestable a Crime, revealed the whole Mystery to Sir
William Boswell, the King's Leiger Ambassador at the Hague, who gave private
notice of the same to the Archbishop of Canterbury, by whom it was declared to
the King himself.

Sir WILLIAM BOSWELL's first Letter to the Archbishop, touching this Plot.
May it please your Grace,
THe Offers (whereof your Grace will find a Copy) here enclosed toward a
farther and more particular Discovery, were first made to me at the second
hand, and by word of mouth by a Friend of good Quality and Worth in this place.
But soon after, as soon as they could be put into order, were avowd by the
principal party, and delivered me in writing by both together, upon promise and
Oath, which I was required to give, and gave accordingly, not to reveal the
same to any other Man living, but your Grace, and by your Grace's hand to his
Majesty.

In like manner they have tied themselves not to declare these things to any
other but my self, until they should know how His Majesty, and your Grace
would dispose thereof. The Principal giving me withal to know, that he puts
himself and this Secret into your Grace's power, as well because it concerns
your Grace so nearly after his Majesty, as that he knows your wisdom to guide
the same aright, and is also assured of your Grace's fidelity to His Majesty's
Person, to our State and to our Church.

First, your Grace is earnestly prayed to signify His Majesty's pleasure, with
all speed, together with your Grace's disposition herein, and purpose to carry
all with silence from all but his Majesty, until due time.

Secondly, when your Grace shall think fit to show these things to His
Majesty, to do it immediately, and not trusting Letters, nor permitting any
other Person to be by, or within hearing, and to entreat and counsel His
Majesty as in a case of Conscience, to keep the same wholly and solely in his
own bosom from the knowledge of all other Creatures living, but your Grace,
until the business shall be cleared out.

Thirdly, not to enquire or demand the Names of the Parties from whom these
Overtures do come, or any farther discoveries or advertisements in pursuit of
them, which shall come hereafter, until satisfaction shall be given to every
part of them. Nor to tell to any Person but His Majesty, that any thing of
this Nature is come from me.

For as I may believe these Overtures are veryfiable in the way they will be
laid, and that the parties will not shrink; so I may account, that if never so
little glimpse or shadow of these Informations shall appear by His Majesty's or
your Grace's words or carriage unto others, the means whereby the business may
be brought best unto Trial, will be utterly disappointed. And the parties who
have in Conscience toward God, Devotion to His Majesty, Affection toward your
Grace, and Compassion to our Country disclosed these things, will run a present
and extreme hazard of their Persons and Lives. So easily it will be conjectured
upon the least occasion given either by His Majesty or your Grace, who is the
Discoverer.

These are the Points and Offers which they have pressed me to represent more
especially to his Grace.

For my own particular, having already most humbly craved Pardon of any Error
or Omissions that have befallen me in the managing this business, I do beseech
your Grace to let me know,

First, whether, and in what order I shall proceed with the Parties.

Secondly, what points of these Offers I shall first put them upon to enlarge
and clear?

Thirdly, what other Points and Queries I shall propose to them, and in what
manner?

Fourthly, how far further I shall suffers my self to hear and know these
things.

Fifthly, whether I shall not rather take the parties answers and discoveries
sealed up by themselves, and having likewise put my own Seal upon them, without
questioning or seeing what they contain, so to transmit them to your Grace or
His Majesty.

Sixthly, whether I may not insinuate upon some fair occasion, that there will
be a due regard had of them and their service by His Majesty and your Grace;
when all particulars undertaken in these general Offers, and necessary for
perfecting the discovery, and work intended, shall effectually be delivered to
His Majesty and your Grace.

Upon these Heads, and such other as His Majesty and your Grace shall think
proper in the Business, I must with all humility beseech your Grace to furnish
me with Instructions, and Warrant for my proceedings, under His Majesty's Hand,
with your Grace's attestation, as by His Majesty's Goodness and Royal
disposition is usual in like Cases.

May it please your Grace to entertain a Cipher with me upon this Occasion; I
have sent the Counterpart of one here enclosed.

If these Overtures happily sort with His Majesty's and your Grace's mind, and
shall accordingly prove effectual in their Operation, I shall think my self a
most happy man, to have any Oblation in so pious a Work for my most Gracious
Sovereign and Master. More particularly in that your Grace under His Majesty
shall be Opifex rerum and mundi melioris Origo. Which I shall incessantly beg
in my Prayers at his Hands, who is the giver of all good things, and will never
forsake or fail them, who do not first fail and fall from him, the God of Mercy
and Peace, with which I remain ever more,

Your Grace's most Dutiful and obliged Servant, WILLIAM BOSWELL.
Hague in Holland, Sept. 9. 1640. Stylo loci. I have not dared to trust this
business (without a Cipher) but by a sure hand, for which reason, I have sent
the Bearer my Secretary Express, but he knows nothing of the Contents thereof.



Superscrib'd For your Grace.

Endors'd by the Archbishop with his own hand.

Received Sept. 10 1640.

Sir WILLIAM BOSWELL, About the Plot against the King.
ANDREAS ab HABERNFELD's Letter to the Archbishop, concerning the Plot
revealed to him, written by him in Latin.
Most Illustrious and most Reverend Lord,
ALL my senses are shaken together as often as I revolve the present business,
neither does my Understanding suffice, to conceive what Wind has brought such
horrid things, that they should see the Sunshine by me: for unexpectedly this
good Man became known unto me, who when he had heard me discoursing of these
Scotch stirs, said, that I knew not the Nerve of the business, that those
things which are commonly scattered abroad are superficial. From that hour he
every day became more familiar to me, who acknowledging my dexterity herein,
with a full breast poured forth the burdens of his heart into my bosom,
supposing that he had discharged a burden of Conscience wherewith he was
pressed. Hence he related to me the Factions of the Jesuits, with which the
whole earthly World was assaulted; and showed, that I might behold how through
their Poison, Bohemia and Germany were devoured, and both of them maimed with
an irreparable wound; that the same Plague did creep through the Realms of
England and Scotland, the matter whereof, revealed in the adjacent writing, he
discovered to me: Which things having heard, my Bowels were contracted
together, my Loins trembled with horror, that a pernicious Gulf should be
prepared for so many thousands of Souls: With words moving the conscience, I
inflamed the mind of the Man; he had scarce one hour concocted my admonitions,
but he disclosed all the secrets, and he gave free liberty that I should treat
with those whom it concerned, that they might be informed hereof. I thought no
delay was to be made about the things: The same hour I went to Sir William
Boswell, the King's Leiger, at the Hague, who being tied with an Oath of
Secrecy to me, I communicated the business to him, I admonished him to weigh
these things by the Balance, neither to deser, but act, that those who were in
danger might be speedily succored: He, as becomes an honest Man, mindful of
his Duty, and having hearer looked into the business, refused not to obey the
Monitions. Moreover, he forthwith caused that an Express should be dispatched,
and sent word back again what a most acceptable Oblation this had been to the
King and your Grace; for which we rejoiced from the heart, and we judged, that
a sase and favorable Deity had interposed it self in this business, whereby
you might be perserved.

Now that the verity of the things elated might be confirmed, some principal
heads of the conspiracy were purposely pretermitted, that the knowledge of them
might be extorted from the circumvented Society of the Conspirators.

Now the things will be speedily and safely promoted into act, if they be
warily proceeded in at Bruxels. By my advice, that day should be observed
wherein the Packet of Letters are dispatched, which under the Title of, To
Monsieur Strario Archdeacon of Cambray, tied with one cover, are delivered to
the Postmaster; such a Packet may be secretly brought back from him, yet it
will be unprofitable, because all the enclosed Letters are written
Characteristically. Likewise another Packet coming weekly from Rome, which is
brought under this superscription, To the most Illustrious Lord Count Rossetti,
Legate for the time; these are not to be neglected: To whom likewise Letters
writ in the same Characters are included. That they may be understood, Read is
to be consulted with. The forenamed day of dispatch shall be expected: In
Reade's House an accumulated congregation may be circumvented; which
succeeding, it will be your Graces part to order the business. The intestine
enemy being at length detected by God's Grace, all bitterness of mind, which is
caused on either side may be abolished, buried in oblivion, deleted and
quieted, the enemy be invaded on both parts: Thus the King and the Kings
Friend, and both Kingdoms near to danger, shall be preserved and delivered from
eminent danger.

Your Grace likewise may have this injunction by you, if you desire to have the
best advice given you by others, That you trust not overmuch to your
Pursevants, for some of them live under the stipend of the Popish Party. How
many Rocks, how many Scilla's, how many displeased Charybdes appear before your
Grace, in what a dangerous Sea, the Cock-boat of your Graces life, next to
Shipwreck, is tossed, your self may judge; the Fore-deck of the Ship is
speedily to be driven to the Harbor.

All these things (I whisper) into your Grace's ear, for I know it bound with
an Oath of Secrecy; therefore by open name, I would by these Presents become
known to your Grace,

Hague Sept. 14. S. N. 1640. Your Graces most observant, and most officious,
Andrew Habernfeld.

Superscribed by Andreas ab Habernfeld, a Noble Bohemian, Dr. of Physic to the
Queen of Bohemia,

Illustrissimo ac Reverendissimo Dom. Domino Gulielmo Archiepiscopo
Cantuariensi, Primati and Metropolitano totius Regni Angliae Dom. meo.

The Archbishops Indorsement with his own Hand. Received, October. 14. 1640.
Andreas ab Habernfeld. His Letters sent by Sir William Boswell, about the
discovery of the Treason. I conceive by the English Latin herein, that he must
needs be an Englishman, with a concealed and changed name. And yet it may be
this kind of Latin may relate to the Italian. Or else he lived some good time
in England The Declaration of this Treason I have by His Majesty's special
Command, sent to Sir W. Boswell, that he may there see what proof can be made
of any particulars.

The general OVERTURE and DISCOVERY of the PLOT, sent with Sir William
Boswell's first Letter, and written in Latin.
The King's Majesty and the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury are to be secretly
informed by Letters,

1. THat the King's Majesty, and the Lord Archbishop are both of them in great
danger of their lives.

2. That the whole Commonwealth is by this means endangered, unless the
mischief be speedily prevented.

3. That these Scotch Troubles are raised, to the end, that under this pretext,
the King and Archbishop might be destroyed.

4. That there is a means to be prescribed, whereby both of them in this case
may be preserved, and this Tumult speedily composed.

5. That although these Scotch Tumults be speedily composed, yet that the King
is endangered, and that there are many ways, by which destruction is plotted to
the King and Lord Archbishop.

6. That a certain Society has conspired the Death of the King, and Lord
Archbishop, and Convulsion of the whole Realm.

7. That the same Society, every Week deposits with the President of the
Society, what Intelligence every of them has purchased in eight days search,
and then confer all into one Packet, which is weekly sent to the Director of
the Business.

8. That all the Confederates in the said conspiracy may verily be named by the
Poll. But because they may be made known by other means, it is thought meet to
defer it till hereafter.

9. That there is a ready means, whereby the Villainy may be discovered in one
moment, the chief Conspirators circumvented, and the primary Members of the
Conjuration apprehended in the very act.

10. That very many about the King, who are accounted most faithful and
intimate, to whom likewise the more secret things are entrusted, are Traitors
to the King, corrupted with a Foreign Pension, who communicate all secrets of
greater or lesser moment to a Foreign Power.

These and other most secret things, which shall be necessary to be known for
the security of the King, may be revealed, if these things shall be acceptable
to the Lord Archbishop.

Likewise they may be assured, that whatsoever things are here proposed, are no
Figments, or Fables, nor vain Dreams, but such real Verities, which may be
demonstrated in every small tittle. For those who thrust themselves into this
business, are such men, who mind no gain, but the very zeal of Christian
Charity suffers them not to conceal these things: Yet both from His Majesty and
the Lord Archbishop some small exemplar of gratitude will be expected.

All these premises have been communicated under good Faith, and the Sacrament
of an Oath, to Mr. Leiger Ambassador of the King of Great Britain, at the
Hague; that he should not immediately trust, or communicate these things to any
mortal, besides the King, and the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Subscribed, etc. Present, etc.
Hague, Com. 6. Sept. 1640. In the Style of the Place.
The Archbishops own Indorsement.

Recieved Sept. 10. 1640.

The Plot against the King.
The Archbishop of Canterburies Letter to the King, concerning the PLOT; with
the King's Directions in the Margin, written with his own hand.
[I beseech your Majesty read these Letters as they are Endorsed by Figures, 1,
2, 3, etc.]

May it please your Majesty,
AS great as the Secret is which comes herewith, yet I choose rather to send it
in this silent covert way, and I hope safe, than to come thither, and bring it
my self. First, Ye had reason so to do.
because I am no way able to make have enough with it. Secondly, because should
I come at this time, and antedate the meeting, Sept. 24. there would be more
jealousy of the business, and more enquiry after it: Especially, if I being
once there, should return again before that day, as I must, if this be
followed, as is most fit.

The danger it seems is eminent, and laid by God knows whom; but to be executed
by them which are very near about you. (For the great honor which I have to be
in danger with you, or for you, I pass not, so your Sacred Person, and the
State may be safe.) Now, may it please It is an unanswerable Dilemma.
your Majesty, This information is either true, or there is some mistake in it:
If it be true, the Persons which make the Discovery will deserve thanks and
reward; if there should be any mistake in it, your Majesty can lose nothing but
a little silence.

The business, (if it be) is extreme foul. The I concur totally with you in
opinion, assuring you, that no body does, or shall know of this business; and
to show my care to conceal it, I received this but this Afternoon, and now I
make this dispatch before I sleep. Herewith I send his Warrant, as you advise,
which indeed I judge to be the better way.
Discovery thus by God's Providence offered, seems fair. I do hereby humbly beg
it upon my knees of your Majesty, that you will conceal this business from
every creature, and his name that sends this to me. And I send his Letters to
me, to your Majesty, that you may see his sense both of the business and the
Secrecy. And such Instructions as you think fit to give him, I beseech you let
them be in your own hand for his Warrant, without imparting them to any. And if
your Majesty leave it to his descretion to follow it there in the best way he
can, that in your own hand will be Instruction and Warrant enough for him. And
if you please to return it herewith presently to me, I will send an express
away with it presently.

In the mean time, I have by this Express returned I like your answer extreme
well, and do promise not to deceive your considence, nor make you break your
word.
him this Answer, That I think he shall do well to hold on the Treaty with
these men, with all care and secrecy, and drive on to the Discovery, so soon as
the business is ripe for it, that he may assure himself and them, they shall
not want reward, if they do the Service. That for my part he shall be sure of
Secrecy, and that I am most confident, that your Majesty will not impart it to
any. That he have a special eye to the eighth and ninth Proposition.

Sir, for God's sake, and your own safety, Secrecy in this Business: And I
beseech you, send I have sent all back. I think these Apostyles will be warrant
enough for you to proceed, especially, when I expressly command you to do so.
me back this Letter, and all that comes with it, speedily and secretly, and
trust not your own Pockets with them. I shall not eat, nor sleep in quiet, till
I receive them. And so soon as I have them again, and your Majesty's Warrant to
proceed, no diligence shall be wanting in me to help on the Discovery.

This is the greatest business that ever was put In this I am as far from
condemning your judgment, as suspecting your Fidelity.
to me. And if I have herein proposed, or done any thing amiss, I most humbly
crave your Majesty's pardon. But I am willing to hope I have not herein erred
in judgment, and in fidelity I York, Sept. C. R. 13. 1640.
never will.

These Letters came to me on, Thursday, Sept. 10. at night, and I sent these
away according to the date hereof, being extremely wearied with writing this
Letter, copying out those other which come with this, and dispatching my
Letters back to him that sent these, all in my own hand. Once again secrecy for
God's sake, and your own. To his most blessed protection I commend your Majesty
and all your Affairs: And am,

Lambeth, Sept. 11. 1640. Your Majesty's most humble faithful Servant, W. Cant.
The Archbishop's Postscript.
As I had ended these, whether with the labor or indignation, or both, I fell
into an extreme faint Sweat; I pray God keep me from a Fever, of which three
are down in my Family at Croyden.

These Letters came late to me, the express being beaten back by the wind.

The Archbishops Indorsement with his own hand.



Received from the King, Sept. 16. 1640.

The King's Answer to the Plot against him, etc. Superscrib'd by the
Archbishop, For your Sacred Majesty: By the King, Yours Apostyled.

Sir William Boswel's second Letter to the Archbishop.
May it please your Grace,
THis evening late I have received your Graces dispatch, with the enclosed from
His Majesty, by my Secretary Oveart, and shall give due account with all
possible speed of the same, according to His Majesty's and your Graces
Commands, praying heartily that my endeavors, which shall be most faithful,
may also prove effectual, to His Majesty's and your Grace's content, with which
I do most humbly take leave, being always

Hague, Sept. 24. 1640. S. Angelo. Your Graces most dutiful and humblest
Servant, William Boswell.

The Archbishop's Indorsement.

Received, Sept. 30. 1640.

Sir William Boswell his acknowledgement, that he has received the King's
Directions in my Letters.

Sir William Boswell's third Letter to the Archbishop. sent with the larger
Discovery of the PLOT.
May it please your Grace,
UPon receipt of His Majesty's Commands, with your Grace's Letters of 9, and
18, Sept. last, I dealt with the party to make good his Offers formerly put in
mine hand, and transmitted to your Grace: This he hopes to have done, by the
enclosed, so far as will be needful for His Majesty's satisfaction; yet if any
more particular explanation or discovery shall be required by His Majesty or
your Grace, He has promised to add thereunto, whatsoever he can remember, and
knows of truth. And for better assurance and verification of his integrity, he
professes himself ready (if required) to make Oath of what he has already
declared, or shall hereafter declare in the business.

His name he conjures me still to conceal, though he thinks His Majesty and
your Grace, by the Character he gives of himself, will easily imagine who he is,
having been known so generally through Court and City, as he was for three or
four years, in the quality and employment he acknowlegeth (by his Declaration
enclosed) himself to have held.

Hereupon he does also redouble his most humble and earnest Suit unto His
Majesty and your Grace, to be most secret and circumspect in the business, that
he may not be suspected to have discovered, or had a hand in the same.

I shall here humbly beseech your Grace to let me know what I may further do
for His Majesty's service, or for your Graces particular behoof; that I may
accordingly endeavor to approve my self, As I am,

Hague, October. 15. 1640. Your Grace's mest dutiful and obliged Servant, William
Boswell.

The Archbishop's Indorsment.

Received October. 14. 1640.

Sir William Boswell in prosecution of the great business. If any thing come to
him in Ciphers, to send it to him.

The large particular Discovery of the PLOT and Treason against the King,
Kingdom, and Protestant Religion, and to raise the Scottish Wars, written in
Latin.
Most Illustrious and Reverend Lord,
WE have willingly and cordially perceived, that our offers have been
acceptable both to his Royal Majesty, and likewise to your Grace. This is the
only Index to us, That the blessing of God is present with you, whereby a spur
is given, that we should so much the more cheerfully and freely utter and
detest those things whereby the hazard of both your lives, the subversion of
the Realm and State both of England and Scotland, the tumbling down of his
Excellent Majesty from his Throne, is intended. Now lest the discourse should
be enlarged with superfluous circumstances, we will only premise some things
which are merely necessary to the business.

You may first of all know, that this good man, by whom the ensuing things are
detected, was born and bred in the Popish Religion, who spent many years in
Ecclesiastical dignities. At length being found fit for the expedition of the
present Design, by the counsel and mandate of the Lord Cardinal Barbarini, he
was adjoined to the assistance of Master Cuneus ( Con) by whom he was found so
diligent and sedulous in his Office, that hope of great promotion was given to
him. Yet he, led by the instinct of the good Spirit, has, howsoever it be,
contemned sweet promises, and having known the vanities of the Pontifician
Religion (of which he had sometime been a most severe defender) having likewise
noted the malice of those who fight under the Popish banner, felt his
Conscience to be burdened; which burden that he might ease himself of, he
converted his mind to the Orthodox Religion. Soon after, that he might
exonerate his Conscience, he thought fit, that a desperate Treason, machinated
against so many souls, was to be revealed, and that he should receive ease if
he vented such things in the bosom of a friend: which done, he was seriously
admonished by the said friend, that he should show an example of his conversion
and charity, and free so many innocent souls from imminent, danger To whose
monitions he willingly consented, and delivered the following things to be put
in writing, out of which the Articles not long since tendered to your Grace,
may be clearly explicated and demonstrated.

1. First of all, that the hinge of the business may be rightly discerned, it
is to be known, that all those factions with which Christendom is at this day
shaken, do arise from the Jesuitical Offspring of Cham, of which four Orders
abound throughout the World.

Of the first Order are Ecclesiastics, whose Office it is to take care of
things promoting Religion.

Of the second Order are Politicians, whose Office it is by any means to shake,
trouble, and reform the state of Kingdoms and Republics.

Of the third Order are Seculars, whose property it is to obtrude themselves
into Offices with Kings and Princes, to insinuate and immix themselves in Court
businesses, bargains and sales, and to be busied in civil affairs.

Of the fourth Order are Intelligencers, ( or Spies) men of inferior
condition, who submit themselves to the services of great men, Princes, Barons,
Noblemen, Citizens, to deceive ( or corrupt) the minds of their masters.

2. A Society of so many Orders, the Kingdom of England nourishes: for scarce
all Spain, France, and Italy, can yield so great a multitude of Jesuits, as
London alone; where are found more than 50 Scottish Jesuits. There the said
society has elected to it self a Seat of iniquity, and has conspired against
the King, and the most faithful to the King, especially the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, and likewise against both Kingdoms.

3. For it is more certain than certainty it self, that the forenamed society
has determined to effect an universal reformation of the Kingdom of England
and Scotland. Therefore the determination of the end, necessarily infers a
determination of means to the end.

4. Therefore to promote the undertaken Villainy, the said society dubbed it
self with the Title of, The Congregation of propagating the Faith; which
acknowledges the Pope of Rome the Head of the College, and Cardinal Barbarini
his substitute and Executor.

5. The chief Patron of the society at London, is the Popes Legate, who takes
care of the business; into whose bosom, these dregs of Traitors weekly deposite
all their Intelligences. Now the residence of this Legation was obtained at
London in the name of the Roman Pontiff, by whose mediation it might be lawful
for Cardinal Barbarini to work so much the more easily and safely upon the King
and Kingdom. For none else could so freely circumvent the King, as he who
should be palliated with the Popes Authority.

6. Master Cuneus did at that time enjoy the Office of the Popes Legate, an
Universal Instrument of the conjured society, and a serious Promoter of the
business, whose secrets, as likewise those of all other Intelligencers, the
present good man, the Communicator of all these things, did revive and expedite
whither the business required.

Cuneus set upon the chief men of the Kingdom, and left nothing unattempted, by
what means he might corrupt them all, and incline them to the pontifician
party: he enticed many with various incitements, yea, he sought to delude the
King himself with gifts of Pictures, Antiquities, idols, and of other vanities
brought from Rome, which yet would prevail nothing with the King.

Having entered familiarity with the King, he is often requested at Hampton
Court, likewise at London, to undertake the Cause of the Palatine, and that he
would interpose his Authority, and by his intercession persuade the Legate of
Colen, that the Palatine, in the next Diet to treat of peace, might be inserted
into the Conditions; which verily he promised, but performed the contrary. He
writ indeed, that he had been so desired by the King concerning such things,
yet he advised that they should not be consented to, lest peradventure it might
be said by the Spaniard, that the Pope of Rome had patronized an heretical
Prince.

In the mean time, Cuneus smelling from the Archbishop, most trusty to the
King, that the Kings mind was wholly pendulous (or doubtful,) Resolved, That he
would move every stone, and apply his forces, that he might gain him to his
party: Certainly confiding, that he had a means prepared. For he had a command
to offer a Cardinals Cap to the Lord Archbishop in the name of the Pope of
Rome, and that he should allure him also with higher promises, that he might
corrupt his sincere mind. Yet a fitting occasion was never given, whereby he
might insinuate himself into the Lord Archbishop. Free access was to be gained
by the Earl and Countess of A -- likewise Secretary W -- The intercession of
all which being neglected, he did fly the company or familiarity of Cuneus,
worse than the plague: He was likewise persuaded by others of no mean rank,
well known to him, neither yet was he moved.

7. Another also was assayed, who hindered access to the detestable wickedness,
Secretary Cook, he was a most bitter hater of the Jesuits, whom he intercepted
from acces, to the King, he entertained many (of them) according to their
deserts, he diligently enquired into their factions; by which means every
incitement, breathing a magnetical (attractive) power to the Popish party, was
ineffectual with him; for nothing was so dear unto him, that might incline him
to wickedness. Hereupon being made odious to the Patrons of the Conspiracy, he
was endangered to be discharged from his Office; it was labored for three
years space, and at last obtained.

Yet notwithstanding there remained on the Kings part a knot hard to be untied,
for the Lord Archbishop, by his constancy, interposed himself as a most hard
rock.

When Cuneus had understood from the Lord Archbishops part, that he had
labored in vain, his malice and the whole Societies waxed boiling hot: soon
after ambushes began to be prepared, wherewith the Lord Archbishop together
with the King should be taken.

Likewise a sentence is passed against the King (for whose sake all this
business is disposed) because nothing is hoped from him which might seem to
promote the Popish Religion; but especially when he had opened his mind, that
he was of this opinion, That every one might be saved in his own Religion, so
as he be an honest and pious man.

8. To perpetrate the Treason undertaken, the criminal Execution at
Westminster, caused by some Writings of Puritans, gave occasion of the first
Fire: which thing was so much exasperated and exaggerated by the Papists to the
Puritans, that if it remained unrevenged, it would be thought a blemish to
their Religion; The Flames of which Fire, the Scotch Book of Prayers increases,
occasioned by it is alterations.

9. In this heat, a certain Scottish Earl, called Maxfield, if I mistake not,
was expedited to the Scots by the Popish Party; with whom two other Scottish
Earls, Papists, held correspondency: He was to stir up the People to Commotion,
and rub over the injury afresh, that he might inflame their minds, precipitate
them to Arms, by which the hurtful disturber of the Scottish Liberty might be
slain.

10. By this one labor, snares are prepared for the King; for this purpose the
present business was so ordered, That very many of the English should adhere to
the Scots; That the King should remain inferior in Arms, who (thereupon)
should be compelled to crave assistance from the Papists, which yet he should
not obtain, unless he would descend unto conditions, by which he should permit
Universal liberty of the exercise of the Popish Religion; for so the affairs of
the Papists would succeed according to their desire. To which consent, if he
should show himself more difficult, there should be a present remedy at hand.
The King is to be dispatched: For an Indian Nut, stuffed with most sharp
Poison, is kept in the Society (which Cuneus at that time showed often to me in
a boasting manner) wherein a Poison was prepared for the King; after the
Example of his Father.

11. In this Scottish Commotion, the Marquess of Hamilton, often dispatched to
the Scots in the Name of the King, to interpose the Royal Authority, whereby
the heat of minds might be mittigated, returned notwithstanding as often
without fruit, and without ending the Business: His Chaplain at that time
repaired to us, who communicated some things secretly with Cuneus. Being
demanded of me in jest, Whether also the Jews agreed with the Samaritans?
Cuneus thereunto answered; Would to God all Ministers were such as he: What you
will may be hence conjectured.

12. Things standing thus, there arrived at London from Cardinal Richelieu, Mr.
Thomas Chamberlain, his Chaplain and Almoner, a Scot by Nation, who was to
assist the College of the confederate Society, and seriously to set forward the
Business, to leave nothing unattempted, whereby the first heat might be
exasperated. For which service he was promised the reward of a Bishopric; He
cohabited with the Society four Months space; neither was it lawful for him
first to depart, until things succeeding according to his wish, he might be
able to return back again with good news.

13. Sir Toby Matthew, a Jesuited Priest, of the Order of Politicians, a most
vigilant man of the chief heads, to whom a Bed was never so dear, that he would
rest his head thereon, refreshing his Body with sleep in a Chair for an hour,
or two, neither day nor night spared his Machinations; a Man principally
noxious, and himself the Plague of the King and Kingdom of England; a most
impudent man, who flies to all Banquets and Feasts, called or not called; never
quiet, always in action and perpetual motion; thrusting himself into all
Conversations of Superiors; he urges Conferences familiarly, that he may fish
out the minds of Men; What ever he observes thence, which may bring any
commodity, or discommodity to the part of the Conspirators, he communicates to
the Pope's Legate; the more secret things he himself writes to the Pope, or to
Cardinal Barbarini. In sum, he adjoins himself to any man's company; no word can
be spoken, that he will not lay hold on, and accommodate to his Party. In the
mean time, whatever he has fished out, he reduces into a Catalogue, and every
Summer carries it to the general Consistory of the Jesuits Politics, which
secretly meets together in the Province of Wales, where he is an acceptable
guest. There Counsels are secretly hammered, which are most meet for the
Convulsion of the Ecclesiastic, and Politic Estate of both Kingdoms.

14. Captain Read, a Scot, dwelling in Long-acre-street, near the Angel Tavern,
a secular Jesuit, who for his detestable office performed (whereby he had
perverted a certain Minister of the Church, with secret incitements to the
Popisn Religion, with all his Family, taking his Daughter to Wife) for a
recompense, obtained a Rent, or Impost upon Butter, which the Country People
are bound to render to him, procured for him by some chief men of the Society,
who never want a spur, whereby he may be constantly detained in his Office. In
his House the business of the whole Plot is concluded, where the Society, which
has conspired against the King, the Lord Archbishop, and both Kingdoms, meet
together, for the most part every day: But on the day of the Carriers (or
Posts) dispatch, which is ordinarily Friday, they meet in greater numbers; for
then all the Intelligencers assemble, and confer in common, what things every
of them has fished out that Week; who, that they may be without suspicion,
send their secrets by Sir Toby Matthew, or Read himself, to the Pope's Legate;
he transmits the compacted Packet, which he has purchased from the
Intelligencers, to Rome.

With the same Read, the Letters brought from Rome are deposired, under fained
Titles and Names, and by him are delivered to all to whom they appertain: For
all and every of their Names are known to him.

Upon the very same occasion, Letters also are brought hither under the covert
of Father Philip; (he notwithstanding, being ignorant of things) from whom they
are distributed to the Conspirators.

There is in that very House, a public Chapel, wherein an ordinary Jesuit
Consecrates, and dwells there. In the said Chapel Masses are daily celebrated
by the Jesuits, and it serves for the Baptizing of the Children of the House,
and of some of the Conspirators.

Those who assemble in the forenamed House, come frequently in Coaches, or on
Horseback in Laymens Habit, and with a great Train, wherewith they are
disguised, that they may not be known, yet they are Jesuits, and conjured
members of the Society.

15. All the Papists of England contribute to this Assembly, lest any thing
should be wanting to promote the undertaken Design. Out of whose Treasury, a
Widow, owner of the Houses, wherein Secretary W. now dwells, dead above three
Years since, bestowed forty Thousand English Pounds; so likewise others
contributed above their abilities, so as the business may be promoted unto its
desired end.

16. Besides the foresaid Houses, there are Conventicles also kept in other
more secret places, of which they dare not confide, even among themselves, for
fear lest they should be discovered. First, every of them are called to certain
Inns, (one not knowing of the other;) hence they are severally led by Spies to
the place where they ought to meet; otherwise ignorant where they ought to
assemble, lest peradventure they should be surprised at unawares.

17. The Countess of A -- a strenuous She-Champion of the Popish Religion,
bends all her Nerves to the Universal Reformation; whatsoever she hears at the
King's Court, that is done secretly, or openly, in words or deeds, she
presently imparts to the Pope's Legate, with whom she meets thrice a day.
Sometimes in A -- House, now at the Court, then at Tarthal. He scarce sucks
such things by the Claw.

The Earl himself, called now about three years since, this year ought to go to
Rome, without doubt to consult there of serious things concerning the Design.

At Greenwich, at the Earls cost, a Feminine School is maintained, which
otherwise is a Monastery of Nuns; for the young Girls therein, are sent forth
hither and thither, into Foreign Monasteries beyond the Seas.

Mr. P -- of the King's Bedchamber, most addicted to the Popish Religion, is a
bitter enemy of the King, he reveals all his greatest Secrets to the Pope's
Legate; although he very rarely meets with him, yet his Wife meets him so much
the oftener, who being informed by her Husband, conveys secrets to the Legate. In
all his actions, he is nothing inferior to Sir Toby Matthew; it cannot be
uttered, how diligently he watches on the business.

His Sons are secretly instructed in the Popish Religion; openly, they profess
the Reformed. The eldest is now to receive his Fathers Office, under the King
which shall be. A Cardinal's Hat is provided for the other, if the Design shall
succeed well.

Above three Years past, the said Mr. P -- was to be sent away by the King to
Marocco; but he was prohibited by the Society, lest the business should suffer
delay thereby.

He is a Patron of the Jesuits, for whom, for the exercise of Religion, he
provides Chapels both at home and abroad.

Secretary W -- a most fierce Papist, is the most unfaithful to the King of all
men, who not only betrays and reveals even the King's greatest secrets, but
likewise communicates Counsels, by which the Design may be best advanced. He,
at least thrice every Week, converseth with the Legate in Nocturnal
Conventicles, and reveals those things which he thinks fit to be known; for
which end, he hired a House near to the Legates House, whom he often resorts to,
through the Garden door; for by this vicinity, the meeting is facilitated.

The said Secretary is bribed with Gifts to the Party of that conjured Society,
by whom he is sustained, that he may the more seriously execute his Office.

He sent his Son expressly to Rome, who was to insinuate himself into the Roman
Pontif.

Sir D -- Sir W -- Mr. M -- the younger, who has been at Rome; my Lord S -- a
Cosen of the Earl of A -- the Countess of N -- the Duchess of B -- and many
others, who have sworn into this Conspiracy, are all most vigilant in the
Design. Some of these are enticed with the hope of Court, others of Political
Offices; Others attend to the sixteen Cardinals Caps that are vacant, which are
therefore detained idle for some years, that they may impose a vain hope on
those who expect them.

The President of the aforesaid Society was my Lord Gage, a Jesuit Priest, dead
above three years since. He had a Palace adorned with lascivious Pictures,
which counterfeited Profaneness in the House, but with them was palliated a
Monastery, wherein forty Nuns were maintained, hid in so great a Palace: It is
situated in Queen Street, which the Statue of a Golden Queen adorns. The
secular Jesuits have bought all this Street, and have designed it into a
Quadrangle, where a Jesuitical College is built in private, with this hope,
that it might be openly finished, as soon as the universal reformation was
begun.

The Pope's Legate uses a threefold Character or Cipher; one of which he
communicates with all Nuncioes; another, with Cardinal Barbarini only; with a
third, he covers some greater secrets to be communicated.

Whatsoever things he either receives from the Society, or other Spies, those
he packs up together in one bundle, dedicated under this Inscription; To
Monsieur Stravio, Archdeacon of Cambray: From whom at last they are promoted
to Rome.

These things being thus ordered, if every thing be laid to the Balance, it
will satisfy in special, all the Articles propounded.

WHEREIN

1. THe Conspiracy against the King and Lord Archbishop is detected, and the
means whereby ruin is threatened to both, demonstrated.

2. The eminent dangers of both Kingdoms are rehearsed.

3. The rise and progress of that Scottish Fire is related.

4. Means whereby these Scottish Troubles may be appeased, are suggested: For
after the Scots shall know by whom and to what end their minds are incensed,
they will speedily look to themselves, neither will they suffer the Forces of
both parts to be subdued, lest a middle party interpose, which seeks the ruin
of both.

5. With what Sword the King's Throat is assaulted, even when these stirs shall
be ended, Cuneus his Confession, and a visible Demonstration, shows.

6. The place of the Assembly in the House of Captain Read is nominated

7. The day of the eight days dispatch by Read and the Legate is prescribed

8. How the names of the Conspirators may be known.

9. Where this whole Congregation may be circumvented.

10. Some of the Principal unfaithful ones of the King's Party are notified by
name; many of whose names occur not, yet their habitations are known; their
names may be easily extorted from Read.

If these things be warily proceeded in, the strength of the whole business
will be brought to light; so the arrow being foreseen, the danger shall be
avoided; which that it may prosperously succeed, the Omnipotent Creator grant.

The Archbishops Indorsement with his own hand.

Received, October 14. 1640.

The Narration of the great Treason, concerning which he promised to Sir
William Boswell to discover, against the King and State.

Historical Remarks ON THE JESUITS.
WHoever shall Compare the before-recited PLOT against King Charles the First,
of Glorious Memory, with that against His most Sacred Majesty now Reigning;
shall find them so like in all the Parts and Circumstances, that never were two
Brothers more: the Design the same, the Contrivance the same, the Working and
Machination, all moving upon the same Wheels of KING-killing, and
State-destruction; and in reference to Condition, Quality, Religion, and
Motive, the Conspirators the very same. From whence it follows, that there is
no such Improbability of the Late discovered PLOT, as the Papists would have us
believe. An ill Name is half a Conviction; Quo semel est imbuta recens, and
naturam expellas furcalicet, are the Jesuits Morals: Plot, Contrivance, and
Cruelty are so much the Essential Attributes of Jesuitism, as if like so many
Romulusses and Remusses they had sucked the Milk of Wolves rather than of
Christian Mothers, that when you hear of Plots and Designs against Kings and
Princes, you may be assured what sort of Cyclops were the Forgers of such
Conspiracies.

Neither is this bare Allegation, but Matter of Fact, there being nothing more
frequently taught, nor more frequently practiced, than the rebellious
Principles of the Jesuits and their Adherents. How abominably the Reigns of
several of our Princes here in England has been pestered with this Generation
of Vipers and Blood-suckers, the Penal Statutes of the Kingdom, and the utter
Expulsion of the Popish Priests and Jesuits out of the Nation, are convincing
Evidences. And as to their Behavior in other Countries, take this following
Account.

First then it is a Maxim most true and undoubted, That a Vacuum in Nature may
be as soon allowed, as that there is any Court of King of Prince where these
Jesuits do not swarm and abound, if they can but creep in at the least Creviss.
To come to particulars, we will begin with Portugal, a Kingdom altogether
acknowledging the Papal Jurisdiction.

In the Year 1578. the Jesuits persuaded Sebastian King of that Kingdom, to
undertake that Fatal Expedition into Africa, to the end that by his ruin they
might transfer the Kingdom to the Dominion of the Spaniard. The Success
answered their Expectation; for Sebastian being cut off, together with his Son,
and the greatest part of the Portugal Nobility, presently Philip King of Spain
prepares to invade Portugal with two powerful Armies: But well knowing how
little Right he had on his side, and how much he should be censured as well in
Italy as in Portugal for such an Action, he began to make it a Point of
Conscience, and referred his Scruples to be discussed by the Jesuits and
Franciscans in the College of Alcana de Henares, and of them he desires to
know, Whether if it were apparent that he had a Right to the Crown of Portugal
by the Death of Henry, he were not obliged in Conscience to submit himself to
some Tribunal, that should adjudge the Kingdom to him. Secondly, Whether if the
Portugals should refuse to admit him for their King before the difference were
decided between the Competitors, he might not by force of Arms Invest himself
in the Kingdom by his own Authority. To which the Jesuits and Pranciscans made
answer, That Philip was bound by no tie of Conscience to subject himself to the
Will of another, but might act as he saw fitting by his own Authority. Which
flattering Sentence of those irreligious Cusuists being approved by Philip, he
presently began the War. In the heat of which War, the Jesuits were they that
would have betrayed the chiefest of the Azores Islands to the Spaniards, which
so incensed the People, that some would have had them tried for their lives,
others would have had them and their College burnt together.

In France, Joane Albret Queen of Navarr, was poisoned with a pair of Perfumed
Gloves, at the procurement of the Jesuits, for being the Patroness of those of
the Reformed Religion.

That Rebellious League of the Guizes against Henry the Third of France, was
carried on and promoted by the Jesuits, both at Paris and other places:
Insomuch, that when the League got strength and began to appear, the Jesuits
making a wrong use of their Power of Confessing and Absolving, would Absolve
none that professed themselves obedient Subjects to the King. This unfortunate
Prince was not only harrass'd and tormented by this Villainous and Jesuitical
League, not only driven out of his chief City, but at length at the Instigation
of the Jesuits, stabbed and murdered by a Dominican Monk, by them procured. The
Murder was also applauded by Pope Sixtus the Fifth, in a long Oration spoke in
a full Consistory of Cardinals in these words: That a Monk (says he) should
kill the unfortunate King of France in the midst of his Army, was a rare,
noble, and memorable Act. And a little further, This Act, says he, was done by
the Providence of God, designed by the Inspiration of the Holy Ghost; a far
greater Act than that of Judith, who slew Holofernes. Expressions rather
becoming the Mouth of a Devil, than of a Vicar of Christ.

After him Henry the Fourth was first attempted by Barrier, exhorted and
confirmed in the lawfulness of the Fact by Varada the Jesuit, and others of the
same Gang. Secondly by John Castle, at the Instigation of Gueret and Guignard,
both Jesuits: And Francis Verona the Jesuit, published an Apology in vindication
and justification of the Fact: And lastly, murdered outright by Francis
Ravaillac a great Disciple of the Jesuits. And for no worse Pranks than these,
they were banished out of France by Decree of Parliament, As Corrupters of
Youth, Disturbers of the public Peace, and Enemies to the King and Kingdom.
Truly very honorable Characters for those that pretend to be of the Society of
Jesus.

The Venetians expelled them upon this occasion: The Senate observing that the
Ecclesiastics, especially the Jesuits, began to engross Lands and Houses of
their Territories under the pretense of Legacies, to the great damage of the
Public Income, thought it convenient to put a stop to this Jesuitical
Engrossment; and provide by Law that Ecclesiastical Persons should not possess
all the Temporal Estates in their Territories to themselves, but give leave for
others to share with them, it being positively against the Constitution of
their Order, and the Institution of Christ their Founder. The Jesuits took this
in great dudgeon, and wrote to Pope Paul the Fifth about it.

The Venetians being summoned to answer, would not relinquish their Right,
Protesting withal, that they had the Supreme Jurisdiction in their own
Territories, and consequently to make Laws; and that the Pope had nothing to do
with them in those Matters. Upon which Answer, the Pope thunders out his
Excommunication. The Duke and Senate by public Decree condemn the
Excommunication as unjust and invalid; which done, they call the whole Body of
their Clergy, and to them declare how Affairs stood. The elder sort take part
with the Commonwealth, and maintain the Argument against the Pope in writing,
among whom Paulus Venetus was most eminently Signal: The Jesuits not enduring
the kneeness of his Reasons, hire two Ruffians, and upon the fifth of October,
1607. set them to assassinate Paulus Venetus, who thinking they had done his
work, left him for dead, and fled away. This was something near Sir Edmundbury
Godfreys Case. The Senate hearing this, by a new Law banish the Jesuits for
ever out of their Territories, and cut them off from all hope of ever
returning: And this was their Fortune in Venice.

In the year 1609. the Bohemians made a Complaint to the Emperor against the
Jesuits, for the same Encroachments of which the Venetians had accused them
before, desiring of Caesar that they might no longer be permitted to transfer
and translate into their own possession such ample Patrimonies, under pretense
of Donations and Legacies, as they did continually. Of which when the Emperor
took little notice, they were by the Bohemian States themselves in the year
1618. utterly expelled out of that Nation for ever, with these Characters: 1.
That they were lavish Wasters of the Public Peace and Tranquillity of the
Nation. 2. That they endeavored to subject all Kingdoms and Nations to the
Power of the Pope. 3. That they did nothing but set the Magistrates together by
the Ears. 4. That they made particular Advantage of Confessions, to the
destruction of the people: with many other Crimes of the same nature.

The same year they were expelled out of Moravia for the same Reasons; and the
next year out of Hungaria for the same Causes. In Silesia also a Decree was
made, That the Jesuits should not enter that Province upon pain of Death, as
being the only means to preserve peace in the Nation.

As to other Villainies in Poland, a Polonian Knight, himself a Papist, in an
Oration by him made in a full Assembly of the Polonian Nobility, declares, That
Cracow the most Famous City of Poland, and Ornament of the Kingdom, was so
plagued by the Jesuits, that several good men, though Catholics, affirmed,
That they would rather live in the Woods among wild Beasts, than abide in the
City. One time among the rest, these Jesuits having brought their Conspiracy to
perfection, brake into the most ancient Monument of Antiquity in the City, and
to the great danger of the whole City, set it on Fire, as being granted to the
Evangelics by Consent of the King, and States of the Kingdom.

In Posnania another great City of the same Kingdom, they set Fire on the
Church belonging to those of the Augustan Confession, and committed so many
Insolences without Control, that the Nobility refused to meet at the Diet
shortly after to be held at Warsaw, resolving to repair further off to Lublin,
for the redress of these Misdemeanors. Neither indeed was there any thing more
grievously burdensome to that Kingdom than the Pride and Avarice of those
Miscreants.

In Muscovy, upon the Death of the Great Duke Basilowich, the Jesuits set up
one Demetrius against the lawful Heir, who had made them large Promises, if he
obtained the Dukedom. Thereupon by the help of these Jesuits, the said
Demetrius gets Aid from the King of Poland, which was not only the Occasion of
a great War in Muscovy, but had like to have cost them the Alteration of their
Laws, and loss of their ancient Customs and Privileges, had they not prevented
it by a desperate Attempt upon the Impostor, and put him to Death; surrounded
with Impostors and Jesuits.

The Transilvanians publicly and with one Consent laid all the Cause of their
Miseries and Calamities, upon the Subtilties and Contrivances of the Jesuits,
for which reason by a Public Decree of the States of that Province, they were
Ejected out of the limits of their Territories. Nevertheless they secretly
fomented the Ruin of that Country, and were the reason that Sigismund Bathor
involved himself in War and Trouble, and at length died an inglorious and
miserable Death.

By their Contrivance also Stephen Potski, Prince of Transylvania, opposing
their Bloody Sect, was put out of the way, as they call it, by Poison, in the
year 1607.

In Styria and Carinthia, Provinces of Germany, they never left till they had
voided those Provinces of all the Inhabitants of the Reformed Religion.

In Holland, they never left till they saw the Blood of William Prince of
Orange, spilt by the traiterous Hand of Balthazar Gerard, a Burgundian and
Disciple of their own.

The same Attempts did Peter de Tour, and other Ruffians make upon the person
of Maurice his Son, a brave and Martial Prince, and all at the Instigation of
the Jesuits, those Insatiable Sons of BLOOD and PERDITION.

A VINDICATION OF THE Dissenting Protestants,
From being Authors of the REBELLION against the late KING, and Plotters of
Treason against His MAJESTY now Reigning.

SEeing then no Corner of Europe has been free from the Plots and Conspiracies
of these Jesuitical Fiends, it would be a kind of Crime and sleepy Desertion of
our own Safety, to suffer our selves to be charmed by the Delusions of
insinuating Libels and Rumors of Presbyterian Plots, to mistrust the Truth of
the continued Jesuitical Contrivances against the Kingdom. Neither can they be
thought the best Subjects of England, who are so willing to Gratify the Popish
Party, by giving Credence to such idle Surmizes which they can have so little
ground to believe. The Jesuits have committed a great piece of Villainy in this
Nation; they have attempted the Life of the King, and have been Plotting to
subvert the Established Religion of the Kingdom, and now they would throw it
upon the Presbyterians: Which is a Fourbery so plain, that common Sense and
Policy may easily discover the full intent and meaning of it: And therefore it
is fairly to be hoped, that neither Presbyterians, nor any other Protestant
Dissenters will be so Unchristian-like Disloyal, as to receive any Exasperation
from these Calumnies; but rather unite against the Common Enemy, from whom they
can expect no more Mercy, than the severest Champion of Episcopacy can hope for.

But you will say, the Presbyterians are not accused of any Design to bring in
Popery, but miraculously discovered, as the Authors of a Plot to set up the
Classes of their own Ecclesiastical Government. Well! if it were so, they were
the arrantest Bunglers of Plotters that ever plotted Mischief in this World:
For I do not find their Plot to be above a years standing; And it was a Plot
that was driven on out of pure Kindness to the Papists. For the Presbyterians
understanding that the Papists, (their Incarnate Enemies) were under a
Praemunire, as being accused of Treason and Conspiracy against the KING and
Kingdom; They therefore would needs enter into a Plot, which they would so
order as to be discovered a Twelvemonth after, to ease the Papists of the Load
they groaned under. So that as considering the time, it fell out most
confoundedly unluckily, that the Presbyteriaus should conceal this Plot from
the Papists, till so many good, honest, pious and loyal Priests of Baal, and
Sons of Belial were hanged, which would never have been done, had there been
the least Inkling given of the Meal-Tub in season. But when the Names of the
Persons came to be seen that were to be Actors in this Presbyterian Tragedy,
then to the Laughter of the whole World, there never appeared such a Dow-bak'd
Plot out of a Meal-Tub since the Creation, to bring so many Great Men plotting
against their own prosperity and enjoyments; so many wise and polity
Statesmen, by whom the Nation has been so long steered, to be Plotters and
Conspirers against their own Preservation. These are Plots of such a strange
Nature, that if they could be thought real, they would occasion the unhinging
of the whole Frame of Order and Government, while it were impossible for
Honor, Probity, and Reputation to remain upon the Earth. Obedience and
Allegiance to Government are grounded either upon Religion, or Moral Virtue; or
if these two fail, there is a necessity which obliges the ordinary foresight
of Prudence.

Against these Ambition or Revenge are the only Combatants; but neither
Ambition nor Revenge can bear so great a sway in persons that understand the
Intrigues of Policy, or the more mysterious management of Prudence, as to
delude them into Plots and Conspiracies where there is no prospect of a secure
Change. The Presbyterians are a sort of people wary and deliberate: Neither are
their Tenants, which had their rise and beginnings from men whom the Papists
themselves confess to have been men of great Learning, Eloquence, and Exemplary
Lives, of that Crimson Constitution, as to prompt them to lay the Foundations
of their Hierarchy in Blood and Massacre; or so deeply to wound the Reputation
of the Protestant Religion, by the clandestine Treachery and secret
Contrivances of Disloyalty. For as for that Design of the Huguenots under
Francis the Second, King of France, of which the Prince of Conde, and the
Admiral Coligni were said to be Chief; that was no Design against the Life or
Person of the King, but against the exorbitant Pride of the Guises, Duke and
Cardinal, who were at the same time Papists, and were themselves contriving to
take away the Life of the young King, and translate the Royal Dignity into
their own Family. Neither could the Civil Wars of France be said to be the
Rebellion of the Hugonets: But a War of the Queen Regents, and the two Guises
own weaving, while they all strove to preserve their own Authority. And the
Queen Regent her self was the first that caused the Prince of Conde to take
Arms, as fearing the Guises would wrest the Government out of her hands, by
recommending to his Protection the young King Charles the Ninth her Son, her
Self, and the Kingdom. Nay they were so far from being Rebels to their King,
that they joined with the Catholics for the Recovery of Haure out of the
hands of Queen Elizabeth, who had been their Friend: And though the Admiral and
Danaelot were not at the Siege, for fear of being tared by the Queen of
Ingratitude, yet they sent both their Forces and Friends. Some indeed justly
deserved to be blamed for the violence of their Conduct in the late Wars; but
it is a Question, of which some make no doubt, whether those Violences were not
occasioned by the Papists in Masquerade, who well knew how to intermix
themselves both in their Counsels and Actions; whether they did not stand
behind the Scene and prompt those Sons of Jehu? Whether they did not pour Oil
upon those Flames? For it appears that the Presbyterians (if Names of
distinction may be used among people of the same Religion) were the first that
relented, as is evident by Votes of Addresses, and their Treaty at the Isle of
Wight, not broke off by them, but by One that was playing his own Game, and
meditating the destruction both of his Sovereign and them too: Who having made
his Exit, they then considered what ill Phaetons they had been before, and
returned the more skilful Phoebus the Reins of his Chariot again. But that you
may know that it is an old Dog-trick of the Papists to play the Devils
Incarnate, and lay their most wicked Actions upon the Innocent; I will repeat
this short Story out of one of the choicest French Historians, and a Catholic
to boot. The Queen Regent of France having long designed the Destruction of the
Protestants in France, and of all the chief Heads of the reformed Religion; and
among the rest of Admiral Coligni, the Life and Soul of the whole Party,
projects the Execution, with the Assistance of the Duke of Anjou, the Counts of
Tavanes and Raix, and the Chancellor Birague, and easily drew in the young
King, whom they made believe that there was no safety so long as those persons
were alive, and the young Guises were as ready as she to revenge their Fathers
Death. As for the King of Navar, they had so ordered it, that he was to be
married at Paris at that time, and that brought the Prince of Conde to the
City. But the Admiral more wary kept aloof, till the King had begun the War
with Spain in the Low Countries, which the Admiral had so passionately desired,
and of which the King and Queen Regent, had assured him the Management. Then he
came an end, seeing the War begun, and two of his own Favorites, Noue and
Genlis, at the Head of some thousands in Flanders. And these three Great
Personages, the King of Navarr, the Prince of Conde, and the Admiral Coligni,
brought such Trains after them, as thronged all Paris with the Flower of all
the Protestant Nobility and Gentry of France: Who being all thus within the
Net, Orders were given to make a general Slaughter of all without distinction,
excepting the King of Navarr, and the Prince of Conde. Hence proceeded that
Horrible Massacre in the Year 1572. which lasted for seven Days together, to
the destruction of above 5000 persons of all Ages and Sexes; and among these
above 600 Persons of Quality.

After this Deluge of Blood, and that the Queen had sent the Head of Coligny
Embalmed as a Present to the Pope, the Queen Regent had contrived to lay the
Load of all the committed Impiety upon the Guises, who were Captains of the
Massacre, believing that the Monmor ancies would certainly seek to revenge the
Admirals Death upon them: So that while those two Factions ruined and destroyed
one another, she might have all the Power in her own hands, and rule according
to her own Will. But the Guises being aware of this Design, and having the
Catholic Nobility, the Duke of Montpensier, and the Parisians on their side,
caused the Queen to change her Note; and thereupon she caused the King to write
abroad, That all was done to prevent the detestable Conspiracy of the Admiral
and his Confederates, againsh his Life and Royal Family. Thereupon there was a
Court of Justice erected, wherein the Admiral was Condemned, and after they had
murdered him, Executed again in Effigies, his Goods Confiscated, and his
Children degraded: And the better to color this, two poor innocent Gentlemen
that had escaped the Massacre, were apprehended for saving their Lives,
Briquemaut, and Arnaud de Covagnes, as his Accomplices, condemned to the same
punishment, and executed accordingly.

Thus what these did, our late Plotters would have done: We may then say to all
Protestants in general, Felices Agricole sua si bona norint, Happy would they
be, would they but know their own strength, Would they but make the right use
of these wicked Contrivances of their Enemies, and laying aside all froward
Puuctilio's of private Opinions, join unanimously against the common Adversary.
For if it be a Maxim falsely argued against, that Peace and Diversity of
Religions cannot be preserved in the same Nation, as the Ambassadors of the
Germane Princes urged to Charles the Ninth of France; much more truly may it be
said, that little matters of difference between persons of the same Religion
can be no impediment to their Union and Conformity.

But further to clear the Dissenting Protestants, I shall here add a perfect
Narration of the Management and Contrivance of the Jesuits, to render the
greater part of the principal Men in this Kingdom, as well those of the Church
of England, as the Dissenters, obnoxious to the Government, thereby utterly to
ruin them and the Protestant Religion, which Design God of his infinite
Goodness has been pleased to bring to Confusion, and the Instruments thereof
through the same Divine Providence, we hope shortly to see brought to Condign
Punishment.

A Complete HISTORY OF THE LAST PLOT OF THE PAPISTS, UPON THE Dissenting
Protestants.
THe late PLOT of the Romish Priests and Jesuits for murdering His Majesty,
subverting the Government and Protestant Religion, and introducing Popery,
being proved by undeniable Evidences and Circumstances; the cunning Jesuits
thought it their best way (since peoples Eyes were too open to be made believe
there was no PLOT) to confess there was a Plot, and to aggravate it too; but
withal to use their utmost skill to prove, That this Plot was not a
Popish-Plot, as was generally believed, but a pure Design of the Presbyterians,
and other Dissenters from the Protestant Church of England, to ruin the Loyal
Roman Chatholiques, whilst indeed themselves were the Conspirators; who
(whereas they gave out that the Papists intended by murdering the King, etc. to
bring in Popery) really intended by killing His Majesty, to Introduce
Presbytery and a Commonwealth, and so at one Blow subvert the Government both
in Church and State, and then to set up a new one of their own under the Name
of Conservators of the Liberties of England: And for this purpose they had
secretly given out Commissions for raising an Army, the principal Officers
whereof were such Persons who seemed to have the greatest share in the Peoples
Affections.

This Design being agreed to by these Hellish Miscreants, all possible
Diligence was used to bring it to Execution; and for this purpose they drew up
the Scheme of a Government they intended to Impeach several of the truly Loyal
Nobility and Gentry, and the whole Body of Dissenting Protestants, of
conspiring. This being done, they began to form Letters of Intelligence
concerning this Presbyterian Plot, and also to provide themselves with Persons
to Swear for the Truth of their Allegations. To this end Mrs. Cellier (a
zealous Papist, and Midwife to the Lady Powis, and other Roman Catholic Ladies)
procures the Enlargement of one Wiltoughby, alias Dangerfield, alias Thomas;
alias Day, who had been a Prisoner in Newgate about six Weeks, and had been
Convicted once at Salisbury Assizes, (where he was fined Five pounds, and
sentenced to stand Three several times in the Pillory, which he did twice, and
then brake Prison and escaped;) and twice at the Old Bailey, for uttering false
Guineys, (where for the first Offense he was fined Fifty pounds, and for the
second he got His Majesty's Pardon.) He was no sooner released from Newgate,
but he was Arrested and thrown into the Counter, from whence by the means of
Bannister and Scarlet she got him removed to the King's Bench, where (after
some fruitless attempts to get some Papers relating to Captain Bedlow from one
Strode a Prisoner there) he was furnished with Money by the five Lords in the
Tower, viz. the Lord Bellasis, the Lord Powis, the Lord Petre, the Lord
Arundel, and the Lord Stafford, (Mrs. Cellier also giving him 5 l.) to Compound
all his Debts, etc. Before Mrs. Cellier would discharge him from Newgate, she
made trial of his Wit, by ordering him to draw up Articles according as she
directed, against Captain Richardson, which he performed to her liking, and
confirmed her in the Choice she had made of his being a fit person to carry on
the Designed Plot. The general Esteem the Conspirators had of him is evident by
the Trust they reposed in him; for though they had several Others to carry on
their New Plot, yet he appears to have the chief Management of it.

Being now sufficiently provided with Instruments to execute their Damnable
Designs, this Dangerfield was recommended to His Majesty by a Great Person, as
one who was much concerned in a Plot of the Presbyterians against His Life and
Government, and that from time to time he would make discovery thereof. Thus
they endeavored to insinuate into His Majesty's Mind a belief of the Plot,
that he might not be surpised at the Discovery they intended to make.

Another of the intended Actors in this Tragedy, was Thomas Courtees, once a
Clerk to Sir William Bucknal, one of the Excise Farmers, then a Servant to Mr.
Henry Nevil, and after to a worthy Member of Parliament; from whose Service, he
fell into a lewd course of life: But being thought a Man fit for the Design in
hand, he was entertained for one of the Witnesses. This Person was very
industrious in promoting a Belief of this Presbyterian Plot; for being well
acquainted with Mrs. Bradley, who keeps the House called Heaven in Old
Palace-Yard; and there being a Club of several honest Gentlemen kept at her
House, he desired her to bring him into their Company, which she promised to
endeavor. Discoursing with her about the late Plot, he told her, that it would
shortly appear to be a Plot of the Presbyterians, and that they were privately
giving out Commissions for raising an Army: Whereupon she demanded, who gave
out the Commissions; to which he replied, it was Mr. Blood; and added further,
That if she would use her Interest with Mr. Blood, to get a Commission for him,
though it were but for an Ensign, he would give her 100 l. and told her also
that he should get 5000 l. by it. Mrs. Bradley told this to Mr. Blood, who
fearing the Consequence, acquainted His Majesty therewith, and from Him
received Encouragement to make a further Inquiry into this Matter. Mr. Blood
hereupon desired the Woman to keep still her Correspendency with Courtees, and
if possible to find out the Mystery of this Business. Courtees came several
times afterward to the House, and discoursed freely with her about the
beforementioned matter, and told her, that he knew seven or eight persons who
were employed upon the same account as he was.

But that which follows put a stop to his proceedings, and made these wicked
Agents carry themselves more warily.

The Jesuits thought it not sufficient to throw the Plot upon the
Presbyterians; unless they could likewise bring off the Evidence that had sworn
against them, and by getting them to recant, put their Innocence out of
Question. For this purpose Mr. Dugdale, one of the Kings Evidence, is attempted
by one Mrs. Price, (for whom it is said Mr. Dugdale had formerly some
kindness;) she warily discovers her Design, and he as warily entertains it; and
after some Treaty, one Mr. Tesborough appears in the Case. They promised Mr.
Dugdale a great Sum of Money, upon condition that he would Recant what he had
Sworn, and Sign a Paper, which they had ready drawn up to this effect.

Being touched with a True Remorse of Conscience, and an hearty Sorrow for the
Great Evil I have done, in appearing as a witness against the Catholics, and
there speaking that which in my own Conscience I know to be far from the Truth;
I think my self bound in Duty to God, to Man, and for the safety of my own
Soul, to make a true Acknowledgment, how I was drawn into thesewicked Actions;
but being well satisfied that I shall create my self many powerful. Enemies
upon this account, I have retired my self to a place of Safety, where I will
with my own hand discover the great Wrong that has been done the Catholics,
and hope it may gain Belief: I do likewise Protest before Almighty God, that I
have no Motive to Induce me to this confession, but a True Repentance for the
Mischiefs that I have done, and do hope that God Almighty will forgive me.

Having done this, they told him he might immediately withdraw himself beyond
the Seas into Spain, where he should be honorably entertained, during his stay
there, which should be no longer than till they had brought their Designs to
their desired End, and then he should be recalled, and have both Riches and
Honor conferred upon him as a Reward for faithfully serving the Catholic
Interest. Mr. Dugdale seemed willing to agree to their Proposals, (though at
the same time he acquainted several honest Gentlemen of every particular that
passed) if the Reward could be ascertained to him; but as for the two Proposers
he would not take their Security for it; whereupon they offered the Security of
a Foreign Ambassador, but he told them that he thought him a Person not fit for
Security, because he might suddenly be commanded home, and then he could have
no remedy against him. Then they proposed several others, whose Security they
said he need not question; but still he found a plausible Excuse; his Design
being only to gain time, that he might make a further Discovery who set them
on work. His Delays created a Jealousy in them, that he never intended to
answer their Desires; wherefore least he should discover this Treaty, and
render them liable to punishment, (as it happened in Mr. Readings Case) they
were resolved to begin with him first; and by the assistance of a great Person,
a Complaint was made against Mr. Dugdale, That he offered for a Sum of Money to
Recant his Evidence, and that he would have Signed such a Paper as
beforementioned; adding withal, that it was a lamentable thing to consider how
much Blood had been shed upon such Evidence. Upon this Mr. Dugdale was summoned
before the King and Council, where giving a full Relation of the Affair, and
having those Gentlemen ready, whom he had all along acquainted with the
Intrigue to prove what he said; and it plainly appearing, that Mrs. Price and
Mr. Tesbrough had endeavored to take off the Kings Evidence, they were both
committed to safe Custody. This it was that alarmed Courtees.

Mr. Dangerfield in this time had been employed to murder the Earl of
Shaftsbury, which he twice attempted, but could not meet with an opportunity,
the Earl refusing to speak in private with him; which he urged, under pretense
that he had something to reveal to his Lordship of great Concern to his
Lordships Person. He waited on his Lordship by the Name of Day, and went armed
with a Dagger, which he received from Mrs. Cellier, to whom three or four were
brought by Mr. Rigaut. To perform this Murder, he was promised 500 l. by the
Lords Powis and Arundel, (the Lord Arundel giving him then 10 Guineys) and
encouraged by the Lady Abergaveny, Lady Powis, Mrs. Cellier, and others, and
his Confessor Sharp conjured him to stab him with all possible speed. After his
first disappointment, they advised him to tell the Earl that he was in danger
of being Impeached for High Treason, and that from Letters under his own hand;
and that when he should find himself in the Tower, he would have cause to
repent that he had refused to hear what he had to tell him. These Instructions
he followed, and told his Lordship that his Servants had Copied out his
Letters, from whence would be drawn Matter to form an Impeachment: But the Earl
would not be Wheadled by this to give him a private Audience, and thereby
administer to him an opportunity of taking away his Life; but asked him which of
his Servants they were that had Copied out his Letters: To which Dangerfield
replied, That he knew not. Then the Earl answered, That he knew that all he
said was false, for that if his Letters were made known to all the World, there
would not be found Matter sufficient to endanger the least Hair of his Head,
much less to form an Impeachment. Whereupon Dangerfield told him, That if that
was his Lordships Opinion, he would take his leave; and so departed, leaving
his Lordship a little jealous of his Intentions.

The Lady Powis would have persuaded him upon a Third Attempt, which he
refusing, she struck him gently on the Hand with her Fan, calling him
Cowhearted Fellow, telling him, she would do it her self; but Mrs. Cellier told
her, that should not be, for She would perform it. In order to which, the very
next day she went armed with a Dagger, to wait upon his Lordship, who received
her very civilly; but being made more wary than formerly, by Dangerfields last
carriage, he strictly observed her, and perceiving her fumbling about her
Pocket, betwixt Jest and Earnest, he clapped his hands upon hers, and there held
them, pleasantly drolling with her till she was ready to depart; but she was
not gone so far as the Door, before she offered to return, which his Lordship
observing, stepped to her again, and clapping his hands upon hers, quite dashed
her out of Countenance; so that she departed without attempting further. Thus
was his Lordship thrice, by Divine Providence, miraculously preserved from the
bloody hands of Papists.

The Plot being now ripe for Execution, and Treasonable Letters ready written,
to be conveyed into the Custody of such Persons they intended to Accuse, and
two or more Witnesses prepared to swear the Delivery and Receipt of such Letters
or Commissions against every man in their black List; Dangerfield under the
Name of Thomas, takes a Lodging in Ax-Yard in Westminster, (pretending himself
a Country-Gentleman) where lay one Colonel Mansel, whose Chamber he soon made
himself acquainted with, and therein conveyed about Nine or Ten of the
aforesaid Treasonable Letters, superscribed to several honest Gentlemen and
Persons of Quality, some of which were Favorers of the Dissenting Protestants:
When he had so done, he informed some of the Officers belonging to the
Custom-House, That in that House there was concealed great Quantities of
French-Lace, and other prohibited Goods, desiring them the next Morning to
bring a Warrant with them and search the House, which they promised. At Night
he brought one Captain Bedford to lie with him (as is supposed) that he might
be a Witness against the Colonel: Next Morning after the Colonel was gone
forth, came the Officers to search for prohibited Goods; Dangerfield was very
officious in assisting them to search the Colonel's Chamber, and at length from
behind the Bed brings forth the beforementioned Packet of Letters; upon which,
casting his Eyes, and seeming surprised, he cried out, Treason, These are all
Treasonable Letters; Whereupon the Officers carried them away to the
Commissioners: But the Colonel coming in soon after, and being acquainted with
all that had past in his absence, found means to retrieve them again; and when
he had so done, he made some Enquiry after Dangerfield, of whose Quality being
well informed, he carried the Letters to His Majesty, with Protestations of his
own Innocence, and Dangerfield's Villainy. Whereupon on the 23. of October, the
Council ordered Dangerfield to be taken into Custody by a Messenger, and after
a full hearing of the Business before them, Oobct. 27. they Committed him to
Newgate.

When Colonel Mansel had thus detected Dangerfield, the above-mentioued Captain
Bedford came in very generously of himself, and confessed several things he was
privy to, amongst which, one was, That this Dangerfield would have persuaded
him to swear that Sir Thomas Player spoke Treason, thereby to have taken away
the Life of that honest Gentleman.

The Letters beforementioned gave Light enough to perceive what the Design was
the Papists were then contriving; Whereupon Sir William Waller (who has been
all along very zealous in discovering the Priests, and their wicked Plots,
notwithstanding their Threats and Attempts to take away his Life) understanding
that Dangerfield used to lodge at Mrs. Celliers, went thither on Wednesday,
October. 29. to search her House; and that he might leave no place unsearcht, he
ordered a Tub of Meal to he emptied, which being done, at the Bottom thereof
was found a little Paper-book tied with red Ribbons, wherein was a List of
several Persons of Quality, and others, to the number of above 500. whom they
designed to ruin by this their New Plot. They had set down his Grace the Duke
of Monmouth for General of the Army to be raised; the Lord Gray, Lord Brandon
and his Son, and Sir Thomas Armstrong, for Lieutenant-Generals, Sir William
Waller and Mr. Blood for Major-Generals, etc. the Duke of Buckingham, Lord
Shaftsbury, Lord Essex, Lord Roberts, Lord Wharton, and Lord Hallifax, were to
have been accused for the chief Counselors and Managers of this Plot. Many
other things were contained in these Papers, relating to the Management of
their Design: Upon this Mrs. Cellier was committed to the Gatehouse.

Their Plot being now sufficiently laid open, Dangerfield (notwithstanding Mrs.
Celliers Encouragement to be constant and firm to the Catholic Cause) thought
it time to confess the Truth, and being brought before the Right Honorable Sir
Robert Clayton Lord Mayor of London, on Friday October. 31. 1679. he made a large
Confession, which held them from Five of the Clock in the Afternoon, until Two
next Morning. Part whereof was, That he was sent for to the Tower, whither he
went in disguise, where after some discourse with the Lord Powis, the Lord
Arundel asked him, If he were willing to do any thing to advance his Fortune;
to which he answered he would do any thing. Then the Lord Arundel asked him if
he would kill the King for a good Reward; to which he replied, He would kill
any body but the King, or his Royal Brother. That then the aforesaid Lord asked
him the same Question again; and he answered, No. Then said the Lord Powis, No,
no, my Lord Arundel does only this to try you: But my Lord (continued he) what
would you give him to kill the King? It Is worth (said the Lord Arundel) 2000 l.
That then the Lord Powis told him, he should have 500 l. to kill the Lord
Shafisbury. That Mr. Gadbury told him, the Lords in the Tower were angry with
him, as also chiefly the Lord Castlemain, for that he would not kill the King,
when he might easily do it, and no hurt befall him. That here, upon he asked
Mr. Gadbury, How no hurt should befall him, when in his Opinion it could be no
less than Death? To which Gadbury made answer, That he knew he might do it
safely, for at the Request of the Lady Powis he had Calculated his Nativity,
and that it was clear from thence. That the Lord Castlemain very angrily asked
him, Why he was so unwilling to do that for which he was released out of
Prison; and fearing some mischief from him, he left him, and went and told Mrs.
Cellier, that the Lord Castlemain was angry; to which she replied, That it was
his custom to fall out one hour, and be good friends the next. That his
Confessor Sharp told him he must do Penance for denying to serve God, as the
Scriptures taught. That he asked him, If they taught him to kill his King? To
which Sharp replied, Yes, if he were condemned by them. That when he told the
Lady Powis and Mrs. Cellier, of having been alone with the King in his Closet;
they both said, What an Opportunity have you lost? And the Lady Powis added,
How bravely might you have killed him, if you had been provided! That he was
sent by the Lady Powis to Mr. Webb's at Petterley in Buckinghamshire, with a
Letter directed, For Mrs. Jean; which Mrs. Jean he found to be a Priest in
Woman's Habit. That upon reading the Letter, Jean administered the Sacrament to
him, obliging him thereby to Secrecy; and then gave him Papers containing a
rough Draught of the Plot against the Presbyterians, which he told him were to
be drawn up into Particulars by the Lords in the Tower, and Mr. Nevil in the
King's Bench. That Mr. Wood told him, The Lords in the Tower had consulted, that
before Mr. Oats wat Indicted, something should be made appear of a
Presbyterian Plot. That one Duddel brought him 27 Letters, written most by by
Mr. Nevil, which Mr. Turner the Lord Powis his Priest, desired some Catholics
might Transcribe; whereupon Mrs. Cellier sent for Mr. Singe who wrote there
about a Week. That the Contents of these Letters were, That there Business went
on well here at London, as they hoped theirs did in the Country: That
Commissioners would shortly be ready; (mentioning in some of these Letters the
Names of diverse Persons of Quality;) and that they would now be their own
Choosers in Matters of Government, and use Papists as they pleased. That these
Letters were to be sent into all parts of the Kingdom where any Presbyterians
lived, and privately to be put into their Houses, and then their Houses were to
be searched, and these Papers produced for Evidence against them, as they
intended against Colonel Mansel.

Saturday, Novem. 1. His Lordship waited on His Majesty and Council with
Dangerfield's Confession; and Dangerfield being again sent for to come before
the Council, did further declare, That all the Lords in the Tower gave him
Money, more or less, and did desire him to go to Turner the Popish Bookseller
to get his Remarks on the Trials Printed. That the Lord Powis advised Lane
should be sent out of the way, lest if Mr. Oats should find him at his House,
they should all be ruined. That he saw Sir G. Wakeman at Mr. Stamford's House,
(the Duke of Newburgh's Agent) in whose own Room he lay, and that Sir George
told him, He hid himself there for fear of the People, who had posted a
threatening Paper over his Door; and that he had received 500 l. by the Queens
Order for his Transportation. That Sir George asking his Advice, how he might
get away, he told him, He had best send for a Shallop from Calice to take him
in about six Miles from Dover, which he did, and escaped to Newport. That
Dormer was Author of Traitors transformed into Martyrs; and that Gadbury had
writ a Ballad and several Pamphlets. That the second time he visited the Earl
of Shafssbury, he intended to stab him, and then put out the Candle, and under
pretense of running down to light it, have made his escape. That the two Books
taken (whereof one was found in a Meal Tub) was writ by him, and that the Names
therein were all Dictated to him by the Lady Powis. That Mrs. Cellier and he
used the words, Lady Mary for the KING, and Lady Anne for the DUKE.

In the Afternoon Mrs. Cellier was Examined, and declared, That Dangerfield had
for some time lain at her House. That she paid 3 l. 10. s. out of the Money to
be distributed to Prisoners for his Release, but denied the paying of Twenty
pounds, or Five pounds, as had been alleged. That she employed Dangerfield
only to get in some desperate Debts belonging to her Husband, and to Bail two
or three persons out of Prison, and in nothing else. That she did lie at the
Lady Powis; but denied she sent a Note to Dangerfield in Newgate, till the Note
was produced, and then she owned it. That she knew nothing of killing the Earl
of Shaftsbury. That she did indeed go to the said Earl upon business. That
Dangerfield did draw up Articles against Captain Richardson, but not by her
Order.

Then Dangerfield was called in again, who said further, That Banister and she
visted him in the King's Bench, and that she ordered him to get the Papers from
Strode about Mr. Bedlow; to which end, Hitton the Priest advised that Opium
should be put into Strode's Drink. That Margaret Mrs. Celliers Maid brought him
Opium from Mrs. Celliers Son-in-law, Plasdel; and that Mounson told him how to
use it. That Knowles and Sharp, Priests, told him if he continued firm to the
Business, he would thereby merit Heaven.

Mrs. Cellier confessed, That she hid the Papers in the Meal-Tub: That she did
agree with Mr. Dangerfield to use Lady Mary in stead of King, and Lady Anne in
stead of Duke. And That Gadbury did Calculate Dangerfield's Nativity, but said,
He would be hanged.

Then the Lady Powis was Examined, who denied all, except, That she paid Ten
shillings per Week to Mrs. Cellier for Dangerfields Diet. That she saw him in
the Stone-Gallery, but was not near enough to speak to him. That once and no
more she discoursed him at Mrs. Celliers, and that then he told her of some
Treasonable Letters hid at Westminster, and that the Secretary refused to give
him a Warrant to search for them, unless he would make Affidavit of it; and
that then Mrs. Cellier advised him to make use of the Custom-House Officers to
search for them.

On Sunday, Nov. 2. Mr. Gadbury was examined, who acknowledged, That he had
seen Mr. Dangerfield once or twice at his House with Mrs. Cellier, and that he
thought he cast his Nativity under the Name of Thomas, and that looking on his
Horoscope, he did say, it prognosticated a bold and adventurous Man, but does
not remember that he told Mrs. Cellier he would be hanged. That he likewise
cast the Lord Powis his Nativity, and that it was a usual thing with him to
cast the Nativities of such Persons of Quality, whose Time of Birth he could be
assured of. But as to other things, he said, He was innocent.

Nov. 1. Susan Edwards, Mrs. Cellier's Maid, deposed, That she carried Notes to
Mr. Dangerfield from her Mistress, when he was in Newgate; as also a Guinney,
Twenty Shillings in Silver, and two Books of Accounts: As likewise a Message by
word of mouth, importing, That Mrs. Cellier's Life lay in Mr. Dangerfield's
hands. And said, That the Lady Powis had been three times at her Mistresses in
five Weeks time that she lived there, and that once she had discourse with Mr.
Dangerfield.

Nov. 2. William Woodman deposed, That Mr. Dangerfield was two Months at the
Lord Powis's House, and that Mrs. Cellier and he writ often; and that he
carried Letters from them to the Lady Powis in the Tower; as also Letters from
the Lady Powis to Nevile in the King's Bench; to whom also he had carried
Letters from Mr. Dangerfield and Mrs. Cellier.

Mary Ayray deposed, That Duddel and she carried Notes taken by Mr. Willoughby,
alias Dangerfield, at Langhorn's Trial, to Mr. Nevil in the King's Bench, and
that they left Dangerfield at a Coffee-House in the mean time. That she carried
a Letter from Nevil to Mrs. Cellier, and another from Mrs. Cellier to the Lady
Powis. That she had seen Sing often with Mrs. Cellier. That Dangerfield writ
the Speeches of the Five Jesuits, as they were dictated to him by Mrs. Cellier.
That she had seen Lane (by Mrs. Cellier's order called Johnson) at Powis-House.

Bennet Duddel a Carpenter, deposed, That he had seen Mr. Dangerfield at
Powis-house. That he went with Mrs. Ayray to the King's Bench, and Mr.
Dangerfield stayed in the mean time at a Coffee-House there by. That they
brought Papers back with them, and that soon after Mrs. Ayray went to the
Tower. That at Powis-house he has often seen Mr. Dangerfield, Mrs. Cellier, and
others, writing. That Mr. Lane lay in the house, and that Mrs. Cellier was once
much concerned when she thought him lost. That Dangerfield once asked him if he
could make a Printing-Press. That he went to the Gate House once or twice with
Mrs. Ayray, who carried Money to the Prisoners. That by the Lady Powis's Order
he made a private place in Powishouse.

To all these Depositions, the Lady Powis being called in, answered
particularly. To Susan Edwards, That when she came to Mrs. Cellier, she never
lighted from her Coach. To Woodman, That she never received a Letter from
Nevil, or sent one to him. That she had received several from Mrs. Cellier, and
perhaps she might have received one from Dangerfield. That going to see the
Lady Gage in the King's Bench, some body pointed to Nevil as he stood at the
Window: And excepting once she never saw him besides that time. To Duddel, That
Mrs. Ayray did bring her some Remarks upon Langhorns Trial, but she never saw
any thing from Nevil. To Mrs. Ayray, That she never brought her any Message
from Nevil.

Being demanded, whether Mrs. Cellier had not been with her in the Tower from
Mr. Willoughby? She answered, Yes; but that she never saw Willoughby but twice.
Hereupon Mrs. Cellier being called, and asked, Whether she had not been in the
Tower with the Lady Powis; she stiffly denied it: but being told, the Lady
Powis her self had owned it, she then confessed she had been there.

Captain Bedford was then called in, and said, That he was at several Clubs
with Dangerfield. That he was at Thompsons the Printers, where was printing,
The Presbyterian unmasked. That Dangerfield paid Money to Dormer in S. John's.
That Dangerfield would have got a List of the Club at the King's Head, but the
Drawer would not give it him. That at the Green Dragon he got the Names of
about 60 Persons that used to meet there. That he went with him to the Sun and
Ship Taverns, where he enquired if the Duke of Monmouth had not been there the
Night before he went away. That Dangerfield said, Gadbury brought him
acquainted with Sir Robert Peyton. That Dangerfield told him, the Lord
Shafisbury, Sir William Waller, Doctor Tongue, and others, had private Meetings
near Fox-hall about the Plot.

The Earl of Peterborough being called in, and having an account of what was
laid to his Charge, made a very plausible Speech in answer thereto; and as to
the business of Sir Robert Peyton, he said, That Mrs. Cellier told him that
among others which she had brought over to be serviceable to His Majesty and
the Duke, Sir Robert Peyton was one, who had declared to her, that he would
gladly come in, but that he thought the Duke of that temper, that he would
never forget an Injury. That then he assured Mrs. Cellier, the Duke was no such
person; and then she replied, that Sir Robert would willingly meet him at Mr.
Gadbury's. That they did meet accordingly at Mr. Gadbury's, where Sir Robert
did say, that he would serve the King to all purposes; but seemed to doubt of
the Dukes being reconciled to him. That afterward he waited on the Duke at his
Lordships Lodgings, and from him received all the assurance of favor he could
desire.

These are the principal things that were acted before the King and Council,
the Result whereof was, that the Earl of Castlemain (first) and (after) the
Lady Powis was committed to the Tower, Mr. Gadbury to the Gatehouse, Mr. (...)
and Mrs. Cellier to Newgate, and several others to the Custody of Messengers.

About this time Sir William Waller (searching a House near the Arch in
Lincoln's Inn Fields, leading to Duke-street) seized on several Habits,
Vestments, Crucifixes, Relics, and other Popish Trinkets, all very rich; as
allodivers Trunks and Boxes full of Books and Papers, that did belong to Father
Hercourt lately executed, wherein are set down several great sums of Money paid
by him in about 7 or 8 years last past, for carrying on the Catholic Cause;
as likewise many other things that confirm the truth of the Kings Evidence.

Among the Relics was found one great Piece of Antiquity, and by computation
of time near 800 years old. It was a Cross of Gold, weighing about 4 Ounces,
upon which on the one side was engraven these words, Defendite Gentes hanc
partem Crucis Omnipotentis; in English, Defend O ye Nations this part of the
Omnipotent Cross: On the other side were engraven the Arms of Alfred King of
England, who dyed in the year 901. Besides which engraving, it was empail'd
with diverse precious Stones of a considerable value. Within this Cross was
another Cross of Ebony, to which the Gold one seemed to serve only for a Case;
and as if it had been a little Nest of Serpentine Idolatry, the Ebony Cross was
inlaid with another Cross of a quite different Wood, which it is supposed, they
believed to be a piece of our Savior's Cross.

There was also a Gold Ring with a Motto wrapped up in white Paper, upon which
was written, The Ring of the Bishop of Glascow, with several other Curiosities,
which are as yet preserved.

On Novem. 5. Mr. Courtees was taken and brought before Justice Warcup, who
having taken his Examination, sent him to the Gate House. At his Examination,
he gave an account of his first acquaintance with Mr. Willoughby, (not knowing
then that he went by any other Name) and that Willoughby told him, that the
Presbyterians were conspiring against the King and Government, and were
privately raising an Army, and that Mr. Blood was one that gave out Commissions
for that purpose; and persuaded him to use his endeavor to get one, and if he
could do so, he would bring him to the King, whereby he should get 5000 l. And
that upon this he made his application to Mrs. Bradley in order thereto,
believing what Dangerfield said, and that there was really a Presbyterian Plot
on foot: so that what he did, he said was upon a Loyal Design. But there is
some cause to suspect what he said, if we reflect on what Mrs. Bradley deposed
on Nov. 1. and what he acknowledged now; viz. That the last time Mrs. Bradley
saw him, asking him when they should get the 5000 l. He replied, that he would
not meddle in it, that it troubled his Conscience, and that it would be
Treachery if it were done, and it is to no purpose to meddle in it now, for
there is a List found out. However it be, he is since bailed out of the
Gate House: And for a confirmation of his Guilt, is gone aside.

And now almost every day new Discoveries are made, either of Priests or their
Appurtenances, Relics and feditious Papers. Dormer a Priest was seized by Dr.
Oats at the Door of the Council Chamger, on Nov. 4. as he was busy in
discourse with the Lady Powis, and was sent to Newgate.

On Nov. 11. Sir William Waller seized at Turner's in Holborn, several
seditious and scandalous Libels, Popish Books and Pamphlets; as also diverse
Beads, and Priests Habits, and some Relics, one of which was a very fine
Handkerchief, which had been dipped in the Blood of the five Jesuits lately
executed.

Not long after Sir William seized on one William Russel, alias Napper, a
Franciscan Friar, and Titular Bishop of Norwich: With him were taken the
Garments belonging to his Office; as also the Form of an Oath of Abjuration,
for his Proselytes, to this effect; That they did from thenceforth renounce
those damnable and heretical Doctrines, wherein they had been educated and
instructed, and that they did oblige themselves under the penalty of Damnation
to remainsted fast in the Faith of the Mother Church of Rome, etc. Together
with a Latin Prayer, in the Margin whereof was written in English, Whoever says
this Prayer shall be free from the Plague. And several Popish Books, etc.

On Friday. Nov. 21. Sir Robert Peyton, Mr. Nevil, Mr. Gadbury, Mrs. Cellier
with her Maids, and others were severally Examined; when it was sworn, that Sir
Robert Peyton had had frequent Conferences with Mr. Dangerfield; and the
further hearing of the Matter being put off till Wednesday, Nov. 26. Sir Robert
was then ordered to give Bail for his Appearance at the Kings-Bench-Bar, the
first day of the next Term, to answer to such Informations as should then be
brought against him by the Attorney General.

Dr. Oats during these Transactions had two of his Servants, Lane (often
mentioned in this History) and Osborn, confederated with one Knox belonging to
the Lord Treasurers Family, against him, who Indicted him for no less a Crime
than Sodomy: But it being proved a malicious slander, and his Accusers perjured
Villains, who were hired by the Lords in the Tower, to invalidate his Evidence,
the Jury brought it in Ignoramus. And Dr. Oats thereupon bringing in an
Indictment against them in the King's Bench, Knox and Lane ( Osborn being fled)
were tried on Tuesday, Nov. 25. When the whole Design was so particularly laid
open, especially by Mr. Dangerfield, (whose Pardon was perfected the day
before) that every one present was convinced of the intended Villainy, and the
Jury (without the Lord Chief Justice's summing up the Evidence) declared them
guilty of the Indictment: But their Sentence is deferred till next Term. We
shall here close our History with our Prayers to God, to bring to Light all the
Dark Contrivances of Jesuits and wicked men; and to their Plots, and our
Divis^^^^^ Dangers, put

FINIS.

