THE APOPHTHEGMES OF THE ANCIENTS; TAKEN Out of Plutarch, Diogenes Laertius,
Elian, Atheneus, Stobeus, Macrobius, and others.

Collected into one Volume for the Benefit and Pleasure of the Ingenious.

LONDON, Printed for William Cademan at the Pope's Head, in the New Exchange in
the Strand, 1683.

TO THE TRULY VIRTUOUS Mrs. Esther Woodward, THE RELICT OF RICHARD WOODWARD
Esquire, Deceased.
Madam,
THere being but two sorts of persons fit for the Patronage of such a Book, the
Great, and the Good; as I have for ma^ny Reasons declined the first so I know
my Choice of the second to be so Judicious by dedicating this to your Self that
I dare adventure to affix my Name to it, which ^ have not done to many others.
I will not let loose my Pen to launch into your just Praise, lest it be looked
upon as Interest, or Flattery; besides, Virtue and Goodness ever carry their
own Commendations, as their own Reward, with them. This piece is one of the
noblest Relics of An^iquity that ever was transferred to us. A learned Author
calls it a Heaven full of Asterismes, a Body full of Eyes, in which if there be
any Defect, it is the too many Beauties crowded together, and like a Banquet of
Sweetmeats must be tasted at Intervals, lest it prove over lushious and cloy,
and one thing impare the Relish of the other, though each be exquisite in its
self. This, though but Paper, may perpetuate your Name beyond the duration of
Monuments of Marble, or Porphiry, for the Apophthegmes of the Ancients shall
last till time shall be no more, and may your Memory live so too. All I shall
add, is, Madam, to desire you would forgive the Weaknesses I may be guilty of
in this, or any other thing relating to your self, and that you would believe
it a great truth (which I expose to the Worlds Contradiction if otherwise) that
I am unfeignedly, and without any mental Reservation,

Madam, Your most obedient Son and most humble Servant, John Bulteel.
York Garden, this 20th. of January 1683.
THE PREFACE.
AN Apophthegme, called in French Un bon Mot, (a good Word) and which may be
called in English, A good Saying, tho it is Signification is somewhat more
extensive in the Original, is a pithy and short Sentiment upon a Subject; or a
^eady, and sharp answer, which causes Laughter, or Admiration. From thence
arises the great distinction in Apophthegmes, between those that are grave and
sententious, and such as are purely pleasant; which I have purposely observed,
and separated, because the mixture of serious, and ridiculous together, has
something of monstrous in it; which appears not with a good decorum. But, as we
are compounded of two parts, which have nothing of common, but their being
united together, and each of them standing often in need of different
recreations; one may turn to those that are pleasant, when Mirth is required,
as we use Interludes in Tragedies to unbend the mind, which is so much upon the
stretch in Heroicks. An Apophthegme is properly therefore, neither a Sentence,
nor Proverb, nor Example, nor Fable, nor Enigma, nor any the like; of which
however Apophthegmes may sometimes be made, when well and fitly applied, And I
have therefore inserted many sentences in this collection, because they seem as
Apophthegmes of some Philosophers. There are others likewise which are mute
ones, which by certain and significant signs make us know what is meant; tho
all these are indeed but improperly reckoned for Apophthegmes. The foundation
of this work is taken from Plutarch, and Diogenes Laertius, etc. But I have not
omitted the addition of a great many others gathered from Erasmus, and such as
Lycosthenes has reduced into Chapters. Notwithstanding I have neither followed
the Method of the one which is too confused, nor of the other, which smells too
much of the College. The mind loves to range freely here and there from Flower
to Flower, like the Bees, without fixing too long upon any one, and so gather's
that Honey which is distributed into little Cells, where every thing lies in
it is own place without disorder, and where every particular may be found out
upon occasion. One would say, ^he mind were jealous of it is prerogative, and
displeased when any one does undertake ^o cut out it is work, or prescribe any
other Method besides it is own. Thence proceeds ^he disgust is often taken in
the Learning of ^he Sciences, where the Mind must be confined and obliged to
certain rules for it is ^nstruction, which Plutarch has not persued in this
work, because nothing ought to be so surprising, or so little Studied, as a
good Apophthegme. For this reason, I have set down no moral reflections, no
more then he, as relishing too much of the Scholar or Preacher: And likewise
because there ought somewhat to be left to the Readers, or the hearers guess
and judgment to breed the greater delight in either. Only I have drawn some
short notes and remarks to give light to some things that seemed most obscure.

In the mean time, I do not know any piece of Antiquity that stood in greater
need of being revised and corrected then this same, which wanted the Authors
last and Finishing touches. Erasmus himself has committed an hundred faults,
thorough his great have, and because he went about it but by piecemeal, some
part at one time, others at another; nor has Lycosthenes succeeded better. I
have therefore transpos^ diverse Apophthegmes of Plutarch's which were so
strangely misplaced, that several, which belonged to the Lacedemon^ans were
disjoined from the main Body the^ belonged to, but are here united as they
ough^ to be. The self same Saying was oft-times repeated under diverse Names,
which is as little pleasing to the Gusto, as the serving of the same cold meat
in several Dishes, ^ have also taken away some that seemed to^ common, and
others whose Beauty and smartness consisted in the proprieties of the Greek and
Latin Tongues, which could not be wel^ translated, considering that one bad one
were enongh to spoil twenty good ones in the opinion of the Reader. I have
likewise discarded some Examples that properly belonged not to the Subject they
were listed under, tho several were so pertinent, I thought it were pity to
lay them quite aside.

On the other hand to make them the more quaint and concise, which is an
essential property of an Apophthegme, I have pared away all the Superfluous
Circumstances, because when we would see a thing perfectl^ well we must remove
from about it every o there Body that might hide or obscure it,

Sometimes it was necessary to give things another Air and expression then the
Author, ^o adapt it to the Language we speak, and ^he Age we live in: Of which
the Ancients themselves afford us examples, by often ^elating the same thing
after diverse man^ers, the truth not being here so material as the Beauty of the
Apophthegme, according to the Italian Proverb, Se non e (...) ben trovato,
wherefore a nice and ^er^^bal translation was not intended. If therefore an
Apophthegme be met with h^^e, which shall not be found in Plutarch, or that it
speak otherwise then he relates it, let me not be rashly condemned, but first
examine the reasons of it is variation upon the grounds above mentioned. Besides
there are many in that Author under the name of him to whom they were spoken,
as for Example, that of Parmenion; when he found the Grecian Ambassadors
murmurred while they attended at the Door of Philip, because he made them wait
so long before he gave them Audience, Do not wonder, Sirs, said he, that he
Sleeps while you are waking, for he was awake whilst you slep^; to reproach
them what advantages they had suffered him to take during their Divisions. This
Plutarch had placed on Philip, where^s it belonged to Parmenion. Others are
likewise ranged in a different order, either because they were put in the
beginning, wh^ they should have been at the end, as tho^ which were spoken at
their Death; or e^ because they were jumbled together unaware I need not to
mention the many new ones i^^serted amongst those that are purely pleasan^ Nor
shall I need excuse these, or any other for not being set down according to the
o^^der of time; for time signifies but little (...) an Apophthegme, and to
bestow the pain of searching or computing the time would be of more trouble
then benefit. The name are not always mentioned neither, it were not worth the
while to search for them, be^sides that many in the Original are omit^ted.

Grave or Sententious APOPHTHEGMES OF Great Men.
STRANGERS.
CYrus Cyrus.
was wont to say, That those that do no good to themselves, are constrained to
do good to others. He meant in my opinion, to their Heirs, whom they en^ched by
their covetousness; though Eras^us has taken it in another Sense.

Being yet a Child, he told Astyages who would persuade him to drink Wine, That
^e feared it was Poison, having observed that ^rinces reeling, and other
strange disorders in ^is drunkenness.

He said, One is not worthy to command, ^nless he be better, or worthier than
those he ^s to command. At least in the Art of Government, for it is possible
that an ill man man have Qualifications fit to Govern, Strangers.
which ho^nest men are not always furnished with, thoug^ he cannot have them
all unless he be virtuou^

He would not suffer the Persians to qu^ their barren and mountainous Country,
(...) possess a more fruitful one; For fear, said he that should soften their
courage: as if the Spirits of men did change with the Nature o^ the Soil, as
well as Plants.

He would not be persuaded to let a beauti^ful Woman be brought into his
presence th^^ he might see her, while she was his Prisoner^ For fear, said he,
lest I should become a slave (...) my slave.

His Steward asking what he would have (...) be made ready for his Dinner,
while his Arm^ was on a march? Some bread, replies he, for mean to encamp by a
River; To intimat^ that all Luxury should be laid aside in a tim^ of War.

He said at his dying, he could not be pe^^swaded that the Soul which had been
able t^ subsist so long in a mortal body, could possi^bly perish when it was
freed from it.

Cresus Cresus.
at the taking of Sardes, seeing the Soldiers plunder and destroy every thing,
ask^ed Cyrus what they were doing? They ar^ plundering your Riches, said he.
Nay, rather yours, replied Cresus, for the Treasures of the vanquished are the
Conquerors. This made him stop them from their pillaging.

Darius Darius.
said, That dangers made him become wise, because they awaken our attention,
and increase our Experience.

Some body upon the opening of a Granade ^^pple, asking him, of what would you
de^^e to have as many as here are Kernels? he ^^swered, as many Friends. It Is
that indeed which Kings stand most in need of, because of ^^e multitude of
Flatterers.

One of his Subjects having horribly torn ^^d mangled his face and body to gain
credit ^^ith the Babylonians, who were revolted, and (...) that means
insinuated himself, and recove^^d the City for him by that artifice, he
ex^^essed much discontent, and said, he would ^ther have lost ten Babylons,
than one such ^riend; or he would rather see Babylon again (...) the Rebels
hands, than see his true Friend in ^^at condition.

His Treasurers having settled the Taxes as ^irly and equally as they could; let
them a^te one half yet, said he, that the burden be ^sie.

The last King of Persia, admiring the Vir^es of Alexander: If the Gods, said
he, will ^^ke this Empire from me, may they give it to one other but him.

Xerxes Xerxes.
having reduced the Babylonians to ^^eir duty, brought all manner of Luxury and
^ebauchery in fashion, instead of the Exercise (...) Arms they used before; To
prevent them, (...) he, from making a second revolt. There ^ing nothing that so
much effeminates the ^urage as debauchery.

Having a Present made him of Figs from ^^hens, let us forbear rasting them,
said he, till we have conquered the Country that pro^duces them; To teach us to
despise Forreig^^ Curiosities.

He said to those that admired to see hi^ weep when he considered the infinite
number of men that were in his Army; It is becau^^ that of this swarm of
thousands, there shall not one of them be living one hundred year hence.

Intending to pass over into Greece, he calle^ all his Generals and Governors
of Provinc^ together, and told them, that he had not su^^moned them to that
place to hear their Opin^^ons, but to tell them his. It had been mo^^ modest to
let them guess that, then to (...) them so; for the burden of subjection
should be made as easy as possible.

Being unable to force a passage, he cried o^^ he had a great Army, and but a
few Soldiers and Arthemisa having acted wonders at the b^^^tle of Salamina, he
said, the Men were turn^^ Women, and the Women Men.

Artaxerxes Artaxerxes Longimanus.
said, that it was more worth for a Prince to give than to receive: Becau^^
Riches and Liberality is the portion of t^^ Great, and cannot be exercised by
Inferiors.

When his great Lords committed a^^ faults, he caused their Garments to be
whi^^ instead of them: To punish them, said (...) by their own shame. In the
East, the Gr^^^dees are wont to be punished like Rascals, a^ suffer the same as
their Slaves.

One of his Officers having been promis^ a sum of money, if he could obtain a
thing ^im that was unjust, upon his Petition gave ^im the like sum of money,
but would not grant his Petition; For I will show my self ^^beral, said he, but
not unjust. This is the ^ore noble, because great men most commonly gratify
their own Officers out of other men's ^^urses.

Themistocles taking Sanctuary under his pro^ection after his banishment: May
the Gods, said he, inspire all my Enemies with the like ^houghts and
resolutions, viz. of banishing their ablest Counselors.

As some would have hindered Cyrus the younger, Cyrus the younger.
who made war upon his Brother, to be present in the battle; a Prince, said he,
who pretends to Empire must not show himself unworthy to possess it: Especially
^uch a Conqueror as he, who needed but have ^emained at home if he feared ought.

Having amongst many other Curtesans brought him a Grecian Woman, who would not
accept of his Caresses; it is for that, said he, that she deserves them most.

His Brother permitted every one to approach him, Artaxerxes M^mnon.
and one day a Peasant presenting him some water in the palm of his hand,
because they were not to come to their Persian Kings empty handed, and he had
nothing else to offer him, he rewarded him^ and said, he regarded the Will and
not the Gift.

Another having presented him some Fruit of an extraordinary bigness, he said,
that he that could improve his Fruits so well, might as well improve his
Government, and make a little State become a great one, and thereupo^ gave him
a Government; and yet there ar^ good Gardiners that would make but very (...)
Governors; though we may truly say, tha^ the industry of man is like a general
For^ that is applicable to all things.

He caused the Queen to ride thorough the Cities in an open Chariot unvailed,
contrar^ to the Custom of those Countries: That the Faces of their Sovereigns,
said he, be no Strangers to the People. In the Greek it is to b^ the more
accessible.

Being compelled upon a Retreat to eat dr^ Figs, and Barley bread, his
Provisions having been plundered, Great Gods, said he, what ^ happiness have I
been hitherto deprived of thorough too much plenty? That shows tha^ where there
is the least Cookery, the appetit^ is the sooner satisfied.

Thus having in an extremity of Thirst^ drunk puddled water; he said, he had
never drunk any that relished better to him.

He said, to a man that spoke ill of him, you have the liberty to say what you
list, and I to do what I list. It is a becoming Act to despise Injuries, when
one has the power to punish them.

A rash young Fellow that belonged to his Court, having had his Coat torn off
from his back in hunting, had the insolence to ask him for his. I give it thee,
said he, but with this injunction, never to wear it. To take away the scandal
of a covetous refusal, and yet maintain his Dignity, for Monarchs of old wore a
peculiar Habit, which other People were for^idden to use. Notwithstanding this
young ^iddy-brain'd Nobleman having put it on, he was only pleased to say to
him, that a Fool was ^ermitted to wear any Coat.

His Mother said, Parysatis.
That Kings were to be ^reated with silken Words. For the Ears of great men
being ever used to Flatteries, cannot endure to be grated with the plain naked
Truth.

His Kinsman retiring himself from Court after some disgrace, Orontus.
said, that Kings used their Subjects, as Men do their Counters; sometimes they
stand for a great deal, otherwhile but for a little. Sometimes a Counter stands
but for one, anon it is 100, and then perhaps ^it signifies 1000.

Memnon Memnon.
the General to Darius, striking a Soldier who spoke ill of Alexander; I took
thee to fight against him, said he, not to rail at him.

The Egyptian Kings Kings of Egypt.
forbad the Magistrates to obey them in things that were unjust, because
Justice proceeded from a higher power than they claimed.

A King of Thracia broke to pieces several rare Presents of Crystal that were
sent him, for fear, said he, lest I should be in passion, when any else should
chance to break them. This was rather an Act of a Philosopher, than a King,
unless his Passion were apt to exceed the bounds of Reason.

After the battle of Levetres, he said to the Thebans, who were proud of their
Victory; That Floods rose oftentimes above the natural Currents, but seldom
lasted long.

Darius being entered into Scythia with ^ Puissant Army, Ida-Thyrse.
the King of that Country informed several petty Princes, who were Subjects to
that Monarch, that they would do wel^ to destroy the Bridge that he had made
ove^ the Danube, thereby to hinder his Retreat^ But finding they would not do
it, he said, they were good Slaves, but very bad Princes.

Another sent word to Alexander's Father^ who resolved to make War upon him;
A^^as.
That as the Macedonians knew how to fight well; so^ the Scythians knew how to
fast long. To intimate they would starve them.

Another desirous to demonstrate to his Son^ the advantage of their Union,
Scilures.
caused a Sheaf of Arrows to be brought, commanded them to break the whole
bundle; but when none could possibly do it, he drew them out one by one, and
easily snapt them asunder. Thus, said he, so long as you remain linked
together, you will be invincible; but separated you are easily destroyed. The
States of Holland have since taken a Sheaf of Arrows for the Symbol of their
Union.

Hannibal Hannibal.
inclining to Peace after his Defeat, pulled down a Citizen from the Tribune,
who animated the rest to carry on the War, and said to the People who murmured
at it, Is it not strange that while I who have been a Soldier all my life do
counsel you to Peace, this Fellow that never knew what a War signifies, should
dare to incite you to make War.

The People weeping when they were forced to pay the money agreed to give the
Romans, ^he fell a laughing, and seeing they were astonished at him, This is
not the time for your Tears, said he, you should have wept when your negligence
made you lose all the advantages of my Victories. Or when they ruined your
Fleets and Armies, whose loss was the cause of the ruin of Carthage.

The Roman Army being drawn up in Battalia, a Fop came and told him, he found
the order of it admirable. It is not their order that I do esteem so admirable,
said he, but rather that amongst so great a Number of Men, there is not one so
great a Sot as thou art. This changed their wonder into laughter.

Antiochus, to whom he had withdrawn himself after his Defeat, showing him his
Army in Parade, who were all clad most Magnificently, asking him, whether that
were not enough to satisfy the Romans: Yes, said he, though they were much
more covetous than they are. Meaning their Riches and Plunder, whereas the
other meant their Strength.

As some were talking of a peace between the Carthaginians and the Romans, at
the beginning of the War, he stamping on the Ground, said, Before that comes to
pass, one or other of these Nations must be dust and ashes. Which was a kind of
Prophecy of the Event.

Discoursing with Scipio in Asia, concerning the great Generals of those Times;
he named Alexander first; then Pyrrhus, and himself the third, at which the
other seeming to wonder; I would have put my self in the first place, sai^ he,
could I have conquered you.

Apprehending he should be delivered up to the Romans, he took some Poison
which he carried in a Ring, and said, let us free the Roman People from the
fears we have put them into for so many years. It has been said of him, that
he knew how to conquer, but did not know how to make advantage of his
Victories; because he let slip his advantage after the Battle of Cannae.

An Armenian King seeing the Romans appear in small Parties, Tigranes.
before his Army which was innumerable, said, There were too many of them to be
Ambassadors, and too few to be Enemies. It must be observed that the Ancients
always sent several together on an Embassy.

GREEKS.
A King of Syracuse having defeated the Carthaginians, Gelon.
would grant them no peace, but upon condition that they should not sacrifice
their Children to Saturn. This wa^ the more generous, because the Conqueror
herein had no other end but the advantage o^ the vanquished. However it is
easy to make an Apophthegm of this, by changing the Action into Speech; which
Plutarch has omitted.

When his Soldiers went not to War, he made them cultivate the untilled Lands,
Greeks.
to keep them, as he said, from idleness, the Mo^her of Seditions, and make
some Recompense for the Spoils of War.

Having occasion for money, he borrowed of his Subjects, and repaid it when the
Wars were ended, boasting that by this means he had an unexhaustible Treasure
in the Purses of his People.

While the Guests at a Feast took an Instrument turn by turn to make Music and
Mirth, ^he called for his great Horse, and began to ma^age it before them, to
intimate that a Prince even in times of Peace should make it his Exercise and
Meditation to prepare against a War.

A Curtezan having reproached him for his stinking breath, Gelon's Wife.
he chid his Wife for not giving him notice of it, that he might have sought a
remedy; but she replied, That she thought all men had been so, having never
conversed with any one but himself. The Grecian Dames had no frequent
conversation with men, being never admitted at Feasts and Public Meetings with
their Husbands: Whereas the Romans had the same Liberty as the Ladies here with
us. Plutarch attributes this Apophthegme to the Princes Wife that follows.

Hieron Hieron.
said, That he was always at leisure to hear those that would tell him the
Truth, and thereby banished all Flatterers, and became of easy access to
honest People.

He said likewise that those that discovered Secrets did not only offend those
that had entrusted them; but also those to whom they were revealed: For when we
would not have a thing known, we do not only hate those that publish it, but
those that are made acquainted with it likewise.

He condemned a Poet to make satisfaction for having spoken somewhat too freely
before the Queen; Epicarmus.
and indeed it was an insolent Fellow, for having once invited him to dinner at
a Sacrifice, he told him, you would not invite me to that you made the other
day, hinting the execution of some great men. These indiscreet Sallies of the
Tongue, produce more hurt to those that speak them, then they do good to them
they are addressed to.

Denis the Tyrant Denis the Tyrant.
besieged in his Palace by a seditious Multitude, cried out, seeing an Ox
knocked down at one blow; who would not venture so frail a thing as life is,
for an Empire?

His Son having violated a Woman of Quality, he asked him in passion, if ever
he had seen him do the like? That Is because you were not born Son of a King,
answered he. You will never be the Father of one replied he, if you continue
these insolences. His Prediction was verified, for his Son was dispossessed.
These are two excellent Apophthegmes in one.

Seeing in his Son's Chamber one day a great many Vessels of Gold and Silver,
which he had bestowed upon him; Thou art not worthy to Reign, said he, since
thou have not been able to make Friends of these things all this while.

His Subjects complaining of a Tax, he increased it so much, that they laughed
at the impossibility; It Is enough, said he, for this shows they have no more to
lose. Otherwise they durst not have derided him.

He said to his Mother, who had a mind to marry again in her extreme old age;
That Princes were able to alter the Civil Laws, but not the Laws of Nature.

He severely punished those that robbed on the Highways, but pardoned such as
pilfered Cloaks in the Night time, to compel his Subjects to keep good hours
and avoid debauchery. In the Greek it is, that stole Clothes, either at the
bathing places or elsewhere.

Some body beseeching him to bestow a Talent upon him, and to pretend that he
had learned the Secret of him to discover all manner of Conspiracies; He cried
out aloud, It Is a most important Secret, and bestowed the Talent upon him.

Another desiring to converse with him, asked him whether he had nothing to do?
God defend, said he, there being nothing so insupportable as Idleness. Others
there are that think nothing so pleasing, but we must distinguish; one may
desire to have Leisure, but Idleness is to be hated. It is a common thing to
ask what shall we do to pass away the time?

Having been informed that two several Persons had spoken ill of him at time of
a debauch; he invited them to Supper, and observing that one of them was very
indiscreet and wild, and the other very reserved, He said, that he forgave the
first, as having committed the fault by the frailty and lightness o^ humor;
and caused the other to be put to death, as guilty.

One of his Subjects having concealed a Sum of Money, he caused it to be taken
from him, but being made acquainted that he had purchased a piece of Ground
with the remainder; he restored it to him again, because he knows how to
improve it, said he.

He said, a Prince ought not only to be aware of his Enemies, but of his
Friends. It is because those that have the easiest access, may the most easily
destroy. But this is trulier spoken of a Tyrant, than a lawful Sovereign.

As a Herald, at a Sacrifice, wished him, according to their Custom, a long
Reign; do not, said he, increase the rigor of Tyranny, by endeavoring to make
it Eternal.

A man condemned to death found a Friend so resolute as to be bound for him,
that he might have time to go abroad, and settle his Affairs in order, and
having surrendered himself again, Denis the Tyrant, admiring the confidence and
resolution of the one, and the faithfulness of the other, pardoned the
criminal, And for recompense, I only desire of you, said he, to be received as
the third in your Bond of Amity.

Accusing his Sister for having contrived her Husbands escape. Polyxene.
Do you believe me to be, said she, of so mean a Spirit, as that I would not
have stolen away my self from thy Tyranny, had it been in my power.

His Son said, Denis the Tyrant the younger.
he entertained men of Learning, not for any esteem that he had for them, ^ut
for the esteem he gained thereby from others.

A Grammarian finding fault with his Dia^ect; There is more to be objected
against your Actions, who dare control a Tyrant even in his own house.

Being driven from his Kingdom, it was asked him, what advantage Plato and his
Phi^osophy was to him? They have enabled me ^o undergo with more patience,
replied he, so great a Revolution. Of a King he became a Schoolmaster at
Corinth.

Some body having reproached him, that from being a King he was become a
private man; whereas his Father from a private Person had attained to be King.
My Father, said he, made himself a King when they were wearied with Popular
Government, and I lost my Crown when they began to hate Monarchy. Which is one
great reason of the diverse changes that happens in Governments. Another time,
he replied; My Father left me his Kingdom, but not his Fortune.

Agathocles, Agathocles.
from a Potter's Son, becoming King of Sicily, caused every day some earthen
Ware to be served at his Table; That he might not forget, as he said, his
former condition, and incite others to virtue by his Example.

Dion Dion.
having heard that some of his Friends conspired against him: It is better to
dye once, said he, than to be troubled always to guard ones self both against
ones Friends, and ones Enemies.

After his Exile, seeing his People murm^^ because they made him wait too long
at a great man's Gate; he said it was not the fault (...) great Men, but of
Greatness. Because of the multitude of business which does so much overwhelm
them.

A King of Macedon refused to give a Golden Cup to one of his Courtiers,
Archelaus.
and bestowe^ it upon Euripides; and as the other wondered at it, It is because
he is as worthy to have i^ without asking for it, as you to beg it, and go^
without it. Because of the Modesty of the one, and the Insolence of the other.

His Courtiers murmuring, because some had thrown water upon him as he passed
along the Streets: How can those offend me, said he, when they never thought on
me? The Greek expression is, That it was not him they had offended; but the man
they mistook him for. But it is like it was done without any design, and that
they neither intended it for him, or any other.

Philip Philip.
of Macedon, as illustrious for his Wit, as for his Virtue and Fortune,
rallying one day with the Athenians for that they every year elected ten
Generals, told them they were very happy in finding so many men sit to be
Commanders over Armies, whereas in all his life he could find but one, which
was Parmenion. Every Tribune chose his General, to prevent them from usurping
over the other. In other respects there is nothing so pernicious as so many
Generals; but they know not who to confide in, in a Commonwealth.

Having received Accounts of three several ^ood tidings in one day: O Fortune,
said he, ^end me some little misfortune to allay so great ^appiness. The good
tidings were, the gain^^g of a Battle, the birth of a Son, and the ^inning of a
Prize at the Olimpique Games.

Being counseled to place Garrisons in the ^recian Cities he had taken, I had
rather said ^e, keep them in their duty by love then through fear, and be
beloved all my life, then ^e feared for a while. Fear lasts no longer ^hen
while the dread is upon them, where^s Love continues both in good and ill
for^une.

His Courtiers advising him to banish one that ^ad spoken ill of him: That were
well indeed said he, to make him go and report the same things all the World
over. There is nothing ^an be more prudent then for a man of judgment to find
methods to prevent others from ^oing him mischief.

Another time endeavoring to oblige him to ^hastize a man of quality for the
same Fact, we must first, said he, consider whether we have ^ot given him just
cause; and being informed that he was in ^^me want, and had received ^o
kindness or supply from Court; he be^towed some Favors: which made him turn
^is railing into praises, and begot another most excellent saying from that
Prince. That it was ^n a Kings Power to make himself be either beloved or hated.

He also said, That he was obliged to the Athenian Orators, for giving him
occasion to correct his faults, by their often reproaching him of them. Which
is another excellen^ Lesson for Princes to reform their Conduct^ instead of
being in wrath with those tha^ proclaim their Failings.

After the Battle of Charonea, as some were counselling him to put all the
Athenian Prisoners to the Sword, and destroy their City, he said, he would not
lose the Theater of his Glory. Either because they would celebrate his
Clemency, or exercise his Valor.

He would have encamped in a place of great advantage for strength; when they
brought him word the Country was destitute of all Forage: What a trouble it is,
cried he, that the General of an Army must not only take care for his Men, but
for Beasts? The Prince of Orange said to this same purpose, That Wa^ was a
Monster, which began to be formed by the Belly, because of the regard that must
be had above and before all other things for the subsistence of their Troops.

Having been told that a Castle which he designed to attaque was impregnable,
And indeed it was said that it was not he, but his money that conquered Greece.
he asked^ whether an Ass laden with Gold might not get in. This is
particularly true in a Civil War, where many change Party for Interest, and so
are the more easily corrupted.

He bid Alexander gain the affections of the Macedonians, whilst he was not
their Master, for when he was so, they would love him no longer, because of the
Taxes and other severities of Monarchies, which makes Princes become hateful,
besides that it is natural not to love ones Master.

He likewise counseled him to gain the love of the bad, as well as the good
Subjects, that he might make use of either of them as his occasions required.
He meant it of bad men that had an interest and credit; for without that it
should be said, to make the one fear you, and the other love you.

Being present at the sale of some Captives; ^n an indecent posture, one of
them stepping ^igh whispered him in his ear, to pull down the skirt of his
Garment: Let that man be set at liberty, said he, for I did not know that he
was my Friend.

One of his Friends being dead, and some body telling him, to comfort him, that
he had lived long enough; long enough for himself, said he, but not for me; who
have not yet discharged the Obligations I owed him.

Having understood that Alexander was displeased because he took several Women,
and feared he would beget too many Children. Let him, said he, show himself
worthy to be preferred. Note that Kings formerly chose their Successors without
any regard to Birthright, as appears by David's advancing of Solomon.

He bid him, when he appointed Aristotle to be his Tutor, learn under so good a
Master to avoid those failings which his Father had fallen into.

One of his Courtiers entreating him not to let Judgment pass in a Cause where
the Interest of his Friend was concerned; I had rather, said he, that your
Friend should lose his Cause, than I my Reputation.

His whole Court advising him to chastise the Ingratitude of the Peloponesians,
who had publicly hissed at him in the Olympique Games^ What will they not do,
said he, if I should hurt them, when they scoff at me though I have done them
so much good. This resembles^ that before spoken, of a vile tongue that had
spoken ill of him, whom he would not banish, least he should rail at him all
the World over.

One day having lain long in Bed in his Camp, he said he had slept his fill,
because Antipater waked for him, excusing his sloth ingeniously with the
vigilance of his Minister.

Alexander having tamed a very wild Horse, whom none else durst mount. Seek
another Empire for thy self my Son, said he, embracing him, for mine is too
little.

Another time, he said to him, as he was valuing his own Singing; art not thou
ashamed to sing so well. There are some things we ought to be ignorant of,
wherein it is shameful to be too skilful.

One day having fallen down on the ground, and considering the extent of his
Body in the dust, Great Gods, said he, what a little place we take up, and yet
the World cannot contain us.

He told his Son, who was endeavoring to win the Macedonians hearts by
largesses; do thou believe that a man whom thou have bribed, will ever be
faithful to thee. Those who are tied by Interest, are by Interest likewise lost.

Asking some Athenian Ambassadors, after he had given them Audience, whether he
could do them any Service. The greatest Service ^ou can render us, says a
Brute, is to go hang ^our self; at which Words, without being ^oved, though he
perceived a muttering through all the Court; Those that endure ^hese
Insolences, said he, are much more honest men, than those that commit them;
which was the more to purpose because they came to complain of him.

Alexander, Alexander.
while a Youth, said his Father would leave nothing for him to conquer, and
when they told him, that what his Father gained, would be for him: But I shall
not have the glory of it, replied he, as esteeming more the honor than the
profit of Conquests.

His Father advising him to run at the Olimpick Games, to show his Swiftness. I
would do it, said he, if there were any Kings to run with me for the Prize, or
contend with me.

The Governor of a Place having written to him, that there were brought to him
some lovely Boys that were to be sold; he cried out in great anger, has he
perceived any thing in my behavior that could prompt him to send me such a
Message. So he was likewise displeased in his Youth, against some of his People
that had brought a young married Woman to lie with him; and turned away one of
his Courtiers for having introduced, at dinner time, a Lass that he entertained
under the pretense of Singing. The same Principle made him refuse to see the
Wife of Darius, who was one of the most beauteous Princesses in the World.

His Governor having reproved him for casting whole handfuls of Incense into
the fire at a Sacrifice, and telling him that he should avoid being so profuse
till he had conquered the Country that produced them. He had no sooner made
himself Master of Arabia but he sent him a great quantity, with this reproach;
That he should not for the future be so sparing, when it concerned the Service
of the Gods. I doubt whether ever he was Master of Arabia.

He bid his Soldiers, at the Passage of Granique, which was the Limits of the
Persian Empire, That they should make merry with what they had then, for the
next day they were to be entertained at the Enemies expenses.

A Philosopher whom he loved, having asked him to bestow a Portion to marry his
Daughters, he sent him fifty Talents, who having told him it was too much, and
that ten would have been enough for them to have; But not enough for Alexander
to give, replied he. However our Gifts should be proportioned according to the
Party that receives. But this Prince was excessive in all his Actions, whether
good or bad.

Another time when his Treasurer came and acquainted him, that the Philosopher
Anaxarches demanded an hundred Talents; for he had commanded that they should
give him whatever he should ask; He knows he has to do with Alexander, said
he. Another Huff of this Prince coupled with the Impudence of a Philosopher.

Beholding several Statues in Milet, of those Atheletes that had won the Prizes
in the Olimpick Games. Where were all these Bravo's, said he, when your City
was taken?

He answered the Queen of Caria, who took a pride in the excellency of her
Cooks, and did often send him of her Dainties; That he had much better of his
own, that his Governor had taught him to eat but little at Dinner, that he
might eat well again at Supper, and to march all the Night to get a good
Appetite in the Morning.

Darius having offered him ten thousand Talents, and the one half of his
Empire. Parmenion was of Opinion he should accept of it, and said, if I were
Alexander I would do it, and so should I likewise if I were Permenion, replied
he. He added, that Heaven cannot contain two Suns, nor Earth two Masters.

At the Battle of Arbella, the Chief Officers complaining of the Soldiers
insolence, who threatened they would have all the Plunder to themselves.
Courage, says he, it is a sign of the Victory, for those that talk thus, have no
design to fly.

The Armies being drawn up in Battalia, he stroke a Soldier that was mending
his Javelin: For this is the time for Fighting, said he, not to be mending or
furbushing your Arms.

As he was reading a Letter from his Mother, perceiving that Hephestion
overlooked him, and read it likewise; he took his Seal from his Finger, and put
it to his Lips, to instruct him thereby to keep secret what he saw. This is a
dumb Apophthegme.

The Priests of Ammon having styled hi^ the Son of Jupiter; he said, That all
hones^ men were so, thereby to allay the pride of tha^ Title. In the Greek it
is, that all men were so by Nature, and the good men by Adoption^ which has
some resemblance with the Christian Religion.

He spoke to the same sense when wounded, That it was not such Liquor which
flows from the wounds of the Gods.

He replied to those that praised Antipater for being very modest in his Habit;
That within he was all lined with Purple, and the Son of Antipater going to
caress before him, one that was beloved by a Musician, he interposed, and cried
out, What, shall not Friendship it self be exempted from your Tyranny?

As he was sending back to Macedonia the maimed and the sick; a Soldier that
was in health having thrust in his name to follow a Woman whom he loved. We
must try, said he, to persuade her to stay here; for we cannot compel him.

He sent home all the Thebans, who were taken in Persia, and said, they were to
be excused for coming thither to seek their Fortunes, after their own Country
was destroyed. Note, that he pardoned no Grecians that were found in the King
of Persia's Service.

Having taken an excellent Archer, who could shoot an Arrow through a Finger
Ring, he commanded him to show his skill before him, and upon his refusal, sent
him away to be executed; But being certainly informed that ^ proceeded not from
disobedience, but a fear ^f losing his Reputation, because he had not ^ractised
it of a long time, he said, he esteemed ^im the more for it, and gave him his
pardon.

An Indian King refusing to give him Battle, and saying, they ought to contend
with gene^osity, and not by power, and that the weakest ^ught to receive
kindnesses from the strongest, That is the reason we must fight, said he; that
^e may know which is the strongest, which the ^eakest.

Being told that such a place was impregna^le, but he that defended it was a
heartless ^oldier: Then is it not impregnable, said he.

He told a Governor who had surrendered up ^ City, which he could not take;
That he had ^ore reason to rely upon the Generosity of Alexander, than on the
strength of the Works, and restored him to the command again.

His Courtiers preferring him above Hercu^^s; Not so, said he, for what I have
done, has ^een at the head of thirty thousand men, and that he did, he did all
alone. Not but that ^here have been Herculesses that have com^anded great
Armies; But the Greeks Hercules ^as single in the most of his Exploits.

He fined some of his Friends for being too ^^tent upon their play, and said,
One should ^ ever make a serious study of a pastime.

He honored Craterus most, and loved He^hestion best; because, said he, this
loves Alex^nder, and the other loves the King.

He said of Xenocrates, who would not accept of his Presents, upon pretense
that b^ had no need of them. Ha, what has he (...) Friends! and added, That
all the Treasures ^ Persia, had not been enough to satisfy his.

He asked of Porus how he would be treated who having told him, as a King. Then
to trea^ you as a King, said he, I restore thee all thy Te^ritories with an
addition of some Provinces.

Knowing that some had spoken ill of him It Is the property of Kings, Because of
the ingratitude of Common People.
said he, to d^ good, and receive no thanks for it. Or, it is Royal Virtue to
do good, without any hop^ of a recompense.

He told his Friends when dying, That h^ foresaw great Dissentions, and
slaughte^ would arise amongst them after his Death, an^ the disorders of those
Divisions would e^crease their sorrow for the loss of him.

He called the Persian Ladies, The disease ^ the Eyes, because of their Beauty.

He thought it concerned his Dignity to l^ none but the most excellent Painters
and St^tuaries make his Effigies.

Being asked, when dying, where he ha^ lodged his Treasure, he replied, they
should find it in the purses of his Friends.

Some People willing to compound wi^^ him; I come not, said he, to take what
yo^ are willing to give me: but to leave you wh^ I have no mind to take.

He said he was by so much the more i^ debted to Aristotle, than to his Father,
by ho^ much it is better to live well, than to live.

Dragging along the Priestess of Delphos^ ^^e Temple, to hear an Oracle on a
day in which it was forbidden, she cried out, Thou ^t invincible. I will have
no other, said he, and left her.

Before he went forth to begin his Con^uests, having given all that he had
amongst ^is Friends; some asking him, what he had ^eserved for himself, he
replied, Hope.

Leaning upon one Ear, as he was hearing the ^leading of a Cause, he said, he
reserved the ^ther entirely for the adverse party.

Callisthenes the Philosopher controuling his Actions, he said, He did not love
that Wise^an, who was not wise for himself; Because ^hereby he lost his Fortune.

His Soldiers refusing to swim over a River, ^t the attacking of a place: why
should not I ^wim, said he, and so passed over upon his Shield.

He cried out, over the Monument of Achil^es; Happy was this Prince to have had
Homer ^or the Trumpeter of his praises! Others say, ^atrocles for his Friend,
and Homer for his Historian; and having found a little Trunk rich^y set with
Jewels amongst Darius his Goods, he allotted it to preserve Homer's Works in.
Another time, when they would have showed him Paris's Syra, he said, he would
rather see Achilles's meaning in Homer. One time an express being in much have
to tell him some good News; he asked him, Whether Homer was ^isen again as
judging nothing required such pressing haste, but such like tidings.

He said, He knew he was mortal, by two things, viz. Sleep, and the pleasures
or act of Love, because the Senses are suspended.

He said, If he were not Alexander, he wou^^ have been Diogenes. It Is from the
same ro^ of Ambition to despise all, or to covet all.

Entering into Darius his Tent, glitterin^ with Gold and precious Jewels, he
said, This ^ to Reign indeed. Though there are dive^ Examples in his Life and
Actions, that shew^ how much he despised such Luxury and V^nity.

He would not take advantage of the Nig^^ at the Battle of Arbella, because I
will not ste^ a Victory, said he.

Antipater making some complaints in wr^ting to him against Olimpias; he does
not know, said he, that one tear from a Mothe^ eye, is enough to blot out all.

Being made acquainted that his Sister live^ a little too freely, let us, said
he, leave her, he^ part of the Regency, Impunity and License.

He shed some tears, when it was said ther^ were diverse Worlds; Because, said
he, I have not yet been able to Conquer one.

He said, Homer had prophesied of him in the Person of Agamemnon, when he said,
That he was equally a good King, and a good Soldier.

The Mother of Darius having mistake^ Hephestion for Alexander, because he was
a more proper man; he said, she was not deceived, for that he was also
Alexander; Because of the Friendship that united them.

Admiring that he should fall asleep, just before the beginning of a Battle:
It Is because I am come to the end of my labor, said he It was the last against
Darius.

The Corinthians, having made him free of ^eir City, after the Example of
Hercules, I ^e nothing of this Honor, said he, but the ^^mparison.

After Alexander had distributed all he had a^ongst his Friends, Perdicas.
without reserving any ^ing but Hope: Perdicas said, he was content^ with that
alone also, and returned him his ^resent again.

King Ptolomee Ptolomee Son of Lagus.
eat often at his Friends, and ^ade use of their equipage, as not being well
^rnished himself. His Excuse was, That ^ was more glory to make others rich,
than to ^rich ones self.

Having asked a little Grammarian scoffing^, who was the Father of Peleus: The
other ^turned briskly, who was yours, as a reproach ^f the meanness of his
Extraction; and when ^s Courtiers wondered that he showed no re^ntment, when a
man will rally, said he, he ^ust expect to be rallied with again. The ^me
Apophthegm is attributed to Cicero: for ^etellus, asking him by way of scorn,
who was his Father? It would be a harder thing to tell ^ho was yours, said he,
because his Mother had ^n ill reputation.

Another Prince of the same name, Ptolomee-Philadelph^.
said, That the greatest unhappiness of Tyrants ^as, that they must ever
suspect the greatest (or bravest) men, and be compelled to make them away. This
is true only in Elective Em^ires, where every one has a right to pre^end.

His Son Xenophanes Xenophanes.
being rallied at, beca^^^ he would not play at a forbidden Game; 'T^^ not,
said he, for fear of losing my Money, b^ my Honor.

Antigonus, Antigonus.
set every Engine at work to e^ rich himself, and when they reproached hi^ that
Alexander did not use to do so; The was because he reaped, said he, and I can
b^^glean.

Finding his Soldiers playing at Tennis ^ armed, he sent their Officers to make
me^^ with them, and being informed that they we^ drinking too freely, he
cashiered them, and p^ those Soldiers into their places: Because, sa^ he, those
deserve best to Command, who ^ their duty best.

Admiring that he grew very mild in his o^ Age, having been very rough in his
young^ days; That Is because I would endeavor ^ preserve that with gentleness,
which I gaine^ by force, said he.

His Son inquiring one day of him, when (...) would decamp: Art thou afraid,
said he, tho^ shall not hear the sound of the Trumpet^ This shows it imports a
General to keep hi^ Marches secret.

Sending him to Greece to set them at liberty, he said, That Province was like
the Theatr^ of the whole World, from whence his Glor^ would be seen over all.

After his recovery from a fit of sickness, h^ said, That it had been an
Advertisement of the Gods to let him learn that he was mortal.

A Poet having called him the Son of a God My Valet de Chamber, said he, knows
the con^ry full well.

A Flatterer telling him, that the Will of a ^ng was the Rule of Justice; Say
rather that ^stice is the Rule to the Will of Kings, re^ied he.

His Brother desiring he would in private ^termine a cause he was concerned in:
It were ^tter it should be before the whole World, ^plied he, to demonstrate I
will do nothing ^justly.

Incamping in the Winter time, in a place ^at was inconvenient, he said, to
some Soldiers whom he overheard murmuring near his ^ent. Go farther off and
complain, least I ^e obliged to punish you.

He said, to one that made a harrangue to ^m in a bombast flattering style; Art
thou not ^hamed to speak to me as if I were a Fool?

A Cynique begging a Dragm of him; A piece of about seven pence.
That Is ^o little for a King to bestow, said he; and ^hen the other had desired
him then to give ^im a Talent; That Is too much, said he, Two hundred Guineys.
for a ^ynique to receive. The Medium had been to ^ive more than the first,
less than the last.

His followers counselling him to put a Gar^ison into Athens, to be a Bridle to
Greece, he answered, There could be no stronger Garrison than the affection of
the People.

Pyrrhus challenging him to come down from the Mountains, and he would give him
battle, he said, he made War as his own Judgment guided him, and not as his
Enemy would have him; and that if Pyrrhus were weary of his life, there were a
thousand ways to death. ^ other, on the like occasion said; If he be^ great a
Captain, let him force me to co^ down. Notwithstanding he affirmed that
P^^^rhus would be the greatest Soldier of his ti^^ if he lived to mature Age.

In the height of his Conquests, some bo^ having dedicated a Treatise of
Justice to hi^^ This is very proper to him, said he, while I a^ usurping the
Rights of other men.

His Son at his return from hunting, comi^^ and embracing him while he was
giving Audience to some Ambassadors: Tell this, said (...) to those that sent
you hither. There bei^^ nothing that can better establish a Thro^ than the
mutual love of the Royal Family:

His Son Aleione being very harebrain'd, w^^ killed in a Fight; This happened
somewh^^ later, said he, than I expected, or, than he d^sired.

He said, to another that showed himself very proud, do you not know that
Royalty is b^ a brave slavery; and another time, That if o^^ knew the weight of
a Crown, they would b^ afraid to set it on their heads. In the Greek ^ is, they
would not vouchsafe to take it o^ from the ground.

Antigonus having dreamed, Demetrius.
that Mithrida^^ had reaped a golden Harvest, resolved to make him away, and
communicated it to his Son Demetrius, after he had made him promise not to
divulge a word of it. But Demetrius who loved Mithridates, led him out
immediately to walk upon the Sea Sands, and wrote thereon with the point of a
Javelin, Begone, Mithri^^tes; so that he made his escape to Pontus, ^here he
was chosen King. If equivocations ^e at any time lawful, it is in such cases
where man's life is concerned.

The Rhodians, having entreated him to pre^^rve a Picture of Protogenes, which
he had ^ken in their Suburbs, he said, he would keep as inviolably as his
Fathers.

Having taken the Athenians by Famine, he ^used them to be assembled in their
Public ^ace for Spectacles, where while they dread^^ some exemplary punishment
for their re^olt, he told them, That he bestowed five thousand measures of Corn
upon them to re^eve their misery; and happ'ning to pronounce ^^me word amiss at
the same instant, and the people reproving him for it openly, he added, and I
will give you as much more, for your ^ood Instruction. Many would have been
^ngry at such a public reproof, and have recalled his Gift, instead of
increasing it; so that this is an Example of Clemency, of Libe^ality, and a
greatness of courage.

It was said of his warlike Engines, in which ^e was very intelligent, That
they begot admiration amongst his Friends and astonishment ^n his Enemies.

Demetrius being taken by Seleucus sent word to his Son, Antigonus.
that he should give no credit to his Letters; But that young Prince was so
sensibly concerned for the imprisonment of his Father; that he wrote to
Seleucus with more Generosity than Prudence, that if he would set him free, he
would surrender both his Person and Dominions into his power.

His Pilot telling him, just at the beginning of a fight, that the Enemy was
stronger tha^ he; For how many do you reckon me, said he.

A Soldier desiring the same allowances which one had, who had done eminent
Service: ^ was not the recompense of his Family, b^ his Valor, said he, and
refused him.

Zeno, whom he esteemed above all the Philosophers, being dead, he said, He had
lost the Witness of his Actions, and the Theater o^ his Glory.

Lysimachus Lysimachus.
being constrained to give u^ himself, and his whole Army, for want of water;
cried out, having drank, great Gods, for what a small matter I have lost my
Liberty and Country!

Antipater Antipater.
having heard of the Murder o^ Parmenion; If he were guilty, said he, i^ whom
shall Princes confide? and if he were innocent, where is the Prince we can
confide in?

He said of Demades and Phocion, That he had two Friends of a direct contrary
humor, for he could never satisfy the one, nor ever get the other to accept
of any thing.

Antiochus Antiochus.
sent his Letters into all Parts, at his first accession to the Empire; That if
there came any Orders from him contrary to the Laws, they should not obey them.
He likewise withdrew himself from Ephesus, fearing the great Beauty of Diana's
Priestess should tempt him to violate her.

Antiochus Antiochus Hierax.
surnamed the Hawk, put himself ^^to Mourning upon the report of the death
(...) his Brother though they made War against ^ch other, and being after
assured that he ^ as living, he caused public Thanksgiving ^^d Rejoycings to
be kept; To show, said he, ^at the Law of Nature yet subsists, amidst ^^r
disorders. What was rare in those days, ^ now grown common.

A report being brought to Pergamos of the ^eath of Eumenes, Eumenes;
his Brother Attalus seized immediately on the Empire, and married his ^
^iddow; But the News proving to be false, (...) laid down the Crown, and went
to meet ^^m in the habit of a private Person, of which Eumenes took no other
notice, but only whis^ered in his Ear; another time, be not so ha^y to marry my
Wife, till you have seen me ^id in my Grave. He never after showed a^y more
resentment, and at his Death left him ^is Wife, and his Empire. Attalus on the
o^^er hand did never raise any Children, but re^^ored the Diadem to the Son of
Eumenes, as ^^on as he was of Age to Govern. It would ^e difficult to find two
such rare Examples, the ^ne of Acknowledgment, the other of Mode^^tion.

He was wont to tell his Brothers: If you treat me as your King, I will treat
you as Brothers; and if you treat me as a Brother, I will treat you as I am
King. To teach them to obey him.

Pyrrhus Pyrrhus.
said, He never had taken so many Cities by force, as Cineas had taken by
cunning.

The Inhabitants of a Town besieged, havi^^ railed at him bitterly a thousand
times duri^^ the Siege, he told him, as he was settling the^ after the place was
taken; That they had gre^ need of Masters to teach them to rule th^^ Tongues.

Being asked which of two excellent. Musi^^ans he liked best, he answered, The
Gene^^ Polyperque; to show that Kings ought to est^^^^ brave men, and not
Fiddlers.

One who had never been in the Wars, promising to instruct him in the Military
Art, (...) told him, That he never valued a General, w^^ had never heard the
sound of a Trumpet.

He said, after the gaining of two battles against the Romans, I am lost if I
gain a thi^ because they had cost him so many men; a^^ therefore, admiring
their Valor, he said, the he could easily conquer the whole World wi^^ the
Romans, or the Romans with him. Other improperly attribute this to Antiochus,
w^^ was no great Soldier.

He said, when he quitted Sicily, I leave^ brave Field of Battle to the Romans,
and the Carthaginians^ which proved true in the ^^vent.

He bid those Commissaries whom he sent (...) raise Forces be sure to choose
proper and lu^^^ Fellows, and he would take care of the rest, ^ if courage and
skill proceeded only from exercise which is not always so.

Being entered into Athens to Sacrifice, ^ praised the Athenians for the
confidence the^ had in him; but withal told them, that (...) time they should
have a care of letting in any one that exceeded them in strength.

Having pillaged Laconia by surprise before any War declared, he answered the
Lacedemo^ians who made Complaints to him, that he did not use to divulge his
secrets to any body.

His Children desiring to know of him at the time of his death, to whom he left
his Empire; To him, said he, that has the ^harpest Sword. Though this were
true in some sort, it was ill in the mouth of a Father, who thereby kindled the
Flames of a Civil War in his own Family.

The great Antiochus The Great Antiochus.
having strayed from his Company at a hunting, betook himself to ^ little
Caban, where some People, who knew him not, discoursed of him, some extolling
his good Nature, others saying that his Servants wrought upon it to ill
purposes, and that he spent too much of his time in hunting; he at his return
to his Company, told them, he had never heard so much truth spoken as that day.

At the Seige of Jerusalem the Jews having desired seven days Truce to
celebrate their great Festival, he not only granted their request, but would
needs honor that Ceremony in Person, and himself conducted in great Pomp to
their very Gates huge quantities of ^ncense and Victimes; which touched them so
sensibly, that they surrendered to him, as soon as the Festival was over. To
make an Apophthegme, we should make him tell what he did, but that would lessen
it.

The Romans having lopped off a part of h^ Empire, he said, He was obliged to
them so having discharged him of a great portion (...) his care. Though this is
truth, yet Prince do not lay aside those burdens till they nee^ must.

Pisistratus Pisistratus.
Tyrant of Athens, finding h^^ Friends revolted, who had seized on a Fo^tress,
went and found them with his little R^tinue, and when they inquired of him what
(...) intended to do; Remain with you here, sa^^ he, or get you to return with
me.

Knowing that his Mother loved a youn^ man, who durst hardly visit her out of
the apprehension he had of him, he invited him t^ Supper, and having treated
him well: Her^^ after, said he, show your self more complaisa^ toward my
Mother.

Another that was one of the finest shaped me^ in the City, having been so
insolent as to ki^^ his Daughter in the open Street, and the Mother desiring he
would resent it; If we punish those that caress us, said he, what shall we do
to them that hate us. This was but a color to excuse the capriciousness or
passion of the young man, whom he presently sent for to bestow his Daughter in
Marriage on him.

Some debauched Fellows having done an injury to his Wife, and coming the next
day to beg his pardon; You are mistaken, said he, my Wife was not out of doors
yesterday; but be more modest another time. There is no pleasure in owning to
have received an affront, and especially in such cases; and therefore C^^s^^
denied that his Wife was guilty, though ^e well knew the contrary, and was
divorced ^om her for that reason.

Going to marry a second time, his Children ^ame and asked him, whether they
had given him any just cause to complain; It is so far ^^om that, said he, that
I find you so good, I am ^esolved to get more such as you are.

Themistocles Themistocles.
his Tutor, was wont to say of ^im, that he would prove either the Safeguard
^^r the Ruin of his Country, and compared him ^o a ^iery Horse, that proves
extraordinary good when reclaimed.

Having forsaken his debauchees, and become more vigilant after the battle of
Mara^hon, he said, that the Trophies of Mil^iades would not suffer him to rest.

Being asked one day, whether he had rather ^e Homer than Achilles; That Is as
if one should ask, whether I had rather be the He^auld than the Conqueror. He
alluded to the Public Pastimes, where the Conqueror was proclaimed by a
Herald.

It his Wars with Xerxes, he gave money to him that commanded in Athens, upon
condition he should renounce the Office of General, lest, said he, he should
spoil all by his Avarice and Cowardice.

When Adimant would have deferred giving battle, alleging, that he that
started too soon in his race, was to be punished; But he that sets out too
late, replied he, never gains the Crown.

He said, That the way which leads to Hell, was more to be wished, than that
which lea^ to Honor: Because of the briars one mee^ with in the management of
public Affai^^ Nevertheless he called idleness the Grave ^ the Living.

The People having raised him to Digniti^^ after they had taxed him of Infamy,
he sai^ He could not love those that made use of t^ same Vessel to such
contrary purposes.

Before he began his march against the Per^^ans, he said to the People who were
looki^^ on a Cock-^ighting; That those Creature though so valiant did not fight
for their Country, but only for their Honor. Thereby t^ encourage them, to
show the greater courag^ against their Enemies.

The General of the Lacedaemonians lifting up his Staff against him; Strike,
said he, so yo^ will hear me.

An Inhabitant of a small Village, reproaching him that he owed all his Glory
to Athen^^ It Is true, said he, that I should never have attained to Greatness
in your City, nor you i^ mine.

Simonides the Poet requesting somewhat o^ him that was unjust; as you would be
no good Poet, said he, should you deviate from the rules of Poetry; So should I
be no good Judge if I prevaricated from those of Justice.

One telling him, He might be the first in the Republic, provided he would
espouse no Party; he replied, he desired not a Dignity, wherein he could not
oblige a Friend, and disoblige an Enemy, which is a little contrary to the
Definition he gives before of a good Judge; ^r to take it strictly, a public
Person ought ^ot to have either Friends or Foes. Therefor one of the Ancients
renounced all Friendship at his entrance to the Government: And Aristides
declared he was of no Cabal that he ^ight authorize no injustice.

His Daughter being courted by a Fool, and ^y an understanding man, the first
being rich, ^e other having no wealth; he took the man ^f Parts for his
Son-in-Law: For I had rather, said he, have a man that wants an Estate, than ^n
Estate that wants a man.

Exposing a Country House to Sale, he said, ^t had a very good Neighbor, so
much he ^hought that particular to be considerable. History tells us to the
same purpose, that a ^rince after a Battle, beholding a Gentleman ^o grievously
wounded, that his very Bowels ^ung out of his Belly, and some bemoaning his
^ad condition, he said, It was yet a worse thing ^o have an ill Neighbor.

To one that would instruct him in the Art of Memory, he said, he rather
desired that of forgetfulness. Because of those Misfortunes which happen daily,
the remembrance whereof is troublesome.

He said, there was no Music so pleasing, as ^o hear ones self praised in
public; and hav^ng been received with great Acclamations at the Olimpique
Games; He told them, he was fully recompensed for all the Services he could
ever render to Greece; Or that he had ever done them.

He would not suffer Hieron to assist at tho^ Sports, because he would not help
the Gre^^ with his Forces against the Persians, and sa^^ It was not reasonable
that he who would nev^^ share in their Dangers, should partake of the Pleasures.

After a Victory marching over the Sp^^ of the Enemy, he bid one that followed
hi^ take up something for himself, because you (...) not Themistocles. It does
not become a Generel to load himself with Plunder.

Finding they had little respect for him a^^^^ the War was ended, he said, he
was like th^^ great Trees which stand on the Plains, who^ none regards, but to
find shelter when a sto^^ surprises them.

Being arrived in Persia, he desired a yea^ time of the King to learn the
Language, th^^ he might converse personally with him, because a man expresses
himself but by hal^^ with an Interpreter; and having been ev^^ overwhelmed with
all sorts of favor a^^ kindness, he cried out, I had been lost, if I ha^ not
been lost! as much as to say, he owed (...) good Fortune to his Banishment.

The General Myronides Myronides.
having caused it (...) be proclaimed, that every one should be (...) readiness
for an enterprise, found at his se^ting forth that he was followed but by a
very few, and being advised to stay for the remai^der; all those that are to be
of the Party, a^^ here already, said he,; Either not to delay the Execution;
Or, that he had little reason t^ value the help of those that came so slowly t^
the Randezvouz.

Aristides, Aristides.
surnamed the just, was a mortal ^^emy to Cabals, to avoid, said he, the
autho^^zing of an Injustice.

Going an Embassy with Themistocles, who ^as his Enemy. Let us, said he, lay
down all ^ur quarrels here, lest they should prejudice ^^e public Affairs;
and at the breaking up ^f an Assembly, where they had thwarted ^ach other out
of jealousy, he declared, they would do very well to throw them both into ^he
River, because their enmity did hurt to the good of the Commonwealth.

Having been condemned to pay a Fine by ^he contrary Faction, the People of
reputation ^id not only cause his Fine to be taken off, but made him be
continued in the management of the public Treasury, where showing himself
more favorable and easy to those that brought in their accounts, he was the
third time elected Chief Treasurer; But he told them, that he was more ashamed
of his Election, than his Condemnation, because he had been condemned only for
having done his Duty, and was elected because he was grown remiss. And upon the
Commission he had to allot the Sums which were to be imposed on all the
Gre^ians, for the Wars against Persia, he showed himself so little inclined to
enrich himself, that he expended of his own.

He said to a rich man, who reproached him of Poverty; Thy Riches does thee
more hurt, than my Poverty does me.

He hindered the People from condemning a Criminal upon his bare word, and would
needs have them try him by due Form of Law; For fear, said he, they should make
this a Pre^^dent in favor of some hereafter that m^ have less honesty.

Being Judge in a Cause, where one of t^^ Parties alleged that his Adversary
had spoke several injurious things against Aristid^ Hold, said he, there is
nothing in this Cau^^ that concerns me, but your self.

Going into Exile, he besought the Deity that the Affairs of his Country might
be (...) prosperous, that they might have no occasion to recall him, which they
did soon after Whereupon, he said, That he was not trovbled he had been
banished, for his own sake but for the Honor of his Country.

Themistocles having somewhat to propound which much imported to be kept
secret, the People obliged him to communicate it to A^^stides, who having heard
what it was, said, There was nothing could be more advantageous, nor more
unjust. It was to have burned the Grecian's Fleet that lay in Port, which was
not put in execution.

Themistocles scoffing at his being so sparing, and saying that to be able to
keep money close, was the virtue of a strong Chest, and not of the General of
an Army, he replied, That without this, all the other Virtues would prove
useless, because there was still need of money to make them effectual.

Pericles said, that when ever he took the Command upon him, he made this
Reflection, That he was going to Command a Free People, and which was more,
Greeks and Athenians. That is to say, as free as men could be.

He prayed the Gods, before he mounted ^^e Tribune, that no Word might slip
from ^im, that could scandalize the Athenians, or ^urt either the public or
his private Affairs.

One of his Friends entreating him to make ^ salse Oath in his Favor; We are
Friends, said he, but no further than to the Altar.

The Poet Sophocles, who was his Colleague, ^aying, at the beholding a Beauteous
Woman: Ah, how handsome she is! A Magistrate, said ^e, ought not only to keep
his hands pure, but even his Eyes and Tongue.

Being accused for consuming the public Revenue in Offerings, and consecrating
the best things to the Gods. Will you, said he, ^et me put in my name instead
of yours, and I will pay the charge with my own money, which ^he People refused.

The Soldiers being astonished at an Eclipse of the Sun just before the
beginning of a Naval Fight, he held his Cloak before the Pilot's Eyes, and
asked him if that were not a mighty Prodigy. It is caused by the Interposition
of the Body of the Moon; yet, the Ignorance of those things formerly begot much
Consternation.

Alcibiades not returning from an amorous Adventure, As was their Customs.
he would not suffer him to be trumpetted; Because if he be dead, said he, that
would but make it known a day or two the earlier, and if he living, it would
con^ound him with shame^

The People would have obliged him (...) speak in Public of a business
wherein he w^^ hot prepared, but he excused himself, either out of respect, as
he would have it believe^ or to keep up his credit. The same thing (...)
related of Demosthenes.

Alcibiades Alcibiades.
said, That he led the Life of C^stor and Pollux, being in the Heavens, when b^
was well in the Peoples thoughts, and in H^^ when he knew the contrary. Those
Hero^ were turn by turn in Heaven and in Hell.

He used to say, he wondered not, that the Lacedemomians despised Death, since
their wa^ of living was so miserable; Because of their wretched food, and
rigorous usage.

Wrestling with one, he bit him by the hand^ and the other upbraiding him, that
he bit lik^ a Woman; No, says he, but like a Lion.

It is said, that he cut off the tail of a Dog of his own of great value; That
so the People having that to talk of, said he, may not mind the other things I
do; but there is nothing makes men discourse more of us than such
extravagancies.

Coming one day into a School where they instructed Youths, he asked the Master
for a Homer, who telling him, he had none, he gave him a box on the Ear. This
is a mute Apophthegm, where the box on the Ear must pass instead of Words
spoken, to show the value should be held of Homer.

The Athenians having recalled him from his employment for some Capital Crime,
he slipped away in his return, and being asked, if he doubted of Justice, he
said, I would not trust (...) own Mother, where my life is concerned, ^r fear
lest by a mistake she should take the ^ack Bean for the white; the first being
the to^n of condemnation, the other of absolution.

Being informed that they had condemned ^m to death; I will make them know,
said he, ^at I will live yet, and going over to the Ene^y, was the occasion of
many troubles to the ^ate.

Applying himself to Eloquence, instead of ^usick, which was in Vogue in those
Days: ^et those sing, said he, that cannot speak.

The General Lamachus Lamachus.
chiding an Officer ^ho had failed in his Duty, when the other as^red him, he
would do so no more; War, ^id he, allows no time for repentance.

Iphicrates Iphicrates:
fortifying his Camp in a place ^here there was no appearance of danger, ^^id,
to those that wondered at it; It Is an ill ^xcuse for a General to say, I did not
imagine (...).

He was wont to say, that an Army was to ^e formed like a Human Creature, and
ought ^o have the main Body composed of Foot well ^rmed, and the Wings lightly
armed, the Ca^alry for Legs that they might run every where upon occasion, and
a good General for its Head.

Taking great care to range his men well in his Service against the Barbarians;
It is because I fear nothing so much, said he, as that they will not know that
I am here, to astonish them by his Presence, and Reputation.

Being haled to Justice in a time of W^^ Unhappy man, said he, to his Accuser,
thus ^ oblige my Citizens to sit in Judgment upon (...) instead of marching
under my Conduct agai^^ the Enemy.

He said, it was necessary to excite the Sold^ers to the love of Money and
Pleasures, b^^cause that made them have the more courag^ to gain wherewith to
satisfy their desires.

A Sot of a good extraction reproaching hi^^ of the meanness of his Birth; I
shall be t^^ first of my Race, said he, and you the last (...) yours.

An Orator bawling out to him in an Assembly; What art thou, to show this
Vanity? an^ proceeding to a tedious enumeration of all the Offices in an Army:
I am none of all these said he, but him that commands them all.

Some that envied the Glory of Timotheus Timotheus.
having painted him sleeping with a -- in his hand, where the Cities came and
were taken: If I take Cities sleeping, said he, wha^ cannot I do when awake?
It Is the mark of ^ good Apophthegm to retort their own Argument upon them.

He called money the Soul and Blood of civil Life, and said, that those that
were deprived of it, were like the dead, without action.

That those that were not contented with any thing, Or, were not subject to be
repented of.
thought nothing dishonest.

He said, to Plato who had entertained him, That such Feasts as his, were not
only pleasing on the same day they were made, but the next day also: Because of
the loathing that follows others.

A General glorying in his Wounds, he said; should be ashamed, to have been
wounded in our place: To show that a General ought ^t to hazard himself too
confidently, his ^hole Army depending on his safety. In the ^reek it is, when I
commanded the Army, I ^as ashamed that a Dart fell too near me.

Some body saying that Cares was a good General; Not so, replied he, but a good
Soldi^ier. To hint that he wanted the qualificati^ns for a Commander.

Chabrias Chabrias.
affirmed, the fittest to command, ^ere those that best knew the Enemy.

He likewise acknowledged, That he esteem^^ more an Army of Deer, Or, a Hare.
commanded by a ^ion, than an Army of Lions, commanded by ^ Deer, to show of
what importance a good General is, not so much for Valor as for Con^uct and
Discipline.

Hegesipus, Hegesipus.
animating the Athenians against Philip of Macedon; We shall draw great ^lagues
upon our selves, said one, if thou art ^elieved; and much greater yet, replied
he, ^f I am not believed, meaning their slavery.

Pytheas Pytheas.
offered to harangue in public, to ^revent their allowing divine honors to
Alexander, when some, crying out, you are too young: Him whom you would make a
God, replied he, is younger yet than my self.

Phocion Phocion.
seeming to study in an Assembly, they asked him the reason: I am thinking,
said he, whether I cannot leave out something of what ^ have to say to the
Athenians. the shortest Speeches being the best.

The Oracle having answered, That the^ was a man in the City that found fault
wi^ every thing: Do you trouble your heads ^^bout that Sirs, said he, it is I
that cannot a^ prove of any thing that is done here.

The People, one day, seeming to appla^ what he had spoken to them, he asked,
whither he had not let slip some foolish word or^^ther, so much did he suspect
their approb^^tion.

The Athenians going about to get a volu^^tary Contribution toward their
Sacrifices^ It were a shame, if I should give you any thi^^^ and not pay this
man, said he, showing his Cr^ditor.

The People will murder thee, if ever the^ grow into fury, said Demosthenes to
him; a^^ thee when they recover their reason again, sa^^ Phocion.

That Orator exclaiming against Alexander who was falling like a torrent upon
Thebes Miserable man, said he to him, to exasperate (...) young discontented
Prince against thy Country, who has his Sword in hand.

Beholding an Army of Soldiers that were too gawdily clothed, he said they
were fit for ^ Show, but not for a Fight.

His Friends advising him to forbear giving a Visit to a vicious Rascal in
Prison, who entreated him to come; Where can I better go to see such an ill
man, said he, than in a Prison; being glad he was there.

The Athenians railing against those of Byzantium, who would not admit their
Soldiers: It Is not those Allies are to be blamed for their ^^spicion: but your
Generals that gave them ^^use for it; and being elected in the stead of ^^m
that commanded before, they were re^eived without any difficulty.

Observing a Soldier who was advanced out ^f his rank, return ni^bly into his
place upon ^ght of the Enemy, he told him, chidingly, that he could neither
keep the place his Cap^in had given him, nor that he had taken him^^lf.

The Ambassadors of Alexander, bringing ^^m a Present from their Master, he
asked them, therefore he sent that present to him only? (...) is because he
finds you an honester man than ^e rest, said they; let him give me leave to ^e
so still, replied he, because Presents cor^pt us.

The People making some scruple of send^^g some Galleys to that Prince which he
requi^ed of them; I must advise you, Sirs, said he, ^^ther to be the strongest,
or be Friends with ^^ose that are so.

Upon the news of his death, the Orators ^^lling aloud to take up Arms; If he
be dead, ^id he, to day, he will be dead likewise to ^orrow, without all this
great haste of taking (...) your Arms.

An Orator having persuaded the City to a War by very specious pretenses and
fair hopes, ^e told them; Those sine Speeches were like ^press-Trees which are
lofty and beautiful, ^ut yield no Fruit.

Their first success proving favorable, the People asked him, if he were not
joyful; Yes said he, but I do not repent of what I said.

The Macedonians being come into the Cou^^try with their Forces, he went forth
against them with all the strength of their Youth and finding every one would
needs give hi^ counsel: Great Gods, said he, what a ma^^^ Captains, and how few
Soldiers? It appears b^ this, and by Thucydides, that there is no People
resembles the French, so much as the Ath^^nians.

A while after the Athenians having been defeated and compelled to receive a
Garriso^ when he who commanded would needs ma^^^ him a Present; I refused
Alexander's Gifts, sai^ he, and added upon a juster occasion.

Antipater endeavoring to oblige him (...) something against his Will, he told
him, O^^ cannot be both a Friend, and a Flatterer.

The People having made choice of him for their General, he made Proclamation,
that (...) should take up Arms, not excepting those o^ Sixty years of Age; and
these alleging the^ were exempted by the Laws; and yet they d^ not exempt me,
said he, who am above Fou^^ score.

A corpulent man persuading them to Wa^ against his Opinion, and being
constrained t^ drink several times, because of the heat; Wh^ will this man do
in a Battle, said he, who swea^^ so much with talking only.

Being condemned to death with his Party as he went to Execution in the midst
of their Lamentations, without a word speaking, Rascal came and spit in his
Face: Take hence that insolent fellow, said he, without being otherwise moved;
and it had been observed, that he was never seen to laugh or cry. Some ^ill
affirm that he said, How ill favour'dly that ^ellow gapes, or sneezes, and
attributes it to Aristides.

A wicked wretch despairing to dye at the ^^me time; Are you not happy, said
he, to dye ^n Company with an honest man.

Being ready to take the poison, some body ^sking him, if he would say nothing
to his ^on? Let him never desire to revenge my ^eath, replied he.

He said, It was better sleeping in peace on ^he Earth, than lying unquiet on a
soft bed.

That we must do our Duty, and all the rest was nothing.

That it was difficult to act several Parts.

That we must promise little, and perform it; but we do the quite contrary.

That when one eats more than one should, One has more Diseases than can be
cured.

That he left his Son Estate enough, if he were wise, and if he were not so,
all that could be left him would signify nothing.

Nicostrates, Nicostrates
General of the Argiens, said to King Archidamus, who solicited him to do
somewhat that was unjust; You are not of the Race of Hercules, who traveled
over the whole World to punish the wicked, since you endeavor to corrupt the
good.

Epaminondas Epaminondas.
acquitted himself very well in an employment put upon him, though it was an
Office beneath him; and said in his ow^ defense; It was the man that made the
Offic^ considerable, and not the Office the man.

He would not allow for so much Oil, in a^ account brought him for a Feast;
Because, said he, it is impossible that we should have eaten so much and not be
sick with it.

He withdrew from a sacrificing Feast, because of the great Pomp and Splendour,
saying they called me to a Sacrifice, and I meet with a debauch.

Walking very pensively one time, when all the City was rejoicing he told those
that asked him the reason of it; I am sad, that you may take your fill of Mirth.

He would not render up a Criminal to Pelopidas, but did it to a Curtizan,
giving this reason, that it was a fit Present for a Curtizan, but not for the
General of an Army.

The Lacedaemonians having declared War against Thebes, having gotten diverse
Oracles, some favorable, others not, he put them some on one side of the
Chair, others on the other hand, and said; If you behave your selves well,
these are for you, showing them the good ones, if not you must expect the
others: Like a good Politician, he makes our good or evil Fortune depend on our
Actions, not our Actions on them.

It happening to thunder extraordinarily, whilst he was marching an Army, some
having inquired of him what that signified; That our Enemies are astonished,
replied he, and showed where they had entrenched themselves upon the Hills,
like men that were afraid; or, (...) disadvantageous ground, like People that
^new not what they did.

He owned that the Battle of Levetres did ^^t please him so much for its
importance, as ^^r the having gained it in his Father and Mo^^ers life time.

Appearing melancholy and thoughtful the ^ext day, against his wonted Custom,
asking ^im the reason; It is to allay, replied he, the ^xcess of Joy I felt
yesterday.

The General of Thessaly having sent two ^^ousand Crowns to him, to defray the
expense ^f an Enterprise which they had contrived together, as knowing that he
was very poor; ^e quarrelled at him for it, as if he would have ^orrupted him,
Thirty or forty Shillings.
and satisfied himself with bor^awing some small matter of a Friend of his ^or
that purpose.

He refused Darius his Presents with the ^ame Moderation, saying, he ought not
to do ^t, if he desired nothing but what was just from ^im; if not, all the
Riches he had could not ^corrupt him: Or, it is to no purpose if he be ^our
Friend, if not, I can never be his; but this ^is to be found elsewhere.

Being informed that a Soldier had enriched himself by the ransom of a
Prisoner: You are now too wealthy, said he, to be a Soldier, go and set up a
Tavern in some good City. As a Soldier too much at ease is not fit for the War.

Talking how the Athenians were entered into Peloponese, excellently well armed:
A good Musician, says he, never dreads to meet another provided with a good
Instrument.

So soon as he was Director of Beotia, b^ bid the Thebans furbish their
Weapons, because he intended to make use of them, and not l^ them rust in
idleness; and some advising the^ to live in peace, he said, that under that fa^
pretense they designed to impose the great^^ slavery upon them.

He called his Country the Theater of War^ and said, it could not be defended
unless the^ always had the Sword in hand.

Some comparing him to Agamemnon, sai^ he, That Prince was ten years taking of
o^^ Town, and I for my part have set free a^^ Greece in one days time, by the
Battle of L^ctres.

He patiently endured the ill humor of the Thebans, and said, that one must no
more tak^^ revenge of ones Country, than of ones Father^ Likewise he affirmed
the noblest death was (...) dye for ones Country, and obtained what h^
commended.

A Rich man refusing to lend a Friend of his money, who was in necessity: Art
not tho^ ashamed, said he, to deny assistance to a good man? It is not just so
in the Original, but ^ have put it thus to make it better, for in an^
Apophthegm it is not so material for the truth, as the force of the expression.

It being controverted who was the greatest Captain, he, or some other: Stay
till our deaths, said he, to judge aright; because, one oversight does
sometimes sorfeit all their reputation.

Being brought to judgment with his Col^egues for having kept the command of
the Ar^y four Months after his time was expired; he ^rdered them to lay all the
fault upon him, and presenting himself at the day appointed: ^ am the sole
Author, said he, of the Crime ^harged upon us, and do not resuse to dye,
provided they add to the sentence, That I am ^ondemned to death for having set
Greece at li^erty, and made my ungrateful Country tri^mphant over the
Lacedaemonians, ever till now ^nvincible. This assurance did so astonish his
Judges, that they withdrew, without daring to put it to the Vote. He added,
that no Arguments were capable of justifying them, if what they had done would
not suffice, because Deeds are better then Words, how pompous soever they could
be. This serves to show us, that we must not juggle with the Actions of great
men, nor examine them by the strictness of Law.

Being wounded to death at the Battle of Mantiniea, hearing that such as had
been able to take the Command of the Army were all slain in the Fight, he
advised them to make a Peace, since there were none left fit to carry on the
War, and the Event proved that he was in the right.

He would not suffer them to draw the Weapon out of his Wound, till he was
assured, he had gained the Victory, and finding they had saved his Buckler, he
told them, He dyed contentedly, to live eternally in the memories of men.

Some attribute to him, the killing a Senti^^nal whom he surprised asleep,
saying, by wa^ of excuse, I left him as I found him.

Pelopidas Pelopidas.
took no great care to enrich himself, and when his Friends put him in min^
that money was necessary; Yes indeed, said he, to that man there, showing them
a poo^ Cripple.

Going to the Wars, his Wife recommended to him the care of his own Person;
Give tha^ caution, to others, said he, for it belongs to m^ who am their Chief
to have a care of theirs.

Reproaching the persidiousness of a Tyrant who had betrayed him: Thou have a
great desire to dye, said the Tyrant to him; Yes, replied he, to bestow
vengeance, because it would enrage the Thebane.

The Tyrant's Wife being come to see him in Person, and bemoaning his
misfortune: Thou art more to be pitied, said he, for suffering a Tyrant to be
thy Husband.

When he was set at Liberty, he said, He owed this obligation to the Tyrant,
that he had made him know by experience, the fear of death could not terrify
him.

His Soldiers crying out in a Battle, that the Enemies were numerous: The
better, said he, we shall kill the more. Another said, we mow hay best, when it
is thickest.

Parmenion Parmenion.
observing one day, the Ambassadors from Greece, murmured because Philip of
Macedon made them wait too long for an Audience. Do not wonder Sirs, said he,
that he sleeps while you are waking, for he was wake Whilst you slept. This was
because they had ^^t him take his advantage, during their Divisi^ns. This is
one of the Noblest Apoph^^egms, because it bears two complete Senses, and both
very true, the one Literal, the other ^llegorical.

Demosthenes Demosthenes.
observed of Phocion: that he de^royed by his reasoning, all that ever he set
up ^y his Eloquence. He called him the hatchet ^f his Speeches.

He told the Athenians who would oblige him ^o accuse one unjustly; That he
should ever ^dvise them to what was just, though they dis^pproved it; but he
would never do any un^st thing, though they should command it.

He had written on his Buckler, To good ^ortune, and having cast it away to
save himself, ^e said; That his death would have been of no ^ervice to his
Country, but his life might some ^ther time be of great Service to him. I would
^ot insert, That he that flies may fight again, which is but a Proverb.

Alexander would grant no pardon to the A^henians, till they delivered up ten
of their Citizens to be named by him, amongst which he was one; Whereupon he
said, That the Wolves were once for making a Peace with ^he Sheep, provided
they would surrender up ^he Shepherd's Dog.

Endeavoring to save himself after his Condemnation, being encouraged by one
that held with the opposite Party; Where shall I find, said he, a Friend, that
is worth such an Enemy.

A Courtizan demanping ten Drachmes for one Night's Pleasure; I will not, said
he, bu^ my Repentance so dear.

Being obliged in a contest with another, wh^ could rail most, he said, this
was a Comb^^ wherein the Victor must needs be the Wor^ man. The greatest
Slanderer.

He told a young man that talked too much^ That a wise man spoke but sparingly,
and tha^ Nature had furnished us with but one Tongu^ and two Ears, to teach us
that we ough^ to hear twice as much as we speak. Another time, he said, how
comes it that he that taught thee to speak, did not teach thee likewise to hold
thy peace.

Of a Covetous Wretch, he said, that for want of knowing how to live in his
life time, he would leave a livelihood to others after hi^ Death.

That there was nothing more easy than to deceive ones self, being soon
persuaded to what we like.

That Slander was easily sixed; but time would discover the Fraud of it.

That he had spent more Oil than Wine i^ attaining to be an Orator, by Study
and Sobriety.

That nothing was more harsh to honest People than not to be allowed the
liberty of speaking their minds.

That it was difficult to please a Multitude, when one commanded a Multitude.

That what we had in us of the Image of God, was the love of Truth and Justice.

That if we did but know what we must suffer from the People, we should never
desire to ^eddle with the Government.

That his return was so much more glorious ^an that of Alcibiades, by how much
it was ^etter to obtain it by way of persuasion, than ^y force of Arms.

That he neglected his Estate to cultivate ^is Knowledge, because it was his
Knowledge ^cquired him his Estate.

That he conversed with ill People, as Physici^ns do with the diseased, and
that the best Phy^cian was he that cured the incurable; That is to say, such as
no others could cure.

That the Law is the Soul of a State, because ^t subsists thereby.

Demetrius Phalereus Demetrius Phalereus.
counseled King Ptolomy to read History, to learn, as he said, several things
that no body dares tell you.

Becoming acquainted with the Philosopher Crates, during his retirement at
Thebes, he cur^sed his Affairs that had robbed him so long a time of the
Knowledge of that great man.

The Athenians having pulled down his Statues; they have not, said he, plucked
down those Virtues that caused them to be erected.

He said, we must not wonder if Riches were blind; since Fortune who bestowed
them, was so too.

That Eloquence had as much power in Peace, as force has in War.

That real Friends while Fortune smiles do expect to be entreated; but they are
forward to proffer themselves when she frowns.

His Counsel to young People, that they might not mistake themselves, was, to
respe^^ their Parents at home, Strangers abroad, a^ themselves when alone.

ROMANS.
MAnius Curious Manius Curious.
his Soldiers complained t^ him, that he had not given them Land^ enough in the
conquered Countries: God defend, said he, but that a Roman should believe he
has enough, when it is enough to maintai^ him. And himself was satisfied with
a Soldiers share. They allotted Portions to the V^terans for their Habitation.

He returned those Presents offered him by the Samnites, with these Words; That
those who were contented with a little, had no need of Riches, and that he was
more pleased to command over them that possessed Riches, than to possess them
himself. Others say, he replied, That whilst he could command himself, he
should never want, and attribute it to him that follows: However he was found
making his own pot boil.

Fabricius Fabricius.
hearing they had lost the Battle against Pyrrhus; It Is not the Greeks, said
he, that have vanquished the Romans, but Pyrrhus that has beaten our Generals,
Because he was a great Captain.

Being deputed to him to ransom the Prisoners, he refused his Presents, Romans:
and having with ^esign to fright him caused a huge Elephant ^ppear just behind
him: Thy Gold, said he, ^^uld not tempt me yesterday, nor thy Elephant ^errisie
me to day.

That Prince promising, if he would stay ^ith him, to make him the greatest he
had; ^fear, said he, if your Subjects had once tasted ^f my Government, they
would obey you no ^nger.

Pyrrhus's Physician, having proffered to Poy^on his Master, he sent the Letter
to himself ^ith this Caution, at another time he should ^ake a better choice of
a Friend and an Ene^y.

For this favor Pyrrhus having sent him back ^^l his Prisoners, he would
accept of them, but ^n condition to send him a like number for them; and said,
that it was neither for love, ^or fear, that he had discovered that Treason,
^ut because the Romans never revenged themselves of their Enemies but by open
force.

Martius Coriolanus, Martius Coriolanus.
being Victorious, was ad^ised to repose himself, who replied, that Vi^tory
took away all weariness; and refused those Presents they offered as a
recompense of ^is Valor, Virtue being above all Reward. He would therefore
only accept of some marks of Honor, and the Liberty of a Prisoner that was his
Friend. The same is related of a Roman Knight.

His Mother coming to him, Veturia.
whilst he held Rome besieged, would not salute him, till he declared whether
he did it as Friend, or an Enemy, my, and obliged him to raise the Seige.

Manlius Manlius Torquatus.
told the Romans, who would ma^^ him Consul, that he could not bear with the
Faults, nor they with his Severity.

The Senate having sent him the Complain^ that were brought in against his Son,
he spen^ two days in the Examination, and pronounce this Sentence on the third:
Seeing my Son (...) guilty of Concussion (or Extortion) I forbid him my House,
and the Republic, and com^mand him to depart immediately. The So^ strangled
himself in the Night, and the Father would not be at his Funeral.

Fabius Maximus Fabius Maximus.
encamped always in place very advantageous, that he might not be compelled to
sight, and being in derision nick named Hannibal's Pedant, he would say, (...)
showed more Cowardice to be afraid of the Peoples idle discourses, then to be
afraid o^ the Enemies; and therefore Hannibal, said, he dreaded Fabius unarmed
far more, than Min^tius armed. For this reason they called him the Buckler of
the Romans, as Marcellus their Sword.

Minutius making a great noise for a small advantage obtained against Hannibal,
he said, he feared more the good Fortune of Minutius, then an ill one, because
it puffed him with pride; and the other envying him, If he were wise, said he,
he would consider that he has nothing to do with me, but with Hannibal.

Being informed that a stout Soldier went every day out of the Camp to see a
Woman whom he loved; he sent and had the Woman taken then said to him, now we
have something will keep you with us. And then giving ^^e woman to him pardoned
his fault.

He being asked at the sacking of Tarentum Whether they should carry away their
Images ^^t of their Temples: Let us leave the Taren^es their angry Gods, said
he,

Being deputed to go to his Son, who was Consul, by the Senate, he rode toward
him without alighting from his horse, till his Son ^^nt and commanded him; then
running to em^^ace him: I meant to try, said he, whether ^ou knew what it was
to be a Consul.

He was wont to say, they were much in the ^rong that went roughly to work with
such as ^ey intended to gain unto them, since it is by nothing and caresses
that the very Animals ^e tamed, much sooner then by Whips and ^urs.

Going to Carthage to complain of the taking (...) Sagunte, and he who
commanded speaking ^^me what proudly to him, he made a fold in ^^e Skirt of his
Garment, and said: In this I ^ring Peace and War, and being answered, what he
might give which he pleased, shaking ^^s Coat, he cried War; the Carthaginians
told ^^m they accepted it with the same resolution ^^at he proffered it.

It being intended to give again the command of the armies to Terentius Varro,
Terentius Varro.
after ^e Battle of Cannes, he told them, the Republic had need of a more
Fortunate Gene^al than himself, and refused it, Nevertheless ^e continued the
Command.

Livius Livius Salinator.
in wrath against the People, we^^ and made War in Spain, and being advise not
to give Battle, till he was well informed o^ the Enemies strength, he replied,
He would give it as soon as ever he came thither, to b^ revenged upon the
Citizens, or be crowne^ with Honor. Words unworthy of an ancient R^^man.

He would not totally defeat the whole A^^my of Asdrubal, but said, let some
remainalive, to carry the news of our Victory, an^ their loss.

Scipio said, he was never less alone, the^ when he was alone, Scipio the
African.
Nor more employed the^ when he was idle, because the mind is alway^ most
active, when we have nothing else (...) do.

After the taking of Carthagena, his Soldier having brought him a lovely Woman
prisoner he told them, he would have accepted of he^^ if he had not been their
General: As having too much other business, to think of Love.

At the siege of a City, being very full of business, he appointed some that
sought to him to meet him in the principal Temple of the Town, and having
mastered the place within the time limited, though the service was very hard,
he kept his word with them.

It being wondered at that he would venture over into Afric with such small
numbers, he said, pointing to three hundred of his Guards, there is not one man
amongst those, that would not leap down from a Steeple if I commanded him.

The Carthaginians having offered him great ^ings to procure a Peace, would
have gone ^^om their word upon the arrival of Hannibal; ^^t he, without
remission, told them, he ^ould have five hundred Talents more as a pu^^shment
for their recalling him.

The Senate having ordained that he should ^^ke some money out of the public
Treasury, ^^^d those that had the keeping of it, refusing open it upon some
religious account: Have ^u the insolence, said he, to refuse me en^ance? me,
who am the cause of it is shut^^^g up, By the great sums he had brought in ^ere?

A couple of Tribunes having accused him ^f diverse Crimes, he presents himself
before ^^e People upon the day assigned, and without adeavouring to justify
himself; Sirs, said he, ^was on this day I vanquished Hannibal, and ^bdued
Carthage, let us go and return thanks (...) ^the Gods: and thereupon marched
direct^^ to the Capitol followed by all the People.

Some body taxing him that he was no ^ouldier: I own it, said he, but I am a
Cap^^.

He said, that reason subdued men, as bits and curbs tamed horses.

This Saying is attributed to him, That we must make a golden Bridge for an
enemy, and ^ever give Battle, without a manifest advan^^ge.

Flaminius T. Quintus Flaminius.
who was chosen Consul before he ^ad undergone the other Offices, said to the
^cheans who would needs undertake an enterprise without the Peloponese,
Remember you quit your Court, if once you put your head out of the shell like a
Tortoise. Understood they were surrounded with the Sea, and (...) nothing to
defend, but the Straight into Orinth.

All Greece being in a consternation upon t^^ marching in of Antiochus, he to
encourage the^ said once at a great feast as he was admiring the quantity of
Dishes; his entertainer to^^ him, that all he saw was Pork disguised in^
hundred several fashions; and so this vast A^^my is, only a crowd of cowardly
Scythi^^ dressed in several garbs.

He told a turbulent fellow who was danci^^ in company, and made a great deal
of spo^ that he wondered he could be so merry, sin^^ he had made all Greece
mourn.

Domitius, Domitius.
whom Scipio made Lieutenant^ his brother taking notice of the multituded the
enemies; we will stay, said he, till (...) morrow, to give them Battle, for we
ha^^ not day enough left us to kill all those Peo^ple, and having done so, he
cut off fifty thou^sand.

Licinius Publius Licinius.
the Consul having lost near three thousand Horse in a Battle against Perseus,
to^^ that Prince who besought him to come to a^ agreement; that he would not
admit him b^ upon discretion. There has been Bragadoch^ in all Ages, but the
Roman Braggs were ben^ grounded then others.

Paulus Emilius Paulus Emilius.
was wont to say, that (...) General of an Army ought to be old, ^ there in
years or Judgment. That he might do nothing rashly.

Being elected Consul for the second time, because that Prince made war upon
them, he ^old the People he was not obliged to them, ^nce they chose him only
for the need they had ^f him.

At his return from the Election, his little Daughter coming to him crying, and
telling ^^m that her little dog Perseus was dead, he said, he was glad of the
augury; because of the resemblance of the name; which proved true ^n the event.

Being come to the Camp, every one was ^ery forward to give him their advice,
to whom, he said, have you a care but of sighting well, and I will take care of
the rest.

Having entered Macedonia by the Mountains, and seeing the Enemies ranged in
Battalia on the Plains, a young Roman counselling him to attaque them, so I
should, replied he, if I were as young as you are; but experience has taught
me not to expose a wearied Army and out of breath, against fresh Men, that
expect them ^n a good order, and posture.

After his Victory, treating his Friends most splendidly at a thanksgiving
Sacrifice, and they much admiring the great preparation, and decent Order, he
said, it required as much Judgment to order a Feast well as a Battle.

Perseus imploring him not to lead him in triumph, he told him it was in his
own power By killing himself.
to prevent it, and finding him cowardly and heartless, he added, You dishonor
my Victory and justify fortune.

Having lost his two Sons, one before the o^ther after his Triumph, he said, he
was gla^ Fortune had turned all her spite against him, an^ spared the Republic.

It being admired he should repudiate his Wife, a Woman of great merit, and of
hig^ Birth, he told them, showing his Shooe^ you see this is well made and
handsome, but you do not feel where it pinches me.

Cato Cato.
espying a man whose great Belly swelled up to his very Throat, said, What
service can that man do for the Commonwealth, or for himself?

As they were erecting several Statues of Men that little deserved it in Rome:
I had rather, said he, one should ask, wherefore is there no Statue erected for
Cato, then wherefore there is one erected.

His competitors to be Censors; cajolling the People to get the preference; he
cried out aloud, That the Grievances of the Commonwealth had no need of
Mountebanks to flatter them, but of able Physicians to cure them and was first
elected.

The Army in Spain being in danger, several offered to go and relieve them,
provided they would give them two hundred Talents; he maintained they ought to
accept their profer: For if we are Victors, said he, we may pay them with the
Enemies money, if otherwise there will be none left either to demand the Sum, or
pay it. Because they would be defeated.

He never reserved any thing for himself ^ut of the Spoil of the conquered
Cities, but distributing all amongst his Soldiers, said, That Honor was the
Riches of a General, Or, that it was better many should be made rich, than one.

Some wondering that he did not visit Eumenes, who was come to Rome, he said
that Tyranny was an ill-natured Beast. He did not distinguish Royalty or
Monarchy, from Tyranny as he ought; for there is no better Government then
Monarchy if rightly administered, and Eumenes was an excellent good Prince, and
very worthy therefore of due Praise.

He said of those that love to reprehend, That we can bear with the Sting of
the Bees, for the sake of the Honey they produce; Because reprehensions
instruct.

Making a Speech upon a time at Athens, and his Interpreter being puzzled and
not able to deliver it so quick, because compelled to use many words where he
spoke but a few, he said, a Roman Discourse proceeds from the Heart, a Grecians
from the Lips.

He admired how two Soothsayers could look one upon each other without
laughing. Because of the uncertainty and weakness of that Art, I mean that sort
of Divination called Auruspicy, who judged of things to come by inspecting the
Intrails of Beasts.

He said of a Son who had revenged the death of his Father, that he had offered
him a nobler Sacrifice, than if he had cut the throats of many Victims on his
Tomb.

He told some that praised a rash Headstrong Fellow, there is a great deal of
difference betwixt valuing ones life too little, and ones courage too much.

His Colleague entreating him to release ^ criminal, he said, a Judge makes
himself ^ scorn to Porters, when he does not do his duty.

He said, he never gained any thing in all the Cities he had taken, but the
non-payment of the expenses he made there.

One that was very superstitious being amazed that a Mouse had gnawed his
Stocking: It would have been a wonder indeed, said he, if the Stocking should
have eat the Mouse. There is one very like this of a Lacedemonian.

He said observing the Ladies became Mistresses at Rome, that those that
commanded the whole World were Slaves to Women.

He compared the People to a Flock of sheep; they being easier led in Flocks,
then singly.

These are a part of his Sentences.

That those Judges who do not punish the wicked, are more wicked than the
wicked themselves.

That it is better to lose a Present then a correction, because Presents
corrupt us, and corrections instruct us. Or that it were better not to be
rewarded for good deeds, than not to be chastised for bad.

That he forgave all the World excepting himself.

That it was more becoming for a Young man to blush than to look pale.

That to command others, one must command himself.

That no Witness is so terrible as Conscience.

That Power must be used soberly to make it ^asting. Or, that things must be
managed to keep ^nes credit.

That by dividing Honor from Virtue, we should leave being Virtuous. Because
Interest ^yes often in Vice. This is particularly true in Youth, who seldom
endeavors to do well but for Honors sake.

That a Judge should never condescend to pardon, nor wait to be solicited to
do Justice.

That old age had effects enough without adding Peevishness and ill humor. In
the Original it is Malice; some say, Turpitude.

That the Public has more interest in the punishment of an injury, than he
that receives it.

That Anger differs from Madness, but in the matter of time; As being indeed a
shorter Madness.

That Hope makes little things great, and great things little. We may say the
same of all the Passions.

That he valued more a good Father of a Family, than a good Senator, Because
they are harder to find, or, there is more need of them.

That by doing nothing one learns to do evil.

That Friendship was rather to be untied than broken, Because that makes less
noise.

That we do not envy those that make good use of their Fortune; because envy
respect^ more the Fortune than the Person.

That it is equally Vicious to be sad in a time of rejoicing, and over merry in
sad times. Or, That those who are serious in trifles, are ridiculous in serious
affairs.

That worthy things have need of being well written, as good Diamonds of being
wel^ set.

That to let the same Person be too long i^ the highest employments: is to have
too little regard of the deserts of others, or the dignity of the Commonwealth.

That in a Battle, the Voice did as much as the hand, and that he could not
love such Soldiers as snoared louder then they whooped and hallowed.

That the Mode does not only set a value upon Wares, but upon Virtues, Because
People take a pride in being Modish.

That such as have raised themsevles by their Vices, ought to endeavor to
regain their reputation by Virtue.

That Wise men learn more by Fools, than Fools do by wise men; because the Wise
are more capable of observing the defects of the Foolish, than the Foolish are
of observing the perfections of Wise men. Or of learning from them.

That he had repented him particularly of three things; Of having discovered a
secret to a woman, of having gone by water where he might have traveled by
Land, and let one whole day slip without learning any thing.

That a Country House ought not to want Lands, nor the Lands a House. The rest
belongs ^ot to this.

After the taking of Carthage the Inhabitants being fled into a Fortress,
Scipio the younger.
and some advising the younger Scipio to draw some works about the Place to
hinder them from making any Sallies: It is ridiculous to fear those that are
afraid, said he. In the Greek it is, To fear the Enemy when the Town is taken.

Endeavoring to be Censor, his rival scoffingly telling him, he knew no body,
That is, said he, because I have always labored more to make others know me,
then I to know them.

Having obtained it, he saw a man pass by that had made a false Oath: I know,
said he, that Fellow is guilty; but no body accusing him, I cannot be Judge and
Party both.

Finding some Mules belonging to an Officer laden with things only to serve
his luxury; Thou make thy self useless for a time, said he, to the
Republique, and for ever to thy self.

One bragging of the goodness of his Buckler, he told him a Roman Soldier
ought to trust more to his right hand than to his left.

He said a good General, no more then a good Surgeon, ought not to use his
weapons but in extremity, and they ought to expect a while to do things the
more securely.

The People endeavoring to terrify him with their outcries, while he was
making a Speech in public: the cry of the Enemies never daunted me, said he,
in the Field of Battle, nor shall the Peoples in a sedition: and when the
Mutineers, cried out that they must slay the Tyrant: It is true, said he, you
must pass through me to attaque the Republic.

When Rome believed her self to be in most safety, after the ruin of Carthage,
Scipio Nasica Scipio Nasica.
said, She was then in most danger, having no Enemies to keep them upon their
Guard. Which made Metellus say after a signal Victory, That he knew not whether
that Advantage would procure more good or harm to the Republic, Because we are
apt to run into pleasures and idleness.

Metellus Cecilius Metellus.
deliberating whether he should make an assault, a Captain assured him, that
with the loss of ten men they might carry the Fort: Will you be one of those
ten? said he. This was a good answer for a wary man but not of a Soldier, who
must not fear the loss of a few, to be the sooner Master of a place.

Some body asking him what he would do the next day: I should burn my own shirt
replied he, if it knew my secrets. Designs in War must be kept private.

He lamented the death of Scipio, though his Enemy, and would have his Children
carry him to his Funeral Pile; adding that he ^anked the Gods that so great a
Captain ^as born a Citizen of Rome, and not of Car^age.

Popilius Popilius.
being deputed to carry some orders from the Senate to the great Antiochus,
delivered his dispatches to him, without any sa^utation, and that Prince having
told him, ^e would consider of it, he drew a circle ^^ound about him with his
Wand, and said, he must do it before he stirred out of that ^ring. This
confidence touched that Prince so sensibly, that he promised to obey, and
thereupon Popilius saluting him, embraced him.

Drusus M. Drusus.
being Tribune of the People, had the insolence to say, to the Senate who sent
for him, Why do not they come themselves to me? which the Senate did.

Scevola Q. Scevola^
having purchased an Inheritance which he never surveyed, and having afterward
found it much better than he thought it, gave a greater price for it
proportionably, alleging, that he should have given as much at first had he
known the true value.

Sylla committing great Murders in Rome, he said, with whom shall we live
henceforwards since we slay our Citizens in times of Peace, as well as in times
of War?

Catullus Luctatius Catullus.
put himself in the Head of his Flying Army to make them believe, said he, they
do not run away, but only follow their Commander.

Scaurus accused of Treasons: M. Scaurus.
Sirs, said he, a Rascal accuses me of betraying the Republic; I assert the
contrary: which do you believe? He was absolved by the People without any
further examination in the Cause.

Lucius Crassus Lucius Crassus.
refusing obedience to a Consul that treated him unhandsomely, said, he would
not treat him as a Consul, who did not treat him as a Senator.

An Architect having told Livius Drusus, Livius Drusus.
that for a small charge he could prevent any body from looking into his House:
I would give thee twice as much, replied he, if thou could make all the
world look into it. To show he lived exemplarily.

Marius C. Marius.
having been denied a Command, desired another much inferior the same day, not
to be quite neglected, said he, and to compel fortune, if we may so say.

Having Ulcers in his Legs, he caused an incision to be made in one without
being tied, or making the least noise; but when they would have done as much to
the other; Hold, said he, the remedy is worse then the disease, and sent the
Chyrurgeon packing.

Being solicited for revenge against a beautiful Youth who had killed one of
his Nephews that would have violated him: He is worthy of a Recompense, said
he, and showed him honor. He put a Crown upon his Head.

His Soldiers wanting water in his Wars against the Teutonicks and Cimbri, he
told them, that they must go and fetch some of that which ran close by the
Enemies Camp.

Being reproached for having bestowed the ^riviledge of Burghership on his
Soldiery without observing the due forms and customs, could not, said he, hear
the Voice of the ^aw, amidst the clattering of Arms.

In the Wars of the Allys, one of their Ge^erals holding him besieged in his
Camp, sent ^im word that if he were so brave a man as was ^eputed, he should
come out and fight, It Is ^ou, replied he, if you are a Great Captain that ought
to force me out. I have put this before to Antigonus.

Sylla who was called the Happy, reckoned amongst his good fortunes the taking
of the City of Athens, and the gaining the Friendship of Metellus, Whereof the
one was taken by Storm after a long Siege without reducing it to ashes, and the
other was one of the most worthy men of his time.

Being necessitated to seize upon the Treasures of the Temples for payment of
his Soldiers, some body gave him notice, that as they were going to plunder
that of Delphos, they heard the sound of Instruments: Courage says he, it is a
good Sign, for those do not use to play on Fiddles that are angry. Because
Apollo held a Violin in his hand.

His Soldiers having beaten a Magistrate of Rome to death with cudgels, in the
civil Wars, he said, they would do the better Service hereafter to repair the
shame for such an Action. Indeed, he was not in a Capacity to punish them, the
Soldiers being their own masters in a time of Civil War.

At the Siege of Athens, he said to the Amba^^sadours, that came to tell him
old stories That he was not come thither to be taught, b^^ to be obeyed.

To stop his Soldiers from flying in a Fight he snatched an Ensign, and turning
toward the Enemy, If you are asked, said he to hi^ men, where you left your
General, tell the^ you left him fighting the Enemy in the Fields of Orcomenes.
The place of Battle.

At an enterview with Mithridates, he asked him, without any other ceremony,
Whether he would make good his Agreement? and finding him silent, it behooves
those, said he, that stand in need of Peace to ask it: then seeing he wavered,
he reproached his perfidiousness, and told him, when he was about to excuse
himself, That he must needs be very Eloquent, if he could find out any words
would bear an excuse.

As he was causing the Throats of seven thousand men to be cut at one time, the
Senate who were near hearing their cries: It is nothing, Sirs, said he, but
some seditious Fellows I have caused to be punished.

Having resigned the Dictatorship, a Youth following with Menaces and injurious
language; This young Boy, said he, will another time hinder any but my self
from doing as I have done.

He said that Caesar was worse then Marius, and would have put him to death,
had not his Friends prevented it. Or, that there were many Marius 's in Caesar.

Crassus Marcus Crassus.
said, that a private man was not rich, he had not enough to maintain an Army.
^his were better a^^irmed of a Prince, ^r what has a private Person to do with
an ^rmy?

He said, that a good servant was the chief^st Furniture of a House, and kept a
great number of Slaves; but that was a part of the Revenue of the Ancients, and
not an ^pence.

He first shook hands with Pompey upon a re^nciliation, as who should say, he
that first ^eturns is the worthiest.

The Parthians having sent him a very haugh^^ Embassy, he told them, He would
return ^s Answer in Seleucia, which was their Capital ^ity.

Being importuned to know what he would ^o in a business of consequence: I will
do, said ^e, what shall be for the Benefit of the Commonwealth.

The intrails of the Victims falling out of his ^ands in the Wars against the
Parthians, he ^erceiving they made an Ominous interpreta^ion of it: The Sword,
said he, shall not fall out of my Hand in battle.

The Enemy causing the Head of his Son to ^e carried on the point of a Lance;
let not that trouble you, said he, to his Soldiers, this ^ffront concerns none
but my self.

Lucullus being ready to give Battle to Tigra^es, they came and told him,
Lucullus.
it was an unlucky day: The better, said he, we will make (...) fortunate by
our Victory.

He told his Soldiers; who apprehende^ the Enemies foot, because they had ^
good Armor on: they would put the^ to more trouble in killing them then in
routin^ them.

Pompey finding some fault with an House (...) had in the Country, because it
was only fit for (...) Summer Seat: Sure I have as much W^ as the Cranes, (or
Swallows,) that change their Habitation with the season, said he.

Thanks being returned by some for that (...) had treated them with great
Magnificence: ^ did not do that, replied he, so much for yo^ as for my self.
So, to his Steward once ex^^sing himself that he entertained him (...) better,
because he was alone: Did not yo^ know, said he, that I was to dine with my
self Understand he was very Voluptuous. (...) the Original it is, that Lucullus
was to dine with Lucullus.

When some would have persuaded him to attaque a Camp, where there was much
danger, he said, I would rather save one Roman Soldier, then gain all the
Enemies Plunder.

Fulvius Fulvius.
slaying his Son with his own hands, who was going to join with Cataline, said,
I brought thee up to defend thy native Country, not to oppress it.

Pompey who was as much beloved of the Romans as his Father had been hated, got
an Army together as soon as ever he was but out of his Childhood, and Sylla
having sent for him he said, he would never present himself before ^im till he
was victorious.

His Army being upon a March, he caused ^e Swords of all his men to be tied in
their ^abbards, to hinder them, said he, from robbing and murdering by the way.

Having quieted the troubles in Sicily, as ^e Mamertins were alleging
something in their Excuse; will you never, said he, leave ^rging the law to
them, that have the Sword ^ hand?

Being resolved to put them all to the Sword, ^e that commanded them offering
his own Throat as the sole Author of that disturbance ^ying withal, The
innocent ought not to be ^unished for the guilty: Pompey was so moved with it,
that he replied, That, for that time ^e guilty should obtain pardon for the
innocent, and forgave them all for his sake.

His Soldiers willing to proclaim him Impe^ator after he had vanquished
Domitius in Africa, ^e said, he would never take that name while ^he Enemy's
Camp was in being, and went ^mmediately and took it in despite of all
opposition.

Sylla refusing him the honor of a Triumph because of his age, he told him, It
is the rising ^un is adored, the setting Sun neglected, which made him relent.
But a Senator oppo^ing it with diverse Soldiers, who claimed what he had
promised them, he said, That Triumphs were not to be bought; this made him
appear worthy of it to the Senator himself that had opposed it.

It was the custom of the Roman Hors^ men, after the appointed time for their
Service was expired, to lead their Horse before the Censor, and give him an
account under what Generals they had served. He performed this Ceremony whilst
he wa^ Consul, and told him he had never served but under himself. He commanded
very young.

Finding amongst Sertorius's papers several Letters from the great men in Rome,
he said^ We must allow the means of repentance to those that have failed. And
burnt them all without reading one.

The King of Parthia having sent to intrea^ the Romans to make the River
Euphrates the limits of their Empire, he said, there ought to be no other but
Justice.

Lucullus having quitted all Employments to follow his pleasures, finding fault
with him for keeping his Command, he asked him, whether lust were more
commendable in an old man, then ambition in a young?

His Physician having in a Fit of Sickness, prescribed him some Wild-Fowl, that
was not to be had but of Lucullus; What, said he, could not Pompey live, if
Lucullus were not dainty? and refused it.

After the death of Sylla the Roman People having put all their Power into his
hands: When can I live at ease, said he? It Is the wishes of all Ambitious Men,
but they will not quit their employments for it.

Having gotten together great quantities of Corn from all parts to be carried
to Rome, who were dying for want, and his Pilot dissuading him from failing
because of the stormy weather: It is necessary, said he, that I should go, not
that I should live. It was necessary he should set forward, because the City
could subsist no longer. It was not necessary he should live, because some
other might have performed that Commission. Bold expressions are ^ot to be
minced.

Cato reproaching him that he had often foretold him, that the Power of Caesar
which he abetted, would prove one day fatal to the Commonwealth, he replied,
That Cato was most clear-sighted, and he most charitable or human.

He was wont to say, that he had both taken up, and resigned his Commands,
contrary to men's expectations; for he did the first whilst very young, and the
last whilst very powerful.

When Caesar assaulted his Camp after his defeat; What, said he, in our very
Camp? He thought he would not have utterly ruined him.

Going into the Vessel wherein he was murdered, he said, Whoever puts himself
under another's power, becomes a Slave, how free soever he was. This is a Verse
in Euripides.

Caesar Caesar.
courting the Pontificat, said to his Mother, taking leave of her the day of
Election, That she should find he would be that day either Sovereign Pontif, or
banished.

Having repudiated his Wife for suspicio^ of adultery; some endeavoring to
persuade him to show his resentment, he replied, Than he did not believe her
guilty; but yet the wife of Caesar ought not only to be free from the Crime but
the suspicion too. This was (...) avoid owning the Affront, as I before noted
in Pisistratus.

It is said, he wept upon sight of the Statue of Alexander, for not having
performed any thing at that time of his Age, wherein the other had subdued
above half the World. It was the same Ambition made him declare, he would
rather choose to be the first in a Village, than the second man in Rome.

He said that bold undertakings were to be put in execution without
deliberation, and having passed the Rubicon, said, the dice is cast, as leaving
the rest to Fortune.

Going into Spain, Pompey who was in Asia.
he told them, that he was marching against an Army without a General, and that
afterward he would seek out a General without an Army.

One that had the keeping of the public Treasury endeavoring to hinder him
from having any of it, he told him, threatening to kill him, That it were easier
for him to do it, then say it; and that he ought to make a difference between
the times when laws were in force, and when Arms were so.

His Forces delaying to pass over into Illyria, he got himself alone into a
Challop to fetch them, and perceiving the Pilot apprehend a Tempest: Fear not,
said he, thou carriest Caesar and his Fortune.

Being in one day twice beaten by Pompey, he said, I had been lost, if my Enemy
had known how to gain. Or to improve his advantage.

Pharnaces being defeated, he sent word to Rome, I came, I saw, I overcame, to
show with what speed he obtained a Victory.

He said, he bore some envy for the death of Cato, because Cato had enviously
robbed him of some glory. The Glory he should have had to Pardon him.

Some would have insinuated he ought to have a jealousy of Anthony and
Dollabella, but he replied, There could be no just fear or apprehension of any
treachery in such cheerful and merry Countenances; but of such pale and wan
Complexions as Cassius and Bru^us.

Having upon a rout, stopped an Ensign that was ^lying, he turned his Face
toward the Enemy, and said; It Is there you must charge.

Crowning a Wrestler whose competitor he had favored, he told him, Thou
triumphest in despite of Caesar.

Perceiving his Soldiers startled at the approach of Iuba in Afric, he told
them, That Prince came with ten Legions, a hundred thousand foot lightly armed,
thirty thousand horse, and three hundred Elephants^ and that they should not
doubt, the truth of it, for, that he knew it very well, Thereby to turn their
astonishment into railery.

A Tribune not rising up to him upon the day of his Triumph: Call me to account
for my Actions, said he to him: and afterward when he granted any favors he
would add, If is pleases Pontius Aquilla, which was that Tribunes name.

The People having saluted and called him King, He told them, I am called
Caesar, yet omitted not to punish those Officers who had imprisoned the Man
that crowned his Statue. Because, said he, they have robbed me of the honor of
punishing him my self. Or of refusing that honor.

Upon the information that they were laying Ambushes for him, he said, it were
better to die once, then to live ever in fear.

He was wont to say, That if Laws were ever to be broken, it should be to gain
a Crown.

Falling down upon his first descent in Africa, he said he held Africa under
him. To make a good Omen of an ill one.

Some few days before his death, his Friends disputing in his presence, which
was the best: he said, the least foreseen death.

When they would have pardoned one of his Questors whom they had taken:
Caesar's Soldiors, said he, are wont to give others their lives, but not to
accept of it from any one, and so killed himself.

Scipio Scipio Father in law Pompey.
perceiving one of his Friends to favor another man for the obtaining the
Consulship, said, That Dignity would be too dearly purchased should he obtain
it in opposition to his ^riend, and desisted.

Having thrust his Sword through his Body after his defeat, some asking him,
where is the General, he is very well, replied he.

Cato Cato Utica.
being blamed for his taciturnity: no ^atter, said he, for my speaking,
provided I can act well.

When they would have given him the pre^erence in a thing wherein his lot had
not pro^ed favorable; I will not, said he, triumph (...) despite of Fortune.

Beholding a world of Soldiers in a spacious Place in Arms against him: O the
great Coward Caesar, said he, to muster up so many men against me alone. Never
did any man call Caesar coward, but this same.

Pompey desiring two of his kindred in mar^iage, the one for himself, the other
for his ^on, thereby to engage him on his side: I never give any Hostages,
replied he, against the Commonwealth.

Having refused the entrance into his House to a friend, he excused it upon the
account, that too much Familiarity breeds contempt.

The Senate applauding him for having appeased the People by his Presence in a
sedition: But I cannot applaud you Sirs, said he, for exposing me, or forsaking
me.

Having rivall'd a friend in the pursuit of some dignity: he pleaded, that it
was no strange thing to see two friends contend where their honor was
concerned.

Observing that Pompey was unsuccessful when he took part with the good, and
fortunate when he opposed them, he said, The secret^ of Providence were past
our understandings.

After his Country was ruined, he said, That Cato was not overcome, but his
Fortune; and chose rather to die then submit to the Conqueror.

Some disputing the Honor of the Command with him, after Pompey's defeat: we
must not wonder, said he, that we have bee^ vanquished, having more regard to a
vain Honor then for a Victory.

When Caesar demanded a Thanksgiving should be kept for a Victory he had gained
by surprise, he was of opinion they should rather resign him to the Enemy that
they might revenge his treachery.

He said, that of all those that had attaqued the Commonwealth Caesar only was
wise, the rest were all either Fools or MadMen.

He advised to bestow the Sovereign Authority upon Pompey, because those that
commit great Faults, are the only Persons able to remedy them.

Cicero rallying upon his own Name, Cicero.
which in Latin signifies a Pease, said, he would render it more illustrious
then those of Scaurus, Cato's, or Catullus, and to consecrate the Etymology,
after he had put the name of Marcus T^llius upon an Offering which he dedicated
to a Temple, he graved a Pease thereon.

He said, that Orators made most noise, when ^hey had least reason, as men get
on horseback, when they cannot go on foot.

That that was true honor which we de^ived not from any others, but owed only
to our selves.

That considering the spirit and ambition of Caesar, he apprehended that he
would make himself Master of the Commonwealth; but on the other side his
luxury and softness made his apprehensions vanish.

When he had declared himself, he said ^ find that I ought to fly, but I do
not find that I ought to follow; because one party was the more strong, and the
other the more ^ust.

At his coming to the Camp, Pompey asked him, where is your Son-in-law? He
replied, with your father-in-Law; which pinched him much more then he was
pinched, because from that marriage proceeded the ^uine of the Republik.

Caesar having caused the Statues of Pompey to be repaired, after his defeat:
Cicero said, he had thereby secured his own. The remainder is amongst those
Apophthegmes that are purely pleasant.

Antony said, that the Roman Grandeur appeared more in what they gave, Anthony.
then in what they took, whereby he understood their conquests, and their
revenues. Because sometimes they bestowed Crowns.

Upon the death of Cleopatra, he said, he did not so much bewail her death, as
he envied her glory, in having prevented his dying first ^ b^ that report
proved false, for she died not till a^^^^ him.

His Son making a great present to one tha^ was afraid to accept of it: The
younger Antony.
What do tho^ fear, said he, know thou not that I am the Son of Antony?

Brutus M. Brutus.
lifting his Eyes toward Heaven, at the Battle at Philippi: Do not forget, O^
Jupiter, said^ he, who is the cause of all these troubles.

Being dissuaded from engaging in that fight: there can no ill betide me,
replied he, for I shall be killed, or be Conqueror: and when he was wished to
save himself after his defeat, he said, we must save our selves by our hands,
not with our feet, by slaying themselves.

He would not have Antony murdered with Caesar, that we may not stain, said
he, so noble an enterprise with the Blood of the Innocent. That caused the
ruin of the Commonwealth.

His wife having wounded her self with a Knife a little before the battle or
the conspiracy, Portia.
To practice, said she, to kill her self if the success were contrary.

Cassius being yet a Child, gave a box on the ear to Sylla's Son, Cassius.
who vaunted of the Tyranny of his Father; and heing brought for the same
before Pompey: Assume again, said he, the confidence to brag of it here, that
you may have a second blow.

After the murdering of Caesar, meeting with Antony, and talking somewhat
boldly to him, Antony asked him whether he had his dagger still? Yes, replied
he, for those that affect Tyranny, Or, that durst attempt against the
Commonwealth.

Being treated as a King or Sovereign, after the taking of Rhodes: I am not so,
said he, but the murderer of a Tyrant.

A King of Thracia, who had forsaken Antony's party, to espouse that of
Augustus, bragged of it as a good action. I love the Treason, said Augustus,
but I do not love the Traitor.

Being counseled not to declare himself the Heir to Caesar, because of the
great power of his Enemies, he told them, he would not show himself unworthy of
the rank to which fortune had called him.

He said, that to expose ones self to great dangers for small matters, was to
fish with a golden hook, where one may lose more then can be gotten.

The Inhabitants of Alexandria fearing to be roughly treated after the defeat
of Antony, he told them, he did pardon them, as well for the honor of their
founder, and of their City, as for the consideration of Arius the Philosopher,
who was his friend, and made him sit down by him on his Tribunal.

Some having presented him a little note, in Cicily, wherein was written: The
Treasurer Theodorus is a thief; he underwrit, It seems a truth, and put another
into his place. The History tells us, he had displaced him before he received
this note.

Athenodorus the Philosopher who was lea^^ing the Court by reason of his great
age, having advised him, at his taking his leave, no^ to do any thing in his
anger till he had repeated the four and twenty letters of the Alphabet, b^ took
this for a hint that he was too passionate, and telling him he wanted him, kept
him another year at Court.

Hearing that Alexander after his return from his Conquests, was troubled to
know what he should do all the rest of his life: and yet it is not, said he a
lesser Virtue to govern a Kingdom well, then to conque^^ one.

Having caused that Princes Sepulcher to be opened to contemplate him; being
asked whether he would not likewise see Ptolomy? I was minded, replied he, to
see Alexander, and not a dead Carkase.

He said to a Nephew of his, whom he was sending into Armenia: I wish thee the
courage of Alexander, and my own Fortune, and that thou may be beloved of the
People as much as Pompey was.

Speaking of Tiberius, he said, he left a Successor that never had deliberated
twice upon the same thing; Either from the soundness of his Judgment or his
Constancy.

Two young Officers quarrelling before him in the full Senate: Give ear, young
men, said he, to an old one, to whom old men hearkened unto when he was young.

An Illustrious Grecian having committed some insolence, he told him, he
forgave him, in consideration of his Family, there being none ^^ft but himself.

He wrote to the Athenians, who had done ^^mething that displeased him, that he
was very ^ngry with them, but without any design of ^oing them displeasure.

He said to Piso, who had built a magnificent ^alace, That that made him
believe Rome would ^e Eternal, since their structures promised an eternal
duration: and likewise said, he would ^eave it all of Marble, though he found
it but of Bricks.

One designing to make extraordinary courtship accused Cato in his presence: To
defend the Laws of ones Country is the part of an honest man, said he.

His Daughter causing her gray hairs to be pulled out; he without seeming to
take any notice, asked her, whether she would rather have no hair, then such as
she then had? she answered no: Why does your dresser strive; replied he, to
make you bald then?

Observing some certain strangers that made much of little Dogs and Monkeys, he
asked, if there were no children in their Country. Because it is ordinarily
such people as have no Children that do so.

He had always this saying in his Mouth, That we should do nothing
pecipitately; which he expressed in Greek in these words, Haste you slowly. and
affirmed that a thing was done soon enough, when it was well done.

To show that Honor ought to be dearer then Interest, he said he would rather
bestow the right of exemption, than the right of Burghership.

The People making complaint to him of the dearness of Wine, he sent them to
those Fou^^tains which his Son-in-Law had brought into the City.

To oblige a Parricide to deny his Crime, b^ said to him, most certainly thou
have not mu^thered thy Father.

A friend of his maintaining a slanderer wh^ had often bit him: You feed, said
he, a^ ill-natured Beast: and the other replying^ he would turn him away if he
pleased: No said he, It was I that made you so good Friends.

As he was eating at another, a servant having by chance broken a Crystal
Jarr, cast himself at his feet to implore that he might not be given to the
Lampries, not refusing any other manner of Death; for that monster of cruelty
fed perhaps those Fish with humane bodies to make them more delicious; At which
Augustus in wrath caused all the Crystal Vessels to be broken that were left;
as being the instrumental cause, said he, of the cruelty of his Friend, after
he had reproached him severely for his crime.

An Advocate having said in a cause, that such a one had spoken ill of him, he
replied you shall be revenged by speaking ill of him, when your turn comes.
Another time he said, it was enough that he could do him no ill.

He never recommended his Children to the People, without adding, If they
deserve it.

When he was dying, he asked his Friends whether he had acted his part well,
and spoke ^o them as they are wont to do at the end of ^ Comedy: Clap your
hands if the Play have ^leased you?

Augustus having gently chid his Daughter, Iulia.
because she had dressed her self too gawdily, ^he next day she attired her
self more mo^estly, and he praising her for it: I dressed any self to day, said
she, for my Father, and ^esterday to please my Husband. She ^ad spoken true, if
she had said, for her Gal^ant.

She being exhorted to imitate the modesty of her Father; said, he has forgot
he is a Prince, but I have not forgot I am an Empe^ors Daughter.

Agrippa said, Agrippa^
a Sovereign cannot endure Sub^ects that are greater then himself.

That Princes left the most difficult undertakings to others, and reserved the
more easy to themselves: Or rather, That one must^ ^ake the danger to ones
self, and leave the Honor of the thing to the Prince. It is said likewise,
That Princes leave the Acts of Justice to the Subjects, and reserve those of
mercy to themselves.

Tiberius would not suffer any one should call him Lord, it being then a divine
Title; nor that they should say, his Sacred Employments: and one telling him,
he was come to attend the Senate by his order: No, said he, but by my advice.

He scoffed at those, who after three score years of age, made use of any
Physician, Beca^^^ they ought in that length of time to have observe^
sufficiently what would do them good, and what w^^ hurtful.

He did not often change those that were i^ Offices, or Governments, and gave
this for his reason, That Flies do not bite so much when they are glutted. Or
fresh Leeches suc^ most Blood. The one is more for the advantage (...) the
Subject, the other of the Prince.

Being pressed to punish the Authors of some Libels, he told them, That in a
free Tow^ their Tongues ought to be free likewise. And the Senate continuing
their Complaints, he added, That they had other business enough to do, and if
once they should set open that Door, they should be able to do nothing else.

The Treasurers of the Provinces being of opinion that the Taxes should be
increased, he said, The Sheep ought to be sheared, but not flayed.

Being informed that a criminal had made away himself, he said, He had escaped
from his vengeance.

And another beseeching him to hasten his Death, he added, That he was not yet
reconciled to him. And indeed, his Tutor said of him when he was young, That he
was compounded of Dirt and Blood mingled, because of his sullen and cruel Humor.

His Mother declared that a chaste woman was no more moved at the sight of a
naked man then of a Statue. Lucia.


Caligula Caligula.
speaking of his Subjects, said, Let them hate me, provided they fear me.
Another time he said, There is no man besides the Sovereign but ought to be
frugal. Whereas in truth it may be said on the contrary, That none ought ^o be
so frugal as the Sovereign, because none is at ^o great expense: Or has so many
occasions of ex^ending.

The Emperor Claudius Claudius.
being Censor, sent home a young debauched Fellow without any punishment, he
has, said he, a Father to cha^tize him.

Having restored a man to his Fame, he said, The scar of that infamy would
remain, though the wound was healed.

The Astrolog^rs having foretold Agrippina, Agrippina.
that her Son would put her to death, if ever he came to be Emperor: Let him
kill me, said she, provided he Reign. And when she was ^lain by his Command,
she said, pointing to her Belly, It Is there you should strike. For having
brought forth a Monster.

Nero being to sign a Sentence of Death (...) would to God, Nero.
said he, I did not know how to write.

Dying, he said, he had neither Friends nor Enemies, Because none would either
save him, nor kill him.

He said of Thrasia, It were to be wished he loved his Prince as much as
Justice.

Galba Galba.
having made a great Present to a Musician that had pleased him; This is not
out of the public Treasury, said he, it is of my (...) To show that Princes
ought not to squander that Gratuities.

Vespasian Vespasian.
said to a young perfumed Galla^ That he had rather he should have smelt of
Ga^^lick then perfume, and for that reason took ^ Government from him.

He said to one that had conspired against him, That it was the Gods that
bestowed E^^pires, Or, that it was an effect of Fortune not of Merit.

Having done good to an enemy, he said, He will remember it.

His Son being offended that he had set a Tribute upon Urine, he told him,
making him smell to a piece of money that was part of that Tribute, it smells
of nothing. Retice^ has rendered it, That profit smells well from when^ soever
it is gathered. My Lord Bacon gives (...) thus. Vespasian set a Tribute upon
Urine: Ti^ his Son, emboldened himself to speak to his Father of it, and
represented it as a thing indigne and fordid. Vespasian said nothing for the
time; but ^ while after when it was forgotten, sent for a piece of Silver out
of the Tribute Money; and called to his Son bidding him smell to it; and asked
hi^ whether he found any Offense? Who said, no: Why so, says Vespasian again;
Yet this comes o^^ of Urine.

A private man having quarrelled with a Senator, he declared that we ought not
first to speak injuriously of a Senator, but that we might reply. Or that so
much respect was to be allowed them, as not to begin with them, but o^^ was not
bound to suffer any affronts from them, but if they spoke injuriously, it might
be retorted.

Raising himself up a little before he died, he said, A Prince ought to die
standing.

The Emperor Titus Titus.
being reproached for promising more then he could perform, he said, That no
man ought to go away discon^ented from the Presence of his Prince. It seems his
very denials ought to be pleasingly contri^ed.

One day being spen^^^ which he had bestowed nothing; Friends said he, I have
lost this day.

Domitian Domitian.
said, that Princes passed for Tyrants ^^inridding themselves of such as they
suspected, or otherwise they suffered themselves to be destroyed to keep their
reputation: Some attribute it to Adrian.

He added that such as gave Ear to slanderers are worse then slanderers.
Because they are the cause that there are any.

Nerva Nerva.
said, He sought an Heir, not to inherit his riches, but for the Empire. As
being more important to choose a King then a Successor.

Trajan Trajan.
said, he would show himself such toward his Subjects, as he wished they might
be toward him. Or, such as he wished when a private Man, that his Prince might
be to him.

He said to the Governor of Rome, putting the sword into his hand, which was
the token of his power: Take this sword, and make use of it for me, if I do
well, and against me if I do ill.

The Emperor Adrian Adrian.
used to say, that a good Prince did not believe the goods of his subjects to
be his. And meeting one of his Enemies after he was become Emperor; he said
aloud to him, you have nothing to fea^ now; As being lifted too high to think
of reveng^ against a private person.

He said, that ^ings ought not to be Kings in all things; that is to say, not
to use their power in every thing (...).

The People desiring him to set one of his Slaves at liberty, he said, they
must not thus dispose of other men's goods.

He sent one to bestow a box on the Ear upon one of his Servants who was
walking betwixt two Senators, and said, he ought to remember they might be his
Masters one day.

His intended Successor being infirm, he said, he leaned upon a falling Wall.

He said the Treasure of Princes was like the Spleen, which never swells, but
as the other parts consume. To instruct them to spare their Subjects Purses.

Dying he said that the multitude of Physicians had killed him.

He said to some Lawyers that desired that they might be allowed to plead, That
they had no want of leave but of ability.

His wife ascending the Capitol after his election: Plotina.
May I live, said she, in this dignity, as I lived before this was obtained.

Antonine Antonine.
the Emperor, said, That Marriage was not a title of voluptuousness, but of
dignity, thereby excusing the pleasure he took with other Women.

When some would have hindered his Son from weeping for the death of his Tutor,
Marcus Aurelius Marcus Aurelius.
said, suffer him to be a Man, before he come to be a Prince.

Being advised to repudiate his Wife who ^led an ill life: Let us then restore
the Empire to her, said he, which she brought in Marriage.

He ever consulted with his Friends, before he would undertake any thing,
because said he, It is more rational for one to follow the advice of many, then
many that of one.

At his Dying, he told them they should rather think of death than of him, and
more of the Common Fate of all men, than of his alone, adding that he
recommended his Son to them, and to the Gods likewise if he were deserving.

The Emperor Pertinax being counseled to save himself from the fury of the
Praetorian Pertinax.
Cohorts: What have I done, said he, for this?

It has been said of the Emperor Severus, Severus.
as well as of Augustus: That he should never have been born, or that he never
should have dyed.

His Soldiers having declared his Son Emperor; whilst he had the Gout, he
caused himself to be carried to the Camp; and having punished their insolence:
I will make you know, said he, that it is the Head commands, and not the feet.

At his death, He had passed all the Offices of the Empire.
he said, that he had been all things, and yet all that served for nothing,
That is to say against Death.

He would not suffer the proud Inscriptio^ that had been fixed under the Statue
of Pescenn^us, to be defaced: Whether he were such or no, said he, it is still
the more honor to have thus defeated him.

Pescennius would have all the Judges to be allowed sufficient Salaries,
Pescennius.
to do their duties, said he, without Bribes.

The Egyptian Soldiers asking him for Wine, he showed them the River Nilus, and
when they refused to fight unless they had some, he told them, they were to
engage with an Enemy that drank nothing but water.

He said, he would please whilst he was living, and be praised after his death:
and as one would have rehearsed a Panegyric in his praise, make one upon some
famous Captain of a former age, to serve me for an example, said he.

Caracalla causing his Brother to be consecrated, Caracalla.
whom he had killed; no matter, said he, whether he be a God, so he be dead.

Alexander Severus retrenched a great many of his Domestic Servants, Alexander
Severus.
saying, The Emperors had been ill Husbands in feeding so many useless mouths.

He said, it was not Gold that made our offerings become acceptable, but Piety.

That we must wish for good and suffer evil.

That pleasing things were delightful, and hardships glorious. One of the
Ancients said, to the same purpose, That trouble marched before Virtue, and
after Vice: but that Pleasure followed Virtue, and Vice was followed by
Repentance.

That the Public Safety depended on good ^rmies, and that a Prince ought to
take more ^are of his Forces, then of himself.

That he that sold a Princes favors, sold ^moak. He caused one of his
favorites to be burnt ^ith green wood for having done so.

That Friends must be preserved with good ^eeds, and Enemies gained with fair
^ords.

That Soldiers defended their baggage with ^ore heat then their lives.

That a Thief maintained himself by giving little, and taking much.

That by making the Majesty of Empire mild^r, it became the more supportable.

He solicited a man that had obliged him, to ^sk some recompense, that I may
not, said he, ^ie his debtor.

He would not suffer any Office in places of Judicature to be sold; saying it
were not ^trange to sell, what one bought. He meant Justice.

Some Vintners contending with the Christians about a House, he said, it were
better they should adore a God there, let him be what he would, then make it a
Tavern.

The Soldiers interrupting a speech he made with their loud shouts; those
should be used against the Enemy, said he, and not against your Prince.

He would not employ persons of The Greek says Freemen.
condition, in any service of his, and said, That personal service was the
Office of a Slave.

He said upon the punishment of a Friend that his Friends were very dear; but
the Commonwealth was yet dearer.

The Emperor Aurelian having threatened ^ rebellious City that he would not
spare a dog let all the Dogs be destroyed, Aurelina.
said he, and spare the Inhabitants.

Saturninus said to his Soldiers, Saturninus.
who would make him Emperor, That they would lose^ good Commander, to find a
bad Prince. Thi^ is to say, he was a better Soldier, then a Politicia^ or Ruler.

Tacitus the Emperor being denied some favor which he requested of the Senate:
Tacitus.
They know, said he, they have to do with a Prince that can bear it.

Probus made his Soldiers work when they had no Wars: Probus.
That they may not eat the Public Stock undeservedly.

Seeing a very fleet Horse, he said, it was a fit Beast for a Coward.

Diocletian said, Diocletian.
there was nothing harder then to govern well, because of the continual
Ambushes in and whispering underminings of Princes Ears to betray them.

He told those who would have recalled him to the Government after he had
quitted it: That if they had but seen his Gardens at Salona, they would never
have propounded it to him. Because of the Sweetness of Repose, and the
Pleasantness of Gardening.

The Emperor Julian expelled from his Court the Multitude of Eunuchs, Julian.
Barbers, and Cooks,

The first because having then no Wife, Customs.
he had no need of them; the last, because, said ^e, I eat no curious meats nor
high Sauces: and the other, because one was enough for a ^reat many.

The Soldiers of Valentinian endeavoring to oblige him to do somewhat contrary
to his Will, Valentinian.
he told them, They had chosen him vo^untarily, but he would make them obey
whether they would or no.

The young Theodosius was so far from putting any to death, Theodosius the
younger.
that he said, he wished ^e could call the dead to life again.

CUSTOMS OF LACEDEMONIA, According to Plutarque.
BEfore the producing the Apophthegmes of the Lacedaemonians, Plutarque has
made a little digression concerning their Customs, to show the near relation
and agreement there is between their sayings and their manner of life. Customs
of the Lacedaemonians.
By his example I have drawn an Extract out of a Treatise composed by *
Xenophon to satisfy the Readers curiosity, It follows after this same.
because the thing is well done, and consisting of matters so remote from our
times, and Methods, I thought it well worthy our knowledge, were it only to
discover the ground and principles upon which those great Men founded their
Actions.

The Lacedaemonians, did eat all together in great Inns and the oldest told the
last comers, nothing is to be exposed abroad that we say here, Like the Knights
of Malta, with whom in other things they had much resemblance.
To preserve the Freedom of their Tables, and the Liberty of Feasting,
according to the Proverb, Odi memorem convivam.

They were very temperate in their eating and drinking; and the greatest dainty
that was brought to their Table was a certain pottage Tanne, which was the
ordinary food of their aged people. Denis the Tyrant having expressly sent for
a Cook from Lacedemonia to make some for him, and not finding it agreeable to
to his palate; It Is, said the Cook, to be eaten on the brink of the River
Eurotas, after a Laconick Exercise: because Labor whets the Appetite, and a
sharp stomach makes any thing relish well. Witness him that drank Puddle Water
in a great Thirst, saying, he never drank any so good before.

They retired every night to their homes without any lights, to accustom
themselves to be fearless, Or rather to leave every one the liberty of going
whither be pleased without being observed, as they do at Venice; for it is
certain that Licurgus gave great allowance to the pleasures of love, which is
the common Entertainment of the Idle: Now, all his Subjects did nothing, like
our Nobility, ^ut passed their time like them, in Wars, Love and Hunting.

After their Children could write and read, they taught them nothing else, but
to obey the Magistrates, to inure themselves to hardships, and resolve to be
Victors in fight, or die on the spot. The Masters of other Sciences were not so
much as admitted in Lacedemonia.

The Lacedaemonians wore no Doublets, had but one Garment in a year, without any
change according to the season: used little Bathing or Stows, Oyled themselves
but rarely, and were not very curious in their habits, or manners, To banish
Luxury and soft Delicacy, as being contrary to war like People.

Their Youth lay in Troops upon Mats made of Reeds of the Flaggy tops which
grew about the sides of their Rivers, and in Winter they mixed somewhat that was
warmer. The heads of those Reeds ends like a feather, and is foft enough,
besides it bears a wooly Substance, with which good mats are made. It might be
perhaps of this warmer stuff that they used in winter to keep out the cold.

The courtship of Boys was not allowed as in Greece, but they loved Youth for
their Virtues.

When the aged ones met a young man they asked him whither he went, and what he
was doing? and if he answered not, or replied impertinently, he was chastized.
The Punishment was to go round about an Altar singing reproaches of himself.

It was a shame not to endure reprehension, and those that did not admonish
young men of their faults, were punished ^ Accomplices.

An old man was respected as ones ow^ Father; which kept them in Union in the
City, because they took no less care for what was another, then for their own:
and if any one had complained that another had corrected him, the Father would
have corrected him afresh.

As they gave but little to their Children to eat, they were suffered to pilfer
now and then: but if they were taken in the fast they were scourged and obliged
to fast, Not so much for having stolen, as for not doing it dexterously.

They feed ill in their Inns, to accustom themselves to fare hard in time of
War, which was their chief Exercise; besides they believed that a spare diet
left the Spirits in more freedom, and made the Body more nimble and active in
their Military employments: But less strong and vigorus, for the Athletes eat
much.

Though they lived thus soberly yet they loved music to entertain their mirth;
but their Music was but mean, and their Songs contained nothing but the
praises due to noble actions, and the blame belonging to ill ones, As a spur to
Virtue and a curb to Vice.

It is held that Licurgus mingled Music ex^ressly with Arms to moderate the
fury. The Kings themselves sacrificed to the Muses before ^ battle that their
Actions might be celebrated, ^r to act so as to become worthy of it.

They would not suffer any change of their Ancient Music, and condemned the
most celebrated Musician of his age, to pay a fine though ^e were otherwise a
great adorer of antiquity for having invented a new string which multiplied
their notes and accords, and cut off two which another had added to the Lyre.

Their Songs were composed of diverse couplets, in which they answered one
another by turns. In some the old ones told'em how brave they had been, the
middle-ag'd in another would tell how brave they were; and the youths would
promise they hoped to exceed them hereafter. The steps were military, as well
as the time, and their harmony being mingled with somewhat of Enthusiasme
transported them to such a degree as to despise death it self.

They buried their dead within the City near their Temples, without any
ceremony or superstition, or other Funeral state, but only a red cloth which
wrapped them all over and some Olive leaves; this Burying was common to all,
mourning and effeminate lamentation as well as Epitaphs were banished, which
was never allowed to any but such as died in the Wars.

They would not permit their youth to travel, that they might not be corrupted
with foreign customs, nor were strangers suffered to come and dwell in
Lacedemonia.

Those young men that had not been bred according to the Spartan way, could not
enjoy any of their privileges, whereas a stranger that had been so, enjoyed
them all. It Is said they had their portions likewise when they first shared
their Lands, with this Proviso only, that they might not sell them.

At their huntings they were allowed to make use of their Neighbors Dogs,
Horses, and all other Equipage, when they did not use it themselves, restoring
every thing to them again and not spoiling them.

In a time of War they were clothed in red, as being a Martial color, and on
which the blood is not so conspicuous when wounded.

When they had overcome by a slight, they sacrificed an Ox, and when it was by
force, a Cock; to prefer Prudence before Valor as a higher Virtue.

They asked nothing of their Gods but patience in their labor, In the Greek it
is to suffer Injuries.
and to be happy when they did well. This explication is proved by that
Article; where it is said, they contended in sufferings; which does not at all
relate to injuries; since it follows that a Lacedemonian was chastized for
enduring an affront without resentment.

All their Gods, Venus not excepted, were painted in armor to honor Valor,
and make it known they were not in a condition to receive injuries.

They ordinarily said, one must pray to the Gods with an Arm outstretched, as
much as to say not with folded Arms but in putting the helping hand, The Greek
says, at the beginning of an Enterprise, otherwise not.

They were wont to show their Slaves drunk to their Children, to make them
abhor Drunkenness.

When they were to go into any House, they did not knock at the door; but
called aloud in the street, that they should come and open it.

In their Baths they used Rubbers made of ^eeds, instead of Wyre ones.

They neither acted Tragedies nor Comedies, that no offense might be committed
against the Laws, not even in Plays. Or that they might not be accustomed to
hear their Passions and crimes defended.

They expelled a Poet, for having said, that when a man had lost his Weapons,
he might recover others; but life once lost, was never to be regained. As if he
had thereby instructed them to cast away their Arms to fly with more ^ase.

The Boys and Girls had one common Sacrifice.

The Ephores condemned a Lacedemonian to pay a Fine, for having endured many
affronts without ressentment.

They caused a Soldier to be put to death for having painted his Shield;
According to Erasmus or a Porter for making his Sack of diverse colors.
and publicly reproved a young man for learning the way to a place where they
lived Luxuriously.

They packed away an Orator, who vaunted that he could discourse a whole day
upon any Subject. For discourse ought to be proportioned ^ the Subject, and not
enlarged ad infinitum.

Their Children were whipped once a year upon the Altar of Diana, to teach them
to endure pain, and they contended who should suffer most, as if it were a
Virtue. However it is dangerous to make sufferings become despisable: for we
have nothing to bridle the wicked withal but tha^ and Children hardened by too
much whipping gro^ incorrigible.

It was a shame to exercise any Trade, eve^ Husbandry it self, to which purpose
they made use of their Slaves, as their Farmers, without taxing them too much
or too little, for fear of making them lazy or desperate.

The Lacedaemonians were thus always at leisure which is a pleasant thing, and
they were forbidden to meddle with Navigation, and even to fight at Sea, but
they afterward broke that Custom and renewed it again, finding their manners
were thereby corrupted.

As the use of Riches was utterly banished, there was no fear they should
labor in vain to acquire any, and the first that attempted it were condemned
to death: For an Oracle had been pronounced to two Kings: That Riches would
prove the ruin of Sparta. This Custom was abolished by little and little, and
Lysander after the taking of Athens, filled the City with riches, not only
without danger, but with much Honor.

Whilst Sparta observed these Laws, they were the chiefest of Greece the space
of five hundred years; but coming to relax; and covetousness insinuating it
self, their Allies forsook them, finding their strength decay. Nevertheless
after the Battle of Cheronea, when all Greece had elected Philip of Macedon for
General, and afterward Alexander, after the destruction of Thebes, these would
not acknowledge their Power, nor fight with them, nor for them, nor meet in
their Assemblies, and ^held out firmly even against their Successors, though
feeble, and without any Walls. But at last having forsaken all their Customs,
Nabis, etc.
they were subjected to their own Tyrants, and put their necks under the Roman
yoke with the rest of the World.

A part of these Customs being included in the Apophthegms of Licurgus, we
will marshal them together, because they will serve to give light to many
things; and it will not be amiss, to bring him in the Front, as the Founder.

Licurgus willing to wean his Citizens from their debauchery, to make them
Virtuous, and to let them see how Education and Exercise changed and
out-stripped Nature, brought two dogs forth in Public, one bred to hunting the
other in the Kitchen; and having caused a Hare to be let loose, and meat to be
laid down, the first coursed the Hare, the other ran to the meat, though they
were both fit for the chase, but the last was utterly spoiled for want of
exercise. By this means, he showed them, it was not enough they were descended
from Hercules, as the Lacedaemonians were, unless, like him, they exercised
themselves in virtuous ways.

After he had divided the whole country in nine thousand equal portions,
finding at Harvest time that all their heaps were equal in the Fields, he said,
that all Laconia seemed the partnership of so many Brothers.

He would have done the same with their Goods, after he had abolished all
manner of Debts; but the rich opposing him, he made their Riches become useless
by prohibiting entirely the use of Gold and Silver in any thing, and suffering
only Iron money to pass Current. He likewise retrenched other superflu^ties, so
that in Sparta was to be found, neither Merchant, nor Cook, nor Lawyer, nor
Mountebank, nor Astrologer, and injustice was banished by his having cut up the
root of it which is covetousness. And to take away all excess indyet, as he had
done in Household Goods, he ordained they should eat in common, in public
places, where every one was served alike^, without having either more, or any
greater^ dainties then his fellows.

Those were blamed that did not come thither, as voluptuous People; insomuch
that King Agis desiring to sup at home with his wise after his return from the
gaining of a Victory they would not send him his proportion, and the next day
condemned him to pay a Fine. Notwithstanding the wealthier sort, angry at this
Method, which hindered them of the enjoyment of their Riches, would have stoned
him to death, had he not fled into a Temple, with the loss of one eye. He that
had struck out his eye, being afterward delivered into his hands to suffer
Justice, instead of punishing he pardoned him, made him eat at his Table and of
his Enemy made him his greatest Friend, and his adorer.

Whilst they were at meals, some were appointed to be always in Arms as a
Guard, to psevent any disorders, or unlooked for Accidents; but their number
was never so great as to be able to master the rest.

To obviate all manner of cheats and little quirks, and leave the Judges the
liberty of judging every thing according to it is circumstances without being
tied to the rigor of the Law, he would have no written Laws.

He forbad they should make use of any tools about their buildings, besides the
Axe, and Saw, that they might be ashamed of providing rich furniture for such
ill Houses, and by seeing a Door without any Art of Joyners work, they should
expect to find nothing within that were magnificent.

He enjoined them likewise, not to make War upon the same People too often, for
fear of making them too Warlike. The remainder is elsewhere.

He caused Maidens to addict themselves to Exercises of the body, and to
wrestle naked, to become the more robust, and bring forth the more vigorous
Children, besides that it would make them the less sensible of the pains of
Childbearing. By this means he endeavored to cure them of their Feminine
tenderness, and be only subject to the like passions with Men, and fight in a
time of danger and necessity, in defense of their Country. And indeed, the Wife
of Leonidas reproached those that told her, There were none but the Macedonians
that commanded over Men; That there were none but them that begot Men. But they
were not suffered to be seen by every one at those Exercises, no more then the
young Boys. That Privilege being allowed only to such as were married; and to
incite People the more to marriage, those that were not so, were deprived of
the Honor that was given to old age. From thence it was that Dercillidas taking
it ill, that a young man did not rise up from his Seat when he approached, the
young man replied, That Dercillidas had begot no Children that might show him
the like respect another time. But by this means the homely ones did not easily
get Husbands.


They gave no Portion with their Daughters in Marriage, to prevent making love
to them for any thing but their merits, and that the meaner sort might be
sought after as well as the rich. All use of Face-painting and other Ornaments
were strictly prohibited, that they might have no other advantage but their
Virtue.

He prescribed a time for marriage, as well for Maidens, as Batchelors, that so
coming together in the flower of their Age, they might have the healthier and
lustier Children.

He would not suffer those who were newly married to meet together, but as it
were, by stealth, lest they should be glutted and enfeebled by a continual
enjoyment.

He forbad to put Oil into perfumes, that so precious a thing might not be idly
wasted; and banished all Arts generally, which serve only for show, and even
the Dyers Trade was not admitted, which he called a Flattery of the Senses, or
Deception of Sight.

Chastity was so great in those days, and Women so little acquainted with the
liberty that came in since, that a stranger admiring there was no Law
established against Adultery, was told there was no such thing committed in
that place, whence they had expelled all luxury, and debauchery. Whatever
Plutarque says, Licurgus his Customs were too licentious in that matter: For
they lost all modesty by their wrestling naked before Men, being themselves
Virgins, and the liberty he allowed in some cases that a man might kiss his
Neighbors Wife, did in some manner authorize their debauches. And therefore
Aristotle condemns all the Chapter concerning Women: besides that he forbad
them the carrying any Lights in the Night time, or to lie every one with his
own: which gave the Gallants great opportunity for amorous adventures.

Of all the Exercises of the body, he permitted those only wherein the hand is
extended: that is to say, he condemned fighting with the closed Fist, or any
such like, which might hurt or enfeeble those, whom he designed only to
strengthen by continual Exercise.

He ordained they should make Offerings to the Gods of things of small Value,
that they might never want wherewith to Sacrifice.

In time of War he would make them often remove their Camp, whether for healths
sake or to put the Enemy to the greater trouble, and forbid them to make any
Siege, because the bravest man might be slain by a Coward, by a Woman, or a
Child.

The Thebans consulting with him concerning their Funeral mourning once a year
for Leucothee: If she be a Goddess it is ridiculous to mourn for her; and if a
Woman, to adore her, said he.

To one that praised Democracy, settle it in your own Family, said he,

He said, the means to prevent any ones making of War upon them, was to be
poor; there being nothing to be gained of such, and to share every one alike,
there being then no cause of division, but every one would have the same
interest for the presevation of the Commonwealth.

He told some that admired the City of Sparta was not walled, and fortified,
that it was so by the Valous of it is Inhabitants.

He gave order to spare the Enemy in fight, as soon as they left off defending
themselves, that they might not force them to make head again through despair;
besides that it is not generous to kill those that make no defense: Neither
would he suffer them strip the dead, lest they should be overloaden with
plunder, and give the Enemy opportunity to rally.

He said, that reward and punishments, were the two poles upon which all
Government turned.

He ordained them to wear long Hair, because it made the handsome more comely,
and the unhadsome more dreadful.

CUSTOMS OF The LACEDAEMONIANS, According to Xenophon. To serve as a Commentary
to that of Plutarque.
When we consider that the Republic of Sparta which was the poorest and the
least peopled of any in Greece, is become the most illustrious, and the most
potent, it fills us with astonishment; But when we come to cast our Eye upon
their Laws and Customs, there is nothing to be admired but the Prudence of the
Legislator, who has made them great and flourishing by methods opposite to all
others. First, as to what concerns the Children, which are like the Foundations
of an Empire; whereas in Greece, they will not suffer maidens to eat their
fill, or to drink Wine, or if they allow any, it is but very little, the
contrary is practiced in Lacedemonia; and whereas in other places they sit all
day long at their work, like Artisans; Lycurgus thought there were Servants
enough to spin, and make clothing for them all, and would have the Daughters
employ themselves like us, in running and wrestling, and other the like
Exercises, that they might bring forth lusty and vigorous Children, which the
other kind of Education does much impair. And then considering that people
newly married are subject to run into an excess of Nuptial pleasure which
enervates their strength, he would never let them come together but by stealth,
it being esteemed as it were something shameful to be found together; thereby
to allay their overheat, and prevent an over-glut, which commonly attends a
full enjoyment of our desires. Neither did he allow the freedom to marry at any
age, but would have them coupled when they were in their prime strength and
ripeness to get Children, fearing lest otherwise the fruit might partake of the
debility of the body, and the decay of it is producer. And if sometimes they
grant an Elderly man the liberty of Matrimony, Whereas in other places they are
the most jealous, here they make choice of the most beautiful young ones to
supply their own defects, and bring them a Race worthy of Sparta. Even young
people that have no mind to wed, have a right of desiring a married man, that
has a handsome Wife, to give them leave to beget Children, who without any
right of succession, serve only as a prop to the Family.

These Customs, though a little strange, are the cause that there is no where
to be found such strong and large men as in Lacedemonia. Having now spoken of
what concerns their production, let us treat of their Education. As soon as
ever Children can but understand what is said to them, the Greeks who are most
careful choose out some Slaves for Tutors, and send them to the College, to be
taught to read and write, as well as Music, and other Exercises. They shoe
them neatly, and change their habits according to the different seasons which
makes them tender and less capable of Labor. But Licurgus instead of Slaves,
allots one of the principallest of the City of be their Master, who brings them
together every day, and chastizes those that fail; so that the youth of
Lacedemonia learn much modesty and obedience in their greenest years. Instead
of being neatly shod he makes them go barefooted, which does harden their
Legs; and makes them the better able to climb up, or get down any steep or
craggy places, and more active in their Exercise. They are allowed but one
Garment a year, that they may be early used to endure heats and cold: and
whereas others eat as much as they list, these are not so well treated but they
learn from their infancy to be able to endure both hunger and thirst in case of
necessity. Besides, not having their Stomachs over-loaden with Victuals, their
minds are freer, their spirits clearer, and their bodies more healthy and fit
for action, and apt to increase in growth to a just proportion. But they are
suffered to pilfer little things, that may hinder them from being incommoded
through hunger. And indeed, it is well enough known the Lawmakers did not thus
contrive it out of frugality, nor because of any scarcity, but to rowze their
Ingenuity by this artifice. For to filtch any thing from those who had the
command of the Kitchen, they were forced to watch whole nights, to lay in
ambuscade, and set out Sentinels to avoid being taken in the fact; which
altogether does somewhat resemble an apprentiship in war. But how will some
object, if it were lawful to steal does it come to pass they should be punished
for theft? I answer, it is the same as is current with the learners of any
other Trade, when they do not their business well. It Is not for the theft that
they are punished; but because they could not steal cleverly: whereby they
learn to know that in actions which require Skill and Experience, They were
whipped once a year on Diana's Altar.
they never thrive that are slow and stupid. As for the pain or smart they
endured, it was to inure them betimes, that they might lead the remainder of
their lives in quiet and without fear. Notwithstanding as their Governor could
not be ever present to instruct them, so the first that came, had a charge to
supply his Office, and if none came, then the ablest of themselves took the
care; so that they never wanted some to be their Guide, which makes them become
wise and respectful: for there is in no place so much respect shown to those
that command as in Lacedemonia. As for the regulation of Boys or young men in
their Amors; since that is part of the Education of youth, A man and wife.
Whereas in Beotia, it is permitted to cohabit with them; and in Elide to enjoy
the Flower of their beauty, though in other places it is forbidden so much as
to converse with them: Licurgus, neither imitating the Severity of the one, nor
the Licentiousness of the other, would have them converse together, to incite
each other to Virtue; but not to touch them any more then a Father would his
Child. For that is infamous, though some can hardly believe it, because the
practice in Greece is contrary in most parts. Now I leave it to be judged which
of these Customs are most likely to beget respect and modesty, either these of
Lacedemonia, or the others. Truly, you could neither hear them talk, nor cast
their eyes about, when they walked in the streets any more then if they had
been Marble Statues. They hold their hands folded up in their Robe, appear more
bashful then a maiden, and when they come to their Inns, do not say a word,
unless a question be propounded, which demonstrates that our Sex is as capable
of modesty as the women's. All these Methods were ordained by Lycurgus to beget
modesty, the chiefest foundation for Virtue. When they have attained to the age
of fifteen, or thereabouts, whereas in other places they let them rule
themselves, according to their own discretion, without minding their conduct
any further; it is then we take most care in Lacedemonia, and keep them most
employed to prevent them from running into the debauches incident to that age.
And those who will not be restrained by these rules are not reckoned amongst
people of credit: So that, not only such as aspire to Offices and employments,
but others likewise are compelled to subject themselves to preserve their
reputation. When they begin to have most ambition, and desire to appear, the
Legislator endeavors to augment it, and spur them on with the love and sense
of honor, to make them the more eager after Fame. To this end, the Ephores
choose three of the best shaped Youths, who each of them picks out an hundred
more with a great deal of caution; they being obliged to give a good reason for
their choice. These become the objects of the jealousy and resentment of those
that were rejected, who are spies upon all their actions that they may discover
their failings. From thence arises a noble emulation very beneficial to the
Republic, since it instructs young people to discern betwixt good and evil,
and pushes them still onwards to perfection. For these three hundred aim at
nothing else and do their Country great service, whether singly or together
when opportunity presents. They are careful to preserve their Vigor, for the
others engage them to try their strength in any place wherever they meet. But
for fear these contests should go too far, it is in the power of the first that
comes near to part them, and those that will not obey are severely punished to
teach them not to be so overmuch transported with anger, as not to be in a
condition to obey Law and reason. When they grow more advanced in Years and
Stature, and are capable of the best commands, for it is from amongst these
they are selected; whereas the Greeks take them from their Exercises, to go and
bear Arms; Lycurgus sends them to hunting, as being a kind of Image of War,
when they are not employed otherwise.

This is the greatest part of their Exercises: I will now speak of their manner
of living. The Legislator, having observed that diverse kinds of excess was
committed at the feasts and debauches so frequent amongst the Greeks, he found
it better to make their meetings in public, where as decorum is easier kept.
He would therefore have them eat at Inns, where they are served with every
thing necessary for life without Superfluity or want: Besides the Hunters do
often present them with Venison, and the like Fare, and those who are very
rich, with all they have more then is needful; by which means nothing is
wanting, although they can neither get enough to be Surfeited nor drunk, none
being obliged to drink. For being constrained to return home at night without
any Lights, they take a care to do it honorably: Every one drinking what best
pleases himself, which is both more healthful and more delightful at once. And
whereas in other places, those of near the same years do usually eat together;
the aged are here mixed with the Youthful; which begets more respect, and ties
up their Tongues from running into any undecencies; besides that their Colder
Temper, is an allay to the boiling heat of Youth. Thus is their Instruction
mingled with Delight; for they discourse of nothing but the Brave Actions of
great Men. On the other hand, the Legislator having by experience found that
exercise contributed mightily toward Health, and that such as Labor have
fresh and ruddy Complexions, whereas the Idle Drones, are pale and wan, or
stuffed with ill humors; he ordered the eldest of every Inn to take care that
none overcharged himself with Meat, or Drink to that Degree as not to be able
to work; in which he Succeeded so well, that there are no healthier, nor more
Laborious People for all manner of Work, then the Lacedaemonians, for they did
always exercise their Arms, their Legs, and their Backs. And there is this in
Particular that tho in other Cities each Family has it is Master who commands
both House and Goods, yet here one may make use of any other men's goods without
Prejudice to any one. Any man's Children are commanded as if their own; So that
if a Child which one has beaten runs to his Father to complain, he is obliged
to correct him anew, so well are they Satisfied that none would impose an
unjust thing upon him, and that they have dealt by him, as they would have
others do by theirs in a like occasion. They likewise make use of any others
Servants, or their equipage. For after notice given to any one that they are
going a Hunting, if he be not desirous or at Leisure to go with them, he lends
them his Horse, or Dogs: And if any one wants a Chariot, either because he is
not well, or upon any other account, he takes the first he meets withal, and
restores it again, when he has done with it, as if it were his own. Those whom
the night has overtaken in Hunting, if they have no Provision, eat what ever
they find ready at any other place, and when they have had what is Sufficient
they put up the rest for the owner of it. By this means the Poorest are
provided for, out of the abundance of the Rich. There is another particular
very remarkable, which is this, that in other places every one Labors to
Enrich himself, one by this Trade, another by that: But the Lacedaemonians have
no other profession but the Art of War, the rest being done by Slaves. To what
end, therefore, would it be to heap up Riches, the use of it being prohibited,
and not to be employed either in gaudy Clothes, nor delicacy of Diet, they
esteeming health and Strength the greatest ornaments of the body. Nor is it
necessary to help a Friend, for there every one may have what he Stands in need
of. It is enough that one can make use of his Person when requisite, which is
more honorable. But besides that it is not allowed amongst the Lacedaemonians
to Enrich one's self by unjust ways, it is also a very difficult thing; For it
would require a Cart to carry one hundred Crowns of their Money, and it is
forbidden under great penalties to have either Gold or Silver, after which they
make very Strict Search. The acquisition therefore and the possession of wealth
would bring more hurt and danger, then it can pleasure. Furthermore, there is
no place, as I have said, where more respect is given to the Laws and
Magistrates; for, whereas in other Cities of Greece, it is a kind of infamy to
obey, and the Rich men dispense with it; in Lacedemonia the greatest men Strive
most to express their obedience, and run with have and zeal wherever they are
commanded to give example unto others. This makes me believe they gave consent
to those Laws established by Lycurgus, and that with them he created the power
of the Ephores, which is the more dreaded, by how much it is the more absolute.
For they have power to cendemn whom they will to pay a fine, and to make him
pay it; to imprison, or casbiere an Officer, and make him give account of his
actions, without waiting till the time of his Service be expired. But the
prudence of Lycurgus appears principally in his having consulted the Oracle
before he made his Laws, thereby to give them a more then humane Authority. It
was likewise a great craft in him to make them prefer an honorable Death,
before a shameful life; because more men are saved by their courage, then their
cowardice, and every one strugles to help a Gallant Person, which shows that
Honor is the inseparable Companion of Virtue. But it is necessary to know what
he projected to render good men happy, and the other sort Miserable. In other
places, there is no greater punishment for Cowards, or evil doers then to pass
for what they are. Mean time, they Game, converse and trade with any other fort
of men. But, in Lacedemonia, it is a Scandal to admit them into company, or to
have any dealings with them; and in their Assemblies they are always put in the
least honorable place. They are bound to give way to any one in the Streets; To
rise up when they pass near them, as the Boys do; to justify any Suit of Law
by the Sword; To give account of their actions; To feed their poor kindred, and
marry, or pay a lusty Fine. They dare not adorn themselves, nor take the same
freedom as Creditable Persons upon pain of being abused. We must not wonder
therefore, if an honorable Death be preferred before such an infamous life.
Lycurgus, did hitt this well too in my opinion, for to preserve the fame of
men's brave Actions, when they grew old, he established a kind of Judicature
where those Ancient Persons did preside till the time of their Death, to make
them the more honorable. In other places they punish those that wrong their
Neighbors: Here they punish such as do not do all within their power to become
most virtuous. And indeed, by other sorts of Vices we only do hurt to
particular men, whereas the Coward does an injury to all his Country, by basely
betraying it; and it is for that reason the Punishments he has ordained
against that sort of People is the most Severe. In sine he has imposed upon
his Citizens a pleasing and easy constraint of well doing, by bestowing upon
all worthy honest men a Share in the advantages of the State, whether they be
strong or weak, or Rich or indigent men, and depriving the rest utterly of
them. For the Antiquity of these Laws it appears by the time he lived in, which
was in Heraclides days, tho they may be called new in respect of other people.
But that which is most wonderful, is that they have been well known and admired
by all the World, and yet were never imitated by any. The rest of this Treatise
concerns their Manner of making War, and other things of the Regality, which
belongs not to this Subject.

APOPHTHEGMES OF THE LACEDAEMONIANS According to the Alphabetical order.
SOme admiring that a Lacedemonian King, Agasicles.
who was curious in his Learning, and entertaining of knowing men, did not make
any use of a Stranger who was very illustrious; I desire, said he, to be a
Disciple to those amongst whom I was born.

He said, the way to rule without Guards was to govern the people as a Father
does his Children.

The Steward of a Feast, where Agesilaus presided, Agesilaus.
having enquired of him, how he would have them drink. If there be Wine enough,
said he, let them drink as much as they will, if not, let not one have more
then another. It was the Greeks Custom to choose one of the Guests to preside at
the Feast.

Seeing a malefactor endure the torments of death with much constancy and
resolution: Ha, the wicked Wretch, said he, to abuse Virtue so highly!

An Orator being applauded for making little things great: I do not like a
Shoemaker, said he, that makes Shoes bigger then fits the Feet. And so
Cleomenes reproved an Orator, who made a very large dicourse upon a very little
Subject; the Discourse being Irregular if not proportioned to the Subject.

One pressing him, to make good or perform an unjust promise, If it be not
just, replied he, I have not promised it. He meant that he never intended it.
But Kings, urged the other, ought never to promise, but what they will perform:
nor others, said he, require any thing of them which they ought not to promise.
It is held that none is obliged to perform an unjust promise, and that if it be
a fault to promise it, it is a double crime to perform it.

He said, we must have a regard from whence did proceed either reproof or
praise, before we could well judge of it; and that there was a great deal of
pleasure to be commended by those that might as well blame us without fear.
Because it is no credit to be praised by a Rascal, or by one that has no
understanding, or to be blamed by any the like persons signifies no thing.

Having been seated at the lower end of the Table at a Feast: This was to let
you know, said he, that it is not the place that makes the Person honorable,
but the Person makes the place so. The upper end is wherever the most eminent
person is seated, and it is him they first serve.

A Physician prescribing him a very strickt Diet. Should I take all the Drugs
in the World, said he, it could never make me immortal.

A Mouse having in his sight bitten a little Boy that caught it: If it be
dangerous, said he, to attack the least Animal, much more to assault a Man of
Courage. Brasidas upon the like occasion, said, there was no Animal so small or
weak, but was willing to defend its Liberty.

Tisaphernes having broken his Word with him he said, I am obliged to him, for
having engaged the Gods on the Grecians side, by his Perjury.

Selling in his presence many Slaves, and much Plunder gained from the
Persians, and finding all the People run to the Plunder, not minding the Slaves
because of their effeminate breeding: Behold what are the Combatants, said he,
and what is the reward of combating?

He once refused some Presents from the King of Persia, saying, he gloried more
in taking than in receiving from his Enemy, and in making his Soldiers rich
rather than himself.

He said he would rather be Master over himself than the best City in the
Enemy's power, and rather preserve his own Liberty, then usurp another.

Though he was a great observer of the Laws, yet he once wrote to a Judge, a
Friend of his, who had imprisoned one, to release him again, whether he were
Innocent, or Guilty, and that he would do this either for his Requests, or for
Justices sake.

Upon a precipitate Decamping, wavering whether he should forsake a sick person
whom he loved: How difficult is it, said he, to love, and to be wise!

He said a Prince ought to be distinguished from his Subjects by his Virtues,
and not by his Pleasures; and therefore he went always simply clad, ate
accordingly, and would lie no softer then the meanest Soldier, and being told,
that he would one day perhaps be forced to alter his method of living: I have
used my self, said he, not to change in a time for change. And indeed, so he
lived to his end, to take away all excuse from young people when they saw a
Prince and an old man, do the same that he advised them to practice.

He said, The Lacedemonian Laws for their chief foundation had the contempt of
Pleasures, and liberty for their reward.

Passing through a Country where the Inhabitants lived in all Licentiousness,
and they having brought him a great many Presents, he took only their Corn for
his Soldiers, and when they earnestly pressed him to accept of the rest, he
caused it to be distributed amongst the Slaves, and said, Men of courage ought
not to esteem of those things, which were the delight of mean Spirits.

The same People having ordained divine Honors to be paid him, he asked them
whether they had the power to make Deities, and if so, wherefore they did not
begin with themselves.

With the same austerity he rejected those Statues the Cities of Asta would
have erected, nor would suffer his picture to be made, there being no
Portraiture so good of any eminent man as his own Actions.

He used to say, The Strength of a City did not consist in the Walls, but in
the courage of the Inhabitants. The Remainder is in the Apophthegmes of
Licurgus, or Antalidas.

When he would have any thing done with expedition, he put his own hand first
to the Work, and took a pride in laboring as much as any private Soldier. The
rest is elsewhere.

He said, we ought not to heap up a provision of riches, but of virtues.

A Cripple seeking to get a Horse that he might fight in a Battle, Friend, said
he, thou seek for legs to run away withal, for thine are good enough to
stand in Fight with. It is not so verbatim in the original, but that is not so
requisite in an Apophthegm, as the good sense.

Another Cripple being rallied withal for going to the Wars, said, the question
was not running away, but standing stoutly to it.

He was asked, how one should render himself illustrious: By despising of
Death, replied he another time, to the same question, he answered, By saying
well, and doing the same.

To one that asked him, wherefore the Lacedaemonians went to battle with the
sound of a flute, he replied, To discern the cowards from the valiant by the
Gate of their Marching. Lycurgus gives another reason.

As some were admiring the felicity of a young Prince: At the same Age, says
he, Priam was a happy man too.

In the height of his Conquests, being recalled by the Ephores, he said, It was
not ^ess the devoir of a Prince to obey the Laws, ^hen to command over men.

Upon his return, he asked whether they would have him pass as a Friend, or an
Enemy; and some Barbarians requiring an hundred Talents, and a hundred
beautiful Women; to let him pass quietly, he told them, they should come and
fetch them, and so Marching immediately against them, defeated them.

Having asked the same thing of the Lacedemonian King, and that Prince desiring
time to consider. Let him consider still, said he, in the mean time we will not
stop our March.

Two of his Friends having been detained in a City of Thessaly, whither they
went to treat, he replied, to those that would have counseled him to force the
place, That to gain all Thessaly, he would no hazard the life of one of those
Friends. That Sounds more of an honest man, then a Politician.

Hearing of a Bloody battle that had been fought near Corinth: How miserable is
Grecia, said he, to turn their Weapons against themselves, since with much
lesser numbers then have been lost, we might have conquered all Persia. As much
might be said of Christendom.

He Solicited his Sister to run with her Chariot in the Olympian Games for the
prize, To make them know, said he, that there was no thing either great or
generous in that exercise.

He advised Xenophon to bring up his Children at Lacedemonia: To learn the
Noblest of all the Sciences, which is, to command, and to obey.

He bestowed several Employments on his Enemies; to turn, said he, their hatred
into Friendship.

An Advocate desiring Letters of recommendations for a Judge that was his
Friend: My Friends, said he, Stand in need of no recommendations, to make them
do Justice.

Some body showing him the Fortifications of a Place, and asking him whether
they were not very fine: yes, for Women, said he. Another asked, what Women
dwell there? and a third said, there is a very fine apartment for the Ladies.

A celebrated Comedian admiring that he would not speak to him, and inquiring
whether he knew him: yes, said he, are not you Callippides the Buffoon? Because
the Lacedaemonians prized nothing but virtue, otherwise that profession was not
infamous amongst the Grecians tho it were prohibited in Lacedemonia.

When some would persuade him to hear a fellow that counterfeited the
Nightingale: ^ have several times, said he, heard the Nightingale it is self.

A Physician who would be called Jupiter, as who should say, the Savior,
because he had wrought some famous Cures, having sent a letter to him with this
Inscription, Menecrates, Jupiter, To King Agesilaus, Health. He replied, King
Agesilaus to Menecrates, Wisdom, treating him as a Fool.

Some telling him that the Lacedaemonians took party with the Persians: No, said
he, it is the Persian hold Parties with the Lacedaemonians; So to those that
called the King of Persia, the Great King, as we say at present the Grand
Siginor, he said, he was not greater then himself, unless he were more just;
not measuring his greatness by the Extent of his Empire, but of his Virtues.

Being asked whether Valor were better then Justice: It would be useless, said
he, if all men were just. He added, that it would likewise be of no use, unless
accompanied by the other.

He said, that the Inhabitants of Asia, considered as free, were nothing worth;
but they were passable for Slaves.

He said, that we ought to teach Children, that which would be of use to them
when they are men.

One making an ill defense for himself before the Judges, yet still imploring
the benefit of the Laws, In vain do thou miplore the benefit of the Law,
said he, unless thou make a better Plea. This is the sense, the Strictness of
words are not so.

When the King of Persia sought his alliance, he told him, that were needless,
for if he were a true Friend to his Country, he should be so to him.

A Friend of his Surprising him unawares as he was Sporting with his Children:
Stay, said he, and do no mock, till you have Children of your own. Or till you
are a Father.

Such as were allied to the Lacedaemonians, complaining that they furnished them
with more Soldiers, then themselves raised, he made it appear that they indeed
furnished them with more men, but not so many Soldiers, because there was not
one of them but had another Trade, whereas the Lacedaemonians practiced nothing
but the Art of War.

Necessity obliging them to do something that was contrary to their Laws, he
said, that they must let them lie and sleep that day, and on the morrow they
would wake and rise with more Vigor. To teach us, that the Laws are made for
men, and not men for the Laws.

The Egyptians despising him, because he had no great attendance, nor
extraordinary Equipage: I will make them know, said he, that Royalty does not
consist in vain pomp, but in great virtues.

Philip having razed the City of Olynthia, he cannot, Agesipolis. Son of
cle^mbrotus.
said Agesipolis, in a long time rebuild such another. To teach us, that we
ought not to resolve upon such great cruelties but in extremity.

Being twitted that he had been given in hostage in his youth: It belongs to
Kings, said he, to bear the faults of their Country.

A Stranger telling him, the Dogs of Spar^a were good for nothing: The men were
no better at first, replied he; but they are improved by study and exercise.

When the Athenians would have chosen those of Megara to be the Umpires,
Agesipolis, Son of Pa^sanias:
or Judges in a controversy they had with the Lacedaemonians: It were a shame,
said Agesipolis, that a small Village should know how to do Justice better then
the two Capital Cities of Greece.

Agis, said one, should not inquire how many the enemies were, Agis.
but where they were. This sounds more brave, then wise, as the most part of
Apophthegmes have more of Gallantry then Solidity.

When they would have hindered him from giving battle at Mantinea, because the
Enemy was much Stronger: When a few people, said he, would command over a great
many, they must not be afraid to Fight them.

He said to one who inquired how many Lacedaemonians there were: There are
enough to beat the Enemy. Anothersaid, they were but few, but would do much, or
to much effect. Or they seemed to be many in a battle.

To one, who was commendable for nothing thing but discourse, he said, when you
are silent, you are worth nothing.

The Argians having rallied after their defeat, and coming furiously upon him,
he said to his men, who were astonished: Courage Companions, if the vanquished
have so much resolution, what should the Victors have? In the Greek it is, if
the Victors are astonished, what shall the vanquished do.

A tedious Orator, asking at the end of his Speech, what answer he would give
to those that sent him; Tell them, said he, that I have given thee leave to say
all thou had a mind to. Or, that I have let thee talk thy fill without
interrupting thee. To another, he said, tell them that you were much puzzled to
make an end, and I to understand you.

In his presence, as some were praising those of Elida for their well behaving
themselves at the Olympic Games: What a Miracle, said he, that once in four
years they should do their duty well?

He said, that envious people were very Miserable, in being tormented as much
at others happiness, as their own Misfortune. Or, for their not being only
troubled with their own Miseries, but the good fortune of others.

As some were advising him in a battle to let those go by quietly that were
flying. How shall we assault those that stand to it: said he, if we fear those
that run.

One talking very Magnificently of Liberty: Thy discourses, said he, have need
of power and wealth to maintain them.

His Father said, it ought not be wondered at, ^f things grew worse and worse;
but it would be more wonderful if things went better; since all the World grew
worse.

Being asked the means, or way, how to become free; by despising death, replied
^^e.

Demades saying in rallery, Agis the younger.
that the Lacedaemonians Swords were so short, the Juglers of Athens swallowed
them: Yet we can reach our Enemies with them, said Agis.

When they would have had him March to the assault of a place under the Conduct
of a Traitor: What reason is there, said he, to trust the lives of so many
brave Soldiers, under a man that has betrayed his own Country?

A wicked fellow, asking him, who was the best of men in Sparta; he that least
resembles you, replied he.

Agis, Agis 3.
who was the last King of Lacedemonia, and had been thrust into Prison because
he would restore the discipline, being asked, if he did not then repent of his
design? Good actions, replied he, are not subject to repentance.

His Father and Mother desiring him to do somewhat that was unjust: I obeyed
you whilst I was young, said he, give me leave now to obey the Laws and Reason.
It might have been said, let me now put in practice the good instructions you
gave me: But that is not the Authors sense.

Being led to execution, and beholding one of his followers weeping: Do not
weep, said he, for those that put me to death unjustly, are more to be pitied
than I.

Some body inquiring of Alcamena Alcamena.
the way to preserve ones honor, By despising, said he, of Riches.

Another wondering he had rejected the Messenians Present, I did it, said he,
in obedience to the Laws which forbids it.

He told one, who taxed him of being a^ little too straight-laced, in his way
of living, that it was better to obey his reason, then his concupiscence or
desires.

Alexandridas, Alexandridas son of Leon.
told one, who being banished complained of his Exile: You ought not to be
troubled at your Exile, but the subject that causes it. According to the
Stoics, tha^ there is no evil, but Vice.

Some body saying good things, in a tim^ very unfit: What, good things out of
season said he.

Being asked wherefore the Lacedemonian^ caused their Lands to be cultivated by
their Slaves? They have work enough to improve or cultivate their Virtues,
replied he.

One saying, honor does a great deal o^ mischief, happy is he that wants it:
Rascal^ replied he, are very happy then, for the^ are little troubled with it.

To such as admired that the Lacedemonian^ exposed themselves so frankly to
dangers, h^ said, It was because honor was more dear t^ them, then life.

To others who asked why they were so long a time about giving judgment against
a Criminal in Lacedemonia: It is because, said he, there is no room for
repentance, when once a man is Dead.

Some inquiring of Anaxander Anaxander Son of Eurycrate.
wherefore the Lacedaemonians had no public treasury: Because those that must
keep the Keys, might plunder it, said he. As much as to say, the private people
were the best guardians, from whom they might have it upon occasion.

Anaxilas Anaxilas.
said, that the greatest advantage of Kings was, that they could not be outdone
in good Deeds.

Being asked, why the Ephores did not rise from their Seats before the King:
It Is because they are Ephores, replied he. As much as to say, those Magistrates
were to inspect the Kings actions.

A Samothracian Priest, asking Antalcidas, Antalcidas.
according to their custom, upon the point of being imitated in those
Mysteries, Or whether he had never done an illthing.
what was the greatest crime he had ever committed? God knows, said he: Which
was to say, he would not tell him.

An Athenian reproaching the Lacedaemonians of their Ignorance; It is true, said
one, that you could never yet teach us to do any evil.

Another bragging, how the Athenians had often drove them back from their City:
That is a reproach, said he, that we cannot cast upon you: Because they never
durst approach them.

Being interrogated of the way to gain love: To speak nothing but what is
pleasing, and do nothing but what is useful, replied he.

A Declamator willing to read the praises of Hercules to him; who is it, said
he, that blames him.

Agesilaus having been wounded in a battle against the Thebans, he told him it
was no more then he deserved, for having taught them in spite of their teeth to
make War. For this reason Lycurgus forbad them to make War too often upon the
same Enemy.

He called the Youth, the Walls of Sparta, and said their Empire extended as
far as they could lance their Javelins.

Some asking him wherefore the Lacedaemonians wore such short Swords: To joy^
with the Enemy the nearer, said he.

Antiochus Antiochus.
having heard that Philip had given to the Messenians a Country yet contended
for: Has he given them Forces likewise to defend it, said he. Because without
that they could not preserve it.

Arigea, Arigea.
said to one who was commending another man's Wife: It belongs only to he own
Husband to know her, Or, an hones^ Woman is known only to her own Husband.

As they were commending the saying o^ Cleomenes, that we must do good to our
Friends and harm to our Enemies; Not so, said Ariston, Ariston.
we must do good to all to preserv^ the one, and convert, or gain the other.
This is likewise a saying of Socrates.

One having made a Funeral Oration in praise of some Athenians, who were slain
in a defeat: What praises, said he, do not the Victors deserve, if the
vanquished are so praiseworthy?

Whilst they were praising one that he was gentle and mild to all the World:
Archidamidas.
What, said he, even to the Wicked! To teach us, that one cannot be merciful to
those, without being cruel to the good.

An Orator being blamed for having said nothing at a Feast: Those that know how
to speak, replied he, know also how to be silent, Or know when they ought to
speak.

Archidamus Archidamus sonof Xeuxidamus.
being asked who was the Master of Sparta; The Laws, said he, and next them the
Magistrates.

A Musician being highly commended: What commendations, said he, will you give
a virtuous man? To teach that nothing is very commendable but Virtue.

Another saying, here is an excellent Musician; that is as if one should say,
here is an excellent Cook, setting the same value upon all that belongs to the
pleasing our senses. But that is a little Barbarous.

Some body promising to give him excellent Wine: That will only serve to spoil
the taste of my ordinary drink, said he, Or, to make me Drink more then I
should, and weaken my virtue.

Two men being come to him to be their Arbitrator; he made them swear they
should stand to what he said; then ordained them not to stir thence till they
were agreed. From out of a Temple, to which he had led them.

He would not suffer his Daughters to accept of some fine Garments, which Denis
the Tyrant had sent them: Because they would appear more homely, said he. As it
is said of Country Brides, the more they are tricked, the ^glier they look, or
that they might esteem of (...) Ornament but virtue.

Seeing his Son being but young, Fight with too much eagerness: A bate your
courage, my Son, said he, or increase your Strength. To show we must match the
one with the other.

Archidamus Archidamus, Son of Agesilaus.
replied to Philip, who wrote too Insolently to him after the battle of
Cheronea: If thou measurest thy shadow, thou will not ^ind it longer then it
was before.

A celebrated Physician neglected his Art, to addict himself to Poetry, wherein
he Succeeded not well: Wherefore will thou change thy quality of a good
Physician, for an ill Poet, said he?

Some advising him to carry the War a long way from his own Country: That is
not the most important business, said he, but to gain the Victory.

Being applauded for having won a battle; or more advantageous.
He said, it might have been easier to determine those differences by
condescension, then by force. Or, by prudence, then, etc.

He wrote to those of Elida, who would needs assist the Arcades: Quietness is a
very pleasant thing, Or, not to be entangled in others affairs.

He said to the Allies, who would know what every one was to pay toward the
Peloponesian War, that no certain measures could be taken in a War.

Looking on a new Engine to force Towns withal: Farewell courage, said he. Or,
valor is at an end.

The Greeks would not make a breach with two Rings that were very Potent: And
said the Lacedaemonians would be more insupportable then those, if they became
Masters: The Sheep, said he, ever bleat in the same manner; but men change
their Tone, according to the change of events. Or, according to their several
Interests.

After Agis had lost the Battle against Antigonus, Astyratidas
some body asking a Lacedemonian, whether they would now obey the Macedonians:
They cannot yet hinder us, said he, from dying with our liberty.

Another being fallen into an Ambuscade, Bi^s:
his Soldiers asked him, what he would do: Dye, said he, and save you, Or,
whilst you save your selves.

Brasidas Brasidas.
going forth to War, said he would die, or drive the danger far enough from his
Country.

Callicratidas Calliratidas.
having great want of Money to pay his Soldiers, refused Fifty Talents that
were proffered him, if he would deliver up one they desired; and said, he never
sold any man's life, nor his Honor. I have shaped this into an Apothegme.

Going to Young Cyrus to demand some money to pay the Fleet, they told him,
that Prince was at Table: I will stay, said he, till he has dined. But not
having been able to come to the Speech of him that day, nor the next, because
he was in a debauch: Let them be cursed, said he, that first made Courtship to
Barbarians: and added, that at his return, he would labor with all his might
to reconcile the Greecians together, and would come there no more, that he
might do nothing unworthy of Sparta.

Cyrus, having sent him pay for his Army, with Presents to himself, he sent
back the Presents, and said, that the general alliance was enough, without
making any particular one. The same almost is in another Apophthegme.

Being ^eady to begin the Fight with the Arginuses, his Pilot having told him,
that the Enemy was the Strongest: Since a retreat is shameful, and Death or
Victory Honorable, it is best to conquer, or Die, said he.

When the Soothsayers had declared to him at a Sacrifice, that he was threatened
with death, but that he should obtain the Victory: The Fortune of Sparta, said
he, does not depend upon the life of one Man: Or, she can lose but one Citizen
by my death, but shall agrandize her Empire by my Victory, come on. And having
named his Successor he gave them battle, and Dyed.

Chariles Chariles.
being Interrogated, wherefore Lycurgus had made so few Laws? Because, there
needs not many for those that talk but little, replied he.

It being asked, wherefore the Virgins in Lacedemonia went bare-^aced, and the
Women veiled; it is, said he, because the one seeks to get a Husband, and the
other is afraid to lose a Husband, for jealousy.

He told his Slave, one time, who had done some idle thing: I would beat thee,
if I were not in wrath. Others cannot Strike unless they be in passion: This
relishes more of the Philosopher, then a Warrior.

He said, that the Hair of the Head was the greatest Ornament of Man, and which
cost him the least: And therefore the Lacedaemonians let theirs grow.

That the best form of Government, was that where there was much Emulation, and
little Envy. As in Lacedemonia.

That the Gods were portrayed in Armor, that so we might not have the
boldness to offend them.

He told the Thebans, they ought to speak more modestly, or be more strong:
Which agrees with what Lysander said to those of Mega^a.

Clearques Clearques.
said, that nothing could be done with an Army without Discipline, and that a
Soldier ought to fear his Captain more then his Enemy.

Cleombrotus Cleombrotus.
said to a Stranger, who contended in point of Honor with his Father, He has
not made, or got a Son like me yet.

Cleomenes Cleomenes.
said, that Homer was the Poet of the Bravo's, because he speaks of nothing but
Battles, and Hesiod of Slaves, treating of Agriculture.

Having agreed a Suspension of Arms for seven day with those of Argos, he went
and surprised them one Night, and said, to excuse it, that the Nights were not
comprehended in the Suspension, and that it was lawful to do all the mischief
one could to an Enemy: But, he could not make himself Master of the City, for
the very Women drove him thence, and becoming frantic afterward, he mutilated
his Members and Dyed.

The Deputies of Samos, having made him a long harangue, he told them, he had
quite forgotten the beginning, which made him unable well to understand the
middle of it, and for the Conclusion he could not do what they desired.

Of a Rascally Fellow, who was backbiting every Body, he said, it was to keep
every one upon the defensive posture, that so none might attack him.

Some body affirming that Kings ought to be ever courteous: Provided it does
not make them be despised, said he.

After a long and dangerous Sickness, giving ear to the Priests and
Soothsayers, he said to excuse it, that being no more the same he was, they
ought not to admire that he had other Sentiments, Or, that having lost his
Strength, they need not wonder he had changed his Maxims.

A learned man having made a long discourse of valor, he said smiling, it was
a very becoming thing for every one to talk of what he understood.

He drove a Prince out of Sparta, who would have corrupted him, for fear, said
he, lest he should make the same profers to some that could not so well resist
him, as my self.

He said, that the Lacedaemonians would not ruin Argos, that they might leave
something to exercise their Youth withal.

Being asked why the Lacedaemonians did not consecrate the Spoil of those they
had conquered to their Gods: It is, because, said he, the Deities despise any
thing belonging to those that suffer themselves to be beaten.

He reproved a Lacedemonian who had treated his Host after the Laconick way:
Because, said he, he should have dispensed with that rule toward a Friend.

Alexander having sent word to Sparta, that they should render him divine
Honors, Let him be a God, said Damis, Damis.
since he will have it so.

Some body saying, Damidas.
that the Lacedaemonians would suffer much by Philips Army which was entered into
Thessaly, what can he do, said D^midas, to People that does not fear Death.

Damonide Damonide.
having been seated at the lower end in a great Assembly, said, they had a mind
to make that place the most Honorable. This resembles that of Agesilaus, that
it was not the place that gave the quality.

Demarat Demarat.
being a little rudely treated by Orontus told those, who began to murmur at
it; It is those who flatter us that do us hurt, and not those that treat us ill.

Being asked, why such as lost their Bucklers were punished at Sparta, and not
those that threw away the rest of their Arms: It is, said he, because they are
permitted to forsake their own Defense, but not that of others. The joining of
several Bucklers^ served as a kind of a Rampard to the bastaillon.

He said of a man that played well on the Lyre, that man fools pleasantly
enough.

In an Assembly where he was silent, being asked, whether it were out of
stupidity, or prudence: A fool, said he, cannot hold his Tongue.

One having asked him, wherefore he fled from Lacedemonia, where he was King:
It is, said he, because the Laws have more power then the Sovereign.

A Persian Lord that had revolted from his Prince, returned to Court at the
instance of Demarat; and when the Prince would have put him to Death: It would
be shameful, said he, to take away his life now he is your Friend, since you
could not do it while he was your Enemy.

Pyrrbus endeavoring to oblige the Lacedaemonians to restore their King
Cleonyme: If thou art a God, said Dercillidas, Dercillidas.
we do not fear thee, because we have done no ill, and if thou art a man, we
are as brave as you can be.

An Ephory cutting the two Strings which a famous Musician had added to the
Lyre: Art not thou ashamed, Emerepe.
said he, to corrupt Music thus, by rendering it low and effeminate, whereas
it was loud and Masculine?

Eudamidas E^damidas.
told a Philosopher who talked of the art of War, that none could discourse
knowingly of it, that had not been wakened by sound of Trumpet, Or have
practiced what one would teach.

When they would have obliged him to make War upon the Macedonians, after the
Persians defeat; It is not, said, he, the same thing, to have to deal with a
thousand Sheep as with fifty Wovles.

Some speaking in praise of the City of Athens: No man, said he, is become the
better for having been there^

Another observing, that the Lacedaemonians were corrupted in Strange Countries;
but none, said he, are corrupted in Lacedemonia.

Alexander at the Olympic Games having caused Proclamation to be made that all
such as were banished should be restored, except the Thebans: That is severe to
them, said he, but it is Glorious. Because Alexander feared them.

Observing an old Philosopher busy himself still in the Search after Virtue:
When is it that the will put it in practice, said he?

Another saying, Eudemonide
that none but a wise man could be a great Captain: That Is very fine, said he,
but it should be some great Captain that affirms it.

It being asked of a Lacedemonian wherefore the Ephori did Justice to private
Persons: Eurycratidas.
To accustom themselves, said he, to do it to the Enemy. They were the
Sovereign Magistrates.

Having heard that at Athens they had condemned one because he did nothing:
Show me said Herondas, Herondas.
any one they have condemned for living nobly. Because the Lacedaemonians did
nothing.

Upon the point of giving battle Agis would have sent home to Sparta an old man
of Fourscore years, Hippodame.
to save him from danger: Where can I find, said he, a braver place to die in;
and would not go. He dyed at his feet.

The Satrape of Caria having asked of Hippocratidas Hippocratidas.
what treatment he would show to a Lacedemonian who had not revealed a
conspiracy: If he were your Friend, said he, he has deserved Death; if not, to
be banished, for not having courage enough to adhere to Virtue. This is a
little obscure.

Finding a young man much ashamed because he was met in ill company: We ought
to keep such company as will not make us blush, said he.

One asking Leon Leon.
where he should dwell to be in safety: Where equallity reigns, said he, and
whence injustice is banished, at Lacedemonia.

At the Olympic Games seeing the Athletes making ready to take the advantage
of starting upon the first Signal, great Gods, said he, how much more passion
have men for Honor, then for Justice.

When Leonidas went forth to defend the pass of Thermopyles, Or, for the
Victory. Leonidas.
from whence he expected not to return, his Wife asking, whether he had nothing
to say to her: Nothing, said he, but only that you should marry again after my
Death to some brave man, that may get you Children like me.

The Ephori wondering he carried so few men for this enterprise: Here are but
too many, said he, to be ^lain: And being asked, what he would do with those
few Companies: Dye, replied he, under the pretense of obstructing the Enemies
passage. To another that put the same question, he said, that all Greece did
not equal those Enemies in number, but these alone equaled them in valor; and
being arrived, let us lose no time, said he, the Enemy advances, we must either
dye, or conquer.

Some body telling him aloud, the Enemy approaches us; and we them, said he.

One telling him to amaze him that the very Sun would be darkened with the
Persians Arrows, The better, said he, we shall fight in the shade then.

Xerxes having sent him word, that agreeing with him, he would bestow the whole
Empire of Greece upon him: I had rather dye for my Country, replied he, then
command it unjustly. He added, that Xerxes deceived himself in believing it a
Virtue to usurp another right.

That Prince having sent to him to Surrender his Arms, he answered, He should
come and fetch them.

Being asked wherefore brave men preferred Death to life: Because they hold one
by Fate, Glorious death.
and the other from their Virtues, said he.

Leotychides Leotychides
accused for being changeable^ It is not I that change, replied he, but the
times. Or, affairs.

One asking him the way to preserve wh^^ he had; not to expose it to Fortune,
said he.

As some were telling another of that name that a Slanderer had spoken ill of
him: Leotichides Son of Ariston.
That is, said he, because a Slanderer can speak well of none.

The Prognosticators making it a great Prodigy, that a Serpent had wound it
self round the Key of his Chamber Door: No said he, but it would be one, if the
Key should wind it self about the Serpent. This alludes to that of Cato, of the
Mouse that had nibbled the Stockin.

A distressed wretch, who was initiated in the Mysteries of Orpheus, asserting
that all such who were so, should be thrice happy after their Death: Why do
thou not die immediately then, said he?

Lysander Lysander.
being reproached for doing things unworthy of Hercules from whom the
Lacedaemonians drew their Original: We must piece the Foxes furr, said he, to
the Lions skin where it wants. Alluding to Hercule's his Lion.

Those of Argos, alleging better reasons then the Lacedaemonians upon some
difference betwixt them: He that has the best Sword, said he, will have the
most right. This smells of the corruption of that Age, for the Lacedaemonians
were more reserved; and indeed, he would have altered the Laws of Lacedemonia,
with the Government; and did introduce Riches.

His men fearing to give an assault on Corinth, a Hare starting up in the
Rampart: Are you not ashamed, said he, to dread those Enemies, that a poor Hare
is not afraid of.

To a Deputy of Megara who spoke a little too confidently, he said, your words
require another-guess City, To show ones courage must be measured to ones
Fortune or Strength.

He said that truth was to be valued above leasing; but that both might be made
use of upon occasion, and so confounded interest with honesty. He added, that
Children were amused with Rattles, and men with words, which is a pernicious
Maxim, because it disbands all Faith, which is the foundation of humane Society.

As he was consulting the Oracle of Samothrace, Or, going to be initiated.
the Priest examining him, according to the Custom, what was the worst Act he
had committed in all his life, he inquired of him, whether he put this question
in behalf of the Gods, or himself; and being answered, that it was in behalf of
the Gods: Then I will stay to give account, said he, till they ask it me
themselves.

A Persian asking him, Which was the best sort of Government: That where every
one is treated as he deserves, replied he. Or, where Dignities are the reward
of virtues; for this reason he would have made the Kingdom Elective.

A Flatterer and an honest man courting his friendship at the same time, and
the Parasite vaunting that he spoke in his praise every where: I have, said he,
a Yoke of Oxen in my Cart, and I know which is the best of them tho it speaks
never a word.

One speaking a great deal of ill of him: Say all what thou will, replied he,
if it be to unload thy heart.

Having beaten a Soldier for going out o^ his rank; and the fellow crying out
it was no^ to steal: you ought not to have given the leas^ Suspicion, said he.

Being worsted at a wrestling, he said it was not for want of Strength, but of
Skill^ Because the Children had no wrestling masters i^ Lacedemonia, that they
might not make a Science o^ an Exercise.

As they were extolling Namertus Namertus^
for hi^ having so many Friends, he asked, if the^ could tell how one might
know them; when ^hey inquiring of him how that was, he replied, by Adversity.

It was told Nicander, Nicander.
that the Argi^ns spoke ^ll of him: It is punishment enough to them, to speak
evil of a good man, said he. By the ^samy that accrues.

An Athenian saying to him, you love to do nothing, you Lacedaemonians: But we
do not ^ommit a hundred crimes, like you, to attain ^, said he. To become Rich
that they might live ^dly afterward.

The Philosophers having bandied several ^are questions before Panthoida,
Panthoida.
and asking ^im what he thought of them: That those ^ne Discourses are to no
purpose, replied he, because you do not put them in practice.

Pausanias Pausanias, Son of Cleombrotus.
being asked, wherefore they had ^iven the right of Burghership in Sparta to
the ^oet Tirteus: That they might not seem, said ^e, to have a Stranger for
their Chief.

A little Fellow ill shaped advising him to ^ake War: Will thou have us strip
thee stark ^aked, said he, to make us see the weakness of ^im, that prompts us
to try our Strengths.

Several admiring amidst the plunder of the ^ersians, the Riches of their
Ornaments: It ^ad been to better purpose, said he, that these ^ad been worth
less, and the Owners of them ^orth more.

After the Victory of Platea, causing a Din^er to be made ready according to
the Persi^^ mode; observing the Magnificence of the ^reparation, What did these
people dream of (...) their abundance, said he, to come and attack ^^r beggary?

Another of that name being asked, why it was not permitted in Lacedemonia to
change the Laws: Because those are to command, sai^ he, and not to obey.

After his Exile, Pausanias. ^ Son of Plistanax.
being retired to Tegeum where he ceased not to praise the City of Sparta, he
being asked, wherefore then he had le^ it: Because Physicians have nothing to
do, ^ places where all are in health. This was b^ an evasion: For he was
condemned to death, an^ durst no return.

One asking him, the way to conquer the Thracians? By choosing, said he, a good
G^^neral.

Pedaret Pedaret.
hearing some people commend man for his Modesty: That Is the Virtue a Woman,
said he.

To one that would have terrified him with the numbers of the Enemies, he sai^
there will be the more Honor in overcoming them.

Not having been able to obtain an electi^ amongst the three hundred of the
most H^^norable in Lacedemon, he said, he rejoiced the they had found three
hundred Citizens b^^ter then himself.

Plistarcus Plistarcus, Son of Leonidas.
hearing that an envio^s man h^ praised him: He believes that perha^ I am dead,
said he. Because the Dead are ^ of the jurisdiction of envy.

Of a Counselor that played the jeaster, ^ said, he will become ridiculous at
last, by ^vermuch acting so.

Polydore Polydore; Son of Alcamenes.
said to one who was eternal threatening his Enemies, that he spent all his
Revenge in words; for it is certain that Passions evaporate that way, as well
as grief does by tears.

Leading his Army against the Messenians, one reproaching him that he would
make War upon his Brethren: No, said he, but take my portion of an Inheritance,
which is not yet shared. That Country was in the Neighborhood of Lacedemonia.

After the battle of the three hundred, and the defeat of those of Argos that
followed; being counseled to assault the place, which could not defend it
self: I will not, said he, undertake a new process, Or, take a Town, when there
is no dispute but to settle the Limits, or Frontiers.

He was asked why the Lacedaemonians were so brave; because they love dangers,
replied he, or because they do not Fight so much out of fear, as love. In the
Original it is, because they have learned to respect their Commanders, and not
to fear them.

Polycratidas Polycratidas.
being sent with some other to the Persians, he was asked, whether they came on
the behalf of the public: Yes, said he, if we obtain our demands; if not, no
body sends us. That their Republic might receive no ^ffront.

Telecres Telecres.
said to his brother, who complained that he could not be made an Ephori, as he
was: That he could not so well dissemble his injuries, or undergo them.

Some body inquiring of him, wherefore the Lacedaemonians gave so much Honor to
old men, To teach them, thereby, said he, to respect their Fathers.

Being asked how much Wealth he had; as much as I want to keep me alive, said
he. As if the rest did not belong to him, since he enjoyed it not.

Thearidas Thearidas.
being questioned whether his Sword were very sharp: sharper then Calumny,
replied he.

Theopompus Theopompus.
said, the means to preserve an Empire was to give ear to the advertisements,
or admonitions of our Friends, and not to suffer the little ones to be trampled
upon by the great ones.

Some discoursing, that the City of Sparta did triumph, because they knew how
to Command; No, said he, but because they know how to obey.

He said, that time abolished those Honors that were too great; and augmented
the meaner. Or time pulls down the great and axalts the little.

APOPHTHEGMES OF LACEDAEMONIANS Whose Names are not illustrious, or are not to
be found.
BEfore the Battle of Thermopylae. Leonidas having sent away some young men who
were unmarried, to keep them out of harms way; and intending to do the same by
three more, under the pretense of giving them some Commission; one of them
said, he was come thither as a Soldier^, and not to be a Messenger; another,
that he could do more Service there, then in Lacedemon: And the third replied,
I shall as willingly dye here, as elsewhere, Or Fight at first, as with the
last:

A Lacedemonian having a Gray-beard, and being asked, wherefore he wore it so
long: That by beholding it, I may do nothing unworthy of it, replied he.

A Poet having said, that the City of Athens was the support of all Greece: A
Lacedemonian replied, it would soon fall, had it no stronger Pillars.

Another observing a man that willingly gave ear to slandering: Do not, said
he, lend thy Ears against me.

Some belonging to the Isle of Kio, having done somebeastly things in their
passage through Lacedemon, the Ephori not willing to punish them, caused it to
be proclaimed, that those of Kio should be allowed to be nasty Villains.

A Lacedemonian spying a man lying at his whole length in a Chariot: I should
be ashamed, said he, to be seen in a posture that I could not defend my self in
case I were assaulted. Or, as the Greek is, that I could not rise up, if I met
an old man.

Diogenes being naked, embraced a Statue in cold weather, and saying to excuse
himself, he felt no hurt or inconvenience: Wherefore do thou do so then,
said a Lacedemonian.

Some one of a Nation that was not very Valiant, saying, Nevertheless we have
Conquered our Neighbor Countries: That is because you are not only cowardly,
but unjust too, said a Lacedemonian.

Another who was about having a ^shooe put on, saying to a Lacedemonian, that
he could not stand so long upon one Foot, as he did: No, said he, but Cranes
can stand longer yet. To show we must not take vanity in such idle things.

A Rhetorician bragging of his Art: do thou call that an Art, said a
Lacedemonian, which has not truth for it is Object and End. Because they often
persuade to believe untruths.

An Inhabitant of Argos, saying they had many Lacedaemonians buried in their
Country: Yes, said a Lacedemonian; but there are no A^giens Graves in
Lacedemonia. To show, they had not the courage to approach them. This has some
resemblance with another of an Athenian, who said, they had often repulsed the
Lacedaemonians from the Walls of Athens.

A Sergeant who was selling of Slaves, saying: I have a Lacedemonian to sell:
say, a Captive, replied he.

Lysimachus, asking a Lacedemonian who had listed himself in his Army, if he
were not a Hilote, which was a kind of Slave: Do thou believe, that any
other would come to serve thee for five pence wages? said he.

The Thebans after the Battle of Leuctres, coming down even to the very Gates
of Lacedemon, one of them cried out aloud, where are the Lacedaemonians now?
They are not here, said a Captive, for if they were thou durst not approach so
near them.

The Athenians having been compelled to Surrrender to the Lacedaemonians,
demanded of them to have the Isle of Samos left in their hands: That were not
just or fair, said they, to let you keep possession of another Lands, when you
have not been able to defend your own.

Philip sending to know of them, whether they would have him enter the Country,
as a Friend or a Foe: they answered him neither as one, nor other.

Another time they condemned an Ambassador to pay a Fine, for having given the
Title of King to Antigonus, although that Prince had made a Present of great
quantities of Wheat to the Spartans in a time of Famine. But they reckoned all
those Successors of Alexander to be Usurpers.

A wicked person having propounded very good advice upon occasion, they caused
him to be registed as an honest man, that they might not seem to give
countenance to Vicious persons.

Two Brothers pleading against each other they raised a Fine upon the Father of
them, for his not deciding that Controversy. A Musician was likewise condemned,
for having played on the Lyre with his Fingers, contrary to their Custom,
because they would not suffer Sparta to be corrupted with Novelties.

A little Boy being mortally wounded by his Camerade; he said to those that
cheered him with the hopes of a revenge; that needs not, for I had done the
same to him, had I been strong enough.

Another having stolen a Fox, suffered it to tear his Bowels, rather then
discover his theft, and said to excuse it, that it were better to Dye, then be
taken in an ill act. It was permitted to steal, provided they were not taken in
the Fact.

Some saying to a Lacedemonian, it was happy for him, that he had not been met
with by Thieves: But, they are so, said he, for not meeting with me.

A Lacedemonian, being Interrogated, what he could do: Be Free, replied he. Or,
dye for my Liberty.

A Young Lacedemonian Captive, who served his Master well enough, having order
to bring him his Chamber Pot, answered not; and being pressed to do it, he made
his Escape to the top of the house, and told him, you shall quickly find whom
you have to deal withal, and cast himself down, that he might not do a thing
unworthy, or beneath himself.

Another being asked whether he would be a good Boy, if they bought him: Yes,
said he, or whether you buy me, or not.

One being Scoffed at, for having painted a Fly upon his Buckler, as if he
would avoid being known by so small a token: You deceive your selves, said he,
for I will charge the Enemy so near, that they shall have Reato know this Mark
well enough.

Some having proffered to put a Lyre into the Hands of a Lacedemonian, after
they had dined, he said, he had no skill in Fooling.

One inquiring of another, whether it were safe going to Lacedemon: There is no
danger for any but Lions, said he, for the Hares sleep at our very Gates, To
show they minded not cowards.

A Lacedemonian mortally wounded at the first onset: It does not trouble me to
dye, said he, but to be killed thus basely, before I had Signalized my courage.

Another having given some Fish to be dressed at an Inn: hearing the Host call,
to bring him some Oil, Vinegar, and some Cheese to make the Sauce: If I must
have all that, said he, I shall not need the Fish. This shows their Frugality.

At Lysander's Death, Agesilaus having found among his Papers a Speech
concerning the changing of the form of Government. And being about to publish
it, his Friends told him, He ought not to Rake Lysander out of his Grave; but
rather bury his harangue with him. Because it is dangerous to reveal what may
hurt us.

Those that were Betroathed to his Daughters, refusing to Marry them after his
decease, because he Dyed Poor, the Ephori condemned them to pay Fines: Because
they had showed more regard for Wealth, then for their Faith.

At their return from a Battle, a Lacedemonian being asked, whether those that
were slain were not the bravest Fellows: Death, said he, must be very cunning
to distinguish between Cowardice and Valor.

Some admiring the happyness of a Merchant who had many Vessels: I do not
value, said a Lacedemonian, a happyness exposed to the mercy of the waves.

A Lacedemonian beholding his Son brought home from a Battle, with seven mortal
wounds, and all in Honorable places: I do not weep for thee, my Son, said he,
it is the cowards should be wept for.

Philip being entered into Laconia, some body said to a Lacedemonian, what will
you do now, poor People? We will dye, replied he, for we have not learned to
serve. They answered to the demands that Prince made them with one word, no.

Antipater requiring of the Lacedaemonians Fifty Young men in hostage, they
rather chose it should be Women, or Ancient men, lest their Youth should be
corrupted with Foreign manners, and when he threatened unless they would obey
him: If thou command us, said they, things worse then Death, we will rather
choose to dye.

An Aged man at the Olympic Games running about every where to find a Seat, no
sooner came near the Lacedaemonians quarters, but all the Young men rose up;
which being observed with great Acclamations: Great Gods, said he, all the
Grecians know what Virtue is; but there are none but the Lacedaemonians that put
it in practice. Aged men were much Honored and respected amongst them;
whereupon one said pleasantly enough; that it was an advantage no where but in
Lacedemon to grow old.

A poor Fellow craving an Alms of a Lacedemonian: He that gave thee the first,
said he' ruined thee. Because that encouraged his Idleness.

One having desired an offering of a Lacedemonian; I do not value those Gods,
replied he, that are more Beggarly then my self. Or, that wants the Assistance
of men.

Hearing an Orator very glib in a Discourse: Great Gods, said he, how fast that
Fellow's Tongue waggs! Not setting any value on his Eloquence.

Another being asked, what he thought of a Poet of those times, said, He is a
fit Instrument to corrupt Youth. Because of the Licentiousness of the Poetry of
those times.

A couple of Lacedemomans having freely offered themselves to Death, to expiate
the crime committed against the Persian Ambassadors; the King being astonished
at their bravery, and entreating them to stay with him: We cannot, said they,
live without those, for whom we are willing to dye.

A Lacedemonian not being able to obtain Audience of a Prince, who excused it,
by Reason of his indisposition: Tell him, replied he, that I did not come
hither to Fight with him; but to speak to him.

Another spying a Ghost whilst he was crossing over a place of Burial in the
night time: What do thou come hither for, Miserable Wretch, said he, to dye
once again, and presented the point of his javelin to him.

some Republic to It was not allowed in without a generalcon make away ones
self sent, ^as at Marselles.
A Lacedemonian having obtained leave to precipitate himself, withdrew after he
had observed the height of the fall; and being Scoffed at for it: I did not
Think the favor they had done me, would require a Second to put it in
Execution. He meant, Resolution.

Another in a Battle, hearing a Retreat founded, just at the instant he was
giving his Blow: It is better, said he, to obey the Law, then to kill an Enemy,
and so withdrew himself.

It being told a Lacedemonian, who was worsted at the Olympic Games, that his
Adversary was too Strong for him: Not so, replied he, but too Skilful. In
Lacedemon they made Wrestling only an Exercise, but had no teachers of that Art.

Fifty thousand Slaves being taken and carried away at one time out of Laconia:
How are we eased of a world of Rascals, said a Lacedemonian!

Another, who gloried in his Victory at the Olympic Sports, and who refused a
great Sum of Money if he would yield the Conquest, being asked, what his Reward
would be, to March, said he, crowned before the King. For so Valor was
Honored, by them.

A Lacedemonian being overthrown, and ready to be thrust through behind: Strike
me, cried he, in the Forepart; that my Friends may not blush for me when I am
Dead.

A Lacedemonian Tutor, being Interrogated, what he would teach his Disciple:
Honor, replied he. For that all the Precepts are contained in that. Another
said, that a good tutor served to make that which was Useful to become Pleasant.

A Lacedemonian being Sentenced to Death, said, he was glad they had condemned
him to a Fine, which he could easily pay down.

Another said, the Lacedaemonians spoke but little because there was nothing so
much like silence. Or so near to silence.

That Calumny was so much worse then Injustice, as a Traitor is worse then an
open Enemy.

At Sparta it was usually said, that those who were free were absolutely so,
and those who were Slaves the same. By Reason of the full Liberty of the one,
and the extreme Servitude of the other.

APOPHTHEGMES OF SOME LACEDEMONIAN Women.
BRasidas Brasidas.
being slain in Thracia, his Mother enquired of some Ambassadors of that
Country, whether he dyed like a brave man; and they having replied, that he was
unparalleled: You deceive your selves, said she, there are many still in
Macedonia, that excel him.

The Daughter of King Cleomenes observing an Ambassador, Gor^^.
that made great promi^es to her Father: Send away that stranger, said she,
lest he corrupt you.

Seeing his Servant one day dressing him, she ^yed out; that he had no hands,

And meeting another that let his Train drag after him out of State:
Lacedemonian women.
He does not so much as understand the Woman's Trade yet, said she. Or, could
not act that effeminate part well.

Gyrtias Gyrtias.
when they brought home her little Son, half dead with his wounds, she turned
out all her Friends and Servants that wept and bewailed him; and said, Brave
people are not to be lamented, but all their care must be to help to cure them.

Another time having received news that he was slain: It was fit he should
conquer, or dye said she; I am better satisfied that he is dead honorably, then
to have lived long to no purpose.

Damatrias Damatrias.
flew her Son, being returned from Battle, where he had behaved himsel^^
coward-like. Another did the same, adding^ he was none of hers. A third, sent
hers wor^ there went an ill report of him, which he mus^ wipe off, or dye.
Another ran before he^ Children who were Flying from the Enemy ^ and pointing
to her Belly, asked them, whether they would hide themselves there. Another
seeing her Son come Back alone, inquired ^ him for his Companions, and Learning
from him, that they were all Slain; broke his head saying, Go and follow them.

One telling his Mother, that his Brothe^ was Dead: Art thou not ashamed, said
she to Survive him? This was not brave but ^nn^tural.

A Woman having five Sons, who we^ Marched out against the Enemy, placed h^
self at the Gate of the Suburbs, to hear some tidings of the Fight, and being
told they were all Dead; that is not the thing I would know; but whether they
gained the Victory; which being assured of: Courage, said she, all goes well.

Another Burying her Son who was killed in Battle, said to those who would have
comforted her: I begot him only for this.

A Lady taking pride in some curious Needlework, a Lacedemonian said to her,
pointing to her four Sons; Behold, there is my work.

The Mother of Pedaret, wrote him word: Do better, or never return, for thy
fortune is desperate.

Another finding her Son go Lame after his return from War, said, thou can
never make a step, but it will mind the ofthy valor. Another added, the Honor
will not let thee feel the inconvenience. But, a third told her Son, who could
hardly crawle along, that he had more reason to glory in his Valor, then be
ashamed of his Misfortune.

Another giving her Son his Fathers Buckler, charged him, that he should keep
it as well as his Father had done: Another said, bring it back again, or let
them bring thee back again upon it.

Another complaining that his Sword was too short: You must make your thrusts
the more home, said she, Or, take one stride the nearer.

Another hearing her Son had done bravely; ('It Is because he was my Son, said
she. And of another who was faint hearted, she affirmed, he had been changed at
Nurse.

Another being informed of the Honorable Death of hers: By that, he has made
it appear he was my Son, said she. Another said, let them place his Brother in
his rank. Another said to him that brought the news: I am ashamed for thee,
that thou did not follow him. Another said, it was more Honorable to dye for
his Country, then to Return Victor from the Olympic Games, and would not take
off the Garland of Flowers she had upon her Head.

One attempting to corrupt a Lacedemonian Lady; she bid him, make his Addresses
to her Husband. That was a thing allowed of by Lycurgus's Laws.

Some body enquiring of another, what she brought in Marriage, she replied,
Chastity.

A Female Captive of Lacedemon, being asked, what she could do; replied, she
could keep House: Another said, she could Govern it well: another, be free: and
being commanded to do some unworthy thing, she told them, they would be sorry
for her one day, and slew herself.

Another being asked, if she had lain near her Husband: Not I near him, replied
she but he near me.

The Mother of Agis contemplating him after his Death: Ha my Son, said she, thy
Virtue made thee dye! He would have restore the Ancient Discipline.

She said, killing her self; I can do no o^ other Service now, but this to my
Country. Or, I have been Serviceable only in this.

A Lacedemonian Lady, having by chance discovered her naked Arm in the Street;
and some body crying out, ah! how white and Handsome it is: She replied, it is
not common.

APOPHTHEGMES OF PHILOSOPHERS.
THales Thales.
said, it was indifferent either to live, or to dye; and being asked, wherefore
he did not dye then; Because it is indifferent, replied he.

To one that inquired of him, what was the Strangest thing he had seen in his
whole life: he answered, an old Tyrant.

One that had committed Adultery, asking him, if he should swear he did it not,
he told him, that Perjury was not worse then Adultery; But they are two Crimes
instead of one.

Being asked his opinion, which was the best form of Government in a State:
That, replied he, where there are neither Poor, nor Rich. That is because
nothing can be drawn from the Wealthy by reason of their interests, nor from
the poor by Reason of their want, besides, that abundance, and want makes
people more undertaking.

These are a part of his Sentiments. Philosophers.


That Night had preceeded Day. It must not be added of one day, for there was
none.

That the Gods do not only know our evil Actions but our evil Thoughts.

That it is the most difficult thing in the world to know ones self; (...) most
casie to Counsel another; and the most delightful to obtain ones desires.

That Truth is as far distant from untruth, as the Eyes are from the Ears.
Which is to say, that there is nothing of certainty but what one sees, not what
one ^ears.

That the best means to make one undergo Misfortune; is to see one more
unfortunate then ones self, Especially ones Enemy.

That to live well we must abstain from those things, which we reprove in
others.

That the happyness of the body consists in health, and that of the mind in
knowledge.

That one must expect from ones Children the same that one has done to ones
Father.

That a great talker, is seldom a wise man.

That one must choose well, and hold fast.

That the most Ancient thing that is, is God; the most beautiful, the World;
the greatest, Place; the Swiftest Thought, the strongest, Necessity; the
wisest, Time.

That we must not tell any thing to an^ that can hurt us, to which this
Resse^^^ that one should live with his Friends, as if they might become
Enemies. That is to say, love as if it might turn to hate, and hate as if it
might convert to love; which is attributed to Chilon.

That the hardest things become easy by Custom; that it were as easy for a
wise man to become Rich, as it were hard to make him covet it.

Pythagoras Pythagoras.
interrogated when one should take the enjoyment of the pleasures of love,
replied, when one has a mind to grow worse. Because it decreases strength.

He said, the whole World was a Comedy, of which the Philosophers were the
Spectatours.

That those who reproved us, did more good, then such as Flattered us, Because
the one correct us, the other corrupt us.

That Wealth tended to Debauchery, Debauchery to Violence, Violence to
Repentnce.

That it is better to make our selves be beloved, then feared. The reason is
given formerly.

That nothing is so fearful as a guilty conscience.

That Sickness should be banished from the Body; Ignorance, from the Mind;
Vice, from the Will; Disorder, from the Passions; and Civil Wars, from ones
Country; Or, rather from ones self.

That the Mind which takes too much care for it is body, makes it is prison more
insupportable.

Solon did all he could to hinder Pissistratus from usurping that Tyranny, and
having discovered his design, divulged it openly in the Assembly; but when he
saw him become Master of the City, he withdrew, after he had told them, He was
wiser then those that had not foreseen it, and more courageous then those that
durst not disclose it.

When Pisistratus sent to him to know upon what Grounds he undertook to oppose
him, he replied, upon my old Age; As having nothing more to fear.

Cressus showing himself to him in all his Glory; and asking, Whether he had
ever seen any thing Finer; yes, said he, Peacocks and Phesants: By how much
their Beauty and Bravery is natural, and his was borrowed. Nor would he style
him happy, till he had finished his Race, all being uncertain till the time of
our Death.

Being asked whether he had given the Athenians good Laws: Yes, said he, the
best that they were capable of.

He said, the Laws resembled the Spiders Webs, that catched only poor Flies,
Because the little ones only are punished, the great ones escape by their
interests.

That to make an Empire lasting, the Magistrates must obey the Laws, and the
people the Magistrates.

That the Athletes were good for nothing when they were become old, after it
had cost them a great deal to attain it.

That silence was the Seal of speech, and time of silence; Because it marks the
season when to speak and when to refrain.

That he still learned by growing older.

That he had provided no Laws against Parricides, because he did not believe
there were any.

That to prevent injuries, the way was that those who were not touched by them,
should the first Present them.

That Luxury attended by Riches, degenerated into Tyranny.

He termed Cities, the common-shoar of humane Misery, Or, the receptacle.

Chilon Chilon.
asked one, who was vapouring that he had no Enemies, have you no Friends
neither? Both the one and the other arising from the same Principle.

He said, the perfection of man consisted in foreseeing the future, as much as
it was possible to do by Reason.

That good men differed in this from the bad, that they had none but honest
hopes.

That Gold was the Touchstone of man.

That he repented himself but of one thing in all his life, having advised a
Party to agree, that it might prevent his Friend from being condemned. That is
to say, to prefer Friendship to Justice. Or, for having refused to Judge
between two, for fear of giving it against one, tho he had been choson
Arbitrator for that purpose.

That when one says, what one ought not to say, one is subject to hear, what
one would not hear.

That a dishonest gain is more to beappreed then a loss, because we are sorry
for that but once, for the other all our life time. Or, should bemoan that but
once, etc.

That one should not undertake, what one cannot perform.

That the Tongue ought not to outrun the Wit, but must be bridled at all times;
especially at Feasts. Because the heat of Wine and good Cheer, is apt to make
one say things, which one would not have done fasting.

That the three most difficult things, were to keep a Secret, to forget an
injury, and make good use of ones leisure.

That Jupiter's past time, was to list some up, and cast others down. These are
called the Sports of Fortune.

That one should not threaten, because that ^orewarnes them to stand upon their
Guard.

That one ought not to take a Wife too well qualifyed with Beauty, Birth,
Grandeur, or Riches, for fear of taking a Mistress instead of a Wife, or Mate.

That we must not speak evil of those that cannot defend themselves. He meant
it of the Dead.

That we should honor old Age, not only upon the Score of Reason, but of
Interest, That care may be bad of us, when old Age is come.

That the great ones ought not to be flattered, lest they become proud.

That to make themselves be loved, as much as respected, they ought to temper
their Majesty, with sweetness, Or, they should descend a little from their
height.

That to Govern a State well, one should Govern his Family well.

That one must ever stand upon the Guard, against ones self.

That one should guide ones self in such a manner, as not to fall into
contempt, nor into hatred. By too much pride, or too little Spirit.

That one should despise Death; but without neglecting life.

That what it had of most affrightful, was the Preparation toward it.

That one should neither desire it, nor fear it: Which he expressed in these
Terms: I will not dye; but I care not if I were Dead.

That one should be old when one is young, and young in old Age; that is to
say, wise in one, and not peevish in the other.

That one ought to remember kindnesses received, and forget those one has done.

Pittacus Pittacus.
being told, that to put in execution what he had propounded, they must find
out an honest man: The thing is then impossible, said he.

He said, that a Pardon was of more value then Repentance. That is to say, then
revenge which is subject to repentance.

That of all things the Jest ungrateful, was time; the most obscure, things to
come; the most faithful, the Earth; and the most unfaithful, the Sea.

That the half was worth more then the whole: It is a riddle which may be
expounded of diverse things, and particularly of Riches and of Quality, the
Mediums of which are by Aristotle held the best.

That there is nothing more certain then to dispose of the Present, without
waiting the Future, Because of it is uncertainty. He added, that it belonged to
Prudence to foresee it, and Resolution to undergo it; When it comes, and is
unhappy.

That one ought not to divulge their designs, lest missing one be laughed at.

He ordained a double punishment, to those that did any Mischief being Drunk:
One for the fault committed, and the other for the Drunkenness.

When some wicked Villains were invoking the Gods in a Tempest: Hold your
peace, said Bias, Bias.
and if possible, let them not know that you are here.

An Impious Fellow asking him, what Piety was; He gave no answer; and when the
other muttered at it, what have thou to do with it, said he, it concerns thee
not?

Being Judge, he wept at the Condemnation of guilty Persons, and said, He gave
one to Nature, the other to the Law.

He said, the worst of wild Beasts, was the Tyrant, of tame ones the Flatterer.

That the most difficult to undergo of all things, was the change of Fortune,
and added, that those that had ever been unfortunate, were not so.

That hope was the most pleasing thing of life; but the most esteemed was
profit.

That it was better to be a judge betwixt Enemies, then betwixt Friends;
because amongst the first one was sure to gain a Friend, among the other an
Enemy.

Periander Periander.
said, to those that asked him, wherefore he retained the Dominion: That it was
as dangerous to quit it, as to take it, Or, to lose it, as it is in the Greek.

That Kings ought to be Environed with good Will, in stead of Guards; that is
to say, that to reign Securely, it is necessary to have the Affections of the
People.

Cleobulus Cleobulus:
said, there were two things to be feared, the Envy of Friends, and the Hatred
of Enemies.

Anacarsis Anacarsis.
bid them tell Solon coming to see him, that it was a Stranger who sought his
Friendship: Go, and let him know, replied Solon, that it is in his own Country
he should make Friends, and not amongst Strangers; then coming in briskly to
him, I am in my own Country, said he. He was come to dwell in Greece.

He said, the best Ship, was that which was Arrived in Port, and replied to
those that asked him, Whether there were more Living, or Dead: Amongst which do
you reckon those that are Sailing? Another said, those that are asleep.

Being asked, whether there were any Music in his Country? He replied, that
there was not so much as any Vines. To show, that was the Prompter to debauch.
He likewise said, there were two sorts of Grapes, the one Sweet, the other
Sour. To note, the different effect of Wine, in the diverse use of it.

An Athenian reproaching him that he was a Scythian: My Country, said he, is a
shame to me, and thou art a shame to thy Country.

To a Debauched man that did some Extravagancies, he said, if he could not bear
Wine better in his youth, he should be forced to drink Water in his old Age.

He said, that the public Market Place was the Theater of Injustice. Because
of the frauds committed in trade.

That Drunkenness was a lesson for Sobriety. Because of the inconveniences one
endures, and the infamy that follows; the Greek says, the sight of Drunkards:
But my expression extends yet further.

That the Tongue was the worst, and the best part of man. Or, member, for the
ill, and the good it can do.

That the prosperity of the wicked, was the affliction of the good.

That in Greece it was the Ignorant that gave judgment and the wise that were
judged. As Tragery, Music etc.
Because the common people presided in those sports of which they understood
little; regulated the Politics in which they understood yet less; and called
the Generals to account, without any Skill, or Knowledge of the Military Art at
all.

He wondered that at Feasts they began with little Glasses, and concluded with
great, and thus Drank small Draughts when they were thirsty, and greater when
thirst was gone. But otherwise their thirst would have been abated too soon,
and by consequence the pleasures of a Debauch could not have lasted.

He was Slain in Scythia, attempting to bring in the Grecian Customs, and said
dying, that the Envy which had spared him amongst strangers, had murdered him
at home.

To a Grecian who reproached him, that he was a Barbarian: He replied, thou
would be so in my Country, as I am in thine.

Myson Myson.
said, that we must not judge of Things by the Words, but of Words by the
Things. They are the Rul^^ and by consequence the only Measure.

Some admiring that he laughed to himself being alone: It Is for that Reason, I
laugh, said he. He loved no company.

When Anaxagoras Anaxagoras
his Kindred reproved him, for that he took no care of his Wealth: Do you take
Care of it then, replied he, and gave it them. Note the saying of Cicero, that
there is nothing so Foolish, but has been said by some Philosopher. One might
add, done.

Some body finding fault with him, that he cared not for his Country: You
deceive your self, said he, pointing to the Heavens. And therefore he said, he
was Born to contemplate the Sun and Stars.

Being twitted that he was deprived of his Country by his Exile; as that is of
me, replied he. Diogenes said as much.

Of Mausoleus Tomb, he said, it was Gold turned into Stone. The same may be
said of all stately Buildings.

As some were bemoaning that he must dye in a Foreign Land: The way to the
other World, said he, is as near from one place as the other.

Pericles endeavoring to dissuade him from the resolution he had taken to dye.
When one would have the light of a Lamp to continue, said he, they put some Oil
to it. He was in want.

He said, that knowledge did as much hurt to such as knew not how to use it, as
it did good to others.

That Age and Sleep, did by little and little teach us the way to Death.

That of all those whom we held to be happy, there was not one that was so.

Socrates Socrates.
having received a kick, will you not ^esent it, said some: No more, replied
he, ^hen if an Ass had struck me.

Of Heraclitus's Works, he said, that what he understood was very exquisite,
and he believed, that what he did not understand was so too, but that it
required a good Diver to go to the bottom. Because of their profoundness.

Alcibiades having bestowed a great deal of Ground upon him to build: This is,
said he, ^ike one that should bestow a whole Ox Hide, ^o make one pair of
shoes. As having no ^^eed of a great House; being but poor.

In a Fair, beholding a multitude of Wares and diversity of Merchandise: How
many things I have no need of, cried he!

He was wont to say, there is no Sauce like a good Appetite, and that Water
seemed good to the thirsty.

He said, that knowledge and ignorance, were the Principles of good and evil,
and that not only Nobility and Riches were no goods: But that they caused many
evils.

As some were reproaching Antisthenes that he was Born of a Thracian Mother:
That is, said he, because from two Athenians so great a man could not have
proceeded. Because of the Luxury, and the softness of Athens.

He learned Music in his old Age, saying it was never too late to learn. Or,
it was always time enough to learn.

Observing some were paying very dear for Fruits before the due season, he
asked, whether they despaired that Season would eve^ come.

While they were Acting a Tragedy of Euripides, where he Scoffs at Virtue, he
wen^ away, saying, it was a shame they took care to keep a Slave secure, and
yet suffered so precious a thing to be cast away.

Some body asking his advice, whether h^ should Marry, or not; which soever you
do you will repent, said he. Because we ar^ ever wearied with our present
condition, finding the inconveniences.

His Wife being offended that he but Sle^derly treated some people of Fashion:
If the^ are worthy men, said he, they will be contented, if not, I do not care
to plea^^ them.

He said, of those that were afraid to spea^ before the People, that they
dreaded tho^^ in Companies, whom they despised Single.

One of his Scholars having nothing to give him, gave himself to him: Thou
do not think, said he, what a great Present thou have made me, for since
every thing was made for man, man is more worth then any thing else that can be
given.

When it was told him, that he was Condemned to Death by the Athenians; and
they, said he, by Nature. But it is unjustly, added his Wife: Would thou have
it to be justly, replied he?

The day he was to Drink the Poison, one of his Friends having sent him a Fine
Gown: How, said he, will not that which has served me all my life, serve at my
Death?

Observing a Philosopher who affected to wear a ^^ttered Garment: I Spy thy
Vanity, said he, through the Holes of thy Coat.

To those that asked him, whether Slandering did not offend him: There is
nothing but truths that can offend. Another time he said, if what they say of
me be true, it will serve to correct me; if not, it does not concern me, for it
is not of me they speak.

One of his Friends not being able to suffer his Wives Bawling, he said, he was
accustomed to it, as one is with the Gagling of Geese, or the Cackling of a
Hen: But the Geese lay Eggs, and Breed young ones, said that Friend; and she
brings me Children, replied Socrates.

Some wishing him one day to strike her, because she came and took his Cloak
away from him in the midst of the Street: It Is to much purpose, said he, and by
that means we shall call all the people together about us, who will cry, to him
Xantippe, to her Socrates!

He applauded the Apology which an Orator had made for him; but he said it was
not proper for him: As Shoes, said he, may be well made, and yet not Fit my
Feet.

His Judges asking him, what he believed he had deserved, To be maintained,
said he, at the Public charge in the Prytanea. As one should say, in the
Palace or the Town Hall.

He would have people refrain from Eating, and Drinking, such things as tempted
one to Eat and Drink, when they have neither hunger, nor thirst, and said there
was no worse Food. Because it begets Superfluous humors, which produces
Maladies. It is added, that some times he would not Drink when he was very
thirsty: But there is nothing that debilitates the natural faculties more, then
to deny them their Lawful desires and it is not so much a subduing ones self,
as a destroying ones self.

Aristophanes, having exposed him in his Comedies, he said, he could endure
Railery without Murmuring. While he was reproving a Friend publicly, Plato
telling him it had been better to have done it in private And thou likewise to
have advifed me so too said he.

Hearing a Dialogue of that Author recited, where he speaks much of him: How
many Falsities, said he, does that Young man tell of me.

A Debauched Fellow complaining to him that he had no Money, he told him that
he should borrow some of himself, by Retrenching his Expenses.

Of a Prince, whose happyness was much extolled, he said, he did not know
whether he were happy because he had never talked with him. Felicity depending
more upon our selves, then upon external things.

To one that asked him questions concerning the State of the Dead after this
life, he said, that he had never been in that Region, nor had seen any that
were returned from thence.

He measured Riches by the use one had of them, and said, that the rest was not
only Superfluous, but incommodious, another added, that they were worse then
Poverty.

He said, to a Debauched man that bragged he had more Scholars then himself,
that it was not so easy to ascend, as to descend.

Being in company, and receiving the news of the Death of his Son: Come, said
he, let us go and Bury him. Without being otherwise moved.

He said of a Prince who had expended much in the building of a Palace, but had
been at no cost to improve himself; that People came Flocking from all parts to
see his House: But no body was desirous to come to see him.

He recommended three things to his Disciples, Wisdom, Modesty, and Silence.

Being witness of the Massacre made by the thirty Tyrants, he said to a
Philosopher: Let us comfort our selves that we are not like the great ones, the
Subject of Tragedies.

His Wife finding fault with him that he had refused Alcibiades's Presents: I
have, said he, my Ambition, as well as he has his.

He said, there was no better Inheritance, then a good Friend.

Some body treating ill his Servant before him: Have thou never taken notice,
said he, that thou art more Guilty then he? Some attribute is to Diogenes.

A man followed by a little Servant, who carried his Clothes, complaining of
his weariness: Art thou not ashamed, said he, to be weaker then a Child?

Against those that amused themselves in Fruitless and curious Studies, he
quoted a Verse of Homer, where it is enquired what they do at home, and said,
that those things that are above us, concerns us not. He meant the Heavens, and
the Constellations.

When his Friends were concerned, that he having saluted another, the other did
not return his Salutation: Wherefore should I be angry, because another is not
so Civil as my self, said he?

He said, that Sumptuous Clothes were only fit to Act Tragedies in.

Of a man that loved to contend, he said, He could not live amongst honest good
natured men, but ought to wast his days in Solitude.

Some body complaining that every thing was very dear at Athens, he made it
apparent, Leading him round the City, that there was nothing dear but
Superfluities.

He would not accept the Presents of a Prince because he could not return him
the like, nor would he go to wait upon him, that he might not trouble his
quiet, nor lose his Liberty.

Saying one day to his Friends, being returned from a Fair, that if he had had
Money, he would have bought him a Cloak, they all proffered him some: But too
late, said Seneca; for they should have prevented the shame of asking for it.

One saying, his Travels had done him no good; that is, said he, because you
Traveled always with your self.

He commanded Xenophon to follow him: To learn, said he, a Science which he
Ignores, which is to make a good man. Or, to make man good.

Walking in the Morning, he said, he was preparing a relishing Sauce for his
Dinner. Because it begets an appetite.

He called good Fame, the perfume of Virtues, because it ever follows and makes
a lasting Sweetness.

To a Young man who was silent, he said, speak that I may see thee.

He believed Woman to be as capable of Discipline as man, contrary to
Aristotle's opinion, who holds her for a less perfect Animal.

Having adorned himself more then ordinarily to dine with the Fair Agathon,
said he, we must make our selves Handsome, to go to the Handsome. However he
was very ill-favored, and resembled the Pictures of the Silenes, who are
Painted flat-Nosed and great-Belly'd.

Feeling a pleasing itch, when they took off his Chains, he said, that Pleasure
was the Daughter of Pain, Or, rather that the one begot the other, by turns.

Before he Drank off the Poison, he asked the Executioner, as they ask a Doctor
before they take Physic, what he must do afterward, and said, he was going to
be delivered from all his troubles.

When he was told, he ought to preserve himself for his Children, and for his
Friends, he said, God would provide for his Children: And for his Friends, he
should find others in the Regions whither he was going, or at least, it would
not be very long 'ere he should see them there.

A man well Skilled in Physiognomy, having said of him, that he was Brutish,
Lux^rious, and addicted to Drunkenness, he replied, that it was true, he had an
Inclination to those Vices; but that he had corrected himself by his Reason.

Aristippus having sent him some Money which he had earned by teaching, he
returned it back again, saying that all things were not decent for all men. He
never took any thing of his Scholars.

As he was treating a Friend, his Wife having thrown down the Table, and that
Friend rising to be gone; your Hen did as much at your House the other day,
said he, and I did not go away for that.

These are some of his Sentences.

He said, he knew but one thing; which was, Or, a bonus Genius.
that he knew nothing: And added, that he had a God for his Conductor; who
advertised him of what he was to do. Plutar que says, of what was to come.

That it was no small matter to begin well, tho that were little valved.

That it was very imprudent to separate the useful from the honest, as if any
thing could be really useful that is not honest. Or, that dishonours us.

That Young People ought to do nothing to excess. This is a mark of Wisdom: But
not of a great Genius, which runs on with great ardour to all it does undertake.

That great care was taken to make a Picture that resembled, but we had none to
resemble the Deity, in whose Image we were made: That we trickt up our self in
a Looking-glass, and did not a dorn our selves in Virtues habit. This is a
little varied from Plutarch.

That he did Eat to live: But that the most part did live to Eat.

That it was with an ill Woman, as with a Vicious or ill-conditioned Horse,
when one is once used to it, all others seem the better. Or, seem good.

That we were the more happy, or more good men, by how much we approached
nearer to the Fountains of goodness and feli^ity, which is God.

That we must ask nothing of the Gods, but what they would have us, nor offer
any thing but what cost nothing. Prayers, Praises and Thanksgiving.

That there was more Pleasure in Sobriety then in Debauchery; Because we taft
it better and it is mixed with no bitterness; which mad him say, that the
temperate were more Voluptuous then others.

That the means to make ones self to be admired, was to be such, as one would
have others believe one to be.

That as one does not take ones Shoe-makers Son, or ones Tailors, to make our
Shoes or Clothes, unless they know the Trade; i^ was Ridiculous to suffer ones
self to be Governed by such as did not understand Affairs, upon the pretense
that their Fathers were able men.

That if a man would manage his steps one might make a very long Journey with
a^^ those that are idly lost.

That to strong natures, as well as Head strong Horses, there is more
instruction requisite then to others.

That no kind of Labor is shameful, but that it is Idleness that is Shameful.

That it approaches Divinity to subsist with but a little, for they subsist
without any things But there is a great deal of difference betwixt the Divine
Nature and ours, and by Regulating our^ like theirs, we should destroy it.

That there was nothing so precious as leisure, not because we should do
nothing, bu^ because one may Choose to do what one wi^^

That the Beauty of the Soul is more amiable then that of the Body, tho she
have not so many Adorers.

That true Friends are in this particular contrary to Lovers, that these always
crave, and the others are ever giving.

That Books have destroyed, or ruined the Memory, because formerly the Memory
was the only Book. Or, was instead of Books.

That if all the Evils were heaped together, to be dealt to every one his
share, there are none but would rather keep his own then choose any other man's.

Aesop Aesop.
told those that Scoffed at his ill Countenance, That makes not the man, but
his Reason.

Some body relating some injuries that had been said of him, and excusing
himself that it was not he, but others: Neither is it those that makes the
Swords, said he, that Murders men; but those that use them. His other
Apophthegmes may be found in his Fables.

Empedocles Empedocles.
said to one who complained he could not find a wise man: That is because one
must be wise to find one.

Interrogated wherefore he was in so much choler against those that had spoken
ill of him, that being unworthy of a Philosopher: I should not be sensible of
Praise, said he, were I insensible of injuries.

He said, the Agrigentines builded as if they were to live for ever, and lived
as if they were to dye quickly, like Prodigals.

Democritus Democritus.
said, He had attained to an extreme old Age, by not yiedling to
Voluptu^ousness. By this he understands the pleasures o^ the body, or, rather
the excess of pleasures, for there is nothing, to speak properly, but pleasure
tha^ maintains life. Therefore it has been said, tha^ the Gods are immortal by
their continual pleasures.

That a little Wealth was much to those that were not covetous, Or, rather, to
those that were not Prodigal.

That we search for good and cannot find it and we find the evil without
seeking after it.

That Luxury furnishes the great Tables with Meats, and Temperance the little
ones.

That the hopes of Wisemen do sometimes succeed; but never those of Fools,
because their Wishes are ever above their reach.

That old Age had every thing, and had nothing; which may be likewise said of
the covetous; of the one because they will not make use of what they have; and
the others cannot.

That Riches did not consist in the possession of Wealth; but in the use of it.

That if the body should arraign the Soul in Judicature, it could easily prove
it had not done it is duty.

Of a Prattler he said, that he was not so capable of speaking, as he was
incapable of holding his peace.

He called discourse the shadow of Action.

Having met with a Cucumber of a taste that was more then ordinary, he was
informed that it had been put in a Pot wherein there had been Honey: How much
they have disobliged me, said he, in discovering the reason: For they have
deprived me of the pleasure I should have taken, in searching it out.

Heraclitus Heraclitus.
said, one should run to prevent an injury, as one does to exstinguish a Fire.
Because it breaks out immediately if not timely prevented.

That one should Fight for the Laws, as for the Outworks of a City. As being
the Bullwarks of a state.

He told the Ephesians who admired to see him play with the Children, that he
would rather choose to do that, then to meddle with their Affairs. Because of the
trouble and danger there is to intermedle with the public Affairs.

When some Murmured because he was silent in an Assembly; It is, said he, to
give others lieve to speak.

Timon, Timon.
Surnamed the Misanthropus, because he hated men, gave this for his reason,
that one half of them were worth nothing at all, and the other worth very
little. Because they hated not the ill ones enough.

He caressed Alcibiades, because one day, as he said, he would cause the Death
of a World of People.

Some body that treated him, having said, what a pleasant Meal was this! Yes,
replied he if thou had not been here!

Intending to Fell a Tree in his Garden, whereon one had hanged himself, he
gave notice to the People, that if any more had the same design, they might
make use of it before it were cut down.

He said, that Coveteousness and Ambition were the two Elements that entered
into the composition of all crimes.

Xenophon Xenophon.
Sacrificing, heard of the Death of his Son, and laying down the Garland of
Flowers he had upon his head, put it on again, as soon as he was assured that
he dyed like a brave man, and said, as some have written, that he knew he was
born Mortal.

He said, that good Deeds were Trophies erected in the hearts of men.

He added, that we must draw advantage from our very Enemles; and that to make
the Gods be Favorable to us in Adversity; we ought to invoke them in
Prosperity.

Aristippus, Aristippus.
of whom it was said, that he was the same in his Purple, as in his Rags, to
express how well he acted any part; having bought some Wild-Fowl very dear,
said to those that muttered at it, that he was as dainty as they were covetous,
and reproached another, who told him, he would have bought it if it had not
been of so great a Price: That he did not hate the Luxury, but the Expense.

The Tyrant Denis having spit in his Face, he without being moved, said to
excuse it the Fishermen are wet all over to catch a little Fish. Courtiers
endure any affronts to attain greatness.

Diogenes washing his Cabbage, cried out to him, if thou could wash
Cabbages, thou would not make thy court to great ones And if thou could
court the great ones^ replied he, thou would not amuse thy self with washing
of Cabbages.

Being asked what Philosophy had taught him: To live well with all the World,
said he. Or, to speak freely.

He said, to those that reproved him for treating himself too Magnificently.
That if it were a fault, it would not be practiced at the Feasts of their Gods.
Plato reproving him for the same thing, he asked him, why he did not do it to
Denis the Tyrant? But there is great difference between a Prince and a
Philosopher, and a day of Feasting, and an ordinary Meal.

He said, that the Wise would live well, tho there were no Laws.

Denis the Tyrant, having told him, in a way of reproach, that Philosophers
were often seen at the Gates of great men; But that great men were not seen at
the Doors of Philosophers: That is, said he, because Philosophers know what
they want, but great men do not know it. Another time he said, that it was as
we see Physicians at their Patients Doors.

He said there was as great a difference betwixt a Fool and a Wise man, as
between a Horse that was managed, and another that was not.

One of his Scholars being scandalized to see him go into a naughty House: The
mischief, replied he, is not in going in, but in not being able to come out
again. As much as to say, that nothing is blameable in pleasures, but excess.

He said, that it were better to be poor then Ignorant; because knowledge is a
Treasure far more precious then Riches.

Retiring from one that spoke injuriously of him, and the other crying,
wherefore do thou fly: Because thou art used, said he, to speak ill, and I
am not used to hear it. There is somewhat like this of Cato.

One asking him wherefore he seemed to be more affrighted then others were in a
storm: It is, replied he, because I have more to lose. That is to say, a man of
Worth runs a greater risque then a Fool, because the loss is greater.

He said, to one who vapoured of knowing much, or, of having read much: It is
not those that eat most are the Fattest nor most healthful, but those that have
the best digestion, Or, that eat the best meats.

An Advocate that pleaded for him, having gained his Cause, and saying to him,
by way of reproach: Wherein has Socrates done you Service? In making, replied
he, that all what you have said of me, was truth.

Thus one asking him to what end he would have his Son Study: To the end, said
he, that being set in the Theater, it may not be a Stone upon a Stone. Or, one
block upon another. Some body also telling him, that he could buy a Slave for
the Sum^ he asked to teach his Son: Buy one, said he, and then thou will have a
couple.

He said, he took money of his Friends, not for the need he had of it; but to
teach them thereby what use they were to make of it.

He was reproached for having given money ^o a Lawyer to plead his cause: As I
would do, ^^id he, to a Cook to dress me a dinner. Observe that in former times
the Parties pleade^t themselves.

Denis the Tyrant urging him to speak of somewhat at Table that did not please
him^ It belongs to those that know how to speak, to know when they ought to
speak, said he. The rest is in the Lacedaemonians.

Some who were Bragging of their rare Swimming; that is the Excellency of a
Fish, said he. To teach them not to brag, but of things that de^ave it.

He being reproached, that Socrates took ^o money of his Scholars, as himself
did, ^eplyed, The greatest of Athens are his Purteyors, and I have none but my
servingman.

Being told a Lady possessed him: No, said (...) it is I possess her.

A Gynick asking him by way of reproach, who are those Miscreants that love
perfumes? My self, said he, and the King of Persia; but he cursed their excess
and wantonness that a^^sed so precious a thing.

Being asked, how Socrates Dyed: As I ^ould dye, said he.

His Servant being troubled with some money that he carried: Throw away, said
he, that which troubles thee. To teach us to ridd (...) selves of what we have
too much of.

One time casting his money into the Sea, for fear of some Thieves who were on
board with him: It is better my money should perish said he, then my self.

Denis the Tyrant wondering that he was come to see him: When I wanted wisdom
said he, I applied my self to Socrates; an^ now that I want money, I address my
self to those that have it. Or, I come to receive wh^^ I lack, and to give you
what you need.

Having so we what to request of that Prince he cast himself down at his Feet,
which some admiring: It is, said he, because his Ears an^ in those parts. To
check his pride, who wou^^ have people prostrate themselves before him, to
ob^tain what they desired.

A mean Fellow bemoaning him for that he had lost an Inheritance: I have yet
three mo^^ left me, said he, and thou bemoanest me; an^ thou, who have not one
thy self, do n^^ bewail thy self at all.

A Braggado^io having had the better in dispute betwixt them, he said, the
conquere^ would repose himself more quietly that nigh^ then the conqueror.

He wondered at those that examine an^ consider every thing with great cane
before they buy it; and yet make Friends without ever examining them be
fore-hand.

To excuse himself for being disguised with Drink at a Debauch, On a day of
rejoicing.
he said, that nothin^ could corrupt Virtue.

Having been siezed and carried before man of quality, some asking him, whether
(...) had confidence: When should I be confiden^ said he, if not now, since I
am to speak to Person who is able to understand me, and to now my worth? I have
given it the fairest (...).

He said, that those that Studied particular ^^iences, and neglected
Philosophy; were (...) Penelopes Woers, that made love to the ^^iting Woman,
because they could not ob^^in the Mistress.

So^rates asking from whence so much Rich^^, or Good came to him, He replied:
From ^hence comes so much Evil to you? To let him ^ow he might be wealthy if he
would.

Somebody reproaching him that he neglect^^ his Son, who came from his body: So
do I, ^id he, those Excrements that fall from me: (...) his Son were a Rascal,
he had reason; of not, (...) was one himself.

It being marvelled at, that he had taken ^oney of a Prince, of whom Plato had
on^^ taken a Book: It is because I have want (...) money; said he, and Plato of
Learning.

He told the same Prince he was liberal without any danger, because he always
proffer^d money to Plato, who would take none; whereas he proffered him none,
that would ^ye accepted it.

Having upon a time desired somewhat of (...) the Tyrant; that Prince answered
him, that a wise man had need of nothing. Bestow upon me, said he, what I
crave, and then we (...) see how that is; and having obtained it: (...) is
true, said he, that the wise man wants no^^ing, when he has all he can want.
Wisdom is not hinder but one may want what is necessary ^^bse.

The same telling him that a man who com^ to a Princes Court, becomes a Slave,
wh^^ he was free before, which is a Verse in Euri^^des. He is not a Slave, said
he, if he betru^^ free.

Being at Variance with Aeschins: Ho^ long, said he, shall we be such Sots, as
to gru^^ble at each other? The rest appertains to A^chines, rather then him.

Having been cast ashore by a Tempest on desert Coast, and spying some
Mathemati^^ Schemes upon the Land: Courage, said (...) I see some manks of men
here. Note, (...) Barbarians, whom he treats as beasts, were (...) capable of
those Sciences.

Antisthenes Antisthenes.
said to such as reproached (...) being begot betwixt a free Person and a Slav^
That a man might prove an excellent Wre^^ler, tho he were not bogot by two
Wrestle^.

Being told, that the Wars did ridd them a great many Mi^erable poor people.
But makes many more, then it ridds us of, sa^^ he.

He replied to those that complained he (...) too severe to his Scholars: That
a Physi^^^an was not commendable if too gentle toward his Patients.

To a Fellow, that had been like to be s^^^prized in the act of Adultery, he
said, the for a small matter he might have avoided the great danger. By giving
money for a Woman (...) those days a small matter was the hyre of Wench.

He said, that Flatterers were worse th^^ the Ravens, because those devour none
but the Dead, but the others Fed upon nothing but the living.

He said, that it was a good Fortune, to dye (...) no want; But it is a greater
to dye when one (...) unhappy.

To one that complained he had lost his Writings he said, He should have had
them in ^is Head.

He said, the way to Immortality, was to live well. One may add, and to dye
well.

That envy consumed the envious, as rusts ^ats the Iron.

That States were at the Brink of ruin, ^hen the wicked could not be
distinguished from the good. Or, when they were treated (...).

That Concord betwixt Brethren, was like ^ Wall of Brass.

That we should prize those Riches, which (...) themselves with us in a
Shipwreck. Honesty, Wisdom, etc.

That one was Fair, or handsome, by Nature, (...) dextrons by Instruction.

That great pains was taken to cleanse Corn, but none to clean the heart.

Being asked what he had gained by Philo^ophizing? To be able to entertain my
self, said he. Another replied, to be able to do that ^oluntarily, which others
do by compulsion.

Some body calling out to him at a Feast, ^ing, meaning to speak; Blow, replied
he, ^^aning he should give him the Subject to dis^ourse. This is a comparison
borrowed from such Instruments, as require some Wind ere they can be played on.
Erasmus interprets it otherwise.

He said, the most necessary of all the Sciences, was to unlearn Evil.

That one ought to manifest as much resolution in the suffering of injuries, as
was shown in the enduring of Blows in a Battle. These are warded off
notwithstanding, as much as may be.

He compared Plato to a War-horse, and one day, after he had been well Purged,
he said that now he had no ill humors remaining in him, but Vauity.

Observing such Persons made choice of to be Generals as understood nothing in
War^ He, asked, whether, if they should ordain that Asses should become Horses,
they would prove so in Effect.

He said to those that loved Pleasures, So may my Enemies live. And wished
rather to become a Fool, then Voluptuous. Because (...) Enervates the body and
mind, whereas he place^ felicity in Knowledge and Virtue.

One of his Scholars delaying to pay him^ putting him off till the arrival of a
Ship, h^ led him to a Bakers, and taking a Loaf^ This Fellow, said he, will pay
thee, when hi^ ship is arrived. To let him know, that hunger can give no
credit, or deal upon trust, but must have ready money.

To Scoff at the Athenians for bragging because they were born in that Country;
h^ told them, that the Tortoises, and Snails might say as much.

Out of modesty he called his Scholars, the Disciples of Socrates. To show that
he had drawn his Doctrine from him, or at least to give the more Authority to
his Doctrine.

Being reproached that he was a Phrygian: and so is the mother of the Gods too,
said he.

He said, one must wish their Enemies all sorts of good, excepting courage.
That they might not defend themselves.

That Nobility consisted in Virtue, and Virtue in Action.

That to be wise was sufficient to be happy: That all belonged to him: That
nothing happened to him new: That he obeyed not the Laws, but Reason. That being
the Soul of Law.

That the wicked sought after power without probity; but that the one could not
be without the other but to the ruin of humane kind.

That Virtue is an Inheritance that could not be lost.

That Enemies are more necessary then Friends, because they correct our
errors, whereas the other flatter us. This agrees with another reprehension.

That there is nothing wonderful in the World but Vice.

Plato maintaining that a Prince ought to have no other aim, but the good of
his Subjects: Denis the Tyrant told him, that his discourse smelt of the old
Dotard: And thine, replied he, of the Tyrant.

That Prince having Written to him, that he should speak no more ill of him, he
said, he had not leisure to talk of him.

Reproving a Young man for some folly: Thou reprovest me, said he, for a small
matter; But Custom is no small matter, replied Plato.

He advised those that were given to Drink, to View themselves in a
Lookinglass, when they were Drunk. This has some Analogy with the Lacedemonian
Custom, to show their Drunken Slaves to their Children, to make them abhor it.

He said, that Greatness was the companion of Solitude: Because the pride of
great ones renders them insupportable. Or, unsociable.

He loved not Idleness, and would have all leisure time employed in some useful
thing.

He refused to give Laws to the Cyreneans, because they were too Voluptuous.
Or, too much at their ease, which sort of people are hard to be Governed.

He said, one should measure his discourse according to the Capacity of the
Auditors, and not to his own.

He blamed sorrowing for the Dead as useless, and said, we know not whether
good or evil has betided them.

I trample upon Plato's pride, said Diogenes, treading upon one of his Rich
Carpets: Yes, said Plato, but with greater Pride, Diogenes.

Diogenes one terrible Frosty Morning came into the Marketplace, and exposed
himself naked, to show his Tolerance. Many of the People came about him,
pitying him: Plato observing it, and knowing he did it to be seen, said to the
People as he went by; if you pity him indeed let him alone to himself. To show
be did it to be admired.

Seeing one do an evil act: Am I like to that man, said he?

He would have one exercise the Body with the mind, as inseparable companions.

He said, his Reputation would serve him for a Monument, and that there could
be none more magnificent.

A small Bird pursued by a Hawk, having flown into the Arms, or Bosom, of
Xenocrates, Xenocrates.
he sheltred it with his Cloak: Not to betray, said he, those that fly or have
recourse to our protection.

He rejected a Scholar who would have come to hear him, before he had learned
the Mathematics, as not being ^urnished, as he said, with the Key of
Philosophy. The Mathematics opens the Eyes of the understanding, and ^^rges it
from all matter.

He refused Alexanders's Presents, and having treated his Ambassadors with his
ordinary meal: You may see, said he, that I have no need of them; Because he
was at no great ex^ence.

He said, one had often reason to repent for having spoken; but never for
holding ones peace. And yet it might happen that for want of speaking a man
might neglect, or forfeit his Duty, his Reputation, or his Fortune; but we must
not examine an Apophthegme too soverely.

To avoid making any reply to the Scoffs of a Comedian, he said, That Tragedy
never Vouchsafes to answer Comedy, when she rallies. He compares Philosophy to
Tragedy, because of it is gravity.

Denis the Tyrant telling Plato, some body will take off thy Head: Not before
this, said Xenocrates, pointing to his own. To show he would defend him to the
Death.

He said, one should not carry ones Eyes, nor hands into another House. The
Greek says, Feet.

That one should guard the Ears of Children with no less care, then the
Athletes did their own. To speak nothing but what is good in their hearing. The
Athletes Armed their Ears with somewhat, because a blow on the Temples is
mortal.

He said, that Pride was the great Obstacle to Learning. Because having an
Opinion of their own knowledge, they will learn no more.

Polemon Polemon.
neglecting his words, to keep closer to his matter, faid, that those were
derided who spoke well, and did ill.

When Archelaus Archelaus.
held with any opinion that was propounded to him: He would say, this is my own
Sentiment, and if he were against it, he would say, that is not the Opinion of
such a one, naming somebody, Out of Modesty, as unwilling directly to
contradict another in his own Person.

Treating some Strangers, and finding there was no Bread, when they were
sitting down to Table: How little, said he, does a Philosopher understand
Feasting.

He said, that Poverty, like Ulysses his Country was Barren; yet the Nursery of
brave Youth. Because we are corrupted through plenty.

That there were many diseased, where there were many Physicians, and many
Vices, where there are multiplicity of Laws. Many the like Observations might
be made, in other instances.

It being said, that from other Sects, they passed to that of Epicurus; but
from the Epicureans to no others: That is, because of Cocks one may make
Capons, said he, but of a Capon one can never make a Cock.

Having the Gout, Carneades would needs leave him alone to bemoan himself in
quiet: Stay, said he, for what pain soever my Feet endure, it has not invaded
my heart. As much as to say, he was not concerned at it.

Bion Bion.
said, that none had more care upon them, then those that would take no care.
Because their want of care made them become overwhelmed with business at last.

To dissuade from Marriage, he was wont to say, that an ill favored one made
the Heart ache, and a beautiful one, the Head. By reason of Jealousy.

Speaking of Riches, he said, that we ought not to value things bestowed by
Chance, kept by Vice, and confounded or squandred away by Virtue. By the first
is meant Fortune, the second Covetousness, the third Liberality.

He compared those in high Offices, to men walking on the Ice, who are ever in
danger of falling.

He said, old Age was the Harbor of all Miseries. Either because all mischiefs
flow into it: Or, because it brings Death that puts an end to all. Or, the
safest harbor is the Grave.

That it was a great Misfortune, not to be able to undergo Misfortune.

That Fame was the Mother of Time. Because it makes a man live, after he is
dead.

That the way to Hell was very easy, since it is found out Blindfold. He meant
the Grave.

He called Beauty, other Folks goods, Because one is not properly Beautiful to
ones self, but to others.

He said, Money was the Sinews of business. It is said to be the Sinews of War,
because it cannot be made without money.

That Impiety was the Enemy of Assurance. In Pythagoras, it is said, nothing is
so fearful, as an ill Conscience: This relates to the same.

Being siezed on together with some Thieves, we are lost, cried they, if they
know us: And I, said he, if they do not know us. A good man has as much
interest to be known, as a Knave to be concealed.

Of a Covetous Wretch he said^, he did not possess his Riches: But his Riches
possessed him; and he made use of it, as if it were another, and yet took
care, as if it were his own.

He said, that Prudence was the Eye of Virtue; and served for Valor in Old
men, as Valor for Prudence in the Young. Because the first exempts old men
from danger, and the second brings the others out of it.

That one should Honor old Age, because every one would fain live to it. This
is better expressed then one foregoing, therefore I have set down both.

That one should preserve Friends, however they proved, l^st our judgment be
called in question, or for fear they be changed for worse. In the Greek it is,
that it may not be thought we had ill ones, or that we have cut off good ones.

Of a Melancholy Envious Wretch he said, one cannot well guess whether any ill
be happened to him, or any good to others.

He would have one be assured they have profited in Virtues School, when they
did any good thing, without regarding Praises or Reproof.

Aristotle, Aristotle.
said, that one gained nothing by lying, but the reputation of not being
believed, when one spoke truth.

Giving an Alms to a wicked man, he said, that he did not give to the Person,
but to Nature, whose infirmities requires relief. In the Greek it is, not to
the manners, but to the man; however I find it in others as I have put it.

He said, the mind was Enlightened by learning, as the Eye, by the Air that
surrounds it.

That the Athenians had invented the Law, and Agriculture or Husbandry; but
that they had quitted the one to exercise the other.

That the Roots of Sciences were bitter, but the Fruits were sweet.

That nothing grew old so soon as a good turn.

That he was Socrates's Friend, and a Friend to Plato; but much more to the
truth.

That to be Learned, there were three things requisite; the Genius or Nature,
Study, or Exercise.

That Beauty was a great letter of recommendation: Others have called it, the
gift of Heaven: A Royalty without Guards: A short Tyranny: A precious evil: A
pleasing Deceit, etc.

That Knowledge differed from Ignorance; as life from death, and that study was
an Ornament in good Fortunes, and a help in bad, and a great Treasure for old
Age. I have removed it hither from another place below!

That Friendship was like the Soul of two Bodies.

That some lived, as if they had but a short while to live; and others, as if
they were never to dye: The Prodigal, and the Covetous.

That the question, wherefore one delights to look on a Beautiful Person, was
the question of the Blind.

That Philosophy had taught him to do those things Voluntarily, which others
did by Compulsion.

That the way to make a Progress in the Sciences, And in virtue.
is to cast our Eyes on those that outrun us, not on those that Lagg after us.

That we should Govern our selves toward our Friends, as we would have them
behave themselves toward us.

That one should, neither blame, nor praise, for the one seemed folly, the
other presumption.

That one not ought so much to look on the head of lustful pleasure, as the
tail, Because of the mischiefs that follow.

That to go about to prove things which are evident in themselves, is to light
the Sun with a Candle.

That Envy is the Attendant on Fortune.

That we ought not to regard from what place we came, but what place we were
worthy of; and that dignity did not consist in Possessing of honors, but
deserving them.

He called hope, the dream of a waking man.

Hearing some body abused him in words when he was absent; let him beat me too,
said he, if he please, when I am not near him.

One day, he cried ont: Ha my Friends, there are no Friends! As much as to say,
Friendship is but a mere name in respect of what Philosophers would have it to
be.

Diogenes Diogenes.
importuning Antisthenes that he might be his Scholar; Antisthenes lifted up
his staff to strike him: Strike, said he, provided you will teach me.

He lived in a Tun, under the Portico of a Temple, and said, that no Palace was
more magnificent, and that what was every man's, was no man's.

Seeing Plato eating Olives at a Feast: To eat of those, said he, one need not
have gone into Sicilia. Because they were common in Athens, and a man that
could be satisfied with little, and had no need of making Courtship to great
men.

He was asked where he had ever seen any brave men: No where, replied he; but^
have seen brave Children in Lacedemonia. Because that was a School of Virtue.

He ever praised those who said they would Marry, yet never Married; that they
would go to Sea, yet never sailed; that they would manage Affairs, yet never
undertook them. And derided those Grammarians, who found out Ulysses his
Errors, and neglected their own: Those Musicians that put their Instruments in
Tune; and left their passion in discord: Those Astrologers, that lift their
Eyes always up to Heaven, and do not see, or know, what is at their Feet: Those
Orators that Study to speak well, and not to do well: Those covetous Wretches
that take care to get Wealth and not to make use on it: Those Philosophers, that
Praise the contempt of Greatness, and yet court the Great ones; and those that
often Sacrifice for their health, and sur^eit themselves with Eating at those
Sacrificings^

No body giving Ear to him while he discoursed of Virtue, he fell a Singing,
and every one Crowding to hear him; Great Gods, said he, how much more is Folly
loved, then Wisdom.

He admired that Servants could stand waiting so long behind their Master at a
Feast, and not Snatch away the Meat. Because people talk a long while after
they have filled their Bellies, while the Servant is almost Starved.

When they were selling him; being a Cap^ive: He cried out, who will Purchase a
Ma^ter? And told those, who inquired what he could do, That he could command,
and him that bought him, that he resolved to obey him, (...) great Persons did
their Physician while they were Sick; adding that he that led a Lion, ^as
properly his Slave, and not his Master,

He wondered that one would sill a Kettle with Water before they would buy it;
and ^et would buy a man before they had tried ^im. Or, a Tub with Water, etc.

He said, he always set things a note higher, ^imitation of Mustek Masters,
that the Scho^^^s might endeavor to raise themselves to as ^igh a Pitch as
they could proportionably. As ^^opkeepers ask more then they will sell for.

He said, that all things absolutely necessa^y for life were cheap, and
Super^luous things ^o^t very dear. As for Example a Loaf of ^^ead a Penny, and
a Statue, or a Jewel a vast ^rice. This is much like what Socrates s^id, (...)
nothing was dear but unnecessary things.

He said every thing belongs to the Wise^an, because every things belongs to
the ^ods, and amongst Friends all was common. ^he Wise ma^tbeing, Gods Friend.

Observing one Drink out of his hand, he ^rely away his Cup as a needless thing.

He said, that to live well, one must oppose nature to Law; Reason to passion;
and Vir^^e, or resolution, to Fortune.

Alexander asking him upon a Visit he made, ^^ether he would have any thing, he
told him, he was Richer then himself: Because he wanted nothing, whereas
Alexander not satisfied with his Fathers Kingdom, was going to invade Asia. He
therefore desired only, tha^ he would stand a little, aside that the Su^ might
come to him. Or, that he would no^ keep his Sun from him, and leave him in the
Shade^

One pretending to prove by a Sophistica^ argument that he had Horns upon his
Head^ he made him seel his Forehead: And another denying Local motion, he only
rose up and walked, to oppose the experience of sense to the uncertainty of
Reasoning: Out of the same Principle, an Astrologer discoursing t^ him, about
the Heavens, and their Constella^tions, he asked him; how long is it, since yo^
came from thence?

The Athenians trying to persuade him, to b^ initiated into their Mysteries,
that he mig^^ be one of the first in the next World: It would be Scandalous,
said he, that Agesilaus and ^^paminondas, who were never initiated, should
stand amongst the Crowd, whilst a compan^ of Rascals should preside over them

Plato having defined man, to be a two-Leg^ Animal without Feathers, he Plumed
a Co^ quite bare, and turning it into Plato's Schoo^ said, behold Plato's mau^

Being asked, when one should eat; If the^ be provision, when one pleases; if
not, when one can. He might have said, when hunger oa^ as we drink when we are
Thirsty, for our nature necessities are determined in themselves.

He called Orators Slaves to the people, a^^ ^he Crowns of the Athletes the
Swellings of Honor. Or Excrescences.

To those that asked him, wherefore he car^yed about with him a Lanthorn at
Noon day, (...) replied, I seek a man.

Observing one who was Superstitiously ^^hing himself, to cleanse him from Sin:
O ^ool, said he, do thou believe that Water ^o^e, which cannot so much as
get the Spots ^ct of thy Clothes, can purify thy Soul? In the ^^^k it is
somewhat otherwise.

In derision of men's wishes, he said, that ^^ey make wishes for idle things;
not under^^^^ding what is best for them. Or, for false ^^sures, not minding
true ones.

To those that were terrified with Dreams, ^ said, they should not be troubled
at what ^^y did Sleeping, but what they did waking. (...) not being sinful,
when we have not the use of ^^son.

At the Battle of Cheroned Philip who had ^en him, crying out, he is a spy!
Yes, said (...) of thy Ambition and Vanity.

Alexander having sent a letter to Antipater ^ the Athenians, by one named the
Miserable: (...) one Miserable, said he, that carry's a ^^er from a Miserable
to a Miserable, for ^ Miserable. He esteenied all men unhappy, ^ the wise; and
therefore he named man three (...), when he would name unhappyness three (...).

^^ndiccas having threatened him with Death, ^a^e he would not come to him, he
said, the ^est venomous Creature could do as much, (...) would not go.

He said, that Felicity was exposed to the sight of all the World, and yet was
rare^ found, because other things were mistaken f^^ it. Pleasures, greatness,
Riches.

To a man that made his Servant put on (...) Shoes, he said, you want nothing
to be ha^^ py, but to lose both your hands, that yo^ man may blow your Nose for
you.

Observing those that kept the Public Tre^ sury, were sending away a Thief to
Execu^^ on, he said, the great Theives are goi^ to hang a little one.

A Young Rogue throwing Stones at ^ Gallows; courage, said he, it will be t^
own. Or thou will hit it, at last.

Of a silly Fellow, that wore a Lions sk^ like Hercules, he said, he
dishonored the ^ very of Virtue.

Calisthenes being thought happy, beca^^^ he eat at Alexander's Table: It Is in
the esteem him unhappy, said he, because he (...) wait another man's appetite.

When he took money of any Friend, would say, he took but what was his o^
because amongst Friends every thing is in c^^ mon.

One valuing himself because he could play ^ at an unlawful Game: Thy Praises,
said he, t^ to thy shame, because the better thou pla^ the more guilty art
thou. Or, the bette^ worse at villainous sports.

He called an ignorant Rich man, a Go^ Ass: And told a little spruce Fellow,
complained he was quite tired with busi^ that he acted the Woman in every thing.

Observing that some People had fixed their Eyes upon a beauteous person, he
began to do some Exrravagances; and every one then looking toward him; I
thought you had not been at leisure to observe me, said he.

A Credulous Person threatening him, he said, he would make him tremble by only
placing himself at his left hand. Because that was held ominous, against those
Superstitious credulous Fopps.

To one that sought for Books: When you want Fruit, said he, do you buy painted
ones? As much as to say, he spent his time about the superficies, and did not
come to action, or he was for notional, not for practical knowledge.

He said, he had that obligation to his Banishment, it had made him an honest
man.

Some body saying, his Citizens had Banished him, from their City: And, I, said
he, condemn them to remain there.

He was wont to hold forth his hand to a Statue, to accustom himself, said he,
to be denied.

To a Tyrant, who was inquiring of what Brass he should make use for his own
Statue; he said, take that of Harmodius, and Aristogi^^n, both Tyrannicides.

He said, that Tyrants used their Friends, as men do bags, which are hanged up
when full, and left in a corner when empty.

Looking on a new Married man's house, where over the door was written, let no
evil enter here, he said, this is to send for the Doctor when the Patient is
dead. Because he believed Woman to be the greatest evil in Nature.

He called a craving Covetousness, the Metropolitan of all Vices.

Observing a Prodigal, that had nothing but^ Olives to Supper: If thou had
always dined thus, said he, then mighst have Supped better.

He called Love the Idle-mans past-time, Or business.

He said, that good people were the Images of the Gods.

Being asked, what was the most miserable thing in the World, Want in old Age,
said he^^ Or, old Age without assistance.

He called Flattery a Sweet Poison; and a^ Drunkards belly, an Abyss.

Some body asking him, who should bury him, when he was dead, because he had
no^ Servant to do that Office: He that wants the Place, where my body shall
then Iye on, said he.

To a Young man that asked when he should Marry, he said, It was too soon; and
to an old^ It was too late.

He told a Lady that loved Fine Clothes too well, that it was to no purpose to
Trick herself up so for her husband, and a sin to do it for her Gallant.

He called Modesty, or a blush, Virtues Dye, or Live^y.

Being asked what Bread was best, another man's, said he. Whether we fancy
other people' things above our own, or because variety delights.

One telling him, that other Folks Scoffed at him, he replied, and I at them.
The Greek is, I cannot be Scoffed.

He said, to one that blamed life: That is not to be blamed, but Vice.

He said of the Sciences, they were left off, as people do hunting, because it
is too much Toil and Labor. Or, too hard to attain them.

That the wise man would eat of all things, even the most delicious Food. And
therefore, a Philosopher of his Sect, reproved because he eat boney, said,
do thou believe this was made for Fools?

He said, that such as were Rich, would sooner give to a Beggar, then to a
Philosopher; because they might sooner come to be Beggars, then Philosophers.

Being reproached, The Greek says, coined false Money.
that he had formerly done ill things: That is because I have been like you,
said he, but you will never be like me.

A Lord entreating him to come and see him, he said, he would rather eat Bread
at home, then be Feasted at another man's Table.

Being reproached for eating in the Street: It is because I am hungry in the
Street, answered he.

Observing a comely Person that had forsaken his Debaucheries, to follow his
Studies: Courage, said he, thou will lead men from the love of the Body, to
that of the Soul.

Contemplating the Offerings of such as had escaped Shipwreck: There would be
many more, said he, if the Offerings of all those were here, that made Vows and
Prayers in stormy weather, and yet perished in the Sea.

He said, to a handsome Youth that was going to a Feast, Thou will come back
the worse.

Returning from Lacedemonia to Athens, he said, he went from the men's
apartment, to the Women's. In Greece they were distinct.

Being come back from the Olympic Games, he said, he came from beholding a
great many people and few men.

He compared the things that belonged to Prodigals, to fruits that grow on a
Precipice, which none ever tastes of, but the Ravens. Flatterers.

Upon the Offering that Phryne bestowed on the Temple of Diana, he wrote. Of
the incontinency of the Greeks. She was a Famous Curtezan, who had gotten great
Wealth.

Alexander saying to him, I am Alexander the Great: And I, said he, Diogenes
the Cynick, and gave a pleasant Reason of his name: Because like Dogs, he
Fawned upon those that fed him, and Barked at such as would bestow nothing.

Eating some Fruit from a Tree whereon one had hanged himself, he said, this
way I will purify it.

Some body Praising a man for a Present he had made to Diogenes: It is me, you
ought to praise, said he, for being worthy of it.

Being asked what Countryman he was, he replied, of all Countries, or, a
Citizen of the World; and said, he had gained this advantage by Philosophising,
to be able to Act any part; and be prepared against all the Accidents of
Fortune.

To one that Sacrificed that he might have a Son: add, said he, that it may be
a good one.

He called Beautiful Women, Queens, or the Mistrisses of Kings, because they
make themselves to be obeyed.

The Athenians having ordained that Alexander should be called Bacchus; and I,
said he, Serapis; to Scoff at them, because the name Signifies the Nature,
which cannot be altered.

Being reproached that he frequented Lewd Places; as the Sun shines on the
Dunghill, said he, without soiling it is Beams.

He was twitted that he pretended to be a Philosopher, and knew nothing: I am
the greater Philosopher, said he, for Philosophy consists in making doubts of
all things.

One recommending his Son to him, telling him he was well Born, and well Bred:
If so, replied he, what need has he of me? That being the end of all Study.

He compared those that said well, and did ill, to those Musical Instruments,
who understand not the harmony that is played upon them. Or, themselves make.

Going one day into the Theater, when every body else was coming out, he told
those that wondered at it, that it was to use himself to do quite contrary to
the rest of the World.

To an Effeminate Fellow, he said, Nature had made him a man, and he made
himself a Woman.

He said, to a Fool that tuned a Lyra well, why do not thou endeavor to put
thy Soul in Tune, as well as thy Instrument?

One saying, I am not fit for Philosophy: Why do thou not dye then, replied
he, if thou can not live?

A Proud man despising his own Father: Wherefore, if thou art any thing, do
thou despise the Author of thy being?

Being reproached that he eat at a Tavern: As I go to a Barbers to be Shaved,
said he.

To one that accused him for taking something of a Prince, he said, One must
not refuse the Presents of the Gods. Which is a Verse in Homer.

He said to an old man that was Courting a Young Girl: Art not thou afraid to
be taken at thy word? Or, why do thou court her for a thing, which would be
better for thee not to obtain? The Greek speaks in general, but it is better of
an old man.

To a Young perfumed Gallant, he said, take heed the Perfume does not corrupt
thy Brain. Or, the perfuming thy Body, corrupt thy Soul.

He said, the wicked obey their Passions, as Slaves do their Masters.

Observing an unskilful Archer, he set himself just at the Butt, or mark, at
which some wondering: It is because he is never like to hit it, said he. Or,
that he will sooner hit me any where else, then here.

A good Prince telling him, thou do not fear me: A good Prince, said he, is
not to be feared.

He said, that Liberty was the greatest of all goods, and the Foundation of all
others.

That when he considered Philosophy, the Politics, and Physic, he took man to
be the wisest of all Creatures; but on the other side observing the Diviners,
Astrologers, and Interpreters of Dreams he thought him the most Foolish, Or,
ridiculous.

He admired People fortifyed the Body by Exercises, and did not fortify the
Soul with Virtues; and said, the true Paralyticks were not those that had that
distemper in their Bodies, but their Minds.

Some body having spit in his Face, he made a full stop, and one saying to him.
Thou art in wroth Diogenes; no, replied he, but I am considering whether I
ought to be so, or not.

One very diseased, having wished him a good day: There is no such thing for
thee, said he, whilst thou suffer so much pain and trouble thy whole life
long. Or, in the miserable condition of thy life.

He said, that what was not evil in it self, could not be made evil by any
Circumstance whatever: And therefore he eat, drank, and did all the necessities
of Nature, in the Face of all the World. His Principle was false, for
Circumstances change the Nature of moral actions, and turn a Virtue into Vice.

That there was no Government without Laws, nor Laws without a Government.

That Nobility, Riches, and other the like things, ought to be Banished from
amongst human kind, which serve only for a Cloak to Knavery and Crimes. As
Encouragements to commit them more boldly, and frequently.

That the way to hate a Courtesan, is to see her in private.

That Poverty is the Mother of Sobriety, Temperance, and many other Virtues;
and that none were punished for being poor, but for being wicked.

That to happy People, life was Sweet and Death dreadful; but to a Tyrant, both
the one and the other was insupportable.

That hope was the last thing that dyed in man.

That Poverty is a silent teacher. Which teaches virtue without a word speaking.

That the way to be Revenged of ones Enemies, and to make Envy burst, is to
live in such manner, that none can blame our Actions. He added, that to live
well one must have either very faithful Friends. or very severe Enemies.
Because the first counsel us, and the other keep us ever upon our Guard.

Of a wicked Rascal that spoke ill of him, he said, that it signified nothing:
For as I should not be believed, if I spoke well of thee, so will thou not be
believed in speaking ill of me.

Observing a Scholar very Debauched, he said, his Master ought to be whipped.

He compared Grandees to a Fire, which we must not approach too near, nor stand
too far off from.

He forbad any to bury him, and being told, the Dogs would devour him: Let
them, said lie, set my Staff by me; But you will have no feeling, replied they:
no, matter if they devour me then, said he.

Being quite stupifyed at his Death, he said, that the two Brothers were going
to Embrace each other, meaning Sleep and Death.

Some body telling Stilpon, Stilpon.
that his Daughter was his dishonor: As I am her Glory, replied he. To teach us
that failings are personal.

Demetrius having taken his City: And asking for an Inventory of all that he
had lost: I have lost nothing at all, said he, of what was truly my own. He
meant his knowledge and virtue, the rest being Fortunes.

He said, to Crates, who asked him whether the Gods delighted in the Prayers
and Vows of men: Why do not thou ask me that in Private? It being not safe
to give our opinions of Religion openly. Himself having been called to an
account for saying, that the Minerva made by Phydias was not God. And had not
saved himself, but by affirming, That a Goddess was not a God, upon which
occasion a Libertine inquired pleasantly enough, whether he had searched under
her Petticoats to discover if she were Male or Female, as if what is related of
the Gods were great uncertainties.

Every body running after him at Athens, one told him, they run after thee, as
after an Elephant: No, said he, but as after a man. To hint that nothing was
more rare, and that most have but the shape only.

Antigonus sending to know of Menedemes, Menedemes.
whether he would meet at a Debauch: Remember, said he, that thou art Born Son
of a King. That he might do nothing unworthy his quality.

Some body asking him, whether a Wise man ought to Marry: It is not so
mannerly, replied he, to put that question to a man that is Married as I am.
Because it makes a doubt whether he be wise.

Another saying, it is a great happiness to have what one desires: It Is a much
greater, said he, to desire nothing but what one has. The Greek is, what one
should have.

To one that spoke not well of Prognosticators he said, he spoke ill of the
Dead, the credit of that Foolish People having lain dead a long time.

One that was unfit for study, coming to him to be instructed: Return home
again, said he, for fear of learning nothing, but losing rather what thou
know already. The Greek is a little otherwise.

Theophrastes Theophrastes.
said, of an Orator without judgment; that he was a Horse without a Bridle.

Observing one that was silent: If thou art an able man, said he, thou art to
blame; if not, thou art an able man.

He said, that there was nothing so precious, or dear, as Time, and those that
lost it, were the greatest of all Prodigals.

Crates Crates the Theban.
made a simily of the Pomegranat, which ever has some Kernels that are
Perished: to demonstrate that in the bravest and best Actions, there are some
Failings.

Demetrius Phalerius sending him some Wine he grew very angry, as if Water were
no^ sufficient, and said, he could wish that Bread were as common as Water.

Some Scoffing at his shape, because he was of an ill Figure: Courage, said he,
Crates, thou shall soon find those that Laugh at thee, Envy thy condition, and
begin to loath their own.

He said, one ought to Philosophise till they did not wonder at any thing. The
Greek says, till one took a General of an Army, for an Assdriver.

He added, that such as have none but Flatterers for their Friends, are exposed
more ^^gly in dangers, then a Lamb amongst Wolves, Because they keep them
company only to devour them.

A Prince proffering to rebuild his Patrimony, Some other will perhaps come and
demolish it again, said he.

And added, that his, indeed, was only Poverty, and the contempt of Honor, over
which fortune has no Power; and that the Disciples of Diogenes, like himself,
were not exposed to envy.

He said, that Fasting, or Time, were Remedies against Love, or, if these did
not cure, then Death.

That Philosophy had taught him, to live with little, not fruitlesly troubling
himself, and Laughed at those Grandees, who wast a great deal in Superfluities,
and bestow but little in necessaries: And therefore he left order at his Death,
that his Goods should be distributed amongst the Poor, in case his Children
were addicted to Philosophy, as having no need of it if so inclined.

Metrocles ashamed to appear, because, he had let an escape in good company, he
went to visit him, after he had filled his own Belly with Lupins, Pease flat
and bitter.
which work the same effect as Turnips, and proved to him, both by his own
Example and Precepts, that it was no shame or fault.

The Sister of Metrocles being very desirous to Marry him, he threw off his
Cloak, to let her see lie was Bunch-back'd, and showing his Staff, and his
Knap-Sack: Behold, said he, all the Matrimonial Furniture, or, Jointure; and
finding her persist still in her resolutions notwithstanding all his
Objections, he Married her.

Zenon Zenon.
having consulted the Oracle to know what manner of life he should lead, it was
answered him, that he should take upon him the complexion of the dead; which he
interpreted to be Study, because of the Paleness of most great Scholars.

His Vessel laden with Purple, being bro^en to pieces by Storms at the Port of
Athens, ^eturned Philosopher, and said, that he had ^ot so much suffered by his
Shipwreck in that ^^rt, as he had found a safe Port by his Sipwrack.

A Young man asking him some unhandsome ^ings, he showed him a Looking-glass,
to ^ew whether that were becoming his Age. ^cause Bashfulness is the best
complexion for ^^^th.

Some body telling him that he did not like ^i^thenes, he asked, Whether he
could re^^t any remarkable good Sentence out of his ^ritings? No replied the
other. Then, said he, (...) are an unjust judge not to remember the ^od, as
well as the bad in him. But it is or^uryin men, to take more notice of the
defects, (...) of the perfections of an Author.

Another saying, that the discourse of a ^losopher ought to be short; and his
Sylla^es too, if possible, said he.

To a man that talked too much, he said, ^^at his Ears were turned into Tongue;
and ^^ded, that Nature had bestowed two (...) for one Tongue, to teach us that
we ^old hear twice more then we spoke.

He said, that if a Wise man ought not to ^^re, as some would maintain, then
nothing ^old be more miserable then beautiful Wo^^; that should be Loved only
by Fools.

That the Wisest were not Wise in all things ^other said, at all times; and
that the Wise, ^^re ignorant in the most vulgar things.

That one part of knowledge consisted i^ the being ignorant of such things, as
ought no^ to be known.

He had always in his mouth, that sayin^ of one of the Ancients, Or, talked
Bigg.
who striking one (...) his Scholars that played the Huffe, told him^ that
virtue did not consist in greatness, bu^ greatness in virtue. In like mauner,
said h^ there is nothing more unbecoming then Prid^ especially in Youth, and
censured a You^^ man that talked too haughtily, there bei^^ nothing that Suits
so well with green Year^ as modesty, As well in Speech, as Habit, Ga^ and
Countenance.

He said, a true Friend, was another se^

He compared those that speak well, an^ yet Acted no better then others, to the
Co^ of Alexandria, which was fair to look on, b^ of no more value then other
money.

Against Public Acclamations, he sai^ that an Auditor ought to be so far
transport^ with a curious discourse, as to leave him ^ time, Or, to make one
forget to clap his hands.

A Scholar finding fault that he did not c^^rect him; it is, replied he,
because I disp^ of your Learning.

He said, that a small matter gave the p^^fection to a piece of Work, tho that
perfecti^ were no small matter.

His Servant, crying out, while he was be^ nig him for Pilfering: I was
predestinat^ to Steal, and to be beaten too, said (...)

Observing a Fellow who belonged to Friend of his, all bruised with beating:
If^ said he to that Friend, the marks of thy Fury.

A Young perfumed Gallant being in com^any where he was; who is it that smells
of the Woman here, said he? For that perfums (...) not so becoming to men.

Interrogated how he Governed himself in ^ase of injuries: Like those, replied
he, that ^end back an Ambassador without an answer. As ^she said, without any
Resentment.

Crates pulling him away from Stilpon by the Cloak, he told him, It was by the
Ears one should ^raw a Philosopher away. Or, by Reason and Persuasion.

Some Ambassadors from a Prince, having ^reated him, and admiring he spoke
never a lord; they asked him afterward, what they ^ould tell their Prince of
him: Tell him, ^eplyed he, that you have seen an old man, ^^at could hold his
Tongue at a Feast. As a ^ing difficult enough

A Disciple of Cleanthes Cleanthes.
asking his Master, therefore he drew Water; he told him, draw, I Drink, I
Water my Garden, etc. (...) do every thing to gain virtue, Or, to be^e Wise.

He endured the Raillery, or Scoffs of his ^onarades, and when they called him
Ass, he ^old them, he wore only the Trappings of (...). Such he called his
Doctrine.

To those that reproached him for his Time^osness, he replied, it was that
which kept (...) from running into wickedness. Or, (...) failing.

He preferred Poverty to Riches, and the^ Labors of Husbandry to other
Exercises.

Some body overhearing him chiding himself, said, whom do you talk to? To a
man^ replied he, that is not Wise in his Gray-hairs Or, that wants Wit, in old
Age.

It being said, that Arcesilas Banished all virtue by his discourse: He
Establishes it, said he by his Works. Whereupon Arcesilas hinting that he did
not love Flattery: It is true, sai^ he, that it were a lie to say, that
Arcesila^ said one thing, and did the other.

Being asked what precept he would giv^ his Son, he repeated that saying of
Electra Peace, Peace, March slowly, Intimating Silenc^ and Moderation.

A Lacedemonian saying, that Labor wa^ a good thing; he told him, he came of
good Race. From Hercules whose Labors were extolled.

Imagining a Young man to whom he talke^ did not hear him, he asked him, do
tho^ hear me? And he replying, Yes: Wherefor^ do not I preceive it my self,
said he. To sho^ that we must give some token of our attention,

A Poet saying one day in the Public^ Theater, Those that are hurried with the
fury Cleanthes. He replied nothing, for whi^ the People applauding him, obliged
the P^^et to crave his Pardon; but he said, the Hercules and Bacchus could
endure well enoug^ to be affronted every day in the open^ The^^ter.

He said to a man that was talking to himself; that he should have a care he
did not converse with a wicked Person. Or, thou do not talk, etc.

Some Scoffing at his old Age: It is true, said he, I ought to have departed
long since; but finding my self healthy and vigorous, I stay yet.

He took Sneezing for a Mark of too much tenderness.

Having Fasted some days to cure a distemper; he said, since he must dye once,
and was now so forward on his way, he would go thorough. And so refusing to
eat, tho his distemper were quite gone, he dyed.

Chrysipes Chrysipes.
being reproached, that he did not do like other men, replied, if I had done
like others, I should not have been where I am. A great Philosopher.

Some body enquiring of him, for a Master for his Son, he named himself, at
which the other admiring: If I had known, said he, any one more able then my
self, I would have named him. And indeed, it was said, that if there were no
Chrysipes, there would be no Stoic.

Zenon being discovered of a Conspiracy against a Tyrant; and being put on the
Wrack and examined, Zenon, Elea^s.
accused, or named, all the Tyrants Friends, and after they were all put to
Death, the Tyrant asking him, if there were any other: No, said he, there are
none but thy self, that have deserved to dye.

He called Instrumental music, a consort of Nerves, or rational Guts.

He said, one might know by their Dreams, whether one had made a Progress in
virtue.

Crantor Crantor.
inus his afflictions, often repeated this Verse of Euripides: Alas! Wherefore
alas, nothing is befallen us, but what is humane? As much, as to say; that man
is born to suffer.

Carneades Carneades.
said, that great men Learned nothing perfectly but to mount on Horseback,
because Horses do not Flatter them.

Metrocles Metrocles.
caused all his Writings to be Burnt before he dyed, as Whimsies that deserved
not to be brought to light.

He said, that Knowledge, or Sciences, were acquired by time, other things by
money.

Xenophanes, Xenophanes.
said, one must either not keep company with great men, or else comply with
their humors.

Anaxarques Anaxarques
said, that Justice was Painted standing by Jupiter's side, to show that all
the Actions of Kings were just. Or, rather those of the Deity.

While they were Braying him to Death in a Mortar; he told them, that it was
not Anaxarque they were Braying, but only his outward case, and spit out his
Tongue in the Tyrants Face, when he threatened to cut it out.

Pyrrho Pyrrho.
envied the Felicity of a Hog, which eat during the Tempest, and said, that a
Wise man ought to attain to that Intrepidity. Or fearlesness.

Defending himself one day against a Dog, he said, it was very difficult to
forget the man. Tho he believed every thing indifferent. Or, thought nothing
certain.

Demetrius Demetrius.
having received a great disgrace, if I had known, said he, this had been the
will of the Gods, I would have prevented them.

The Emperor having offered him two hundred Talents: You should not have made
two biddings to tempt me, said he, you should have profer'd your Empire.

Demonax Demonax.
said, of such as neglected their minds, to take care of their Bodies, that
they furnished their House, but never minded the Master.

He added, that men puzzled their Brains to know how the World was made, and
never troubled their Heads to understaud how they were made themselves, which
is a much more useful point of knowledge.

He told the Athenians, who were about to set up the Combats of Gladiators,
that they ought first to pull down the Altar of Mercy.

He said to a Sophister, who asked him, wherefore do thou speak ill of me?
Because thou art concerned at it. The only means to put Calumny to silence, is
to be unconcerned at it. Or, despise it.

One asking him upon what consideration he had taken up Philosophy: upon my
being a man, replied he.

He said, if Divinators could change the order of the Fates, one could not give
them too much; if not, one could not give them too little. Either credit,
respect, or reward.

That Laws were useless, because there was no need of them for good men, and
the bad were not ^made the better by them. They are not really the better; but
are forced to appear so, or counterfeit.

That Friends did more Mischief then Enemies, because one suspected them not.

Epictetes Epictetes.
said, that before we put any thing into a Pot, it ought to be washed, for fear
of spoiling, or losing all, To show we must correct our faults before we
undertake the Sciences. He comprised all Morality in these two words, Sustain
and Abstain; that is to say Strength and Temperance. There is a particular
Treatise of his other Sentiments.

APOPHTHEGMES OF Diverse Persons.
DEmades the Orator, Diverse Persons.
after the Death of Alexander, compared his Army to Polyphemus, who was Blind.

Dining one Day with Phocion, who fed very coursly: how can a man, said he,
that is satisfied with so little, meddle with Public affairs? Or, trouble
himself with the Government.

To a Prince, who did some Actions unworthy of his Dignity, he said, that
Fortune had made him a Prince, and he had made himself a Sordid Fellow.

Antigonus observing a brave Soldier, whom he had caused to be cured of a long
Sickness, to be less daring afterward, and demanding the Reason of it. It is
your self, replied he, that are the cause of it, by having cured me of that
distemper which made me hate my life.

Alexander reproaching a Pirate for his thefts I am a Pirate, said he, because
I have but on^ single Ship: For if I had a good Fleet, should be a Conqueror.

Sulpitius Gallus, having repudiated hi^ Wife, who had walked abroad unveiled
said in his own excuse, that a Woman of reputation ought to be known by none
but he^ Husband.

Some body having heard that Music animated Alexander to Fight; A particular
sort of Musi^k.
It would have been much better for mankind, said he, if it ha^ dispirited him,
Or, cooled his courage.

Themistocles having demanded money o^ those of Andros in the name of two great
Gods, Power and Justice, they excused themselves in the name of two greater,
Poverty and Impossibility.

The Athenians being assembled to Banis^^ one of their Citizens according to
their Ostracisme; a poor man, not knowing Aristides, desires of him to write
the name o^ Aristides down for him, and Aristides inquiring of him the Reason:
Because I am vexed said he, to hear him called the Just. The pride of that
surname displeased him, tho he ha^ deserved it.

A Carthaginian not daring to go to the Romans, because some treacherous thing
had been done to one of their Magistrates; Fear not, said the Consuls, the
Roman Generosity secures thee from all dangers. Or Treachery.

Those of Numantia chiding their Youngmen for Flying upon the approach, of
Scipio, when they had so often beaten the Romans: This is the same Flock,
indeed, said they; but it is not the same Shipherd.

The Poet Simonides, called Poetry a speaking Picture, and Painting, silent
Poetry.

Being asked, whether was better to be Rich, or to be wise: There would be no
difficulty in determining this question, replied he, if we did not so often
find the Wisemen, at the Rich men's Doors.

Pausanias entreating him to give him some good Counsel; Remember, said he,
that thou art man. His Ambition ruining him.

He told such as reproved him for Covetousness, that he would rather leave
something to his kindred, then Beg any thing of his Friends.

He said, the Thessalians were too dull to be cheated by a cunning man.

Hieron asking him, what opinion he had of the Gods: The more I think on it,
said he, the more difficulties I find about it.

An Ambassador from the Athenians speaking a little boldly to Philip of
Macedon; and that Prince threatening to take away his life: My Country, said he,
will give me another that shall be immortal.

One of the Ancients said, that he who had got a good Husband for his Daughter,
had gained a Son; and he that met with a bad one, had lost a Daughter.

Isocrates used to say of two of his Scholars, that the one wanted a Bridle,
the other a Spur: And that himself was like a Whetstone to^ sharpen Knives,
which does not cut it self, tho it gives other things an Edge. Because he had
made the greatest Orators, yet durst not speak in public.

To a Young man that loved to Work, he said, that he heaped up a Treasure for
old Age.

A Talkative Fellow willing to Learn of him he asked him double his usual
Price: Because, said he, I must both teach him to speak, and to hold his Tongue.

A man of much Discourse Braging at Table^ if thou understoodest much, said he,
thou^ would talk but little.

Being told he took too much for teaching, he replied, that he would give twice
as much to have that confidence he wanted.

Anacreon the Poet refusing a Princes money, said, that he would accept no
Presents that should make his head ache; But it troubles the head as much, at
least, to be in want of money, as to have more then one wants.

The Poet Philoxenes said, to such as wondered why he represented Women bad,
whereas Sophocles made them all to be good; that he represented them as they
really were, and Sophocles as they ought to be.

He quitted his Estate in Sicily, because of the Debaucheries of that Island,
and said, he would rather lose his Estate, then his Estate should lose him.

To those that reproached him for his Birth, he said, that was part of his
Glory, to be beholding to none but himself for his Fortune.

Lysimachus asking a Poet what he desired of him; what ever you please, said
he, provided it be not your secret.

Pyrrhus having sent for some Young People, that had spoken ill of him in their
Cups; instead of denying it, they told him; We had said a great deal more, if
we could have had more Wine. They cunningly cast the Liberty they had taken on
the effects of Drunkenness, which obtained their pardon.

A man wrongfully accused before Augustus, said, after he had justified
himself, that another time, he should inquire into nothing that was spoken of
an honest man, but amongst such as were honest.

That Prince having composed some Verses against Pollion, it being admired at,
that he wrote no answer; It is, said Pollion, because it is not safe to write
against ones Master. In the Latin it is, not to soribble against them that can
proscribe.

A Night Bird breaking Augustus's rest, was taken by a Soldier, who having
received no reward for it, as he hoped, I had rather it should live, said he,
and let it go again.

A Veteran who had served him very well in his Wars, coming to recommend a
business of Importance to him, he gave order to one about him to recommend it
for him; my Lord, said the Veteran, when it concerned your Service, I did it
always my self, and never served you by Proxy.

Augustus Seeing a Poet come toward him, who was wont to present him with
Epigrams, made one Extempore and gave it to him. The Poet then, drawing out his
Purse: The reward, said he, is not worthy your Merits, but if I had more, I
would have bestowed it on you. This Action touched Augustus so to the quick,
that he made him a very great^ Present, not taking notice of his confidence,
which was a secret reproach for his covetousness, because he had never
gratifyed him.

An Artisan to whom a Pythagorician owed some money, being dead, the
Pythagorician threw the Sum into his Shop, that he might not accustom himself
to withhold what was another man's due.

The Romans asking an Ambassador, whether, if they should consent to a peace,
it would be lasting: Yes, replied he, if it be just.

Asking another, what he thought his Countrymen deserved for their Revolting:
What ever brave men can deserve, said he, that think themselves worthy of
Liberty.

A man whose Field produced a much better Crop then his Neighbors, being
accused of Witchcraft, brought all his working Utensils into Court, kept in
good repair and order; and pointing to them, said, behold here is all my
Sorcery, and Charms of Witchcraft.

Caesar willing to oblige a man to Disinherit one of his Sons: It is easier for
you, said he, to make me lose them all, then to make me lose one voluntarily.

A wicked man Swearing before the Roman People, the Roman People Swore a^oud,
they would not believe him,

Caesar, the day he was Murdered, said to an Astrologer, who had predicted it
that day; Ha, well, said he, it is come. But it is not yet gone, said he, Or,
ended.

The Emperor Adrian having taken an ill Secretary, it was told him, that with
all his Power, he could not make an able man of a Fool.

Some Body being put to Death unjustly, said, amongst other imprecations
against the Author of his Death; may he not dye, when he desires it.

A Seditious man having caused a good man to be assassinated, when he found
that he was not dead of his Wounds, he Summoned him to Justice, and being asked
what he would accuse him for; for being still alive, replied he.

A Roman Consul threatening a man; I have that will make thee obey, said he: And
I, replied the other, have that will prevent it. Or, exempt me. Meaning he could
kill himself.

A man who was condemned to Death, swearing he dyed innocent: No matter, said
his Adversary, so he do but dye. This made him be absolved.

A General killing his Horse on a day of Battle: If I am overcome, said he, I
shall want none, and if Conqueror; I shall get enough others.

While in a civil War, they were consulting to Banish all the contrary party:
This will only be a means, said one, to bring divisions amongst our selves,
when we shall have no other Enemies left to keep us upon our Guard.

A Prince that had not wept for the Captivity of his Son, nor his Daughter
shedding Tears for his Servant, said in excuse of it, that we seldom bemoan any
but small afflictions, for the great ones are above all complaints, and
expressions.

Euripides reproved by the People in the Public Theater; it is to instruct you
that I write, said he, and not to receive Instructions from you.

Complaining to a Poet that he had been three days about making a few Verses,
and the other telling him, that he made a hundred in a day: And thine, said he,
will last, or, live, but three days, and mine to Eternity.

Menander said to an ill Poet, whom they Crowned in his stead: Do thou not
Blush at thy Victory?

A Poet being asked, wherefore he did not rather choose to be a Barrister, since
the gains was much greater: It is not at the Bar, replied he, as on the Stage,
where we can make the Actors say what we please.

A Musician whose Songs were not acceptable, said to comfort himself, that he
Sung for himself and the Muses: another said, he valued not a Public
approbation, he desired none but his own.

Some body at a combat of Gladiators, see^ng the People cry out, upon a great
Blow a Gladiator had received, tho he that was ^ounded said nothing: Just thus
it goes with ^he World, said he, those that undergo most ^y little, whilst
others make the noise.

A man excessively Fat and corpulent pre^^nting himself to make a Speech to a
ppease ^ Sedition, they all burst out into Laughter: ^^s, said he, you Laugh
because I am so over^own; my Wife is yet much bigger then my ^^lf;
notwithstanding when we agree toge^er, one Bed contains us both very well; ^t
if we fall out, the whole City is not wide ^ough to hold us, This appeased the
Sedition.

A man saved as it were by Miracle from ^eat Peril and Danger, cried out, To
what ^est thou reserve me, Fortune? As distrust^g her very Favors.

It was the saying of a Prince, that we must ^spence with Justice in small
matters, to keep ^ in greater. Or do Justice in great Occasions ^er then in
small.

It has been said of Tyrants, that he that ^s much feared, had much to fear.

An Actor walking on his Tip-toes, to re^esent the great Agamemnon, Or, a man
great and not a great man.
they called out ^ him and said, he made him tall, but not ^eat, and that he
ought to seem pensive, and ^otriving.

Another reproved by the People for not ^eping enough Gravity when he acted the
^t of Hercules; he pulling off his Vizard, ^ld them aloud: You Fools, I am
acting a Furious person. He was to act Hercule^ Furens.

Another acting Oedipus, his companion^ said, you see plainly. As not
counterfeiting ^ blind man well.

One of the Ancients said of the Romans that they did undergo Evil better then
goo^ Fortune, and Labor better then Idleness It may be said of all Nations,
and almost of a mankind.

A Philosopher said, we choose evil, when weary, or cloyed with good. This is
ver^ true in the change of Modes, and many other suc^ like things.

Some body said to a Prince, who made the^ drive away the Flies, That those
were not the worst. He meant Court Flies, or Flatterers.

One said, the best Fish were those that di^ not smell too much of Fish. As
much may ^ said of wild Fowl; the best, or most conven^^ent Navigation, is
along the Shore and the pleasantest walking, near a River^ side.

A Prince pretending to find fault with some Pictures in a Painters House, the
Painte^ told him, he made the very Prentices Laug^ at him, whereas they had a
respect for him while he said nothing.

Another having Painted a Bunch of Grape^ so well, that the Birds came to peck
at the^ His Antagonists to outvie him, Painted Curtain so dexterously, that
the first comin^ to see it, went to draw aside the Curtain tha^ ^e might see
the Picture, and finding his mistake, acknowledged he was out done: For, ^^id
he, I only cheated the Birds, and you ^ave cheated, or deceived a man.

Another time having Painted a little Boy ^arrying a Bunch of Grapes in his
hand, and ^he Birds coming to eat them likewise, he said, ^^e Grapes were
livelier Painted then the Boy; ^therwise the Birds ^durst not have come so ^ear.

Some admiring to see vast quantities of use^ss Household Stuff at a Rich man's;
he said, ^man is Rich only in these, viz. in super^^us things.

An excellent Sculptor having made two ^^gures, one according to the Rules of
Art, ^e other by the directions of the people; ^e first being most admired, he
said, that it ^s the people had made the other. As done by ^or directions.

Some body going about to deface a Tyrants ^^ure; he was told, that he ought to
make ^ar against the Tyrant, and not against the ^inter.

Some certain Soldiers being terrified at ^ne Prodigies: Leave the
consideration of ^ose things to the Astrologers and Sooth^ers, and their
Captain, and do your du^.

A General that had done eminent service ^ his Prince, being Poisoned upon
Suspici^^, or the like occasions; said, this we get ^ great men, in serving
them. Thus many ^e Perished through jealousy, or fear.

One ^aking some Security or Writing from a Frien^ to whom he lent money; said,
the is not because I would demand it as a Credito^ but as a Friend.

A man that looked very ill, showing h^ Doctor a Sore-finger: It Is not there
thy ^ stemper resides, go and make thy Will.

One seeing a man fallen into a Well, a^ asking him how he came in there: That
not the question, replied he, but how to g^ out.

A Physician having cured a Patient, and t^ Patient another time using the same
Medici^ without effect; It Is, because it was not I, sa^ he, that prescribed it.
It was to let him kno^ that it is not enough to know the Receipt, but ^ Season
and other Circumstances to apply it.

It is said, that the worst of all Winds, a^ those which uncover us. Because
they take way that which was intended our Shelter.

A Lady meeting her Gallant who had s^saken her, after he had given many Rich
p^sents: Why, said she, will you lose all you h^ bestowed on me?

A Woman wooed by her Husbands Murth^er, agreed to Marry him, at which some
miring: It is to revenge my self the more curely, said she, and Poisoned him.

One about to Marry a handsome Woman but ill spoken of, he was told, That in
M^^riage, he was not only to consult with Eyes, but with his Ears also.

One having preferred her Brothers saf^ before either that of her Son, or her
Husba^ said, that she might have other Sons, or Husbands; but no Brothers.

An old Woman wishing long life to a Tyrant, said to such as wondered at it; It
is for fear lest a worst succeed him. Old Women are great observers of
Proverbs, and this is one, seldom comes a better.

A Sick man fretting at every thing, was told, the things you find fault with
are not ill. It is your self. One of the Ancients speaking of Voluptuous
pleasures said, we taste Honey only with the tip of the Finger.

A Gouty Fellow said, he had Hands and feet only to endure pain. Because he
would not use them.

Some endeavoring to make a man in trouble Laugh: The afflicted, said he, are
not to be comforted but with Tears.

An Orator that had not considence to speak in public, said to excuse himself,
that he was not afraid of others, but of himself.

A Grammarian told an Emperor, who spoke a word that was not Current, or in
use, that he might make a mere Stranger a free Denizon, but not a Syllable with
all the power he had.

A Widow excusing her self because she did not Marry again, said her first
Husband was still living in her Heart.

One of the Ancients said, that he that hated Vice, hated men, because they are
vicious. It is also said for another Reason, that we must hate the Vice, but
not the Person, Because man ought not to be the object of our hatred; but the
defects he is^ subject to, from which being purged, he becomes m^st justly an
object of our Love.

A Lady being asked, which was the best complexion: she replied, Bashfulness.
Or a Blushing Modesty.

One of the Ancients speaking of the times he lived in, said, that formerly
they reckoned but Seven wise men; but now every one thought himself one.

Another speaking of Riches said, that it cost but little to heap up much, and
much to heap uplittle. Because when one has nothing it is hard to bear up any
thing; but when one has some, it is casie to make it more.

Papinian told an Emperor, who would needs oblige him to defend a Parricide,
that it was easie^ to make one, then to defend one.

One of the Ancients compared the Dialectick Art, to the Spiders Webs, wherein
there is much curiosity, and little solidity. Another compared it to the
Cray-sish where there is more picking then meat. Another to a Thorn bush, which
pricks where ever one touches. Another to sish full of little Bones.

One told a Treacherous Fellow, he was glad to be his Enemy, because his Malice
was only against his Friends.

Another said, that one must no more expect a kindness from a usurer, then an
answer from a dead man.

Of one who was Prodigal of his favors, it was said, that of Virgins, he had
made them Courtezans.

A Prince told his people, who desired Bloody Spectacles that he did not
delight in Cruelty.

Xantippe said of Socrates, that he always returned home, with the same
Countenance as when he went forth.

A Blind man said, that the night had it is Pleasures, as well as the day.

One of the Ancients said, that good sense was the part, or perfection, of an
Orator, and that the voice and gesture were to be reserved for the Comedian.

A Father being reproached that he expended too much in the Education of his
Children, said, he would give all he was worth to make them more virtuous then
they were.

When some would have engaged a Philosopher to talk at a Merry, or rather a
Drunken Meeting, he said, it was not time then to tell what he knew, nor did he
know, what it was then time to tell.

Pompey telling a Young man that had undertaken a Friend of his, that nothing
remained now but to attack him: Give me security, said he, that you will not
trouble the Commonwealth, and I will do it.

A Consul haranguing with great Acclamations against the Power of Pompey: You
do well, said he, to applaud what I say at present, for very shortly you will
not have so much Liberty.

A man whose Friend had refused him some unjust favor, telling him he would
have nothing to do with his Friendship, since it was useless to him: Nor I with
thine, replied he, since it cannot be maintained without injustice.

Polybius advised Scipio the African never to go out of the Court, The younger.
till he had obliged some Body; which he called making a Friend.

A Captain coming to demand the Consulship for Augustus, said to the Senate who
refused it: Here is that which will give it him, laying his Hand on his Sword.
Others name Caesar, instead of Augustus.

A Tarentine observing the Citizens make merry while they were threatened with a
Fierce War: said, courage, good people, you do well to rejoice now, for in a
short time you will have no cause for it. As the Proverb has it, a short life
and a merry.

Cineas asked Pyrrhus, who was every day undertaking some new enterprise, what
he would do in the end: Then I will rest my self, or live at ease, said he:
What hinders thee, replied Cineas from doing that now?

A General boasted otherwhile, that he had never made his Citizens put on
Mourning. It cannot be said so of Pericles, but must be some other.

The Son of Papyrius earnestly importuned by his Mother, to tell her what had
been done in the Senate: They debated, said he, whether a Husband should be
allowed several Wives, or the Woman several Husbands. He was applauded by the
Senate for finding out this seigned Story, to avoid discovering the secrets of
that Council, tho it begot a great deal of trouble in Rome.

One of the Ancients said, that, Wine was the Looking-glass of a man, Because
it shows us the very bottom of his Soul.

A Musician used to make such people Sing before his Scholars as had no skill
in Music: To teach them, said he, how they must not Sing.

Some body pursued by his Son to the very Door: Or beaten.
Stop, said he, for I pursued my Father no further.

An Orator being asked, what Master he had had to teach him his Art, replied,
the Bar. A great Painter said, the people.

A Prince told his Mother, who would engage him to do some unjust thing: She
made him pay dearly the nine Months she had carried him in her Womb.

Another to whom all things succeeded well: It is your best time now to dye,
said some, while the Splendour of your life is not clouded with any Misfortune.
And therefore the Ancients held, that such as were beloved by the Gods dyed
Young.

As some were advising to break down a Bridge that the Enemy might not escape:
You ought rather to make two, said others, that they may retreat the sooner.
The decision of this question deponds upon the consideration of their forces.

To a Father who bemoaned his Son too much; it was said, if you did not weep
for him before he was Born, why do you weep so now he is dead.

One of the Ancients said of Thieves, that the little ones lay in Chains,
whilst the great ones triumphed in all abundance.

The People absolving a Criminal whom Cato had condemned, said in excuse, that
he was punished enough by having displeased Cato. Or, having his ill will.

That Roman being asked what usury was: A long Death, replied he.

Of cruel and jealous Princes it has been said, they might rid themselves
indeed, of all whom they suspected, yet could they never destroy their
Successor.

It being marvelled at that a man should bestow his Daughter on his greatest
Enemy: It is to be revenged on him, said he.

Of a man who Counterfeited the Fool to save himself: It was said, he had been
one, if he had not done so. Or, a Fool, if he had not played the Fool.

A Prince refusing to give Battle, because the Omens were not favorable: Do
you give more Faith, said an old Captain, to the Intrails of a Victime, then to
my Experience?

To another, who upon the same account, made a doubt whether he should keep an
important Place, or not, it was said: If he be a Soothsayer he should surrender
it, and keep, or, defend it, if a Statesman.

A wicked Fellow affirming something with an Oath, they cried out, That they
were not to give credit to Oaths, but to Honesty, Or, Probity.

A Prince being commended for several virtues, which he wanted: I will do all I
can possible, said he, that you may not prove Liars.

The Ancients said, that to blame any one before his Face, was Impudence; and
to Praise him was Flattery.

A Philosopher weeping at the loss of a Son: It is Nature, said he, that sheds
these Tears, not I.

The City of Athens was wont to be compared to a Curtezan, whom some are
content to entertain a while but none loves to Marry withal.

One repeating to another some injurious things that had been spoken of him:
They had not been told to thee, said he, but that they knew thou would tell
them again.

A Lady of quality, said, she had gained her Husbands favor by doing what
pleased him, and concealing what did not please her self.

Some admiring a man did not cause himself to be sent to the other World, in
his extreme old Age, (as the Custom then was) it is because, said he, I have no
cause to complain of it.

Another said, it was fit to continue life, till one found by Experience, that
Death was more to be desired then life. The Ancients made away themselves in
their afflictions.

Another said, that there was nothing more Charming then Beauty: Nor nothing
that decayed so soon.

Caesar leading Cato Prisoner, a Senator cried out, that he would rather be a
Prisoner with Cato, then at Liberty with Caesar, and followed him to Prison.

A Philosopher said, he did not abstain from Lusts, out of Temperance, but of
Pleasure. Because of the smarts that attends it.

It is said of old, of the Mul^iplicity of Laws, they are Marks of the
Corruption of a Nation; as the great numbers of Physicians are a sign of many
diseases.

A Judge refusing a Present from a Party: Said, it was, for fear he should show
himself either ungrateful or unjust.

A Philosopher being asked, wherefore he had not Learned Music: We do not
find, said he, Jupiter either Singing, or playing on a Fidle, like the other
Petty Deities in the Poets.

Another said of the Grandees, that they do all they can to lose the use of
their Feet and Hands, which is the greatest Curse that can befall a man. Because
they make their Servants put on their Shoes and Clothes, Ride in Coaches: and
in a word do all they can by the Ministry of others, while their own Laziness
destroys, or weakens them to inability of their natural Functions.

Some Body complaining one day of his mean Fortune, he was told, that whoever
was not content with a little, would never be satisfied with a great deal.

A Philosopher accused for corrupting such as frequented him. It is, said he,
because they take that with their left hand, which I present them with my right.

A Learned man submitting in a point disputed with an Emperor; said, it is not
safe contending with one, that has twenty Legions at his command.

A Young Prince being admonished to forbear Fighting, or, making War, till he
were of riper Age: I am afraid, said he, I should lose my courage with my Youth.

A Conqueror sending to demand money of some to Purchase their Peace: They
answered, that they had no money to buy a peace withal; but they had Swords to
defend it.

The wife of Phocion dressing her self very modestly, said, her Husband was her
Ornament and Bravery.

One of the Ancients said, that it were easy for one to become Rich, if one
would become wicked. This alludes to the Proverb, poor and honest.

Another said, upon the consideration of Plato, and Denis the Tyrant, whereof
the one went into Sicily, and the other was a Schoolmaster in Corinth: That it
was not so strange to see a Prince dethroned as a Philosopher ambitious, viz. A
true Philosopher.

A Courtier said, he profer'd his Service to all the World, but performed it
only to that that deserved it.

An ill man, holding his peace in company; it was told him, that a wicked, or
Treacherous man's silence, was more to be apprehended then his discourse.

It being inquired of an old man, how long he had lived; But a little time,
replied he, and many years. It being no living, while we live not in ease.

Another being asked whether he desired to dye, said, it is good to be always
ready to quit a falling House.

One restored from a long Sickness, said, it was but troublesome to begin the
Journey again, which must be gone early or late. Or, a trouble to return back
when he was almost at his Iournies end.

A Statesman was wont to say, that in Counsel it was not so proper to debate
what should be done as what could be done. Or, not what was in their wills but
in their power.

Philip of Macedon being at Variance both with his Wife, and his Son, and
asking of Demarat, whether the Greeks were in unity? It becomes you well, said
he my Lord, to iniquire after the disorders of the Grecians, whilst you are at
discord in your own Family.

When some would have persuaded a Prince to resent an Offense committed by a
Drunkard: Would you be angry, said he, with a man for running against you, if
his Eyes were Blindfolded?

A Prince driven from his Throne, cried out, that he never knew his Friends
from his Enemies, till it was out of his Power to do them either good, or harm!

A Declamator having made a very tedious discourse of the Art of War before an
Eminent Captain, the Captain told him, he had never seen any thing so insolent.
It being very impertinent to speak of those things before a man that
understands them better then our selves.

An Orator said of an arrogant Fellow that showed but little respect toward
his Prince: He thinks it reflects on his Honor to stand in fear of his
Sovereign.

One of the Ancients said, that those that love too much, were more troublesome
to those they loved, then those that hated them.

Some wondering at the great Poverty of an Orator; it is because I know the Art
of speaking, better then the Art of getting said he. Or, I have Studied to
speak well, not to grow Rich.

A great Captain fallen from his Seat just before the beginning of a Battle:
Courage, said he, it is a Sign we ought to be sitting no longer, but stand up to
our business.

A great talker that disturbed every man's Brain in the Company, was told, that
he would certainly speak less if it were but as much trouble to him to prate
so, as to them to hear it.

A Courtier who had heaped up a great deal of Wealth, said, it was by returning
Thanks, when they did him injury.

A Prince inquiring of a Philosopher how he should do to reign a long time: You
must, said he, do good to all and trust but few.

As Nero was putting to Death the Consederates in a conspiracy against him,
asking an Officer of his Guards, wherefore he joined with them: Because, said
he, I could find no other remedy against your Crimes. Another told him, I loved
you while you deserved it; But I hate you since you are become a Particide,
Buffoon, Coachman, and Incendiaty. He delighted in driving a Chariot, and set
Rome on fire.

A Prince that was too easy having succeeded a Tyrant, it was said, that it
was a great unhappyness to live under the rule of a Prince where nothing was
permitted; but it was not a less to live under the reign of one that permitted
every thing.

A Prince admiring the curious Household Stuff of a Private Person; and asking
him where he had gotten all that: When we enter under another Roof, said he,
we should be Deaf, and Dumb.

A man much applauded for an Act of Valor, said, he had only lent his Arm, and
the Deities had done the Execution.

A Philosopher said, we ought to desire of the Gods, only, Beauty, Health and
Wealth; for the rest we might attain our selves.

The General of an Army taking the Treasure out of a Temple to carry on his
War: I will restore it, said he, out of the Enemies Spoil.

One of the Ancients whose Books were ordered to be Burnt, said, they should
Burn me too, for I have them all by Heart.

A Philosopher accused for not Sacrificing; said, I did not believe the Gods
had any need of Sacrifices.

The same coming to a man who was inconsolable for the Death of one, told him,
that he would undertake to raise him to life again, if he could name him any
three Persons that had not thus mourned for some Body.

A Person desiring to lead him to the Temple to give thanks to the Gods for
restoring his Son to Health: Do thou think, said he, that the Gods cannot
hear us from this place.

A Roman Senator willing to revenge himself of a Cynick, that had Scoffed at
him for having his Hair pulled off by the Roots: For his punishment, said the
same Philosopher, you should do the same to him.

One of the Ancients said of the Italians, that they resembled Slaves, of which
the subtillest ^^e ever the worst.

APOPHTHEGMES Purely PLEASANT.
SEmiramis having caused to be Written on her Tomb, Pleasant.
that whoever of her Successors was in want of Money, should find some there:
Darius having broken it open, found nothing but these words, Without an
extraordinary covetous desire, thou could never have been so base as to rake
into the Sepulcher of the dead. I have taken this for ^ raillery, as well as
Erasmus, for although there were some kind of Sacrilege in this Act, yet it was
the custom of the Eastern Princes to enclose their treasure in their Monuments.

Sardanapalus wrote on his Tomb, that h^^ carried away nothing with him but
what ha^ served him in his pleasures. Others say ther^ was, Drink, Eat, and be
Merry, for all the rest (...) nothing.

Cressus said to Cambyses, who would needs equal himself to his Father, that he
had not yet got a Son like him.

The Young Cyrus inviting the Lacedaemonians to quit the alliance they had with
his Brother, to join with him, amongst other Reasons alleged, that he Drank
better then his Brother, as a token of his Strength and Courage.

A King of Thrace said, that he thought himself no better then his Groom, when
he was not employed in a War.

Another bestowing a Lion upon one that had presented him a Panther, told him
he had ^o Reason to complain because he was paid in his own Coin. But a Private
man bestows more then he gives a Lion, then a Prince that gives a ^^nther.
Which I have added to make an Apophthegme, of what was but an Example.

The Athenians having out of respect made ^im a Citizen of Athons, he made them
Citizens of Thrace, to return them, said he like ^or like. As valuing his
Country, as much a^ ^hey did theirs.

The Ambassadors of Philip of Macedon meet^^g with Silure who was currying his
Horse, King of Thrace.
(...), dressing him, he asked them whether their ^aster did the like; and they
answering, No^ ^ow then, said he, dares he be so bold as to ^^tack me?
Aristotle proves very clearly, that (...) most brutish are not the most brave,
as this ^^barian believed.

Having heard a most excellent Musician, he ^^d, the neighing of his Horse
pleased him (...) better.

A Grammarian who undertook to find fault with Homer, complaining one day to
Hieron that he had not enough to keep a serving man: How can you have the
confidence, said he, to reprove a man, that maintains above ten thousand
People, so long after he is dead?

Denis the Tyrants Subjects, complaining that he employed a wicked man: That
is, to make them hate some body else more then my self, said he: It might have
been said, that is t^ turn their hate from me, upon him; but in that i^
contained a kind of instruction, which belongs no^ to this place which is only
for pleasant sayings.

The Ambassadors of Corinth having refused his Presents: You are greatly to
blame, said he, to deprive your selves voluntarily of the only good thing that
Tyranny can do.

A Musician complaining that he gave hi^ nothing, after many great promises he
ha^ made: Then we are quit, said he, for you have Flattered and tickled my Ears
with a Swee^ sound, and I have fed you with fair promises.

Having the Wind favorable at his retur^ from Locrida, where he had Plundered
the Temple of Proserpine: You see, said he, ho^ the Gods favor the
Sacrilegious. I have put this amongst the pleasant ones, because the Reason is
not solid.

He took away the Mantle of Gold which Hieron had sent to Jupiter Olympus, and
t^ excuse it said, that it was too cold for Wi^ter, and too heavy for Summer.

He likewise cut off Esculapius his Golden Beard upon a pretense, that it was
not decent the Son should wear a Beard, the Father having none. For Apollo was
Painted Beardless.

Taking away the Offerings that were for the Gods, he said, that being so good
as they were, one might make use of their goodness, and accomodate ones self
with those things that they stood not in need of.

The Inhabitants of a City besieged by Agathocles, crying out to him from their
Walls: Where will thou find money to pay thy Army, poor Potter? He replied
without any passion, In your Purses: And having gained the place, Hereafter,
said he, if you affront me, I will not call you to account, but your Masters.
For he sold them in chains, as they did Slaves.

Those of Ithaca complaining that his Matiners had Stolen some Flocks upon
their coasts: We have, said he, more Reason to complain, Ulysses. Polypheme.
for your Prince not satisfied to take away our Sheep, put out our Shepherds
Eye.

An impertinent Barber asking of Archelaus, King of Macedon.
how he would be Trimmed; In silence, said he, Or without Babbling. One of the
Beauties of an Apophthegme is to hit, where one does not expect.

Some body at a Feast having made Courtship to a Lady somewhat aged, who had
been illustrious for her Beauty; says that Prince, some Beauties, are handsome
in their very Autumn. As the setting Sun, looks often times Rich and Glorious.

A Musician impatient because he gave him nothing, turned his looks toward him
and Sung these words: Thou love money, bred in the base Earth: but he without
concern, replied: Do thou think strange that I should love it, when thy self
does even pine to Death to get a little from me?

After the Battle of Cheronea, Philip of Macedon having set at Liberty all the
Athenian Prisoners; they farther desiring all their Equipage: I think, said he,
they believe we did not Fight in earnest.

Having received a wound near his Throat, and his Chyrurgeon beging every day
some new grant of him: Take all thou desire, said he, for thou hold me by
the Throat. I have accomodated it to our Language.

Upon a difference between two Rascals, who mutually accused each other of
great Crimes^ he Banished the one, and condemned the other to run after him.

Another making complaint to him, that the Macedonians called him Traitor, as
indeed he was; it is because they are so unmannerly, said he, as to call things
by their true names.

A Person to whom he had some obligation, denying to accept of any thing from
him: Do not, said he, deprive me of the quality of invincible, by endeavoring
to vanquish me in Courtesies.

Going one day to Dine abroad, with more company then the entertainer expected;
when he observed him to be a little surprised: Let us, said he, reserve a
corner, for the second Course, which made them leave some remainders.

Alexander's Army being ranged in Battalia, the Generals came and asked this
Prince whether there were any thing Omitted: Nothing, said he, unless it be to
send for Barbers to shave the Soldiers because their Beards are too long. I
have taken it for a raillery, for they have something else to do in a Battle
then to take an Enemy by the Beard. Tho it might be done at a wrestling.

Seeing a very little Fire made for him in the Winter: Bring, said he, more
Wood, or Incense. That he might either warm himself, or offer Sacrifice.

When he proclaimed himself every where to be the Son of Jupiter, his Mother
wrote him word, he should forbear setting her at odds with Juno. Or, of making
Juno jealous.

Antigonus would by no means suffer the Athenians to give the Freedom of a
Citizen to one of his people: For fear, said he, left I being in wrath, should
strike a Citizen of Athens.

Being reproached that he fled after a defeat: No, said he, but I am seeking an
advantage, which lies yonder behind.

Interrupting one that was making a speech, to ask him some question: And
finding it put him out: Is it because that was not in your speech, said he.

Being informed that they had Lodged his Son at a Widows who had three
handsome Daughters; Let them remove his Lodging, said he, for he is too hard
beset.

Some body that was short sighted having Written a letter to him in very large
Characters: A Blind man, said he, might read this.

Desiring a Lady of Pleasure to Sing, who was somewhat stricken in years, he
asked another Lady, what she thought of her: That she is old, replied she. He
inquired of the Music, she answered of the Person.

Having surprised the Poet Anaxagoras while he was Frying of a Conger: Do
thou believe, said he, that Homer busied himself in Frying of a Conger when he
was Writing the Acts of Agamemnon? And do you believe, replied he, that
Agamemnon had nothing else to do but to inquire whether any one were Frying a
Conger in his Camp?

Demetrius after the taking the City of Megara, having told St^lpon the
Philosopher, that he left him his City free, or, at Liberty: True, said he, for
you have carried away all the Slaves.

Lysimachus reproaching Demetrius his love to a Curtezan, he replied, that she
was Chaster then his Penelope. Because his Wife had an ill report.

The same showing that Princes Ambassadors, some Bruises he had received in a
Combat against Lions: Demetrius, said they, has other-guess hurts, by the
Bitings of a mad Beast. They meant a Curtezan he entertained, who used to Bite
him, when she made much of him.

Antipater said of the Orator Demades, already grown old, that nothing more was
left of him, then of the Beasts that were Sacrificed, the Tongue and the Belly.
Prating, and Gormandizing.

A Philosopher reproached for bis Banishment, said, it was because his Country
could bear him no longer, no more then Semele could Bacchus.

Hannibal having drawn the General of the Romans into an Ambuscade, from which
Fabius who was encamped upon the higher Grounds having rescued him: I believed,
said he, that Storm which was gathering on the Hills would break down upon us
at last in the Plains.

Fabius having retaken Tarentum after the same manner that he gained it: Rome,
said he, has it is Hannibal also?

A Roman who had lost Tarentum, boasting that he had been the occasion of it is
retaking: It is true, said Fabius, for if thou had never lost it, it could
not have been retaken.

Crassus already old, reproaching Dejotarus, that he began to build very late:
And thou likewise, Captain, said he, to make War. These two being very aged,
the one founded a new City, and the other marched against the Parthians.

One who had disdained Themistocles in his Youth, seeking after him when he had
laid those thoughts aside: We have both of us repented, said he, but too late.

Speaking of his Son, who was yet but a Child, he said, that he alone had more
Power then all Greece; for my Mother, said he, does any thing that he will
have; I do every thing my Mother desires; the Athenians do what ever I require;
and the Grecians, all the Athenians ever have a mind to.

An old Lady reproaching Pericles for somewhat, he made her no other reply;
but, That it did not become an old Woman to pretend to beauty.

Of the Island AEgina he said, that it was a Thorn in the Eye of the Port of
Athens. Lying too near them.

Alcibiades understanding that he was Laboring to give in his accounts; why
does he not rather endeavor to give no account, said he. This is but jesting,
for a man of honor is bound to give an account of what he has received.

Chabrias accused of Treason jointly with Iphicrates, did not forbear Eating
and Drinking daily in Prison, for which Iphicrates rebuking him: Had thou,
said he, rather dye Fasting, then after Dinner?

One of Phooion's Friends, being condemned with him, desiring himself to take
the Dose of Poison first: I must not deny him at Death, said he, whom I never
denied any thing in all my life.

There being too little of the Poison left, because of the great number of
condemned Persons, he made Signs to one of his Friends to lay out the money it
would require to have more: Because one cannot so much as dye, said he, at
Athens without expense. Or, for nothing.

Epaminondas said of a Soldier too much overgrown, that he would need two or
three Bucklers to guard his Belly.

An Ambassador reproaching the Thebans with Oedipus, and the Argiens with
Orestes: It is true, said Epaminondas, they were Born amongst us, but we drove
them hence, and you entertained them.

The Lacedaemonians extending to great length, their accusations against the
Thehans: How I am troubled, said he, that for our sakes you have left off
speaking Laconically. That is to say, briefly.

A Prince promising the Athenians to help them to meat for little or nothing,
because he intended to Plunder the Enemy of all: And we will boil it for
nothing, said Epaminondas, for we will set Fire all about.

One that was not very Fortunate in his own Marriage, advising him to Marry: In
that, replied he, I shall hardly take your Counsel, Or, follow your Example. He
added, That a single life gave this advantage, that a man might be the Bolder
to dye for his Countries Service.

Of a man that dyed during the time the Battle of Leuctres was fought, he said,
he wondered he could have leisure to dye in a time when they had so much to do.

Demosthenes, said to a Thief who objected that his discourses smelt of the
Lamp, Meaning Study and Labor: I know, said he, that you are vexed that I keep
my light in the Night time. And to a Prodigal Fellow who had consumed all his
own Estate, and found the same fault: You know that Oil has cost you more then
ever it did me. Meaning his Gaming by Night, as the other Studied.

When Archias who had been a Comedian, advised him, to forsake the Temple
wherein he had Sheltred himself, and put himself into Antipater's hands: He
told him, he was no better an Orator, then he had been a Comedian; and that as
he had never satisfied him in one of his Qualities, he should never persuade
him in the other.

Romulus having Drank but very little at a Feast, it was told him, that if
every Body should Drink like him, the Wine would be very cheap. Not at all,
said he; but very dear, for every one would Drink his fill. Or, as much as he
could.

Flaminius having sent to demand an enterview of the Macedonian King; and that
Prince refusing to come without Hostages, as pretending he was alone, whereas
the Romans had many other Generals; I know he is left alone, said he. Because
he had put all his Relations to Death.

He said of Philopemen, who had great numbers of Horse and Foot, but had no
money to pay them, that he had Arms and Legs, but wanted a Belly. That which
made this raillery the more pleasant, was that Philopemen resembled such a
Figure.

Cato the Censor making a harangue against the Luxury of great Tables, said, He
knew not how to make himself be understood, or heard, because the Belly has no
Ears. He added, that he marvelled how a City could subsist, where they sold a
Fish for more then an Ox.

Jesting upon a Debauched Person, who had eaten up all his Inheritance which
lay along the shore, he said, That he was more unmerciful then the very Sea,
because he had swallowed what that had spared.

It being debated with much heat in the Senate, whether they should send back
all the old People that had been Banished, to their own Cities: To much
purpose, said he, we make all this bustle to know whether these old people
should be Buried at their own homes, or in Italy. And when Polybius propounded
the Restoring them also to their dignities: He does, said he, like Ulysses who
would needs return into the Cy^lops Den, to recover his Girdle. Which
intimated, that in contending for all, he would venture to lose all.

A Roman who had Written their History in Greek, desiring pardon if he had not
succeeded well in a foreign Language: That were but fit, said he, if thou
had Written it by a decree of the Amphictyons. As who should say, by an act
of Parliament.

Of three Ambassadors, whereof one was a Fool, and the two others had the Gout,
he said, that Embassy had neither Feet, nor Hands, nor Head. It is a little
changed for the better in our Language.

He said, to evade making Friendship with a voluptuous Person, that he could
not love those whose appetite was Sharper then their Wits; Or, whose taste was
more exquisite then their judgments.

A Magistrate suspected to have Poisoned some body having propounded a most
pernicious Law: I cannot tell which is of greatest advantage, said he, either
to Drink of the Liquor thou give, or to consent to the Laws thou propoundest.

One that carried a piece of Timber which hit him, crying out afterward,
Beware: What, said he, do thou mean to hit me again? Or have thou any thing
else to be aware of?

Of a Woman who had a lewd Debauched Son, he said, that when ever she Prayed
for him, she made imprecations against the Common Wealth.

He said, he did not love those Soldiers who used their Hands more then their
Feet on a March, and their Feet more then their Hands in a Fight, and Snored
louder then they talked. Thieves Cowards and Gormandizers.

A Soldier that had not been in the Battle, saying he stayed behind to guard
the Camp: I do not love, said Scipio, Young Scipio.
those that are so overcareful of their Baggage. Or, I do not love so much
Circumspection in a Soldier.

One of his Friends putting in for the Consulship, having waited a long time
for Pompey, who had promised them his assistance, they were informed that he
made a party for himself: What do we stay here, said he, for a Piper, as if we
expected the assistance of the Gods, and not of men? Pompey was reported (...)
be the Son of a Piper, and in their Service of ^he Gods they made use of
Flutes, or Flageo^^tts.

Speaking against their Stoves and Baths, he said, None but Horses wanted
Washing and Currying, because they could not rub down themselves.

When he was Censor he condemned a Young man to pay a Fine, for making a Pasty
that represented Carthage while it was yet besieged: Because, said he, thou
have deprived me of the Honor of taking Carthage first.

A wicked Fellow asking the Proconsul Sce^ola for an employment in his
Province: Thou do not know, replied he, what thou desire; for where can
thou find a better place to become Rich then in Rome, where all sorts of Vice
and Corruption are in their height?

Sylla giving some money to an ill Poet, who presented him with some Verses of
his aching: Told him, when he was returning thanks; It Is on Condition that you
scribble no more.

Pompey angry at Cicero's railleries: I would, said he, that he were still our
Enemy, that he might fear us at least, if he did not respect us.

As they were Boasting of Caesar's Power, he said, that only by stamping with
his Foot on the Ground, he could raise up Legions.

Cato observing in a cause the railleries which Cicero made against the
Stoics: We have, said he, a pleasant Consul. Hinting, that it was not becoming
a Consul to make such railleries. But Cicero was not there in quality of a
Consul, but of an Advocate, and endeavored to invalidate the Authority of
Cato, who was of that Sect, which by this means he did effect.

Some body having reported, that a wicked Villain was dead; Cicero said, when
the News proved false; the Devil take the Liars.

It being afterward doubted again; well, there is yet good hopes, said he; and
the Freeman of him who was said to be dead, coming with the news that all was
well, why then he is certainly dead, replied he.

A Fellow whom they judged to be an Affrican, telling him that he did not hear
him: And yet your Ears are bored, said he. The Affricans wore Earrings.

An ignorant Lawyer, who came in as a witness, being asked a question, and
answering, that he knew nothing of it: Thou think perhaps, said he, we are
speaking of Law.

Metellus reproaching him, that he had lost more by his witnessing against him,
then ever he had saved by his pleading for him: That is, said he, because I
have more truth then Eloquence. Or, my integrity is greater then my Eloquence.

The same asking him, by way of reproach for the meanness of his Birth, who is
thy Father? He replied, it would be harder to ^^^ess who is thine, Because his
Mother had an (...) Fame. These two Apophthegmes are elsewhere, (...) only by
allegation.

Hortensius the Orator, saying to him by ^ay of answer to some of his
Railleries, That (...) understood no Enigma's: And yet you ^ave a Sphinx at
home, replied he. To twit (...) how he had been corrupted with Bribes, amongst
^^ich was a Sphinx of great value. This was a ^^^nster that propounded Riddles.

Of a man who had very ill favored Chil^^en, he said, that he Married in
despite of Ve^^^, and the Graces. In the Original, it is said ^pollo.

Some body who had made his escape out of ^^sars Camp, having left his Horse
behind to ^^oid Discovery: He has taken more care of (...) Horse, then
himself, said he. As believ^^^ Pompey to be the weaker.

After the Battle of Pharsalia, some body say^^, there were Seven Eagles left
yet: That ^ere well enough, said he, if we were to Fight against the Mag-pies.

Being reproached in Pompey's Camp, that ^e was come very late: There is
nothing rea^^^ yet, said he. He made an allusion to Feast^^^, and reproved
those people for their negli^^nce.

Pompey having bestowed the Freedom, or ^^ght of a Citizen to a Gaul: He gives,
said (...), Rome to a stranger, and cannot restore (...) to the Romans.

Of good old Wine, lie said, it bears it is ^^ge very well.

His Son in Law, who was very little, wearing a long Sword, he said, his Son in
Law was tied to his Sword. Or, hung upon his Sword.

Observing a great Stone Statue of his Brothers head, who was likewise a very
little man, the half of my Brother, said he, is bigger then the whole.

His Daughter walking very quick, and his Son vere Slow; my Daughter walks like
a man, said he, my Son like a Woman.

Milon's accuser, crying out, at what Hour, Sirs, do you think, that Clodius
was killed, he replied, late. It was done indeed at a late Hour, but his
meaning was, he should have been killed sooner.

Some body pretending to be Younger then indeed he was, when we two studied
together, said he, you were not then, it seems, in the World.

A Stranger telling him, that he was come to Caesar to obtain the liberty of
his Country (...) Get ours restored to us, said he, when thou have obtained
thine.

To a Lady somewhat old, who would not own to be above thirty Years, he said,
she owned the same about thirty Years ago.

To such as reproached an old man for taking a Young Girl: She will be Woman
tomorrow, said he.

He told an Ancient Orator, who alway^ began with an excuse for his Age, that
h^ would never want an Exordium.

A Gowty Person telling him, that he began to walk farther and farther every
day: It (...) because the days grow longer, said he.

Being grown thirsty whilst he was indea^ouring to be chosen Consul, he was
constrained to Drink in the Public Marketplace; when spying the Censor; let
us hide our selves, said he, that he may not see us Drink Water. Because he was
a Drunkard.

Going to visit Vatinius, who was Consul but one day; let us make have, said
he, before his Consulship expires.

He also said, that he was very vigilant, not having slept so much as once, in
all the time of his Consulship.

Some making much of a Fool upon his becoming Rich, he asked, whether any one
had (...) queathed him an estate of Wisdom.

Having bought a Horse, which he had openly declared he would not purchase, he
said to excuse it, that it was to get the better Pennyworth.

Excusing himself for having commended an (...) man; he said, it was to
Exercise his Wit. As some have praised the plague, or a Fever.

Crassus having been to sup with him, as a token of his reconciliation, he said
of another who was willing to be reconciled afterward: Is it because he would
Sup with me likewise?

An old Senator having said, That so long as he lived such a business should
not be done: We have not long to wait, said he.

Some body that had been accused for Poisoning his Father at a Feast, happening
to threaten him. He told him, that I would rather thou should threaten me,
then treat me however,

Some body taxing Cato for Drinking al^ Night long: Thou forgetest, said he,
that i^ is after he has Gamed all the day. To destroy^ or contradict one lie
with another more incre^dible.

Caesar alleging in his defense of Nicomede the obligations he had to him:
Every on^ knows well enough the reciprocal engagement you have to each other,
said he. Caesar wa^ accused for having prostituted himself to tha^ Prince.

He said of such as stole from the Writing of the Ancients, that they did like
thos^ Thieves that changed the handle of their Neighbors Pot, that it might
not be known again. So they disguised their theft, to make the things pass for
their own compositions.

Caesar said of Sylla, that he could not read because he deposed the
Dictatorship. On^ must know how to read to be able t^ dictate.

Augustus having blotted out a Tragedy of Ajax, which he had composed, and did
not pleas^ him, it being afterward inquired of him what his Ajax did; he has
stabbed himself through the Body with a Sponge, said he. Alluding to the Death
of Ajax: We might more properly say with a Pen, but the old way of Writin^ was
rubbed out with a Spung.

One presenting a Petition to him and trembling: One would think, said he, that
it were a piece of bread thon were presenting to an Elephant. Because men are
afraid to go near them

One of his Courtiers telling him, there is a report abroad that you intend to
bestow a gift upon me: Have a care you do not believe it, replied he.

A man whom he had set aside from an ill employment, entreating he would bestow
the like Present upon him, as he had done upon others, to take off the disgrace
he received: Say, that thou have had it, replied he, and I will not deny it.

A Young Debauched Fellow whom he turned out of his Camp, saying to him, what
shall I tell my Father, when he sees me return home again? Tell him, thou
could not comply with my humor, said he.

A Coward showing him an Honorable wound, Have a care thou do not look back,
said he, the next time thou runnest away.

At the end of a Meal, where he had not been too well treated: I did not know,
said he, that we were such good Friends, Or so Familiar. We use to say, treat
you as a Friend, when we do it slightly.

Looking on some purple which was somewhat too dark, and the Merchant telling
him, that it should be looked upon in a better light: Must I walk always in the
Sunshine, said he, when I put it on?

His Nomenclator, who was a little defective in his memory, going into the
Marketplace: Take, said he, some letters of recommendation, for thou know
no body. These Nomenclators made profession of knowing every body, that so one
might call them by their name^ when they saluted or met them: Which was then ^
Mark of Honor, and at present of contempt.

A man much in debt, dying very old: Le^ them buy his Bed for me, said he, it
must be a very good one, since he could Sleep so quietly in it, under such
Circumstances.

Those of Terragone coming to Congratulate him because a Branch of Palm-Tre^
sprung up upon an Altar consecrated to him It is a sign, said he, you have not
often mad^ Fires there on.

Some body having made an Idle request to him, and he observing another that
stood ready to make a Second much like it. I shall no sooner grant what you
desire, said he, but shall grant what he requests likewise.

Being informed that Herod had put his own Son to Death, he said, he would
rather have been his Hog, then his Son. The Jews killed no Swine, because they
eat none.

Being displeased that his Daughter kept only Young People about, her and
pointing to Livia, who had none but such as were Aged Those were Young, replied
she, when she too^ them, but are grown old in her Service.

Tiberius having seized on the Empire, and out of Modesty refusing the proffers
made him by the Senate, it was said, that others could hardly make good what
they promised, and he, hardly promised what he made good^

A Grammarian whom he went to Rhodes to visit, having put him off for Seven
days, he did no more, but only put him off for Seven Years; when he was
Emperor, and the other came to visit him.

Caligula called Livia, a Gowned Ulysses, and said, that Virgil had no Wit, and
less Learning; and that the Style of Titus Livius was too much extended, and
too much neglected, and his Language relished of the Peasant.

A Senator going from Rome into the Country to be Purged, and desiring a
Prolongation of time, he said, They ought to Bleed him, since Purging was
ineffectual, and so caused him to be put to Death.

A Judge falling asleep at a Public Sale, and nodding often with his Head, he
awarded him to pay an immense Sum for somewhat that was set up to be sold,
saying he made a Sign with his Head that he would have it at that price
demanded for it.

When he Gamed he would Swear at every turn, that his Chance was so and so, and
then Sweep up the stakes: and going forth one day torefresh himself, whilst
another played his hand; he confiscated the Estates of a couple of Wealthy
Citizens, and at his return, said, that he had never played a better Game.

Clodius complaining of his Poverty, whilst those about him took from every one
with both Hands, he was told, that if he would but go Snips with his Officers
he might soon become Rich enough.

Nero having Poisoned him with a Dish of Mushrums^ did ever after call that
Meat, the Food of the Gods. Because they consecrated the Emperors after their
Death.

Having sent some to kill a Consul while he was at a Feast; when he heard how
much the rest of the company were affrighted, he said, they had paid dearly for
the Honor of Eating with a Consul.

Being necessitated in his Flight to Drink some Water out of a Brackish Slough,
he said, that that was none of Nero's Ptisane.

Vespasian informed by one certain Florus, Au, and O, make two different
pronunciations in the Latin.
that he must Pronounce the O in the Latin words very open, or broad, the next
Morning he saluted him by the name of Flaurus.

Having made a Present to a Lady that was Enamored with him, his Treasurer
asking how he should put that down in his account: Put it, replied he, to a
Lady that thought me Handsome. This is the more pleasant because he was very
homely and ill favored, looking like one that sits crowding on a Close-stool
when too much bound, which occasioned that repartee from a jeaster whom he
would needs engage to say something: I'l^ stay only till you have done your
business. Or, emptied your Belly.

One that waited upon him, requesting a Favor from him, for one whom he called
his Brother, he took this man aside, and inquiring what he was to give him for
doing it, would needs have the Money himself, and then told his Servant, go and
look thee out another Brother, for this is mine.

Another time observing his Coachman would needs stop and new Shoe his Mules,
to give one an opportunity to speak with him; He afterward asked him, how much
he had got for his shooing, and would needs have the one half of it.

A certain City having designed, or decreed to set up a Statue for him, he told
the Deputies that were sent to him about it: I will have it here, said he,
holding forth his Hand, and made them pay down the money that was for it.

The Sepulcher of the Emperors opening of it self, and a Comet appearing, he
said in a jeasting way, that the first Prodigy concerned a Lady who was now
forgotten, being of the Caesar's Family; and the other the Parthian King, who
wore long Hair.

Dying he said, he felt he was becoming a God: As much as to say he was dying,
because they consecrated Emperors after Death.

Domitian said of one that tricked up himself; I wish I were as Handsome as
such a one takes himself to be.

An old man having caused his Gray-locks to be dyed of a Youthful Color,
requesting somewhat of the Emperor Adrian: I have already refused your Father
the same thing, said he. Alexander told another, That he should ^^ther dye his
Knees. Or, mend them.
that he should rather change his Knees then his Hair. Because old Age is most
defective there, and his Father added, that such men were not to be trusted,
and set such a one aside from his place of Judicature.

Knowing that a Woman had made some Secret reproaches to her Husband, and
hinting somewhat of it to him when he saw him: Has my Wife written the same
things to you, as she did to me, replied the Husband?

A Grecian whom Marcus Aurelius had sent for to be his Sons Tutor, saying to
him at his first approach, that it was the Scholars part to go to the Master,
and not the Masters to come to the Scholar: It has proved an easier thing for
this man, said the Emperor, to come from Greece into Italy then from the City
of Rome, to the Princes Palace. To tax his pride.

Heliogabulus called cowardly Senators, long Gowned Slaves.

He said, the price of Meats served to whet the appetite, and could not relish,
or eat of such Food as was cheap.

Some condemning his great expense, when he was but a private man: I will be
the sole Heir to my self, said he. Meaning he would devour all and leave
nothing.

A Prince who Murdered his Brother, having taken the name of Parthique
afterward, it was said, he ought to take that of Getique rather. Because his
Brothers name was Geta.

Another said of an unskilful Archer, that it was difficult to shoot so often
at the White, and never hit it, and Crowned him for it, as an Extraordinary
Archer.

A Physician having given too strong a Dose to Agesilaus, and saying to him,
fear nothing: If I had feared any thing, replied he, I would not have taken it,
As much as to say, it was enough to kill him.

A Lowse having bitten him while he was Sacrificing, he killed it openly before
all that were present, saying, we must cut a Traitors Throat even at the very
Altar.

Wondering to see that in Asia their Beams of Timber were Square, for it was
prohibited to Build Elegantly in Lacedemon, he asked whether they grew so in
that Country, and being told, No: If they grew Square, said he, without doubt
you would make them round.

He said, that he was driven out of that Province by thirty thousand Archers,
because with so many pieces of Gold which had that stamp, the chief of the
Grecians were corrupted, or bribed to make War upon his Country.

Brasidas having received a wound thorough his Buckler, said, that his Buckler
had betrayed him.

Leonidas bid hismen, at the Battle of Thermopyles, make have to dine, that
they might go to Supper in the other World.

Agis said to one who was bragging that Philip of Macedon would hinder the
Lacedaemonians well enough from coming into Greece, that they had Room enough in
their own Country to walk about in. Or, take the Air in.

Some body showing a Lacedemonian a draught of a Battle, wherein the Athenians
were Victors, and saying, they were very brave men, he replied, Yes, in
painting.

A Lacedemonian having seen them do all manner of things at Athens; being asked
what news, upon his return, he replied, that he had observed nothing dishonest
amongst them, As much as to say, that every thing was allowed of there.

A Persian having Debauched with money Demarat's Mistress, and telling him he
had stolen her from him: Not so, replied he, you bought her.

When some would have obliged Xenocrates to have begun his dicourse again upon
the coming in of Eudamidas; if he had newly eaten his Supper, said Eudamidas,
would you persuade him to eat again presently?

It was admired at, that when every one besides would needs make War against
the Athenians, he alone advised they should not: It is because I would not have
them lie, said he. The Lacedomonians not having indeed strength enough to do it.

Pausanias being informed at Delos, that they suffered neither Women to lie in,
nor Burials to be there: How is it then your Patrimony, or, native Country,
said he, if you can neither be Born, nor buried there?

An ignorant Physician being come to see another Pausanias, and telling him, he
ailed nothing: That is because you are not my Doctor, replied he.

Denis the Tyrant having sent Lysander two Garments for his Daughter, with
order to take which he liked best: She can choose better for her self, said he,
and so took both.

One asking a question of a Lacedemonian, who answered him at Random, and the
other saying it could not be so: Wherefore do thou ask me then, replied the
Lacedemonian, since you know it so well?

A Servant being Chastized, crying out, it was against my will that I did it:
And so it is against thy will that thou art beaten, replied the Master.

A Lacedemonian to whom they sold some hard Almonds extremely dear, inquired,
whether the Stones were cheap in that Country.

Another seeing a Nightingale stripped of it is Feathers, said, it had more Voice
then Flesh. Or, more sound, then S^dility. Vox et prae -- etc.

Some body Surprising a Gallant with his Wife who was very ill favored:
Nothing compelled you to it, said he. As much as to say, himself was obliged to
kiss her, as being his own Wife.

One that had Clubbed, or crooked Feet, having lost his Shoes, prayed God, that
for a Punishment they might fit his Feet that stole them.

Accusing a Lacedemon for lying, he said, it was a Token, or Mark, of his
Liberty: Thus it was said of a Grandee, that he would not be a Slave to his
word.

Anacarsis being told that a Vessel wherein he was embarked, was but four
Inches thick: We are, said he, within four Inches of Death, then.

Xantippe perceiving Socrates took no notice of her Brawling and Scolding,
threw a Pis-Pot on his Head: I thought, said he, we should have Rain after so
much Thunder.

Another time having received a Cuff on the Ear: Says he, a man does not know
certainly at what time he ought to put his Headpiece on. Some attribute this to
Diogenes.

Denis the Tyrant having sent three Curtezans to Aristippus to choose which he
liked, he kept them all three, saying, that Paris got no good by his choosing
out one, and displeasing the other two.

A Curtezan challenging him that he had got her with Child: This is, as if one
should roll her self upon a Thorn Bush, and say, it was this Thorn that Pricked
me.

Some body blaming him for loving of Wh^res; would you rather sail in a new
Ship, said he, then venture upon one that had made Voyages before.

Antisthenes said, that he drove away his Scholars with a Silver rod, because
he took a great deal of Money for teaching.

Xenocrates said, that the Danaides would have been much more punished in the
other World, if they were to draw their Pitchers full, then empty. Because they
would weigh much heavier.

A great talker requesting Bion to undertake his defense: I will do it, replied
he, provided you will not speak a word. As if that were impossible.

Another asking Aristotle, whether he had not tired him: No, said he, for I did
not mind what you spoke. Or, did not hearken to your idle talk.

Diogenes carrying some Figs, met with Plato, and said, you may have Liberty to
taste of them; the other eating greedily: I said taste them, and not devour them,
added he.

After a tedious and wearysome reading, seeing the end of the Book; Courage,
says he, I spy the Land.

As others perfumed their Heads, he perfumed his Feet, and said to those that
wondered at it: It is because smells ascend always.

He said, it was better to be a Lamb, then a Child at Miletus; because the
Children there went naked, and the Lambs wore a soft woolen Garment.

When they would have had him send for his Servant again, Or, run after him.
who had left him: It were strange, replied he, if that my man should be better
able to shift without me, then I without him.

A Son of a Whore throwing Stones in the Street: Have a care, said he, thou
do not hit thy Father.

Some body having hit him with a piece of Timber, cried; have a care: he
replied, have a care thy self, and struck him. The rest is before in Cato.

A wicked Fellow having written over his Door, Let no evil thing enter here:
Which way does the Master get in, said he.

A Flat-nosed Fellow showing him his House, which was very neat and clean, he
having occasion to spit, did it in his Face, as the Fowlest part of the House.
Others attribute this to Aristippus, but he was too gentile to commic such a
sordid action.

Some body coming out of a Tavern, stepped in again upon sight of him ^ Do
thou Earth again, said he? There are some render it, thou Sinkest deeper still.

Giving one a Fish to carry, who desired to be his Scholar, and that making him
retire out of shame, says he, a Fish has destroyed our Friendship. Others say
a Gammon.

Espying a Mouse feeding under his Table^ What, said he, Diogenes has his
Parasites too?

One asking him, what he would take to let him strike him a Box on the Ear: He
replied, a Helmet. Some add, that having received a blow, he said, I did not
think that I had a Headpiece on: To show he did not resent the injury, unless
it must be interpreted as is before in Socrates.

A Banker having rubbed him soundly with a Cudgel, and telling him, that there
was three thousand Dragmes for him in Bank, (which was the Fine for such an
Offense;) he bangs the Banker lustily again, and tells him, now keep your money
for your self. Or, take your money again.

A little Effeminate Person coming to ask him somewhat; I shall give thee no
answer, said he, till I know whether thou be Male, or Female.

Some body throwing Bones to him, as if he had been a Dog, he presently Pissed
upon them, to Act, like a Dog, said he, in all things.

Observing a House belonging to a famous Drunkard was to be sold: I ever
believed, said he, that with much Drinking he would Swallow his House at last.
Or, that the House so full of Drink would Spue out it is owner in the end.

Finding a Bath that was very Muddy, what Bath do they go into, said he, when
they come out of this?

He praised an Artist that every one besides ^ound fault with: Because, said
he, tho he be such a bungler, yet he rather chooses to work (...), then to steal.

An ill Musician he named, the Cock; because when he crows, every one rises. To
be gone.

The Stupidity of the Athletiques proceed^d, as he said, from their eating
nothing but Beef and Pork. They used strong meats to ^ake them sturdy.

When he craved an Alms, his word was, continue your good will, or begin your
ap^entiship.

Of a Centaur that was very ill painted, he asked, Which is the greater
Monster, the Beast, (...) the Picture?

He said, that Gold looked Pale; because so ^any lay in ambush for it.

Meeting a Thief in a Fair, it is, said he, (...) steal or to buy?

Observing a Tree where some Women ^ere hanged; there are few, said he, that
^ears so well.

To the Inhabitants of a little City, which ^^d great Gates, he said, Shut up
the Gates, ^^st the City run out.

Of an ill Wrestler who was turned Physici^^, he said, It was to be revenged of
those ^^at had thrown him in the Dirt.

A Prodigal Fellow admiring he should Beg (...) a great Sum of money of him,
he told him, ^ was because lie feared that in a short time he would have
nothing left to bestow.

Beholding in a School many Pictures of the Muses, and but a few Scholars,
says he to the Master, With the help of the Gods, you have a good Company
here. The Muses being Goddesses.

His Master inquiring of him how he would be Buried; With my face downwards,
replied ^he, for when the World is turned tepsy turvy, then I shall lie right
again. The Macedonians were then growing Masters.

Being asked what Dog he was, he replied, a Mad-dog when I am hungry; and a lap
Dog, when my Belly is full.

Being blamed for throwing some Wine out of his Glass. I had rather throw that
down, said he, then that should throw me down, Because there was too much, and
he feared i^ would make him Drunk.

Observing the Corinthians employed in Fortifying themselves upon the
apprehension of a Siege, he sets himself to removing his Tub ^ That he might
not be the only idle Person said he, in so busy a place.

The Painters of old being wont to Write over their Pictures, By the hand of
such a one Crates being wounded on his Forehead, pu^ a Scrowl on with this
Writing; By the hand o^ Nicodromus, which was his name that hurt him.

Zenon said of a drowzy Scholar, that his Father begot him when he was Drunk.

Wondering that his Severity was ever moderated when he sat at meals; the
bitteres things lose their strength when they are Soaked in Liquor, said he.
Or, iningled.

A Pyrat taken upon the Coast of Laconia, said in his defense, that he was
constrained to take what he needed, because no body would bestow it on him.

A Lady giving a little Dog to a Philosopher to carry that was a Stoic, it was
said, that of a Stoic, he was become a Cynical Philosopher. Cynick, is derived
from the Greek word, which signifies a Dog.

All being in Debauch at the Marriage of Silius and Messilina, they asked one
who was gotten up into a Tree, what he saw? I see, replied he, a storm toward
Ostia, To intimate the Emperor was hastening from thence to take vengeance.
Valens.


Some body asking what an Hydropick whom he saw standing in the Sun, was doing,
it was answered, that he was heating of Water.

Another admiring to see the Children of a famous Painter so ill-favored: It
(...) replied some, because he Paints by daylight and gets his Children in the
Dark.

A Judge being asked whether a Pine Apple were comprehended within the Gender
of other Apples: Yes, replied he, if it be ^hrown at Vatinius his Head, Observe
he had ^irbidden to throw any thing but Apples at one ^mother.

Some body being blamed for letting some White appear in his mourning Clothes:
Tho I do go clad in mourning, replied he, ^et I need not refrain eating of
White Bread.

Fabius who triumphed after Caesar, causing Wooden Figures, to be carried in
his Triumph, of all his places he had taken; whereas Caesar's were all made of
Ivory; it was said that these Wooden ones, were only the Cases of Caesar's Ivory
ones.

A Gladiator having missed his blow against his Enemy; It was, said some,
Because he intends to take him alive.

Augustus saying to a Citizen who was eating at a Public show: When I have a
mind to eat, I go home: That is, because you are not afraid of losing your
place, replied he^

That Prince reproving one for having confounded all his Estate: I thought,
said he, i^ was my own. And a man may spend his own i^ he please.

One brought into a Court of Justice for having spoken injurous words against a
Person of Quality, who was of the Epicurea Sect; his Advocate said no more in
his defense; but, that he was a Stoic. Because those Philosophers Railed at
each other Eternally^

Another reproached as for a Crime, that he was forbidden by a great man to
enter h^ Doors: Well, said he, can any body accu^^ me that I have been there
since. This is o^ Grace of an Apophthegme; to turn the question to another
sense.

A Lawyer saying to one that reviled him wherefore do thou bark at me?
Because spy a Thief, replied he. Or, smell a Thie^

An ignorant Lawyer, asking whether he ha^ not moved the Judges to compassion:
Yes, sai^ they, you made them pity you?

An ill Play Master, saying to excuse him, that he lived very poorly: Treat your
self better, and pay me, said his Creditor.

One desiring to borrow a Cloak of a man who lived in a house where it Rained
in every Room for want of repair: I cannot lend you my Cloak said he, because I
have business within Doors. Another replied, if it does not Rain; you want no
Cloak; if it does I shall need it my self.

An indulgent Husband pretending to Sleep after Dinner, to give the more
liberty to a Person of quality to be free with his Wife: Perceiving a
Serving-man take that opportunity to steal some Plate. Hold, Friend, said he, I
do not Sleep for every one.

Some body telling another that he had bought a Lamprey in Sicily five Foot
long: Yes, said he, they are so large in those Countries, that they use them
like Girdles to go round the Wast. This is one slight in an Apophthegme as I
have formerly showed, to elude one lie with a greater.

It was said, of a Witty, but a deformed man, that his Wisdom was ill lodged.

A Judge being asked his opinion concerning a Person that had been taken in the
Act of Adultery: I find him a little too lazy said he. This is attributed to
Cicero.

A Fellow showing a great wound in his Thigh, which his Antagonist had given
him: I wonder, said his Counsel, he did not hit you in the Belly. To turn it
into Raillery by an Ambiguous answer. His Belly being much bigger then his
Thigh.

A Fugitive Slave being pursued, and sheltring himself in a Galley: It is
there, said his Master, I would have thee be:

A Thessalian said, the greatest Rogues in his Country, never went to the Wars,
To hint that Idleness is the Mother of all mischief.

One that carried a thing concealed, being asked what he had there: I conceal
it, said he, on purpose it may not be discovered.

A Jeaster said, that the Effigies of all the good Princes, might be easily
graved upon one Finger-ring.

A Roman Lord meeting a stranger that resembled him very much, asked him, if
his Mother had never been in Rome: No, replied he, but my Father has been
often there. It it one of the chief excellencies of an Apophthegme, to catch a
man in the same snare he laid for you.

A Domestic Servant to a Prince threatening a man in his presence and the
Prince saying nothing: The Servants words do not Fright me, said he; but the
Masters silence.

A Husband who had Married an ill favored Wife, for some considerable
advantage, having Surprised her with a Gallant: What Reason was there to give
me so much, said he, since another does kiss you for nothing?

A man Dreaming that he had seen an Egg lying in some corner of his House, was
advised by a Figure-Flinger to dig there upon an assurance he should find
hidden Treasure: This having been performed; he afterward showing the Conjurer
some of the Silver: But, where is the Yolk of the Egg, said he, as ^^dging that
there was Gold likewise.

A Plaintiff that had but an ill Lawyer, wishing him to Drink cold Water to cure
him of an Hoarsness: May not that endanger the losing my Voice quite, said he;
I had rather, replied the other, you should lose your speech, then I lose my
Cause.

A man condemned to Death, wept; some body, asked him, why do thou weep?
Would you have me Sing, replied he?

Another muttering at a Prince because his Horse had dashed him all over with
Mud going in the Street: Do thou take me for a Centaur, said the Prince, or
that my Horse and I ^are of one piece?

A Rascal reproached an honest man, that he had wept for the Death of a Fish:
And you, replied he, have buried three Wives without shedding a Tear. The
perfection, or delicacy of this Apophthegme lies in the opposition.

A Roman Lord going to visit the Poet Ennius; that Poet made them say, that he
was not within, which made the Lord, another day when the Poet came to wait on
him, tell him, himself, that he was not within: Do not I hear your Voice, said
Ennius? Thou art very incredulous, replied he, showing himself, for I believed
your Maid the other day, when she told me so, and you will not believe me tho I
say it my self.

Taking a Laboring Fellow by the Hand, and feeling it very hard, he asked him,
Whether he walked on his hands.

A Lawyer examining a witness, said to him: It may be, that he that spoke what
you have deposed, spoke it in heat of rage; he agreed to that. It may be, you
did not hear the words exactly; he made a sign that that might be so too. It
may be possible, added he, that you did not hear him at all; at which a showt
was made that quite confounded the Evidence. This is another excellency in an
Apophtbegme, to engage a man insensibly to own himself Ridiculous.

Some body accused of Adultery being tired with long waiting at a great man's
Door: When will he come out of his Chamber, said he. When you leave going to
another man's Chamber, replied the other that heard him.

A Senator having said to a Fantastical man that had argued before him; if I
contradict your opinion, will you no take it ill? As you sow, you must reap,
replied he.

Another being of opinion in a time of trouble, to make choice of a great
Robber for General, but a good Soldier withal; when the party came to give him
thanks: You owe no thanks, or obligation to me, said he, I did it because I
would rather be robbed, then killed. In the Greek it is sold, because they sold
their Slaves, but that would not be understood here.

An old Debauched Fellow, designing to jear a Young man for his being too much
finifyed: When will thou come to my House, said he, my Pretty little Miss? I
dare not replied the other, my Mother has forbid me going to visit any
Whoremasters. Or, lewd people.

Some body being tired in the place where they used their Exercises: I wish,
said he resting himself, that this were called Labor.

A Young Gay Lass coming one day to a Feast, at a Persons House who was
desperately in love with her, carried away in a jeasting manner a great deal of
the Silver-plate that stood on a side Table: at which the company being
somewhat Scandalized: We should thank her, said the owner, for what she has
left, for it was in her Power to take it all.

Some complaining to a Captain that his Soldiers had robbed them: Did they
leave you nothing, said the Captain? they answered, Yes; they were none of my
Soldiers then, replied he, for they would have taken all away.

An Orator being reproached in a full assembly, for having given money to free
himself from some accusations: I do thank the Gods, said he, that in all the
time I have been concerned in your affairs, I have not been taxed for taking
any thing; but only for giving my own. He avoids the strength of the question
by a plausible evasion, which is another perfection of an Apophthegme.

One speaking of his Antagonist in wrestling said, That he managed it so
bravely, that when he has received a fall, he does even persuade the People
that it was not he was thrown.

A Prince intending to destroy a City, and seeing a Friend of his coming to
endeavor to prevent it, made Oath that he would never do any thing he should
desire in it; but the other hearing his expressions and resolutions, entreated
him to demolish it; and by that means saved the place.

Another being commanded by the Oracle to Sacrifice the first thing he met,
would needs take an Ass-driver for that purpose, whom he met by chance; but the
Ass-driver telling him, that the Beast ever went before the driver, the Fellow
escaped, and the Ass was Offered.

A Fellow with but one Eye, being joaked at by another with a Bunched-back:
Thou bear my repartee upon thy Shoulders, said he.

An Orator making a Florid Speech to the Grecians concerning Peace and Unity,
some body rising up said; Sirs, it is a strange thing this man should pretend
to unite all Greece, since having in his own Family none but his Wife and one
Maidservant, he could never yet persuade them to live a day quietly together.

Another blamed by the People for ordaining public thanksgiving and rejoicing
for some news, which after proved false: What great Crime, Sirs, said he, to
make you live merrily, or comfortably, three days together?

It being asked what does Antony since the loss of the last Battle: He does,
replied one, For fear of the Crocodiles in Nylus.
like the Egyptian- Dogs that Drink running. He retreated in great have, and
yet left not off his Debaucheries.

One accused, defending himself with Vehemence; his Accuser, who was an
extravagant Person, told him: This Obligation you will owe me, at the least,
that I have made you Eloquent: I wish, replied the other, you could be obliged
to me, for making yon Wise.

A great Drinker used to say, that he did not Drink because he was thirsty, but
to prevent being thirsty.

A most excellent Actor leaving a Town, where they had not given him those high
commendations he expected: What benefit can a man reap, said he, in a place,
where they are not liberal even in things that costs them nothing? He meant
Applause and Commendations.

One being Landed in a very bad Island, This Island was neither Scotland: Nor
I^eland, I suppose.
asked his Host. Whether they did not banish guilty People from thence? who
saying, Yes; why do not thou commit some Crime quickly then, replied he, to
be the sooner Banished?

A man observing an Oratory nigh a muddy Bath: Sure they go thither to give
thanks, said he, as soon as they have escaped out of that Bogg. Or, mire.

Another going out of a very Debauched Town in the Evening, said, It was,
because it were a shame to go out of an ill place, till the twylight.

Some body walking very demurely thorough a Town that was full of Catch-Poles,
said, it was for fear he should justle any one of them.

A Fisherman being told, that the Sea was common to all men: True, replied he,
but the Fish belongs to those that Catch them.

It was said, of an insipid Speech, that in a whole torrent of Fine words,
there was not one drop of good Sense.

Some body Laughing because he saw others Laugh, being asked, why he Laughed:
It is because I am persuaded they do not Laugh without a cause.

A Prince reproaching of one, that he was always begging of somewhat: This is,
because I never remember I have asked, said he, when they give me nothing.

A Parasite belonging, or being a hanger on to a great man, seeing his Master
wounded in the Thigh, of which he dyed, said, The same Weapon, that Stabbed him
in the Thigh, Stabbed me in the Belly. Or, cut my Throat.

A Master in some want, having frighted one of his Servants: I will take my
turn to Fright him, said he, and asked him for some money.

Some body said of black Bread, brought to the Table, it was not so truly
Bread, as the shadow of Bread.

A man pretending to relate an Apophthegme, said, that one going to visit his
Friend in want, conveyed a bag of money under his Pillow, it was told him, this
was not a good saying, but a good Action. I have adjusted it after this manner,
to make it an Apophthegme.

A Creditor enraged against his debtor, who did not pay him, swore he would
make him repent; the other swore he should not, and paid him,

A man who was maintained by an old Woman, being jeasted withal for his growing
so over Fat: What should I come to, if I lay alone then, said he: Thou would
grow too lean, said one to him. Because he would starve for want.

Some body Drinking a small Wine, tho it were old: Said it is very small for
it is Age.

Two men Scuffling for a Whore: Let not the vanquished weep, said she, for the
vanquisher shall pay most. Or, it shall cost him dearest.

Phryne being grown old, said, that good Wine was Drinkable till it came to the
sees. It is storyed of her, that playing with some other Curtezans at a sport,
where every one is obliged to do, what the first begins, she Washed her Face,
and thereby discovered their wrinckles and deformities, which their Paint had
concealed.

A Young man turned out of Doors by a Curtezan, made great and expensive
preparations to Force her House: at which, she in derision said; You needed but
to bestow that money upon me, and I had let you come in quietly.

A Painter having promised the best Picture he had, to one that had no judgment
in Painting, she on a sudden told him, that his House was on Fire, and chose
the first that he endeavored to save. This is like the Artifice to know the
best Puppy of a whole litter sometimes used, or of any other such like
Creature, the Dam ever carrying away the best first out of the danger.

A Curtesan having laid a wager she would tempt a Philosopher; finding she
failed in the design: I thought, said she, it had been a man, and not a Statue.
Or, a Philosopher, not a Stone.

A Prince bragging of some Prefents made him by a Lady somewhat stricken in
years: My Grandmother, said another, will give you Richer Presents, if you
will make love to her.

An Actor making a false gesture on the Stage, they cried out to him, he made a
Solecisme with his hand.

It has been said of Poetry and Painting, that he that could deceive best, was
the most worthy. Because that is the end of those Arts.

One being sent back by a Prince without his Errand, who came to demand money;
desired, when he took his leave, that he might have some Guard to secure him
from Robbery. This was a Scoff; for having received no money, there was no
danger of being Robbed.

A Senator under a pretense of liberty, having in the open Senate, said a
thousand Flattering things of a Prince who was there, he was asked, Whether he
did not ^ear he might lose his life, for his liberty. In the Original it is,
your liberty will cost you your life. The Prince being a Jealous and Suspicious
man.

As they were reproaching a General of an Army for his running away: It was,
Sirs, replied he, because I would not leave you. As much as to say, they ran
away first.

A Lacedemonian being asked wherefore he Drank so Sparingly at a Feast: To lead
those home again, that will be Drunk, replied he. It has been said so in
general of the Lacedaemonians, because they were no great Drinkers.

A Poet taking a great deal of pains, to Praise Castor and Pollux, in a
Panegyric he wrote upon another; he to whom it was designed gave him but the
one half of what he had promised, and when he grumbled; Let Castor and Pollux,
said he, pay you the remainder, Or their share:

Denis the Tyrant reading some sorry Rhymes to Philoxenes to have his
approbation: Let me be sent back again to the Quarrys, said he. As much as to
say, he would rather be sent to dig as a Slave in the Quarrys again, then be
obliged to approve of what he thought did not deserve it: He had been once
before condemned to that Slavery for the liberty of his Tongue: But the Tyrant
took this for a piece of Gallantry, as indeed Philoxenes intended it, and did
not punish him for it.

As it was the Custom of those who were made Free from Slavery, to give some
Present to their Patrons, when they married their Daughters, or designed any
enterprize^ one of Augustus his freed-men, having written down the Sum in a
Note, that Prince altered the Figures, and made it twice as much; at which the
other being surprised, made yet no difficulty to pay it; but the next time, he
put down in his Note. What you please.

Chrysipus shaking his Legs at a great Feast, and notwithstanding making most
excellent discourses, the maid Servant attending said, that naught but his Legs
were Drunk.

A great man being accused for making defense for a wicked Fellow in a Court of
Justice: Why, said he, an honest man, does not need any one to defend him.
Because they commit no Crimes.

He said, if it were a sign of Wit to Babble much, the Swallows, or Daws,
Parrots and Magpies, were to be prized.

Some Judges having for Bribes absolved a guilty Person, after they had
required a Guard that they might give their opinions freely: Is it, said
Catullus, that you were afraid lest the money should be taken from you which
was given to corrupt you?

One said to an ill reader; when you read, you sing; and when you sing, you
sing scurvily.

Some body that would be thought handsome, and was no so, asking a Philosopher,
if a wise man ought to love: No, replied he, unless he be as handsome and well
shaped as thy self.

A Philosopher said of a Debauchee who had eaten up all his estate; That the
Earth had swallowed up Amphiaraus, but this man had swallowed his Land.

A rich man having treated a Philosopher very magnificently, excused his
profuseness, and laid it upon the Score of his over great plenty and Riches:
Would you, replied he, excuse your Cook for over-Salting your Meat, or Sauce,
upon this account of having more Salt then was needful.

A man of Quality presenting his Son most curiously dressed to a Philosopher: He
is very pretty, said he, but he resembles his Mother.

Some body speaking to him in the old Dialect: Are you not ashamed, said he, to
talk to me in Agamemnon's Language, when I speak in our own?

One Laughing at him for showing some fear at his going into a Bath which was
too hot: Why, said he, this is not like venturing ones life for ones Country.

A Lewd Fellow being twitted that he waited for his Father's Death to pay his
creditors: I do not wait for it, replied he: Pray God thou may wait for it,
answered another, As fearing he might hasten it, by making him away.

Philopemen being sound by his Servants drawing Water out of a Well: I am
paying the reward due to my ill countenance, said he. It hapnin g that he
coming to his Inn before any of his train^ the Maid who knew him not, by his
ill mien took him for some ordinary Fellow, and prayed him to draw her some
Water, she being very busy to provide things against the arrival of Philopemen.

A Thracian Prince being solicited by both Parties during the Wars of Troy,
advised Paris to yield up the Lady, and said, he would give him two for one.

A Rascal telling Lelius, that he was unworthy of his Ancestors: And thou
worthy of thine, replied he.

A Roman Knight interrogated by a Censor, how he came to be so Fat, and his
Horse so Lean: It is, replied he, because my man looks to my Horse, and I look
to my self. He was fined for this answer.

One reformed from his Debaucheries by a fit of Sickness, said, that if he had
not been Sick, he had been Dead.

Sertorius being retreated at the coming of Metellus, after he had beaten
Pompey: Had it not been for this old man, said he, I would have curryed that
Child to some purpose. The one was very old, the other very Young.

A Courtier being at a Princes Table, and having a mind to Eat of a great Fish
at the upper end, took a little one and held it to his Ear: Being desired to
tell what he meant by that, I only asked this a question, and it replies it
knows nothing of it, but I must inquire of it is Grandfather at the upperend of
the Table there.

Some applauding a King for his ability in great Drinking: That Is a
commendation for a Sponge, said one, and not for a Prince.

A Philosopher turned out of his Country for his speaking too freely, said, he
was more unfortunate then the Crickets, who might Sing as long as they pleased
and none controuled them.

Of a most excellent Actor, it was said, that he spoke with his Hands. Or,
rather a Pantonimick.

A Captive Philosopher, observing a little Effeminate Fellow a-Bargaining for
him: Do, buy me, said he, for thou need a man.

One of the Ancients called runaway Soldiers, Hares in Armor.

A Thief having Robbed one, said to the owner of the Goods by way of excuse: I
did not know the things I Stole belonged to you: But you knew, replied he, that
they belonged not to your self.

A Poet said, he had two Chests at Home, one to hold praises, or compliments,
and the other for money: And that he found the first always full, but the
other quite empty. Against such as pay with excuses and mere Ceremo^ies, but
deny just rewards.

Another said, he did not desire his Works should be read by the ignorant, nor
by the Critical; because the first understood too little, the others too much.
Or, because the first cannot spy the Beauties, and the others lay open all^ be
Defects.

An importunate Poet reading some Verses, and having a great many more to read,
asking of a sudden, of him that sat by, which were the best? Those you have
not yet read, replied he. Because he had not been troubled with them.

Some body pretending to be Learned, because he conversed with Learned men, was
told, that a man was not Rich by frequenting Rich People.

A man making a seeming Apology for a Doctor of Physic that was too Rash,
said, He did not use to make his Patients Languish long. That Science has been
defined, The Art of killing men by Authority: And Plato said, that lying was as
necessary in them, as in the Politics.

A Scholar having promised a Rhetorician to pay him down a certain Sum, when
he had taught him the Art of persuasion: The Master finding he delayed it too
long, Sued him at Law, grounding his assurance of Success on this Presumption;
that if he should persuade the Judges that he owed him nothing, then he would
be obliged to pay it, because he had the Art of Persuasion, and if he could not
persuade them, then he lost his Cause. But he answered with the same way of
reasoning: If I can persuade them, I shall pay nothing, because I gain my
Cause; and if I cannot persuade them, then he is to have nothing because he has
not taught me the Art of persuasion.

One of the Ancients said, that none bu^ Ghosts would attack the dead. To hint
that no man ought to write against such as were no more.

A Prince Learning Music upon some Instrument, having sounded one String for
another and taking it ill that his Master reproved him for it: If you play as
King, said he, you may strike what Strings you please; but if as a Musician,
you are in the wrong.

One said, the Sea is pleasant to behold; but then you must look upon it from a
safe Port.

Another said, a man is not so Lame, tho he were crippled both in Hands and
Feet, as when he is so in his Purse. Because naught can be done without money.

It has been said of Alexanders Picture, that the Alexander of Philip was
invincible, and that of Apelles inimitable.

A Lacedemonian seeing some men besiged, who made no sallies, asked, whether
the Women had locked up the Gates after the Death of their Husbands.

Apelles said of a Painter who boasted that he Painted quick; Yes, it appears
plainly. Or, 1 see it.

A man interrogated at a Feast, wherefore he was so mute; that others may have
time to talk their fill.

A Musician said, that if others knew the great delight he took in Singing,
instead of giving him money for it, they would ask him to give them some.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for William Cademan at the Popes Head in the lower Walk of
the New Exchange in the Strand.
Folio.
AN Institution of General History; or the History of the World, by William
Howel, L L. D. in two Volumes.

Historical Collections, or an Exact Account of the Proceedings of the four
last Parliaments in Queen Elizabeth's Reign.

A Journey into Greece by Sr. George Wheler in Company of Dr. Spon of Lions, in
six Books, containing, 1. a Voyage from Venice to Constantinople. 2. An Account
of Constantinople and the adjacent places. 3. A Voyage thorough the lesser
Asia. 4. A Voyage from Zant thorough several Parts of Greece to Athens. 5. An
account of Athens. 6 Several Journies from Athens into Attica, Corinth,
Boeotia, etc. with variety of Sculptures.

Pharamond Complete in English, an Excellent Romance.

Clelia, A Romance in English.

Parthenissa Complete in English.

An Historical, Heroic Poem on the Life of the right Honorable Thomas Earl of
Ossory (with his Picture neatly Engraven on a Copper Plate) Written by Elkanah
Settle.

A Protestant Plot no Paradox, or Phanaticks under that name Plotting against
the King and Government.

The English Iereboam, or the Protestant Reforming Magistrate, and what the
Church of England may expect from such a one.

Considerations Offered to all the Corporations of England, containing
Seasonable advice to them in their Future Elections of Burgesses to Serve in
Parliament.

Quarto.
An Historical Relation of the first Discovery of the Isle of Madera.

The Protestant Religion is a sure Foundation, etc. by the right Honorable
Charles Earl of Darby.

The Jesuits Policy to suppress Monarchy, by a Person of Honor.

A Warning piece for the unruly, in two Visitation Sermonsiby Seth Bushel. D. D.

The great Efficacy and Necessity of good Example, especially in the Clergy in
a Visitation Sermon at Guilford, by Thomas Duncomb, D. D.

A Sermon Preached before the King by Miles Barn, Chaplainin Ordinary to his
Majesty.

A Sermon Preached at the Assizes at Lancaster, by Henry Pigot, B. D.

Praise and Adoration, a Sermon on Trinity Sunday before the University at
Oxford, 1681. By Thomas Manningham M. A. late Fellow of New College in Oxford.

A New years Gift for Antiprerogative men, or a Lawyers Opinion in defense of
his Majesty's Power Royal of Granting Pardons as he pleases; wherein is more
Particularly discussed the Validity of the Earl of Danby's Pardon.

Octavo.
THe Spanish History, or the Differences that happened in the Court of Spain
between Don John of Austria and Cardinal Nitard; with all the Letters, and
Politic Discourses relating those Affairs.

Rapin's reflections on Ancient and Modern Philosophy.

The English Princess, or the Duchess Queen, a pleasant Novel.

Court Songs and Poems, being an exact Collection.

The Temple of Death, with other Poems, by a Person of Honor.

Hogan Moganides or the Dutch Hudibras.

FINIS.

