The Foundation OF THE UNIVERSITIE OF OXFORD, and With a Catalogue of the
principal Founders and special Benefactors of all the Colleges, and total
number of Students, Magistrates and Officers therein being.

And how the Revenews thereof are and have been increased from time to time,
and by whom, with Buildings, Books and Revenues as no Universitie in the world
can in all points parallel: These are the Nurseries of Religion, and Seminaries
of good Literature.

Ito and fac similiter.

LONDON, Printed by M. S. for Thomas Jenner, and are to be sold at his Shop, at
the South entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1651.

ABout the time of the foundation of the Universitie of Oxford, the ancient
Historians have diversely written: some affirmed that it was founded when the
most ancient Britains first inhabited this Island, and that from Greeklade, a
Town in Wilt-shire; this Academy was translated to Oxford, which some will have
called Ouseford, from the River of Ouse (by the Latins called Isis) which
gives name to the next adjoining Island, called Ousney. Others say it was
founded when the City of Oxford was first builded, many years before the
Incarnation of our Savior Christ. Others say it was builded, or at least
restored, by King Vortiger: But the chiefest conclude and agree, that Elfred,
of some called Alured, King of the West Saxons, about the year 872, was the
chief and Principal Founder thereof: And that (besides the ancient Hostles for
Scholars, which is evident were there remaining after many overthrows of
wars) he caused to be erected therein three Colleges or public Schools, for
the teaching of Grammar; Philosophy, and Divinity, sending thither his own
son Ethelward. Since which time, by reason of diverse incursions and continual
wars which were daily in this land, between the Britains, Romans, Saxons, Kings
of this Heptarchie, Danes and Normans, the light and glory of this Academy was
not only of old eclipsed; but even since the Conquest (in the Barons wars)
also obscured and defaced. And it is most certain, as the destructions were
many, so the restaurations thereof shortly ensued by one Prince or other: so
that at length recovering the fame and dignity which it holds amongst other
Christian Academies of Europe, it is now worthily reputed one of the most
famous Universities in the world; the ancient and noble Family of the Veres
having been long Earls thereof, and so still remain. And howsoever the Hostles,
Hals, Innes, Schools, and religious Houses, whereof this University since the
Conquest did consist, and which now are wholly defaced, or in part converted
into some of the present Colleges, were for their number, and for the number
of Students in them, much above all that now are extant, viz. Divi Fridswidi
Prior. S. Mariae Aula, Divi Jacobi Aula Divi Gregorii Aula. D. Johan. Baptist.
Aula, D. Thomae Aula, Portlat. Aula, Sacerdotiss. Aula, Peckwateri Aula,
Phiswici Diversorium, Magnae Academiae Aula, S. Margaretae Aula, Regis Aula,
Reginae Aula, Pittantii Aula, Green-Aula, Corbetti Au'a, Parvae Academiae Aula,
Stapul. Aula, and many others; yet at this present there are eighteen goodly
Colleges and houses erected, maintained with the lands and revenews of their
founders; and seven Hals that Students live in at their own charge, not having
endowment of land to maintain them. Besides there are public Schools and a
Library, whose Fabric by the bounty of many royal, noble, and religious
persons, was of late years finished, which no Universitie in the world can in
all points parallel. These are the nurseries of Gods true religion, and
Seminaries of good literature.

I. University College, founded 872.
ALfred or Alured King of the West Saxons, being addicted to Religion and good
literature, for the increase and study of Divinity, Philosophy and other arts,
in the second year of his reign founded this College, by the name of the
Great Hal, or Universitie College; from the foundation whereof the students
were maintained out of the Kings Exchequer, until King William the Conqueror
did take the same from them: by which means both the College wanted repairing,
and the students also were for many years enforced to live by the devotion of
religious people. Afterward William Archdeacon of Durham, about the year,
1217 repaired and endowed the same with new possessions, establishing therein a
Master, two Fellows, a Bible Clark, which is the Porter. Since by the bounty of
Walter Skirlow Doctor of Law, Bishop of Litchfield and Coventry, after of Bath
and Wels, and lastly of Durham, who gave three Fellowships, Henry Piercy Earl
of Northumberland, who gave other three; and by the gift of Robert Dudley late
Earl of Leicester, John Friston, Esquire, Mast. Gunsley Rector of Tytesley in
Surrey, Mistress Pain, Mast. Aston, S. Simon Bennet, who has bequeathed good
lands to increase the number of Fellows and Scholars (after the decease of his
Lady) Master Charles Greenwood, sometimes fellow of this College, and Proctor
of this University, who gave 1000 pounds toward the new building of this
College, and some other benefactors; the company and revenues of this College
is much increased, so as there is at this present in the same a Master, eight
Fellows, one Bible-Clerk, with officers and servants of the Foundation, besides
other students; the whole number being 73.

II. Baliol College founded 1262.
John Ba'iol, born at Bernards Castle in the Bishopric of Durham (a worthy
warrior to King Henry the third in his civil wars against his Barons) with his
wife Dervorgilla, a Lady of honorable Parentage (being in her right Earl of
Galloway, and Lord high Constable of Scotland) parents of John Baliol King of
Scots, founded this College, giving thereunto both lands and revenews, for the
maintenance of a Master, 10 Fellows, 11 Scholars, which is recorded to be the
first, and most anciently endowed College in this University, as some late
Historians constantly affirm. But by the reason of the Scottish wars in the
reign of King Edward the first, the students could not peaceably enjoy the
same. This College has fince, by the liberality of Philip Somervil, and
Margaret his wife, the Lady Ella Longspee Countess of Salisbury, Richard de
Hofinger, William Lord Felton, Hugh de Vrenna Knight, William Hamon of
Gilford Esquire, Doctor Bell Bishop of Worcester, Peter Blundel Esquire, the
Lady Elizabeth Perian, sister to the honorable Sir Francis Bacon late Lord
Chancelour, Mary Dunch, and John Brown, with diverse other benefactors, been
much increased with buildings, and other ornaments. In which the number of
fellows are uncertain, and at the discretion of the Visitour, Master, and
three seniour Fellows, as the revenews thereof do increase or decrease. There
are in the same at this present a Master, 11 Fellows, 11 Scholars, four
exhibitioners, besides officers and servants of the foundation, the whole
number being 138.

III. Merton College, founded 1274.
WAlter de Merton sometimes L. Chancellor of England, Counselor to King
Henry the third, and Edward the first, Bishop of Rochester, founded this
College by the name of Merton College, endowing it in effect with all the
lands and revenews which at this present are belonging thereunto, ordaining in
the same a Warden, and no definitive number of Fellows, Since by the liberality
of John Williot Doctor of Divinity, Chancellor of Excester (formerly Fellow of
this College, who gave maintenance for twelve Scholars, whereof nine should
serve the nine seniour Fellows, and are by them to be chosen, upon which they
were called Postmasters, the other three should serve all the Fellows, and they
are chosen by one who is yearly elected to be principal of the Postmasters)
Thomas Leech, S. Thomas Bodeley Knight, a memorable benefactor to this
University, Doctor Wilson, Mast. John Chambers, sometimes a Fellow of Eton,
Canon of Winsor (who made them 14. and gave 1000 pounds that two Fellows should
be elected out of Eton School to this College successively) Doctor Jervice,
Doctor Jesop, and the late worthy Warden, S. Henry Savil Knight, Provost of
Eton, (who founded two mathematick lectures in the Universiry, which he in his
person read publicly for two terms, by whose procurement and care this
College has been much beautified and enlarged with fair buildings, books, and
ornaments) it is much enriched. In this College at this present is a Warden,
21 Fellows, 14. Scholars, besides officers and servants of the foundation,
with other students the whole number being 80.

IV. Excester College founded 1316.
Walter Stapuldon, being descended of noble parentage (for his wisdom,
gravity, and learning was often employed in Embassages for King Edward the 2.
who made him Bishop of Excester, Lord Trea surer of England, and one of his
Privy Council) founded this College by the name of Stapuldon Hall; which he
endowed with lands and revenews, for the maintenance of one Rector, and 12
Fellows, out of which number one should beyearly chosen to govern the rest.
After in anno, 1404. Edmund Stafford Bishop of Excester (brother to Ralph Earl
Stafford) Lord Chancellor of England, gave two Fellowships, reformed the
statutes, altered the name thereof, and called Excester College. To this
College since, Sir Willam Peter Knight, principal Secretary to King Henry the
8th, K. Edward the 6th. Q. Mary, and Q. Elizabeth, gave eight fellowships, and
augmented the wages of the Fellows of the first foundation, to make them equal
with his. Sir John Periam Esquire. gave 560 pounds, which was expended in building;
Sir John Aelan Knight, gave 800 pounds, which was bestowed in building of a
fair and spacious Hall, and George Hakewell Doct. of Divinity, Archdeacon of
Surrey (yet living) sometimes Fellow of this House, founded, erected and
finished the new Chapel, all three Devonshire men. In which College at this
present is one Rector. 22 Fellows, two Pensioners, and one Bible-clark, besides
officers and servants of the Foundation with other students to the number of
230.

V. Oriall College, founded 1337.
KIng Edward the second (called Edward of Canarvan) began the foundation of
this College, by the procurement of Adam Brown Clerk, Almner to the said King,
dedicating the same to the honor of the blessed Virgin Mary, calling it the
House or Hall of S. Mary the Virgin ( Vulgo, Oriall College) which he endowed
with lands and revenews for the maintenance of one Provost, and 10 Fellows. But
afterward by the liberality of John Frank, who gave allowance for four
Fellowships, John Carpenter Bishop of Worcester; who gave one Fellowship,
William Smith Bishop of Lincoln, who gave one Fellowship; the aforenamed Adam
Brown, who was first Provost, being also a great benefactor; King Edward the
third, who gave the Hospital of S. Bartholmew near Oxford; Anthony Blincow D.
of Law, late Provost, who bestowed 1200 pounds in building the forefront, and
Rich. Dudley, who gave maintenance for two Fellows, and 6. exhibitioners, other
six being of a more ancient foundation, besides diverse other benefactors, this
College is much increased. Moreover our late Sovereign L. King James, being
informed that the title of the foundation thereof with the lands thereunto
belonging were in question, and subject to eviction, has confirmed by Letters
Pattents a sure estate of the same: wherein at this present is one Provost, 18.
Fellows, 12. Pensioners or exhibitioners, one Bible-Clark, besides officers and
servants of the foundation, with other students, the whole number being 106.

VI. Queens College, founded 1340.
RObert Eglesfield Bachelor of Divinity, Chaplain to Queen Philippa, wife to
King Edward the third, founded this College in his own ground, by the name of
Queens College (commending the patronage thereof to his Lady the Queen and to
the Queens of England successively) which he endowed with lands and revenews
for the maintenance of a Provost, and 12 Fellows which were to be augmented as
the revenews increased. But since by the bounty of King Edward the third, who
gave the Hospital of S. Julians in Southampton, commonly called Gods House;
King Edward the fourth, who gave the Priory of Sherborn in Hamshire, Robert
Langton, Thomas Langton Provost, Bishop of Winchester. Edm. Grindall,
Archbishop of Canterbury, Christopher Bambridge Provost, Archbishop of York,
William Fettiplace Esquire, Henry Robinson Provost, Bishop of Carlisle, D. Ayrie
late Provost. and diverse other late good benefactors; the number of students
are much increased. Moreover, our late Sovereign Lady Q. Elizabeth in the 3
year of her reign, being informed that the title of the foundation thereof,
with the lands thereunto belonging were in question, and subject to eviction;
by Act of Parliament confirmed a sure estate of the same. Likewise of late, for
the better encouragement of the Fellows, who are all bound by statute to
profess Divinity; King CHARLES, by the intercession of Q MARY, Patroness of
this College, to bestow upon the same the perpetual patronage of certain
Benefices in the County of Southampton. In it at this present is a Provost,
Fourteen Fellows, Seven Scholars, Two Chaplains, and fourteen other students
Under-graduats, called by the Founder, Servientes ad mensam, or Sociorum
ministri; besides officers and servants of the foundation, with other students,
to the number of 160.

VII. New College, founded, 1375.
William Wickam, alias Perot, Rector of S. Martins le grande, and after Dean
there, Archdeacon of Lincoln, Northampton, and Buckingham, Provost of Wels,
Prebend of twelve several places, principal Secretary to King Edward the
third, Keeper of the Privy Seal, Bishop of Winchester, L. high Treasurer, and
Chancellor of England, founded this College, dedicating the same to God the
Father, and the blessed Virgin Mary; which he endowed with lands and revenues
for the maintenance of a Warden, Seventy Fellows, and Scholars, Ten Chaplains,
three Clarks, one Organist, Sixteen Choristers, besides officers and servants:
and before he builded the same, he gave exhibition to Fifty Scholars, for the
space of ten years, in this university. He also founded a College at
Winchester, wherein he established one Warden, ten Fellows, two Schoolmasters,
and seventy scholars, with officers and servants, which are all maintained at
his charge; out of which School he ordained should be chosen the best scholars
always to supply the vacant places of the Fellows of this College. Since by
the bounty of Master Rawlins, Sir Richard Read Knight, Doctor Newman, Doctor
Reeve late Warden, Doctor Martin, Robert Bell, Doctor Smith, and others; this
College is much enriched with plate, books, and other ornaments: in which at
this present is a Warden, Seventy Fellows and Scholars, ten Chaplains, three
Clarks, one Organist, sixteen Choristers besides officers and servants of the
foundation, with other students, being in all 135.

VIII. Lincoln College, founded, 1420.
RIchard Fleming born in Yorkshire, Doctor of Divinity, Bishop of Lincoln, in
the eight year of the reign of King Henry the Fifth, founded this College by
the name of Lincoln College, which he endowed with lands and revenews for the
maintenance of one Rectour, six Fellows, and two Chaplains. After, Robert
Fleming Deane of Lincoln, Edward Derbie Arch Deacon of Stow, endowed the same
College with lands, for the maintenance of three Fellows, superadded to the
number of the foundation; John Forest Deane of Wels, Thomas Beckington Bishop
of Bath and Wels, John Southam Arch Deacon of Oxford, William Fyndern, Esquire,
Henry Beauford Cardinal, Bishop of Winchester, John Bucktott and John Crosbie
augmented the same. In anno 1479 Thomas Scot, alias Rotheram, borne in
Yorkshire, Fellow of Kings College, Chaplain and Lord Privy Seal to King
Edward the Fourth, Provost of Beverley, Bishop of Rochester, after of Lincoln
(and then chosen Master of Pembroke Hall in Cambridge) Archbishop of York,
Lord Chancellor of England, Chancellor of the University of Cambridge,
Secretary to four Kings, when he was Bishop of Lincoln did much enlarge, and
finally perfect the buildings of the same, adding to the former number five
fellowships. Since Walter Bates, William Dagvill, William Atwater Bishop of
Lincoln, Edmund Audley, Robert Traps, Richard Kelbie late Rector, John Randal;
the Right Honorable and Right Reverend Father in God, John Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, etc. (who at his great charge erected a fair Chapel) and diverse
other Benefactors, have much increased the same: wherein at this present is one
Rector, fifteen Fellows, two Chaplains, and four Scholars, besides officers
and servants of the foundation, with other students being in all one hundred
and nine.

IX. All-Soulnes College, 1437.
HEnry Chichely Doctor of the Civil Law, Chancellor of Salisbury, Bishop of
Saint David's, Archbishop of Canterbury, in the fifteenth year of the reign of
King Henry the Sixth, founded this College by the name of All Soulne College,
(procuring the said King Henry to give thereunto four Priories Alians, namely
Alberbury, Rumney, Weeden, Pinkeney, and Languenith) the building whereof the
perfected in such form as it still remains, endowing the same with lands and
revenews, for the maintenance of one Warden, forty Fellows, whereof twenty
four should be Divines, and the rest students of the Civil Law, appointing by
statute that the number of Fellows should never be augmented nor empaired; and
that once in every year all places (by death, or otherwise void) should be
supplied. He also gave lands and revenews for the maintenance of Chaplains,
Clarks and Choristers, sans number. Since Reginald Pool Cardinal, and
Archbishop of Canterbury, Sir William Peter sometime Fellow of this College,
Privy Counselor to Henry the eight, King Edward Queen Mary, and Queen
Elizabeth, have been benefactors to the same. And the late Queen Elizabeth of
famous memory, confirmed by letters Pattents to this College, the Parsonage of
Stanton Harecourt. In this at this present is one Warden, forty Fellows, two
Chaplains, three Clarks, six Choristers, besides officers and servants of the
foundation, with other students, the whole number being 70.

X. Magdalene College, founded, 1459.
William Pattin commonly called Wainfleet, from the place of his birth, having
been Provost of Eton, juxta Winsor, after Bishop of Winchester, and Lord
Chancellor of England, about the thirty seventh year of the reign of King
Henry the sixth, founded first Magdalene Hall; after that this College (where
S. John's Hospital had formerly been situated) dedicating the same to the
honor of S. Mary Magdalene, endowing it with lands and revenews for the
maintenance of one President, forty Fellows, thirty Demies, or Scholars, four
Chaplains, eight Clarks, and sixteen Ghovisters. Since King Henry the seventh,
Thomas Ingledue, Chaplain to the Founder, William Fitzallen Earl of Arundel,
Knight of the most noble Order of the Garter, who married Jane daughter of
Richard Nevil Earl of Salsbury, from whom is lineally descended the Right
Honorable, and my singular good Lord Thomas now Earl of Arundel and Surrey,
Earl Marshall of England, ut supra; John Forman, D. Higden President John
Clamond President, Robert Morewent, John Mullins Archdeacon of London, John
Warner D. of Divinity, Deane of Litchfield, with some others, have been
liberal benefactors; but the number of Fellows and Scholars neither has been,
nor may be increased. In which at this present is a President, forty Fellows,
thirty Demies, or Scholars, four Chaplains, eight Clarks, sixteen Choristers,
Schoolmaster, and an Usher, three Readers of Divinity, natural and moral
Philosophy, besides diverse officers and servants of the Foundation, with other
students, being in all two hundred and twenty.

XI. Brazen Nose College, founded 1515.
William Smith, borne at Farmoutb, sometimes Fellow of Pembroke Hall in the
University of Cambridge, Bishop of Coventry and Litchfield, translated to
Lincoln, first Lord President of Wales, and that for many years, five years
Chancellor of the University of Oxford, in the first year of the reign of King
Henry the eight, founded this College by the name of Kings Hall, and College
of Brasen-Nose (but he lived not to finish the same as he intended) in a place
where heretofore diverse Hals have been situated (some whereof still remain)
namely Parva Aula Vniversitatis and AEnaei-Nasi, or Little University and
Brazen-Nose Hal, otherwise called the Kings Hall, with many more. After whose
death Richard Sutton Esquire, took upon him to perfect the same, which he
accomplished; wherein he established a Principal, and twelve Fellows,
maintained partly by the charges of the Founder, and partly by his own charge.
But since by the liberality of William Clifton, William Porter, John Elton,
alias Baler Humfrey Ogle, Edward Derbie, John Clamond, John Williamson, Brian
Higden, Alexander Noel Dean of Saint Paul's in London, Joyce Frankland, Richard
Harper Justice of the Common pleas, Sir John Port Knight, John Lord Mordant,
Doctor Barnston, George Palin, and other good benefactors, this College is
much beautified with buildings and other ornaments, for the perfecting whereof
there has been expended great sums of money, within these few years past:
and at this present there are in the same, a Principal, twenty Fellows,
besides Sholars, officers and servants of the foundation; the whole number
being 186.

XII. Corpus Christi College, founded 1516.
RIichard Fox Doct. of Law, Agent in France for King Henry the seventh, Lord
Keeper of his Privy Seal, principal Secretary, and one of his Privy Counsel,
Ambassador into Scotland, Bishop of Excester, Bath and Wels, Durham and
Winchester, Godfather to King Henry the eight, and then chosen Master of
Pembroke Hal in the University of Cambridge, 1507. founded this College by the
name of Corpus Christi College, in Anno 1516. which he endowed with lands and
revenews for the maintenance of a President; nineteen Fellows, twenty Scholars,
two Chaplains, 2 Clarks, and two Choristers. To this College Hugh Oldham
Bishop of Excester, sometimes of Queens College in Cambridge, Chaplain to the
Lady Margaret Countess of Richmond and Darbie, etc. contributed so
bountifully, that the next after the Founder, he is entitled the principal
benefactor. Since by the liberality of John Claymond first President thereof,
Master Mordent, William Frost, Mistress Moor, Doctor Reynolds, Sir George St.
Paul Knight, and other good benefactors, this College is much beautified and
adorned, so as there is at this present in the same, a President, twenty
Fellows, twenty Scholars, two Chaplains, two Clerks, and two Choristers,
besides officers and servants of the foundation, with other students, the whole
number being seventy.

XIII. Christ-Church College, founded, 1546.
THomas Wolsey Cardinal, Archbishop of York, etc. growing toward the height
of his honor, laid the foundation of a College, which from the name of his
dignity, was to be called the Cardinals; and this was done upon the site of
ground, where formerly had stood the ancient Priory of St. Friswid; while the
Cardinal was raising this building he was pulled down himself, and falling
within the statute of Praemunire, his design for the College failed with the
Founder; whereupon Henry the eight, King of England, France and Ireland, etc.
having in his hands that which remained of the Cardinals intentions, added
thereunto Canterbury College and Vine Hall, otherwise called Peckwater Inn.
And having translated the Episcopal sea from Osney, he placed it here, calling
this his new foundation, The Cathedral Church of Christ's Church in Oxford:
which being endowed by him with a fair and ample revenew, he established
therein a Dean, 8 Canons, 3 public Professors of Divinity, Hebrew and Greek,
60 students, eight Chaplains, eight Singing men, an Organist, eight Choristers,
twenty four Almsmen, and a Free School for Scholars; the revenews whereof, by a
visitation in Queen Mary's time, were converted to the maintenance of forty
students more, to make up the full number of a hundred, as now it is. Since
that time Otho Nicholson one of the examiners of the Chancery, has in building
and furnishing of a fair Library expended the sum of eight hundred pounds. In
which at this present are students of all sorts, with officers and servants of
the foundation, to the number of 223.

XIV. Trinity College, founded 1556.
SIr Thomas Pope Knight, founded this College, in the fourth year of the
reign of King Phillip and Queen Mary, dedicating the same to the holy and
individual Trinity, where about the year 1350. Thomas Hatfield, Secretary to
King Edward the third, afterward Bishop of Durham, had formerly builded a
College called Durham College, which was endowed with certain lands by the
gift of the founder, and Robert VValworth Prior of Durham, for the Maintenance
of eight Monks, and seven Clarks, such as should be thought fit to come
thereunto from Durham: which old College being by continuance of time
exceedingly decayed and ruinated, the said Sir Thomas Pope Knight obtained to
erect his new College thereon, endowing the same with Lands and possessions
for the maintenance of a President, twelve Fellows, and twelve Scholars. Since
by the liberality of the late Lady Elizabeth Powlet, and many other worthy and
well affected benefactors, the same is much beautified with buildings, books,
and other ornaments; for the perfecting whereof there has been expended great
sums of money; wherein there is at this present a President, twelve Fellows,
twelve Scholars, besides officers and servants of the foundation, with many
other students, the whole number being a hundred thirty three.

XV. St. John's College, founded 1557.
HEnry Chicheley Doctor of the Civil Law, Chancellor of Salisbury, Bishop of
Saint David's, Archbishop of Canterbury, etc. among other buildings laid the
foundation of this Fabric, and called it Saint Bernards College. After its
suppression by King Henry the eight, it was in a dream ( ut tradunt) showed
unto Sir Thomas White Knight, Merchant Tailor of the City of London, and
thereupon by him new built to the honor of S. John Baptist; who endowed it
with a maintenance for a President, fifty Fellows and Scholars, a Chaplain, a
Clarke, six Choristers, and four Singing men. The company of Merchant Tailors
in general, and diverse of them in particular have been also very beneficial;
more especially Sir William Craven Knight, Sir William Paddie Knight Doctor
of Physic, sometimes Commoner of this College, has given toward the
building of the Library, and not only furnished it with a hundred books, but
also purchased perpetual patronages, of Greek three hundred pounds, and of
Bagley a hundred pounds, erected a fair pair of Organs in the Chapel, gave
twenty pounds per annum for the maintenance of the Organist, etc. And as this
College was first begun by Henry Archbishop of Canterbury, so it is now
enlarged with a fair and spacious back-Court embattled, by William Archbishop
of Canterbury: in which at this present is a President, fifty Fellows and
Scholars, a Chaplain, a Clarke, besides servants, Commoners, and other
students, being in all 110.

XVI. Jesus College, founded 1572.
HVgh Price Doctor of the Civil Law, treasurer of Saint David's, procured the
foundation of this College on the ground where White Hall had formerly been
situated, which was given with the edifices and gardens thereunto belonging by
Queen Elizabeth, who is the true Foundresse thereof, being so styled in the
mortmain, by her confirmed 27 Junii Anno regni sui 13. Collegium Jesu, infra
Civitatem and Vniversitatem Oxon. ex fundatione Reginae Elizabethae; wherein
she established a Principal, eight Fellows, eight Scholars; and Hugh Price is
only styled a benefactor, who builded one part thereof. Since by the bounty of
Herbert Westfalling Bishop of Hereford, Henry Rowland Bishop of Bangor,
Griffith Loyd Dr. of Law, Griffith Powel, and John Williams Doctor of Divinity,
late Principal, Sir Eubule Thelwel Knight, late Principal of the same, who
has made a Court in a manner apiece, builded and wainscotted the Hall,
perfected the Chapel with a curious and costly roof, seats, glass, and all
other things necessary for so sacred a place, and many other goodly ornaments;
Mistress ^^ne Wood widow of Owen Wood Deane of Armagh in the Kingdom of
Ireland, with other good benefactors, it is much increased with students, and
has at this present in the same a Principal, sixteen Fellows, sixteen
Scholars, besides officers and servants of the foundation, with other students,
being 109.

XVII. Wadham College, founded, 1613.
NIcholas VVadham of Merefield, in the County of Sommerset Esquire, in the
seventh year of the reign of King James deceased; and bequeathed four hundred
pounds per annum, and left in ready money six thousand pounds to purchase more
Lands for the endowing of a College in Oxford, and gave order for raising of
five thousand pounds more upon his lands for the building of it, and before his
death gave directions to Dorothy his wife (sister to John Lord Peter) for the
erecting of the same; who in testimony of her love to her husband, has since
erected and perfected in such fair and ample manner, as no College in Oxford
(for the quantity) does exceed the same, expending between eleven and twelve
thousand pounds in the building thereof: and has endowed and settled a
perpetual estate of her own and her husbands of near eight hundred pounds per
annum in present, for the maintenance of a Warden, fifteen Fellows, fifteen
Scholars, two Chaplains, two Clarks, furnishing them with serviceable officers,
and other necessary ornaments fit for such a society. To which College since
Philip Bisse Doctor of Divinity, Canon of Wels, and Archdeacon of Taunton,
gave 1849 books for their Library, valued at 1200 pounds: Wherein at this
present is a Warden, fifteen Fellows, fifteen Scholars, two Chaplains, two
Clarks, besides officers and servants of the foundation, with many other
students, the whole number being 129.

XVIII. Pembrook College founded 1620.
THomas Tisdal of Glimpton in the County of Oxford Esquire, bequeathed five
thousand pounds to George Abbot then Bishop of London, John Bennet Knight, and
Henry Airay Doctor in Divinity, to purchase lands for the maintenance of 7
Fellows, and 6 Scholars; with which money lands were purchased to the value of
two hundred and fifty pounds per anuum for the said use. And Richard VVightwick
Bachelor in Divinity, Rector of East-Isley in comitat. Berk. gave lands to the
value of a hundred pounds per annum for the maintenance of three Fellows, and
four Scholars, whereupon Petition being made to King James, he granted a
Charter for the foundation of a College by the name of Pembroke College with
mortmain of seven hundred pounds per annum: which College was founded at
Broadgates Hall, an ancient house for Scholars, but not endowed, having only a
Principal, and voluntary students therein. This College was called Pembroke
College in respect to William Earl of Pembroke, then Chancellor of the
Uniuersity of Oxon. and Visitor of Broadgate Hall, to which King CHARLES gave
the Patronage of the Church adjoining to it, viz. Saint Aldats, for ever. This
College consists of a Master, ten Fellows, and ten Scholars, with other
students and officers, to the number of 169.

THere be also in this University seven Hals, in which there are many students
living at their own Charges, viz. Gloucester Hall, which was first built by
John Lord Grifford of Brimsfield for five Monks of Gloucester to study in:
afterward it was augmented by the Monastery of the order of Saint Benedict,
for their Benedictine Monks, and lastly converted to a House for Scholars, by
Sir Thomas White Knight, ut prius: and nine students. Edmund Hall was builded
by S. Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury, wherein is a Principal, and ninety
three students. Saint Albon Hall was builded by the Abbot of Saint Albons, for
their Monks to study in; wherein is a Principal, and ninety nine students.
Heart Hall was builded by Walter Stapuldon Bishop of Excester, for students:
wherein is a Principal, and a hundred and four students. N^w Inn was in the
Tenure of New College, heretofore called Turlocks Inn; wherein is a Principal,
and 140 students. Saint Mary Hall was founded by King Edward the second;
wherein is a Principal, and a hundred students. Magdalene Hall was founded by
William Waithfleet Bishop of Winchester, wherein is a Principal, and two
hundred and twenty students.

The total number of Students of all Degrees in this University, that had
names in every particular College, with the Magistrates and daily officers
thereunto belonging, besides diverse young Scholars that were relieved therein,
which had no names in any of the Colleges aforesaid, were in Anno 1622 2850.
And at this present there are in the same 3247.

FINIS.

