Opus Astrologicum, etc. OR, An ASTROLOGICAL WORK Left to POSTERITY, By NICH.
CULPEPER, Gent. Briefly containing,
1. A Century of Aphorisms, appropriated to the Resolving of Horary Questions.
2. Elections Astrological, for such as are going to War. 3. Elections and
Observations concerning Journeys. 4. Elections for Buildings, Hidden Treasures,
and Marriages. 5. Prognostications, and Astrological Secrets, proved by Example.


LONDON, Printed by J. Cottrel, for Ri. Moon and Steph. Chatfield; at the
seven stars in Paul's Churchyard, and in the middle of St. Dunstan's
Churchyard. 1654.

The Author TO The Reader.
Courteous Reader,
I Have here collected and published the most choice and principal ASTROLOGICAL
APHORISMS used in the Resolution of Horary Questions; with Elections and
Considerations of great use in going to War, taking Journeys, erecting
Buildings, making Marriages, etc. and reduced them into such a plain and easy
Language and Method, as will suit with a very mean Capacity: not for Gain,
Profit, nor Vainglory, (for those things I never desired, nor sought after) but
out of an earnest desire to benefit my own Countrymen, (who do very much want
English Tracts of this nature) to advance this kind of Learning, to serve and
assist those that are Learners and Students in this so admirable, so excellent
an Art and Mystery, and to stir up more active Pens to a publishing things of
this nature, at this time, now this kind of Learning is so much vilisted and
reproached, by a company of men that are both ignorant and malicious, who like
the Fox in the Fable, that discommended the Grapes, because he could not reach
them; so these despise Learning, because they cannot attain unto it.

But the Reproaches of the Ignorant I shall not value, nor shall I doubt but
that the Ingenious will make a good Construction of these my Labors, (which
will very much encourage me to proceed in my intended works in this kind) but
if not, I had rather have the Reproofs of the Wise, then the Applause of Fools.

N. C.

The Stationers TO The Readers.
Gentlemen, etc.
WE suppose you are not ignorant of the (praiseworthy) Labors which this
Author (of deserved Memory) has (heretofore) published; therefore it would be
a needless Task for us to undertake the Praise of him, (who is so generally
known, and whose Parts are so highly approved of, and commended by the most
Ingenious of this Age) or the true worth of the Work it self, which a short
time and experience will give you to understand.

All we shall trouble you (or our selves) with herein, is, only to assure you
that this Tract is certainly his, (under whose name it goes) and no abuse
fathered upon him: which plainly appears by the testimony of his own
handwriting, in the Original Manuscript: for he had completely perfected it,
with a full intent to publish it, long before his death: but some urgent
occasion frustrating his then-resolution, it rested for a time; in which space
death suddenly snatching him away, he could not see it printed; But having
committed it to the custody of a friend, he choicely kept it, and has now
permitted it to be published, to the honor of his dear friend, though dead,
yet living; and for the perpetual good of all those who truly love Arts and
Sciences.

Richard Moon, Stephen Chatfield.

A CENTURY OF Aphorisms, Appropriated to the resolving OF Horary Questions.
Collected by NICH. CULPEPER Gent. Student in Astrology.. 1647.

LONDON, Printed for R. Moon, and S. Chatfield. 1654

Aphorisms.
1.
UNder Aries are born men of thick hair, white or yellowish, curling; long
visage, crooked nose, hazle eyes, little ears, short legs, little feet: the
first 15 degrees give a more gross body then the later.

2.
Under. Taurus are born men of a short and thick stature, big, broad men, high
forehead, wide nose, great mouth, fat short neck, dark ruddy color, short
arms, thick hands, thick black hair, big buttocks, short legs, slow to anger;
but if once angered, hardly ever pleased again.

3.
Gemini gives a delicate, strait, wellcomposed, and well-set body, good color,
bright clear eyes, good sight, and piercing; long arms, long hands and feet,
large breast, brown hair, good wit, fluent tongue, and apt discourse; yet a man
of no great fidelity.

4.
Cancer gives but a little short stature; yet the later fifteen degrees give a
more full body then the former: you know one Sprat may be something bigger then
another: the upper parts of the body are more thick then the lower; disorder in
the teeth, little eyes, blackish hair, a low whining voice.

5.
Leo arising, gives great head and eyes, quick sight, a large, lusty, strong
body; full of metal, courageous, vstouthearted; thick, broad shoulders;
yellowish or flaxen hair; a big great voice, resolute spirit, aspiring brain,
of a generous, free-hearted, and courteous disposition.

6.
Virgo arising at a Nativity, gives a spare body, yet well composed; a mean
stature, lovely brown complexion, great eyes, thick black hair, subtle wit, no
great fidelity, aiming at self ends.

7.
Scorpio gives but short s^ature, yet a big-limbed, full, and well-set body.
strong and active; wilful, malicious, false, and deceitful; sad-brown hair,
dark sallow complexion, a short neck; quick in motion of body, but of reserved
thougnts.

8.
'Twere pity to have missed Libra, the come^iest of person, and uprightest in
condition of all the Zodiac.

Libra gives a delicate, comely, strait body; a round, fair, and well-favoured
face, hair for the most part flaxen or lightbrown, but sometimes black: a
cheerful well-sp^ken creature; red lips, cherry-cheeks; a tall slender body;
courteous, impairial, just and upright in all their dealings.

9.
Under Sagittarius are born strait, well-proportioned-bodies, strong and
well-set; of a loving cheerful countenance, high color, oval visage; good
horsemen, and great shooters; stout hearts, brown hair, and quickly bald.

10.
Capricorn gives a very slender weakly man, dry and lean; the face (...) and
thin; blackish hair, and i^ exceeding thick; (...), ob^^^^^, or pale (...); a
man as big about the middle as about the breasts; long ne^k, a disproportioned
body; witty, choleric, and sad.

11.
Under Aquarius are born men of a middle stature, well shaped, clear skin, fair
visage, yet more lovely th^n beautiful or curious, yet a handsome-composed
body, a whitish-bright hair, and sometimes yellow.

12.
And lastly, pisces gives a short, ill-composed body, yet a good face of clear
complexion and color; thick shoulders, brown hair, fat and plump in all parts;
an idle body, else no way hurtful.

13.
In general descriptions of the Planets, consider, The Sun presents one of a
brown or yellowish color, round forehead, great hazle eyes, sharp and
piercing, quick-sighted; of no great stature, yet fleshie, and full-boned: he
has a long beard; and is quickly bald; a generous creature, high-minded,
aiming at no base or mean things.

14.
The Moon declares one with a pale and whitely face, mixed with but little
redness, if any: of mean stature, proud, of an auburn hair, slow of speech,
fat, and phlegmatic; short arms, fleshy hands, of a mutable condition, often
removing from place to place; a wearish peevish creature, seldom contented:
neither delighting much in action nor idleness.

15.
Saturn signifies a man with a black swarthy color, big and large eyebrows,
black and little eyes, thin beard, and sometimes none at all; thick shoulders,
and sometimes crooked; heavy lumpish looks, tall stature: he goes with his
head stooping forward: lean face, thick lips: he delights to be alone, and is
always musing: he hits one leg against the other as he goes: he can hide his
anger, and his tongue will tell no tales of his heart: wilful, envious,
malicious, fearful, proud, and slovenly; coverous, aiming wholly at his own
ends.

16.
Jupiter represents a man tall of stature, of a brown ruddy complexion, an oval
visage, high-forehead, fair gray eyes, lightbrown hair, a handsome well-set
strait body, large belly, great thighs, great well-proportioned legs, long
feet, a sober, well-spoken, well-conditioned man, desiring to benefit all men;
not covetous, nor caring for the goods of this world.

17.
Mars describes one of an high color, slender, yet strong, and well-set, a
round sunburned face; his hair yellow or f^^^en and (...); hazle eyes, quick,
sharp, and piercing; furious looks; proud, presumptuous, vallant, full of words
boasting and lying.

18.
Under Venus are born people of a whitely-brown color and complexion; black
and quick eyes, little eyebrows, red lips, cherry-cheeks with little dimples
in them; the nether lip some what bigger then the upper; a neat, well-composed,
and well-ordered body; strait, but of mean stature; affable, courteous, merry,
wholly delighting in Curiosities..

19.
Lastly, Mercury gives a creature of a tall stature, black hair, long lean
face, high forehead, long strait nose, lean lank body; long fingers, and lean;
long feet; and he goes swinging one arm: a witty subtle man, full of talk, and
of no great fidelity, unless Mercury be in a fixed sign.

20.
By comparing the Planet with the sign he is in, the description of the body
is found out. Also, by considering the strength of the Planet, his aspect to
the Sun or Moon, his being with fixed Stars, either of, or opposing his own
nature, with his being above or under the earth. For Planer, when they are
above the earth, give far taller, stature, then they do when they are under the
earth.

21.
In an Horary Question, when the Lord of the hour is the same Planet, or of the
same Nature or Triplicity, or in the same Triplicity with the I have found many
Questions true, wherein this has not been so.
Lord of the Ascendent, the Figure is radical, and sit to be judged of; else
not.

22.
Pass no judgment upon I suppose the true reason of this is fear of mistaking
the Sign^^^^^^.
a Figure, when either the first or later degrees of a Sign ascend: for if few
degrees ascend, the Question is not (as then) ready for judgment: but if the
later ascend, the time is slipped, and the Querent has been tampering with
some other Artist about it.

23.
Saturn or Mars peregrine in the tenth house, or the Dragons tail there, the
Artist gets no credit by that Question.

24.
In all Questions, have a special eye to the Moon for she brings the strengths
of the other Planets to us: It is better the Lord of the Ascendent be
unfortunate, then she.

25.
In all Questions wherein the Fortunes are significators, hope well: but if the
Infortunes be significators, fear the worst, and so order your judgment
accordingly.

26.
When the Moon is void of course in a Question, there is no great hopes of
effecting any thing to purpose: yet if she be in Taurus, Cancer, Sagittarius,
or Pices, the fear is the less.

27.
The Planet which the Moon last separated from, shows what has been done
already in the business: If from a Fortune, good; if from Judge the like by the
(...) of the Ascendent:
an Infortune, ill. See what house the Planet is in, and give your judgment
accordingly.

28.
The application of the Moon shows the present state of the thing demanded:
(...) a good (...), in a good ^ouse, by a good aspect, gives strong hopes of
the thing desired.

29.
The application of the Moon to a Planet in his fall, or detriment, signifies
trouble and delay in the business.

30.
If a Planet re^^ograde, or in his first station, be Significator, he denotes
much dicord and contradiction in the business.

31.
A Planet slow in motion, if he be Significator, prolong mightily the thing
sought after; especially, if he be in a sign contrary to his nature, or in the
house of his enemy.

32.
When the Infortunes signify evil, they bring it to pass with much violence:
but if they signify good, they either bring it not to pass at all, or if they
do, it comes with much care, delay, and vexation.

33.
When the Infortunes signify any evil, see whether Jupiter or Venus cast
friendly beams thither: if they do, they mitigate the evil; and so much the
more, if it be with reception.

34.
When the Fortunes portend any good, if Saturn or Mars cast froward beams
thither, without reception, it mightily hinders the good promised.

35.
Confide not too much upon what a Fortune promises, unless he be either in
essential dignities, or received by another Fortune: for else, he is like a man
that would fain do thee good, but wants power.

36.
Saturn and Mars peregrine, are malicious beyond measure: they are not so bad
when they are in essential dignities; for then they are like noble enemies that
have got their enemy in their hands, and scorn to hurt him.

37.
If Saturn or Mars be in their houses or exaltations, and in angles, and
promise any good, they bring it to pass.

38.
In a Question, when For^unes and Infortunes are equally weak and ill-seated,
defer the judgment till the heavens are better seated.

39.
When a Planet promising any good in a Question, is either in combustion with,
or opposition to the Sun, he never brings the good to pass.

40.
Saturn and Mars in conjunction, if they promise good, it never comes to pass:
but if they promise evil, it comes with more malice then was expected.

41.
The Lord of the Ascendent, and the Moon peregrine, show the Querent is out of
all hopes of obtaining his desire.

42.
View whether the Significator of the thing desired be in a fixed sign: if he
be, it will continue: if in a fickle sign, it will quickly end: if in a common
sign, it will change out of one thing into another.

43.
If the Lord of the Ascendent, or the Moon, ^e with the head or tail of the
Dragon, it brings damage I shall diligently heed the Dragons head in this
particular. As for the Dragons tail, it is out of question.
to the Question propounded. Look in what house they are, and from the
signification of that house you may know whence the damage will come.

44.
The first house signifies the life, complexion, disposition, will, manners,
and understanding of the Querent; the beginning of all enterprises.

45.
The second House signifies riches, gain, traffic, gold, silver, and loss and
gain by traffic; all moveable goods without life.

46.
The third house signifies brethren, sisters, kindred, small voyages, short
journeys, interpretation of dreams, etc.

47.
The fourth house signifies the father, houses, land, immovable goods,
orchards, tillage, hidden treasures, minerals, all things under the earth,
prisons, obscure places, the grave, and good report after death, and the end of
all things taken in hand.

48.
The fifth house signifies children, all younger kindred, joy, pleasure, gifts,
bravery, delight, the riches of the father, all profit of the fourth house,
playing, gaming, drinking, etc.

49.
The sixth house signifies servants, sickness, all cattle not fit for labor,
as dogs, sheep, etc, fowls, wild beasts, hunters, goalers, prisons, false
accusations, etc.

50.
The seventh house signifies marriage, wives, lawsuits, contention, quarrels,
known enemies, all the men we deal with, common persons, etc.

51.
The eighth house signifies death, sadness, riches never thought of, dowry,
estate of them we deal with, and of known enemies, all the benefit of the
seventh house.

52.
The ninth house signifies Religion, pilgrimage, long journeys, dreams, faith,
sacrifice, ceremonies, Clergymen, Navigations, etc.

53.
The tenth house signifies honor, dignities, preferment, calling, offices,
trade, Magistrates, Kings, Princes, Governors, advancement, renown,
profession, and the mother; Captains and Conductors in War; help, succor.

54.
The eleventh House signifies friends, acquaintance, hope, the things we
desire, companions, counsel of friends, all the benefit gotten by the tenth
house; good angels, etc.

55.
The twelfth house signifies private and secret enemies, evil spirits, prisons,
captivity, bondage, slavery, torment, treason, villainy, horses, and all beasts
fit for labor.

56.
In all Questions, look whether the Ascendent or his Lord be in the degree of
any Eclipse at hand: for then though the matter be in never so fair a way, it
will receive prejudice when it is least expected, and hardly ever be concluded.

57.
Seldom comes good end of a Question, when the Moon is impedited. Judge
accordingly, if neither Fortunes give her good aspect; namely, danger of death
in War, ill success in journeys, ill end of Marriage, and the like, according
as the Question is.

58.
If the Lord of the Ascendent be opposite to it, or in Square to it; also, if
the Moon be opposite to her own house or exaltation, the Querent is careless,
and cares not which end goes forward.

59.
If the Significator of the thing demanded be impedited, consider what Planet
impedites him: and from the houses he is in, and Lord of, you may find the
cause and persons hindering the business.

60.
The nearer the Significator is to an angle, the more good you may expect:
less, if he be in a succeeding house: little or nothing, if he be in a cadent,
unless the matter of the Question be such as belongs to that cadent house he is
in.

61.
In any matter promised by any aspect, consider diligently whether there be not
any frustration: if there be, there will be hinderance by persons signified by
the Planet frustrating.

62.
In every Question, consider part of Fortune: if it be well dignified, the
Querent gets by thing or men signified by the house it is in: if il^ dignified,
let him expect loss from such. The like may be said of Jupiter and Venus.

63.
Beware of men and things belonging to that house where the Dragons tail is:
seldom times but the Querent receives loss, damage, slanders, or scandal, by
men or things signified by that house.

64.
Judge not rashly of the Conjunction of two Planets, before you have considered
what sign they are in: for if it be a sign of their own nature, it increases
their signification; if not, the contrary.

65.
Also consider the nature of the sign, whether humane, violent, etc. fixed or
moveable, etc. and order your judgment accordingly.

66.
Of this, and all significators, whether they be with fixed Stars of or against
their own natures: for the one mightily increases, the other retards their
significations.

67.
Figures of Horary Questions are either true or false, according to the intent
of the Querent.

68.
Beware of Questions when Mars is in the Ascendent, or when Scorpio arises:
for it is a sign of falsity.

69.
A Radical Figure resembles either the nativity, or the revolution of the
nativity of the Querent.

70.
In a Question truly Radical, there is a sympathy between the matter
propounded, and the position of the heavens at the time of the proposition.
This is the most absolute way to judge of the radicalness of a Figure.

71.
Love and Hatred cause error in judgment: the one magnifies trifles, the other
depresseth great matters. Ye see what impartial men Astrologers ought to be.

72.
When benevolent Planets are Lords of the eighth or twelfth houses, and ill
dignified, the Querent shall receive damage from reputed honest men.

73.
A man had need have a special care of his judgment, when the seventh house or
his Lord are impedited.

74.
The seventh house and his Lord are Significators for the Artist; and therefore
when they are afflicted, his judgment is subject to be clouded.

75.
The matter of any Question is obscured, when the Planet signifying the thing
is either under the earth, or under the sunbeams.

76.
But if the Planet signifying the thing, be out of combustion, direct, and in
the tenth house, the business lies as clear as the noonday.

77.
Do not judge rashly that the absent party is dead: it may be he is but drunk.

78.
Do not rashly judge a man is wounded: it may be he was let blood.

79.
Do not judge rashly that a man shall find hid treasures: it may be he may but
take something to pledge. The figures of these Questions are alike; and by
these you may find out many others of like nature.

80.
In all Questions, see what dignity the Lord of the Ascendent had in the
precedent Lunation; and order your judgment accordingly.

81.
Also the Revolution of the Nativity, if it can be had, will profit much; viz.
by considering the strength of the Lord of the Ascendent then.

82.
If the Figures of the New and Full Moon precedent and subsequent to your
Question be the same, and the Ascendent of your Question the same with them,
defer your judgment till another time.

83.
Significations for the Uncle are taken from the sixth house; for the
Grandfather, from the seventh.

84.
Note what Planet is Lord of the Figure, and according to his quality and
place, you may judge of the thoughts of he Querent.

85.
In all Questions, regard By Lunation, I mean the Conjunction of the Luminaries.
the next subsequent Lunation: for matters are subject to vary at every
Lunation.

86.
The matter in question will soon be performed, when the Lord of the Lunation
is Cardinal.

87.
Determine nothing before thou know the intent of the Querent. For if he know
not what to ask, how can thou tell what to answer?

88.
Judge not upon light motions of the Querent. A Question fit to be judged,
ought to be premeditated by the Querent.

89.
Mars spoils matters by too much hastiness: Saturn, by slowness.

90.
A Planet withinsixteenminutes of the Sun, is in Cazimi, and exceeding strong.

91.
Observe whether the Ascendent, or his significator, be in the place of any
Eclipse at hand: if it be, though the matter for the present be in never so
fair a way, it will receive prejudice when least expected, and hardly ever be
concluded.

92.
Very seldom there coms any good of the Question, when the Moon is impedited.

93.
When Significators are in houses of their own nature, they bring the matter to
pass with much ease.

94.
When the Lord of the eighth is unfortunate in the eighth, the Querent has
debts he will never get in.

95.
An Infortune in the seventh house, shows disagreement betwixt man and wife,
except that Planet were significator at the birth.

96.
An Infortune, unfortunate beholding the significator, brings inevitable
mischief to the Question, according to natural causes.

97.
There is no so great affliction to the Moon, as her combustion.

98.
The superior Planets Oriental, and the inferior Occidental, perform a
business with most speed.

99.
If the significator commit his strength to a Fortune that is angular, the
matter is soon performed.

100.
These Aphorisms, if rightly understood, discover the key of the mystery of
resolving all manner of Questions.

This Treatise was revised, and multifariously amended, 12 m. 1648. NICH.
CULPEPER.

Discite justitiam, moniti, and non remnere Divos: O that men would be warned,
and justice love, And learn not to contemn the powers above!
ELECTIONS ASTROLOGICAL, For such as are going to WAR. Collected by NICH.
CULPEPER Gent. Student in Astrology.. 1647.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Moon, and Steph. Chatfield. 1654.

Prooemium.
THe heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows forth his
handiwork.

The heavens hold forth the glory of God in a threefold manner:

By their Creation, Preservation, Operation.

Creation, by Mighty Power. Preservation; by Infinite Wisdom. Operation, in
manifold Virtues, by exceeding Harmony.
The heavens declare the (...) by their Creation, being produced to a being
from nothing: which is so great a work, both too high for Intelligences and
Angels. So the heavens themselves, simply considered, declare and manifest the
glory of God by their Creation.

Concerning the second, their Preservation, they depend immediately upon God:
for every creature, both spiritual and temporal, barely considered in it self,
tends to Ad non a not being. And the more excelesse. lencies a creature has,
the greater Providence it requires for its conservation; as a Horse needs a
less Providence then an Angel, because an Angel has more excellencies then a
Horse. Now the heavens declare the glory of God mightily in this respect,
because it requires a wonderful hand of providence, to conserve them in that
harmony they are in.

Concerning the third, the heavens wonderfully declare the glory of God, by
their virtual operation; whence come so many variations and changes of times;
Spring, Summer, Harvest, Winter, Cold, Heat, Rain, (...) ^^^^^nness, War,
Plenty, Diseases, Pesti^^^^^ (...) among Men, Beasts, Fowls and Fishes; all
these, and many more, too tedious to relate, come from the influence of the
heavens, and wonderfully set forth the glory of God in creating such creatures
with such wonderful influences.

All second causes act in the virtue of the first cause, and the first cause
suspends their operations when he pleases, bringing an effect immediately of
himself.

Concerning these second causes, and the concourse and operation of the
heavens, diverse learned men have written, That the effects do not fall out
necessarily, but contingently: Ptol. in centiloqu. Judicia quae tibi trado,
sunt inter necessarium and possibile.

And so the Sun signifies cleerness, and Saturn cloudiness; because Sol is
exalted, and Saturn cast down in Aries.

Also Jupiter is exalted, and Mars is cast down in Cancer; Jupiter signifies
justice, Mars deceit.

So Venus signifies singing and mirth, Mercury Philosophy, and other Arts and
Sciences.

And so the Planets have their several operations in the Signs, and also by
their Conjunctions and Aspects, from which, happy Elections may be made for
diverse business, part of which is our present scope.

Elections for such as go to War.
1.
Such as go to War, ought above all things to have a care, that they may come
safe home.

2.
Therefore let the Sun, Venus, Jupiter, or the Dragons head, be in the
Ascendent, otherwise they may come short home.

3.
If Saturn be in the Ascendent, he will come home again a coward, and will be
surprised with fear, and not fight.

4.
If Mars bethere, he will either die, or be dangerously wounded.

5.
If both Saurn and Mars be there, be confident he will never return.

6.
If the Lord of the Ascendent be in his fall, he will never return.

7.
If no Planet be in the Ascendent, look in the eighth and tenth Houses: if an
evil Planet be in the eighth, he will die; if in the tenth, he will be taken
prisoner.

8.
In Questions of Wars, if the Lord of the Ascendent, or other good Planets be
in the Eastern Angle, the Querent will obtain what he desires.

9.
If evil Planets be in the Ascendent, or the Lord of the Ascendent be in his
fall, the Querent will be vanquished.

10.
The tenth, eleventh, twelfth, Ascendent, second and third Houses, are
appropriated to the assailant; but the fourth, fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth,
ninth, to the defendant; and so are the Planets found in them.

11.
An ill Planet in M. C. signifies ill to the Querent, but in J. C. to the
Defendant.

12.
If the Ascendent be a fixed Sign, the War will hold long; if a moveable
Sign, but a little while; if a mean Sign, indifferent.

13.
If the Lord of the Ascendent, and the Lord of the seventh House be in square
or opposition, when the Question is demanded, no peace is to be hoped for, or
expected.

14.
If the Lord of the Ascendent and seventh House be in trine or sextile, a peace
may be concluded by treaty, if they treat by such men as are of the condition
of that Planet. which is Lord of the figure at the time of the Question.

15.
If the Lord of the Ascendent be in the fourth House not impedited, or give
good aspect to the Lord of the fourth, the Querent will obtain victory, honor,
and profit.

16.
If there be no aspect, nor collection, nor translation of light, etc. between
the Lord of the Ascendant, and the Lord of the seventh, there will be no war at
all.

17.
If there be a good aspect, and the Planets good, there will be a firm and
lasting peace established, by the free consent of both parties.

18.
If you would know whether the defendants have victuals or treasure, veiw the
eighth House, and the Planets in it: for that is the second from the seventh;
and signifies their substance and the Lord thereof will show either their
poverty or abundance.

19.
If Saturn, Mars or the Dragons tail be there, they want; if Jupiter, Venus,
part of fortune or the Dragons head be there, they have abundance; and the more
that House is strengthened the better they are provided.

20.
The like you may judge of the Assailants, by the second House, which is the
House of their substance.

21.
If the Lord of the seventh House be in the fourth, or the Lord of the fourth
House in the seventh, it is good for the defendant, provided they are not
impedited for this one testimony is sufficient both in wars and lawsuits.

22.
Judge the like by the Ascendent and tenth for the Assailant.

23.
It is not good to fight when the Lord of the Ascendent is in the eighth House.

24.
The Sun does no good in the Ascendent in the hour of battle, nor yet joined
to the Lord of the Ascendent.

25.
The assailant always loses the battle, if the Lord of the Ascendent be an
infortune, or retrograde, or combust.

26.
But if the Lord of the seventh be so, the defendant will be beaten, and he
that begins the battle first, will have the victory.

27.
Let no King go to battle, when the Lord of the Ascendent applies to the
seventh House.

28.
There is no taking of a City, when the Lord of the Ascendent at the revolution
of the year of the world.

29.
When the Moon, Saturn and Mars, are joined together in the same degree, Kings
will be deposed, and there will be much effusion of blood, and war, in the
places signified by that Sign they are joined in.

FINIS.
This Treatise was revised, 12 m. 1648. NICH. CULPEPER.

Coeli enarrant Dei gloriam.
ELECTIONS AND OBSERVATIONS, Concerning Journeys: Collected by NICH. CULPEPER
Gent. Student in Astrology and Physic. 1647.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Moon, and Steph. Chatfield. 1654.

Observations.
1.
HE that goes about any business to a King or Prince, when the Moon is in
Aquarius, he may be received: but the King will not regard him, nor his Suit.

2.
If the Moon be in Pisces, the King will not let him see his face.

3.
If any demand any thing of another (which may in Reason be granted) when
Capricorn is in the Mid-heavens, and Jupiter in it, and the Moon applying to
him; or if separating from him, she apply to the Lord of the Ascendent; or if
the Lord of the Ascendent apply to Jupiter, he will quickly obtain his desire.

4.
Venus causes rain and moisture; Mercury, short journeys and changes.

5.
Venus in the first degree of Cancer at the Conjunction of the Luminaries, or
any other great Conjunction, causes great Rains.

6.
In all Elections, fortify the Lord of the Ascendent, and the Lord of the
house of the thing desired.

7.
Saturn does most mischief in long journeys, Mars in short.

8.
Fixed Signs forbid journeys, moveable Signs urge them, the later end of
Libra excepted.

9.
The Moon increasing in light, in good Aspect to the Sun, helps forward
Journeys.

10.
When an Infortune receives a Fortune by good Aspect, it works no mischief.

11.
In Journeys, the greatest impediment a Planet can have, is to be peregrine.

12.
Cancer regards the Sea most; and Pisces, Rivers.

13.
Every thing which is suddenly made, and suddenly destroyed, and suddenly
re-made, the cause is in Mars.

14.
Every thing that is suddenly made, and suddenly destroyed, and remains long in
destruction, is caused by Saturn and Mars.

15.
When you go a journey by land, it is bad to have Mars in the ninth or third,
because he signifies thieves: but it is worse to have him in the second.

16.
When you would go into the Country, let the Lord of the second house be in a
fortunate place, and not in the fourth house, nor in the Ascendent.

17.
At the very time when you enter a journey, take heed there be no ill Planet in
the seventh house: for that signifies evil will befall thee, in the place to
which thou go.

18.
Yet if he be well dignified, and in good aspect to the Lord of the Ascendent,
the mischief will not be much.

19.
If the Lord of the ninth house be in the Ascendent, the journey will be made
with honor and profit.

20.
If the Lord of the Ascendent give power to the Lord of the ninth, the Journey
will be good and profitable.

21.
In short Journeys, view the Lord of the third, because he is Lord of short
Journeys.

22.
In all Journeys, view the Moon, because she is general Significatrix of
Journeys.

23.
And have a special care to the Lord of the hour: for if he be impedited when
you take a Journey, he will do as much mischief as the Lord of the Ascendent if
he be impedited.

24.
The Significator of Messengers and Ambassadors is the Lord of the fifth house.

25.
The hours of Saturn and Mars are ill to take a journey in; the hours of
Jupiter, Venus, and the Luminaries, is good.

26.
In Journeys, the impediments of Saturn are very many; and may be known by the
nature of the Sign he is in.

27.
For example: if in a Sea-journey, at the setting forth, Saturn ascend in
Pisces, the ship will suffer shipwreck.

28.
Take no journey by Sea, when a fiery Sign arises: for then a watery Sign is
in the eighth house.

29.
If you go to a Prince or King, let the Sun be fortunate, and let Aries or Leo
ascend.

30.
In all journeys, let not the Lord of the Ascendent nor hour be impedited, nor
in combustion, nor Square, nor Opposition to the Sun; neither let the Moon be
in the Ascendent.

31.
When the Sun is in his own house or exaltation in the day, or the Moon in hers
in the night, and one of them Lord of the hour, it is good to take a journey.

32.
If at such a time the Sun or Moon behold the tenth house, it is so much the
better.

33.
If the Sun or Moon give power to the Lord of the Ascendent, it is good.

34.
By a Nativity you may judge which part of the world is best for any to live
in: if you have not the Nativity, you may judge it by a Question.

35.
If the Fortunes be joined with the Lord of the Ascendent, between the M. C.
and the Ascendent, it is best for him to live eastward.

36.
This is also so much the better, if the Question be demanded in the forenoon.

37.
But if the Fortunes be between the seventh and fourth house, the Western part
is best for him, and most profitable for him to live in. And if the Question be
demanded between sunset and midnight, it is more prevalent.

38.
The other parts of the heaven may easily be gathered from these.

39.
These all will be far more significant, if the Lord of the hour be a Fortune,
and the Lord of the Ascendent joined with a Fortune.

40.
If a Question be demanded, to know the return of a man, behold whether the
Lord of the Ascendent, or the Moon, be in the tenth, or in the Ascendent: for
then he will return.

41.
If the Lord of the Ascendent be retrograde, he will quickly return: if direct,
it makes his return the slower.

42.
Moveable Signs hasten his return; fixed, delay it; mean Signs make him
travel from one place to another.

43.
If the Lord of the Ascendent give his strength to the Lord of the ninth or
third houses, or to any Planet in those houses, his return will be slow enough.

44.
If the Lord of the Ascendent be in the tenth, in a moveable Sign, he will not
stay a day before he come home, but certain hours only.

45.
By considering the Sign the Significator is in, whether fickle, fixed, or
mean, and his difference from the Cusp of the Angle, or from the body or Aspect
of the Significator of the Querent; and guiding your judgment by Reason,
according to the thing quesited, you may judge how many hours, days, weeks,
months, or years, it will be before he return.

46.
The Moon also has great strength in such Questions.

47.
Notwithstanding, if she be in the second, sixth, eighth, or twelfth houses,
regard her not.

48.
Also, if the Ascendent be Leo or Aquarius, Gemini or Sagittary, the Moon is of
little force: not so in other Signs; the reason is, because these Signs have
no aspect to Cancer the house of the Moon.

49.
Also, give the Lord of the fifth house to the Messenger or Ambassador; and
the Lord of the Ascendent to the Querent; and give judgment of his return by
the former Rules.

50.
If the Question be about any that is sent to receive money, see what
application the Lord of the fifth has with the Lord of the second, and judge
accordingly.

51.
If the Lord of the fifth house be separated from the Lord of another house,
you may see what has been done already, by the signification of that house;
and whether it be good or bad, by the signification of the Planet he is
separated from.

52.
And also, you may know whether the business be effected wholly, or in part, by
the strength of the Significators.

53.
Also, you may note what Planet either impedites or strengthens the
Significators; and so you may know the cause of it.

54.
If the Question be about Honor, take the Lord of the tenth house, and work
accordingly.

55.
Another way to judge of returns, is this: See if the Moon be Lady of the hour
of the Question: if so, and she be strong, she is Significatrix of the return:
if she give beams to the Lord of the fifth house, he will return when she comes
to his place, or perfect Aspect.

56.
But if she aspect the Ascendent, he will return when she comes to the degree
ascending at the Question.

57.
But let judgment herein be ruled by Reason; namely, if there be a possibility
of his returning so speedily.

58.
By these Rules may any Astrologer, that is not troubled with the Simples,
easily make Elections for the beginnings of any of these businesses.

This Treatise was revised, 12m. 1648. NICH. CULPEPER.

ELECTIONS For Buildings, Hidden treasure, and Marriage. Collected, and put
into this form, BY NICH. CULPEPER Gent. Student in Astrology., 1647.

LONDON, Printed for Rich. Moon, and Steph. Chatfield. 1654.

Elections for the Beginnings or Foundations of BUILDINGS.
1.
AMan ought to have a regard in all edifices, that they may stand and continue
long.

2.
In the Foundations of Cities, in the first place regard the fixed stars, then
join benevolent Planets with them.

3.
In the foundation of houses, first regard the Planets, and their natures; and
in the second place, the nature of the Signs.

4.
If the Moon be in Scorpio or Pisces, having latitude Meridional descending,
begin no building: if you do, it will quickly fall down.

5.
The most fortunate time of all, to begin buildings, is when the Moon is in
Aquarius; or else let Aquarius ascend, and the Moon behold it, and the Fortunes
also, by good aspect, to wit, the degree ascending.

6.
Also, Leo and Taurus are good, but not so good as Aquarius.

7.
Let not the Lord of the Ascendent be combust, nor retrograde, nor in his fall,
nor detriment, nor in ill aspect to any Planet.

8.
If it be possible, let both the Luminaries behold the Ascendent.

9.
At such a time, Saturn will do most good, or at least, least mischief in the
twelfth house, and Mars in the sixth.

10.
Beware that the Sign ascending at the revolution of the year, be not in the
seventh house, when you lay the foundation: for then enemies enough will infest
and molest the house.

11.
The Lord of the Ascendent is strongest when he is in his Auge: for when he is
opposite to his Auge, he is unfortunate, because he is Retrograde.

12.
If an ill Planet be peregrine in the tenth house, the building will stand as
long as a Cat is tied to a Pudding: and yet you had better have Saturn there
then Mars.

13.
That City will be most unfortunate, whose foundation is said when Mars is in
M. C. for many of its Citizens and Princes or Rulers will die by the sword.

14.
When the foundation is laid, let not the Moon be in Conjunction with Saturn,
nor yet with the Dragons tail; nor yet let Saturn be in the Ascendent, nor yet
in the fourth, if he be unfortunate; for then the building will go on slowly,
and be finished at Doomsday in the afternoon; or if ever it be finished, and
made habitable, the inhabitants will be possessed with incessant fears, and vain
illusions, and fooleries, and thieves, and tribulations: and a thousand to one,
if the building at last do not fall down upon a sudden.

15.
If Mars be so seated, or so aspected, as we speak of Saturn in the former
Aphorism, the house will be burnt down.

16.
If there be any fantastical apparitions in a house, and thou would fain
remove them, let not the Moon be in the Ascendent, in any of these signs, nor
any of them ascending; viz. Cancer, Leo, Scorpio, Aquarie: and let her separate
from evil Planets, and apply to good ones.

ELECTIONS Concerning Hidden Treasures.
1.
HIdden Treasures belong to the fourth house, and to his Lord.

2.
If the Lord of the Ascendent, and the Lord of the fourth house, be fortunate
in the Nativity of any, and in good aspect the one to the other, and the
Luminaries behold the Ascendent by good aspect; that native will be subject to,
and fortunate in finding Hidden Treasures.

3.
In Questions about such businesses, if the Lord of the fourth house be
fortunate in the Ascendent, or Lord of the Ascendent, or in the fourth house,
the treasure may be found.

4.
If in the Question Saturn, Mars, or the Dragons tail, be in the Ascendent, the
Querent will take labor in vain in searching for it, and in the act will be
troubled with foolish fantasies and illusions.

5.
If good Planets be in angles, let the game go which way it will, there is a
possibility of finding it, if good courses be taken.

6.
If you would know whether there be any treasure or no, consider the Angles of
the heaven, especially the Ascendent, then the fourth, then the tenth: for the
seventh is of little or no value, in such businesses as these.

7.
If within the first degrees (to wit, five degrees from the Cusp) of these
Angles, there be any good Planet, it is a good argument there is treasure hid.

8.
If the Sign possessing the Cusp of the fourth house be a fiery Sign, it lies
in the east part; if airy, the west; if watery, the north; if earthly, the south
part of the house.

9.
Fiery Signessignifie it to be near chimneys; airy, on the top of the house,
about the cieling or rafters; watery Signs, near water; earthly Signs, in the
earth, or cellars.

10.
For the Planets, the Sun signifies open places; the Moon, near gates or doors;
Saturn, stinking moist places, cellars, and where they lay dust and coals.

11.
Jupiter signifies halls of entertainment; Venus, bed-chambers; Mercury, walls.

12.
You must also consider other testimonies, viz. the nature of the Signs, and
of the Planets, Whether Oriental, or Occidental; whether Septentrional, or
Meridional; and in what part of the heavens they be.

13.
If the Lord of the Ascendent be in his house or exalration, the treasure is
great; if in his detriment or fall, it is worth little.

14.
If the Lord of the Ascendent be Oriental, it is newly laid there: if
Occidental, it has been there a long time.

15.
If the Lord of the Ascendent be fortunate, it may be had all; if unfortunate,
you must be content with part, and glad you can get that too.

16.
Fiery and Airy Signs show things of greater value then Earthly and Watery
Signs do.

ELECTIONS FOR Marriage.
1.
THe Ascendent stands for the man, the seventh house for the woman

2.
In which of these two parts good Planets be, it will be best for them.

3.
In both, beware of the end of Libra, and the beginning of Scorpio; for that is
the combust way, and portends no good in such matters, nor in few other matters.

4.
Let not the Moon be in combustion with the Sun; for that signifies death: nor
in the combust way; for that signifies an ill end.

5.
'Tisill in the time of Marriage, if the Moon apply to Saturn or Mars, be the
Aspect never so good: for there will be neither Peace nor Love between them.

6.
If you would marry to have many children, let the Moon be in Cancer, Scorpio,
or Pisces, not impedited: and if she be in the West, it is so much the better.

7.
In all Marriages, let the Moon increase in light and number; let her have no
ill Aspect to the Sun, nor any Aspect at all to Saturn or Mars.

8.
Venus is the general Significatrix of Marriage; therefore it is best for the
Moon to apply to her.

9.
These Aphorisms are Fundamentals in Astrology: he that has any brain, may
find a thousand more from them.

10.
He that cannot make Elections for any of these businesses, from these
Aphorisms, is unworthy the very name of an Artist.

Revised, 12 m. 1648. NICH. CULPEPER.

Creed mihi miseris coelestia numina parcunt. 1647.
PROGNOSTICATIONS, AND Astrological Secrets. Collected by NICH. CULPEPER Gent.
Student in Astrology and Physic. 1647.

Elaudandus Deus est in operibus suis. LONDON, Printed for Rich. Moon, and
Steph. Chatfield. 1654.

Prognostics.
1.
WHen you hear any News, or else in Questions about News, behold the Ascendent
and his Lord, and the Lord of the hour.

2.
If the Dragons tail, Saturn, or Mars be there, or the Lord of the Ascendent
with them, there is not a word of it true.

3.
If Jupiter, Venus, or the Sun be there, not impedited, it is true enough.

4.
If no Planet be in the Ascendent, view the fifth house: if any Planet be
there, judge by the former Rules.

5.
If there no Planet there neither, view the Lord of the hour; see whether he be
Direct or Retrograde, in what house he is, and to what Planet he is aspected.
Your own Reason, and the former Rules, will help you to judge of the matter.

6.
The part of reports is taken from the distance from Mercury to the Moon,
counting so much by the Ascendent: you may judge by that: for if that be in a
fixed Sign, or a Sign of right ascensions, it is likely to be true; otherwise
false.

7.
If the Ascendent be a moveable Sign, especially Aries, be sure there is never
a word of it true.

8.
If the Fortunes be in angles, it is probable to be true: if the Infortunes be
there, it is false, unless it belong to the Infortunes.

9.
As for example: if it belong to Wars, or strife, and Mars be in an angle, they
are true.

10.
If Jupiter be there, it is false, because Jupiter loves Peace; War is contrary
to his nature.

11.
Likewise if Saturn be angular, and the report be concerning death, captivity,
or sickness, it is true, because they are of his nature.

12.
If a Letter come to thee, and thou would know his intent that sent it; the
man that sent it is signified by the Planet the Moon separated from; the
messenger, by the Lord of the fifth house; thy self, by the Lord of the
Ascendent: and Mercury is the general significator of writing Le^ters.

13.
At the time when you search for hid treasures, let the Lord of the Ascendent
be in the tenth or eleventh houses, or else give his strength to the Lord of
them: let the Moon apply to a Planet above the earth: let Jupiter be Lord of
the hour; let him not be retrograde nor combust, nor impedited; nor let Saturn
nor Mars be in angles.

14.
If a Question be demanded, when any any shall get out of prison, or captivity,
behold the Ascendent and his Lord.

15.
If the Lord of the Ascendent be angular, especially in the fourth house, it
will be long ere he be delivered.

16.
The like if the Moon be angular; worse in the twelfth, or joined or aspected
to the Lord of the twelfth.

17.
The like if the Lord of the Ascendent be joined to the Lord of the twelfth:
for then if Saturn or Mars be Lord of the twelfth, he will die in prison.

18.
If you would know his intents that laid him in prison, behold the Lord of the
seventh house, and judge accordingly.

19.
Moveable Signs hasten delivery; so does the Lord of the third house, in
aspect to the Lord of the Ascendent, or the Moon or Lord of the Ascendent in
the third house.

20.
When a man comes to demand a Question, it is possible to know what his
thoughts are, before he reveals them.

21.
Behold where the Lord of the Ascendent is; provided he be not combust, nor
retrograde, nor in his detriment or fall: for then you must heed the Moon, and
the Lord of the hour.

22.
Consider them: if they, or which is strongest of them, be in the first house,
the Querent comes about himself; if in the second, about his estate or goods.

23.
If in the first part of the third, about little journeys; in the second, about
his brethren.

24.
In the first part of the fourth, his father, mother, or ancestors; the second
part, his house, farm, or ship: if it be a watery Sign, the third part, of the
end of some business.

25.
In the first part of the fifth, children or scholars; the second, joy or play;
the third, clothes or ornaments; the fourth, reports, letters, books, or
messengers.

26.
In the first part of the sixth, of sickness; the second, of servants; the
third, of small cattle.

27.
In the first part of the seventh, of his wife or sweetheart; the second, of
his society; the third, of theft, or goods lost.

28.
In the first part of the eighth, of death or fear; in the second part,
dividing inheritance; in the third, of debts.

29.
In the first part of the ninth, of Religion, or Laws; the second, of journeys;
the third, of dreams.

30.
In the tenth, of Kings, Princes or Potentates; of honor, office, or dignity.

31.
In the first part of the eleventh, of Merchants, or Merchandising; the second,
riches; the third, of friends.

32.
The first part of the twelfth, enemies; the second, captivity; the third,
beasts.

33.
If the Lord of the Ascendent be impedited, or not in a Sign of his own sex,
take the Moon: if the Moon be in no better case, take the Lord of the hour.

34.
There are two Significators special, of Questions: First, the Planet which the
Lord of the Ascendent is separated from. Secondly, the Planet the Moon is
separated from.

35.
The general Significator is the Planet which has most dignities in the
Ascendent, or in the Conjunction or Opposition of the Sun and Moon, if it were
near at hand, or in the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, if that were also
newly past.

I shall insert one Example for this, and so conclude.

A certain man came to an Artist about a Question, without revealing one
particular, but only the general, what he came about.



First, he viewed the Lady of the Ascendent, from whom she was separated; and
that was from the Sun, who is Lord of the eleventh house, and is in the fourth:
by that, he knew the Question was about something which he loved; which was
signified by the fourth house; viz. either his father, or his mother. But
because the Moon is separated from the Lord of the seventh, which is the house
of women, he knew it was his mother he came to enquire about. And because the
Moon is in the house of Journeys, he knew it was about some Journey his mother
was about to take; which is aggravated by her being disposed by Mercury in the
third house.

And because Venus is opposite to Jupiter in the tenth house, he said she was
going to the King.

But because both of them are Retrograde, and in Opposition, and Venus in the
fall of Jupiter, he said the King would frown upon her at the first; as also
because the Moon is received by Mercury Lord of the twelfth house.

Yet because Jupiter is a Fortune, in his exaltation, in an Angle, free from
the beams of Saturn and Mars, he said he would hear her, at last; also, because
the Moon disposes Jupiter, and is in an humane Sign.

This was all true.

Revised, 12 m. 1648. NICH. CULPEPER.

FINIS.. 1647.

