A REVIEW OF THE COVENANT, WHEREIN The Original, Grounds, Means, Matter, and
Ends of it are examined: AND Out of the Principles of the Remonstrances,
Declarations, Votes, Orders, and Ordinances of the prime Covenanteers, or the
firmer Grounds of Scripture, Law, and Reason, disproved.

HOSEA 10.3,4.

Now they shall say, We have no King, because we feared not the Lord, What then
should a King do to us?

They have spoken words, swearing falsely in making a Covenant: thus judgment
springs up as hemlocke in the furrows of the field.

Printed in the Year, 1644.

The Contents of the Chapters in this ensuing Discourse.
CHAP. I.
By what means the Covenanteers were reduced to the necessity of entering into
this Combination, confessed to be their last refuge. p. 1.
CHAP. II.
The Grounds of the Covenant, and false Assertions laid down in the Preface to
it, disproved. p. 4.
Wherein is showed that the Covenanteers falsely affirm^
1. Themselves to be All sorts of Commons. 2. To live All under one King. 3. To
be All of one Reformed Religion. p. 5. 4. In taking this Covenant to have an
eye to the King^ Honor and Peace of the Kingdoms, 5. Or upon all the Plots
against Religion in all places. 6. That they swear after mature deliberation.
7. That their supposed Enemies have an intention to subvert Religion. p. 6. 8.
That their own Supplications and Remonstrances have been any means to preserve
it, 9. Or themselves from utter ruin. p. 7. 10. That this Covenant is
according to any former practice of these Kingdoms (The late Scottish Covenant
how unlike it.) 11. Or the example of God's People (Jews, Germans,
Low-Countreymen, or other Protestants) in other Nations. p. 9.
CHAP. III.
The unlawfulness of the Covenant in respect of the Cause Efficient; as made
by Subjects against the will of their Superior in such things as necessarily
require his consent. p. 11. This illegality proved upon it 1. As a Vow. This
illegality proved upon it 2. As an Oath. p. 12. This illegality proved upon it
3. As a League.
CHAP. IV.
The matter of the Covenant examined; and proved, first, to be against Truth.
p. 13.
In that they falsely swear
I. The Doctrine, Discipline, Government, and Worship of the Church of Scotland
to be according to Gods Word. II. The Doctrine of England not to be so, as
contradicting their practices. p. 14. III. The Lord not to be one amongst them,
so long as Prelacy is not extirpate. IV. That Prelacy is a sin, and that if
private men should not take upon them to be Reformers, they should be partakers
in other men's sins. V. That the Cause of Religion is common to them all. p.
18. VI. That they earnestly desire to be humbled. VII. That the sins by them
mentioned, are the true causes of the Kingdoms distress. p. 19.
CHAP. V.
That the Covenant, by reason of the many ambiguities in it, especially this,
Who shall be the authenticke Interpreter o^ it, cannot be sworn in judgment.
p. 20.
Where we enquire,
I. Who ought to be the Interpreter in other ordinary Oaths; II. Who in this.
Whether every man for himself, or the foremen for all; and how they may
differ. Particular doubts proposed upon which the Covenanteers are not
resolved: As, III. Wherein the Doctrine and Discipline of Scotland consists. p.
22. IV. Who those Common Enemies are against whom they swear. V. What the
Doctrine, Worship, Di^cipline, and Church- Government of England is, as to the
Covenanteers. p. 23. VI. To what that clause relates, According to the Word of
God. VII. What meant by -- Whatsoever shall be found contrary to the power of
godliness. p. 24. VIII. In what sense they vow to de^end his Majesty's Person
and Authority. IX. And whether the Kings preservation must be preferred before
the preservation of all, or any one Privilege of Parliament. p 25. X What
Liberty they intend. Whether to be free States. XI, Who meant by -- Both
Kingdoms. And which the Supreme Iudicatory in them. p. 26. XII. What they
understand by the Yoke of Antichristian Tyranny.
CHAP. VI.
That the performance of sundry Clauses in the Covenant cannot be without grand
inconvenience or injustice. p. 27.
Such is their swearing
I. Constantly to preserve the Scottish Government (a humane invention) and
Discipline, in its own nature alterable. II. To reform the English and Irish,
according to the example of the best Reformed Churches: which is hard to be
found, and not necessary to be followed. p. 28. III. To endeavor the nearest
uniformity in all the three Kingdoms; which is not possible to be compassed,
nor fitting to be kept. p. 30. IV. To preserve the Privileges of Parliaments;
whereof some challenged to be such, are declared to be incompatible; others
argued to be injust. V. To accuse all Delinquents and Malignants, not excepting
a man's own self. p. 34. VI. To endeavor that all such may be brought to
punishment, without hope of mercy or pardon. VII. Each man to go before another
in the example of Reformation; without waiting for the Ministers to show, or
Magistrates authority to lead the way. p. 35.
CHAP. VII.
That many things vowed in the Covenant are not possible to be fulfilled. p.
36.
For it is impossible for all the Covenanteers,
I. Constantly, and all the days of their lives to endeavor each particular
they swear. II. Mutually to preserve the Privileges of Parliament of all the
Kingdoms. III. To assist and defend all that enter into thi^ Covenant. p. 38.
IV. Never to alter their opinions to neutrality or indifferency. V. To observe
all the Cla^ses in the Covenant, some whereof imply contradiction.
CHAP. VIII.
That the very taking the Covenant, and other avowed actions of the
Covenanteers, are in ^act contradictory to the formal words of their Oat^. p.
40.
This is argued, in that they swear,
According to their callings, to extirpate all Popery, Superstition, Heresy,
Schism, Faction; And to preserve the Privileges of Parliament, Liberties of
the Kingdoms, Authority of the King:
Yet is their taking and enforcing of this Oath
I. Inconsistent with most of their Callings. II. An act of Popery, properly so
called. p. 41. III. As great a Superstition as Monastique vows. p. 44. IV. A
Branch of Aeriani^me, and so a Heresy. p. 46. V. A vowed Schism from their
mother Church. p. 48. VI. A breach of the just Privileges of Parliament. p.
50. VII. An encroachment upon the public Liberty. p. 53. VIII. A contempt of
the Kings Authority. IX. A sworn Faction against the better part of the
Kingdom.
CHAP. IX.
That many particulars vowed in the Covenant, and intended by the Covenanteers,
are simply and absolutely unlawful. p. 55.
Such are
I. The alteration of Religion established by Law, without the Lawgivers
consent. II. The Extirpation of Episcopacy. p. 61. III. The pulling down the
present Church^Government, before they be agreed upon another. p. 63. IV. The
Extirpation of the present Ministry, as being Ecclesiastical Officers that
depend upon the Hierarchy. p. 66. V. The Extirpation of Deanes and Chapters,
and alienation of the Churches patrimony. p. 68. VI. Their illegal forcing the
King to go against his Oath, legally taken at his Coronation. p. 72. VII. Their
swearing to have no respect of persons in their Extirpations. p. 75. VIII.
Their allowing their Judges to punish Malignants as they shall think
convenient, though their offenses do not so deserve.
CHAP. X.
That the Covenant is repugnant to those general Ends for which it is
pretended to be taken. p. 78.
As being,
I. Contrary to the Glory of God. II. Destructive to the Protestant Religion,
and serving rather to advance Popery. III. Derogatory to the Kings Honor. p.
80. IV. Prejudicial to the Liberties of the Kingdoms, as taken for the
upholding of their power, by whom all public Liberty is already destroyed. V.
Inconsistent with the Peace of the Kingdoms: as tending immediately to nothing
but War with others, and not likely to end in Peace amongst themselves.
CHAP. XI.
That the particular Ends of the several Articles are likewise inconsistent
with the matter of them. p. 87.
As,
I. A violent Reformation, with the Growth of Religion. II. A violent
Extirpation of what is not sin, with the clearing of the Extirpers from sin.
III. Their swearing, absolutely to preserve the power of Parliaments, but the
Kings Person and Authority with reservation, for this End, that the world may
judge of their loyalty, and how they have no intentions to diminish his just
Power. Here the world is in part informed wherein the Kings just Power
consists: As, ( 1. In making p. 88. of Law. 2. In making p. 88. of Law. 3. In
declaring p. 89. of Law. 4^ In executing 5. In appointing Justices. 6. In
pardoning offenders. p. 90. 7. In disposing of preferments. 8. In protecting
his Subjects. 9. In Supremacy over all Estates. 10. In calling, adiourning,
proroguing, dissolving of Parliaments.) p. 91.
And how all these Powers are actually diminished, if not destroyed by the
Covenanteers. In treating of the last particular, the equity, and so the
validity of the late Act, Against the Dissolution of this present Parliament,
is ventilated.
CHAP. XII.
The true End of framing and enjoining this Covenant, The bringing in of the
Sco^s, absolutely unlawful. p. 96. I. In respect of the English inv^^ing. p.
97. II. In respect of the Sco^s coming. (Where the three pretended Reasons of
their Invasion are debated, viz.
1. The g^^d ^f Religion in England. p. 98. 2. The (...) of their native King.
p 99. 3. The rescuing this Kingdom from destruction.) p. 100.
III. Their many former Oaths and Protestations to the contrary^

CHAP. XIII.
From these premises the Covenant is concluded unlawful in respect of the
Form. p. 104.
Errata,
Page, Line, For, Read 3 18 left last 6 3 desciverant desciver^nt 7 2 and or 8
34 abjected abjured 10 13 Passan Passa^ 14 35 convented convened ib. 37 knew
know 21 21 interferre interfere 23 33 Assembly that Assembly of that 25 6 bulk
balke 29 6 to English to the English ib. 20 our one 31 29 must might 37 31
considered considerable

Those Quotations which occur out of the Remonstrances or Declarations of
Parliament, are taken out of that Exact Collection, printed for Edward
Husbands, and published by special Order of the House of Commons made Martii
24. 1642. which is here usually pointed at, the most compendious way by these
Characters.

A Review of the Covenant.
CHAP. I. By what means the Covenanteers were reduced to the necessity of
entering into this Combination, confessed to be their last Refuge.
WHen the danger is once over, to reflect upon the many miseries they have
undergone, may happily afford some small comfort to such as shall escape: but so
long as we groan under the present distempers, and can discern no probable
end of our sufferings but with our selves, it is but a sad contemplation to
look back upon our former Peace, and enquire by what sleights we were fooled
out of so happy a condition. He that found the poor man ready to perish in the
bottom of the pit, and was more inquisitive how he fell in, then sollicitous
to use means how to help him out, expressed a greater measure of curiosity
then Charity.

It shall therefore be my chiefest endeavor to rescue, if I may, the many
seduced Scules out of that pit of Destruction into which they are already
plunged. The danger of those courses that led them thither, was wisely
foreseen vide; Exact Collection of all Remonstrances, Declarations, etc.
between the Kings Majesty, and the Parliament. page 61. 102-127.164.1^^. 252.
and 381.
and timely foretold by His Majesty; but urgentibus Imperium fatis, salutares
Dei atque hominum admonitiones spernuntur.

If the Contrivers of these great Tropicks in Church and State had at first,
(...), acquainted us with their designs, we should have been afraid to own,
and ashamed to abet them. No question but what comes last in execution was
first in their intention. The subversion of Government, as well Civil as
Ecclesiastical, was the prime aim of those Architects of State, who were to
erect their private greatness upon the public Ruins. For whom it had been
in vain to strike immediately at the face of Majesty, or talk of pulling up
Root and Branch the first day. At the beginning of our Parliament it was with
the common People of this Land, as once with the Roman Soldier, Miles longo
Caesarum Sacramento imbutus, ad destituendum Imperatorem, art magis and
impulsu quam suo ingenio traductus. The tie of Allegiance which had been ever
held sacred, and the many blessings of a long Peace, enjoyed under His Majesty
and His Royal Father, would not, without the help of Arts and Industry, suffer
them to make a sudden defection from their Loyalty. Their nature therefore,
fatally inclined to change, must be cunningly wrought upon by an odious
representation and malicious aggravation of some past grievances; their dull
restive Spirits must be conjured up by those two vulgar Charms, Religion and
Liberty; they are commanded to believe this is destroyed, and that endangered:
So to bring them out of love with their present condition, and make them
venture a certain happiness for uncertain hopes.

By what degrees they were disciplined and broken to a perfect Rebellion, I
forbear to rehearse. But if the Covenanting Members yet remaining at
Westminster (of whom only I desire to be understood through this discourse) be
the same men that managed the Cause from the beginning, and were the true
Authors of all those Declarations and Remonstrances fathered upon one or both
Houses of Parliament, I crave leave once more to put the Kingdom in mind of
what they were told before, Declarat. of May. 19 1642.

E C. p. 213. vid. and p. 16. and ^86.


how they had brought their work to such a height and degree of success, that
nothing seemed to be left in their way able to hinder the full accomplishment
of their desires, unless God in his Justice should send a grievous curse upon
them. When we lay this profession of theirs in the balance with His Majesty's
Answer to that very Declaration, Ex Coll. p. 255.
where he desired his actions might no longer prosper, then they were direct^d
to the glory of God, and the maintenance of true Religion; and weigh withal,
Their strength and His weakness at that time, he having but a few men to guard
him, less money to pay them, nothing at all to arm them, save a good Cause,
the only thing that his adversaries wanted; and see how the Scales are turned
since, how they are enforced to call in Foreign assistance, and verify their
own prophetic fear of invasion; we cannot but acknowledge His Majesty found
that blessing which he desired, but whether it were the curse of God that thus
far hindered the accomplishment of their desires, we are not forward to
pronounce.

After they had been twice foiled by His Majesty, first by His Pen, and since
by His Sword: when writing and fighting would not serve the turn, they fell to
vowing and swearing; their City Covenants led the way, and to bring on the
Scots, this National followes^ which their own elect M. Nigh in his Exhort.
Co^. with a Narrative. p. 21.
Orator tells them, As it is the last Oath they are like to take in this kind,
so it is their last Refuge. Tabula post naufragium. If this help them not, they
are like to remain till their dying day an unhappy People.

This then being (as is supposed) their Achilles, upon which the fate of Greece
depends, I have adventured to encounter it. Though I must confess the minds
of all men being long ago preengaged, and the grand controversy not likely to
be decided by any other dispute, then of the sword: Discourses of this kind
are much out of date. Nor can I conceive what other great advantage they can
make of this Covenant, unless it be to enrich themselves by the injust spoils
of some few men resolvedly honest, who by refuseing of it shall give testimony
to the world, that they value the salvation of their souls, above that of
their Estates. As for those many softer tempers, who may be won by
persuasions, or forced by constraint to the taking of it, they will no sooner
have opportunity to free themselves from those inducements, then they will hold
themselves freed from any obligations laid upon them by this Oath, which is no
other then a band of iniquity, as I shall endeavor to prove by thi^ ensuing
Discourse.

CHAP. II. The Grounds of the Covenant, and false Assertions laid down in the
Preface, disproved.
THe more sacred any Ordinance is in it self, the more prodigiously
Sacrilegious is their sin who would abuse it to injust ends. Such are all
those who traitorously affected to the King of Heaven, without any warrant from
his Law, upon false suggestions and surmises of their own, dare counterfeit his
Sign Manual, a Vow, and affix his Great Seal, an Oath, to any illegal
Ordinance of their own invention.

The Preface to this Covenant, if it be no part of it, (as Covenant with
Narrative. p. 28.
Master Henderson says it is) yet it contains the grounds of it; which ought
to be so true and evident, as might be fit foundations to build a Solemn Oath
upon; so unquestionably certain, that at least the Covenanteers themselves
should not doubt of them. Whereas here they present us with almost as many
untruthes as lines, and some of them such as themselves know and confess to be
false.

1. For it is not true, that all sorts of Commons in the three Kingdoms,
either yet have, or probably ever will take this Covenant, nor that it is
indeed, what is here insinuated and commonly given out, a National Covenant
between the Kingdoms. When the Covenanteers in the close, declare their desire
to be humbled for their own sins, and the sins of these Kingdoms; as they
put a distinction betwixt their sins, so must they admit a vast difference
betwixt themselves and these Kingdoms, of which they are but an inconsiderable
part; I mean for their worth, and I hope for their number too. 2. It is not
true, that all those who take the Covenant upon their own Principles, Live
under one King; the States of Scotland, and the two Houses in England, are
commonly affirmed to be above the King, at least Coordinate with him. His
authority is M. Wards Analysis of the Covenant.
said to reside with them, though the person of Charles Steward be not there.
This indeed makes them Kings, but not one King, so long as England and Scotland
are not one Kingdom. As for other inferior Covenanteers they must be
Subjects, but whether to one, or the many Kings, let it be thus tried. King
Charles Commands they shall not swear this League, the many Kings Command they
shall; and their Subjects they are to whom they obey. 3. It is not true that
all the Covenanteers are of one reformed Religion. Edenb. Ian. 4. 1642.
The Scots have often Petitioned for unity in Religion, and S. Andr. May.
3.1642. E.C. p. 598, 599, and 600, 602.
professed there can be no hopes of it, till there be first one form of
Ecclesiastical Government: this being not yet effected amongst themselves,
they must not pretend to be of one Religion. 4. It is not true that in making
this Covenant they could have all those goodly things before their eyes, which
they here boast off. Vision is properly of things present; the Liberty and
Peace of England, and Ireland could not be visible to them through the
deplorable Estate of the one, and the distressed Estate of the other Kingdom.
But if they meant the phrase in a figurative sense, yet am I loath to believe
they looked upon the Glory of God, and the honor of His Majesty with the same
eye. That they intended to make him a glorious God, in the same sense, they
endeavor to make his Majesty a Glorious King. 5. It is not true that they did
or could possibly call to mind the plots, attempts, and practices against the
true Religion, and professors thereof, which have been in all places ever since
the Reformation. It is now above sixscore years since Luther first broke the
ice, no doubt many plots have been against our Religion, or the professors of
it, some perhaps bare plots, stifled in the womb, and never known but to the
plotters; others might come to the birth, attempts, and practices, but at such
a distance of time and place that none of the Covenanteers could be privy to
them then, or were acquainted with them since; either never committed to story,
or those Histories not now extant, or at least not read, no^ observed, or
forgotten by the Covenanteers, who therefore cannot now call to mind the plots
in all places ever since the Reformation. 6. And if they have not done so, then
is the succeeding position likewise false, they did not enter into this
Covenant after mature deliberation. Surely two or Order of the Commons. Sept.
25. 1644.
three days after the first proposal was too short a time to ripen such a
Deliberation. But if it must be held an essential mark of malignancy, not to
swallow without chewing whatsoever is offered by such hands who pronounce the
sentence by that Law, Qui dubitant, desciverant. If any one Covenanteer be
truly guilty of such a politic rashness, as to swear upon trust, that
others have maturely deliberated, though he have not, his default is sufficient
to make all the rest liars, who in that case cannot truly say, We of all sorts,
calling to mind the Plots in all places, resolved, after mature deliberation,
Swear, etc. 7. If it were agreed, who are the greatest Enemies of our
Religion, we should be better able to judge of the increase and exercise of
their power and malice. Upon that principle which the Scots have taught us, No
unity in Religion without unity in Ecclesiastical Government; we must conclude
against the Covenanteers, that they who swear to extirpate the Government are
Enemies to the Religion of the Church of England. But if they intend by
Enemies, the King and Bishops, and other misnamed Malignants, whom they traduce
for an intention of subverting Religion, it is a calumny, as void of truth as
full of malice: nothing was ever denied by his Majesty, or opposed by his
Followers, which might conduce to the settlement of the true Reformed,
Protestant Religion And if it be such a permanent truth, that when ever any man
swears this Covenant, The power of these Enemies is at that time increased; I
wish they would consider what a strange Enemy they have to deal with, who
grows stronger by their opposition, Qui saepius vinci potest, quam illi
vincere: and take heed they be not given up to incureable blindness and
hardness of heart, that they cannot see, or will not acknowledge the hand of
God working against them, and themselves fighting against God. 8. It is not
true, that their Supplications, Remonstrances, Protestations, and Sufferings
have been any means to preserve themselves or their Religion from destruction.
First, for Supplications: we have not heard of any from Ireland without effect,
save such as are put upon the Covenanteers score. Nor have the Scots been
repulsed in any desires which concerned themselves; it was their crime, which
is our misery, they would needs be in aliena Republica curiosi. And such
supplications as have been presented in the name of this Kingdom, were either
for fashions sake, desiring the Kings consent to things they resolved to do
without it; and after the rejection of that gracious Message of January 20th,
which might have prevented all those unreasonable demands insisted upon since,
Non ut assequerentur, sed causam seditioni. To send an Army to present a
Petition, was a strange address of Subjects to their King. Nor need they
impute their Remonstrances of all the conceived errors in Government, or their
Protestations to defend his Person, accompanied with a October. 22. 1642. E.C. p.
663.
Declaration against his syncerity in Religion, and resolution to hazard their
lives against Him and his Army, which the very next day they performed
accordingly: but if supplications and sufferings were truly means, why do they
not continue to supplicate, since they have no right to command? Why do they
not (like Christians) rather suffer still, then offer wrong? Rather submit to
the Laws in force, then by violence compel their Sovereign to receive new
ones from them? 9 Their Resolution to enter into this League, for the
preservation of themselves and their Religion from utter ruin and destruction,
implies a double untruth, that both they and it may be utterly destroyed.
Though our Bodies and Estates have been long exposed to the peril of
destruction; yet our souls are shot-free, we may take our Saviors Matthew. 10,
28.
word for it; and Animus cuj^sque est quisque. When Pandora's box of fears and
jealousies was first set open, we were told of dangers though we could see none
then, save that it was certain ruin for any man to think he was not in
danger; but we have now too just cause to believe their predictions, who by
that artifice got so much power into their hands as is sufficient to undo the
Kingdom; and by this Covenant vow so much ob^tinacy as not to entertain any
thoughts of peace till either that be done, or they perish in the work: and if
they shall, yet will their Religion (if it be that which they profess, the
true Protestant) never fail, for Magna est veritas and praevalebit: Matthew. 16,
18.
the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it; and 7. 27.
it is founded upon a Ro^ke, and all the Enemies of God cannot overthrow it,
Act. 5.29.
because it is of God. 10. The pretended truth of that which follows is
obtruded upon the people to serve for a shooing-horne to draw on the Covenant,
which is falsely affirmed to be according to the commendable practice of these
Kingdoms in former times. The Subjects of England never entered into a sworn
Covenant, such as this is, either amongst themselves, or with other Nations. If
the late Rebels in Ireland did any such thing, none but equal Rebels will
think their Example worthy of commendation. So then, if neither England nor
Ireland ever did the like, t^en not these Kingdoms. Scotland only remains,
the near and neighboring Example whereof Covenant with a Narrative. p. 28.
Master Henderson proposes to our Covenanteers, as worthy their best
observation, he would not say imitation: for Examples are the weakest
Arguments; and in matters of doubtful right those that urge them commonly go
beyond their Copy. It is but a poor defense, Societatem alieni criminis
innocentiam vocare. Nor will the late Scots Covenant 1538, serve to justify
this now.

For first, in relation to themselves, there is a great difference in the
occasion then and now. Their Religion and Liberties they then affirmed to be
invaded; now they cannot pretend any such matter.

Secondly, for the efficient cause, that Covenant was made only betwixt
Subjects of the same Kingdom; but this is a League amongst People of different
Countries and Laws.

Thirdly, that was not without some stamp of royal Authority; being alleged
to be the same for substance with the general Band, formerly subscribed and
allowed by King James 1580. and enjoined by several Acts of Council and
general Assembly 1581, 1590. and to justify their explanations upon it many
Acts of Parliament were produced. But this is wholly contrary to the Kings
Command, and some part of it against the whole current of English Parliaments.

Fourthly, the maine matter in both, Episcopacy, though it was supposed or
suggested to be against Law in Scotland, yet was Ministers Answer to the 4.
Them. of the Doct. of Aberden.
not required to be abjected, but the practice of it forborne, and the matter
referred to a free general Assembly. Whereas here, though it be so deeply
rooted in our Laws, that no man can tell what is Law without it, it is vowed
to be utterly extirpated, and that without the advice of the Clergy in
Convocation, without a free Convention of both Houses in Parliament, without
His Majesty's Assent or Approbation.

Fifthly, for manner of prosecution, Ibid. Answ. to the first Demand. and Answer
to the first Reply.
the Scots then professed to persuade, not enforce men to Covenant; disclaimed
all threatenings, but of Gods Judgments; all violence, but of reason. Whereas
Ordinance of the Committee of Estates, Nov. 6. 1643.
now if their greatest Peers do post-pone or refuse to take this Covenant, all
their goods and rents must be confiscate, and their persons made incapeable of
any benefit or office in the Kingdom.

Lastly, the case in England and Scotland is not now the same; the edge of
those Laws which were formerly urged against them, is taken off by a late 2
Parl of K. Charles. Act. 29.
Act of Parliament. Whereas our Laws stand yet in full force, and no man can
be assured but the King may one day recover so much strength as to put them in
execution.

11. The next Assertion being equally false is equally destructive to the
foundation of this Covenant; which is not (as is affirmed) according to the
example of Gods People in other Nations; which Text if we expound by Covenant
with Narra. page 28.
M. Hendersons Comment, either of the Israelites of old, or the Protestants in
Germany and the Low Countries of later times, it will but serve to set out the
ignorance or impudence of the Contrivers.
It is true, the Jews made many vid Genesis 17.7. Deuteronomy. 29.12. Josh. 24. 23, 25.
2. Chron. 15. 8, 12. and 23. 16. and 29. 10. and 34.31,32. Nehem. 5.14. and 10.
1, 28, 29.
Covenants, but none like to this. For 1. All theirs were terminated within
themselves; they did not vow the Reformation, much less extirpation of any
Common Enemy, Syrians or Babylonians, of another Nation or Religion; for which
yet they might have a better color then our Brethren of Scotland now have. 2.
The object of their Covenants was not like this of o^rs; no pretended
Privileges or disputable Liberties in matter of State, nor any conjecturall
fancies, or probable opinions in point of Religion: but either an universal
obedience to the whole Law, or a more strict observance of such particular
Precepts, wherein they found themselves most defective. 3. No one of their
Covenants was ever sworn against the will of the Magistrate, but always at
the personal command and example of their Supreme, or at least subordinate
Rulers, not opposed but countenanced by the Supreme. A circumstance which had
it ever been omitted by them might have been thought less necessary, in regard
the matter of their Covenant was always enjoined by God himself.

Next, for Germany, we must remember, that Country is of a much distant
constitution from the Kingdom of England. Many Princes, and some Cities there,
do not acknowledge the Emperors Supremacy, as we do our Kings; yet never
made any such Covenant as this against him. The first and principal by the
Protestants at 1530. and 1535. Sleidan. Com. lib. 7. and l 9.
Smalcald, was not of sworn Subjects against their Sovereign, but together
with their Princes, for mutual defense only, not to offend any. And their
last Covenant in the Pacification at 1552.
Passan, after much effusion of blood, and the ruin of many Noble Families,
ended in this, that no man should be troubled for his Religion, whether
Romanist or Reformed.

Lastly, the highest strain that I meet with in any Covenant made by the
Protestants in the Low Countries, is no more then this, Strad. hist. lib. 5.
Me^erran. lib. 2. page 44.
To defend themselves, and oppose the Inquisition. The never vowed to extirpate
either Popery or Prelacy, though the Prelates were of a different Religion: but
in some of their Idem. lib. 6. page 177. lib. 7. p. 194. lib. 4. p. 95. lib. 8.
p. 217. 227, 228. lib. 9. p. 239. 248.
Covenants bound themselves to preserve them; and plead in their Petitions for
the expediency of toler^ting diverse Religions in the same State. Nor can I but
admire the confidence of that Orator, who would impose upon his Honorable and
Reverend Auditors a thing so contrary to all experience, urging the example of
those Countries for extirpation, whose constant and continued practice in the
toleration of all Religions is almost without example.

If this be not enough to disprove the truth of this ground, their own
Writers, Covenant with a Nar. p. 12. and 19.
M. Henderson, M. Nigh, and M. View of the Covenant. p. 15.
Mocket, shall witness against it, who with one mouth confess this Covenant
to be such a thing as they never read nor heard of, nor the World ever saw the
like. It is not then according to the former practice of these Kingdoms, nor
the example of Gods People in other Nations. Only the Holy League in France,
which M. Ward.
some of our Covenanteers so much disclaim, was so fully parallel to this in
all circumstances, that if I had leisure to confront them, the Reader would
say, Bithus and Bacchius were not more alike.

I could with a wet finger, out of the Thuanus D' Aubigue Davila, etc.
Authenticke Histories of that League, derive the whole pedigree and progress
of this, and point out thence the maine Heads and particular insinuations of
such Remonstrances and Declarations as ushered this Monster into the world.

-- Sed spatiis disclusus iniquis
Praetereo. --
CHAP. III. The unlawfulness of this Covenant in respect of the Cause
Efficient; as made by Subjects against the will of their Superior, in such
things as necessarily require his consent.
HAving discovered the grounds of the Covenant to be false, we may well presume
the superstruction it self is rotten and ruinous; as will more fully appear
upon a strict survey of all its causes and ingredients.

First, in respect of the Cause efficient, which is the parties covenanting,
swearing, vowing, and inter-leaguing one with another, the unlawfulness of it
does appear in this, that it is made by such as are, or should be what they
profess, Subjects all living under one King, not only without any leave
obtained, or so much as once desired, but contrary to the known will, and
express command of this their lawful King; and that in such matters whereto
his consent and approbation is necessarily required; without which they could
neither lawfully take it at first, nor after his dislike is made known to them,
ought they to persist in it, so as to hold themselves bound by it, though the
matter of it were in it self otherwise just and good. For without controversy
the parties Covenanting, as to some parts of this Oath, are as much subject to
their supreme Head, the King, as the daughter to her father, or the wife to her
husband. I shall not here need to question whether the King be Minor Vniversis,
it will serve the turn if he be Mayor Singulis, for in this Oath every man
swears for himself, as a private person, not in any public capacity. If
then by the Numb. 30.
Law of God, the vow of the daughter or wife was so far in the power of the
father or husband, that he might confirm or cancel it, as he pleased; and God
refused to accept of it from the woman, unless the man, to whom she was
subject, did ratify and allow it. Upon the same ground of subjection, though
the matter vowed in this Covenant were not otherwise unlawful, yet being such
wherein the parties vowing are and ought to be subject to the King, it is in
his power to irritate their Oath, to declare it void and null, and if they
persist in it they sin.

2. This shows the Covenant to be unlawfully taken, but much more unlawfully
obtruded upon others as a new solemn Oath, which they have no authority to
impose that do it. The same Engine by which they dismounted the late Canons,
and di^charged that Oath, will serve to fetch off any Ordinance o^ Lords and
Commons commanding this, That a new Oath cannot be imposed without an Act of
Parliament, was a Truth so undoubted by the two Houses that they insist upon it
twice in one lea^e of the same Ex. Coll. p. 859,860.
Declaration. Their Ib. p. 908, 910.
petitioning his Majesty to pas^e an Act for establishing a new Oath, and that
he would be pleased to enter into a more strict alliance with some neighbor
Nations, are sufficient convictions of their want of Authority in themselves
either to impose a new Oath upon the Subjects of this Kingdom, or to enter
into a new League with those of another, unless the consent of his Majesty be
first obtained.

3. I^ any private Men, Town, City, or County, may lawfully take this Covenant
of their own accord and free will^ (which is the way to ingratiate themselves
the more) then in other cases of the like kind, they may at any time of their
own accord, without any command from Superiors, enter into a League of mutual
defense with other Countries, and bind themselves by a solemn Oath to
performance. And then farewell, not only the ancient Authority of the King,
but that modern Privilege of Parliament, which claims, that E. C. p. 628,
and 823.
no County can bind it self without their consent.

But if all the Kingdom be therefore bound to take this new Covenant, because
it comes to them as commanded by the two Houses, though there were no Law for
it before, then must all our Histories be purged, all our Law-bookes taught to
speak another Language, and all those Declarations revoked, wherein the Lords
and Commons of this Parliament, so many E.C.p. 270, 715.
times disclaimed all power of making any new Laws without his Majesty's
cons^nt.

CHAP. IV. The matter of the Covenant examined, and proved first to be against
Truth.
NExt to the Efficient, we shall survey the material Cause of this Oath, and
allow it fair trial by the Laws of God and the Land. If it be endited upon
the Text of Jeremy 4.2. It will be found guilty in the highest degree, as
destitute of all those conditions required to a lawful Oath, Truth, Judgment,
and Righteousness.

For the first, though this be for the maine a Promissory Oath, to the formal
Truth whereof, as such, no more is required but that the meaning of the parties
swearing be truly conformable to the words of their Oath; that they truly
intend to perform what they swear: yet is not the whole frame of it merely
promissory; some assertions are interwoven, either actual or virtuall, by way
of implication: which may be justly suspected for want of Truth; and i^ that be
proved upon any one of them, all the Covenanteers are, ipso facto, guilty of
perjury. I shall but point at some particulars.

I. Those words wherein they swear the Preservation of Religion in the Church
of Scotland, do imply that the Religion of that Church is in all the
particulars there mentioned, Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government,
according to the word of God. Which is justly doubtful in some, and flatly
false in others. 1. The Doctrine of that Church, so far as it is distinct
from their opinions concerning Discipline and Government, and other matters of
practice, I have no purpose to quarrel. I acknowledge the ancient Articles of
their public confession for true; but if by Doctrine they understand all the
modern explanations and other doctrinall positions which have issued from their
General As^emblies in later times, I could bring more instances and more
objections against the truth of these Doctrines, then I know how to answer. But
I forbear to make the wound wider then necessity requires. 2. As touching their
manner of Worship, if we should deny, they would be hard put to it, to prove
those forms which they use in Marriage, Baptism, the Lords Supper, Public
Prayer, Preaching, Catechizing, and other of Gods Ordinances to be according to
his word. 3. Much less their Discipline and Government, by Classes and
Assemblies, higher and lower, which they pretend to be iure divino and
perpetual. Some of their ablest Scholars have acknowledged their moveable
temporary Deacons, not to be consonant to divine Institution. And, if we might
be admitted to argue before equal judges, we should go near to prove as much
against their ruling Elders, which first justled the Superintendents, and since
the Bishops out of that Church. If they will submit to that rule, the
Presbytery, in Scripture, must submit to Episcopacy: that at best was but a
Delegacy under the Apostles, who were in right the primitive Bishops, and from
whom ours challeng by undeniable succession.
II. When they swear the Reformation of Religion in England in Doctrine, as
well as Discipline, according to the wo^d of God; they falsely imply that our
Doctrine is erroneus, and not according to the word. Which though it be
scandalous to us, is advantageous to the Covenanteers. The Articles of our
Church most true in themselves, cannot be wire-drawne and forced to comply with
their designs, and therefore no wonder if they desire to have them altered.
They must therefore set the Dial by the Clock, and seeing the present Doctrine
of the Kingdom condemns their practice and opinions, they must so far
reform it, that it shall not contradict them.

When a new Assembly of Divines must be convented, to tell the People such
things are according to the word of God, which all men knew to be contrary to
the Law of the Land, seeing the Royal assent could not be obtained to
authorize a Convention of such Persons, and in such an uncouth illegal way as
was desired, it was inavoydably necessary, that the Doctrine of our Church in
the 21. Article should be reformed, which teaches, That Counsels may not be
gathered together, without the commandment and will of Princes.

When they are resolved to extort those rights from their Sovereign by force,
which he is unwilling to part with upon entreaty, then it is fit the 35. Article
be reformed, which confirms the Homily against Rebellion, as containing Godly
and wholesome Doctrine, and necessary for these times. In truth never so
necessary for any times as these, the like whereof England never saw before.

When they have vowed the extirpation of Episcopal Government, Root and
Branch, is it not high time to reform the 32. Article which talks of Bishops,
Priests and Deacons: much more the 36. which adds Archbishops, and confirms
the book of Consecration and Ordination?

When that Doctrine must be instilled into the people, that the King is no more
then the Prince of Orange, or the Duke of Venice, only Mayor singulis but
minor universis, and that when his command^ and those of one or both Houses are
different, theirs must and ought to be obeyed, as with whom the suprem power
does reside; then surely a Reformation of the 37. Article is indispensably and
eminently necessary, by which the Subjects have been led into that dangerous
and deadly Heresy, that has cost so many thousand lives, That the Kings
Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England, unto whom the chief
government of all (not only particular persons, but) Estates of this Realm,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, (not in some cases only, but) in
all causes does appertain.

Lastly, when they were to take such an Oath as this, without the consent and
against the command of the Magistrate, so utterly destitute of all the
conditions required to a Lawful Oath, they could do no less then reform the
39. Article, which requires those conditions. So that it cannot be denied, but
they have strong inducements to reform the Doctrine, as well as the discipline
and Government of England; and as they vow them both in one clause, so perhaps
they intend them both in one sense; the Reformation of Doctrine as well as
Government must be a total Extirpation of Branch and Root; we must not have
one chip left of the old block.

III. Their swearing the first Article to this end, that they may live in
Faith, and that the Lord may be one amongst them, implies that before, and at
the time of their entrance into this Covenan^, they neither lived in Faith, and
so were Infidels; nor was the Lord one amongst them, and so without God in the
world; which I hope is not true. But if faith be here taken for obedience, (as
sometimes it is) or for an assent to the truth of that Doctrine which is
Harmon, Confess.
acknowledged by the world for the Confession of Faith of the Church of England:
so I grant their late and present demeanor i^ a sufficient demonstration, they
have not lived in that faith. And I confess we have been told in effect by
some of their forerunners, that the Lord is not one where Prelacy is not
extirpate. Countermarch to M. James his Retreat. 1607.
That the true Church of Christ consists of Saints, Covenanted with God and
themselves, having power to Christ and all his Ordinances; which the Assemblies
of England want; being violently compelled to submit to another Christ of the
Bishops devising; and so are no true Church. For the true visible Church is but
one, as the Baptism but one, and the Lord but one, John 10. 16. This was the
scandalous imputation of the Brownists upon our Church, in the beginning of
their separation; and it is shame and misery we should live to see it confirmed
by a Solemn Oath. IV. When they swear in the second Article to extirpate
Prelacy, and that for this end, least they be partakers in other men's sins;
this implies not only that Episcopacy is a sin, which is an errant untruth;
but that if they should not labor for the extirpation of it in such a violent
manner as they do, they should be guilty of that sin. This conceit was the
maine ground of Separation both to the ancient Donatists and our modern
Brownists; they both imagined, that if the Church be any way stained with
corruption in Doctrine or Discipline, her Communion is hateful and defiled,
and that whosoever joins with her is Ibid. and Protestation Protested. page 14.
partaker of her sins, and so in danger of her plagues. Which is certainly
false; our Savior did not partake in the sins of the Jews, yet he did
communicate with them. So long as we neither command nor counsel a ^inne to be
done, nor consent to the doing of it, nor commend it when it is done, but
barely permit it (though it be naturally, yet if it be not legally in our power
to hinder it) we are no way guilty of it. God himsel^e does permit sin
without sin. And if any man will be a Reformer without a Commission, he must
look to be checked with a Quis requisivit? Israel sinned not by staying in
Egypt, nor Lot by remaining in Sodom, till the Lord sent Moses to call them,
and the Angel to fetch him out. It was their affliction, but not their fault
to see those unrighteous dealings of their Neighbors, which did vex but not
pollute their righteous souls. All sin is to be avoided, but not by all
means; some are possible which are not lawful. Death is a certain cure for
all distempers, but a man may not kill himself to avoid intemperance; nor make
away his Children in their infancy to prevent the sins of their age.

The President of the New Assembly with his twenty assistant Brethren have
published some truths in this Argument which might have been of singular use
had they come in time, sufficient to stop that current of blood which has
flowed from other principles then that which they now Preach to others but do
not practice themselves. Considerations to diswade men from further gathering
of Churches. December. 23^ 1643.
They tell their more zealous Brethren, who (having conspired with them to
extirpate this Government, and sworn every man to go before another in the
example of a real Reformation) begin to gather themselves into Church
societies, Although it be the duty of all the Servants of Christ to keep
themselves always pure from corruption in Religion, and to endeavor in an
orderly way the Reformation of it, yet it is an undoubted Maxim that it
belongs to Christian Magistrates in an especial manner to be authorizers of
such a Reformation. If this Maxim had been as well followed as it was known,
we had never had a Rebellion to make way for a Reformation. How can they
without blushing talk of an Orderly way to others, who know their call and
sitting to reform where they do is altogether disorderly?

But suppose the sins of Government did involve every one of our Nation in a
common guilt; what is this to the Scots? Though Israel offend no necessity
that Judah should sin. They may have sin^ enough of their own to reckon for,
though they should not swear that those of another Kingdom shall be put upon
their score: and yet they do it, by vowing to extirpate Bishops, etc. least
they be partakers in other men's sins.

V. That which they have undertaken to maintain is not truly called in the
sixth Article, The common Cause of Religion, Liberties, and Peace of the
Kingdoms. The many Sects and different opinions among the Covenanteers, and
the reiterated desires of the Scots for unity in Religion, abundantly prove
that the same Religion is not common to them all. And de facto the Religion,
Peace and Liberties of England and Ireland have been disturbed, when the Scots
enjoyed all theirs without opposition; and may do so still, unless they will
thrust their fingers into the fire when they need not. The Cause of one
Kingdom is not common to another though they be in subjection to the same
King. Philip the second, might have done well to grant a toleration to the
Protestants in the Low Countries, though he had resolved never to allow the
like in Spain. And His Majesty, by reason of his necessary absence from
thence, may have granted some Liberties to Scotland, which if he should do in
England would be in vid. 27. ^en. 8. c. 24.
disherison to the Crown. VI. In the last Article, they profess and declare
to the World their unfeigned desire to be humbled for their own sins. Which
profession the World, that sees only their Actions, will ^carce admit to be
true. For it may well be conceived that the chief Heads among the Covenanteers
are the same that projected the Nineteen Propositions, whence the World will
conclude rather an ambitious desire in them to be exalted, then any unfeigned
desire to be humbled.

Besides, it is not unknown to the World that, among other Sects which swarm
in that great City where the Covenant is so generally taken, the Antinomians
for number are not contemptible, of whose Creed this is a fundamental Article,
That God sees no sin in his elect, such as they take themselves to be; and
they would think it a derogation to the satisfaction of Christ should they be
guilty of an unfeigned desire to be humbled for their sins: if any thus
opinionated have taken this Covenant, he makes the rest liars as well as
himself.

VII. Lastly, though it cannot be denied, but the present distresses and
dangers of these Kingdoms are the fruits of their sins, yet to unde^take (as
they here do) to determine for what sinne^ in particular God is pleased to
inflict these Judgments upon us, is an Act of State proper for such as are of
Council to the Almighty, and should not be avowed by a solemn Oath, without a
special warrant by Revelation. Besides, I do not find such a Harmony betwixt
this Confession of sins here, and that formerly published in the Feb. 1^.
1642 E.C. p. 917.
Ordinance for Humiliation. And it is not long since the Assembly informed
their two Houses, that impunity was the cause of those reigning sins, Incest,
Adultery, Fornication, Blasphemy, etc. but they forbore to tell us who were the
cause of that impunity; were not they who pulled down those Courts where such
sins were punishable?
Amongst other provoking sins they make this one, that we have not labored
as we ought for the purity of the Gospel. I am afraid there is a bad design
lurks under these good words, which the Covenanters are now in labor of;
probably the introducing of the long ago pretended holy Discipline, or some
like Monster already Christened before it be borne, by the name of Purity and
Reformation. If so, then is it false, that the not laboring for such a Purity
is any cause of our present distress. For in all Queen Elizabeth and King
James his Reign and the first fifteen years of King Charles, for fourscore
years together, though we wanted this pretended Purity, yet we wanted not the
happiness of a blessed Peace. Which in the Judgment of our K. James his
Proclamation for Uniformity. 1. Iacobi. March. 5.
English Solomon is a strong evidence, that God was well pleased with that
form of Religion established by Law. Yet was he informed then, as Queen
Elizabeth had been before, by the frivolous suggestions of some light Spirits,
of diverse errors both in Doctrine and Discipline, which stood in need of
Reformation. Nor did we ever groan under the heavy hand of God, as at this
day, till men of like humors upon the same grounds, have reenforced those
opinions by the Sword, which their Predecessors failed to make good by
Discourse.

These things if they be not all formally false, because in some sense they may
be true; yet being not certainly true, they are all guilty of a virtuall
falsehood, because in some sense they are false: and seeing no man can know in
what sense he ought to swear them now, or shall be required upon his Oath to
believe them hereafter, he cannot therefore swear them in truth and Judgment.

CHAP. V. That this Covenant, by reason of the many ambiguityes in it,
especially this, Who shall be the authentic Interpreter of it, cannot be
sworn in judgment.
I. EVery Oath ought to be conceived in such familiar language as may be least
obnoxious to misconstruction; and though few or none can be so void of
obscurity, but a man, disposed to quarrel with words, may easily find
himself matter to work upon. Yet in other Oaths, all doubts of this nature
may be quickly removed: for when a Vow or an Oath is taken by any man of his
own accord, he knows in what sense he meant it at the time of emission, and
in that he is bound to make it good.

But when an Oath is imposed by the authority of another, the taker is bound in
that sense which the impo^er meant it, so as it be not repugnant to the
ordinary signification of the words, and such as may rationally be presumed to
be intended by that authority.

But if any man shall conceive the words of an Oath to be meant by the imposer
in such a sense as he would not willingly swear, but can frame to himself a
different construction of them, according to which only he will take the Oath
and resolves to be bound by it: this will no more excuse him from perjury, then
if he should make all the Vows, and take all the Oaths in the world, with an
actual intention not to be bound by any of them; which is utterly contrary to
the nature of all of them.

II. Upon these premises, I infer that the present Covenant cannot be sworn in
judgment; not so much because it is clogged with many doubtful clauses, which
may be common to it with other Oaths, as because it is infested with this one
fundamental doubt proper to it self, Who shall be the authentic Expositor
of it.

It should seem here in England, by their way of proposal at first, not
commanding it by Ordinance^ but recommending it by their own Example, and
Orders of Commons Sep. 25.1643.
requiring the ministers to explain it to the people, that the Members at
Westminster desired it should be a free Vow, and then every Covenanter must be
his own Interpreter, not withstanding the many inconveniences that must ensue
upon it. For every man abounding in his own sense, instead of swearing union,
they shall swear division; and by their Vow to preserve all such as take the
Covenant in the same words, they shall be obliged to destroy all such as take
it in a contrary sense to themselves.

But if this be an Oath imposed by the Authority of the remaining Members at
Westminster for England, the Convention of Estates for Scotland, and I know not
who for Ireland, the clearing of all doubts must in equity depend upon the
Imposers intentions. This ministers occasion to many other doubts: as first,
whether the States in Scotland and ours of England did not at first intend some
material clauses in several senses, and whether hereafter their expositions
may not interferre, and neither being superior to other, what must be done?
Secondly, whether all the Members of both or either House in England, nay,
whether the greater part of them, did upon the taking of the Covenant, concur
in the same sense; if not, it cannot be any way obligatory as according to the
sense of the Houses. Thirdly, if there were a full agreement of the major part
present in the same sense at the first taking, yet hereafter, when they shall
come to expounding, the major part then may declare themselves in an other
sense then was first intended; for either some other Members may come in by
that time, and concurring with the now minor, make a mayor part; or some of the
present mayor part may dye, or be removed, or be absent, or alter their
opinions, and so vary the sense of the Houses, especially in that great
business of Reformation in Doctrine and Government, con^erning which, neither
the two Houses nor their assistant Divines^ as themselves Consid. of the
Assembly. Dec. 3. 1643.
confess, are yet agreed. Fourthly, if it shall hereafter appear that the
major part at the time of their taking and imposing this Oath did understand it
in one sense, and the major part at the time of declaring shall expound it in
another, it must be doubted in whether sense it shall be obligatory. And
lastly, if the greater part of Lords shall declare it in one sense, and the
greater part of the Commons in another, whose Declaration must carry it. Upon
the resolution of these doubts it will appear, that many well meaning
Covenan^eers, whiles they labored for such a Reformation as themselves
conceived to be according to Gods Word, were zealously perjured, by not
endeavoring it in that sense which the Houses will declare was only intended.

III. This maine doubt being premi^ed, which has an influence upon all the
rest, I shall only mention such others as I am persuaded the chief
Covenanteers themselves are not agreed upon. Where first I conceive in the top
branch of this Covenant, it is not only doubtful wherein the Doctrine and
Discipline of Scotland consists, which are here sworn to be preserved, but how
far the preservation of them is intended; and who are meant by common
Enemies. Since the ancient Confession of that Church has been so much improved
by modern explanations, and all these confirmed by a National Oath; since
their Discipline is such a mystery that many of themselves are not fully agreed
upon it; since their first and second Book of Discipline contain several
platformes, and the Contents of those four Volumes of the Acts of General
Assemblies ratified at Glasgow, are not yet published, it is a hard case that
any man should be forced to swear to preserve what no body knows.

IV. Next, I cannot tell where to ^ix that Character of common Enemies, which
Master Hend^rson obscurely paraphraseth Syrians and Babylonians; Covenant with
Nar. p. 17.
and Master Nigh more express, but not more satisfactory, tells us that Popery
and Prelacy are the chief. For considering Church government in England and
Ireland is by Episcopacy, and that of Scotland by the Presbytery, this Covenant
being supposed to be taken by all the three Kingdoms, it follows that neither
Papists nor Prelates are enemies to both Governments, who stiffly maintain the
one to be of Divine or Apostolical Institution; but the Separatists are common
Enemies, who hold a distinct Form of Pastoral and Independent Government to
be ^niversally enjoined by the Word of God, and both Episcopacy and Presbytery
to be humane inventions and Antichristian.

V. I am sorry I should be forced to question what is meant in the next Clause
by the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government of England. Whether that
which has been constantly avowed by this Church, and accepted for such by other
Nations. Or if that Government be already abolished by the Votes of both
Houses; if the life and soul of that Discipline be taken from it by new
Expositions made upon the late Act for taking away the High Commission; if that
Form of Public Worship, the Book of Common Prayer be suspended by an Order,
if the ancient Doctrine be already altered in part or in whole by the
extemporary Declarations of an upstart Assembly; if these Declarations, that
Order, those Expositions, those Votes be indeed binding to this whole Kingdom
(as the Covenanteers pretend they are) it will be impossible for them or any
man to affirm what is now the Doctrine, Worship, Government, and Discipline of
the Kingdom of England; there being no General Form left in which the
Kingdom is any way required, or supposed to agree, and the particular Forms
may be as many and different as the persons and opinions of the Reformers.

VI. Those words following, [ According to the Word of God] are in themselves
very material, and the misapplication of them is a matter of great
consequence. I doubt whether they ought to be restrained to the Clause
immediately foregoing, touching Reformation of Religion in England and Ireland;
or, (...), they must be extended to the preservation of Religion in Scotland
too, and so every Covenanteer be bound to maintain that the Scotch Discipline
and Church Government is according to the Word of God. I am confident the Scots
themselves do now intend them, and will hereafter expound them in this sense;
and I raise that confidence upon these reasons. First, because the General S.
Andr. Aug. 3. 164^. E. C. p. 598.
Assembly that Church, with the assent and concurrence of the Edenb. Aug. 18
1642. E. C. p. 599.
Lords of Secret Council in that Kingdom, have declared to our two Houses,
that their Kirke-Goverment by Assemblies, higher and lower, is jure divino, and
perpetual. Secondly, because in that form of this Covenant which came from
Scotland, the words ran thus, Preservation of Religion in the Church of
Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government according to the
Word of God. Now upon the other part there is equal reason to believe, that
not only many particular English Covenanteers, as possessed with an opinion of
another Government, but that our Lords and Commons at Westminster do not in
this point concur with the sense of the Scots. For first, they Ex. Coll. p.
602, 603.
declare (in answer to that Declaration of Scotland) that one Form of Church
Government will hardly be obtained in all his Majesty's Dominions, unless some
way might be found for a mutual debate in framing that one Form. Whence it
must be collected that the Form they aim at is not yet framed, and therefore
not that which the Scots practice. Secondly, their reforming that draught of
the Covenant agreed upon in Scotland, and reducing that Clause, [ According to
the Word of God] to a more proper place, and swearing in their new project of
Reformation, to have an eye not only to Gods Word, but to the example of other
Reformed Churches, without any expression of, or restriction to that of
Scotland, do persuade with me, that ou^ English Covenanteers do not conceive
the Scottish Discipline and Kirk-Government to be according to the Word of God.

VII. Their Vow to extirpate whatsoever shall be found contrary to sound
Doctrine and the power of godliness, points at some new discovery not yet
made; I would be resolved who are designed for that inquisition; how far
their Commission shall extend, and by what rules they must pronounce, what
Doctrines are sound, what rotten, what they must take to be contrary to the
power of godliness, what not. If Bishops be upon the file, either because some
have too much enlarged the Philacteries of their Authority, or have been
otherwise personally faulty; or, because Superiority and distinction of degrees
amongst the Clergy are discovered already to be contrary to found Doctrine and
the power of godliness: The same grand Enquest of Middlesex which found the
Bill against Episcopacy may impannell hereafter, and upon the same evidence
find against Magistracy. The same Arguments which set the Rooters on work,
will find them more employment when this is done; when their hands are once
in, they may proceed for a through Reformation to extirpate all Civil
superiority all distinction of Lords and Gentlemen. They who put these reasons
into the mouths, and that power into the hands of so many known Anabaptists,
may be too weak to wrest it from them when their own turn is served.

VIII. In the third Article, I bulk the Privileges of Parliament, so
mysterious and intricat as no man dare undertake to state them truly, and
only take notice of that passage, where they swear to preserve and defend the
Kings Person and authority, in the preservation and defense of the true
Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms. If his Authority were as well known
as his Person, yet might it well be doubted, how far these words intend the
preservation of one or other. Analysis of the Covenant.
Mr Ward (in behalf of the Covenanteers) gives two expo^itions of them for
surenesse; either that we swear to defend his Person and Authority, so long as
he defends our Religion and Liberties. (Which is not so much as they swear to
do for any ordinary person that takes this Covenant. For they vow in the sixth
Article, absolutely, to defend all those; but here they undertake no more then
barely to endeavor to defend the King.) Or Secondly, that in defending
Religion and Liberties we do defend His Majesty's Person, and Authority; yet
may it so fall out, that what they do, or intend for his defense may truly
tend to his destruction. And this we must confess is not common to His Majesty
with the rest of His people; who (as it seems) has these two Prerogatives left
yet unquestioned, that as the Kings Commands, and none but His, may be
disobeyed by the Kings Authority, so his sacred Person, and only His, may be
destroyed in His own defense.

IX. It is further to be observed in the frame of this Oath, that contrary to
the method of the general Protestation, the Privileges of Parliament (what
ever they be) have got precedence of His Majesty's Person; which alteration
surely was not without cause. It is therefore a doubt very necessary to be
resolved, when the certain safety of the Kings person comes in competition
with any of their real or pretended Privileges, which is to be preferred?
Whether by this Oath they are not bound in such a case rather to suffer his
person to perish, or actually to destroy him, then violate any such Privilege,
or leave it unpreserved.

X. I likewise doubt what manner o^ liberties those are which the Covenanters
aim at, seeing they have never yet claimed any, as due by law, which were
denied them. I meet with a new word much in request of late in some Scottish
papers, The States; and though it has been naturalized by Act of Parliament in
England, I am not yet willing to understand it.

When our men would caresse the united Provinces, they apply the word to this
Kingdom; and tell those High and mighty Lords, when they complain of that
assistance which His Majesty received from thence, Ex: Coll^p. 636.
We cannot believe it was done by any direction from their Lordships. Neither
can we think that they will be forward in helping to make us Slaves, who have
been useful and assistant in making them Freemen. Whence we may well be
jealous ^^at by Liberties of the Kingdoms they intend no less then those of
the Low Countries; and till they can attain to be such Free-States, in their
own opinion they are no better then Slaves.

XI. When they make it a part of their Oath to bring all Malignants to such
punishment as the supreme Iudicatories of both Kingdoms respectively shall
judge convenient, it should seem they have lost a Kingdom already, for (...)
they begun with three Kingdoms, and now here are but two left. I will suppose
England to be one; and here it will be a grand doubt to determine which is the
supreme Iudicatory. Vid. 1. Hen. 4. cap. 14. and 4. Hen. 4. c. 23.
Whether in some case^ the Kings Ordinary Courts of Justice be not supreme.
Whether the House of Commons be a Iudicatory at all. 14. Ed. 3. c. 5.
Whether the House of Lords be in all cases. Whether, if they differ in their
judgment, eit^er of them be supreme, (and which that is) or both, or neither.
Whether, if they should both concur, in matters of universal concernment to
the whole kingdom, without or against the King, they ought to be reputed
Supreme. Whether if His Majesty should concur with them, in things concerning
Reformation of Religion, (the maine business of this Covenant) the joint
assent of the 24. Hen. 8. ^. 12. 1. Eliz. c. 1. 24. Hen. 8. c. 19.
Clergy be not regularly required by the Laws of this Kingdom. If this one
question about the supreme Iudicatory were rightly stated, perhaps all other
doubts would not be tanti. But this still depending, we are left to uncertain
resolutions for all the rest.

XII. In the close of the Covenant it is very uncertain who they mean by
those other Churches groaning under the yoke of Antichristian tyranny. Surely
none more than those of the Romish Religion, who acknowledge the Popes
Supremacy. Yet Master Covenant with Nar. p. 32.
Henderson applies it rather to other Reformed Churches, which (as he says)
when they shall hear of this blessed Conjunction, it will be no other than the
beginning of a Iubile and joyful deliverance unto them from the Antichristian
yoke of tyranny. Who those Reformed Churches are, I profess I do not yet
understand, unless that Civil Dominion which their natural Princes of the
Popish Religion exercise over them, be reputed by the Covenanteers a yoke of
Antichristian tyranny.

CHAP. VI. That the performance of sundry Clauses in this Covenant, cannot be
without grand inconvenience, or injustice.
RIght reason will dictate that we ought not to make such a promise as cannot
be performed without manifest inconvenience; and Religion will add, that it
were a sin in such cases to bind our selves by a solemn Oath. Many things in
this Covenant though they be not simply impossible, nor absolutely unjust^ in
toto genere, yet in many cases they may prove to be so, and therefore cannot be
sworn in righteousness and judgment. If I make good this charge against it,
then must it be acknowledged a rash, indiscreet, and therefore a sinful Vow.

I. If a quite different Form of Church Government from that of Scotland be
approved by the Word, or at least conceived to be so, then all such as are so
conceited (as amongst the Covenanteers not a few) cannot with a safe conscience
swear to preserve that Government in any Church, which they are persuaded is
not according, but contrary to the Word of God.

Again, the Discipline and manner of Worship used in Scotland, are not only
alterable in themselves, but confessed to be so by the Con^. Scot. Artic. 20.
Doctrine of that Church: therefore it is unlawful to swear to preserve them
by a solemn Oath, which might be majoris boni impeditivum. This inference will
be no news to the House of Commons; it was urged with much vehemence, and
heard with approbation against the late Oath enjoined by the Canons. First
argument against the Canons, p. 17.
My Author concludes by a dilemma, that whosoever takes such an Oath,
inavoidably falls upon a rock of perjury; either for saving his Oath he must
deny obedience to the King, or by obeying the King he must break his Oath.

Master Nathaniel Fiennes a better Orator than Soldier, upon the same
Argument discourses thus, Second Speech, p. 13.
It is against the Law and light of Nature that a man should swear never to
consent to alter (that is not so much as the Covenan^eers here ^weare
constantly to endeavor to preserve) a thing which in its own nature is
alterable, and may prove inconvenient, and fit to be altered. And in case the
Scots should think fit, upon any occasion to alter some parts of their
Discipline, or Ceremonies in their Worship, whether must our English and Irish
Covenanteers endeavor to resist any such alteration, or sit still and let them
take their course, holding the Scottish per^ury sufficient excuse their own?

II. When they swear to cut out their intended platform of Reformation by a
double pattern, first of Gods Word, and then of the best Reformed Churches,
the latter might have been well spared, it was added without any necessity, but
not without much inconvenience. For suppose there were two best Reformed (as
certainly less than two cannot pretend to the name of Churches) which must
they conform to? Of if there be but one best, how shall they know which it is?

If Discipline hold the same course with Doctrine, and must be prescribed by
Gods Word, more than one Form cannot be admitted. There may be many errors,
but one Truth; many bywayes, but one right. But if in Discipline and Worship
for certain, and perhaps in some things concerning Government too, the
Scripture have not so fully and evidently defined, but some doubts are left
which require a further determination. Who shall be Judges in this case? Must
we sit upon all other Churches, and pronounce against them, uncalled, unheard?
Or, seeing it is a point wherein they are all equally concerned, shall they be
equally admitted to Vote with us? And when they are all met, at least by their
Delegates, shall it be referred to most voices to determine, which Church is
best Reformed? Then what if some two or three, nay, what if all have equal
voices, each Delegacy voting for their own Church, as it is most likely they
will, who shall have the casting Voice? We are now where we begun, unless
happily the Irish Church will sit down to English, and so we may carry it by a
double Vote. Or rather shall that Church be taken for the best reformed upon
whom the most second Voices do concur, the first being commonly the child of
affection, but the second the offspring of judgment? So, not improbable but
our Church might carry it again, for I could produce the testimonies of many
Authors of best note in other Reformed Churches, very liberal in their
commendation both of the Doctrine and Government of the Church of England.

Or if it were a thing easily to be agreed upon which, Church is the best
reformed, it might not be fit to swear Conformity to that example: the best
that is, is not the best that may be. The best existent may have some errors
as well as faults, and therefore no absolute pattern for Reformation. What is
best to another Church, may not be best for us. What is best for our time and
place, is not so for another. No necessity then to reform according to the
best example, if it were agreed upon. And till it be so, it had been best for
us, these troubles excepted, to stay where we were.

I conceive the reason of this addition (wherein they go less, having before
sworn to reform according to Gods Word, afterward swear to do it according
to the example of other Churches) to have proceeded from the Scots, who having
no better plea from Gods Word than others, will yet challenge our Covenanteers
upon this Clause to declare them the best reformed Church, or otherwise why did
they abjure their own, and swear to preserve the Scottish Church Government?
which though it be none of the best, yet our men have thus far followed the
Scottish Example, not of any other Reformed Church. Some want Bishops, because
they cannot tell how to have them, their Princes being of a different Religion,
will allow none but of their own. Some enjoy the Thing under another name of
Superintendents. Some are willingly without them, because settled in such a
Government as they find most suitable with a popular State, and dare not
venture upon a change. But I have not heard of any Church, the Scottish excepted,
which ever cast out her Bishops by violence, if they were of the same Religion,
and vowed to root them out by the sword, contrary to the Law and command of the
Supreme Magistrate. If Scotland be not in this an Example to our men (as some
of their Apologetiques profe^se they are not) then I am confident, this course
of Reformation is without Example in the sight of men, I wish it be not without
excuse in the eye^ of God.

III. In the next Clause I doubt the Scots have put another slurre upon the
rest of our Covenanteers, who having got them first to swear the preservation
of the Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government in the Church of Scotland,
have induced them since to vow their endeavors to bring the Churches of God in
the three Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and uniformity in all these
particulars. For there being no means imaginable by which this nearest
Coniu^ction may be obtained, but either by a mutual condescension of all the
three Churches, or an absolute submission of some two to the third: all hopes
of condescending in Scotland, by the former part of the Oath, being taken away,
it remains that the other two must totally sit down and submit to the Scots.
Only endeavor fully to inform themselves what the Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, and Government of the Scottish Kirk is, and then they have no more
to do, but conform to it.

Again, though a tolerable uniformity in all the three Kingdoms were much to
be wished, and by all lawful means to be endeavored; yet the very nearest
conjunction is not fit to be sworn. That excludes all variety, not only in
Confession of Faith, and Form of Ecclesiastical Government, but in rites of
Worship, and rules of Catechizing; for if any difference be admitted, the
conjunction is not simply nearest.

Nor perhaps is such an absolute uniformity morally possible. All men will
never be of one mind: and therefore a mutual toleration in some things may
conduce more to the preservation of ^he Church than a violent Conformity. The
Apostles times had their differences; and so long as we hold to one immovable,
irreformable Rule of faith (as Tertullian calls that short Creed) Cat^ra iam
disciplin^ and conversationis, admittunt novitatem correctionis. And if the
nearest conjunction be not possible, sure it is not nece^sary, i^ it were so,
the Scripture, which is not deficient in necessaries, would not only have
proposed fitting directories, but prescribed set forms unto us, and limited
the times, places, and manner of worship. Which our Savior has not done, being
willing (as it seems) to leave every Church at Liberty to consult with her
own occasions or necessities, and accordingly to constitute as she should
find in Christian prudence to be most convenient for the exegency of the
times, disposition of the place, and temper of the People. The use of which
liberty, we have both practiced our selves, and allowed in other Churches.

It must here be remembered that this very thing which is now sworn, to bring
all the Kingdoms to an uniformity, is nothing else for substance then what was
intended by King James, and attempted by King Charles; and that upon better
grounds then now it is: they having both more authority to enjoyne it, then the
present Covenanteers can justly challenge; and presuming to meet with less
opposition, then these have found. For, whatsoever have been declared since,
the business which these two Princes went about, (to settle Episcopacy, and a
Common form of Worship and Discipline in Scotland conformable to those in
England and Ireland,) was not at first affirmed by any to be so destructive to
the Laws and Liberties of that Kingdom, as the now intended alteration is
known to be against the Laws of England and Ireland.

IV. If the Rights and Privileges of Parliament were once truly stated, which
are here sworn to be defended with lives and Estates, we must be able to make
a clearer judgment of the Lawfulness of this Oath, as to that Particular. Bu^
this being a task which we neither dare undertake, nor can go through with, it
will be sufficient, and perhaps not impertinent, if we wave the two other
Kingdoms, and take a short view of some few particular Privileges pretended
to be due to the Parliament of England, and see whether they be such as the
Subjects ought to swear the preservation of them, before that of His Majesty's
Person, and the public Liberties.

1. As a Council they E.C.P. 655.
challenge the Privilege to be advised with in all the great affairs of Church
and State: whereas their Writ calls them only to consult De quibusdam arduis.
And His Majesty is accused for breach of Privilege, because he did not ask
their advice in some such things. Yet sometimes Ib. p. 114. 158.164. 272.716.
he desired it so much, till his importunity was voted a breach of Privilege.
Here he is in a hard strait, like that in the Oracle, Si fecero peribo; si
non-fecero, vapulabo. Not desire advice, and break Privilege; desire it, and
break Privilege too.

2. A vote is passed in January 1642. E.C.P. 35.
tha^ to arrest or detain any Member of the Commons House, without first
acquainting tha^ House, and receiving Order from thence, is such a Breach of
Privilege as must be vindicated with life and fortunes. And yet a Ib. p. 724.
Declaration is issued in November following, that in those very cases which
were formerly in controversy, any Member may be arrested by the ordinary
Ministers of Justice, and detained in sa^e custody, till he may be brought to
the Parliament. It will conc^rne the Sergeants to be informed in what months
this Privilege i^ in season, and when it goes out.

3. Another Ib p. 278.
Declaration speaks in this manner, Though the Privileges of Parliament do
not extend to Treason, Felony, and breach of the Peace, so as to exempt the
Members of Parliament from punishment nor from all manner of process and
trial, as it does in other cases. From these last words we must infer, that
in case of Incest, Adultery, Fornication, Idolatry, Sacrilege, Blasphemy,
Schism, Heresy, Popery, Perjury, or what you will besides the three excepted
particulars, the Members of Parliament may sin Cum Privilegio, they are
exempted from all manner of process and trial.

4. I do not know the mysteries of some Privileges, why they are ambitious to
entertain Treaties with foreign States, but when his Majesty desires the
like, it should be answered, Ib. p. 580.
We cannot do it by the fundamental Privilege of Parliament. Why the People
may take notice of their proceedings, but His Majesty may not without Ib. p.
81,94. 684.
a high breach of Privilege, mind them of him who said He was not worthy to
be King. Why the meanest Subjects should be admitted to give in their reasons
against established Laws and desires of alteration; and the King be Ib. p.
565, 566.
accused for breach of Privilege, for desiring them to retract a private Order,
as contrary to an express Act of Parliament. Why in Sir John Hothams case all
Ib. p. 156.
interception of letters to the Parliament should be such a high breach of
Privilege; and now his Majesty cannot send a letter but shall be intercepted,
nor a Messenger to them but shall be imprisoned, if not executed by their
Commands.

5. It is a new piece of Law, which our predecessors were ignorant of, that all
Acts and agreements made by any private Companies or Corporations, by any
Parish or County, nay by any particular person^, are of no further force in Law
then they are confirmed by Parliament: and that to make any such till the two
Houses be first accquainted, and their consent obtained, E.C.P. 628. 823.
is an entrenching upon that Peculiar Privilege of Parliament, To bind all or
any part of the Kingdom. This was the ground upon which they cancelled those
agreements made by the Lord Farefax in Yorkshire, and the like by their
adherents in Cheshire; and declared that they who made them were not bound by
them.

6. The number of Privileges in this kind may be infinite^ yet we shall be
able to set bounds to the measure of them by their own Declarations. Where
first the Kings coming to the House of Commons is Ib. p. 493.
affirmed to be the greatest violation of Privilege that ever was attempted.
Secondly, His wishing he had no cause to absent himself from White Hall is Ib.
p. 100.
taken as the greatest breach of Privilege of Parliament that can be offered.
And therefore the former must needs be less: and if there can be none greater,
what shall we think of those many lesser, which have made a greater noy^e? Let
the Reader say, if he make any Conscience of his life, or have any care of his
Estate, or bear any Allegiance to hi^ Majesty's Person, or any reverence to
His Authority, or have any considerable portion in the public liberty,
whether he can willingly, according to the tenor of this Covenan^, sacrifice
his life and liberty, his Soul and Estate to the preservation of all and every
of these Privileges, and perhaps thousands more which are not yet declared, so
as to prefer the least of them before the preservation of the common Liberty,
His Majesty's Person and Authority. For so it is declared, Ib. p. 338.
that the Kings Authority and Person can be no way maintained, bu^ by upholding
the power and privileges of Parliament.

V. That passage where they swear the discovery of all such as have been or
shall be Malignants, etc. carries with it a probable injustice and certain
inconvenience. For it engages every Covenanteer not only to be a common
delator and accuser of his Brethren, but even of himself too, if he ever were
or shall be any way guilty. The old Oath Ex officio, so long cried out upon as
unnatural and injust that it was thought fit to be abolished by an For taking
away the high Commssion.
Act made this Parliament, was not half so bad as this new Oath is. For by this
a man swears to discover himself, though there be no common fame against him,
never any suspicion of him, though no Judge ever question him, no other person
accuse him, though he be now reformed and have altered his resolution, yet if
he was ever peccant, he is bound by this Oath to discover himself, that he may
come to his trial, and so receive condign^ punishment.

VI. That last clause to bring all to public trial, that they may receive
condign punishment, carries fire in the tail of it, sufficient to consume the
better half of the Kingdom. It is but a small matter to tell their Soldiers,
that if they deny Quarter to any Malignants in his Majesty's Army, they are
guilty of perjury by anticipating that trial, which by this Oath they shall be
brought to. I shall rather apply my self to the Lords and Commons at
Westminster, who have already passed sentence, Ex: Co^l: p. 260. and 57^, and
509.
That all such persons, as upon any pretense whatsoever, assist his Majesty in
this War, with Horse, Arms, Plate, or money, are Traitors, unparalleld
Traitors; and ought to suffer as Traitors, and their punishment is here Vowed,
as it was before threatened to be, speedy and exemplary. How the King of
Denmark, or the Prince of Orange will escape does less Trouble me; then to
see the sworn cruelty of these Covenanters, who have vowed the hanging of the
greater part of this Kingdom, and without any hope of mercy or pardon. If it
were to be doubted which party were guilty of Treason, those whom the King has
proclaime^, or whom these Votes have declared, yet this is out of question,
that many who sometimes assisted the one, are now turned to the other side;
many yet perhaps assist that party with money, to which they are less
cordially inclined; if all these, as they are declared Traitors for so doing
Ib. 576.
upon whatsoever pretense they did it, must suffer the condign punishment of
Traitors, the Covenanteers will have as little comfort in the payment of this
Vow, as Iephta had in his. If the City be not startled at this consequence, yet
for pities sake to their poor friends in the Country, who have paid
Contributions to His Majesty's Army, let them put on some bowels of compassion;
let not judgment so far triumph over mercy, as to vow nothing but
punishment, no pardon. Why should they devote that little blood to the axe or
the halter, which the sword shall spare in this gasping Kingdom? We have not
forgotten him that told us (what we now find) they were not in a right way
that made choice of such a Rubricke to their Reformation. And those who Sit,
and Vote, and vow to punish according to those Votes, may remember, if we be
Traitors it is not long since they were so; and it is not certain what they
may be.

VII. When each man has sworn to go before another in the example of a real
Reformation, he is bound upon his Oath not to expect till a general
Reformation be publicly debated and agreed upon, not to forbear till he see
whether the right rule will be commended to him in an orderly way, he must not
stay for the command of Authority, or company of his neighbors; but where he
conceives the Doctrine to be erroneous, the Worship superstitious, or otherwise
faulty, the Discipline and Government not so exactly according to the Word, he
must presently fall aboard with his Reformation work, publicly profess what
his opinion is, and apply himself to the practice of that which he is
persuaded in his own conscience is right; and must endeavor to set up that
Idol in the Church which he has already erected in his own imagination, and
labor to extirpate all that oppose it, and refuse to bow down to it; that so
he may go before others in the example of a real Reformation. And surely those
Brethren in London, who begin to join themselves into Church Societies, are
thus far to be commended. What though it be (as the Considerations, etc.
December. 23^ 1643.
Assembly tell them) unfit, uncomfortable, unseasonable, yet being by them
judged lawful, now after they have sworn, it becomes necessary. And I wonder
why the Presbyterians should not be as zealous in fetting up their Government,
and endeavoring to go before others in an exemplary way. I wish they would
begin their Reformation in London with extirpation of Schism, which it will be
no hard matter to find, and by that time it shall be extirpate out of the
City, Religion and Peace may once again revisit the Country.

CHAP. VII. That many things vowed in this Covenant are not possible to be
fulfilled.
TO make good this charge, which is a further ^vidence of injustice in the
Covenant, as involving the takers in downright perjury, we shall propose such
particulars as are either morally or absolutely impossible to be performed.

I. That constancy of endeavor and zealous continuance which they swear to
use all the days of their lives in the observance of most Articles, is more
than they can assure; the work of Reformation may be longer, and their other
avocations greater than they imagine; and in the interim of their hopes, their
endeavors may flagge, and their zeal remit. Besides the particulars of their
Vow are so many, and of so different natures, as must needs distract their
thought^ and employments, which being fixed upon some, must divert their
endeavors from the rest. And if they shall in truth all the days of their
lives endeavor to extirpate the Government of the Church, they will never live
to effect it. II. The mutual preservation of the Rights and Privileges of the
Parliaments in all three Kingdoms cannot always be possible. To evidence this
Truth, I shall suppose what the Covenanteers will easily grant: First, that the
word Parliament is here secondarily, if not principally, intended for the two
Houses in the respective Kingdoms, exclusively to the King. Secondly, that the
Parliament of Scotland (if not that of Ireland) has as much right and
privilege to all intents and purposes concerning that Kingdom, as our
Parliament has in relation to England. Thirdly, that whatsoever Rights and
Privileges have been challenged by our Lords and Commons of this Parliament,
are truly due unto them, and the King bound to admit of them. These
suppositions being granted, it cannot be denied but the several Parliaments
(all challenging as great Councels to his Majesty, whose advice he must follow)
may advise many things repugnant in themselves, and both or all impossible to
be hearkened to. The nineteen Propositions of the English, and the Scots
Demands in the Act of Pacification will save us the labor of enquiring into
former times, or straining invention for possible cases. 1. The English advise
and require that no Marriage of the Kings Children be treated of without their
notice, nor concluded without their consent. The Scots and Irish having equal
interest, especially in the Princes Person, may require equal privilege. But
their public national interests, and affections to other States, being
different, their advice and resolution will be so too. The Irish may advise and
resolve upon a Match with Spain, the Scots with France, the English with some
other distinct Family^

Again, the Scots demand that the Prince may reside with them at some time;
the English may require his continual residence at all times, at least they
may both exact it at the same time. So when E.C. p. 93.
these would have him at St. James, those would have him at St. Andrews. Such
like for the King himself, much about the same time when the 2. Parliament of
King Charles. Act. 27.
Scots exact his residence with them; the E. C. page 148.
Council of Ireland desire his presence amongst them, the and 143.
English protest, if he leave them, they will no longer submit to him, so as to
be directed by any Commissioner. This impossibility will be more considered, if
we restrain it only to the time of Parliaments; at the same time 1640. there
were three Parliaments sitting in the three Kingdoms; if they have equal
Privileges, all equally require the Kings Presence; what shall he do, when he
is told his absence from Parliament is a breach of Privilege, M. Prina^
Sovereign power of Parliam. part. 4^
against Law, against ancient Custom, against his Oath? Is it possible for him
to be in three Kingdoms at the same time? Grant him his just Power, and he may
without inconvenience rule all; but if the Supreme Power be in them, he will
have a hard task to serve so many masters.

Secondly, if all the Parliaments be considereed as Courts, and allowed for
Supreme Iudicatories in the several Kingdoms, may not one of them declare Law
against another? Surely yes, we have a fresh precedent for it. The Scots were
declared Traitors by the Parliament of Ireland, 1638. They were declared loyal
Subjects by the 2. Parliament of King Charles. Act. 38.
Parliament of Scotland, 1640. And their Actions were condemned to oblivion by
the Parliament of England. 3. Lastly, if each Parliament be considered as the
Representative Body of the respe^tive Kingdoms, with a power to enact, order,
or ordain, whatsoever they shall hold fitting, or of public necessity, and
the King be bound by his Oath to pass all the Bills which shall be pesented
under that notion, as they have formerly before the union of the Kingdoms made
many vid. 4. Iacobi. cap. 1.
contra^iant Laws, so will they do again; for the interests of the Kingdoms
being several in themselves, none having any mutual dependence or superiority
above another, the titular union in the same King will be found in effectual
to reconcile their differences, if he be not Supreme in the old received sense,
but only in the new-coyn'd notion of coordinate (as some) or subordinate
Supremacy, as others wittily have expounded. In any such case of difference,
whether in matter of State or of Law, a mutual preservation of the Privileges
of all the Parliaments will be utterly impossible both for King and Subject; to
preserve one, is to destroy two.
III. Every Covenanteer undertakes more than he is able to perform, when he
swears, not barely to endeavor, (as in other Articles) but actually to assist
and defend all those that enter into this League, and actually to reveal and
make known all lets and impediments against it. Though they have a will to do
it, yet they may want means to effect it. If they do not send assistance to
any Covenanteer when it is demanded, or what they do send be not sufficient to
defend him, they fail in their Oath; and were to blame they did not use the
word endeavor here, which is so carefully inserted in other places. IV. Nor
can the most confiding of them be assured that he shall not suffer himself
directly or indirectly, by whatsoever combination, persuasion, or terror, to
be divided from this union. As it is not in any man's power to hinder other men
from using what Arguments they can to persuade him, so neither can he totally
hinder those Arguments from leaving any impression in his soul. Besides, daily
experience of many flitting from that cause to which they were sometimes as
zealously addicted as any (witness Sir John Hotham and others) there is reason
why it should be so, in spite of any resolution to the contrary. Though
ambition, avarice, passion, or prejudice, make men very willing to have that
pass for true and good which they affect, and ^o first stagger their
judgment, which at last fixes in a resolution not to examine any grounds of
the contrary part which they hate: Yet the variety of success may so much
alter the face of things, the inconstancy of humane nature may so far comply,
the light and evidence of the object may be such as will dispell all those
mists of the understanding, and prevail against any obstinacy of opinion. But
if they mean by this Oath such a resolution, Non persuadebo, etiam^i
persuaser^, that against the light of their own consciences, they will still
persevere in the same courses, though they be never so much convicted of their
unlawfulness; they do but add Heresy to Perjury. For a pertinacious
maintaining of an opinion after a man is convicted that it is erroneous, I take
to be the very formality of Heresy, and that which I suppose the Covenanteers
have sworn to extirpate. V. It will not be denied, but if one part of the
Covenant, either in terminis, or by implication, contradict another, then it
will be impossible to perform both. And I pray what are these but
contradictions? 1. That all the Covenanteers in the three Kingdoms should
profess to be of one Reformed Religion, and then swear to preserve it in one
Kingdom, but to reform it in two. 2. To preserve the Kings Person, without
respect of Persons. This they vow in the second Article, and that in the third.
3. If the Parliament^ be^ as they conceive, the supreme Iudicatories in the
respective Kingdoms, with what congruity do they swear to preserve the
Rights and Privileges of the Parliaments in all three Kingdoms, and then that
all Delinquents shall be punished by the Supreme Iudicatories (of both. i.e.)
only of two Kingdoms? No marvel if some parts be liable to contradiction,
when the whole Covenant is ushered in with a gross absurdity, which has
influence upon every sentence in it. When each one for himself professes, We
swear, etc. Indeed why should one man swear for all the rest? But what is
this to salve the Soloecisme? How shall he be said to swear only for
himself, whose every word in his Oath includes all others, as much as
himself? These things being not certainly possible ought not to be sworn. It
is all one as if they should swear they will not dye till they be old, nor be
sick till they dye.
CHAP. VIII. That the taking this Covenant, and other avowed Actions of the
Covenanteers, are in fact, contradictory to the formal words of their Oath.
What the Civilians call Protestatio contraria facto, (as if one should kill
or rob a man and vow to do him no wrong) is a foul crime which infests many
parts of this Solemn Oath. The very act of taking or enforcing it, besides
many other avowed practices of those that take it, does contradict the formal
words of the Covenant.

I. So though they swear in all their endeavors to keep themselves within the
bounds of their several places and callings; Yet if we look upon the courses
they take we shall find nothing less. Who are they who can challenge it as the
proper duty of their calling to set on foot that Reformation vowed in the
first, or that extirpation which is the matter of the second Article? If
Religion and the Controversies thereanent be a thing common to every vocation;
then is that restriction to several callings superfluous, and in a Solemn
Oath, profane. But if it be the more peculiar function of the Clergy, then why
do other men intermedle in matters beside their calling? If it be the proper
work of a Parliament, why do our Assembly men challenge, as Ministers of the
Gospel, to be leaders in this work of Reformation? What have they to do in
Parliament affairs? Were the Bishops cast out, that they might be taken in?
What just calling can they pretend, who were neither summoned by his Majesty,
to whom the calling of Ecclesiastical Assemblies do in right belong, nor
elected by the Clergy, to whom the nomination of Members to such Assemblyes, by
the constitution of this Kingdom does appertain?

So in the third and sixth Articles, where they swear mutually to assist and
preserve one another with their Lives and Estates, but with like restriction to
their several vocations, places, and callings, either most of those who have
actually taken up Arms in this quarrel,, Noblemen, Knights, Burgesses,
But^hers, Tapsters etc. are forsworn, by undertaking that service which is
inconsistent with their professions; or if they be not, then all the rest of
the Covenanters are, who being of the same callings, have not put themselves in
Arms, and assisted their brethren with their Lives, as they are bound to do,
if it be not contrary to their Calling.

Nor can the Authors or Executioners of those Ordinances be excused from
perjury, whereby many men have been pressed for Soldiers without any regard to
their callings. What calling have the Watermen to be employed in Land-service?
What calling have the City Tradsemen to come and conquer the Country? What
calling have the framers of this Covenant to exact a new Oath of all this
Kingdom, or to enter in League with another? And if they have no calling that
enables them to Command, then have the rest no calling to obey; and so both the
imposing of this Oath, on one part, and the taking of it on all parts, is
contrary to that clause so often repeated in it^ According to our several
callings.

II. Though they swear the extirpation of Popery, yet (if the time would
permit) I could make it evident from their own principles, that not only many
avowed actions of the Covenanteers are originally popish: (as their di^pensing
with Oaths lawfully taken: their excluding all Clergymen from secular
judicature: their Doctrine of propagating Religion by the Sword: Covenant with
Nar. p. 17.

E.C. p. 228. 603. 604. 637. 624. 826. 915.


their entering into Leagues and Covenants for that purpose: their usurping a
more then papal infallibility and omnipotency^ their exalting themselves above
all that is called God: Lysimachus Nicanor.
their rudiments of Rebellion and opposition against the Supreme Magistrate,)
but that very power by which this Covenant is enjoined, which they swear to
preserve in the third Article, is in the highest degree properly Popery. I am
sure there is nothing in that large discourse of the Discourse of Epis. Sect.
1. c. 10. p. 54. and dei^ceps.
Lord Brook against Episcopacy, which may not be applied here with more
congruity. That power, which the Covenant-makers do pretend to, and Popery are
all one in re. They have the same Rise, the same media of their progress, and
the same end.

1. First, Ib. p. 59.
the Rise of Popery was by overthrowing Christ's Ordinances; in Doctrine, as a
Heretic, but not as Pope: in Discipline, as Pope; This most properly
belonging to Christ Royal Office, as Doctrine to his Prophetical. Does not
the pretended power of the Covenant-makers do the same? I confess with them,
Scripture is the rule, but who must expound this Scripture? Synods, Assemblies,
Committees. And though by their own confession those bind not men's
consciences, yet they bind them to obedience; which obedience they precisely
challenge; and when any fail thereof, they do without the least scruple of
Conscience proceed to Sequestrations, Fines, Imprisonments, Deprivations, and
what not? And so these men making Scripture a rule in appearance, do in truth
monopolize all to themselves. This is just and flat Popery.

2. The same Author proceeding to parallel Episcopacy with Papacy in the
means of their rising, Ib. p. 61.
tells us how Popes dealt with Princes; laid pillowes under them with one hand,
thrust them down with the other, and then trampled upon them. This can no way
be affirmed of our Protestant Bishops: but whether our Arch-Covenanteers, when
they promised to make their Prince a great and glorious King, and protested to
defend His Person, Honor and Authority, did not in the mean time by their
underhand practices labor to thrust him down, and by their open violence to
trample upon him, the World sees in part, and themselves know more.

3. Touching the means of the progress of Popery he informs thus, Ibid.
That which they have most sounded in the peoples ears is, The Church, The
Church; The Temple of the Lord, The Temple of the Lord; By this as by a
stalking horse they come much nearer then else they could. And has not the
empty noise of Religion, Religion, Reformation, Reformation, heightened the
credit of the Covenanteers in the opinion of the people, and so been made a
stale to their equally Popish ambitious ends?

4 Lastly, to prove the ends of Prel^cy the same with those of Popery he says,
Ib. p. 62.
It cannot be doubted but by all these means they aim at the same End (which
is also the Popes) to pull down all other power, and set up their own. Nor is
there any great cause to doubt whether the principal Projectors of the
Covenant aim at the like End, which they have already effected in too great a
measure. They have (to their ability) pulled down all other power, both Regal
and Episcopal; they have set up the one, and perhaps intend to settle the
other, as a prudentiall Government, in themselves. We may therefore conclude
this discourse with the words of Our Author against Bishops, Thus the
Covenanteers oppose, and exalt themselves above all that is called God or is
worshipped: which is most true Popery, in respect of the Imposers; and the
submitting to such a power is likewise popish in respect of their adherents;
and so the taking as well as the enjoining this Covenant a formal Act of
Popery, and therefore contradictory to that vow to ^xtirpate Popery.

I need no other Apology then what the same Author has framed to my hand. Ib.
p. 60.
I bring not in these things, as if by agreeing in these I might convince the
Covenant-makers and Papists, or the Pope, were all one. But the original
fountain whence all these spring, the virtue and power which actuates them in
their proper channel, this is papal.

Nor may they evade by this, that though they do and command these things, yet
they neither do them from the Popes command, nor command them in the Popes
power. Though I grant this, yet they may be Antichristian, and so such in Re a^
the Pope is, though not literally Romanists^ For he, or they, whoever it be,
that commands or prohibits the least title of Doctrine or Discipline, merely
eximperio voluntatis, though the thing he so commands shall happen to be good
in it self, (or that which he forbid^, to be evil,) yet he, in his so
commanding, or prohibiting, is not only Tyrannical, but Antichristian,
properly Antichristian^ Encroaching on the Royal Office of Christ, which is
truly High Treason against God, and most properly Antichristianisme. I care
not whether we call him a Pope, Papist, Romanist or any other name, I call him
Antichrist; and if you will call Antichrist by the name of Pope, I call such
imperious Commanders among us (though they have no shadow or dependence on
Rome, or the Romish Pope) English Popes, I mean English Antichrists.

Nor is this any particular fancy of that one Lord, but is attested to be the
Id. Sect. 2. cap. 7. p. 119.

Protest^tion protest^d. page 2.

Countermarch, etc.


general Doctrine of all the Brownists, who upon these principles conclude
Episcopacy to be a ragge of Popery, which we have here brought home to their
own doors, and there we leave it.

III. If Superstition be (as View of the Cov. p. 35.
M. Mocket defines it) Quicquid supra statutum est. All Religious observances
which have no command in Gods word: every outward Act sign or circumstance in
Gods worship, which he has not enjoined. An Oath being a part of worship
expressly commanded, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. and this Oath being taken for a Religious end,
if either the matter or any circumstance of it be such as God never required,
it cannot (according to the Doctrine of the Covenanteers) be excused from
Superstition.

1. Now that outward Act used by the Covenanteers in the taking this Oath,
where Covenant with a Narrative.
each person by swearing is required to worship the great name of God, and
testify so much outwardly by lifting up their hands, has no more colorable
warrant from the word of God by way of command, then bowing the knee at the
name of Jesus, and therefore must be guilty of equal Superstition; and how
great that is M. White shall determine.

2. Again if the Vows of their Religious Orders in the Church of Rome be
confessedly Superstitious, I shall not know how to clear this vow from the same
imputation. 1. Their vow of voluntary poverty i^ not so much as the Vow of
these Covenanteers to spend not only their Estates but their lives in pursuance
of this Covenant. Without all peradventure it is no more unlawful by the word
of God, for a Papist to part with his Estate for a known good end, then for a
Protestant to devote his to the maintenance of a supposed good Cause. 2. The
popish Vow of Continency, what has it more then the Covenanteers Vow of
Obstinancy? Never to suffer themselves by whatsoever persuasion to be
withdrawn from this Union. That is, never to be of another opinion or
resolution then now they are. It is no sin in any man to live a single life
and to contain, but for a man to vow who has not the gift. And may not the
Covenanteers want the guilt of Constancy, as well as other men the gift of
Continency? Their own Confessor tells them so: M. Nigh in his Speech. page 13.
Especially when (as we this day) sensible of our infirmity of an unfaithful
heart, not steedy with our God, but apt to start from the Cause, bind our
selves with cords, as a Sacrifice to the Horns of the Altar. If this will
serve to absolve the Covenanteers, how shall the Vow of Continency be condemned
at their Tribunal, the matter whereof has more approbation in Scripture, and
the performance of it is no whit more impossible?

3. The Popish Vow of Regular obedience to their Superiors, is justly
condemned as Superstitious. And is not as absolute, as blind an Obedience
required by the framers of this Covenant? to believe all their Declarations, to
observe all their Ordinances, to preserve all their Rights and Privileges,
which are more unknown, and sometimes more unjust then those of the Cloister?
Yet the Covenanteers Vow to conserve them with the utmost hazard of their
lives. 4. If we shall add to these more ancient and ordinary Monastic Vows
that fourth of the Jesuits, the Vow of Mission; whereby they bind themselves
to go into whatsoever Country their Superiors shall send them, for the
propagation of their Religion; we shall find something not unlike it in this
Vow of the Covenanteers, compared with their practice. By the ancient 1. Ed^ 3.
cap. 5.
Laws of this Land no man should be compelled to go out of his County^ save
in case of actual Invasion; but by their Ordinance of the Militia, and the
several Orders of Association and instructions to their Lievtenants, E^ C. p.
88. 389.
made by the prime Covenanteers, all men are required to follow their Leaders,
as well within their several Counties, as to other places: and those pretended
Rights, by virtue whereof these commands are laid upon them, they here Vow to
maintain wi^h their Lives and Estates: which these Superiors may, when they
please, with equal authori^y and better reason, employ into France, Spain,
Italy, or any other Popish Countries; whither, if they shall command, all are
bound to go, by the tenor of this Vow for extirpation of Popery, and
universal Reformation of Religion.

3. Lastly, if whatsoever is not commanded by God be Superstition (as they hold
it is) then if it were true that the Leaguers were all of one Religion, yet is
there no command for them to enter into such a Holy League. Beside the
Pacification at Passau, concluded betwixt the Protestants and Papists of
Germany 1552, and confirmed in a Diet 1555, generally commended by Protestant
Sleidan. Gerard. Camerar. O^iander.
Writers, the examples in Scripture of Jacob and Laban, Ioshuah and the
Gibeonites, Solomon and Hiram, do abundantly prove that Leagues betwixt men of
diverse Religions is not against the word of God, and therefore a League betwixt
people of the same Religion, for extirpation of such as are not of the same, is
no way required by it. So then this Covenant, as to that point is Supra
Statutum, and therefore Superstition.

4. But if this sin consist rather in using such Acts, matter, signs, or
circumstances in divine Worship, as are in their own nature no way apt to
express that honor which we acknowledge to be due unto God, nor reducible to
that end for which we intend them; surely then there may be Superstition in the
inward as well as in the outward Act of Worship; and in particular Romans 10.2.
indiscreet zeal will appear to be a piece of Superstition: for though zeal
be of its own nature apt to be referred to Gods Worship, yet thus qualified it
is not; and then I am confident, as Diogenes trod upon the pride of Plato, so,
many of our zealous Covenanteers here vow to extirpate superstition with
greater superstition.

IV. The clearing of that clause which concerns Extirpation of Heresy depends
upon the resolution of many questions which we cannot here determine; upon this
mainely, who shall be the So^eraigne Judge of Controversies to define what
Doctrines are Heretical, and what not; whether must every man for himself fit
upon other men's faith, and proscribe all that for Heresy which crosses his
own fancy? The Church of Scotland allows no other Judge in this point but
Scripture; which will scarce come home to the point; for who shall give the
sense of Scripture? The Lord Discourse. Sect. 1. c. 9. p. 51.
Brook has answered the question aright; What is true Doctrine the Scripture,
or rather the spirit must Judge, but what a Church will take for true Doctrine
lies only in that Church. And amongst the Covenanteers who shall Judge as the
Church? In Scotland it is agreed, the general Assembly; in England I know not
who, perhaps a select Committee of some Lay-Covenanteers. Such as shall be
appointed to convent Ministers for preaching false Doctrine, and will not stick
to censure him for Heresy and Blasphemy who shall call the Virgin Mary the
Mother of God. (...). I must once more borrow the words of that Honorable Ib.
p. 52.53.
Author I last mentioned, so long as the Church in her tenets intermedles not
with State matters under the notion of Religion, I suppose the Civil Power is
not to interpose. If the question be what is Idolatry, what superstition, what
Heresy, what the punishment of those crimes, who shall Judge but the Church?
Whiles Parliaments labor for the Church, dealing no further in the affairs of
the Church then by Scripture they may, certainly they do well: but if they
once exceed their bounds, the issue will be CONFUSION instead of REFORMATION.
Yet in regard our Laws, if they should be put ordinarily in execution, are
somewhat severe in the punishment of Heretics, it was not amiss in the 1.
Eliz. c. 1.
Parliament to restrain the Power of Ecclesiastical Commissioners in judging
of Heresy, to what had been formerly determined by Scripture, or by the four
first general Counsels: only when they added, Or such as shall hereafter be
ordered, judged or determined to be Heresy, by the high^ Court of Parliament
in this Realm, with the assent of the Clergy in their Convocation: The matter
had not been much different if the words had been a little inverted; if they
had left the judgment to the Clergy, who (without disparagement) may be
thought more compe^ent for such matters, and reserved the power of approving
and confirming to themselves. But the Law being as it is, we willingly
subscribe to it; and when the Parliament shall determine, with the Convocations
assent, any matter or cause to be Heresy, we shall better know how to conform
either our judgment to their determinations, or our patience and obedience to
their censures. In the mean time we must entreat our Brethren of the Clergy
convened at Westminster to be persuaded, that though the Lords and Commons in
the Court were indeed the Parliament, yet they in the Chapel are none of the
Convocation. And so what Heresy is or what to be taken for such by any
authoritative definition in this Kingdom we are not like to hear in haist.
But if Tertullians Prescriptions, or that golden Rule of Vincentius Lirinensis,
Quod ab omnibus, quod ubique, quod semper, etc. be of any use for the trial of
Heretics, then we can tell whose Disciples the Covenanteers are, that swear
to extirpate Episcopal Government: if Aerius, for affirming that a Bishop is
not above a Presbyter, was generally reputed by the Christian world for more
then thirteen hundred years together, as well in the Eastern as Western
Church, for a downeright Heretic, we can charge those men with no less then
a Contradiction who with the same breath vow the extirpation of Prelacy and
Heresy.

V. The case is much alike concerning Schism. Which is so near allied to
Heresy, that 1. Cor. 11. 18,19.
S. Paul, if he do not confound them, makes that the necessary forerunner of
this. But allowing the word for current in the common acception without any
scrupulous enquiry into the nature of it, we must infer. 1. That this vow of
the Covenanteers to extirpate Schism is contradictory to that vow of mutual
assistance, which they make in the sixth Article: for being knownely divided in
their opinions concerning Church Government, they must be one to another
mutually Schismatiques. 2. The mere taking of this Covenant, being in the
principal part of it an utter condemnation of the Church of England, and a
sworn Separation from it as Prelaticall, (that is, in their sense,
Antichristian) can be no other then a most formal vowed Schism, in respect of
all those Covenanteers, who formerly held Communion with this Church: which
being a true Church wherein Salvation might be had, suppose the worst, (which I
do not grant) that there were some errors in her Doctrine, or some
unlawfulness in her practice, yet so long as they are neither required to
profess those errors nor to approve those practices (as, if we consider His
Majesty's frequent proffers of passing fitting provisions for the ease of
^ender consciences clearly they are not) any separation from this their Mother
Church is utterly causlesse; and unless by virtue of some Legislative power, a
new sense be imposed upon the word, this is the greatest Schism that ever was
in any Church since the foundation of Religion.

If they had not broken it already they might easily observe this part of their
Oath for the future, for having by this Covenant left amongst themselves no
visible Church, it quickly follows, no Schism. Were it not so, I should
wonder how it comes to pass, that after such a solemn Oath for extirpation of
Schism, and that not by public Order, but where every one must go before
another in the example, so few should be found all this long time worthy to be
extirpate out of that great City, where so many are known to be. Where all
such as have been accounted Schismatiques from our Church of England either had
their birth or have their breeding. Anabaptists, Brownists of all sizes,
Separatists^ Semi-Separatists, Leamarists, Barowists, Iohnsonians,
Ainsworthians, Robinsonians, Wilkinsonians, the several Congregations of
Busher, Smith, Helwise, Hancock, Nevill, Pedder, each of which (as I am
informed) had their distinct forms of Separation: the Antinomians, Eatonians,
Gringletonians and Familists the Cottonians and Anti-Cottonians, and whatsoever
spreading grafts have been transplanted from those fruitful seed-plots of
Schism, the Colonies of New Englaud or Amsterdam.

All these were known, by head, even when the Government of the Church was in
the hands of the King and Bishops; and sure their number is naught abated since
it was seized by the Covenanteers: many whereof have small reason to swear the
extirpation of Schism, unless it be out of their own hearts. Which is so
foul a sin, that some of themselves have confessed Jeroboam the son of
Nebat, for this only cause, not for Idolatry, to be so often mentioned with
that odious Elogy, Who made Israel to sin. And considering the general
defection now made from the Church of England, and the shallow grounds of this
Separation, I take leave to mind those men who have had the greatest stroke in
these divisions, of what De Haeres. lib. 4. c. 62.
Irenaus writ so many hundred years ago. The Lord will judge also those that
make Schisms; who valuing more their own profit then the Churches unity, do
rent and divide, and to their power murder the great and glorious body of
Christ, upon small and any occasions: speaking Peace, and making War; truly
straining at a gnat, and swallowing a Camel. For they can make ^o such
Reformation, as will be able to countervaile the harm of Schism.

VI. The imposing this Oath by their own Authority is a great violation of the
Rights and Privileges of Parliament which they swear to preserve. If we
should allow the Leaders to be, what they desire to pass for, the two Houses
of Parliament; yet is it denied that the one House has any power to give an
ordinary legal Oath; or that both Houses can lay any civil, much less
Religious obligation, by a new Oath, upon the whole Kingdom without His
Majesty's Assent by E.C. page 859. 860.
Act of Parliament. Let but any Law be produced that it may be done, or any
precedent showed that ever it was done by any free Parliament, and we shall be
ready to recant this position. In the mean time I crave leave to intimate in
some few particulars how the Covenanteers have violated not only the ancient
and just Rights of Parliament, but those very Privileges of the last Edition,
which were never heard of before this Session.

1. In relation to the King, who is the Head of that great Body, the denying
His Negative in making of Laws, the signifying His Authority contrary to his
Will, the doing many things without Him, which, how necessary soever, he does
not challenge any Prerogative to do without them, are sufficient instances of
their injust usurpations. 2. In relation to the House of Peers: whether were
not their Privileges invaded, when some of the Temporal Lords were committed
by Mr Pennington, the then Lord Major of London, and a Member of the Lower
House? when others of the Spirituality, twelve Bishops at a clap were impeached
and committed for a crime they were no way guilty of? That never forgotten
breach of Privilege, His Majesty's impeachment of the five Members was thus
aggravated; E.C. p. 278^
If such an accusation might be allowed, then it would be in the power not
only of His Majesty but of any private man, under pretensions of Treason, to
take away any man from his service in the Parliament, and so as many, one after
another as he pleases, and consequently to make ^ Parliament what he will,
when he will; which would be a Breach of so essential a Privilege of
Parliament, that the very being thereof depends upon it. How much His Majesty
did then abhor the thoughts of any such consequence, depends in part upon the
now visible and then just grounds of that accusation. But whether in that more
general, and more causlesse impeachment of those twelve Members of the House
of Peers, the Projectors did not over-act all the sad consequences of the
former Discourse, and transgress that essential Privilege upon which the
very being of Parliament was said to depend, I do not determine; Only, this
is evident, the now Covenanting Commons ever since that time were able to make
their House of Lords do or say what they would when they would. Witness their
several Counter-mands and cross Declarations. The Lords declare the Laws
should be observed, and the Common Prayer Book used: these Commons declare,
both shall be suspended. The Lord declare, Tumults shall be suppressed, and
the Authors punished: these Commons declare there are no Tumults, and command
those persons shall be released who were apprehended as the Authors. The Lords
thought the new Ordinance for the Militia unnecessary, and refuse to Petition
for it: these Commons declare it is necessary, and Ex. Coll. p. 19. and 59.
complain of the Lords for their refusal. What would you more? In some cases,
these men Order, Ib. p. 112^
that the House of Peers agree with the House of Commons. 3. In relation to
particular Members; It is somewhere confessed by the Commons, that Ib. p. 723.
they cannot give away the Privilege of their Members without their consent.
Sure the many affronts^ indignities, injuries, which several Members of that
honorable House have sustained in their Persons, in their Estates, in their
Protections, in their other Privileges and Liberties, were never done by their
own consent. 4. In relation to the constitution of Parliaments, is not the
freedom of the place and safety of the persons so absolutely necessary, that
E.C. p. 10^.
no Parliament can be without it? yet have not both been disturbed and
endangered by tumultuous Citizens? Have not some been expelled, others
committed, for being so honest as to Vote according to their conscience, but
not so fortunate as to jumpe with the supposed Sense of the House? Were not
their names posted up, and their lodgings notefied who were unwilling to have a
hand in the first Act of this National Tragedy? I^ the public demanding a
List of such Lords names as dissented in their Votes from the carrying party in
the Lower House; if confining the whole Authority of both Houses to the
pleasure of a few persons under the name of a Committee for the safety of the
Kingdom, into whose secret^ the rest may not presume to enquire; if the
admitting of Commissioners from another Kingdom without whose concurrent
advice nothing must be agitated in this, be not as totally repugnant to the
nature of a free Parliament, as confessedly repugnant to all Precedents of
former times; if all these things have been done, and yet no Privilege broken,
then (...), there will be no danger of breaking Privilege. But if all these
were high violations of the Parliament Privileges, all the Covenanteers are
sworn to enquire after and punish the offenders without respect of persons. 5.
I cannot see that those who had a special hand in the creation have ever had a
due care for the conservation of many new Privileges. They who declared it to
be no ordinary, but a high breach of Privilege to E.C. p. 156.
intercept any Letters or Messenger^ coming to or from the Parliament, have
since countenanced the interception of His Majesty's Letters, commanded the
imprisonment of His Messengers, and done enough to prove themselves either
guilty of Priviledge-breaking, or no Parliament. Who if they shall pretend in
case of Privilege, as they have done in point of Law, that whatever they do,
or command or approve, how contrary soever it may seem to be to their
confessed or declared Privileges, yet must not be taken for a violation of
Privilege, because it is approved by them in whom the Privilegilative power is
supposed to reside. I confess this might be urged with good coherence to their
other principles nor should I know well what to reply if I were not furnished
out of their Store-hou^e; Where I find them telling the King, August. 25. 1642.
that till he have recalled His Declarations and Proclamations, and taken down
His Standard, E.C. p. 580.
they cannot, by the fundamental Privileges of Parliament, treat with him. Yet
within a few months after, though the Royal Standard was not taken down, nor
any Proclamations recalled, those very men who before refused to grant, are now
Ib. p. 745.
petitioning for a Treaty, to His Majesty at Colebrooke, and we find them
actually Treating at Oxford: Whence we conclude, seeing they did afterward
what they had formerly declared, by their fundamental Privileges, they could
not do, not only in some cases they possibly may, but in this particular,
according to the principles of their own Declarations, they actually did
violate a Privilege of Parliament, and that a fundamental one.
VII. There can scarce be imagined any invasion upon the Public Liberty more
manifest, or of greater consequence than is the imposing of this Oath by such
as have no Authority to exact it: and the submitting to this usurped Authority,
is in all them that take it, a betraying of the Liberty of the Kingdom. We
have already proved that no new Oath can be imposed but by Act of Parliament^

Besides, what can be more in prejudice of the Liberties of England, then
forcing all the Subjects to swear to defend the Liberties of Scotland, and the
unknown Privileges of their Parliament? Are we not hereby made sworn vassals
and slaves to another Nation? Do we not give them a Supremacy over us? or if
their obligation be reciprocal, yet I doubt whether, in case they prove
perfidious, that will serve to excuse our perjury.

If by swearing to preserve the Liberties of the Kingdom, they swear (as
their M. Mocket. View of the Covenant. page 36.
Expositours bear us in hand) against all Arbitrary Power; whereby the Rulers
will and pleasure is made the only Rule of the Subjects obedience, their Oath
strikes at none more than the Master^Covenanters, to whom I fear the
description in that Author is most aptly fitted, New, proud, ambitious,
domineering Officers of the first Head.

VIII. Seeing no Act of Parliament can be made without his Majesty's consent,
no new Oath imposed without an Act of Parliament, their pressing of this
Covenant by any Ordinance, their entering into League with two Foreign
Nations, and inviting others to join in the like Association, is such a
palpable violation of the Kings Authority, which they swear to preserve, and a
contradiction so gross as none can reconcile, unless He to whom nothing is
impossible.

IX. What is the whole Design of the Covenant but an apparent dividing of the
King from his People? Or, which is all one, of the People from their King?
What, but a sowing of division between the Kingdoms, by hiring the Scots to
take part in our dissensions? What, but a sworn Faction amongst the People of
this Land, being a combination of some who confess themselves not to be the
Kingdom? And yet they would seem to swear against all these in the fourth
Article.

That they who here swear against Faction and Division have been the Authors
and are still the upholders of Division, and that by Faction, is plain from
their constant refusal to descend to any Treaty for accommodation. First, when
his Majesty wooed them to it from Nottingham; then when the most substantial
Citizens petitioned for it at London. Again, when in July last the Lords
remaining at Westminster did Vote for it; when the major part of Commons then
present did entertain the first motion of it; when the many poor People and
the weaker sex did offer up strong cries and tears for it: yet so potent was
the prevailing party of the Common Council of London, (of Master Pennington's
election, and therefore at his devotion) as not to spare their greatest
Patriots; all their former service could not protect their names or persons
from the rude hands and ruder tongues of those enemies of Peace; from whom the
poor Petitioners found such barbarous entertainment as pitied me to see, and I
take no pleasure to remember. Nor need I mention the many gracious overtures
from his Majesty, that have been spurned at and rejected since. That which most
irremoveably pinnes the Faction upon the Covenanteers sleeves is their entering
into such a League as this with Foreigners; which they would never have
purchased at so dear a rate, had they confided in the native Forces of our own
Kingdom. Besides, the very ground of the Contestation decides the
Controversy. The Covenanteers fight for Subversion of the Laws and Government
established; his Majesty (as, by their confession, he is bound to do) and his
other Subjects, for preservation of them: Say then, who are the Faction?
Whether they who willingly submit to all Laws now in force, and are ready to
pay equal obedience to all such as shall be established in a free Parliament,
or they who not only deny obedience, but vow to extirpate the present Laws
and Government?

CHAP. IX. That many particulars vowed and intended by the Covenant, are simply
and absolutely unlawful.
HAving already demonstrated the iniquity of the Covenant upon such general
Heads of Discourse, as by sound consequence do infer no less; I proceed to
the proposal of such other particulars as are found prima facie, without any
help of deduction, immediately unlawful in themselves.

I. Such is the maine matter of the first Article, if not of the whole
Covenant. The alteration of Religion in England and Ireland. Which if it were
false and erroneous, as it is fal^ly suggested to be, yet being already settled
by standing Laws in both Kingdoms, such as the King is sworn to defend, as
much if not more then any other, for any Subjects by force of Arms to go
about to introduce an alteration, however veiled under the specious title of
Reformation, is a thing not only directly contrary to the positive
Constitutions of these Kingdoms, and without warrant or example from divine
Law, but utterly against Scripture, Reason, the practice of the true Church of
God in all ages, the very nature of Religion it self, and the common
principles of civil Policy.

I might for methods sake parcel this Section, See to this purpose, a Solid
learned Discourse, Of Resisting the lawful Magistrate upon color of Religion.
and show first that all force for Religion, Secondly, that all force against
the King is unlawful. But because I find both swords united in the present
undertakings of the Covenanteers, I shall not divide them in my discourse.

1. First, That to labor the advancement of Religion by way of Force, contrary
to established Laws and the Prince's will has no warrant by way of command or
approbation from Gods word, must be taken for granted, till those who are
otherwise minded can show the contrary: and will be needless to persuade if we
prove in the second place that it is against express testimony of Scripture.
Our Savior Ioh. 18.36.
professes his Kingdom is not of this world, and adds, for then would my
servants fight. Which words as they evince that it is lawful for Subjects to
fight at the command of their temporal King, for the maintenance of his wordly
Estate; so do they insinuate that Christ's Kingdom being Spiritual, cannot,
must not be advanced by temporal Arms. 2. Cor. 10.4.
The weapons of our Spiritual Militia are not carnal, but Spiritual. We have
no command from Christ our spiritual Head, to kill and slay the common enemies
of our Religion, but contrariwise to Matt. 5.44.
pray for our persecutors, and not to resist evil. Perhaps upon the same
conceit o^ Gods glory and advancement of their Religion they persecute us, as
we Vow to extirpat^ them. St Paul out of the abundance of Zeal, Gal. 1.14.
(...), did at first Philip. 3.6.
persecute the Saints of God; yet not without Act. 9.2.
authority from the Magistrate; and therefore his case was different from this
of the Covenanteers; and he obtained pardon (it was a sin then) because he
did it ignorantly. Our Savior left it not untold to his Disciples, and in them
to the Church, Ioh. 16.2.
that the time would come that whosoever killed them, would think he did God
service: those very murderers had the glory of God for their ends, but that
could not excuse their actions.

Heu, primae scelerum causae mortalibus aegris, Naturam nescire Dei! They were
truly ignorant of those means which God requires for the advancement of his
Kingdom. Ib. verse 3
These things they will do, because they have not known the Father, nor me. He
will not have the Mat. 13.30.
tares extirpate out of his field, the Church, till the time of harvest, and by
the proper reapers. Covenant with a Narrative. p. 24.
M. Nigh in his exhortation to the Covenant, has made choice of a text sufficient
to break the neck of it. He bids us be zealous, as Christ was, to cast out all
(he never cast out any by fire and sword) but let us do it in an orderly way,
and with the Spirit of Christ whose servants we are. 2. Tim. 2.25.
The servant of the Lord must not strive (sure then he must not kill and slay)
but be gentle to all men, (I hope Papists and Prelates may pass for men) apt
to teach, (not to enforce) Patient, (not violent) in meekness instructing (not
in fierceness consumeing, destroying, extirpating) those that oppose. If
Seditions, Tumults, Insurrections, Rebellion^ must go current for Discipline
and Order; if the taking up of Arms defensive or offensive, be a work of
patience and meekness, if the Spirit ^f contradiction be more conformable to
the Spirit of Christ then that of suffering, the Lord be Judge; for amongst
men, great Authors are produced on both sides. The chief Covenanters E.C. p.
725.
call it a Spirit of slavery, and and 728.
advise all to make use of that defense which Nature teaches every man to
provide for. But God in Scripture teaches no such matter; Romans 8. 17. 2. Tim.
2. 12. 1. Pet. 3.14. and 4. 16.
he commands every man to be conformable to the image of his Son; if we
suffer with him, that we may be also glorified with him.

3. Thirdly, this course is against the nature of Religion it self. For Faith,
the soul of Religion, is an inward act of the Soul, which all the Tyranny in
the world, that the malice of the Devil can invent, or the wit of man
exercise, can neither plant where it is not, nor extirpate where it is. It is
the gift of God; freely begotten in the hearts of men, not by threat^ and
terrors, not by torture^ and Massacres, but by the quiet still voice of the
word preached: S^adenda, non c^genda. And therefore St Paul, though a lawful
Governor in the Church, flatly disclaimes any 2. Cor. 1.24.
domineering power over the Conscience. A^ for the outward profession of
Religion, neither is that subject to Force and violence: A man may confess
Christ and his Faith in him, as freely in bonds as at liberty, as gloriously
upon the Cross as upon the throne. Fear indeed may incline a weak conscience
to dissemble his opinion, but cannot constrain him to alter it. Fire and
Faggot are strong arguments of a weak cause; undeniable evidences of cruelty in
those that use them; but slender motives of credibility to beget Faith in those
that suffer by them. Lastly for the external, free, and public practice of
Religiou^ duties, that I grant may be restrained by the outward violence of
man; but when it is so, it is not required by God, who never expects to reap
what he did not sow.

4. Fourthly, it is against the constant commendable practice of the true
Church of God in all ages. The Saducees, though they denied the Resurrection,
and many other Truths in Religion, were tolerated in the Church of the Jews;
and our Savior convinces them by strength of argument, not of arms. The
example of Christ and his Apostles is beyond all exception, worthy our best
imitation. When many of his Disciples did apostate, he used no violence to
reduce them, but mildly said unto the Twelve, John 6. 67.
Will ye also go away? When the Samaritans, who were of a different Religion,
neglected to entertain him, because his face was toward Jerusalem, the place
of the true Worship, he sharply Luke 9. 54.
rebuked those sonne^ of thunder who would have consumed them with a shower of
fire. When Peter thought to have defended him by force against a sudden
assault made by the servants of the High Priest (the Ministers to execute an
unlawful command, but employed by the lawful Magistrate) who by destroying
the Master had no other intention but to extirpate that Religion which he had
planted, he commands him to Mat. 26. 52.
put up his sword, for all that take the sword (though it be in defense of true
Religion, yet if it be against the command of the lawful Magistrate) shall
perish by the sword. And as himself was content to suffer an ignominious Death
upon the Cross, notwithstanding he had power infinitely sufficient to repel
all the violence of his enemies; so did his Apostles follow him in the like
example, Acts 5.41.
rejoicing in their life time that they were counted, worthy to be beaten for
his name; and Saint Paul reckons it for a special grace and favor to the
Phil. 1.29^
Philippians ((...), etc.) that they not only believed in in Christ, but
suffered for his sake: and when they had finished their course and fought the
good fight of Faith, they gave up their lives a willing sacrifice in testimony
of the Truth of their Religion.

Conformable to this pattern was the constant Arnob Lact. Cypr. contra Demetr.

Tert. in Apol. and ad Scap. Just. in Tryph. Aug. in Psa. 144.

Ambros. in Luc. 22.38.

Atha^. Ep. ad solit. vitam agente^.


Doctrine and Practice of the Primitive Church. The most ancient Apologists for
the Christian Faith, use this as an Argument to prove the Religion of their
Persecuters to be false, and their own true^ that stood in need of humane force
to maintain it, but theirs stood by the sole power of God. Pudeat te eos
col^re, quos ipse defendi^; pudeat tutelam ab ipsis expectare, quos tu tueris.
Those good Christian^ were content to trust God with the defense of his own
Cause; and indeed they durst do no otherwise; their Religion enjoined them not
to kill, but be killed for it. Nor was this for want of ability, but authority.
They who best knew their own strength, professed to the face of their
adversarie^, that both for number and experience they were nothing inferior.
It was in their power to have oppo^ed, if their Religion would have permitted.
One of them makes Peter put this question to his Master, Cur haberi praecipis
gladium, quem vetas promi? Nisi forte ut videaris potuisse vindicari, sed
noluisse?

Hence it came to pass that when both Swords were in a manner united, after
the Emperors were converted to the Christian Faith, yet Heretics were cut
off by the Spiritual, not by the Temporal. The first General Councels of
Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, condemned those Arch-Traitors in
Religion, Arius, Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutiches, but not to death. The
Council of Constance was the first that proceeded in that kind against John
Husse and Jerome of Prague.

Lastly, as the Harmony of Reformed Churches in their public Confessio Aug.
Art. 16. Gall. Art. 40. Helv. Art. 26. Scot. Art. 24. Angl. Art. 37.
Confessions does not admit of any division or violent resistance against the
supreme Magistrate; so has it been the constant Doctrine of all the Protestant
Divines generally from Luther, down till our times, and more particularly of
this Church of England, as may be more fully seen in the Exhortation to
obedience published in Edward the sixth's days, and the Homily against
Rebellion confirmed by the Articles of our Church under Queen Elizabeth. The
contrary Doctrine being ever reputed peculiar to the worst of Papists, the
Jesuits, and the practice of it made a mark of Antichrist. So as I dare
aver these three last years have produced more seditious Pamphlets in that
kind within this one Kingdom, then all the Christian world ever saw before;
to the shame of our Nation, and scandal of our Profession.

5. Fifthly, this course of violence is contrary to all experience of former
times, by which it is found that Religion has ever been better propagated by
the sufferings of the true Professors, than by force; Persecution to the
Church being like pruning to the Vine; as it was first planted, so has it been
watered and fructified most by blood. Sanguine fundata est Ecclesia, sanguin^
^r^vit.
Not by shedding ^he blood of others, but willingly pouring out her own. The
constant patience of Martyrs was the most winning Rhetoric to persuade others
to the Faith; it being most likely those opinions should be true, for which
they so willingly laid down their lives: at least, common pity is a powerful
Orator to persuade with the People, (with whom the punishment makes the
Martyr) that he who suffers has a good Cause. Whereas should he make resistance
to defend himself, or use violence to compel others, that might be upon other
ends, of profit, vain glory, revenge, and what not? The persecution in other
places drove the Protestants hither in Edward the sixth'^ days, as to a common
Sanctuary, which much advanced the Reformation in England; and the cruelty of
the Papists under Queen Mary was disposed by the Providence of God to perfect
the Reformation both in France and the Low Countries; whither no less that
Girolam. Pollini l' Hist. Eccl. l. 3. ^. 18.
thirty thousand strangers were banished from hence for Religion. The flames of
our English Martyrs did but give more light to the Truth of the Gospel, which
their Enemies thought by that means to suppress; their Fune^als were the most
effectual Sermons for the Peoples Conversion. The bloody Massacre at Paris was
Miterran^ Hist. lib. 4. p. 103^
found to advance the Religion in France, and the rigorous pressing of the
Inquisition made way for casting Popery out of the Low Countries: where the
present Toleration of all Religions is acknowledged by the Lord Disc. Sect. 2^
c. 6. p. 94.
Brook for a special means that makes it flourish.

6. Sixthly, it is against that innate principle of the Law of nature, Quod
tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris. Those who plead most for extirpa^ion of
Heretics, when it comes to be their own turn to be under the Cross, stand
for Liberty of Conscience, and declaime against persecution for Religion as a
thing utterly unlawful; ^o the very Jesuits, Cardinal Allen, and Creswell in
his Philopater. And surely if we will not suffer i^ from others, we may not use
it our selves.

7. Seventhly, 't is against the Law of our Land. W^ have always deprecated
that aspersion which ou^ adversaries would cast upon it; professing we do not
punish any Heretics with death, but Seminaries for Sedition and Rebellion,
not for Religion. And here I must observe that the Lords and Commons in
Parliament primo Elizabethae confess they had no means to free the Kingdom
from the usurped power and authority of the Pope, Cap ^.
but with the assent of the Queens Majesty: so far were they from thinking
it lawful to raise Arms for extirpation of Pop^ry when it was established by
the Law of the Land.

8. Eighthly, it is against the common rules of prudence and Civil Policy, to
use that as a means to propagate, which is more likely to tend to the
extirpation of our Religion: I speak of the Protestant; which in the generality
being not so populous as the Roman, if we shall extirpate them he^e where we
are stronger, we must expect the same measure from them in other places where
they are stronger: and then, in all humane probability, our Religion is like to
come to the worst in France, Germany, Poland, and other Popish Dominions. If
they shall take the same course, what can we have in equity to object against
them? Si quis quae fecit patitur, is he not rightly served?

9 Lastly, it is utterly destructive to all Civil Government: for if any be
allowed to take up Arms for propagation or defense of their true Religion,
against the Civil Laws, and will of their Prince; whosoever has a mind to
rebel, may do it upon the same pretense, and ought not to be questioned by any
humane Authority; for though they do but pretend Religion, yet is it impossible
for any Judge to convince them of such pretense; not can any thing be urged in
defense of the true Religion, which may not be made use of by a false.

II. The extirpation of that ancient Government by Bishops, which has obtained
in England ever since the first plantation of Christianity in this Nation; to
which we principally owe the Reformation of that Religion we now profess, of
which none have been more zealous, more able propugners than our English
Bishops, who by their constant preaching of it, their learned Writings for it,
their pious living in it, and patient dying for it, have sealed unto us that
precious Faith through which we hope, by the mercy of God, for the salvation of
our souls; who have been the Founders or most eminent Benefactours of most
Churches, Colleges, Schools, Hospitalls and other public Monuments of piety
and devotion, which have rendered this Nation so famous abroad and so
magnificent at home. Of whose Government all the Clergy of this Land have
testified their solemn approbation at their entrance into holy Orders, and to
whom all beneficed Ministers have sworn obedience at their institution, and
therefore (it was Concerning the Canons. page 17.
M. Bagshawes Argument) if ever they assent to the alteration of this
Government they are really perjured. Which H^s Majesty, and all His Royal
Predecessors at their Coronation have by a more particular and solemn Oath
vowed to protect: which God himself by extraordinary blessings from Heaven (as
King Proclamation. 10. Iacobi.
James of blessed Memory did acknowledge) has approved and ratified. Which by
the Catholic consent of the Churches of Christendom, both in Asia, Africa,
Greece, Russia, and other parts of Europe, that never acknowledged any
subjection to, or dependence on the Sea of Rome, has been constantly embraced,
and the oppugners of it universally branded for Heretics: which in most of
those few Churches that want it, by their best and ablest Members has been
frequently desired: which of all other forms has undoubtedly the best title to
Divine or Apostolical Institution. Against which nothing is, or ever could be
justly objected but the humane infirmities and personal failings of some
particular men, from which no Government is or can be totally exempt.

If it be not unlawful to swear the Extirpation of this Government so deeply
rooted by the fundamental Laws of this Kingdom (both Common and Statute) as
Monarchy it self, or the new-named Sovereign Power of Parliaments cannot
pretend to be built upon a surer foundation, let it be piously and prudently
considered whether the same Engines by which the Covenanteers would subvert the
Government of the Church, will not be of equal ^trength and fitness to pull
up the Government of the State. Suppose neither King nor Bishop were of divine
Right, certainly Parliaments are not. Suppose both Kings and Bishops fail in
the performance of their trust, is there no expedient, but the Government must
be abolished? Sure it is not impossible for Parliaments to be guilty of a like
defailer; must they be exposed to the like justice? No Bishop, no King, is
granted to be an old received truth by Lord Brook. Sect. 2. c. 6. p. 87.
one who was none of the best friends to either Government. When I consult with
history and experience, and behold the example of some Neighbor Nations, I say
no more, but Vestigia terrent. A strict account must one day be given for every
drop of Christian blood that has been shed in the common Cockpit of Europe
these fourscore years last past.

III. If it were as certainly true, as it is prodigiously false, that
Episcopacy were an Antichristian invention, and therefore fit to be abolished,
yet it would concern our Reformers to provide us of another Government before
they take this away. If Christ did indeed prescribe one set Form to be
perpetually and universally observed in his Church, and Episcopacy be not that
one (as we contend it is) let our adversaries first agree amongst themselves
what it is, and we shall then know how to proportion our conformity to the
authority and reasons of those that enjoyne it. Or if it were left at large, in
the power of the Church, Catholic or particular, to ordain what Form she
shall think most convenient, we still demand, who that Church is, and what that
Form must be here in England? In the mean time this is certain in it self,
and generally acknowledged on all hands, an absurdity so gross as cannot fall
into the imagination of any Christian, that Christ should at any time be
thought to have a Church without any Government; or that it should be in the
power of any man (I do not except a Parliament) to extirpate the present and
so leave the Church void of all Government. I Serinus apud S^ob. Sermon. 42.
read indeed of a Law amongst the Persians, that after the death of the King
there should be a five days Cessation of all Law and Government, (...), that
the People by that want might learn to know what a great blessing it is to
enjoy the King and the Law. As the end was good, so in a civil State the thing
was not injust. But in a Church the case is quite otherwise.

The time was, when the House of Commons took it for an imputation cast upon
them by Malignants, against whom they remonstrate to the Kingdom in these
words, 1. Remonstranc^. E.C. p. 19.
They inf^se into the People that we mean to abolish all Church Government,
and leave every man to his own fancy for the service and worship of God;
absolving him of that obedience which he owes under God unto his Majesty, whom
we know to be entrusted with the Ecclesiastical Law, as well as with the
Temporal, to regulate all the Members of the Church of England, by such rules
of Order and Discipline as are established by Parliament. Were that House now
turned Covenanteers, I should say those Malignants, if they were bad
Counselors, were good Prophets. Is not all that a present Truth, which is
here laid down as a false aspersion? When the Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, Chancellours, Commissaries, Deanes, Archdeacons, and all other
Ecclesiastical Officers, is, according to the tenor of this Covenant, utterly
extirpate, if all Church Government be not taken away, let them show us what
remains; if every man be not left to his own fancy for the service of God, let
them say, what other rule the Covenanteers have to walk by, while they are in
expectation of a new Directory. If the rules of Order and Discipline, by which
the Bishops did govern under the King, be established by Parliament, and no
other so much as pretended so to be; if his Majesty require obedience to these
Rules, according to those Laws, with the execution whereof, next under God, he
is entrusted, when the Covenanteers not only refuse to obey, but swear
disobedience themselves, and require the like of all others, if this be not,
what is it ^o absolve every man from that obedience which he owes under God
unto his Majesty?

The same Authors told us at the same time, Ibid.
We do here declare, that it is far from our purpose or desire, to let loose
the golden reins of Discipline and Government in the Church, and leave private
persons or particular Congregations to take up what Form of Divine Service
they please; for we hold it requisite that there should be through the whole
Realm a Conformity to that Order which the Laws enjoyne. If the reins of
Discipline be not now let loose amongst the Covenanteers, in whose hands are
they? If private persons and Congregations be not at liberty, what Law does
restrain them? If there be any new Form and Conformity established, when was
it enacted? Where may we find it?

It will be said, though they have abjured Episcopacy, E.C. p. 604.
yet they intend to consult with Divines about setl^ng another Form, most
agreeable to Gods Word, most apt to preserve peace at home, and unity with
Scotland. If it were not against the Law of God to rob the Church of all
Government, as it is against the Laws of this Kingdom to abjure the present
Form, yet may it well be thought to be against common Policy, to endanger the
safety, as we have forfeited the Peace, both of Church and State, by
endeavoring to introduce a new Government not yet known of what stamp it is,
nor what effects it may produce. To forsake all ancient and beaten paths, Et
nova and ancipitia praecolere, avida and plerunque fallax ambitio est. Great
care has been taken for the culling out of such Divines as were most likely to
comply in their desires of innovation; many months have they sat a consulting,
and are yet as far from agreement as when they first met. If no Form must be
settled but such as has a concurrence of those three forementioned conditions,
it is probable there must never be any settled at all. What is most agreeable to
Gods Word, next after Episcopacy, may be thought not most apt to preserve
peace, among so many different Sects at home, at least not most apt to preserve
unity with Scotland. The Scots are resolved their Form, and none but theirs,
is according to Gods Word, E.C. p. 598.
jure divino, and perpetual; And the Members at Westminster were once of the
same opinion, or willing to make the Scots believe so, when they told them Ib.
60^.
they concurred with their own judgment touching Church Government. If so,
what need had they to call Divines to consult? Was it to be resolved in
conscience whether they might lawfully tolerate what is ^ure divino, and
perpetual? Or they were resolved upon the conclusion, but the Divines must
find out the premises? Or which is most probable, they never were, nor yet
are, nor perhaps ever will be agreed upon any one Government; though they all
conspire against Episcopacy, as most opposite to their private Factions? For if
we must have no Government but such as shall please the major part of the
Members at Westminster, whether they consult the Assembly for fashions sake, or
in sincerity, we are likely to have none at all. When Master Speaker shall put
every particular Form to the Question, the mayor part, by reason of
distraction in affection or opinion, not concurring upon any one, one by one
they will all be voted out of doors. For example, Shall the Presbytery
succeed? All the Independents, all those that are affected to Episcopacy, all
that are enamoured of any new platform of prudentiall Government by Lay
Commissioners, will with one voice cry, Not content. And such like for the
rest; whatever Form shall be proposed, there will be three to one odds
against it. Till this difference be reconciled, if they will not pardon, I hope
they may be entreated to reprieve Episcopacy; and till we have either found a
better (which we never shall) or be agreed upon another Government, Contenti
simus hoc Catone.

IV. But will extirpation of Prelacy be sufficient to glut the malice of the
Covenanteers? Nothing less, there is a clause in the Covenant, which is
younger brother to the etc^ in the Canons, of as large extent and more
dangerous consequence. For here they swear to extirpate all other
ecclesiastical Officers depending upon that Hierarchy. That is, if they would
speak plain English, all the Ministers in England that have been ordained or
instituted by the Archbishops, or Bishops, or have been inducted, into their
charge by any Archdeacon. I hope I need not yet press the iniquity of this
consequence, but it is requisite I show the truth of it. And let the Country
know, that the most zealous Covenanteers in the City are composed of Brownists,
Anabaptists, and other Brethren of the Separation, who have constantly traduced
the calling of our English Clergy as Antichristian. Vid. Lawne, Schism of the
Brownists, p 78.
It is the 29th Article of their ancient Confession, that not only the
Hierarchy, but The Priests and Deacons of England ordained by Bishops, are a
strange and Antichristian Ministry, and OFFICERS not instituted by Christ's
Testament, nor placed in or over his Church. Hence it was that when Master
Ainsworth and his Company separated from Master Johnson and his Church, it grew
to a Law suit betwixt them in Amsterdam who should have the house allowed them
by the City for their public meetings. The Iohnsonians objected, the other
were Schismatickes; and the Ainsworthians would needs prove those were
Apostates, that they had fallen from their first Faith: particularly, tha^ they
had placed over them one that was made Priest by a Lord Bishops Ordination^ and
had not ordained or imposed hands upon him again, contrary to their 29th
Article: as also against the 32d Article of their Confession, which testifies
that all such as have received any of those false Offices of the Lords Bishops,
are to giv^ over and leave them. The Author of the Countermarch to Master
James his Retreat, endeavors to prove the Church of England a false Church,
and to deny some fundamental points of Doctrine, by this Argument: because it
denies Christ's Kingdom and Prophecy, inasmuch as it appoints men to
prophecy, to preach and administer the Sacraments by virtue of a calling which
Christ has not appointed: for the calling of the Ministers of England is by
the presentation of a Patron, by the institution of a Lord Bishop, and by the
induction of an Archdeacon, which are the mere inventions and devices of men.
Therefore the outward calling is false and humane: wherefore as it was an
error fundamental in Ieroboam's Church, 2 Chronicles. 13.9, 10. 1 Kings 12.31.
that Priests were made after his devising: so is it an error fundatall and
corruption essential, to make Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, which have a
devised Office and form of calling essentially differing from that which God
left in the Church for the calling of his Officers and Ministers. -- The
Minister must renounce his corrupt calling by the Bishop, and enter by the true
calling taught by Christ. And let this be showed by any Minister of any parish
of Engl^nd, if you can. If not, then are they still not truly called, so no
true Ministers of Christ in regard of their calling. I have laid down this
testimony more at large, that I might spare the producing of any more to the
same purpose out of the Writings of Barrow, Cookie, Can, and other Separatists;
with whom nothing is more frequent than to condemn our Ministry for
Antichristian; and to make it no less than Idolatry, to serve Go^ in and by
such a devised Ministry.

How many Disciples these men have in London, and how Orthodox this Doctrine is
amongst the Covenanteers, we may guess in part, if we call to mind Master
Burton, or who else was the Author of the p. 8. and 9^
Protestation protested. He put the question to our English Clergy^ What if the
calling of the Ministry it self should prove a piece of popery? And referred
it to their consideration, Whether they were able to prove themselves the
Ministers of Christ lawfully called, when all of them do immediately derive
their Ministry from the Antichristian Hierarchy, or Papal Prelacy, as the
sole foundation thereof. This Doctrine found so much countenance even in those
days, that neith^r the book was thoutght fit to be censured, nor the Author to
be questioned, though his Majesty complained of it more then once. And whether
the Independents, to whom the Spirit of expounding is most familiar, will not
hereafter, when time serves, expound those words of their new Covenant, All
Ecclesiastical Officers depending upon the Hierarchy, according to their old
wont, of all the Ministers ordained by the Lords Bishops, and what will be the
consequents of such an exposition (which I forbear to press) let the whole
Clergy of England, and the rest of the Kingdom consider and beware.

V. To swear or endeavor such an Extirpation of Bishops, Deanes and Chapters,
as is aimed at by the Covenanteers, is not only unlawful by the positive Law
of this Kingdom, but, as in the highest degree Sacrilegious, utterly against
the Law of God. To prove which, I shall premise these undoubted grounds of
truth. First, that it is Math. 20.15.
lawful for any man to do with his own what he please, so he do not
misemploy it to a bad end. Secondly, that by the Law of God, any man may
dispose of his means as well, if not better, for a pious use (as the
encouragement of Learning, for maintenance of Religion) to a Body Spiritual in
succession, as to his Heirs or Executors, or any secular Corporation. Thirdly,
Acts 5. 4.
that by our Laws the present Beneficiaries (Bishops Deanes and Chapters etc.)
have as true a propriety in their Church-means, as any other person has in his
lay-Fee. Fourthly, that what is on^e devoted to a Sacred use, cannot, without
S^criledge, be converted to a profane. To which purpose I shall not insist
upon any testimony of Scripture (as having been sufficiently done by Sir Henry
Spelman, De non tem: eccles. M. Sempill Sacrilege Sacredly handled. M Vdals
Coal from the ^lter. D. Gardiners scourge of Sacrilege. etc.
others) but only quote (what will be in some men's esteem of more Force) the
de^ermination of an English Parliament 25. Edw. 1. Which declar^s that lay men
(they speak of themselves, as a Parliament) have no authority to dispose of the
goods of the Church; But (as the holy Scripture does testify) they are
committed only to the Priests to be disposed off.

From hence I shall infer, First, that, ex plenitudine potestatis, for a
Parliament to deprive any one Bishop, Deane or Prebend of his present
maintenance whereof he is Legally possessed, unless it be by way of punishment
for some personal delinquency, is as high injustice as to diss^ile any other
man of his freehold without cause. Secondly, that though Bishops, Deanes and
Chapters etc. saving the Right of propriety to the present Beneficiaries, quo
jure quave injuria^ should be abolished for the future, yet to convert their
means from a Religious to a secular use, contrary to the known intentions and
will of the Founders, cannot be excused from downright Sacrilege, and would
be the ready way to bring upon us and our posterity all those fearful
execrations with which those lands were at first devoted to God and the Church;
and we should drink up the dregs of that bitter cup of Gods wrath and
displeasure, of which, it is to be feared, our forefathers supped too deep. The
Lords and Commons at Westminster, in their Feb. 1642, E.C. p. 918.
Ordinance for humiliation, confess the Idolatry and bloodshed in Queen
Mary's days to have a more immediate influence upon the destruction of this
Kingdom, For which to this very day was never ordained such a solemn public
and National acknowledgement of those sins, as might appease the wrath of
that jealous God, against whom, and against whose people, with so high a hand
they were committed. I do from my heart subscribe to this Confession. But may
I not add from St Paul, Romans 2.22.
Thou that abhorrest Idols, Committest thou Sacrilege? May we not fear that
the Sacrilege of King Henry's days cries as loud for vengeance in the ears
of the Almighty, as the Idolatry of Queen Mary; this may seem a transient
sin, which dyed with her person, but that is still intailed upon our
Posterity. And we have never had any Solemn National acknowledgement of it,
or public humiliation for it. The poor Kirk of Scotland may in this be a
pattern worthy our imitation, Assembly at S. Andrews. 1582.
which enjoined a general fast throughout the Realm, for appeasing of Gods
wrath upon the land for the crying sin of Sacrilege. It is not very many
years ago, since a Learned Sir Fran Bac^ns^ Consid^
Statesman of our own, observed the Lands of the Church did pass in
valuation between man and man, at a lower rate then other temporalties; and he
thought all the Parliaments since the 27, and 31. of Henry 8. to stand
obnoxious and obliged to God in conscience, to do somewhat for the Church to
reduce the Patrimony thereof: since they debarred Christ's wife of a great part
of her Dowry, it were reason they made her a competent Ioynture. But we have
lived to see them of another mind; I pray God they do not bring upon this
Land the sad effect of that H. Huntington. lib. 6.

^. Higden. lib. 1. ^. ult.


ancient Prophecy, an utter desolation, by a foreign ignoble Nation, for our
treason and contempt of Gods House. That which Pererius in Genesin. 15. 16.
some of latter times did expect to see fullfilled upon us, when they observed
our sins, like the iniquities of the Amorites, almost full and ripe for
judgment, and told us the time was not far off.

I do seriously persuade my self, that not a few of our Covenanteers, if the
truth were known, do stomach more at the means, then at the Government of
our Ghurch. It is neither the calling nor the persons of Bishops, or Deanes,
but the Bishoprics, and Deanaries that are A^^ichristian and Malignant; and
so they were fairly possessed of these, they care not whether those sink or
swim. If the Presbytery were as rich as Episcopacy, and this as poor as that,
the case would quickly alter, and the holy Discipline be in danger to be turned
out of doors. It is not Conscience, but interest that makes Prelacy have so
many back friend^. It is therefore declared that the public debts shall be
paid out of the Estates of Delinquents, and Malignants; by which they profess
they understand in part all Prelates and their Dependents. This, if it were
true, might be some ground in justice and reason for the Sequestration of that
temporal right which these men have in their Estates; but none at all for
alienating the perpetuity to a secular use; unless God himself be a
Malignant; of whose Patrimony his Ministers are only usu-fructuarii: Or seeing
the Covenanteers pretend to fight God's Cause, therefore they will make him pay
their wages. If the men be peccant they plead no exemption, no impunity; sure
the means is innocent.

The Scripture is more 1. T^m. 3.2. Titus 1.8.
express in requiring Hospitality of Bishops then of other men, and therefore
in congruity never meant they should be so straitened in their abilities. They
are injurious to God who think he would expect to reap more plentifully, where
he sowed more sparingly. If the portion assigned by him to the Levites under
the Law, may be any rule to judge of the Ministers competency under the
Gospel, their revenues will be found much above the proportion of their
Brethren.

It will not be so proper for this Discourse to insist much upon any politic
considerations for conservation of the Churches patrimony: as the constant
revenue which it affords to the Crown, by Tenths, first fruits, and other
annual charges; the ordinary supply by way of Subsidy, or the extraordinary by
Loanes and Benevolences, wherein the Clergy are ever rated above other Subjects
in proportion. The fair and free Estates which their Tenants enjoy under them
upon easy terms, not racked by such oppressions and exactions as are usually
complained of from other Landlords; the many poor Officers and their Families
which are sustained by them in a liberal and ingenious way; the great edge
which they set upon Students in Divinity, so long as they remain the prize of
virtue and industry; the grandeur, wealth, and reputation, which the Cathedrals
occasion to the Cities, by the frequent resort of strangers, and others who
have business to the Chapters. But if they shall upon any pretense be
swallowed up by those Harpies who gape after them, the Exchequer will quickly
find the want; the public burdens will lie more heavy upon the common
People; their Tenants will be reduced to the hard conditions of other
neighbors; their underofficers with their wives and children, if they cannot
dig, must be enforced to beg; the poor will miss of their alms; and when
the reward of piety and learning is taken away, nothing but Barbarism and
Ignorance will succeed in the place.

If nothing that has been said will move with the Covenanteers, who have
conspired the ruin of this flourishing Church, let them examine whether their
intended rapine upon the means of this be not directly contrary to the
Doctrine and Discipline of the Church of Scotland, which they swear to
preserve. Their grand Reformer John Knox in a Aug. 3. 1571.
letter upon his deathbed commands his Brethren of the Assembly at Sterling,
with strength in God, to against and the merciless devourers of the patrimony
of the Church. If men will spoil, let the^ do it to their own peril and
condemnation. But communicate ye not with their sins, of whatsoever estate
they be, neither by consent, nor yet by silence. But with public
Protestations make this known to the world, that ye are innocent of such
robberies, which will ere long provoke Gods vengeance upon the committers
thereof, whereof ye will seek redress of God and man. Their first 1569. ca. 6.
Book of Discipline defines the Churches patrimony to consist not only in all
manner of Tithes, but in all things doted to hospitality in times past, with
all annual rents both to Burgh and Land: and declares all those who had got
any of it into their hands, to be thieves and murderers. Their second Cap. 9.
Book of policy is more full in setting forth that patrimony, and concludes,
that to take any of it away, and convert to the particular and profane use of
any person, is detestable sacrilege before God. One of their Edenb. 1591.
Assemblies appointed M. Robert Pont to write a Treatise against Sacrilege;
and Ibib. 1595.
another laments the growth of it, to the utt^r undoing of the Church, and
staying of the planting of the Gospel; to the overflowing of the Land with
Atheism, and all kind of vice: there being above four hundred Parish ^hurch^s
destitute of the Ministry of the Word by and about the Parishes of Argile and
the Isles.

Let then our Covenanteers be well advised, if not for justice sake to the
Governors of our Church, if not for charities sake to their Dependents, if not
for Honors sake, as they expect to hear in other Nations and after Ages, yet
for God's sake, for conscience sake, for their Oaths sake, for the Doctrine of
Scotlands sake, let them not rob the Church under color of reforming it.

VI. I must here subjoyne by way of appendage, that considering the King at his
Coronation has bound himself by Oath, to defend the Rights and Liberties of
the Clergy in general, and more particularly of the Bishops, if he should give
them up for a Sacrifice to the will of their Adversaries, and upon any
suggested grounds of policy pass away their Rights without their consent,
(which they are bound in conscience to conserve) though in such a case their
Allegiance ties them, not to resist, yet (with humble reverence and submission
be it spoken) I know not how he shall stand excused before God or man from the
foul crime of perjury; and therefore it must be unlawful for any to endeavor
to force his assent to an act so contrary to his Oath, as is this intended by
the Covenant.

For clearing of this point, I shall grant, first, that no Oath is obligatory
beyond the true intention of it. Secondly, that any Oath taken for the benefit
of another may be released by the consent of that party for whose behoof it was
taken; or otherwise it may not^ To this purpose see the Oath of the Princes of
Israel to the Gibeonites, Josh. 11.15. though not approved by the people, verse.
18. yet was the breach of it severely punished by God himself, 2 Samuel 21.
though it be to the takers own loss. Hence I infer, first, that the Kings
Oath for the preservation of the public Laws of the Kingdom, does not bind
him precisely to the perpetual observance of all those which were in being at
the time when he first took his Oath, so as to exclude his consent to any
future alteration; but only so long as regularly they continue in force: and
that when the Lords and Commons in Parliament, as representing the Kingdom,
shall petition for any alteration, the King, if he see cause, may consent unto
it, notwithstanding his former Oath, as having a relaxation from the Kingdom
to whom he swore. But secondly, his Oath to the Bishops and Clergy, being not a
public but a particular one, he cannot, salvo juramento, without their
consent, give way to the making of any new Law in derogation of their Liberties
which he has sworn to defend.

The subject of the legislative power in any State, though by reason of the
Supreme jus dominii over the persons and goods of all the Subjects, he be above
Law, yet will not that make him above his own Oaths and promises to particular
persons. For a Law gives a right against the Lawgivers, only so long as it is
a Law, that is, no longer than till it please them to repeal it. But a promise
or Oath made to another, gives a right against him that made it, as long as the
Creditour pleases. Were it not thus, the public Faith passed by the King and
Parliament were of less value than any private man's bond, they might void it
when they please; all promise of pardons granted to Rebels or other
Delinquents might be rescinded, and no security could be had by them. The
reason I conceive to be this, the King here, and whosoever in other places is
the subject of Supreme Power, though they be originally free from any
engagement to inferior Subjects, yet (if they will) they may in some things
bring a restraint upon their absolute Supremacy, Vnusquisque potest cedere jure
suo, as well for the advantage of particular persons of their own Dominions, as
to Princes, or People of another Nation. Which if they do, their own act shall
bind them; in justice, if it were but a ba^e promise; but in Religion and
Conscience, if it be confirmed by an Oath deliberately taken, and the matter it
self be not unlawful. For this superaddes a religious band unto God, from
which they can neither free themselves, nor any other absolve them, unless
those in behalf of whom it was taken do release their interest. If this were
not so, no Oath could be binding unto them.

I will not deny but sometimes there may be just occasion for a King or State to
make use of their Supreme Power to the present prejudice of particular persons,
as in case of Invasion to destroy a private man's goods, that they may not come
into the enemies hands; but then, I suppose, they are bound in conscience and
equity to make him reparation out of the Commonwealth for his private losses,
deducting so much as he for his part should be liable to bear in the public
charges. Which if they shall refuse to do, and will use their summum ius to
another man's injury, there is no remedy in foro humano, but they must answer
for their injustice at a higher Tribunal.

Here is now the case of our English Clergy; the Bishops, Deanes, and Chapters,
etc. have not only a present personal estate in their Baronies and other
Temporalties, as good in Law as any freeholder in the Land; but the Body of the
Clergy have a perpetual Right in succession; both which his Majesty has by
many reiterated E.C. p. 23.
Protestations vowed to maintain; and by the solemn 291.355.
Oath at his Coronation (which has been so often pressed to other purposes)
sworn to keep the Laws, Customs, and Franchises granted to the Clergy: to
preserve and maintain to the Bishops and Churches committed to their charge,
all Canonical Privileges, and due Law and Justice, and to be their Protector
and Defender to his power, as every good King in his Kingdom in right ought to
protect and defend the Bishops and Churches under their Government. After the
solemn emission of all which Oaths and Protestations, as it were a great sin
if his Majesty upon temporal ends or by-respects, without any offense of the
Clergy, should put their persons out of his protection, much more if he should
cancel all their ancient Rights, and alienate their means, the thought
whereof his righteous soul^ abhorres: So they cannot be excused from the guilt
of perjury, who either by sly insinuations shall go about to incline, or by
armed force labor to compel him to the breach of his Oath. The former may be
the practice of evil Counselors, the latter is the Design of these
Covenanteers. I will not define, which are more inexcusable; their ends may be
the same, the maine difference is in the means, and this it is; these would
extort injustice from their Sovereign, those would persuade him to it, and so
by making him less unwilling would make him more guilty; if the God of Heaven,
in whose hands are the hearts of Kings, do not (as hitherto he has done)
strengthen him with sufficient grace against the subtilty of the one, as with
power against the violence of the other.

VII. If all the particulars in the second Article were indeed criminal, yet
they ought not to receive equal punishment; much less ought all persons
without respect, whether truly or supposedly guilty of them, be (as is here
vowed) in like manner extirpate. Nature has made a difference in crimes;
Religion and Law admits of a distinction betwixt persons, but this Oath
confounds all. Divines were wont to distinguish of Papists, betwixt Seducers
and Seduced; Heretics, and their adherents; those the Laws have sentenced to
death, but allotted to these a milder animadversion, as of whom it may be true
which Salvian spoke of some Arians, affectu piae opinionis errant. But from
these rigid Covenanteers a seduced Lady must expect no more mercy than a
professed Jesuit. Nay, the King himself if he be but prelatically affected,
must look for no better measure. By their own confession his Person is in
danger. If we look back upon what passed betwixt his Majesty and the two
Houses upon that occasion, we shall find them thus reasoning against his going
into Ireland. April 18^ 1642.

E.C. p. 141^


If your Majesty shall go, you will very much endanger the safety of your
Royal Person. Which will be subject not only to the casualty of war, but to
secret practices and conspiracies; especially, your Majesty continuing your
Profession to maintain the Protestant Religion, which the Papists are generally
bound by their Covenant to extirpate. Now then, his Majesty continuing his
profession to maintain Episcopacy, which these men are generally bound by their
Covenant to extirpate; shall not his Sacred Person, by the same consequence, be
subject to the like practices, from them who have added this clause more than
the Papists had in their Covenant, to extirpate all without respect of persons?

The consequent hereof is a thing in it self so horrid and injust, that the
sober Writers against Monarchy, have not been ashamed to profess, that be the
crimes of Kings never so profane, yet their persons ought to be sacred, not to
be violate, not to be touched. And some of the most active well-willers to the
Cause, have granted thus much truth to us, that difference in Religion makes no
difference in the Right of Kings.

The Lord Disc. Sect. 1. c. 9. p. 49.
Brook professes, he is not of their judgment who say, None that are without
the pale of the Church have right to any thing here below: but clearly
conceives a heathen Emperor may be as lawful a Monarch as any Christian
Prince. And I shall subject this reason to it; because Temporal Dominion
respects men, as they are men, in a civil, politic capacity; not as they are
Christians, Papists, Protestants, of this or that Religion. We need not fetch
precedents from foreign Countries, the approved practice of our own Kingdom
will confirm us in this Truth. After the death of Edward the sixth, when the
Protestants could see nothing in Qu^en Mary but what threatened ruin to their
persons, and (if it were in her power) to their Religion too, yet they never
questioned her right of succession to the Crown because she was a Papist. Nor
did the Papists upon that ground oppose against Queen Elizabeth in the first
Parliament of her Reign.

If it be needful to add any examples from Scripture, we shall there read
that diverse Kings of Israel were Idolaters, 1 Kings 11.5. 2 Chronicles. 25.14. and
33. 3, 22.
Solomon, Am^ziah, Manasseh, Amon, and though the Deuteronomy. 17.2.
Law was punctual that Idolaters should be put to death, yet we shall never
find that either the People did, or the Prophets exhorted them to attempt any
thing against the Persons, or to withdraw their Allegiance from the Government
of those idolatrous Kings.

This present Oath then is in that particular injust, because it provides not
for the safety, but implicitly vows the destruction of his Majesty's Person,
in case he be thought obnoxious to Popery, Prelacy, Superstition, Heresy,
Schism, or Profaneness; all which the Covenanteers swear to extirpate,
without respect of persons.

VIII. Those Malignants or evil Instruments, whether truly so called, or
falsely suspected, must all be brought to their trial, and receive punishment,
as the degree of their offenses shall require or deserve, or the Supreme
Iudicatoryes of both Kingdoms, or others having power from them for that
effect, shall judge convenient. So as, though the supposed offense of a
Malignant do not deserve to be punished with confiscation of his Estate, with
death, or bands, yet if it require it, or if the Supreme Iudicatory, (what that
means, I do not question) nay, if any inferior Judge delegate from thence,
shall think it convenient, be the crime what it will, never so small, never so
great, be the Law for punishment of it never so express, all this is not
considerable, these Judges are not tied to any rules of Law, but convenience.
If they think fit, the killing of a thousand men shall be less capital than
the cutting off a dogs neck. Treasonable words against a worthy Member shall
be severely punished, but against the King they shall pass unreproved. What
though there be less justice, there is more convenience in the killing and
sl^ying all such as are made Delinquents by Vote, then in discouraging such as
are Traitour^ by Law?

For any Iudicatory to arrogate a power of punishing offenders, merely as they
shall judge convenient, and condemning them because they will, though the
degree of the offense do not so deserve, is most tyrannical and injust; and to
delegate such a power to others as they cannot challenge to themselves, is to
propagate injustice for convenience sake. In this Covenant such a power is
pretended to be due to some, and deriveable upon others, and all the arbitrary
exorbitant sentences, which either those supreme, or these delegate Judges
shall think fit to pass, all the Covenanteers swear to endeavor.

CHAP. X. That the Covenant is repugnant to those general ends for which it is
pretended to be taken.
HAving dispatched the Efficient and Material, we proceed to examine the
Final Causes of the Covenant, which are set down in the Title and Preface to
it; they are (we confess) very good in themselves, but such is the nature of
the Covenant, that the taking or observing of it, is either inconducing to, or
utterly inconsistent with those proposed Ends, and therefore unlawful.

I. The first maine End is pretended to be here, what in Truth should be the
supreme End, of all humane actions, The glory of God. However some seduced
Zelots may have an actual intention of referring this their Oath to that End,
yet the thing in it self being incapeable of any such relation, there cannot be
a greater profanation of Gods Ordinance, or indignity offered to his Honor,
than the abusing of his Name to unlawful acts, Uti Deo ut fruamur mundo. They
who least reckon of his glory are most ready to make use of that pretense. All
the Popes Bulls, thundered out against Princes, did ever begin, as this
Covenant does, with a Nomine Domini, Having before our eyes the glory of God.
There is nothing more certain, then that the sinful devices of men do not
conduce to the glory of God.

II. The next general End is said to be Religion, pure Religion, a common
cloak for Rebellion in all age; -- Saepius olim, Religio peperit scelerosa
atque impia facta.
The Sicilian Vespers, the Massacre at Paris, the Gunpowder Treason, were all,
forsooth, pretended to be for the advancement of the Kingdom of Christ, for
the Reformation and Defense of Religion. By which I suppose the Covenanteers
understand the true Protestant Religion in opposition to Popery. Yet I am
confident this course of theirs tends more to the advancement than extirpation
not only of Popery properly so called, of that Pope which every man has in his
own belly, but even of Romish Popery: and serve^ rather to confirm that
Antichrist in his Throne, then any way to weaken his force. I am quite of
another mind then Covenant with Narrative. p. 32.
M. Henderson, had the Pope of Rome known what was done that day, when he made
his Speech at Westminster, it would have made his heart dance for joy, to see
the Protestants mutually vowing the destruction and extirpation of one another.

Hoc Ithacus velit. This is not the way to unite our selves against the Common
Enemies, E. C. p. 21.
who are the better enabled by our Divisions to destroy us all. When Bears and
Lions go together by the ears, it is victory to the shepherd if both be
destroyed. We are now doing that of our own accord, which the Pope with all
his arts and industry could never bring about. He prays for the continuance of
our Wars, as the establishment of his peace, with that old Roman, Maneat,
quaes^, duretque gentibus, si non amor nostri, at ^erte odium sui. Quando,
urgentibus Imperii fatis nihil jam presta^e fortuna maj^^ potest, quam hostium
discordiam. They who, in cold blood, pronounced the peace and quiet of this
Kingdom to be the E.C. p. 36.
only visible means under God to preserve the Protestant Religion, if ^hey
now swear no peace, but utter extirpation -- Iurata nepotibus arma -- sure the
care of Religion is the least thing that troubles them.

This then is one means whereby the Covenant advances Popery, confessed and
visible, our distractions amongst our selves, there is a second more close,
which I doubt the Jesuits and other Emissaries make as much use off, to the
seducing of weak souls. Namely that the Covenanteers here in England have
left, as to themselves, no visible Church, no known rules of Doctrine, no set
form of Government and Discipline, and therefore they begin in London to erect
new Church-Societies according to every man's fancy and humor. This is false
for the maine ground, for as our King, so our Church, is still the same, Nun
quam obscura nomina, licet aliquando obumbrentur. Both under a cloud in some
places; but though they do not sh^ne in their full luster, yet are they not so
darkened but any may see them, who do not wilfully shut their eyes against
them.

I must not repeat, what I have proved already, that this Reformation intended
to be brought about by the Covenanteers, (as it is already beg^n) by force of
Armes^ raised by Subjects against the Law, to which they owe, and the Prince to
whom they have sworn Obedience, is a thing not only unwarrantable, as
contrary to the word of God, the nature of Religion, the practice of the true
Church in all ages, and the exper^ence of former times, but even against the
rules of prudence and civil policy.

III. The third End proposed to this Covenant, is the Honor and happiness of
his Majesty and His posterity. Where the King must of necessity be understood
in a personal, not in a politic capacity; for in that only he can be said
to h^ve posterity, in this he never dies. Now for his Spiritual happiness it
must be granted, the many injust provocations from these Covenanteers have
afforded him sufficient matter of Christian patience and meekness, for which
he may expect a more eternal weight of glory in the heavens, having on earth
had so deep a share in that Royal virtue, Been facere and male audire. But how
far their former actions, and so in likelihood their present intentions, are
opposite to the personal Honor, and temporal Happiness of His Majesty, let
them speak and the world judge. If E.C. p. 80.
whatever violence be used against any that exercise the Militia, cannot but be
taken as done against the Parliament; by ^he same reason, whatsoever is done or
said against those that execute His Majesty's Commands, he cannot but take as
done against himself: much more those aspersions cast upon His Answers,
Messages, Declarations, Proclamations, and other avowed actions of his own,
tend immediately to his dishonor. The scandalous Ib. p. 67.68.
impu^ations upon his Government, forged in the same shop with this Covenant:
the defamations and invectives against his Person, suggestions against his
sincerity in Religion, if not countenanced never punished, though often
complained off, were these to his Houour? The seizing and detaining of his
Towns, Forts, Magazine, Navy, Houses, Children, was this for his Happiness?
Directing their Cannon more especially against that part of his Army at
Edgehill and Newbury, where his Sacred person was known to be, was this for
his Safety? If these things be dishonorable in themselves, it matters not by
whose command they were done; that does not alter their nature, and make them
cease to be so. Whether their thoughts of his Children and Posterity be so full
of Honor as they here give out, we shall be glad to know by their fruits
hereafter; and, unless those reveal themselves to the contrary, shall not
further question the truth of their pretensions.

IV. The fourth End of the Covenant is Liberty. The common frontispeice to all
popular Rebellions. Libertas and speciosa nomina praetexuntur; nec quisquam
alienum servitium and dominationem sibi concupivit, ut non eadem ista vocabula
usurparet, What a precious con^erve of public Liberty, what a sovereigne
Antidote against any growing Tyranny this Covenant is like to prove (which is
principally enjoined for the support of those men^ power, who, under pretense
of defending, have already destroyed whatever had the face o^ Liberty by
anunheard of Tyranny) may be easily discerned by presenting some few of their
exorbitant invasions upon the Common Liberty of the Subject.

I am unwilling to be ever bearing upon that harsh string, the Liberties of the
Clergy, which by the Magna Charta, cap. 1.
Laws of this Land are none of the least. Suffering the People to abuse the
Bishops that they might complain, and then punishing them for complaining:
turning them out of those walls where they had sat ever since there was a
Parliament in England: usurping the power of the Convocation, in refusing to
pass such Subsidies as they had freely granted, and imposing others upon them
without their consent: Determining without and against their advice, in matters
of Religion and Ecclesiastical cognizance: Substituting in their place other
Factious Spirits, neither chosen by the Clergy, nor approved by His Majesty:
dispersing printed Tickets, inviting all men to accused them, and publishing to
the world the most odious extracts of those accusations, before any proof made
of them, or the parties appeared to their answers; a thing as full of scandal
to the Religion of the accusers, as of injustice to the parties accused:
Fineing, Imprisoning, Sequestring, and depriving them without any due process
of Law: all these and more I could press, but if the Liberties of other
Subjects have been preserved entire, I am content the Clergy suffer.

We have been informed at large by the 1. Remonstrance of the State of the
Kingdom.
House of Commons wherein the Liberties of the Kingdom consist, and how they
were infringed before this Parliament. If there be any particular mentioned by
them, wherein the Covenanteers have not equalled or exceeded all former
pretended violations from the Crowne^ let our sense of the present confer with
our memory and experience of the former times, and freely pronounce, whether
that Remonstrance had more of History or of Prophecy.

Those distempers which before assaulted, never till now overwhelmed and
extinguished the Liberty, Peace, and Prosperity of this Ki^gdom, nor weakened
and undermined the foundation and strength of the Royal Throne.

The forced Contributions upon the Propositions are executed with more cruelty
upon refusers, then any moneys formerly taken up by Commissions of Loan.

The Petition of Right and Privilege of Parliament have been insufficient to
protect either other Subjects, or the Members of that great Council, from
fines, Imprisonments without bail or Habeas Corpus, from trial of some, and
Execution of others by Martial Law.

Tunnage and Poundage are received, E.C. p. 121.
contrary to an Act made this present Parliament, without any color of Law or
precedent to warrant it.

Shipmoney and Monopolies are revived under the new name of Excise, to the
value of many thousand pounds a month. A thing on their part so odious and
illegal, that they who now impose it did once seem so far^e to detest it as to
put out a Declaration, Ib. p. 638.
calling it, A scandal raised against them by Malignants.

Not only private interest but Public Faith has been broken by them, in
neglecting to pay the Scots, according to agreement, employing that and the
money raised for relief of Ireland, to the maintaining of an unnatural War
in the bowels of England.

The Covenanting Committees have committed more rapes upon the common Liberty
in one year, than all the Courts of Star Chamber and High Commission from
their first Erection.

Judges have been taken off the Bench by armed men and sent to Prison, for
refusing to do against their Oaths and conscience, as Judge Mallet. Others have
been so awed, that they durst not do their duty: and the better to hold a rod
over them, they have been impeached and committed for High Treason; yet brought
to sit upon the Bench again before any Trial or Sentence of Absolution, as
Judge Bartlet. Commands have been sent to prohibit their proceedings in
several particular cases.

Justices and Jurors have been superseded from enquiring upon Routs and
Tumults, and the common Justice of the Kingdom has been obstructed by
Ordinances, prohibiting the holding of Assizes, notwithstanding the General
Protestation for the free course of justice.

New Oaths are enforced upon the Subject without Law.

The usual course of pricking Sheriffs not observed, but mock-Sheriffes
appointed by a new forged Broad Seal.

Master White and his assistants triumph in the Suspension, Sequestration, or
Deprivation of many painful, learned and pious Ministers.

Many noble Personages and other Patriots, are Parliament Men in name, but the
Power and Authority is wholly devolved upon a few, whose resolutions and
determinations (if they be brought at all) are only brought into the House for
countenance and execution, not for debate and deliberation.

All military charges increased and exercised: Soldiers, against their will,
daily pressed by Ordinance, contrary to an Act made this Parliament.

Are we any whit the more secured in our persons or estates, so long as the
root of all these evils is not truly taken away, but only transplanted? Which
was acknowledged to be the Arbitrary Power (formerly pretended to be in his
Majesty, but now usurped by the Covenanteers) of taxing the Subjects without
consent by Act of Parliament. If the blow be the same, it smarts as sore
whatever hand inflict it. To change our masters is not to be free. If they
truly confessed, (in the case of Hull) it were in them an Act of high injustice
should they destroy men's properties, when we see them daily do it, must we call
it therefore just? They have urged against the King what holds strongest
against themselves; E.C. p. 858.
If by Law they might charge the Subject for defense of the Kingdom in time of
danger, they were ill advised that desired aid of the Subject in such times,
and engaged themselves (as we know they have done) without a salvo jure, for
repayment. Admitting it should be so, that without this power of imposing
Contributions it were impossible to defend the people, it follows not that
therefore they may impose such Contributions. Ib. p. 846.
If M. Pym's excuse be yet authentic, the same Law that enables them to raise
Force^ for defense of the Kingdom, enables them to impose Taxes for
maintaining them, otherwise that power were vain and useless, it will serve
the King in good stead; he it is who is entrusted with the power of defending
the Kingdom; he to whom the two Houses themselves sue for protection; he to
whom they confess Ib. p. 700.
All men's persons, lands, and moneys, are subject for the public good.

V. The last general End of the Covenant is Peace: it is true^ the chief
Covenanteers did once profess their detestation of a Civil War, Ib. p. 464.
If it might be avoided without alteration of Religion, which they conceived to
be the main End of their Enemies, and such as would draw with it l^sse of
Liberty, and subversion of Law. This now appears to be their own main End; for
what else is intended by their Oath for Reformation of Doctrine, and
extirpation of the Government in our Church? What was it that altered the
Popish Religion into Protestantisme, but Reformation? And do not these aim at
a greater alteration both in Doctrine. Discipline, Government and Worship, than
ever the Papists went about?

If they had been cordially affected to Peace, we had never been driven to
these sad extremities of war. They might have had it before the Sword was drawn
or a blow struck; no new Religion was pressed upon them; no Law denied which
might conduce to the public safety. Since the war begun, several Treaties
for accommodation have been proffered to them; the most rejected, others made
fruitles by them. But if war be the only means to procure Peace, if weakening
and impoverishing the Kingdom be the way to preserve it, what hopes have we
but in desperation? May they not yet have Peace, if they will embrace it with
the same Religion, the same old Laws? A gracious pardon is freely offered to
all that will accept it. The happiness of a blessed peace concluded between
the two Nations, what hinders the continuance of it? Extirpation of Church
Government was no condition of that Pacification.

Certainly, then these destructive ways of the Covenanteers do not lead
immediately to it, but are they likely to end in Peace? Yes, when they have
extirpated all opposers, Vbi solitudinem fecerint, pacem appellant. Yet I doubt
of that too. The chance of War is uncertain; they could not bring their ends
about when they had more strength and less opposition; which if they shall
ever do, they must know that Laws made by the Sword are but short-lived; they
will be unmade so too. Do they hope so thoroughly to root up the Royal Vine,
and spoil the Branches, that there will not be left (...), so much as to power
upon the Goats horns? There will never be wanting a Title to the Crown, and
justice, or compassion, or faction at home will find, and interest abroad will
lend a sword to defend it.

Besides, it will ask some time to extirpate Popery, Prelacy, Delinquents,
Malignants, etc. who being all declared Traitors, and by this Covenant devoted
to destruction, sure they will sell their lives as dear as they can; they can
expect no worse by fighting than they must undergo by submitting; it is more
honorable to die by the sword, than by the halter. Moriendum victis, moriendum
deditis; id solum refert novissimum spiritum per ludibrium and contumelias
effundant, an per virtutem.

But say the Covenanteers should at last be masters of their most improbous
desires, the Kingdom by that time will be so exhausted of men and money and
other necessaries, by a long War, and the consequents of it, Plague, Famine,
and Decay of Trade, that it will be exposed for a prey to any stranger that
shall think it worth invading, who cannot want as fair a color as the Scots,
either to interpose as Mediators, to propagate their Religion, to protect, or
rescue, or revenge their injured friends. Or if all other States should be
asleep while our house is on fire, what security can we have from our dear
Brethren of Scotland; who^ though it be in Gods Cause, will not work but for
their wages? and to enhanse those they may pr^tract their service so long till
all our Treasure will not pay them; and they who come to be partners, will at
last look to be masters: Ask the Stories, which will not flatter, what was the
event of calling the Saxons and Normans into this Land. We have nothing to
secure us from the like now, save only the innate candor and veracity of the
Nation, so much famed in their own, and ours, and foreign Major. Lesle. Hall.
Harding. Sabellicus.
Histories. Sic notus Vly^ses!

But if the Scots should prove as honest as they are wise, would there be any
certainty of Peace among our English Covenanteers? I conceive not. Consider
them of two sorts, the one engaged out of conscience, the other for politic
ends. For the first, how shall so many different Sects be reconciled, who are
bound by their Oath to extirpate all Schism? They must fall to it pell mell,
the Presbyterians, Brownists, and other Separatists must fight it out. It is
not a Parliamentary Power that will restrain them. The same principles which
are produced now against the King, will serve then against the States. Their
obligations are reciprocal, and if their Excellencies fail in their trust,
they know what follows. If any insolent demand of popular zeal be not
hearkened to, presently Ad arma. Any turbulent Volero, any factious Bo^tefeu,
may set a City on fire, but it requires pains and skill to quench it. Quippe
in turbas and discordias pessimo cuique plurima vis; pax and quies bonis
artibus indigent.

For the second sort of Covenanteers, the Politicians, though their stomachs
be stayed for a while, and the common enemy do yet unite them, when he is taken
out of the way, those coals of dissension, which can at this time scarce be
smothered, will then burst out into open flames. Essex and Waller, Manchester
and Willoughby, Denbigh and Purefey, Brereton and Ashton, will then try the
strength of their parties. The hopes of sharing the means of the Church, and
Delinquents Estates, and succeeding in the chief Places of Honor and Profit
in the Kingdom, which now whets their swords against those that hold them, if
they miss or fall short of those hopes, will set as sharp an edge upon them
against their new Rivals; they must needs fall ^ut about dividing the spoil.
For the preferments being not equal in number to the Competitors, some must be
put by; and perhaps those that are advanced, will complain it is below their
merits; when every man shall set the rate upon his own Treason, but a few will
be satisfied. This will beget new discontents, and those will beget new fears
and jealousies, and these will require new Officers of State, such as may be
confided in; and what Peace, what safety is like to be in the end of all this?
Very little, unless some of the Royal Race again, as Augustus in the Roman
State, Cuncta discordiis civilibus falsa, nomine Principis sub Imperium
accipiat.

CHAP. XI. That the particular Ends of the several Articles are likewise
inconsistent with the matter of them.
I. AS the whole Covenant is either inconducing to, or incon^istent with the
general Ends for which it is pretended to be taken; so are the several
Articles of it to those particular Ends which are specified in them. The
Reformation vowed in the first, by such a violent course as they now endeavor
it, we have alread^ proved to be no means but rather a hinderance to the
growth of Religion, and so to that Life in faith and love, and cohabitation of
God among us, which is the End proposed to that Article. The like violent
Extirpation of Prelacy (which is no sin) vowed in the second, is so far from
preventing the inconvenience there mentioned, partaking in other men's sins,
that all who vow it are thereby guilty of sin; much more they who attempt to do
it in such a disorderly way: and most of all those, who, by fear or
threatening, (which is a moral compulsion) force other men to enter into their
Covenant, who are either persuaded in conscience of the iniquity of it, or
cannot take it without reluctance and doubting; and so not without sin. These
men making it a touch of other men's affections, and the refusal of it a
pretense to spoil and plunder, so causing them to swear, who, if they do,
must forswear, are most properly and truly partakers in other men's sins.

II. Lastly, their End of swearing the third Article to maintain the Rights and
Privileges of Parliament, and the Kings Person and Authority, is said to be,
That the world may bear witness with their consciences of their loyalty, that
they have no thoughts or intentions to diminish his Majesty's just power and
greatness. This is vain and impertinent, for the world cannot see into their
consciences, nor judge of their thoughts and intentions, otherwise than by
their actions. It is acknowledged by the Lord Disc. Sect. 1. c. 8. p. 42.
Brook, That Powers are God's Ordinances set over us for good, and that
Kingdoms certainly in holy Writ have more for them than any other Government.
But let the ius Regium be never so much by Scripture, our King must be allowed
no more than he can entitle himself to by the Law of the Land, nor so much
neither by the good will of the Covenanteers. That the world may have some
evidence to pass sentence upon, we shall propose a few particulars, wherein
the Kings just Power has been diminished, if not abolished by the
Master-Covenanteers.

1. The Kings of England have been anciently so fully invested in the
Legislative Power, that most of the Common Laws we are now governed by, do owe
their creation or conservation to the mere mercy of the Conqueror. Magna
Charta was first granted by Henry the Third 9. Hen. 3.
of his mere free will. 14. Hen. 3. 21. Hen. 3. 3. Ed 1. 6. Ed. 1. etc.
Other Statutes which pass in number and have still the force of Acts of
Parliament, are directed as private Writs, with a Test meipso: and the common
style of most others runs in this strain, The King with the advice of the
Lords, at the humble Petition of the commons, wills, etc. The form of passing
Bills, which is still observed, is Le Roy le veult, and Soit fait comm^ il est
desire. Hence some have collected that the Rogation of Laws belongs to the two
Houses, but the Legislation to the King; that their Act is Preparative, his
only Iussive. The Covenanteers have not only diminished, but E.C. p. 709,
710^715,727.
contrary to their Declarations, utterly deprived him of this so just, so
necessary a power, without which he cannot perform his trust, nor discharge
his Oath to his Subjects. For they Ib. p. 706.
challenge him as bound to pass all Bills that shall be presented to him as
for the good of the Kingdom: whereby they do not leave him so much power as
the meanest Cobbler that gives a voice in the Election, or the Burgess that is
returned and sits in Parliament for any Borough. For any of these may freely
Vote in the passing of any Bills, and when there is an equality of Suffrages
in the rest of the Members, his single voice may carry it, and make that Bill a
Law, or no Law. But the King must not meddle in election of Members, he must
not take notice of any Bill, till it be brought unto him for his assent, and in
case he refuse, it must be a Law without him. Witness the Ordinance for the
Militia, Ib. p. 93. and 121.
and that for Tunnage and Poundage: besides infinite others to which his
consent was never so much as asked, yet are they put in execution with rigor
answerable to their power. 2. The King has a just power, as to diverse other
purposes, so 33. H. 8. c. 21.
to pass Acts of Parliament by his Great Seal. In diminution of this power,
they have declared against his forced absence from Westminster, as illegal;
and made an Ordinance that all things passed by him under that Seal shall be
void. 3. The Kings just power in declaring Law has been formerly so great, that
his Letters have been taken for sufficient Warrants and directions to the
Judges to proceed by; and his 31. H. 8. c. 8. and 34. H. 8. c. 23.
Proclamations to several purposes of no less force than Acts of Parliament.
But now that power is wholly E.C. p. 305, 449,483.
protested against as illegal, and protection is promised to all such as shall
oppose it. Yet the ground of it, (declared in the preface to that Act 31. Hen.
8.) is still the same, The Supremity of the Regal Power given by God; and the
reason of the 1 Ed. 6. c. 1^.
Repeal is quite ceased, which was a willingness in the King to gratify his
People, and upon trust that they would not abuse the same, but rather be
encouraged with more faithfulness and diligence to serve his Highness. 4. The
Kings power in executing Law ^ath been always conspicuous, and undeniedly just
in granting out Commissions of Oyer and Terminer for the holding of Assizes,
28. Ed. 1. c. 8.
and in adjourning the Term to what place he should think fit; a power as
anciently due, so of late acknowledged in an Act made this Parliament for the
abbreviation of Michaelmas Term. Yet have the Covenanteers E.C. p. 194.
898,931.
forbid any Assizes to be kept; they have voted the Kings removal of the Term
to be against Law, and promised to keep indemnified all Judges and others that
shall disobey his Majesty's Proclamations in that behalf. 5. The power of
making Justices of Peace is so entirely the Kings by 27. H 8. c. 24.
Law, that it depends wholly upon his pleasure and will. Yet would the
Covenanteers diminish his power, for they E.C. p. 909.
require that such may be put out of Commission as they desire; and such put
in, as were removed without their consent. 6. The power of pardoning is so
inseparably and absolutely the Right of the Crown, that the 27. H. 8. c. 24.
Law estates it wholly and solely upon the King. And it is not long since the
Covenanteers did E.C. p. 270, 715,901.
confess as much. Yet is nothing more frequent in their Ordinances than to
promise protection for the time to come, and impunity for the time past. And
does not their Covenant vow the punishment of all Delinquents, without any hope
of pardon from his Majesty or themselves? 7. The Kings power over his
Household, and the choice of his Officers is so just and reasonable, that they
have not stuck to Observations upon M. Eliots letter, E.C. p. 486.
acknowledge it an undoubted Prerogative to dispose of preferments in his own
Family. Yet, next to the robbing of the Church, nothing is more aimed at than
to rob his Majesty of this piece of Sovereignty, to get the disposal of his
Servants and marriage of his Children into their hands: as the nineteen
Propositions first informed us, and their actions since abundantly confirm. 8.
The Law has placed in the Kings Person a power to protect all other persons:
as E.C. p. 727, 710.
themselves confess in terminis; and to desire him to part with this power is
such a supposition as cannot fall upon a Parliament. Yet has it been long, and
still is their utmost endeavor to divest his Person of that power, by
excluding him out of the exercise of the Militia, to deprive him of all those
means whereby he should protect both himself and others, by declaring his Ib.
p. 271.
personal Commands, of what nature soever, to be of no force; and by putting
such a 727.
distinction betwixt his Person and his Office, as under color of defending
this exposes that to the vilest attempts that any Traitor can plot, or any
Assassine commit. 9. That Supremacy of Power which the Law places in the King
1. Eliz. c. 1.
over all States, as well as over all particular persons, which all the
Subjects of this Realm, and the Members of Parliament more particularly are
bound by Oath to acknowledge and maintain, which they grant to be due unto him,
when they desire him E.C p. 5. and 73^^^
to protect them in their privileges, and challenge such protection, as due
from him; when they make all their addresses unto him by way of Petition, and
style him constantly in their Acts their only Sovereign Lord. Yet the
Covenanteers endeavor to disseise him of this supreme power, some by making
the Houses coordinate with him, others by making him subordinate to them, and
upon that ground justifying their taking up Arms against him. 10. Lastly,
though the power of calling and dissolving Parliaments, as well as the
appointment of the time and place, has ever See the Preface to the Act for a
Triennial Parliament.
belonged to the Kings of this Realm, yet is this E.C. p. 701.
denied to be any Prerogative, and advantage taken from a late Act, contrary to
the Kings intention and the Kingdoms expectation, contrary to the equitable
meaning of that very Statute; contrary to the promise of the Authors, to the
inestimable prejudice of his Majesty, and the great grief of his Subjects, who
are hereby deprived of the benefit of all other good Laws, and more
particularly of that for the frequency of Parliaments. First, it is undoubted
neither King nor Kingdom ever thought to have seen the sad effects of that Act
for continuance of this Parliament which they now feel. Secondly, the Act it
self, though it be not limited to any determinate time, is in its own nature
but temporary. It was made for a transient cause, that the Houses might find
credit for the raising of such money as was then necessarily to be advanced,
E.C. p. 10, 15,17.
as accordingly they did. And that rule in the Civil Law, Cessante causa,
cessat Lex, the Lords and Commons have Ib. p. 876.
declared to hold good in Acts of Parliaments; thence concluding that Act 5.
Hen. 4. for the Commission of Array to have expired with the cause of it,
though it were never repealed. Thirdly, they did promise Ib. p. 203.
that the gracious favor of his Majesty expressed in that Bill should not
encourage them to do any thing, which otherwise had not been fit to have been
done. They having failed in the performance of that trust, whether is not his
Majesty in equity free from that restraint which in confidence of their loyalty,
he brought upon himself? And if they shall refuse ever to consent to an Act
for Dissolution, as unwilling to part with that Paramont power which they have
now possessed themselves of, whether is the King and Kingdom left without
redress? or may it not be lawful for him to resume his ancient Right?
Especially considering the House of Commons did Ib p. 17.
profess to the Kingdom, that the restraint of the Royal Power in that
particular, was not to take it out of the Crown, but to suspend the execution
of it, for that time and occasion only; which occasion is now over, and the
time long ago expired.

It is full time that the Bill for the Trienniall Parliament take place, at
least once in four years; if not those other two 4. Ed. 3. c. 14. and 36. Ed.
3. c. 10.
Laws for holding a Parliament once every year. If they be still in force,
what hinders but they may be put in execution? Nothing but the rigid
interp^etation of that clause in the late Act, which requires that this
Parliament shall not be dissolved, unless it be by Act of Parliament to be
passed for that purpose. Yet Custom or Desuetude are allowed to prevail
against those very Laws which are made with special provisions, that no
Custom or Desuetude shall prevail against them. Suppose all the Members
should be taken away by death before any Act passed for the Dissolution of
this, were it not in the Kings power to call another Parliament, because the
Act for continuance of this is not repealed? Those two former Statutes of
Edward the Third though never repealed, yet were as good as void by disuse.
When Pa^liaments in that Kings time were made so frequent, they became a
burden to the Subject; and therefore it was found requisite in the Reign of
his Successor to make a penal ^. R. 2^ c. 4.
Law to enforce the Members to obey their Summons. And I find in the Walsing.
An Dom. 1380.
History of those Times, that the Clergy granted a Tenth, and the Laity a
Fifteenth to the King, upon condition, that he should not call any more
Parliaments within the year, Scilicet a Calend. Mart. usque ad festum Sancti
Michaelis anno revoluto. The non-observance of which condition is objected to
that King. So far different was the opinion of those days from these of ours
concerning annual or perpetual Parliaments.

Though all former Statutes are repealed by the later, even then I suppose in
judgment of Law, when there is no special mention made of any Repeal, and
notwithstanding the former require to stand unrepealed, unless it be by
speci^ll Act. Which clause may be thought of as little use in this case as that
we meet with in ^ome of our Statutes, which pronounce themselves perpetually to
be observed, notwithstanding any Act of Parliament made or to be made to the
conrary; this will not protect them against a future alteration or repeal. Yet
I will not affirm that the Act of Pacification, though it was made since the
Act against the Dissolution of this Parliament, is an Act passed to that
purpose, however there be something in it that may be applied that way. For it
buries in forgetfulness, not only all acts of hostility, which might be
conceived to arise upon the coming of the Scottish Army into England, but all
Counsels having relation thereunto; that the same, and whatsoever ensued
thereupon, trenching upon his Majesty's Honor and Authority, be held and
reputed as if no such thing had ever been thought or wrought. It is too
apparent, that the former Act for continnuance of this Parliament, trencheth
very deep upon his Majesty's Authority, and had a very near relation to the
business of Scotland; being obtained for the more easy raising of money
toward the payment of the Scots, and concluding a firm peace between the two
Kingdoms. Besides, there is a special proviso in that Act of oblivion, that
it shall be no prejudice of the brotherly assistance promised to the Scots,
(which assistance was agreed on by Act of Parliament,) but no proviso for
saving any other Act incompatible with this; and we use to say, Exceptio firmat
regulam in non exceptis. But where the words of the Law are ambiguous, we must
not presume to fasten our own sense upon them, but submit to the Declaration
of the Lawgiver, the King, who by the advice of his learned Council (without
calling a Parliament) may expound the Law where it is doubtful, as his
Predecessors D^er f. 376.
have done in other case^.

It is further observable, that the same Statute which says, this Parliament
shall not be dissolved, says also, it shall not be adiourned unless it be by
Act of Parliament to be likewise passed to that pu^pose. Yet we know the two
Houses Ian. 1642.
did, and lawfully might, adjourne themselves from Westminster to London,
without any Act passed to that purpose. Why then may not the King command them,
at least their chief Committee, to adiourne from that place where they now sit
to some other of more safety, where all the Members may freely meet and
consult? If the freedom of the place be so necessary to all Councels, that the
want of it has been ever objected, and that justly, as a nullity to all their
proceedings, and in particular the supposed Design of bringing an Army to awe
the Parliament, or any attempt of force against the Members, have been truly
E.C. p. 657. 695.
declared an endeavor to pull up by the root, and totally to subvert the
Parliament, and to tend to the destruction of the very being of Parliaments; if
the want of freedom and safety be truly Ib p. 100.
declared a thing inconsistent with the nature of that great Council. Then
undoubtedly so long as Westminster does not afford security and freedom to the
Members, so long no true Parliament can be there, which should be as free from
apprehensions of force, as from imputations of Faction.

I would willingly learn, but I cannon find a Teacher, wherein the
Fundamental Laws of the Land consist. For if the taking away the Kings power
to dissolve, adjourne, or prorogue Parliaments, be against the Fundamental
Laws, E.C. p. 887.
then no Statute makes it good. Now whether the perpetuity of a Parliament do
not tend to the alteration of the Government, and so be against the
Fundamental Law; whether the forced exposition of the late Act against
Dissolution, extending it beyond the time and occasion for which it was made,
do not make it as good as perpetual. Whether this do not make way for the
final ruin of all Parliaments, in case the City should be surprised by an
Enemy, the King or Members all taken away by Death, before any Act be passed
for Dissolution. Whether for defect of an Act it may not be dissolved by
Ordinance, by the same Fundamental Law by which this new Oath is imposed;
whether it be not good in reason, yet it must be good in Law, that a Body
Politic may decree by what death they will die, by Act, by Writ, by
Ordinance, by loss of the Head, or by consumption of the inferior Members;
these are scruples which others may resolve.

But if Treason be a charge which a Parliament cannot be capable of, as they
E.C. p. 654.
declare it is, and I believe it to be true; because perhaps, as some Romish
Doctors have asserted the Popes infallibility, teaching that he cannot err as
Pope, for if he do, he cease to be Pope, so if the mayor part of one or hoth
Houses shall consent unto, approve or command any treasonable Act, they thereby
cease to be a Parliament; who are presumed in Law to be no less than they
profess, His Majesty's faithful and loyal Subjects. Then if the Members at
Westminster by raising War against the King, 25. Ed 3. c. 2.
by forging a new Great Seal, and declaring the old one, by which they were
called and do sit, to be of no force; by calling in an Army of strangers, or by
any other Act or Vote of theirs be trul^ guilty of that charge, ^hey are no
longer to be looked upon as a Parliament.

Lastly, if the equitable sense of the Law may take place here, which has been
pressed so much in other cases, it must be acknowledged that the Essence of
that great Council does not consist in the place, but the persons: for the
place may be changed, yet the Parliament remain still the same. When we see
far more of the Lords with his Majesty than at Westminster; when we find
upon strict account that the mayor part of the Commons are either driv^n away,
or have deserted that Cause; when we observe how many Members of either House
do daily hazard, or have already spent their lives in the service against it;
when we weigh their qualities, abilities, and estates with those of their
opposites, and find them to be men of the best rank in their Countries, of
known integrity for their lives, of unspotted zeal to Religion, of sound
judgment and knowledge in Law, of public thoughts to the good of the
Kingdom, as well as loyalty to the King, which has engaged them in this
War, by which they have lost more already than the opposite Faction ever had,
and expect to gain nothing but the testimony of a good conscience; when we
consider how many of those that are most active at Westminster, by reason of
their undue election, had never any right to sit there, and suppose that many
others still remaining are not always carried along with the stream; when we
remember by what means the Bishops (who are acknowledged by Parliament to
represent one of 1. Eliz. c. 3.
the three Estates of the Realm) were thrust out, contrary to the Fundamental
Law, and how by that means all succeeding exorbitancies have been falsely
fathered upon the Parliament: we cannot but pronounce upon these premises, that
the Parliament is in truth for that cause which is owned by his Majesty, and
not for that which passes under the false usurped name of King and Parliament.

CHAP. XII. The true End of framing and enjoining this Covenant, the bringing
in of the Scots, absolutely unlawful.
HAving done with the many specious and pretended Ends of the Covenant, we are
come to the true End of Covenanting at this time, which the Schools would call
Finis applicationis, and finis operantis. This in particular persons may be
diverse, as the desire of advancement in some, the hope of impunity in others,
but the main general End which first set the Contrivers on work about framing
this Covenant, and keeps them still at it, by pressing it upon this Kingdom,
was the bringing in of the Scots. Vide Covenant with a Narrative, and The
Declaration of the Scots.
The Covenant is one of the postnati of that Kingdom, it was begotten and borne
in Edinborough, only our English Commissioner^ played the Midwives, and helped
to lick it over into some fashion. Unless the Faction in England would engage
themselves and their Adherents in such a Combination those conscientious
Brethren of Scotland refused to assist in this Rebellion; as they are now ready
to do, being upon their march to invade us. A thing so repugnant to the Weal
of this Kingdom, that no true English heart but will abhor the mention of
it; and so unjustifiable in respect of them, that no Scot, who has any sense of
Religion to God, of gratitude and duty to their native King, or of brotherly
charity to this neighbor Nation, will ever dare to draw his sword in this
quarrel.

I. First, how far it may endanger the being of this Kingdom to admit an
Army of strangers into her bowels, none such an infant in discretion or History
but is able to descerne. The calling in of foreign Force, if it were not
Treason by Law, is a thing so odious in Nature to any that is touched with
affection to his native Country, that his Majesty's greatest Enemies could not
suggest a calumny more malicious against him, nor more powerful to steal away
his Sub^ects hearts from him, than by giving out that he intended to make use
of foreign aid when they supposed they had brought him to so low an ebb,
that he would never find sufficient succor from his own Subjects. They are
now driven to as great an exigency, and make no scruple of acting that course,
which no necessity would suffer to enter into the Kings thoughts. Such was his
tender care and fatherly affection to His people, He chose rather to run the
hazard of His own ruin, then owe his preservation to any hands but such as
God should raise up in his defense among His own Subjects. These ways of the
Covenanteers do both justify the Commission of Array against all their former
objections, which grant it lawful in the coming in of strange enemies; and if
His Majesty should follow their example, and hire an army to assist him from
some other Nation, whatever were the consequents of it, they must bear the
blame that first led the way, and he would be clear before God and man.

II. Secondly, this intended invasion is so injust in respect of the Scots,
that all who hear of it must cry shame upon them, who at the same time enter
into a solemn Vow inviolably to observe the Articles of the late Treaty of
Peace betwixt the two Nations, and to endeavor that they may remain conjoined
in a firm peace and union to all posterity, and that justice may be done upon
the wilful opposers thereof, and at the same time seize upon Berwick and put a
Garrison in i^, contrary to an express Article of that Treaty of Peace so
lately concluded and settled by both Parliaments; and are now upon the point to
power an Army into this Kingdom; whereby it appears that though we made peace
with them, they made none with us: and we conclude, as a former 7 Hen 7. c. 6.
Parliament did against them, that it were better for us to be at open war with
them, then under such a feigned peace.

III. They cannot say, nor do they pretend, that any one Article was violated
upon our part, unless it were by those whom they come to defend. What cause
then have they for this invasion? Is it for their own necessary defense?
Nothing is threatened, nothing intended against them. Is it to revenge any
injury we have done them? If any were done on either part, we have dearly paid
for it already, and by the Act of Oblivion all former bitterness should be
forgotten; but Chi offend, non perdona: they wronged us so much, they will
never dare to forgive us. Is it for the lawful recovery of any right that we
have taken and detain from them? Nor so, nor so. What then is it which may give
any color of justice to this expedition? Forsooth; no other then the good of
Religion in England, the deliverance of their Brethren out of the deeps of
affliction; the preservation of their own Religion and themselves from the
extremity of misery; and the safety of their native King and his Kingdoms,
from destruction and desolation. -- Ad populum phaleras. -- We must be very
silly if we be cheated with such fair words.

1. Concerning the first we have already disputed and (I hope) proved, that it
is not lawful to propagate Religion by Arms. Nor is it true that those whom
they call their Brethren in England suffer any thing for their Religion, or
need shed one drop of blood in defense of that power without which Religion (as
they pretend) cannot be defended. It has always been, and still is, the
passionate desire of his Majesty to preserve the protestant Religion, and the
just power of Parliaments. He has often profferd, and is still ready to
perform, to pass any Laws that shall be presented to him, for hindering the
growth of Popery, and securing the just Privileges of Parliament. He has only
refused to consent to such an alteration in Religion and Government as the
Enemies of our peace would force upon him, under the general name of
Reformation, who are not yet agreed what is meant by it more then Extirpation.
And therefore if the Scots should sit still and hold their peace, they need not
fear the curse of Meroz when they look upon the cause which these men
maintain. Which if it were indeed (what it is not^) the cause of Religion, it
were but common to them with other Christian Churches, which lie groaning (as
they tell us) under the yoke of antichristian Tyranny. If the Scots think
themselves bound in Conscience, and have any calling or Commission from God, to
be the Catholic Reformers of other Nations, they should do better to begin
their Reformation in other popish Countries, where there is more need of it,
and where less exception can be taken to it: where it may be free from any
suspicion of Rebellion against the Prince, as being not their own Native King;
and of ingratitude and perfidiousnesse to the Country, as having not received
equal courtesies from them, nor entered into the like union and pacification
with them, as they have done with England. God forbid that those weapons which
our money has put into their hands should be drawn to cut our own throats,
or that our Kingdom should be ruined because they think it fit to be reformed.

2. And concerning the second, if they do not enter into England and lift up
Arms against their own King, who (as they confess) has promised and done as
much for them as may secure them in their Religion and Liberties, we shall
never blame them. But if they shall conceive of themselves, or be persuaded
upon reports from hence, that those who adhere to His Majesty in the present
quarrel are none but a popish, prelaticall and malignant party; whereas it is
evident to the world that the greater part of this whole Kingdom sides with
the King, otherwise their assistance had never been implored, never purchased
at so high a rate; that many thousands of the best repute for Religion toward
God, and affection to their Country, to the certain damage of their Estates,
and hazard of their lives, do appear in this cause upon no other incentives
but of Conscience and Loyalty; it is but a groundless pretense in the Scots to
talk of providing for their own pre^ervation against those that mean them no
harm. No pretended experience of former times, much less any principles of
their own Declarations, or conceived jealousies o^ the vindictive disposition
of the English, can warrant them before God, or clear them to the world, if
they shall take advantage of our present weakness, and attempt a conquest of
us now, because it is possible, if we once recover of these distempers, and be
united amongst our selves, we may be strong enough to resist them hereafter.
Nor is there any necessity that the condition of one Kirk and Kingdom, either
in Religion or Peace, should be common to both: the present evidence of their
quiet and our unrest proves it otherwise. And if we should ever be restored to
our right wits and former quiet, whether they consider the peaceable
disposition of His Majesty, His Princely Clemency toward all, and tender
affection He has ever borne to His Native Country; or the Loyal disposition
of His adherents in these troubles, falsely called, Malignant and Preiaticall;
whose constant practice has ever confirmed their Doctrine of subjection to the
Magistrate, and to whose profession and interest nothing is more repugnant then
a Civil War, by which they may loose all, but are sure to gain nothing; or
they consider the present condition of this whole Kingdom, harrased and
spoiled by these intestine divisions, which will certainly produce this good
effect, that if once we see an end of these Wars we shall better know to
value Peace hereafter, and not be easily engaged again. From these grounds of
common reason they might conclude more solidly, more charitably, that what ever
be the event in England, if they do not imbroyle themselves without cause,
they may for ever enjoy their Religion and Liberties, and need not fear an
afterclap from hence. And let them remember thus much more of Isreal's leading
into captivity, that they never revolted from their God, till they first
revolted from their King; Rebellion led the way, Idolatry followed after, and
both ended in Captivity. God preserve both them and us from such a judgment.
But let them take heed how they dally with edge-tools; how they make solemn
Oaths to God, Protestations to the world, promises of Peace and Union to their
neighbors, when they intend nothing less: How they begin a National War
against us, without any provocation from us, or previous denunciation from
them, contrary to the late Treaty, only upon conceit, that if the power of
this Kingdom be recovered into those hands out of which it was wrested by
violence and injustice, we may possibly, according to the Treaty, within three
months denounce War against them.

3. And concerning the third, if the question be not whether they should
presume to be arbitrators in the matters now debated by fire and sword, betwixt
His Majesty and those whom they call the Houses of Parliament, which is truly
foreign and extrinsecal to that Nation, they having no relation to, nor
dependence upon the two Howses or Kingdom of England, only they owe
subjection to the same King; why then, after their mediation has been rejected
(as they suppose) by both sides, upon confidence of their own strength and
several successes, or unwillingnesse to receive conditions from Strangers,
should they think it their duty, though it be in their power, to press that
Ecclesiastical Government upon us by force of Arms, which his Majesty has
often declared he will not, and the two Houses have never declared that they
will accept? They have vowed the destruction of all those that adhere to his
Majesty under the name of Malignants and evil Instruments, and when they come
with an Army to pay this Vow, call they this stopping the effusion of Christian
blood? To hew out their way by the sword through all the forces raised for a
guard to His Person, amongst whom he has yet been safe, whose actions have been
as full of Loyalty as their adversaries professions, is this to rescue their
native King^ His Crown and Posterity out of the midst of dangers? To help to
sacrifice the greater part of this Kingdom to the malice of those by whom they
are declared Traitors, is this to preserve his people from ruin and
destruction? What if every private man be bound in duty to interpose himself
as a reconciler betwixt his neighbors armed to their mutual destruction? Must
they therefore help with armed force to destroy the one party at variance? is
this the part of a Reconciler? What if the son ought to hazard his own life
for the preservation of his father at variance with his Brother? Must they
therefore take up arms to endanger the life of their King, t^eir Civil
father, to side with a company of Schismatiques that flatter them with the name
of Brethren?

III. When they ask, shall a Kingdom sit still, and suffer their King and
neighboring Kingdom to perish in an unnatural War? I shall answer this
question to their own content; it is not fitting, it is not lawful. But let
me in courtesy ask them another. When a Kingdom has taken notice of a
difference debated by fire and sword betwixt their own King and some of his
Subjects of a neighboring Kingdom; when they have solemnly vowed not to give
themselves up to a detestable indifferency and neutrality in that cause; when
they have observed that the maine point in controversy is because the King
will not consent to alteration of some Laws already established; which he
holds himself bound in conscience to preserve; after the whole Clergy in their
Petition presented to his Majesty.

Ian. 1642.


National Assembly have promised to keep the people under their charge in
obedience to his Majesty and his Laws, confessing it a duty well beseeming the
Preachers of the Gospel; after their whole Supplication of the general
Assembly. Edenb. Aug. 12. 1639.
Kingdom has sworn, with their means and lives to stand to the defense of
their dread Sovereign, his Person and Authority, in every cause which may
concer^e his Majesty's Honor, with their friends and followers, in quiet
manner or in arms, as they shall be required by his Majesty; after they have
acknowledged in their National Covenant, that the quietness and stability of
their Religion and Kirk, depends upon the safety of the Kings Majesty; and
have therefore universally protested and promised under a solemn Oath and
hand-writ, upon fearful pains and execrations, 2 Parliam. of K. Charles^ Act
5. concerning the Ratification of the Covenant.
to defend his Person and Authority with their goods, bodies, and lives,
against all Enemies within the Realm, or without, as they desire God to be a
merciful Defender to them in the day of their death, and coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ; after the Nobility, Gentry, Buroughs, Ministers, and Commons of
that Kingdom have confessed themselves, E.C. p. 257.
bound by all the ties of Nature, Christianity, and Gratitude, so fully
satisfied and persuaded of the Royal zeal, and constant resolution of his
Majesty, to preserve the Laws and Liberties of his Kingdoms, that it were the
height of disloyalty and ingratitude, if they should harbor any scruple or
thought to the contrary, having so many real and recent evidences of his
Royal goodness, justice, and wisdom, in settling and establishing the true
Religion, the Laws and Liberties of that his Kingdom, to the full satisfaction
of all his good Subjects; after all these vows, promises, and protestations,
how can they be so strangely given up to folly and wickedness, as to think it
their duty, it being in their power, to come with armed Force to end our
quarrels, by taking part with them to whom they owe no duty, and fighting
against that part which is owned by his Majesty, to whom they stand bound by
all the ties of Nature, Christianity, and Gratitude, who has left nothing
undone that might give them content? Certainly if they shall so far forget or
cast behind their backs all these solemn vows and professions, they will
one day rise up in judgment against them. And if they shall hearken to the
call of the Enemies of our Peace, and come to assist them in this unnatural
War, as they threaten to do, though in the time of animosity and appetite of
revenge, such Invasion may be well taken by those who invite them to help to
destroy their Brethren: yet afterward, when the eyes of the mind, no more
bloodrun with passion, do discern things aright, it will be a grief and
offense to all true English hearts, to see how they have sold themselves slaves
to a viler Nation; and they may be more united to cast them out, who were so
ready, upon the advantage of their Divisions, to thrust themselves in.

I shall in the mean while put them in mind, that there was a time when they
had, if not a juster Cause, a better color for Invasion of England; yet then
they so far disclaimed all intentions of it as to call the bare mention of
it, In their instruction^ concerning the Covenant, 1638.
The despitefull and devilish calumny of the disnatured Enemies of their Kirk
and Kingdom. I am commanded to forget what they did then, but if they shall
now verify those calumnies, and falsify all their solemn Oaths, though the
King and this Kingdom should not be able to call them to account, there is a
God in Heaven that sees all their hearts, and will judge all their actions. And
they cannot be ignorant that all the colors which they use in excuse or
defense of their intended expedition, may with equal, nay better, reason be
alleged by any other Nation, that have a mind to oppress and subdue upon
pretense of assisting us, of providing for their own safety, or coming to
compose our Differences.

CHAP. XIII. From these Premises the Covenant is concluded unlawful, in
respect of the Form.
HAving thus deduced at large the several Illegalities of this Holy League,
both in respect of the Efficient and Final Causes, but especially in respect
of the matter, it naturally follows that we conclude it in the last place to
be likewise unlawful in respect of the Form. For whereas the nature of an
Oath League, Covenant, or Vow, requires that it be holy, just and good, This
thing being a Confederacy of Subjects, against the will of their Sovereigne,
pretending many good, but intending a bad End, swearing many things in
themselves unjust and contrary to all Law, Divine and Humane, the Covenanteers
by laboring to induce the Form of a solemn Oath, a sacred Covenant, a
religious Vow, upon a matter so indisposed and incapable of such a Form, do
profane the Ordinances of God, and give that which is holy unto Dogs.

Any simple Promise, in respect of the Form or nature of it, is apt to create
an obligation of civil honesty, trust, and fidelity: if it be mutual by way
of Contract, as a League and Covenant, it induces a further tie of justice: if
a Vow be joined to it, this superaddes a band of Religion: if all these be
confirmed by a solemn Oath in the presence of Almighty God, the Searcher of
all hearts, with a true intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at
the great day, when the secrets of all hearts shall be disclosed, it is not
capable of any further addition; this is truly Protestation of the Lords and
Common^, Oct. 22.1643. E.C. p. 664.
confessed to be the strongest obligation that any Christian, and the most
solemn public Faith that any State as a Parliament can give.

In an Assertory Oath we make God our Witness; and if we speak not Truth, we
make Him a Liar. In a Promissory we make God our Surety; and should we fail in
performance, we cast an imputation of perfidiousnesse upon Him, as if He were
not faithful in his promises. In a Vow we make God our Creditour, we plight
our Faith to Him, and when that is confirmed by an Oath He is both our Witness
and Sponsor too. So as to sport, and play at fast and loose with these many
religious obligations were little less than to deny Him. He that makes no
conscience of an Oath, though he do not speculatively believe God a Liar, or a
promise breaker, yet practically he deals with Him as if He were no better.

The more sacred this Band is in it self the more religious caution ought
every man to use before he enter into it, even then when it is conversant about
a lawful object. But if any shall dare to prostitute this holy Ordinance to
profane Ends, and stamp their unjust actions with the impression of it, it is
such a crying sin against God, that I dare not promise them any remission. I
have heard of some whom I knew, and therefore will not name, (...), who after
they were induced by persuasions, or fears, or other worldly considerations to
take this Covenant, their conscience was so thunder-strucke with the horror of
their sin, that their own blood spilt by their own hands was not sufficient to
wash away their guilt; and I cannot tell whether they found any place for
repentan^e though they sought it with more than tears. If their case be so
desperate who are enforced to take it, what shall we think of those that
enforce it? Let them sequester our Estates, we care not; God will either
provide us more, or give us grace to be content with less; if they take away
our meat, he will take away our hunger. Let them imprison our persons, we
thank them, so they leave our conscience free. But O, let them not by
threatening death to the body, if we refuse their Covenant, destroy our souls
by taking of it. Let them remember and abhor the example of that wicked
miscreant who having his Enemy prostrate at his feet, promised him life if he
would deny his Savior, and when he had done so immediately slew him, making
his proud blasphemous boast that he had murdered both body and soul at one
blow.

God in mercy open their eyes that they may see the error o^ their ways; then
they will confess, what is certainly true, that this their new Covenant being
taken without Authority, and contrary to their former lawful Oaths of
Supremacy and Allegiance, was void from the beginning; and does not bind them
to any thing, but what I heartily wish they may find in the end, Repentance.

FINIS.

