A Threefold Discourse between three Neighbors, Algate, Bishopsgate, and
John Heyden the late Cobbler of Hounsditch, a professed Brownist.

Whereunto is added a true Relation (by way of Dittie) of a lamentable fire
which happened at Oxford two nights before Christ-tide last, in a religious
brothers shop, known by the name of John of All-trades.



LONDON, Printed for F. Cowles, T. Bates, and I. Wright. MDCXLII.

A Threefold Discourse between three Neighbors, Algate, Bishopsgate, and
John Heyden the late Cobbler of Houndsditch, a professed Brownist.
Algate. SIster of Bishopsgate, what disastrous times are we fallen into, did
you ever know the like?


Bishopsgate. Sister be content, you are not yet fallen, you were but lately
built by the City, Senatus Populusque Londinensis, in the Mayoraltie of Sir
Humphrey Weld; but I and my friends are like to come to ruin.


Cobbler. Truly Land-Lady, the matteris not great, yet I confess I have kept a
Cobblers shop under your nose these two and twenty years, yet I never saw any
great hurt in you, but that you bear the profane and idolatrous name of a
Bishop.


Bish. T^uly Neighbor, it has not been accounted so in times past, nor (I
hope) neither is or will be in these our times.


Cob Well, battle-headed Mistress, I heard a Sermon within these few days in
Moore-fields, the best of your Bishops in the Land might throw his cap at it.


Alg. I John, that is the way never to see it again, among such fellows as
you: but are Moore-fields your walks, where you and your fellows prate to no
purpose.


Cob. Yes: and verily my new white painted Mistress, and we have better
teaching there, than you have at your dull Botolphs, or his brother by you,
Mistress Bishopsgate.


Bish. Nay, that of my k^owledge is false; ours is an honorable and a great
Parish, neither is there such a famine of pious and learned Divines amongst us,
like the famine of Samaria, where we (as you and your Brownists) must value an
Asses head at fourscore pieces of silver (that is ten pounds English) for
every piece which was a Shekel, is half a Crown of our money. How many of
your Sermons have been burned, their Authors hanged, what ridiculous divisions
have you of your Texts? what blasphemous and detorted expositions, absurd
applications? and amongst you the Text is no sooner read; but presently you fly
from it, as wild beasts from fire, and fall a railing against railes, tell the
people Surplices are smocks of the Whore (and I believe John you are acquainted
with some of them) and how our Bishops are like Andirons of State, standing in
a Chimney but for a show; but if an heavy block, or sad billets are brought to
the fire, there are poor little iron Creepers or Cobirons underneath, that
must bear all the weight, and those you resemble to the inferior Clergy that
take all the pains: and thus in your Tubs, like Augustus in his Throne, you
taxall the world. Truly now you were speaking of Moore-fields, I am persuaded
never cost was better bestowed, I never saw them, but I have heard as much. Why
sister Aldgate (or Eldgate, if you please) they are the most necessary,
pleasant, and the sweetest walks, that can lie by the side of any city in
Europe; they say those are goodly walks, with four or five distinct rows of
trees, which are upon the walls of Antwerp.


Alg. There is a Dutch Candle-maker dwelling in White-Chappell has oftentimes
told me as much, and that those walls were five and thirty strides or paces
broad.


Bish. He spoke the truth, they are so indeed.


Cob. Talk no more: Moore fields of it self is a most profane place, they
never get my good word, and except upon the Lords day to a teaching or exercise
I never mean to come thither again.


Bish. It may be John, you are in debt at some of the Alehouses, and dare not
show your head but upon a Lords day, when their doors are shut, and all are
gone to Church.


Cob. I confess my leather has been well liquored at Burwels Babble, where
Mr. Geffreson sels the excellent Ale and Cakes: but since my conversion I say,
Go, I know you not.


Alg. And why I pray you neighbor, are Moore-fields become so odious in your
sight?


Cob. For the great offense they give to us the godly and sober-minded; first,
they are receptacles of unclean beasts.


Bish. That Is true indeed, for horses graze there.


Cob. They carry the mark of the Beast.


Alg. As how John?


Cob. Do you not see how the walks are laid out, and made in the form of a
cross, which is execrable, abominable, and intolerable?


Bish. Why John, are not you your self made in the form of a cross? spread
but your arms abroad and see.


Cob. Verily I am, and it is more than ever I knew before, one I see may live
and learn, but I shall like my self the worse for it as long as I live.


Cob. No I profess, their four quarters are railed about in abominable
manner, like a Communion Table; if some Parishes and Churchwardens I know had
the fingring of them, I know what would quickly become of them.


Alg. You have now done, have you any more to say?


Cob. Yes verily, the Popes head is there nailed up for a sign and makes (...)
fair a show as Pope- Ioane did with her great b^lly in Red-street.


Bish. Rederosse-street you mean, but what of that?


Cob. It is a burning shame it should be tolerated, when al Papists in England
are denied tolerated.


Alg. It is suffered it may be for some especial end which you know not, as
perhaps many Papists and Popish Priests belonging to outlandish Ambassadors
which lie thereabout walking to take the air, for the signs sake will rather
go thither to drink a Pint or a quart of wine, then to another place, and so
perhaps will you and your brethren do sometime.


Cob. You are deceived Mrs. we never go for the signs sake, but for the wines
sake.


Bish. I believe you John, but what say you to the great Turks head hanging out
a little beyond?


Cob. I say, from Turk and Pope defend us Lord.


Bish. That was a Psalm, added to the singing Psalms, long since, by one Robert
Wisdom.


Cob. I believe it, it was long since Robert Wisdom was seen amongst us, he
lived in the time of Q. Eliz. And since I have not heard of any or very few of
that name, it was a Psalm in my opinion that put down all the rest, beside it
had binan excellent tune, my father when he lived in Goos-toft, would often
whistle it at plough.


Alg. But what say you John to the trees, so evenly planted and thriving, which
with their eye-pleasing green and cool shadow in the hot Summer give so great
delight and content to the whole City.


Cob. They look (me thinks) like so many of your Bishops Standing about the
Communion railes to defend them.


Alg. Against such as you are it may be.


Cob. Nay they look like Bishops for all the world for there are Some poor
underling trees besides them which cannot thrive and Prosper, because those
greater over-drop them, keep the sun from them, or suck from earth the Juice
which should nourish them, to themselves.


Bish. But what is the reason they are called Moor-fields, can you tell me
John withal the wit you have?


Cobbler. Because it may be there are more fields in England beside these.


Alg. That is without doubt.


Cob. Or rather because more learned and godly teaching by us and our brethren
is here exercised then in the City or the whole land beside, or it may be they
are so called from a Blackamoor set over an Alley gate in these fields.


Bish. Nay John now you have overshot your self.


Cob. I talk of Moorefields and not of Finsbury: there indeed is shooting and
no preaching.


Bish. But neighbor John Cobbler let me tell you in good earnest, when I was
built new in the time of K. Richard the second, (whose statue in stone holding
his unfortunate and broken Scepter in his hand, I bear upon my Frontispiece, on
the other side Wenceslaus his wives father the Emperor, yet many say it was K.
Edward the 3.) certain calves tied about the necks with withs being brought
for a present to Wat Tyler and his Rebels then in Smithfield, whom, (let me
tell you by the way) K. Richard could plainly discern from Long Acre, so rare
were houses and buildings in the Suburbs in those days) were all stifled and
drowned in those fields, which were nothing else but a Moore or Quagmire whence
they took their name, nay it was such within these 40. or 50. years. Sister
Algate had they brought by your way, (the common road of calves) they had been
out of danger.


Cob. Verily Mrs. Algate I have known of late years many calves to have been
brought out of Essex and other plaaes unto your Gate, where when they should
have entered, their simple country drivers would not suffer them, but drove
them home again.


Alg. They were simple indeed, but what was their meaning so to do?


Cob. Why, I will tell you, you carry upon your top two huge Giants in Armor,
holding up and ready as it were to throw down mighty bullets, who affright
both the calves and the country mon, that I have heard some protest that for
their lives they could not persuade the driver to venture them through this was
at their first setting up, and I well remember in that year Veale was so
scarce at Leaden Hall, that hardly any could be got for money.


Bish. John they were placed there to show the ancient defense of Ports, which
when the enemy offered to assail or break open, Armed men stood aloft and
threw down huge stones, pieces of timber and such like, to kill or knock them
down, but I hear John Cobbler you are a pretender to Divinity, and are ready to
turn Preacher.


Cob. Why not I as well as Walker the Ironmonger.


Alg. I think you never come to any of our Churches in the City.


Cob. Very seldom; yes, I was half a year since at Annes within Aldersgate,
and once a fortnight ago at Margets in West minster.


Bish. St. Margets you should say.


Cob. The matter is not great, they were built by the Papists and smell of
superstition to this day, for name any Church about the City that was built in
time of the Gospel, Cree-church excepted, and that by Tuttle-street in
Westminster not yet execrated, as they call it.


Alg. Consecrated thou would say, that indeed is new, but Cree-Church was new
built upon an old foundation, if we should be all of your opinion: we should
come to no Church at all, but hear Sermons in woods as you do.


Cob. Did not John Baptist preach in the desert or wilderness? And multitudes
of people followed to hear him.


Bish. John you are much deceived, that was no obscure place like St. John's
wood whither you and your fellows go, but a woodie Country wherein were many
Towns and Cities, like the forest of Sherwood in Nottinghamshire inhabited
with many people.


Cob. I will never believe that, for all I am a Translator my self.


Alg. But John I pray thee tell me how came thou to be a Brownist at the
first.


Bish. I have heard that the first beginner of your Sect was a miserable Doctor
in the University who sold his commons and seized away his part of whitebread
and lived all the week with a sixpenny brown loaf, which occasion gave you
all your names.


Cob. No our first father was Mr. Brown parson of A church in
Northamptonshire where he dyed after his many persecutions among the wicked.


Alg. So he that would have no Church was afterward parson of a Church.


Bish. But I assure you John he recanted his opinions and dyed an Orthodox
Protestant and an honest man, it is true he was persecuted in all places, he
fled into Scotl^nd, and had been hanged, had he not been near a kin unto the
L. Treasurer Cicill, (for he was a Gentleman borne, and of an ancient family of
the Brownes of Tolthorpe) beside he was endued with many good and gentile
qualiti^^, among the rest he was a singular good Lutenist, and he made his Son
T^mothy usually on Sundays bring his Viol to Church and play the Base to the
Psalms that were sung, so far was he (like you and your fellows) from being an
enemy to Church Music.


Cob. I would have given all the Shoes in my shop I had known so much before.
But Landlady Bishopsgate, and Mrs. Algate, time calls me away, I have three
pair of boots to mend for the Norwich foot-post, and a pair of shoes for
honest Mr. Sacchar of Buttolphs, and I hope ere long we shall meet, and then
in faith I will have a fling at you and your namesake the Bishops.


Bish. Well John I shall defend those Bishops well enough, and will Petition
that those Reverend men may have their liberty to go abroad in the days, and
repair to their Brother in the Tower again at night, Farewell.


Zeal overheated: A Relation of a lamentable fire which happened at Oxford
two nights before Christ-tide, in a religious Brothers shop, who though he
labored in all men's trades, yet his trades were fewer than his tricks, to
fetch over the wicked, that he might afford the godly a better Pennyworth.
To the Tune of Chivey Chase.
ATtend you brethren, every one,
And listen with a pair
Of swaggering ears, which have out grown
By many an inch the hair:
Of Popish flames I will relate
to you a doleful st^rie,
Which turned a zealous shop of late
into a Purgatory.
There dwells ^n Oxon near the place
where ho^y C^rnish teaches,
One that i^ all trades h^th such grace,
the wicked he ^^-^eaches.
This brother first a Stoic was
Peripatetic^ll;
For 'bout the world as he did pass,
his wealth he carried all.
But when his sins had made his pack
Too heavy for his shoulder,
J'th' foresaid place he eased his back,
and turned a staid house-holder.
In all occasions by and by
he grew so great a Medler,
That if The Exchange his shop stood nigh,
you would take him for no Peddler,
By slight of tongue be could fetch ore
all Sparks that came unto him,
Except those which two nights before
Christ-tide had like to undo him.
When he to sleep himself had set,
and dreamed of no more fire,
Than those his zeal and little Pet
kindled in his desire.
He heard some cry, Fire, fire, amain,
and said that were he slack,
Great John of All trades would again
be brought to his first pack:
Then hasting dowre to see what burned,
the smoke did almost stop
His breath: the new Exchange was turned
to a Tobacco shop.
His wise came down at that report,
her clothes hung in such pickle,
As she were new come from the sport
after a Converticle:
And first in these flames she espide
a pure Geneva Bible,
With gilded leaves, and strings beside,
that were not contemptible.
The second Part,
to the same Tune.
But with less grlefe he could have seen't,
as he then said to some one,
Had but the Apocrypha been in it,
and Prayers that we call Common:
The Practice there of Piety,
and good St. Katherine Stubs
Were martyred, which often quoted he
had heard in several Tubs.
Then being of his Dods bereft,
and Cleavers all and some,
You may presume that there was left
of Comfor^s never a Crum.
A chest of Cambricks and Holland
was turned to a box of tinder,
His virgins tapers out were brand,
th'Extinguishers could not hinder.
They that his Taffities did see,
and various Ribbonds straight
Concluded that in burnt silks he
was richly worth his weight:
His Hobby horses erst so tame,
some babes of grace might run
A race upon them, now became
hot as the Steeds of the Sun.
Of Canes there smoking lay great store,
his eyes ^ad s^one espi^d them,
They never were fi^e canes before,
though he had often belied them:
Mirrors and Prespectives then might
be burning glasses called;
The fever grew so hot that night,
the periwigs grew bald.
The Mouse-traps, Fly-flaps, and whole shelves
of whips, with other some
Such dreadful instruments themselves
suffered a martyrdom:
But to conclude, the flame being done,
some that were there did swear,
Though Christ-tide were not yet begun,
yet was Ashwednesday there.
Dear brethren, be not then too hot,
for if unto your harm
Your zeal like this take fire, J wot,
you will wish 'twere but lukewarm.
God bless the King, the Queen and Issue,
Nobles and Parliament,
And may all such affrightments miss you
of the furious element.
And keep all from disasters,
And such as now good servants are,
May never prove bad masters.
FINIS.

