THE LIFE OF WILLIAM Now Lord Archbishop of CANTERBVRY, EXAMINED.

Wherein his principal Actions, or Deviations in matters of Doctrine and
Discipline (since he came to that Sea of Canturbury) are traced, and set down,
as they were taken from good hands, by Mr. Robert Bayley, a Learned Pastor of
the Kirk of Scotland, and one of the late Commissioners sent from that Nation.

Very fitting for all judicious men to read, and examine, that they may be the
better able to censure him for those thing wherein he has done amiss.

Read and Judge.

LONDON, Printed for N B in the Year of Grace. 1643.

Summa Capitum.
THE Preface shows the unreasonablenesse of this new war, That we have
committed nothing against the late pacification: That compasson, hope, and all
reason call now for peace at home; that at (...) we may get some order of our
enemies abroad, That the Canterburian faction deserves not so well of England,
that arms in their favor ought to be taken against Scotland: We offer to
instruct their insupportable crimes by their own writs: If arms be needlessly
taken in so evil a cause, they cannot but end in an untimous repentance: In
this nick of time very poor wits without presumption may venture to speak
even to Parliaments: The obstinate silence of the English Divines is prodigious.

CHAP. I. The delineation of the whole subsequent Treatise.
OUR Adversars decline to answer our first and chief challenge: The scope of
this writ, All our plea is but one clear syllogism, the Major whereof is the
sentence of our Judge, the Minor, the confession of our party, the conclusion a
clear and necessar consequence from these two premises.

CHAP. II. The Canterburians avowed Arminianisme.
ARminianisme, is a great and dangerous innovation of our Religion: King James
his judgment thereof: the great increase of Arminianisme in Scotland by
Canterburies means: King Charles his name stolen by Canterbury, to the
defense of Arminianisme: the Irish Church infected with Arminianisme by
Canterbury: the Canterburians in England teach the first and second article of
Arminius: Why King James styled Arminians Atheists: they teach the third and
fourth article: Also the fifth: the Arminians in England advanced: their
opposites disgraced and persecuted: Canterbury and his fellows, contrare to
the Kings Proclamation, go on boldly to print, let be to preach Arminian
tenets: A demonstration of Canterburies Arminianisme in the highest degree:
they make Arminianisme consonant to the articles of England, and so not
contrare to the Proclamation.

CHAP. III. The Canterburians professed affection toward the pope and popery
in gross.
ONce they were suspected of Lutheranisme, but at last Popery was found their
mark: To make way for their designs, they cry down the Popes
Antichristianisme: They are content to have the Popes authority set up again
in England: their mind to the Cardinalat: they affect much to be joined with
the Church of Rome as she stands.

CHAP. IIII. The Canterburians join with Rome in her grossest idolatries.
IN the mids of their denyalls, yet they avow their giving of religious
adoration, to the very stock or stone of the altar: As much adoration of the
elements they grant as the Papists require: In the matter of images their full
agreement with Rome. About relicts they agree with Papists: they come near to
the invocation of Saints.

CHAP. V. The Canterburians avow their embracing of the popish heresies and
grossest errors.
THey join with Rome in setting up traditions in prejudice of Scripture: In
the doctrine of faith, justification, fulfilling of the Law, merit, they are
fully Popish: In the doctrine of the Sacraments behold their Popery: they are
for the reerection of Monasteries, and placing of Monks and Nuns therein as
of old: How near they approach to Purgatory and prayer for the dead.

CHAP. VI. Anent their Superstitions.
FEW of all Romes superstitions are against their stomach: They embrace the
grossest not only of their private, but also of their public superstitions.

CHAP. VII. The Canterburians embrace the Mess it self.
THey cry down so far as they can all preaching: They approve the mass both
for word and matter: The Scottish Liturgy is much worse then the English: Many
alterations into the Scottish, specially about the (...), the consecration, the
Sacrifice, the Communion.

CAP. ULT. The Canterburian maxims of Tyranny.
THE tyrannous usurpation of the Canrerburians, are as many and heavy as these
of the Romish Clergy: King Charles bates all tyranny the Canterburians
flatter him in much more power then ever he will take: they enable the (...)
without advice of the church, to do in allEcclesiasticall affairs what he
thinks meet: They give to the King power to do in the State what ever he will
without the advice of his Parliament: In no imaginable case they will have the
greatest tyrants resisted: What they give to Kings is not for any respect they
have to Majesty, but for their own ambitious and covetous ends.

The chief witnesses which in the following action are brought in to (...).
WIlliam Lad Archbishop of Canterbury in his speech before the (...)-(...), in
his relation of his conference with (...) Fisher, is it was the last year
amplified and reprinted by the Kings direction: In Andrews opuscula posthuma,
set out by him, and dedicated to the King.

B. Whyt of Eli in his treatise upon the Sabbath, and his answer to the
lawless Dialogue.

B. Montagu of Chichester in his answer to the gagger, in his appeal, in his
antidiatribae, in his apparatus, in his origines.

B. Hall of Exeter, in his old Religion set out with his own apology, and the
apology of his friends M. Chomley, and M. Butterfield: In his remedy of
profainnesse:

Peter Heylen Chaplane in ordinar in his answer to Burton set out, as he says,
by the command of authority, as a full and (...) Reply to be expected, against
all the exceptions which commonly are taken at my Lord of Canterbury his
actions, in his antidotum Lincolinense subscribed by Canterburies Chaplane.

D. Pottar, Chaplane in ordinar, in his charity mistaken, as he prints, at the
command of authority.

D. Laurence chaplane in ordinar, in his sermon preached before the King, and
printed at the command of authority.

D. poklingtoun in his Sunday no Sabbath, in his altar Christianum, subscribed
by Canterburies Chaplane.

Christopher Dow in his answer to Burton, subscribed by Canterburies Chaplane.

Couzine in his devotions, the fourth edition, subscribed by the B. of London
his own hand. Chounaeus in his collectiones Thelogicae; dedicated to my L. of
Canterbury, and subscribed by his Chaplane.

Shelfoord in his five pious Sermons, printed at Cambridge, by the direction of
the Vice-chanceler D. Beel, set out with a number of Epigrames Latin and
English, by diverse of the university fellows, defended yet still by Heylene,
and (...), in their books, which Canterbury has approved.

Anronie Stafford in his female glory, printed at London, and not withstanding
of all the challenges, made against it, yet still defended by Heylene and Dow
in their approved writs.

William Wats in his sermon of apostolical mortification.

Giles Widows in his schismatic Puritan.

Edward Boughen in his Sermon of order and (...).

Mr. Sp. of Queens College in Cambridge, in his Sermon of Confession.

Samuel Hoards an his sermon at the Metropoliticall visitation.

Mr. Tedders in his sermon, at the visitation of the B. of Norwitch, all
subscribed by the hands of my L. of Canterburies Chaplane, Bray, Oliver-Baker,
or some others.

THE PREFACE
IT is fallen out much beside our expectation We did expect nothing less then
war.
that the storm of war should now again begin to blow, when we did esteem
that the mercy of GOD, and justice of our Prince had settled our Land in a firm
Peace for many generations, at least for many days, and ever while some
appearance of provocation should have arisen from us, for the kindling of (...)
wrath of our enraged enemies; whose fury though we know well not to be quite
extinguished, yet we did surely think itwould not break forth in haste in any
public and open flame, till some new matter had bin furnished, or some
probable color of a new quarrel could have been alleged against us.

When we have scattered that cloud of calumnies, We have committed no (...)
that (...) be (...) with any goodly color (...) the (...) of the late (...).
which bytheir (...) and pens they had spread abroad of our rebellion, and many
other odious crimes, when by our frequent supplications, informations, (...),
declarations, and other writs, we have cleared (...) the justice of our cause,
the innecency of our proceedings to all the ingenuous minds of the I Will, and to
so many of our neighbor nations, as have bin desirous to (...) of our affairs;
when our gracious and just Prince, in the very heat of his wrath (...) alone by
(...), even while arms were in his hand, has been moved with the unanimous
consent of all his English Counsel, of all his Commanders and whole army, to
acknowledge us good and loyal subjects: And after a full hearing of our cause
in his camp to profess his satisfaction, to pronounce us free of those crimes
which before were falsely blazed of us, to send us all home in peace, with the
tokens of his favor, with the hearty embracements of that army which came
against us for our ruin: When we in a general assembly of our Church, with
the kwowledge and full consent of his Majesty's highCommissioner and whole
(...) have justified our opposition to the innovation of our Religion and Laws
by the Prelates, our excommunication of them therefore, the renewing of our
Covenant, and all the rest of our Ecclesiastical proceedings; when our States
in Parliament were going on in a sweet harmony to confirm the weaknesses and
set right the disorders of our Estate, and that no farther then clear equity,
reason, law, yea the very words of the pacificatory edict did permit; when our
whole people were minding nothing but quietness, having cast their (...) under
the feet of our reconciled King, put all their castles and canons in his hand,
without any security, but the royal Word, and received heartily all those
fugitives who had taken arms in the Prelates cause, against theirCountry,
having no other mind, but to sit down with joy, and go about our own long
neglected business; praising God, and blessing the King: The martial minds
among us, panting for languor to be employed over sea, for the honor of the
crown; in spending their blood against the insolent enemies of his Majesty's
house. While these are our only thoughts, It was more then marveilous to us
(...) the dumb and obscure whisperings, and at once the loud blasts, the open
threats of a new more terrible and cruel war then before should come to our
ears, that our Castles should be filled with strangers, be provided with
extraordinary victuals and munition, (...) against a present assault, or long
siege: Many of our Nobles tempted to leave our cause; numbers of assays made to
break the unity of all our Estates: And at last our Parliament commanded to
arise, the commissioners thereof, after a long and wearisome journey to Court,
for the clearing of some surmised mistakes about moods and forms of proceeding,
refused presence: A (...) in England indicted (as the rumor goes) to (...)
that nation, our dearest neighbors, with whom our cause is common, to employ
their means and arms against us, that so our old national and immort all wars
may be renewed to make sport to Prelates, and a bridge for the Spaniard or
French to come over sea and sit down masters of the whole I Will, when both
nations by mutual wounds are disabled for defense against the force of (...)
enemy, so potent as either France or Spain are this day of themselves, without
the assistance which too like shall be made them by the Papists of the I Will, and
many more, who will not fail to join for their own ends with any apparent
victor.

We admire how it is possible that intestine arms Compassion, hope, and all
reason call now for peace at home, (...) at last we may get some order of our
(...) a (...).
without any necessity should be taken up at this season when all the forces
the whole (...) can spare are most earnestly called for, by the tears of his
Majesty's only sister, by the blood and long desolation of her most miserable
Subjects, by the captivity and banishment of all (...) hopeful Children,
Prince Charles, lying daily under the hazard of the French Kings mercy at
(...), (...) Prince Robert of the Emperors at Vienne, the rest of that royal
blood lying so many years with their Mother; (...) in a strange Country: Pity
would command us to put up all our homeward quarrels, though they were both
great and many, let be to (...) any, where (...) real can be sound: Yea, hope
would allure us to try (...), if ever, our Arms on those spiteful Nations,
the hereditary enemies of our Religion and of our I Will, when (...) has made
them contemptible by the clear success he gives daily (...) every one that
rises against them: Bannier with a wing of the Swedish Army, dwelling in spite
of the Emperor all this year in the heart of his Countries, a part of Weymers
forces with a little help from France triumphing on the Rhene, for all that
Baviere, Culen, the Emperor or Spaniard can do against them: That very strong
and great Armado all utterly crushed in our eyes by the Hollanders alone,
without the assistance of any: The very French, not the best seamen, having
lately beaten oftener then once the Spanish navies in the Mediterran, the
Spanish Empire laboring of a dangerous fever both at home and abroad, the
Portugallians in spite of Philip, crowning John of Braganza for their King, the
Catalonians putting themselves in subjection to the French Crown, Naples and
West-flanders brangling, the Fleet of the States almost domineering in the
Westindian seas. Shall we alone sit still for ever? shall we send always (...)
but base contemtible and derided (...) to these (...) Princes? shall we feed
(...) with their scornful promises, which so (...) have sound, to our great
disgrace, (...) false? yea, rather then to beat them by that abundance of
power which we have, if God will give us an heart to employ it, rather then to
pull down those tyrants who have shed rivers of Protestants blood, who have
long trodden on the persons of our nearest friends, and in the, on our honor!
Is it now meet we should choose to go kill one another, alone for the bearing
up of Prelates tails, and that of Prelates as unworthy of respect as any that
ever wore a Mytre. Let our kindred, let our friends, let all the Protestant
churches perish, let our own lives and estates run never so evident an hazard,
yet the (...) pride must be borne up, their furious desire of (...) must be
satiate; all their Mandamus in these dominions must be executed with greater
severity and rigor then those of their brethren are this day in Italy or
Spain, or those of their grandfather at Rome.

To us surely it is a strange Paradox, that a Parliament The Canterburian
faction (...) veth not so well of England that arms in their favor ought to
be taken against Scotland.
of England so wise, grave, equitable a Court, as inall bygon times it hathever
proved, should be thought in danger at any time, let be now to be induced by
any allurement, by any terror, to submit themselves as Vallets and pages to
the execution of the lusts, the furies and outrageous counsels of Canterbury
and his dependers, for they know much better then we, that the maine greevances
both of their Church and state, have no other original, no other fountain, on
Earth but those men. Who other but they have kept our most gracious Prince at
a distance from the country almost ever since he came to the Crown? For whose
cause have Parliaments these many years bin hindered to meet, and when they
have met, been quickly raised, to the unspeakable grief and prejudice of the
whole land, and of all our friends abroad. By whose connivence is it that the
idolatrous chapels of both the Queens in the most conspicuous places of the
Court are so gorgeous and much frequented? Whose tolerance is it that at London
three mass priests are to be found for one Minister, that three hundredth of
them reside in the city in ordinar, and six thousand at least in the country;
If ye trust the Jesuits Catalogues to Rome? Whence comes their immunity fro the
laws, who have set up cloisters for Monks and Nuns, let be houses for open
Masses in diverse cities of the Kings dominions? Why is our correspondence with
the Pope no more secret, but our Agents avowedly sent to Rome, and his
holiness Nuntioes received here in state, and that such ones as in publik
writs have lately defamed with unspeakable reproaches the person and birth of
that most sacred Q. Elizabeth. Such actions, or at least long permission of
such abominations do they flow from any other but his Grace, the head and
heart of the Cabin Counsel? Did any other but he and his creatures, his legs
and arms hinder always our effectual alliance with the Swedes and French,
when their armies did most flourish in Germany for the relief of the oppressed
churches? Why was that poor Prince the King of Boheme to his dying day kept
from any considerable help from Britain? How was these young princes the
other year permitted to take the fields with so small forces, that a very
meanpower of a silly commander beat them both, took the (...) captive, and put
the other in his slight to an evide at hazard of his life: Who moved that
innocent Prince, after his (...), to take so strainge a (...) as the world now
speaks of, and when he was engadged, who did betray both his purpose and person
to the French King, could any without the Cabbine understand the convey of such
matters, and within that (...) does any come without his graces permission? Is
not that man the evident author of all the Scottish broils? Are not his letters
extant, his holy hands (...) of the Scottish service to be seen, his other
writtes also are in our hands, making manifest that the beginning and
continuance of that cursed work has no spring without his brain? When the
King himself after ripe advisement and all about him both English and Scots
had returned in peace, who incontinent did change the face of the Court and
revive that fire, which in the heart of the Prince and all his good Subjects
was once closse dead.

That a (...) of England will not only let such We (...) to instruct by the
(...) of our party their unsupportable crimes.
a man and his accomplices go free, but to serve his humor, will be content to
ingadge their lives and estates for the overthrow and inslaving of us their
best neighbors, that over our carcases a pathway may be made for Bishops now,
and at once for the Pope and Spaniard to tred on the neck both of their bodies
and souls, we cannot believe. Yet if any such things should be propounded (for
what darenot effronted impudence attempt) we would require that sage Senate
before they pass any bloody sentence of war against us to consider a little
the quality of that party for whose cause they take arms, we offer to instruct
to the full satisfaction of the whole world offree and imprejudicate minds, not
by fleeing reports, not by probable likelihoods, not by the sentences of the
gravest and most solemn judicatories of this land, our two last general
assemblies and late parliament, who at far greater length and with more mature
advisement did cognosce of those causes, then ever any Assembly or Parliament
amongst us, since the first founding of our Church and Kingdom did resolve
upon any matter whatsoever: All those means of probation we shall set aside and
take us alone to the mouth of our very adversaries. If by their own testimony
we make it evident, that beside books, ceremonies, and Bishops which make the
proper and particular quarrel of this national Kirk against them, they are
guilty of gross Arminianisme, plain Popery, and of setting up of barbarous
tyranny, which is the common quarrel of the Kirk of England, of all the
reformed Kirks, and of all men who delight not to live and die in the fetters of
slavery. If we demonstrate, not so much by their preachings and practices
amongst us, (...) by their maxims printed with (...) among your selves, which
to this day, though often pressed thereto, they have never recanted. If we show
that yet still they stiffly avow all the articles of Arminius, a number of the
grossest abominations of Popery, specially the authority of the sea of Rome,
that they urge conclusions which will (...) you without any (...), so much as
by a verbal protestation, not only to give way unto any iniquity whatsoever,
either in kirk or state, whereto they can get stolen the pretext of the Kings
name; but also to lay down your neck under the yoke of the King of Spain, if
once he had any footting in this I Will, without any farther resistance; though in
your church by force that Tyrant should set up the Latin Mess in place of the
Bible, and in your state for your Magna Charta and acts of Parliament, the
laws of Castile, though in your eyes he should destroy the whole race of the
royal family, though the remainder of the Nobility and Gentry in the land
should be sent over by him, some to work in fetters in his Mines of Peru,
Others in chains to row all their days in his gallayes in the Mediterrane,
for all these or any other imaginable acts of tyranny that could escape the
wicked head of any mad Nero, of any monstrous Caligula; these men do openly
take upon them to persuade that no kind of resistance for defense can be made
by the whole States of a land, though sitting in Parliament, with a most
harmonious consent, no more nor the Jews might have done against
Nabuchadnezer, or the Christians of old against the Pagane Emperors, or the
Greek Church this day against the grand Signieur in Constantinople, that all
our forbeares both English and Scots in their manifold bickerings against the
misleaders of their Princes, against the tyrannizing factions of Court, were
ever Traitors and Rebels, and ought to have losed their heads and lands for
their presumption to defend their liberties, against the intolerable
insolences of a pack of runigat Villanes, and for their boldness, to fasten
the tottering Crown upon the head of their Kings: all such Services of our
Antecessours to King and Country, were treacherous insurrections.

If for all these their crimes I make speak before you no Arm, (...) taken in
so evil a cause can not but end in an (...).
other witnesses then their (...) tongues, J trust there shall not remain in
your minds the least shadow of any scruple to believe my allegations, nor in
your wills the least inclination to join with the counsels of so polluted and
self-(...) persons: And if to men whose open profession in their printed
books, let be secret practices, leads to so wicked ends so far contrare to
the glory of God, to the honor and safety of our King, to the well of us all,
whether in Soul, body, (...), children, or any thing that is dear to (...),
(...) lead your arms against us; we believe the Lord of (...), the righteous
Judge would be (...) to you, and make hundreds of your (...) in so (...) a
cause (...) before ten of ours: Or, if it were the profound and unsearchable
pleasure of the God of Armi s, to make you for a time a scourge to beat us, for
our manifold transgressions, yet when ye had obtained all the Prelates (...),
when we for our other sins were tred under your (...), we would for all that
hope to die with great comfort (...) courage, as defenders of the truth of God,
of the liberties and laws of our (...), of the true good and honor of the
(...) and Royal Family: All which as we take it, one of the most wicked and
unnatural (...) that ever this Isle did (...), (...) manifestly (...): yet
certainly, we could not but leave in our Testament to you our unjust oppressors
the legacy of an untimous (...); for when ye have killed thousands of us, and
banished the rest out of the Isle, when on the back of our departure, your
sweet (...) the Bishops have brought the Pope upon you and your children; when
a French or Spanish invasion does threaten you with a slavish conquest; will
ye not then all, and above all our gracious Prince regrate, that he has been
so evil advised, as to have put so many of his brave Subjects to the cruel
sword, who were very able and most willing to have done him noble service
against these foreign usurpers? Would not at such a time, that is too likely
to be at hand, if our Prelates advises now be followed, both his Majesty, and
all of you who shall (...) in life, he most earnest recallers not only of your
own Countrymen, (many thousands whereof ye know have lately by Episcopal
tyranny been cast out from their (...), as far as to the worlds end, among the
savadge Americans) but also the relics of our ruin from their banishment,
with as great diligence as in the time of Fergus the second, the inhabitants of
this land did recall our ancestors, when by the fraud and force of a wicked
faction they were the most part killed, and the rest sent over Sea in
banishment. It were better by much, before the remediless stroke be given, to
be well advised, then out of time to sigh, when the millions of lost lives,
when the happiness of our true Religion, when the liberties of both the
nations, once thrown away by our own hands, can not again be recovered.

To the end therefore that such lamentable inconveniences In this (...) of time
very poor (...) without presumption may venture to speak to Parliaments.
may be eshewed, and your Honors the more animate to deny your power to those,
who now possibilie may crave to have it abused against us without cause, beside
numbers of pressing reasons, wherewith I doubt not every wise man amongst you
is come well enough (...) from his own considerations, and which J trust shall
be further presented in plenty by these of our Nation, who have ever been at
the head of our affairs, whom God has still enabled to clear the justice and
necessity of all our proceedings hitherto, to the minds of all, save our
infatuat adversaries, whom superstition and rage has blinded. If it might be
your Honors pleasure when all the rest have ended, I could wish that even unto
me, a little audience were given: my zeal to the truth of God, to the peace of
this Isle, to the honor of our dear and gracious Sovereign, imboldeneth me
to offer even my little myte of information. This is a period of time, when the
obstinate silence of those who are most obliged by their places and gifts to
speak, must open the mouths of sundry, who are not by much so able; very
babes, yea stones must find a tongue when Pharisees deny their testimony to
CHRIST: `Dumbe men will get words when a father, when a King, let be a whole
kingdom, by the wickedness of a few, is put in extreme perrill of ruin: An
Ass will find (...) when the devouring sword of an Angel if drawn against
the Master. Nothing more common in the Roman Annals, then the speeches of very
Oxen, before any calamity of the Commonwealth: The claiking of Geese did at a
time preserve the (...): Amiclae was lost by too much silence: The neglect of
the voice of a Damosel, the contempt of Cassandraes warning, the casting of her
in bands, for her true but unpleasant speech, did bring the Trojane horse
within the walls, and with it the quick ruin both of the city and Kingdom.

J hope then that the greatness of my undertaking An offer de. serving (...)
audience.
may (...) me a little audience: for J offer to make you all see with your own
eyes, and hear with your own ears the Canterburians to declare by their own
tongues, and write down under their own hands their clear minds, to bring in
our Church Arminianisme, and compleet Popery, and in our State a slavery no
less then Turkish. If ye find that I prove my offer, I trust I may be
consident of your Wisdoms, that though Cicero himself, and with him
Demosthenes as a second, and Orpheus with the (...) of his tongue and harp, as
a third marrow, should come to persuade, yet that none of you shall ever be
moved by all their oratorie, to espouse the quarrels of so unhappy men. If I
fail in my fair undertaking, let me be condemned of temeritie, and no hour
of your leisure be ever again employed, in taking notice of any more of my
complaints: But till my vanity be found, I will expect assuredly from your
Honors one hearing, if it were but to waken many an able wit, and nimble pen,
in that your venerable House of Convocation; Numbers there, if they would
speak their knowledge, could tell other tales then ever I heard in an
out-corner of the Isle, far from the secrets of State, and all possibility
of intelligence how many affairs in the World do go.

It is one of (...) of the World, how many The silence of the (...) Divines is
(...).
of the English Divines can at this time be so dumb, who could well, if they
pleased, paint out before your eyes with a Sun-beame all the crimes Ispeake of
(...) that head and members. It is strange that the pilloring of some few, that
the slitting of Bastwickes and (...) nose, the branding of Prinnes cheek, the
cutting of Lightouns ears, the scourging of Lylburne through the City, the
close keeping of Lincoln, and the murdering of others by famine, cold,
vermin, stink, and other miseries in the caves and vaults of the Bishops
houses of inquisition, should bind up the mouths of all the rest of the
learned. (...) wont not in the days of hottest persecution, in the very Marian
times, to be so scant of faithful witnesses to the truth of Christ, we can not
now conjecture what is become of that zeal to the true Religion, which we are
persivaded lies in the heart of many thousands in that gracious Kirk; we trust
indeed that this long lurking, and too too long silence of the Saints there,
shall break out at once in some hundreths of trumpets and lamps, shining and
shouting, to the joy of all the reformed Churches, against the camp of these
enemies to God, and the King; that quickly it may be so, behold I here first
upon all hazards do break my pitcher, do hold out my lamp, and blow my
trumpet before the Commissioners of the whole Kingdom, offering to convince
that prevalent faction by their own mouth, of Arminianisme, Popery, and
tyranny.

The main scope and delineation of the subsequent Treatise. CHAP. I.
OUr Adversaries are Our adversaries de cline to answer ou greatest challenge.
very unwilling to suffer to appear, that there is any further debate betwixt
them and us, but what is proper unto our Church, and does arise from the
Service Book, Canons, and Episcopacie, which they have pressed upon us with
violence, against all Order Ecclesiastical and Civil: In the mean time, lest
they become the sacrifices of the public hatred of others, in a subtle
Sophistication they labor to hide the (...) wrongs and assronts which they
have done openly to the Reformed Religion, to the Churches of ENGLAND, and all
the Reformed Churches in the main and most material questions debated against
the Papists ever since the reformation: for such as profess themselves our
enemies, and are most busy to stir up our gracious Prince to arms against
us, do wilfully dissemble their knowledge of any other controversy between
them and us, but that which properly concerns us, and rubbeth not upon any
other Church. In this their doing the Judicious may perceive their manifold
deceit, whereby they would delude the simple, and many witty worldlings do
deceive themselves: First, they would have the world to think that we
obstinately refuse to obey the Magistrate, in the point of things indifferent,
And therefore unnecessarily, and in a foolish preciseness draw upon ourselves
the wrath of the King. Secondly, when in our late Assemblies, the order of our
Church is made known, and the seeds of superstition, heresy, idolatry and
antichristian tyranny are discovered in the service Book and Canons, they wipe
their mouth, they say, No such thing is meant; and that we may upon the like
occasion blame the service Book of England. Thirdly, when by the occasion of
the former quarrellings, their palpable Popery and Arminianisme are set before
their eyes, and their perverse intentions, desires, and endeavors, of the
change of Religion and laws are upon other grounds then upon the service Book
and Canons objected against them; they stop their ears, or at least shut their
mouths, and answer nothing. This challenge they still decline and misken; they
will not let it be heard, let be to answer to it; And for to make out their
tergiversation, for to dash away allutterly this our process, they have bin
long plying their great engine; and at last have wrought their yondmost mine to
that perfection, that it is now ready to spring under our walls. By their
flattering calumnies they have drawn the Prince again to arms, for the
overthrow of us their challengers, and for the affrighting by the terror of
armies on foot all others elsewhere, from commencing any such action against
them.

As for us, truly it were the greatest happiness The scope of the treatise.
we do wish for out of Heaven, to live peaceably in all submission and
obedience, under the wings of our gracious Sovereign, and it is to us a
bitterness as gall, as wormwood, as death to be necessitate to any contest, to
any contradictory terms, let be an armed defense, against any whom he is
pleased to defend: Yea certainly, it were the great joy of our hearts, to
receive these very men, our mortal enemies, into the arms of our affection,
upon any probable signs in them, of their sincere grief, for the huge wrongs
they have intended, and done to their Mother church and Country. But when this
felicity is denied, and nothing in them does yet appear but induration, and a
malicions obstinacy; going on madly through a desperate desire of revenge, to
move a very sweet Prince for their cause to shed his own blood, to rent his own
bowels, to cut off his own members, what shall we do but complain to GOD, and
(...) to the Worlds eyes the true cause of our sufferings, the true grounds of
this Episcopal war, or rather not Episcopal but Canterburian broyle? for
we judge sundry Bishops in the Isle to be very free of these mischiefs, and
believe that diverse of them would gladly demonstrate their innocence, if so be
my Lord of Canterbury and his dependants, were in any way to receive from the
Kings justice some part of their deserveings.

Howsoever, that we may give a testimony to the truth of GOD, which we are
like at once to seal with our blood, we will offer to the view of all
Reformed Churches, and above the rest to our nearest and sibbest sister of
England, as it were in a Table, diverse of these errors, which our party first
by craft and subtilty, but now by extreme violence of fire and sword, are
laboring to bring upon us; to the end that our dear brethren understanding
our sufferings in the defense of such a cause, may be the more willing at this
time to contribute for our assistance from God, the help of their earnest
Prayers, and for ever hereafter to condole with the more hearty compassion, any
misery which possibly may befall us, in such a quarrel.

Albeit truly our hopes are yet greater then our All our (...), but one (...).
(...), if we could become so happy as once to get our plea but entered before
our Prince; for we can hardly conceive what in reason should hinder our full
(...) of a favorable decision from that Sacred mouth, whose natural equity
the World knows in all causes whereof he is impartially informed, since our
whole action is naught but one formal argument, whereof the Major is the
verdict of our judge, the Minor shall be the open and avowed Testimony of our
party, need we fear that either our Judge or party will be so irrational as
to venture upon the denial of a conclusion, whereof both the premises is
their own open profession?

Our Major is this: Who ever in the Kings Dominions The Major thereof.
spreads abroad Popery or any doctrine opposite to the Religion and Laws of the
Land, now established, ought not to be countenanced, but severely punished by
the King. This Major the King has made certain to us in his frequent most
solemn asseverations, not only at his Coronation both here and in England, in
his Proclamations both here and there, Neither shall We ever give way to the
authorizing of any thing, whereby any innovation may steal or (...) into the
Church, (...) shall preserve that unity of doctrine and discipline,
established in Queen (...) Reign, whereby the Church of England have stood and
flourished, since (...) the (...) of England, 1628. and therefore once for all,
we have thought sit to declare, and hereby to assure all our good people, that
we neither were, are, nor ever (by the grace of God) shall be stained with
Popish superstition, (...) by the contrary, are resolved to maintain the true
Protestant Religion, already professed within this our ancient Kingdom. We
neither intend innovation in Religion or Laws, Proclam. (...) 8. 1638. (...)
all our good Subjects of the least suspicion of any intention in us, to
innovate any thing either in Religion or Laws, and to satisfy not only their
desires, but even their doubts. We have discharged, etc. Proclam. September. 22.
1638. and to give all his Majesty's people full assurance, that he never
intended to admit any alteration or change in the true Religion professed
within this Kingdom, and that they may be truly and fully satisfied of the
reality of his intentions, and integrity of the same, his Majesty has been
pleased to require and command all his good Subjects, to subscribe the
Confession of Faith, formerly signed by his dear Father, in Anno 1580: and it
is his Majesty's will that this be insert and registered in the Books of
Assembly, as a testimony to posterity, not only of the sincerity of his
intertions to the said true Religion, but also of his resolution to mayntain
and defend the same, and his Subjects in the profession thereof, Proclam.
December. 13. 1638.
but also in his late large Declaration, oftimes giving out his resolution to
live and die in the reformed Protestant Religion, opposite to all Popery; to
maintain his established Laws; and in nothing to permit the enervating of
them: Yea, this resolution of the King is so peremptory, and publicly avowed,
that Canterbury himself dare not but applaud thereto; If any prelate would
labor to bring in the superstitions of the Church of Rome, I do not only
leave him to Gods judgment, but if his irreligious (...) can be discovered,
also to shame and severe panishment from the State, and in any just way, no
man's hands should be sooner against him then mine.
in his Star Chamber Speech, who can see me more forward then he for the
great equity, to punish condignely all who would but mint to bring in any
popery in this Isle, or assay to make any innovation in Religion or Laws? We
believe indeed that the man does but juggle with the World in his fair
ambiguous generalities, being content to inveigh as much against popery and
innovation as we could wish, upon hopes ever when it comes to any particular of
the grossest popery we can name, by his subtle distinctions and disputations
to slide out of our hands: But we are persuaded what ever may be the juggling
of sophisticating Bishops, yet the magnanimous ingenuity, the Royal integrity
of our gracious Sovereign is not compatible with such fraudulent
equivocations, as to proclaim his detestation of popery in generals, and not
thereby to give us a full assurance of his abhorring every particular, which
all the orthodox Preachers of this Isle since the Reformation, by Queen
Elisabet and King James allowance have ever condemned as popish errors. Our
Major then we trust may be past as unquestionable.

We subjoine our Minor, But so it is that Canterbury The Minor.
and his dependars, men raised, and yet maintained by him, have openly in their
printed books, without any recantation or punishment to this day spread abroad
in all the Kings dominions, doctrines opposite to our Religion and laws,
especially the most points of the grossest popery. In reason all our bickering
ought to be here alone. This Minor I offer to instruct, and that by no other
mids then the testimony of their own pens. If I do so to the full
satisfaction of all, who know what are the particular heads of the reformed
Religion, and what the tenets of Popery opposite thereto, what are the laws
standing in all the three dominions, and what the contrary maxims of the
Turkish empire, where with Machiavelists this day every where are laboring to
poison the ears of all Christian Princes, for enervating the laws and
liberties of their Kinngdomes: I hope that reason and justice which stand night
and day attending on either side of King Charles throne will not fail to
persuade the cheerful embracement of the conclusion, which The conclusion.
follows by a clear and natural necessity, from the forenamed premises, to
wit, that Canterbury and his dependars in all the three dominions ought not to
be countenanced by the King, but severely punished: Let be that for their
pastime a bloody and hazardous war should be raised in so unseasonable a time,
for the undoing of that country and Church which God has honored with the
birth and baptism, both of his Majesty's own person, and of his renowned
father, and to the which both of them as all their hundredth and six glorious
Predecessors, are endebted before God, and the World, all their Prerogatives
both of nature, (...), and estate, so much as any Princes were ever to their
mother Church and native country.

CHAP. II. The Canterburians avowed Arminianisme.
ARminianisme how great and dangerous an innovation of the reformed Religion it
is, (...) a great and dangerous innovation of (...)
we may learn by the late experiences of our neighbors, when that weed began
to spread among them. The States of Holland have declared in many passages of
their Dordracen Synod, that they found it a more ready mean to overthrow both
their Church and State, then all the engines, policies, arms which the Pope,
and Spaniard, in any bygone time had used against them. The Church of France
the other year, when Amirot, and Testard, and some few of their Divines, were
but surmised to incline a little toward some small twigs of one article of
Arminius, was so affrighted, that they rested not till in a general Assembly
at Alenzon, they did run together for the extinguishing of the first sparks as
it were of a common fire. When P. Baro in Cambridge began to run a little on
this rock, how careful was my Lord of Canterbury and the Bishops then in their
meeting at Lambeth for the crushing of that Cockatrice in the (...) when that
serpent again in the same place began to set np the nose in the writtes of
Thomson, how careful was the Bishops then by the hand of their brother of
Salisbury Doctor Abbots to cut of the head of that monster? But what speak we
of the Churches reformed? The very Synagogue of Rome whose conscience is
enlarged as the Hell to swallow down the vilest morsels of the most lewd
errors that Antichrist can present, yet did they stick much at this bone,
when the Jesuit Molina began to draw out these dregs of Pelagianisme from the
long neglected pits of some obscure Schoolmen, what clamours were raised there,
not only by Alvarez and his followers, but also by numbers of Prelates and some
great Princes, till the credit of the Jesuits in the Court of Rome, and the
wisdom of the Consistory prognosticating a new rent in their Church did
procure from the Pope a peremptory injunction of silence to both sides, on all
highest pains: hoping if the Dominicans mouths were once stopped, that the
Jesuits by their (...) arts, and silent policies would at last work out their
intended point, which indeed since that time, they have wel-neare fully gained.

But to King Charles eye no evidence uses to be King James judgment of (...).
so demonstrative, as that which comes from the learned hand of his blessed
Father. Would we know how gracious a plant Arminianisme and the dressers of it
will prove in England, or any where else, advise with King James, who after
full trial and long consultation about this emergent, with the Divines of his
Court, especially the late Archbishop Abbots, gave out at last his Decree in
print, and that in Latin, not only for a present declaration to the States of
Holland, of his mind against Vorstius, and a clear confession of his Faith in
those points to the Christian World, but above all to remain a perpetual
Register for his Heirs and Succ essors, of his faithful advise, if after his
death (...) Kingdoms should be ever in danger to be (...) with that wicked
seed.

In that Treatise, his Majesty does first Declarat. contra (...) p. 15. (...)
avow all them to be gross Liars, who do not blush to affirm that any of the
Arminian Articles, even that most plausible one of the Saints (...) are
consonant with the Doctrine or Articles of the Church of England. Ibid. p. 12.
(...)
He styleth Bertius for such a slander, a very impudent and brazen-faced man.
Secondly, Ibid. page 18 (...)
He pronounces these Doctrines of Arminius to be Heresies lately revived and
damnable to the Hels from whence they come. Thirdly, Ibid. page 12. (...)
That Bertius for the very title of his book, The Saints apostasy deserved
burning Fourthly, Ibid. page 14. (...)
That Arminius and his Scholars were to be reputed pests, enemies to God,
proud, (...), heretical, Atheists. Fifthly, Ibid. page 15. (...)
He affirms that their toleration would not fail to bring upon the heads of
their Tolerators let be favorers, Gods malediction, an evil report, slander
and infamy with all the Churches abroad, and certain Schism, Division and
Tumults at home. Shall we then make any doubt of King Charles full
contentment, that we avow Arminianisme, to be such a dangerous innovation of
our Religion as the reformed Churches abroad, and his Father at home has
taught us to count it where ever it is found.

The great increase of Arminians in Scotland, by Canterburies mean.
Notwithstanding this bitter root amongst us was setting up the head of late
very boldly in all the prime places of our Kingdom, we have had since the
reformation many bickerings about the Church Government and Ceremonies, but in
matters of Doctrine neverany Controversy was known, till some years ago a
favorable air from the mouth of Doctor Lad at Court began to blow upon these
unhappy seeds of Arminius. No sooner was those Southwinds sensible in our
climate, but at once in S. Andrews, Edinburg, Aberdeen, and about Glasgow, that
weed began to spring amain. Doctor Wederburn in the new College of Saint
Andrews did stuff his Dictates to the young Students in Divinity with these
errors. This man upon the fears of our Churches censure, having fled the
Country, was very tenderly embraced by his Grace at Court and well rewarded
with a fair Benefice in England, for his labors: But to the end his talents
should not lie hid, although a man very unmeet either for preaching or
government, he was sent down tous, without the knowledge of our Church, by
Canterburies only favor, to be Bishop of Dumblane, for this purpose mainly,
that in the Royal Chapel, whereof that Bishop is always Dean, he might in
despite of all our Presbyteries weave out the web he had begun in Saint
Andrews. So quickly there was erected a society of twenty four Royal
Chaplains, who were thought fittest of the whole Clergy of the Kingdom, to be
allured with hopes of favor from Court, to preach to the State the Deans
Arminian tenets. In Edinburgh, Master Sydserfe did peartly play his part, and
for the reward of his boldness, had cast in his lap in a trace the Deanery of
E. dinburgh, the Bishopric of Brechen, and last of (...), with full hopes in a
short time of an Archbishops cloak. In the North, Doctor Forbes the only
Father of the most of those who fell away from the Doctrine of our Church, came
too good speed in his evil labors, and for his pains was honored with the
first seat in the new erected Chair of our principal City. Others about
Glasgow made their preaching of the Arminian errors the pathway to their
assured advancement. In our general Assembly we found that this cockle was
coming up apace in very many furrows of our field: Some of it we were forced,
albeit to our great grief, to draw up and cast (...) the dyke, which at once
was received and replanted in England, in too good a soil.

We confess, that it happened not much beside The Kings name stolen by (...)
to the defense of (...).
our expectation, that our Arminians after the censure of our Church should at
Court have been too graciously received and sheltered in the Sanctuary of his
Grace at Lambeth; But, this indeed, did and does still astonish us all, that
any should have been so bold as to have stolen King Charles name to a printed
Declaration, wherein not only our general Assembly is condemned for using any
censure at all against any for the crime of Arminianisme: Large Declar. page
74. According to their weak and (...) power they did determine (...)
Predestination, Universal Grace, irresistibility of Grace, concurrance of Free
Will with Grace, total and final perseverance in Grace, and other such like
intricate points, that some men would be loath to live so long as they could
make them understand them.
But also Arminius Articles are all-utterly slighted and pronounced to be of so
obscure and intricate a nature that both our Assembly was too peart to make any
determination about them, and that many of our number were altogether unable by
any teaching ever to win so much as to the understanding of the very
questions: P. 16. Some Ministers were deprived for (...), a course never heard
of in any place where any rule of justice was observed, that a Minister should
be deprived for holding any Tenet which is not against the Doctrine of that
Church wherein he lives, and that before it be prohibited and condemned by
that Church. Now there is nothing in the (...) of that Church against these
Tenets.
Yea, those Articles are avowed to be consonant, and in nothing to be opposite
to the confession of our Church, and are freely absolved of all popery. Page
303. They could make no answer when it was told them these Tenets could not be
counted Popish, concerning which, or the chiese of which as learned Papists as
any in the World, the (...) and Jesuits did differ as much as the Protestants,
and that those which do adhere to the Augustan Confession did hold that side
of those Tenets which the Arminians did hold, and yet they were very far from
being Papists, being the first Protestants, and therefore it was against all
sense to condemn that for Popery which was held by many Protestant Churches,
and rejected by many learned Papists.
Because indeed (for this is the only reason) some learned papists find
diverse of Arminius points to be so absurd that their stomachs cannot away with
them, and some of the Lutheran divines agree with the Arminians in certain
parcels of some of their Articles: They must be strangers in these questions,
who are ignorant in how many things the Dominicans and all Papists agree with
Arminius, and in how many the Lutherans disagree from him. However we were and
are amazed to see Canterbury so malapeart, as to proclaim in the Kings name,
beside many other strange things, the Articles of Arminius, to be so far above
the capacity of our general Assembly, that it deserves a Royal reproof for
minting to determine any thing in them, and that they are no ways contrary to
the doctrine of onr Church, neither any ways popish, and that for a reason,
which will exeeme from the note of Popery every error which is so grossly
absurd, that some learned Papists are forced to contradict it; or some gross
Lutheran can get his throat extended to swallow it down.

This boldness cannot in any reason be imputed (...) is the author of this
part of the Declaration
to our gracious Sovereign: For how is it possible that he upon any tolerable
information, should ever have suffered himself to be induced to write, or
speak in such a strain of these thing, which so lately by his learned Father
was declared in print, and that in Latin to be no less then heresies worthy
of burning; yea, damnable to the very infernal pit whence, as he says, they
did first come up. Neither is it like that these sentences come from the heart
of Doctor Balcanquel the penman of them; for he was a member of Dort Synod, and
brought up in the Church of Scotland, the man is not unseene in the Popish
Tenets; How is it possible that his conscience should absolve the Arminian
errors of all Popery, and all contrariety to the Scottish confession. May any
be so uncharitable, as to suspect his late promotion in Durham, has altered so
soon his mind? Sure not long since, both in England and Scotland, he did
desire to be esteemed by his friends, one of those whom Canterbury did malign,
and hold down for his certain and known resolutions, and reputed abilities to
oppose his Graces Arminian, and Popish innovations. His Majesty being certainly
clear of this imputation, and readily also Balcanquel, the Amanuense, on whom
can the fault ly but Canterbury, the directors back? For the world knows, that
on his shoulders for common alone, the King does devolve the trust of all
Bookish and Ecclesiastical affairs that concern him, that at his
commandment (...) has written in the Kings name that part at the least of the
declaration, which patronizeth the Arminian persons and cause, we do not
conjecture but demonstrate by the constant and avowed course of his Graces
carriage in advancing Arminianisme at all occasions; in all the Kings Dominions.

That this may appear, consider his practices, The Irish Church infected with
(...) by Canterbury.
not so much amongst us, and in the Irish Church, where yet his hand is very
nimble, to set these ungracious plants, and to nippe off all the overspreading
branches of any tree that may overtop them: For who else in a moment, has
advanced Doctor Bramble, not only to the sea of Derrie, but to the Kings (...)
General? Who sent Doctor Chapel first to the University of Dublin, and then
to his Episcopal chair? Who holds (...) the head of that Orthodox Primat, and
of all who kyth any zeal there to the truth of God; Who caused not only
refuse the confirmation of these Arminian Articles of Ireland, in the last
Parliament, but threatened also to burn them by the hand of the Hangman? Whose
invention are these privy Articles, which his creature Derry presents to
diverse, who take Orders from his holy hands? We will pass these and such
other effects, which the remote rays of his Graces countenance do produce in
so great a distance; Only behold! How great an increase that unhappy plant
has made there in England, where his eye is nearer to view, and his hand to
water it.

In the 25 year, at the very instant of King James The Canterburians in
England, teach the first and second Article of Arminianisme.
death, Doctor Montague, with Doctor Whites approbation, did put to the Press
all the Articles of Arminius in the same terms, with the same arguments and
most injurious calumniations of the Orthodox Doctrine, as Spalato and the
Remonstrants had done a little before, but with this difference, that where
those had dipped their pens in ink Doct. Montagu does write with vinegar and
gall, in every other line, casting out the venom of his bitter spirit, on all
that comes in his way, except they be fowls of his own feather; for often when
he speaks of Jesuits, Cardinals, Popes, he anoints his lips with the
sweetest honey, and perfumes his breath with the most cordial tablets. If any
do doubt of his full Arminianisme, let them cast up his Appeal and see it
clearly, (...), 60 (...) my through and sincere (...) from the faction of
novellizing (...), but in no point (...) then in the (...) of desperate
Predestination. (...). (...) 70. I see no reason why any Divines of our (...)
present at the Syned of (...), should take any (...) at my (...), who had no
authority that I (...) to conclude me, (...) then I do at them, (...) from me
in their (...), (...) in (...). Ibid. page 71. I am sure the Church of England
never (...) in her (...). Ibid page 72, at the Conference of Hampton Court,
before his Majesty, by Doctor (...), that doctrine of irrespective
Predestination was styled against the (...) of (...), then urged by the (...),
a desperare doctrine without reproof or taxation of any. Ibid. (...) 50. your
absolute, necessary, determined, irresistible, irrespective Decree of God to
call, save, and (...) Saint (...), for (...), without any consideration had of,
or regard unto his (...), obedience, (...): I say it truly, it is the fancy of
some (...) men.
in the first and second Article of Election and Redemption, he avoweth his
averseness from the doctrine of Lambeth and Dort which teaches, that God from
eternity did elect us to grace and salvation, not for any consideration of our
faith, works or any thing in us as causes, respects or conditions antecedent
to that decree, but only of his mere mercy; And that from this Election all
our faith, works, and perseverance do flow as effects. He calls this the
private fancy of the Divines of Dort, opposite to the doctrine of the Church
of England: For this assertion he (...) the Synod of Lambeth, as teachers of
desperate doctrine, and would father this foul imputation; but very falsely on
the conference at Hampton Court. Ibid. (...) 61. 64. I shall as I can briefly
set down what I conceive of this act of Gods Decree of Predestination, setting
by all execution of purpose: thus far we have gone, and no word yet of
Predestination, for how could it be in a paritie? There must be first conceived
a disproportion, before there can be conceived (...) election or dereliction:
God had compassion of men in the mass of perdition, upon (...), and genera
(...), and out of his mercy in his love motumero, no otherwise (...) out to
them deliverance, in a Mediator the Man Jesus Christ, and drew them out that
took hold of mercy, leaving them there that would none of him.
Again he avoweth positively that faith goes before Election, and that to
all the lost race of Adam alike, Gods mercy in Christ is propounded till the
parties free will, by believing or mis-believing, make the disproportion
antecedent to any divine either election, or reprobation.

One of the reasous why King James styled Arminius Why King James styled them
Atheists.
disciples atheists, was because their first article of conditional election
did draw them by an inevitable necessity to the maintenance of Vorstian
impiety: For make me once Gods Eternal decree posterior, and dependant from
faith, repentance, perseverance, and such works, which they make slow from the
free will of changeable men; that Decree of God will be changeable, it will be
a separable accident in him; God will be a composed substance of subject, and
true accidents, no more an absolute simple essence, and so no more God.
Vorstius ingenuitie in professing this composition is not misliked by the most
learned of the Belgic Arminians, who use not as many of the English, to deny
the clear consequences of their doctrine, if they be necessary, though never
so absurd. However in this very place Montagu maintains very Vorstian atheism
as expressly as any can do making the divine essence to be finite, his
omni-presence not to be in substance, but in providence, Appeal, pae. 49. the
(...) among others (...) that (...) of old, (...) to ^. They meant it
substantially, and so (...): Christians (...) it too, but disposively in his
providence.
and so making God to be no God. This thought long ago by learned Featly
objected in print to Montagu, lies still upon him without any clearing.
Certainly our Arminians in Scotland were begun both in word and writ to
undertake the dispute for all that Vorstius had printed: I speak what I know,
and have felt often to my great pains.

Arminianisme is a chain, any one link whereof, They teach the third and
(...) Article.
but specially the first, will draw all the rest; yet see the other also
expressed by Montagu. In the Articles of Grace and Freewill, not only he goes
clear with the Arminians, teaching that Man's will has ever a faculty to
resist, and often times according to the doctrine of the Church of England
actually does resist, reject, frustrate, and overcome the most powerful acts
of the spirit and grace of God, even those which are employed about
regeneration, sanctification, justification, perseverance. (...) (...) 89. St.
(...) in (...) has the very word antipiptete, you resist, nay, fall cross
with the holy Ghost, not suffering him to (...) grace in you. If the Council
meaned it ^, operante: I think no man will deny it, de gratia (...),
subsequente, cooperante; there is without question in the natural will of a
regenerate man so much (...) concupiscence, as may make him resist and rebel
against the law of the Spirit. And if a man justified may fall away from grace,
which is the doctrine of the Church of England, then without question, your
selves being judges, he may (...) the grace of God offered.
Not only does he thus far proceed, but also he avowes that all the
difference which is betwixt the Church of England and Rome, in this head of
freewill, is in nothing material, Ibid. (...) 95. Thus having with as great
diligence as I could examined this question inter parts of Free Will, I do
ingenuously confess, that I cannot find any such material (...) between the
(...), at least of better temper, and our Church.
and really long ago to be ended and agreed amongst the most judicious and
sober of both the sides.

For the fifth of perseverance he is as gross as any Also the fifth.
either Remonstrant or Molinean Jesuit, professing, that no man in this life
can have more assurance not to fall away both totally and finally from all the
grace he gets, then the devils Antigag. p. 161 Man is not likely in the State
of grace to be of an higher alloy then Angels were in the state of glory, then
Adam was in the state of innocence: Now i Adam in Paradise, and (...) in
heaven did fall and lost their original estate, the one totally, (...) and the
other eternally, what greater assurance has any man in the state of
proficiencie; not of consummation.
had once in Heaven, and Adam once in Paradise.

Behold the Arminian ensign fairly now displayed Silence by proclamation
enjoined to both sides.
in England by the hands of Montagu and White, under the conduct of Doctor Lad
Bishop of Saint David's, even then the President, the chief in Ecclesiastical
affairs of the Duke of Buckinghams secret council. At the first sight of this
black banner a number of brave Champions got to their arms; pulpits over all
England rang, presses swate against the boldness of that but small handful
then of courtizing Divines. Their crafty leader seeing the sloud of opposition,
and finding it meet for a little to hold in, and fold up his displayed colors,
did by the Duke his patron persuade the expediencie of that policy, which the
Jesuits had immediately before, for that same very design moved the Roman
consistory to practice. He obtained a Proclamation, commanding silence on both
sides, discharging all preaching, all printing in these controversies,
astricting to the clear, plain and very Grammatical sense of the Articles of
England in these points, without all further deductions. By this means his
intentions were much promoved, open avowers of Arminianisme were by public
authority so exempted from any censure, a real liberty was thus proclaimed
over all the land, for any who pleased to embrace Arminianisme without oppotion.

Hereby in two or three years the infection spread The Arminians in England
advanced.
so far and broad, that the Parliament was forced in the 28. to make the
increase of Arminianisme their chief grievance to his Majesty; But at that
time Doctor Lad was grown greater. He had mounted up from the Bath to London,
and to make a show there in Parliament of his power in the eye of all the
complainers, he raised up Montagu to the Episcopal Chair of his own Diocesan,
Doctor Carleton, who had lately chastised him in print for his Arminian
appeal. D. White his other (...), that all great spirits might be encouraged
to run the ways which Doct. Lad pointed out to them, in despite of these
Parliamentarie Remonstrants, was advanced from Bishopric to Bishopric, till
death at the step of Elie did interrupt the course of his promotion, that to
Wren a third violent follower of his Arminian Tenets, way might be made for to
clime up the remaining steps of the ladder of his Honors. Now to the end (...)
the world may know, that my Lord of Canterbury does nothing blush at the
advancement of such men, hear what a public testimony of huge worth and
deserving, he causes his Herald Peter (...) to proclaim to that Triumvirat,
not only at his own directions, (for that moderate answer of Heylens is the
Iusto volumine which his G. did promise to the world in his Star Chamber
speech) but also in name of authority, if Heylen lie not, who says, He writes
that book at the commandment of the State: There, after the cryasse of
Canterburies own extraordinary praises A moderate answer, page 78 you will be
troubled to find Canterburies equal in our Church, since King Edwards
Reformation, whether ye look to his public or private demeanours.
the renown of his three Underleaders, is loudly sounded as of plain
Non-suches Ibid page 84. White, Montagne, and (...), whom you so abuse, are
such, who for their endeavors for this Churches honor, fidelity in their
service to the King, full abilities in Learning, have had no equals in this
Church, since the Reformation.
.

All these his graces favors to his followers would Their opposites disgraced
and persecuted.
have been the more tolerable, if he would have permitted his Orthodox
opposites to have had some share in their Princes affection, or at least to
have lived in peace in their own places. But behold, all that crosses his way
must down, were they the greatest Bishops in the Dominions. For who else
wrought the (...) Archbishop so far out of the Kings Grace, that he remained
some years before his death well-neere confined to his house at Lambeth? Who
has caused to cage up in the Tower that great and learned Bishop of Lincoln?
what ever else may be in the man. What fray makes that worthy Primate Usher, to
foretell often to his friends his expectation, to be sent over Sea, to die a
Pedant teaching boys for his bread, by the persecution of this faction whose
ways he avows to many, does tend to manifest Arminianisme, and Popery. This
their resolution to persecute with Albeit to this day fleshly fears have made
him to let pass with silence in public the most wicked of their courses.
all extremity, every one who shall mint to print or preach any thing against
Arminianisme, they avow it openly not only by deeds (for why else was Master
Butter the Stationer cast by Canterbury in the Fleet for printing Bishop
Davenants letter to Bishop Hall against some passage of Arminianisme at the
Authors direction, as we see it set down by Huntley in his Breviat?) but even
in open print, for when Master Burton complains to the King that he was
silenced by Canterbury, for expounding of his ordinary text, Romans 8 Whom God
has predestinate, those he has called, and applying it to the present
Pelagianisme and Popery of the Arminians, Christopher Dow Chr. Dow. Answer to
Master Burton, M. Burton did preach on the highest point of Predestination in a
co^troverted way with disputes and clamorous invectives against those who
dissented from him in opinion, his questioning and suspending for this cause,
was nothing contrary to his Majestics Declarations. ibid page 40. Be it so that
the doctrine of election, effectual vocation, assurance of (...), are by the
Declaration suppressed, rather then the peace of the Church should be
disturbed, we might truly say of that time when his (...) Declaration was
published, that men were incapable of these doctrines, when men began to chide,
and to count each other (...), (...) it was with our neighbors, it began to be
with us, was it not time to enjoyne both sides silence? By this means you say,
there is no Minister, not one among a thousand that dare clearly preach of
these most comfortable doctrines, and so soundly confute the (...) heresy.
Blessed be God, that there are so few who dare, and I with those few who dare,
had showed more obedience to his Majesty.
approved by Canterburies Chaplain, and Peter Helyn directed to speak by
Canterbury himself does not stand to affirm, that this was a cause well
deserving all the sufferings he complained of.

Could any here but expect of his Graces wisdom Canterbury and his (...)
contrary to the Proclamation go on still to print, let be to preach their
Tenets.
and loyalty, when his solicitude appears to disgrace and punish, without
respect of persons, all who in contempt, as he says, of the Kings Proclamation
will not desist from the public oppugning of Arminianisme, that on the other
hand the Preachers and Printers for Arminianisme according to that same
Proclamation should be put to some order? yet this is so far neglected, that
all who are so affected, Cousins, Colines, Beal in CAMBRIDGE, Potter and
Jackson in OXFORD, and many more prime Doctors in both Universities, in the
City, in the Court, and over all the Land, boldly give out their mind to all
they meet with for the advancement of the new way; yea boldness in running
those paths has been known to have been the high way in all the three
Dominions these years bygone to certain promotion in many men, who to the
Worlds eyes had no other singular eminency of any good parts.

But that his Graces tramping upon the Kings Proclamation may be yet the more
evident, behold how he does daily dispense both with his own pen and those
also of his Friends to write and print for Arminianisme, what they please.
White being taxed by Master Burton for his subscription to Montagues Appeal,
is so far from the least retractation, that the fifth Article of Apostasy and
uncertainty of salvation which Master Burton did single out of all Montagues
errors as most opposite to Christian comfort, he maintains it in his own
Answer to the Dialogue; but as the custom now is under the covert of some
Fathers name, at great length with much bitterness, and casts out without
provocation in his Treatise of the Sabbath, the first and second Article: Page
82. The benefit of redemption by the antecedent will of Christ is intended to
all men living, though all men by reason of their own demerits do not actually
receive the fruit of it. Volu^tas antecedens est voluntas (...) and (...) Dei
ex ejus nativa (...) existens, (...) sumens occasionem ex nobis.
Master Dow and Schelfoord use the same plainness. Yea, in the one and
thirtieth year that Faction was so malepeart as to set out the Historical
Narration by one Aileward wherein all the Articles of Arminius at length with
these false and bitter Calumniations of our Doctrine, which are usually chanted
and rechanted by the Remonstrants are not only set down as truths, but also
fathered upon the first reformers and Martyrs of England. That Book when it
had been out a while was called in, not because the doctrines were false, not
because the story was forged, as that learned Knight Sir Vmphrey Line by the
ocular inspection of that original manuscript did since demonstrate, but the
only reason of the calling of it back, as his Grace makes Heylen declare to
us, was, the dinne and clamor which Mr. Burton, then one of the Ministers of
London, made against it. Moderate answer, page 121. The historical narration
was called in also for your pleasure.


Conterbury himself is nothing afraid to lend his own hand to pull down any
thing that seems cross to Arminianisme. The certainty of Salvation, the
assurance of Election, is such an eyesore, that to have it away, he stands
not with his own hand to cut and mangle the very Liturgy of the Church,
otherwise a sacred peace, and a noli me tangere in England in the smallest
points, were they never so much by any censured of error: yet if any clause
cross Arminianisme or Popery, his grace does not spare without dinne to
expurge it, did it stand in the most eminent places thereof in the very morning
prayers for the Kings person. Here was this clause fixed since the reformation
(who are the Father of thine elect and their seed) this seemed to be a public
profession that it was not unlawful for King Charles to avow his certainty and
persuasion that God was his Father, and he his adopted Child elected to
salvation. His grace could not endure any longer such a scandalous speech to
be uttered, but with his own hand scrapeth it out. Being challenged for it by
Master Burton, and the outcries of the people, he confesses the fact; only
for excuse, brings three reasons of which you may judge: Star Chamber,
speech, p. 28. It was delet at the King, direction in my Predecessors time,
when theKing had no children
First, he says, It was done in his Predecessors time: Does not this make his
presumption the more intolerable, that any inferior Bishop living at the very
ear of the Archbishop, should mint to expurge the Liturgy? Secondly, He
pretends the Kings command for his doing. Does not this increase his
guiltiness, that he and his followers are become so wicked and irrespective,
as to make it an ordinary pranke, to cast their own misdeeds upon the broad
back of the Prince? Dare he say, that the King commanded any such thing motu
proprio? Did he command that expunction without any information, without any
man's advise? Did any King of England ever assay to expurge the public Books
of the Church, without the advice of his Clergy? Did ever King Charles meddle
in any Church matter of far less importance without Doctor Lads counsel? The
third excuse, That the King then had no seed: How is this pertinent? May not a
childlesse man say in his prayers, that God is the Father of the Elect, and of
their seed, though himself as yet have no seed? But the true cause of his
anger against this passage of the Liturgy, seems to have been none other
then this Arminian conclusion; that all faith of election in particular, of
personal adoption or salvation, is naught but presumption. That this is his
Graces faith, may appear by his Chaplains hand, at that base and false story of
Ap-Evan by Studley, wherein are bitter invectives against all such persuasions
as puritanick delusions, Satan like an Angel of light stirring up in the heart
of immort fied persons, a spiritual pride in a high conceit of their (...),
the assurance of their election, illumination, conversion, imaginary sense of
their adoption, etc.
yea, he is contented that Chouneus should print over and over again his
unworthy collections, not only subscribed by his chaplain, but dedicated to
himself, wherein salvation is avowed to be a thing unknown, and whereof no man
can have any further, or should wish for any more then a good hope. Page 82.
Salus (...) satis certa qua^vis ipsis ignota, ex gratia and (...) sua
misericordia det Deus (...) suavissimam and (...) spei (...), (...) non
expectamus.
And if any desire a clear confession, behold himself in those opuscula
posthuma of Andrews, which he sets out to the world after the man's death,
and dedicates to the King; avowing that the Church of England does maintain no
personal persuasion of predestination, which Tenet Cardinal Peroun had
objected as presumption. Stricturae, we think it not safe for any man
peremptorily to presume himself predestinate.
White also in his answer to the dialogue, makes man's election a mystery,
which God has so hid in his secret counsel that no man can in this life come
to any knowledge, let be assurance of it, at great length from the ninety
seventh page to the hundred and third, and that most plainly.

But to close this Chapter passing a number of evidences, A demonstration of
Canterburies Arminianisme in the highest degree.
I bring but one more which readily may be demonstrative, though all other
were laid aside. By the Laws and practices of England, a Chaplains licencing
of a book for the press is taken for his Lord the Bishops deed: So Heylen
approven by Canterbury teaches in his Antidotum, Page 3. (...) if you be so
(...) as not to apprehend that, yet must the publishing of this libell (...) in
conclusion, on my Lord high treasurer the Bishop of London, at whose house the
book was licentiat, which is so high a language against authority, against the
practice of this Realm, for licentiating of books against the honor of the
Star Chamber on whose decree that practice is founded, etc.
and for this there is reason, for the Laws give authority of licencing to no
chaplain, but to their Lords alone, who are to be answerable for that which
their servant does in their name. Also the chaplain at the licencing receives
the principal subscribed copy, which he delivers to his Lord, to be laid
up in his episcopal Register. William Bray, one of Canterburies Chaplains,
subscribed (...) collectiones (...), as consonant to the doctrine of the Church
of England and meet for the press. The author dedicated the treatise to my L.
of Canterbury, it was printed at London 1636. into this book, the first
article, which by the confession of all sides, draws with it all the rest, is
set down in more plain and foul terms then Molina or any Jesuit; sure I am
then Arminius, Vorstius, or any their followers ever did deliver, Page 18. Non
video (...) in (...) quare cum quae est ex Deo per (...) eandemque actionem
bonitatis a seipso emanantem, recta (...) fidei in Christum resipiscentiae,
obedientiae, perseverantiae, sit causa salvationis, perversa quae (...)
hominibus est damnationis, in eadem unitatis ratione, electinis and
reprobationis (...) causae (...).
teaching in one These those three gross errors. 1. That men's faith,
repentance, perseverance, are the true causes of their Salvation; as
Misbeleefe, Impenitencie, Apostasy are of Damnation: Does Bellarmine go so
far in his Doctrine of justification and merit? 2. That those sins are no
less the true causes of reprobation then of damnation. 3. That men's faith,
repentance, perseverance are no less the true causes of their eternal
election, then misbeliefe or other sins of their temporal damnation. Let
charity suppone that his grace in the midst of his numerous and weighty
employments has been forced to neglect the reading of a book of this nature,
though dedicate to himself, albeit it is well known that his watchful eye is
fixed upon nothing more then Pamphlets which passes the press upon Doctrines
now controverted, yet his grace being publikly upbraided, for countenancing of
this book by Doctor Bastwick in the face of the Star Chamber, and being
advertised of its dedication to himself, of the errors contained in it, yea
of injuries against the King of the deepest stain, as these which struck at
the very root of his supremacy, and that in favor of Bishops. When in such a
place Canterbury was taxed for letting his name stand before a Book that
wounded the Kings Monarchical government at the very heart, and did transfer
from the Crown to the Miter one of its fairest diamonds which the King and his
Father before him did ever love most dearly, no Charity will longer permit us
to believe, but his Grace would without further delay lend some two or three
spare hours to the viewing of such a piece which did concern the King and
himself so nearly. Having therefore without all doubt both seen and most
narrowly sifted all the corners of that small Treatise, and yet been so far
from reproving the Author, from censuring the licencer, his Chaplain, from
calling in the book, from expurging any one jot that was in it, that the
Treatise the second time is put to the press at London with the same license,
the same dedication, no letter of the points in question altered: May we not
conclude with the favor of all reasonable men, that it is my Lord of
Canterburies express mind to have his own name prefixed, and his chaplains
hand subjoined to the grossest errors of Arminius, and so to profess openly
his contempt of the Kings Proclamation, for the pretended violation where, of
he causes stigmatize, mutilat, fine excessively, imprison for time of life,
very virtuous gentlemen, both Divines, Lawyers, Physicians, and of other
faculties.

What there can be said for his graces apology Arminianisme is consonant to
the Articles of England, and not contrary to the Proclamation.
nothing comes in my mind, except one alledgeance, that the point in hand
crosses not the proclamation, discharging toproceed in those questions beyond
the Grammatical construction and literal sense of the articles of England.
The Author indeed in the Epistle dedicatory avowes to his grace that the These
alleged, and all the rest of his Book does perfectly agree with the English
Articles, in the very first and literal sense, whereof the Proclamation
speaks, Nec videantur sensum articulorum (...) in literali and grammaticali
nedum in (...) verborum sensu transgredi.
And to this assertion the Licencers hand is relative as to the rest of the
book: but of this miserable apology, which yet is the only one which I can
imagine possible, this will be the necessary issue, that the gross lie, which
good King James put upon the bold brow of impudent Bertius, for his affirming
that one article of the Saints apostasy, let be other more vile Arminian
Tenets, was consonant with the Articles of England, must be thrown back from
Bertius on the Kings face, and that in as disgraceful a way as it was first
given: Montague and White, with his graces permission, did give that venerable
Prince long ago the lie at home in English, affirming the perfect agreeance of
the Arminian apostasy with the Doctrine of England. But this afront contents
not his Grace except the barbarous medicine, under the shelter of his
Archiepiscopall name belie his Majesty over sea, and over the whole world,
where the Latin is understood. Beside this shameful inconvenience, another
dangerous evil will necessarily follow from this apology, to wit, that the
Arminian doctrine may not only be tollerat in England, which yet if King James
be trusted, cannot fail to draw down upon England a curse from God, shame
from abroad, horrible schism at home, but also since their grossest Articles
are declared in print and in Latin, under the shadow of Canterburies name, to
be fully consonant to the very literal sense of the Articles of England, all
the members of that Church may be compelled presently without more delay to
embrace those doctrines; and that any manis permitted in England, to believe in
peace the Antiarminian Articles, wherein Queen Elisabet and King James did
live and die, it is of mere favor and the Princes mercy, who readily by the
Archbishops intercession is diverted from pressing the profession of those
articles; according to the first and most literal sense, which now is clearly
avowed to be after Arminius; yea, Molina his mind.

CHAP. III. The Canterburians professd affection toward the Pope and Popery in
gross.
IT was the opinion of many among us for a The faction once suspected of
Luthcranisme.
long time, that the innovating faction did mind no more nor Arminianisme, but
at once, those who touched their pulse nearer, did find a more high humor
working in their veins. With Arminius errors they began incontinent to
publish other Tenets, which to all mere Arminians were ridiculous follies. The
elements of the Lords Supper began by them to be magnified, above the common
phrase of protestant Divines, a corporal presence of Christ's humanity in and
about the elements to be glanced at, a kind of omnipresence of Christ's flesh
to be preached, a number of adorations before those elements, and all that was
near them, both the altar, basin, chalice, and chancell to be urged; many new
ceremonies, which for many years had been out of use, to be taken in, a
great bitterness of spirit, against all who ran not after these new guises to
appear. This made us think they intended to step over from Arminius to
Luther. In this conception we were somewhat confirmed, considering their
earnest recommendation, to the reading of young Students the late Lutheran
Divines, such as Hutter, Meisner, Gerard, with their crying down, both in
private and public, of Calvine, Beza, Martyr, Bucer, and the rest of the
famous Writers both ancient and late of the French and Belgicke Churches. Their
giving it out also that their martyred Reformers, Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer,
were of Luthers School, and from him had learned those things, wherein the
English Church did differ from the other Reformed of Calvines framing. But most
of all, by my Lord of Canterburies great diligence underhand, to promove and
reward that late negotiation of Master Duries with the Churches over Sea, for
the extenuating of the Lutheran errors, and procuring with their Churches, not
only a syncretisme, which all good men did ever pant for, but also a full peace
in terms so general, so ambiguous, so slippery, that are very suspicious to
many, other ways very peaceable minds.

This I speak without any intention of putting the least note of blame either
upon the person or pains of Master Durie, or any of the Divines of either side,
who have been ready to declare their inclination, and employ their labors
toward that more desired then hoped for union of the Protestant Churches, whom
evil instruments have kept too too long asunder in a lamentable, dangerous,
and disgraceful distraction. Master Duries labors in this kind were ever by
me esteemed worthy of great praise, honor, and reward: I wished always in my
heart to them a most happy success ever rejoicing when in any of his
informations, I did perceive the lest step of advancement.

My remarke only is upon the malice of the Canterburians, who to their wicked
design of re-uniting to Rome, and so overthrowing all the Protestant Churches,
do most perversely abuse as all, whatsoever at any time has fallen from the pen
of any Reformed Writer, tending toward mutual peace or moderation, so
especially the negotiations which of old or late, has been in hand for the
drawing of us and the Lutherans, into one body: These Treaties whether for a
full agreement, or a friendly toleration, are laid by them as the principal
ground-stones of their negotiation with Rome, for to them both the persons and
doctrine of the Lutherans are more odious than these of the Papists, as you
will see it hereafter demonstrate from the Writs of Forbes and Kellet; so that
all the countenance they have shown hitherto toward the negotiations of our
peace with the Lutherans did not proceed from any true affection, they carried
either to the men or to their negotiation in it self: but their aim mainly
was to have these Treaties abused as plausible means to advance their own
greater design. This for a time, while their mysteries lay veiled, was not
well perceived: the most of men did suspect no more in all their seeming
favors toward the Lutheran party, then that a kind of Lutheranisme had been
there uttermost intension, hoping that the motion of their violent minds might
have consisted here, without any further progress.

But it was not long, while every common eye did But at last (...) was (...) to
be their mark.
observe their bowl to roll much beyond that (...). They published incontinent
a number of the Romish errors, which to the Lutherans were ever esteemed
deadly poison, the Popish Faith, the Trident'ne Justification, merit of Works,
Works of Sup (...), Doctrinall Traditions, Limbus Patrum, the sacrifice of the
Mass, Adoration of Images, Monastic Vows, Abbeys and Nunneries, the authority
of the Pope, a reunion with Rome as she stands. Finding it so, we were
driven to this conclusion, that as ordinarily the spirit of defection does not
permit any Apostates to rest in any midde term, but carries them along to
the extremes of some palpable madness, to some strong delusion for the
recompense of the first degrees of their fall from the love of the Truth, so
also our Faction was carried quite beyond the bounds both of Arminius and
Luther, yea of their own so much once beloved Cassander and Spalato, and all
the Lists of that which they were wont to call moderation, to drink of the
vilest abominations, and the lowest dregs of the golden Cup of that Romish
Whore: For now Canterbury and his followers, are not ashamed to proclaim in
print their affection to popery both in gross and retail. Let no man in this
cast up to me any slander till he have heard and considered the probation of
my allegiance.

f His fifth Sermon through the whole.
Popery is a body of parts, if not innumerable, To make way for their designs,
they cry down the Pope. Antichristianisme.
yet exceeding many. Their is scarce any member great or small in this monster,
whereto the faction has not kythed too passionate a love. But for shortness, I
will show first their affection to the whole mass of Popish errors, their
respect to the Church of Rome, and to the Pope the head thereof, than in
particular to the most principal and abominable parts of that Chaos. As for
the whole of that confused lump, that they may win the more easily to the
embracement of it, they cast down in the entry the chief wall, they remove
the main impediment, whereby Protestants were ever kept there from. What
ever we speak of some very few private men, yet all Protestant Churches
without exception made ever the Popes Antichristianisme, their chief bulwark
to keep all their people from looking back toward that Babylonish Whore. No
Church did make greater state of that Fort than the English, and no man in that
Church more than King Charles blessed Father. He was not content himself to
believe and avow the Pope that great Antichrist, but also with Arguments
invincible drawn mainly from some passages of the Revelation, cleared now as
light, by the Commentary of the Popes practices, to demonstrate to all
Neighbor Princes and States of Christendom in a monitory Treatise this
belief, for that express end, that from this truth clearly proved, they might
not only see the necessity he had to keep himself and his Subjects for
evermore from returning to Rome, but they also by this one argument might be
forced to cast off the yoke of the Pope, when they saw him clothed with the
garments of Antichrist. It was the the continual song of all the Bishops and
Clergy in England, till Doctor Lad got absolute credit wjth the Duke of
Buckingham, that the Popes Antichristianisme was an engine of such efficacy as
was able of it self alone, if well manadged to overthrow the walls of Rome. For
this I give but two witnesses, two late English Bishops both of them deponing
before all England to King James and he accepting their testimony, Caeterum
agendo quam nihil agent, and (...) disputatione ista de antichristo, liquido
constare poterit; quia si causam hanc obtinuerimus esse romanum pontificem
antichristum, de reliqua controversii dubitandi no erit (...) locus, quia de
Antichristo Doctrina quin perniciosa sit et impia dubitari non potest.
Abbots of Salisbury in his dedicatory Epistle to King James before his
treatise of Antichrist, and Downame of Derry in the first paragraph Illa mihi
imprimis quaestio, quae est de antichristo, dignissima semper est (...), in qua
docti determinanda omnes tum ingenii, tum industriae nervos contenderent: illa
enim de veritate quam nos in hac causa singulari Dei beneficio tenemus, si
inter omnes semel conveniret, de reliquis statim controversiis actum esset,
debillatumque, neque aliquid in posterum periculi foret, quemquam omnino
Christianum, cui sua cara esset salus, detecto jam antichristo, agnitoque (...).
of his book dedicated also to K. James upon that same subject.
Notwithstanding my Lord of Canterburyi For making the way to Rome more smooth,
spares not to cause raze down to the earth this fort. Montague and White his
non-such Divines, as we heard them styled at his Graces direction by his
Herald Heylene, will have the Kings unanswerable arguments proponed by him
even to sorreine Princes; not only counted-weak but (...) frensies. This word
does feately cite from their Appeal. Pelag. rediv. 2. tab. page 39. As for the
Protestant arguments taken out of the Apocalypse, to prove the Pope to be the
Antichrist. (...) calls them deliramenta, dotages: And the Appealer to show
more zeal to the Popes cause straineth further, aad terms them
Apocalypticall phrensies.
Christopher Dow is licentiat by Canterbury, to affirm that howsoever our
Divines at the beginning of the Reformation in the heat of dispute did upbraid
the Pope with antichristianisme, yet now that heat being cooled, the matter to
men in their sober blood appears doubtful, P. 53. Many (...) in our Church
especially when the greatest heat was stricken between us and Rome, have
affirmed the Pope to be the Antichrist, yet to them that calmely and seriously
consider it, it may not without good reason be disputed as doubtful.
his Graces Herald appointed to speak for his Lord by the State, does correct
this simple dow and puts the matter out of all doubt, assuring by good
scripturall proof, by a text miserably abused, that the pope is not, was not,
and cannot be Antichrist. Page 128. I have yet one thing more to say to you in
this point, St. John has given it for a rule, that every spirit that
confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the slesh, is not of God, but is
that spirit of Antichrist, whereof ye have heard. So that unless you can make
good (as I think you cannot) that the Pope of Rome confesses not that Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, you have no reason to conclude that he is that
Antichrist.
And that in this matrer there may hereafter betwixe the Canterburians and Rome
remain no shadow of Controversy, their man Shelfoord, comes home to
Bellarmine, well nere in omnibus: making Antichrist one single man; a Jew
preaching formal blasphemies against Christ's natures and person three years
and an half, killing by his hands Enoch and Elias, and least any footstep of
this belief should ever appear in the Church of England; Canterbury confesses
that the place of the public liturgy wherein it was imported, was changed by
his own hand. Star Chamber speech, page 32. the first place is changed thus,
from, Root out that Babylonish and Antichristian Sect, which say of Jerusalem,
into this form of words, Root out that Romish and Babylonish Sect, of them,
which say, This alteration is of sosmall consequence that it is, not worthy the
speaking. or if there be any thing of moment in it, it is answered in the next,
where the chief thing he says, is, that he was commanded to alter it by the
King for to remove scandal from the Papists.


This scarre-crow being set aside, at once the They are content to have the ^.
Pope, the Cardinals and all their Religion began to look with a new face.
Anent the Pope they tell us first, (...)
that the reformers did him pitiful wrong in spoiling him, not only of those
things he had usurped, but of many privileges which were his own by due
right, and should have been left to him untouched. Again they will have us to
believe, that the Sea of Rome was truly Peter's Apostolic Chair, that Peter
was truly a Prince among the Apostles, that the Pope is (...) of the (...)
page 183. A primacie of order was never denied to St. Peter, that Rome had
(...) (...) other Churches: the Protestants grant, and that not only, because
the Roman (...) was ordine primus, first in order and degree, which some one
must be to avoid confusion, but also, etc. Ibid. page 154. (...) says indeed,
that in the Church of Rome there did ever (...) the principality of an (...),
this no man denies. Ibid. page 133. No man of learning doubts but the Church of
(...) had a powerful (...) within its own (...). Montag. Antid. p. 51. Damus a
(...) ad (...). Augustini in (...) Romana Apostolicae (...) princ patum. Ibid.
page 57. Quae ratio (...) singulorum in suis (...) Ep scoporum, cadem erat in
provinciis (...), in ^, recte autem (quis negat (...), and cautum per (...), ut
(...) ille (...) (nec hoc (...)) (...), cui tot per occidentem ^, ubi fides ^
universalis, at (...) in rebus ad (...) (...) and quicquid (...) suo (...)
confirmaret, (...) ratum (...), (...) legis vim and essicaciam per (...) un
versal mobtincret. Ibid. page 80. Monarchae sunt (...) in (...) (...),
Monarchae in suis (...) Metropolitae, (...) augustiores, (...) per unam (...)
Catholicam: Praecipuae (...) parti Christiani orbis hoc est, cunctis ad (...)
cum (...) quadam non (...) praesuit Pontisex, (...) obstaret illa (...) ambitio
etiam hedie (...).
Peter's only successor, that within the bounds of his own Patriarchat he is
a Prince, he is a Monarch. Thirdly, that order and unity do necessarily
require one Bishop to have the inspection and superiority over all Bishops,
and that this prerogative by good Ecclesiastical right is due to the Pope.
Cant. relat. page 183. The Roman Prelate was ordine primus, first in order or
degree, which some one must be to avoid confusion. (...). antid. p. 116.
Certum est ratione vinculi (...) inter (...) ord (...) inter Patriarchas
universalis (...) curam ad (...) sed m constable (...). Ibid. page 51 (...)
ordinata (...) (...) constitu a. (...); multi and (...), ut (...) eluceat, and
harmonia conservetur ab (...) est origo (...). Vnde ^ ab ^, and illum ord
(...), and ^ beat, si (...) Pontiser. Inter (...) sacerdotes (...) and societas
^ quoad (...) and (...) executionem non ^ fieri and (...); Inde (...) per
consensum (...) any orbis (...), (...), a ^ Romano (...). Ibid. page 158 Illi
(...) principatum (...), super (...) anti quitas tribui, ^.
Fourthly, that all the authority which the English Bishops have this day,
specially his Grace of Canterbury, is derived to them from the Pope and Peter's
Chair, That if this derivation could not be clearlie demonstrate, the Clergy
of England might justly refuse all obedience to their Bishops jurisdiction.
Pokling. (...) p. 50. Miserable were we, if he that now (...) Archbishop of
Canterbury, could not derive his succession from St. (...), St. Augustine (...)
St Gregory, St. Gregory from St. (...). What a comfort is it to his Grace, that
he can say, (...) Apostolorum, I, and my preducessours have (...). (...).
Sunday at the beginning. Our Diocesan can derive himself the Successor of an
Apostle, otherwise we should have taken his call for the voice of a stranger,
and not have here appeared. It is St. (...) resolution, (...) Episcoporum ab
ipsa sede Petri, is that which among other things by (...) named, keep, us in
the bosom of the Church, and subjects us to our Bishops jurisdiction
Fifthly, that diverse of the late Popes have been very good men, yea, among
the best of men, that those of them who have been very monsters of men, yet
for that veneration which their high and eminent place in the Church of God,
does require all the styles of Honor in Justice is due to them, even holiness
it self in abstracto, that to refuse them this, or their other titles is but
brainsick puritanisme. Montag orig Eccles. page 114. Patrum nostrorum vel
avorum memoria duo summi Pontisices viri (...) and doct (...), Hadrianus sextu,
and Bellarmini avunculus Marcellus secundus. An id. page 47. (...) Pontisex
Maximus (...), scio vocatum (...), (...) Papam and Pastorem (...), quid si hec
^. Orig. p. 417 Certis quibusdam titulis, and (...) (...) (...) ab (...) viri
(...) etiam and (...) honorarunt, isto honorum (...), non est (...), sed nec
(...) reprehendere, aut (...) derogare id quod solent (...), ^ indigitare
certissimus est character ^ (...) adorator, cum (...) portan ^ Paulo al cui
(...) (...) Sexto, (...) (...) and caeteris, si qui sunt ^ ^ ^.


Sixthly, That the dignity of the Episcopal office specially the Bishop of
Rome his eminency was as far above the dignity of the Emperors and Kings, as
the soul is above the body, or God above the creature, yea, that the style of
GOD was but the Popes due: Montag. (...). page 166. Est (...), ut recte
observat Philo. (...) itaque ut (...) Jesus Christi ut Dei atque hominum (...)
summus a Christianis omnibus, Divino instituto debetur honor and reverentia
singusaris, ibid. p. 40. Fatetur ultro (...) aliquo modo in (...) supra regiam
(...), cum vetusti and orthodoxis (...), (...) (inquit Chrysostom (...) ((...)
prius (...)) (...), and Nazian. in apologia (...) ibid page 161. Allusum est a
pussimo rege ad illud Exodi, Constitui te Deum Pharaonis, communicate (...)
(...), seu Pontificio, seu Civili, sui ipsi is (...), dii (...) quis vingatur
ob hanc (...), and merito quos locum ille suum (...) inter (...) sustinere.
Seventhly, that Emperors and Kings dld but their duty in giving reverence;
yea, adoration unto the Pope with great sums of money by way of tribute:
Montag. antid. page 40. Non est mirum si Constantinus, olim (...), Carolus, and
alii (...), de equis descenderint, venientes exceperint, religionis antistites
Christianae venerationemque exhibuerint. Quid (...) non ita pridem lot Sultanos
tautam observantiam exhibuisse tam ampla (...) persolvi se: Non minora quondam
principes and populi Christiani Christianis (...) Ramanis (...) exhibuerunt,
exhibebunt (...) ad pristinos illos mores, si tantum revertatur, and exempla
pietatis (...). ibid. page 158. Adoravit Johannem Justinus, sic and
Constantinus inferiores Joanne sacerdotes, adoravit autem, dicit author ille
tuus dans gloriam Deo.
Eighthly, that the temporal Principalities which the Pope enjoys this Day
in Italy, or elsewhere are buthis just possessions, which none ought to envy
him: Montag. antid. page 95. Habeat ille suas sibi opes and facultates, fundos
habeat and latisundia principatum and dom nium per Ecclesiae terras, and Petri
possessiones obtineat, dummodo contentus (...) liberalitate, alienam non
invadat possessionem.
Ninthly, that the restitution of the Popes ancient authority in England, and
yielding unto him all the power that this day he has in Spain or France,
would be many ways advantageous, and in nothing prejudicial to the King:
Cant. relat. page 202. He that is not blind may see, if he will, of what
little value the Popes power in France and Spain is this day further then to
serve the turns of their Kings therewith, which they do to their great
advantage.
10 The old constitution of the Emperor, whereby all the western clergy is
so far subjected to the Bishop of Rome, that without him they are disabled to
make any Ecclesiastical law, and obliged to receive for laws what he does
enjoyne, was very reasonable: yea, if the King would be pleased to command all
the Church men in his dominions to be that far subject to the Pope, they would
be unreasonable to refuse present obedience: Montagantid. page 156. Quod e
codice allegatur Theodosiano decernimus ne quid tam (...) Gallicanis quam
alierum (...), contra (...) veterem liceat (...) viri venerabilis (...) urbis
(...) authoritate tentare, sed illis omnibusque legis loco sit, quisquid sanxit
sanxeritve sedis (...) authoritas. Quicquid (...) pontifici ( says Montagow)
arrogatur id totum edicto debetur Theodofiano vel vetustae consuetudini,
quicquid autem per rescriptum (...) imperatoris ad occidentales (...) solos
pertinebat, and nec (...) quibus juxta veterem (...) Pontifex, praesidebat ut
(...): Decernat imperator de (...) is (...), Rex Angliae de (...) suis,
Francorum de Gallicanis, quod olim Theodosius decrivit, dicto (...) omnes
obediantes.
Only by all means my Lord of Canterburies prerogative behoved to be
secured, his ancient right to the patriarchat of the whole Isle of Britain
behoved to be made clear, that to his rod the whole clergy of the Isle might
submit their shoulders, as to their spiritual head and Monarch, from whom to
Rome there could be no appeal, Cant. relat. page 171. It is (...), that in
(...) times, in the Church government, Britain was never subject to the Sea of
Rom; for it was one of the six dioces of the West Empire, and had a Primat of
its own: Nay (...) Capgraw, and (...) tell us, that Pope (...) the (...) in the
Council at Bari in (...), accounted my worthy (...) S (...) (...), and said, He
was as the (...) and Apostolic of the other world, (...) comparem, and veluti
(...) orbis and Patriarcham. Now the Britains having a Primate of their (...),
which is greater then a Metropolitan; yea, a Patriarch, if ye will, he could
not be (...) from to Rome.
in any cause which concerned only the Churches of the Kings dominions; for in
causes more universal of the whole Catholic Church, willingly they are
contented that the Patriarch of Britain and all others should submit to their
grand Apostollcke father of Rome. (...)
Every one of these pontifical positions since the midst of Henry the eights
reign, would have been counted in England great paradoxes, yet now all of
them are avowed by Canterbury himself, in that very book which the last
(...) at the Kings direction he set (...), for to satisfy the world anent
their suspicion of his Popery, or else by D. Montagu in his books yet
unrepealed, and cleanged of all suspicion of Popery by M. Dow, under the seal
of his Graces licensing servant.

This much for the Pope. About the Cardinals they tell us that their office is
an high and eminent Their mind to the Cardinalat.
dignity in the Church of God; for the which their persons are to be handled
with great reverence and honor, Montag. ap. page 56. (...) potuit $$Para$$.
that their office is a (...) due to high graces and (...), that some of them
though the greatest enemies that ever the reformed Churches have felt, such as
(...) that spent all his time in opposing the truth and advancing
Antichristianisme, and Barromaeus (...). Alt. p 34. The (...) (...) in his
jearing (...) Cardinal Baromaeus, whereas, if he (...) to read his life, he
may not be (...) that the Cardinal was a man of (...), and spent the greatest
part of his life in fasting, prayer, (...), preaching, (...), and doctrine, and
did (...) both impiety and vanity both in word and deed. Me thinks his (...)
should check him for his scornful usage of a man who had the report of so
virtuous and pious a Bishop.
a bloody persecutor of our religion and one of the fathers of Trent, that even
such men are so full of grace and piety, that it is a great fault in any
Protestant to break so much as a jest on their rid hattes.

Where the head and shoulders are so much affected it is hard to restrain
charity from the They affect much to be joined with the Church of Rome, as she
stands.
(...) of the body. These good men vent their passion no less toward the body
of the present Church of Rome, then toward the Pope and the Cardinails. For
first his grace avowes over and over again that the Papists and we are of one
and the same religion, that to speak otherways, as the Liturgy of England
did all King James days, were a matter of very dangerous consequent, and
therefore he consesseth his helping that part of the liturgy which puts a note
of infamy upon the Popish religion, least that note should fall upon our own
religion which with the Popish is but all one. Cant. relat. p. 36. the Church
of Rome and Protestants set not up a different Religion, for the Christian
Religion is the same to both, but they differ in the same Religion, and the
difference is in certain gross corruptions to the very endangering of
salvation, which each side says the other is guilty of. Star chamber speech.
p. 36. My second reason is, That the learned make but three Religions to have
been of old in the world, Paganism, Judaisme, and (...), and now they have
added a fourth which is (...). Now if this ground of theirs be true, as it is
generally received, perhaps it will be of dangerous consequence sadly to (...)
that the (...) religion is rebellion, though (...) clause passed in the (...)
through (...) in King (...) (...), this reason well (...) is taken from the
very foundation of Religion it self. ibid. page 34. His Majesty (...) commanded
(...) to make the alteration, and to see it printed.
2. They will have us to understand though we and the Papists differ in some
things, yet that this very day there is no schism betwixt Papists and
Protestants, that Protestants keep union and communion with the Church of Rome
in all things required for the essence of a true Church and necessary for
salvation, that though they communicate not with some of her doctrines and
practices, yet this marres not the true union and communion of the two Churches
both in faith and (...). That these who pass harder censures upon Rome are but
zelots in whom too much zeal has burnt up all wisdom and charity. (...).
page 3. 06. We dare not communicate with Rome, either in her public (...) which
is (...) with gross superstition, or in these corrupt and ungrounded opinions,
which she has added to the faith. These make up the (...), but not the Church
of Rome. In them our communion is dissolved, but (...) have still a true and
real union with that and all other members of the Church universal in faith
and charity. ibid. p. 74. To depart from the Church of Rome in some (...) and
practices, we had just and necessary cause though the Church of Rome (...)
nothing necessary to salvation. There is great difference betwixt shisme from
them and reformation of our self. It is one thing to leave communion with the
Church of Rome, and another to leave communicating with her errors, whosoever
professes himself to forsake the communion of any one member of Christ's body,
must confess himself consequently to forsake the whole. And therefore we
forsake not Romes communion more nor the body of Christ whereof we acknowledge
the Church of Rome to be a member, though corrupted. If any Zelots (...)
proceeded among us to heavier censures, their zeal may be excused, but their
charity and wisdom cannot be justified. Cant. relat. p. 192. The Protestants
have not lest the Church of Rome in her essence, but in her errors, not in the
things which constitute a Church, but only in such abuses and corruptions which
work toward the dissolution of a Church.
3. That the points wherein the two Churches do differ are such as prejudge
not the Salvation of either party, that they are not foundamentall, and albeit
they were so: yet the truths that the Papists do maintain are of force to
hinder all the evil that can come from their errors. Can. (...). 1. p. 249.
The foundation is and (...) whole in the midst of their superstitions. (...)
answer, p. 124. Suppose a great Prelate in the high Commission Court had said
openly, That we and the Church of Rome differed not in fundamentalibus, yet how
comes this to be an innovation in the doctrine of England for that Church
tells us in the 19. article, That Rome does (...) in matters of Faith, but it
has not told us that she does err in fundamentalibus. (...) old religion
after the beginning: It is the charitable profession of zealous (...), that
under the Popery there is much Christian good, yea, all, that under the Papacy
there is true Christianity, yea, the kernel of Christianity? Neither do we
censure that Church for what it has not, but for what it has. Fundamental
truth is like the (...) wine, which if it be mixed with twenty times so much
water, (...) his (...). Rome as it is Babylon, we must come out of it, but as
it is an outward visible Church, we (...) did nor would, (...) Maskel. Popery
is (...), but fundamental truth is an antidote. A little quantity of antidot
that is sovereign, will destroy much poison. Pottar. p. 62. The most necessary
and fundamental truths which constitute a Church, are on both sides
unquestioned, ibid. By fundamental points of (...) we understand these prime
and capital doctrines of Religion, which (...) up the holy Catholic Faith,
which (...) constitutes a true Church and a (...) Christian. The Apostles (...)
taken in a Catholic sense that is as it was (...) opened in some parts by
occasion of emergent (...) in the other Catholic creeds of Nice, (...),
Epbesus, Chalcedon and (...) is said generally by the Schoolmen and Fathers to
comprehend a perfect (...) of fundamental truths and to imply a full rejection
of fundamental (...). ib. p. 109. It seemed to some men of great learning and
judgment, such as Hooker and (...), that all who prosesse to (...) Lord (...),
are (...), and may be (...), though with errors, even fundamental. Heretics
do embrace the principles of (...), and (...) only by misconstruction.
Whereupon (...) opinions, albeit repugnant indeed to Faith, yet are held
otherwise by them, and maintainedas consonant to the Faith.
4. That the Popish errors, let be to be fundamental, are of so small
importance as they do not prejudge either faith, hope, or charity, let be
salvation.

Cant. relat. page 361. Holcat. Non omnes error in his quae fidei sunt est aut
(...), aut (...), In things not necessary, though they be divine truths if
about them men differ, it is no more then they have done, more or less in all
ages, and they may differ and yet preserve that one necessary Faith entire, and
charity also, if they be so well (...), for opinions which fluttereth about
that one souls saving Faith, there are dangerous differences this day. Pottar.
page 38. It is a great vanity to hope or expect that all learned men in this
life should absolutely consent in all the (...) of the divine truth, so long as
the faith once delivered to the Saints, and that common faith containing all
necessary verities is kept. So long as men walk charitably according to this
rule, though in other things they be otherwise minded, the unity of the Church
is no wise violated: for it does consist in the unity of faith, not of
opinions, in the union of men's hearts by true charity, which easily tolerateth
unnecessary differences. Some points of religion are (...) articles essential
in the object of Faith. Dissension in these is pernicious, and destroieth
unity. Other, are secundary probable obscure and accidental points: (...) in
these are tolerable. Unity in these is very contingent and variable. As in
musical consort, a discord now and then, so it be in the discant, and depart
not from the ground sweetens the harmony: so the variety of opinions and rites
in diverse parts of the Church, does rather commend then prejudice the unity of
the whole. Montag. Antigag page 14. Truth is of two sorts among men, manifest
and confessed truth, or more obscure and involved truth. Plainly delivered in
Scripture are all these points which belong unto Faith, and manners, hope and
charity. I know none of these contraverted inter parts. The articles of our
creedare confessed on both sides, and held plain (...). The contraverted
points are of a larger and inferior alloy. Of them a man may be ignorant
without any danger of his (...) at all. A ^ this way or that way without (...)
of (...) Cant. (...). about the (...). The (...) of Rome (...), and in the very
kind and nature, are (...), (...), hay, and stuble, yet the Bishop thought
that (...) as were (...) by education, or long custom, or overvaluing the
Sovereignty of the (...) Church, and did in (...) of heart embrace (...), (...)
by their general (...) and (...) in the (...) of Christ, attended with charity
and other virtues (...) at Gods hand. (...) page 235. Though there be some
difference among us in ceremonies and (...), which (...), yet still our head
Christ by (...) stands upon our body, and the substance of the Gospel is entire
and whole among us by (...) the articles of the Faith, the volume of the
New Testament, and the practice thereof by Faith and good works. ibid. 239.
There be (...) which (...) our agreement. What then? Among the Greeks there
were diverse (...), and yet (...) but one language, they (...) together in the
maine. So though Papists have a letter more then we, and we one letter for
another, yet we hold together in the (...). Paul could bear (...) differences,
expecting Gods reformation. (...) you be otherwise minded God shall (...). For
the present let us be patient, and after (...) God will show where the (...)
heth. Why should we presume so (...) of (...) we are in our none-age, and know
(...) in part? Have not better men then we (...) Have not (...) Fathers and
slyding Schoolists been always borne with in (...) of Religion?
Fistly, That a general repentance for all unknown sins is sufficient to
secure the salvation not only of these who have lived and died in the Popish
tenets before the Council of Trent, but even to this day not only their
people, but their most learned Clergy, Popes, Cardinals, Jesuits, living and
dying in their bitter oppositions and persecutions of Protestants, are in no
hazard of damnation, though they never come to any particular acknowledgement
of their sinful opinions or practices following thereupon. Pottar page 77. We
hope well of these holy (...), who (...) ages lived and (...) in the Church of
Rome, for though they (...) in (...) sinful (...), yet because they did it
ignorantly through (...), not knowing them either to be (...) or sins, and
repented in general for all (...) known (...), (...) doubt not, but they
obtained pardon of all their ignorances. Nay, our charity (...) further to all
these this day, who in (...) of heart (...) the Roman (...) and (...) it. But
we understand only them who either have no (...) to (...), or (...) such as
after the use (...) the best means they can have, (...) things (...), find no
sufficient motives to ^ Hall, I dare be bold to say (...) Church of Rome had ^
years before the council of (...), to good a (...) of ^ does (...).
Sixthly, They teach us that Papists may not in reason be styled either
idolaters, or heretics, or shismaticks. His grace in that great large folio
set our the last year, to declare to the world the farthest that his mind
could be drawn for to oppose Popery, is not pleased to my memory, in his most
vehement oppositions to lay to then charge any of these three crimes, neither
do I remember in all the search my poor lecture has made, that any of his
favorites in their writtes these twelve years bygone has laid to the charge
of Rome in earnest, either idolatry heresy or shisme, but by the contrary has
absolved them clearly in formal terms all those three crimes. (...), page
300. I am not in the (...) that all images are idols, but only when they are
(...) for gods. This the ^ the (...) shipping of (...), with (...), that is
divine worship, as it is used by (...), (...). (...). p. 299 They keep close
to that which is superstition, and in the case of images come (...) to (...).
(...) p. 79. Et (...) palam non (...): a pretate and ^ moribus ^ in (...) non
(...) quam milvus and corvus (...) animalierant in area (...) (...) singulari,
At nullus in area erat idololatres, quia (...) quatenus Christianam (...).
Montag. Orig. p. 309. (...) cultum latriam quam appellant ^, nec debemus sive
(...) sive (...) quamvis excellentissimae impend re. ^ Pontificius and (...)
non (...), ^ modo (...) creaturae (...) ne ^. Montag. Antigag. p. 319 Yousay,
that images must not have (...) so we: let your practice and doctrine (...)
together, and we agree. Dow against Burton. p. 142. When Burton objecteth that
(...) did (...) out of the public (...) of fasts, this sentence, Thou have
delivered us from superstition and (...) wherein we were (...) drowned, his
chief answer is, That men may be good Protestants, and yet not (...) all their
sorefathers, who lived before the reformation, as he must do, who says of
them, they were wholly drowned in idolatry, which though M. (...) perhaps will
not, yet some men may think it to be a reason sufficient for the leaving out of
that sentence.
Of idolatry because they teach not the giving of (...) to any image or any
creature, (...). page 306. Non omnis error in his quae ^ insidelitas aut
heresis. Pottar. p 102. Every ^ so passionately in love with their own
opinions that they condemn all other differing from them to be heretical, so
there (...) not a (...) on earth who in the judgment of many other is not an
(...), ibid. page The Giant in Gath was a true man, though much deformed with
(...) sing is and toes, but if one lose any vital part, (...) a man no longer,
there is not so much danger in adding super (...), as is in (...), what is
essential and (...), that the Church shall never be robbed of any (...),
necessary to the being of the Church, the promises of Christ assures us, but
that she (...) no (...) truth we have no warrant
Of heresy, because their errors takes no part of the foundation away, but
are only excesses and additions consisting with all (...) truth. Cant relat.
page 316. If any will be a leader and teaching (...), and add (...) to (...),
and be (...) in both, (...) without repentance must needs be lost, while many
that succeed him in the error only, and notobstinacy may be saved: I say,
those, howsoever (...), are neither (...) nor heretics before God and are
therefore in a state of salvation. Montag Apar. p. 283. (...) and (...) non
(...) qui constanter retinent doctrinam (...), necenim ille haereticus dicetur,
qui per omnia Romanam fidem integerrime prositetur. ibid. p. 389. Schismatici
and singularitate rapti in transversum quales Scaliger, (...), Pareus, and
(...) opinatores, quaero autem an quis ferendus fit homo novus terrae filius,
(...) contempto spretoque consensu majorum suas phreneticas observationes (...)
serit
Of shisme, because they go on in the practice of their forbeares without
introducing any late novations. 7. They declare it were very good we had
present peace with Rome as she stands, her errors being but in opinions which
charity ought to tolerate, that the Church of England would gladly embrace this
peace, that Cassander and the like who further this reconciliation are the men
of the world most worthy of praise, that the Jesuits and Calvinists both
puritanes who hinder this peace are the most flagitious and intolerable
Shelford p. 238. Let us Christians leave off our divisions, the Papists and we
call upon one God our Father, upon one Christ our Sav our, (...) holy Ghost our
(...), and we have but one mean to unite us to this holy (...), which is
baptism, How then should we not be brethren? O blessed (...) raise up one to
bid the people return, blessed be that peacemaker among men, Nulla (...)
pacem te (...) omnes. ibid. p. 296. Why judge we so eargerly others for holding
of errors, are any without them? Some errors we may bear with, charity (...)
me to judge that errors of Christians are not of intention but ignorance. For
I believe that (...), and willingly, (...), Protestant nor Lutheran would wrong
their head Christ, whom daily they profess. Montag (...). p 45 Citius inter ^
bono, quam inter Protestants and Papistas inaudita (...), and (...) nuper
inauspicato (...) controversis inter (...) questionibus conveniet, sed (...) de
(...) istis quae pene (...) sani, (...), in vita and (...) bus nobis (...), cum
prophani homines and politici sub (...) and (...) religionis suas (...)
actiones, enormiz desideria soleant (...). Post mota (...) inter (...) odiis
decertatum vatinianis, atque eo (...) est (...) and excessus ut far eos
nequeant zelota and (...) I heologi qui non una cum ipsis velint (...). (...)
Cassander vir usque ad miraculum eruditus (...) modestia and (...), (...) ab
importunis utrinque censoribus, Calvino nimirum propter editum (...) aureum
libellum de officio viri pii, and (...) inter (...) propter consultationem
(...) (...) nemo, quam fortunae (...) subeite (...) Fricius (...) qui
impudenter noluerunt esse (...). ibid page 78. Hoc tempore (...) protestantium
and papistarum variantibus de fide ac pietate sententiis distraxerunt in
diversum Christianum otbem, si qui (...) qui bellum malint (...), qui velint
odia exerceri im nortalia traducant illi nostram quae solet odiosius exagitari
tepeditatem vel (...): Ego filius illius pacifici and (...) qui (...) utraque
unum (...) materie separationis; neque certe arbitror ab (...) (...) abhorret
nostrae Anglicanae Ecclesiae (...) and voluntas, quod nonnulli (...) and (...)
contendunt, ibid. p. 245. In Pharisaeis ad vivum depictas imagines intueamur
little (...) qui Pharisaica nobis institu ta in Christianismum retulere, (...)
intelligo and Jesuitas, sive ut verius dicam utrinque puritanos honestatis
etiam civilis reduvias, pietatis carcinomata, and Christianismi dehonestamenta
pacis and concordiae alastoras and pernities.
persons of this age. All this and much more of such stuff you may see printed
not only with allowance but with applause by the chief of that faction his
Grace himself, Montagow the first of the three nonesuches, Pottar in that his
much beloved piece put out as he says at the command of authority. Pottars
Epistle to the King, it was undertaken in obedience to your Majesty's
particular commandment.
Shelfoord in his pious sermons printed by the university of Cambridge Press
at the direction of the Vice Chancellor, D. Beel dedicated to the Lord Keeper
of England, adorned with many triumphing Epigrammes both Latin and English by
a number of the Fellows, and although called in, yet no censure to this day for
all the eomplaints against it, to our hearing has been put either on the
Author or Printer, or Licencer, or Adorners or any Doctrine contained therein,
but the worst that Burton could pick out of it, is all defended by Dow and
Heylen, at his Graces special direction, and subscribed license, as we shall
hear anon.

I hope now that all true Protestants pondering the passages I have brought,
besides many more, wherewith themselves from their own readings are acquainted,
will not only absolve my alledgeances of rashness and slander, but also
wonder at the incredible boldness of those men, who in these times wherein the
Prince and State are by so many and deep ties obliged, and according to their
obligations has so often declared themselves passionately zealous for the
maintenance of Protestant orthodoxie, that yet they should be so peart as to
print in the royal city, and that after the long and great grumblings of the
people and formal challenges of diverse of the learned to reprint their clear
affection to the Pope and Cardinals, and the whole Romish religion, albeit
truly this their ventorious boldness seems not more marveilous then their
ingenuity commendable: For they have said nothing for the Pope, or Rome, but
that which conscience would pouse any man upon all hazards to avow, who was so
persuaded in the particular heeds of controversies betwixt Papists and
Protestants, as they confess themselves to be; to the end therefore that we
may see the former strange enough passages not to have dropped from their
pens by any inadvertance, but upon plain design and deliberate purpose, we
will set down in the next room the affection they profess to the special
heads of Popery, very consonant to that which they have already said of that
which we count the whole lump and universal mass (...) Antichristianisme.
The special heads of Popery are more then I have leisure to relate, or you can
have patience to hear enumerate. Take notice therefore but of some prime
articles which Protestants use most to detest in Papists, four by name; their
idolatries, their heresies, their superstitions, their abomination of
desolation the mass. If from their own mouths I make clear that in these
four they join with Rome against us, it is like none hereafter shall wonder
of any thing that yet they have done or said for the advancement of the popish
party, and the subverting of the Protestant Churches either at home, or over
sea, but rather embrace their sobriety and moderation, who being minded, as
they profess, do not break out in many more both words and deeds, for the
destroying of the Protestant schism, and bringing all back to the Catholic
Apostolic mother Church of Rome, and unto the feet of his Holiness the vicar
of Christ, the successor of Peter, under whose obedience our holy and blessed
antecestors did live and die.

CHAP. IIII. The Canterburians join with Rome in her grossest idolatries.
THE acts of Romes Idolarry be many and various: None more open to the eye of
beholders then these five, their adorations of altars, In the midst of their
denial, yet they avow their giving of religious adoration to the very stock or
stone of the altar.
images, relicts, sacramental bread, and Saints departed: For the first, their
worshipping of the stock or stone of the altar; if we would impute it unto
the Canterburians, they will deny it alluterly, and avow, that they may well
worship God before the altar, but to worship the altar it self, to give to it
that worship which is done before it, to give to it any religious worship any
(...), any (...) any (...) any adoration, they dodetest it, as palpable
idolatry. So his Grace, so Pocklingtoune, so Heylene, so Lawrence, so (...) do
often profess: But that you may see how little faith those men's prorestations
do deserve, and that all may know either their desperate equivocating, or else
their spirit of giddiness, which makes them say and unsay the same things in
the same pages; consider all of the five named authors, for all their denial,
printing with approbation and applause as much worshipping and adoration even
of the altar, as any Papists this day living will require.

Begin with his Grace, you shall find him in his Star Chamber speech, for all
his denial, yet avowing within the bounds of two pages, once, twice, thrice,
Page 47. A great (...) is due to the body, and so to the throne where his body
is usually present. Ibid. page 49. Do mino and (...), to the Lord your God, and
to his altar, for there is a (...) due to that too. ibid. page 45. Therefore
according to the Service book of the Church of England, the Priest and the
people are called upon, for external and bodily worship of God in his Church;
Therefore they which do it not, innovat, and yet the government is so moderate,
God grant it be not too loose, that no man is constrained, no man questioned,
only religiously called upon, (...).
the giving of worship to the altar, and that such worship, which is grounded
upon that place of Scripture, Venite (...), which we suppose none will deny to
be divine adoration: But we must understand, that the King, and the Church of
England here, as in all things must bear the blame of his graces faults, that
the King and his most noble Knights of the Garter must be patrons to this
practice, and the English Liturgy the enjoiner of it: But his Grace and those
that have the government of the Church must be praised for their moderation,
in not urging this practice upon all their brethren. Pockling altar p. 160. I
shall entreat the pious and (...) Reader, to consider with meet reverence, what
is recorded among the statutes of that most noble order; ^ ^ ^, in his Sunday
no Sabbath at the end, if we do not only bend or bow our body to his blessed
board, or holy altar, but fall slat in our faces before his footstooll so soon
as ever we come in sight thereof, what Apostle or Father would condemn us for
it, and not rather be delighted to see the Lord so honored.
D. Pocklingtoune with his Graces license, (...) the bending of the body and
the prostration even to it. (...) comes up at last to his Masters back, and
tells us that the adoration before the altar, is the honor of the altar it
self, and that falling down and kissing of the altar; for the honoring of
the altar was a very commendable practice. Antidot. (...) preface to the King,
altars were (...) so sacred that even the barbarous soldiers honored them
with affectionate kisses. Ibid page 86. The altar being thought to be (...)
sacred, had a far greater measure of reverence and devotion conferred upon
(...), a reverend salutation of the table, (...), he and (...) both page 142.
commends that exhortation of the (...) of (...) in the fifth council, Ado emus
primum (...) altar. Idem, in his answer to (...), page (...). If you look
(...) unto the use and practice of the ancient Church, you (...) raisse a
(...), an honor to the altar, a (...), an ad ^.
Laurence as he prints with Canterburies license, but undoubtedly by an
impudent lie, at the Kings special commandment, does maintain not only
veneration, but religious worshipping adoration, (...), and all, page 25. we
find in (...) (...), a honor due to the altar: and in Tertullian ad
geniculariaris a kneeling to the altar: and in the fifth council, (...), an
adoration of the altar; and in the synoldals of Odo (...) altaribus (...), and
in (...), (...), and in another, divine altaria; and in the life of (...) the
(...). (...), casting my self to the earth, and worshipping the (...) ground,
and the Grecians triple prostrations tria (...) before the altar in the old
(...).
not only by a relative and transient worship as he speaks, Ibid. Although
they gave a religious reverence to these places, yet they determine (...)
reverence in God not in the place: the throne is honored for the King; he that
(...) cts the house for the owners sake, respects not the house but him.
but also, which is a degree of madness, beyond any thing that ever I have
marked in any (...), he will have a Divine adoration given to the altar it
self without any relation, or mental abstraction; because of the union of
Christ's body with it, which sits there as in a chair of Estate even as without
scruple or relations, or mental abstractions we give to the humane nature of
Christ, for that personal union of the Godhead with it, Divine adoration
whereof in it self it is not capable. ibid. page 30. So much they said, but to
justify the practice of our Church, I need not say so much: for as although
the humane nature of Christ receive all from the (...), yet we adore the whole
suppositum in gross, which consists of the humane as well as of the Divine. So
because of Gods personal presence in the place, we (...) without abstraction
of his person, from the place, to wit, the altar. ^ 153. Altars have been in
all ages so greatly honored, because they are the seats and chaires of Estate,
where the Lord (...) to place himself amongst us. Quid est enim altar (as
Optatus speaks) nisi seeds (...) and (...) Christi?


For the adoration of the communion elements, As much adoration of the elements
they grant as the Papists require.
which Protestants count an Idolatry so horrible, that for it alone they would
not fail to separate from the Church of Rome, though she had no other fault,
Apology des (...) reformes par loan Daille chap. 20.
their mind is plain by the practice which his Grace makes (...) in his
State answer to defend, we do pass their adoration in the act of
communicating, (...) we think it strange to see men who once were counted
moderate and wise, by the touch of his Graces panton, to become so insolent, as
to hiss and hout at the doctrine and practice of the best reformed Churches,
as vile and monstrous, (...) remedy of profainnesse, page 1 2 8. away with
these monsters of opinion and practice in this sacrament, Christ Jesus is here
really tendered to us, and who can, who (...) take him but on his knees?
who in the act of receiving has thought meet to sit or stand, rather than to
kneel. We speak only of these their new adorations, which against the
constant practice of the English Church they are now begun to use, without the
act of receiving a number of low cringes toward these elements, when they take
the paten in their hand, a low inclinabo before the bread, when they set it
down, another; when they take up the chalice, a third; when they setit down a
fourth. (...) moderate answer, p. 137. (...) bowing toward the communion table
be offensive to you at the administration of the Sacrament, I would (...) know
upon what reasons (...) stomach, that men should use their greatest reverence
in so great an action, think you (...) the Priest should take into his hands
the holy (...) without lowly reverence, or that it is an innovation so to do?
That these avowed adorations before the elements, without the act of
receiving, are directed by them, not only as they say to the person of Christ,
whom they make there essentially present, but also unto the elements
themselves; we prove it by no other reason but their former confession. Their
adoration before the altar is done as they confess unto the altar, much more
their adoration before the elements, without the act of receiving must be unto
the elements: For I hope they will be loath to affirm, that there is in the
altar any worthiness or aptitude, or any other cause imaginable, which can
make it capable of adoration, but the same causes are in the elements in a
far higher degree: The relation to Christ's Body and Person, which they make
the only foundation of those worships being much more true, more near, more
clear in the elements, then in the altar, howsoever the Popish prostrations,
and adorations, before the hostie, which to all Protestants are so abominable
idolatries, are absolved by these men; not only by the clearing of Papists of
all idolatry every where, but particularly by their impatience, to have the
adoration of the elements to be called Popish. For in our book of Canons when
in the copy sent up to the King, the adoration of the bread, Chap. 6. was
styled by our Bishops the Popish adoration, my Lord of Canterbury on the
margin with his own hand directs to scrape out the word Popish, as we can
show in the authentic manuscript of that book now in our hands.

Concerning images, behold their assertions, first In the matter of images
their full agreeance with Rome.
they tell us that the pullers down of images, out of their Churches, were but
lowns and knaves, pretending only religion to their profane covetousness,
that they were truly iconoclasticke and iconomachian heretics. Montag. orig.
(...). 162. Imagines illae per ecclesias constitutae quae (...),
iconoclastarum, ibid. p. 174. sub praetextu reformatae (...), Deum, (...),
(...), per (...) eversis (...), templis, sa (...), and redactis infiscum ^
lones, etc.
2. That those who do pull down or break, or offers any indignity to a
cross, to a crucifix, to a Saints image, are but madfooles, that those injures
reflect upon Christ and the Saints; and are revenged sundry times with plagues
from heaven. (...). (...). p 28. (...) est omnino quod affirmas (...), (...)
Caesaris imago in numilmate, (...) meletii character in pala annuli, quod (...)
Caesarem in (...) suo and (...) (...) in archerypum transit ea (...), quo modo
si quis sancti (...) imaginem (...) afficiat, illum ego and (...), (...), and
suae temeritatis peaenas dare. Studley in his glass for (...) about the end,
tells us, that he knew a Churchwarden for the taking down of a (...) which he
conceived to have been by his neighbors idolized, to have had his swine (...)
with (...), and thereafter the man in desperation to have drowned himself
Whence he exhorts all men to beware so much as to censure their antecessors of
idolatry, for (...) such monuments of their devotion
3. That the Church of England, (they take that Church commonly by a hudge
mistake, for their own prevalent faction therein) does not only keep
innumerable images of Christ, and the Saints in the most eminent and
conspicuous places of their Sanctuaries, but also daily erect a number of new
long and large ones, very curiously dressed, and that herein they have reason
to rejoice and glory, above all other reformed Churches. (...). page 24. ^
debemus (...), asservamus enim diligenter, and cum cura (...), (...), (...)
virginis, sanctorum (...) innumeras imagines, praesertim vero Jesu ^ etiam in
templorum cryptis, and (...) in parietibus, and ^ non adoramus. Ib. p. 26
(...), ut cum ^ (...). Sunt apud nos quod aliquoties dicendum (...) imagines in
(...) per stallos, ut vocant, Canonicorum, per fenestras, ambones, vasa,
vestimenta, and (...) (...). Pocking. (...) page 87. In my Lord of (...)
private Chapel, are to be seen (...) the altar, most richly furnished close to
the wall under the East window, many goodly pictures which cannot but strik the
beholders with thoughts of piety, and devotion at their entrance into so holy a
place, as the picture of the (...), and likewise of the holy Apostles, together
with a fair crucifix, and our blessed (...), and S. John set up in painted
glass in the east window, just over the holy table, or sacred altar; So that I
must say, That who so lives in this Diocie, must be condemned of great impiety,
that will desert his Lord, and not follow him giving a precedent of such
devotion, so conformable to the rubric of our Church. Heylens answer, page
174. For your particular instances in the Cathedrals of Durham, Bristow, Paul's,
etc. the most that you except against, are things of ornament, which you are
greeved to see now more rich or costly, nor they have been formerly. (...)
altar page 24. Our Churches (by Gods mercy) are a glory to our religion,
beautified with goodly glass windows. ibid page 87. A fair Crucifix, and our
blessed Lady, and St. John set up in painted glass in the East window, just
over the sacred altar.
4. That these their manifold images they use not only for ornament, but also
to be books to the Laics, both for their instruction and kindling of their
affections to piety, zeal, charity, imitation of the Saints; Widows
schismatic puritan, page 10. Church pictures are an external beauty, of the
Church, a memory of honor to the dead, and Saint Gregory calls them (...) men's
books. Pockling. altar page 87. There are to be seen many goodly pictures,
which cannot but strike the beholders with thoughts of piety and devotion.
Montag. Antig. page 318. The pictures of Christ, of the blessed Virgin, and
Saints, may be made, had in houses, set up in Churches, respect and honor may
be given to them the (...) do it, and use them for helps of piery, in
rememoration, and effectual representing of the prototyp. Ibid. page 300.
Imager have three uses, assigned by our Schools instruction of the rude,
commonefaction of story, and (...) up of devotion, these you and we also give
unto them.
5. That toward the Images of Christ and the Saints, the hearts of the Godly
ought to be affected with a pious devotion, with a religious reverence, and
that this reverence may very lawfully be expressed, with an outward religious
adoration; yea, prostration before the Image, as well as before the altar, with
the eyes of the adorer fixed upon the Image; Montag. antid. page 30. Christiani
omnes adoramus Christum imagini and simulachro, non prosternimur coram imagine
forsan, quid ad rem vero? Invitatio est ^ mensam Dominicam (...), in genua
procumbimus, venerationem (...), ^.
6. That the Popish distinction of duleia and latreia is good, and well
grounded, that the only abuse of Images is the worshipping of them with
latreia; that the Papists are free of this fault, that all their practice here
is but iconoduly, not idolatry, that all our controversy with them about the
worshipping of relicts, and so much more of images, (for to images, they
profess a far less respect then to relics) is but the toying of children,
the striving about shadows, that long ago both sides, are really agreed,
though some for their own pride and greed delight to keep this contraversie
about ambiguous words still upon foot. Montag. antid. p. 16. (...), illum
cultum solens (...), neque ego nomen a (...) rationem, vel subjectum
improbavero, eum a (...) soletis (...) re, non also (...), quam quod (...)
subjectarum (...), secundum (...) and minus (...) se distinguantur. page 27.
Tantummodo taxamus (...) (...), usum and (...) non (...) ullo pacto. p. 24.
(...) ad Ecclesiae Romanae (...). Montag. (...) p. 40. Nolunt illi quovis pacto
(...) cuicunque (...) ne (...) cultu relativo exhiberi, sed non constat quis ^
Deo (...) and (...) debitus, quibus terminis (...), quis ille qui solus (...),
quis ejus modus, gradus, mensura, pattes, (...), (...), nec illud agitur ut
constare (...) est in hac questione and ^ nempe vel contendendi vel ^, and
(...) conveniet (...) nos. Magnam (...) ab (...) Christi, and (...) inter se
contendentibus (...), qui ^ in hoc (...) cultu, and (...) possumus sine justo
(...), animae (...) and ^, in ^ (...).


Concerning relics they teach first that the About relics they agree with
(...).
(...) of them about in clothes by devout people is tolerable. Andrew stri
(...) For (...) were (...) sure they were true we would carry to them the
regard (...) becomes. It was (...) and un discreetly done of Vigilantius so to
(...) his (...) co (...) them, had they power of doing miracles we would have
esteemed them so much the more but in their (...) degree: yet the carrying of
them about in (...) and (...) (...) did object, if he did it (...), we would
(...) bear with it, and excuse it as (...) from (...) and (...) devotion which
will ^ end it.
Next that those bones or that dust of the deceased Saints ought justly to be
put in a casse of silk or of gold that they may be well hung about our neck
and often kissed, that they may be laid up amongst our most precious jewels.
Montag. antid. p. 17. ^ vase ^ convolvebant Ego certe cum (...) illas reliquias
fascus ^, admovebo ^ ^.
3. That in those relics there is (...) found so much grace, holiness,
virtue, that all who touches them are sanctified by that touch. (...) antid. p.
16. ^ (...) ^ corpori insidentem, fit quandam tenus particeps sanctificationis.
4. That to these relicts a great honor yea a relative worship is due albeit
not a latria or divine adoration. Monta. antid. p. 16. (...) veterem sanctorum
(...) and cineribus (...) honorem detulisse and veneratione quadam relativa
(...).
Fifthly, That pilgramages to the places where those relicts stand are very
expedient, that Protestants do reprove only these pilgramages toward the
Churches of the Saints which are made for greed or superstition, that Papists
do disallow all such as well as we Montag. antid. p. 44. (...) peregrinationem
religiosam ad loca ut appellant (...) quisquam (...) qui in rebus Ecclesiae
Christianae veteris non est hospes: improbat Molinaeus and merito
peregrinationes ut appellant malas, inventas vel ad superstitionem, vel ad
questum, vel ad tyrannidem, quas and ipsas nemo sanus inter catholicos Romanos
non improbaverit.
6. That all the controversy which here remains betwixt Papists and
Protestants is about just nothing even about goats woll and the shadow of an
Ass. Montag. orig. p. 45. Ut de lana caprina, vel (...) hic (...) videantur
contendentes. (...) come very near to the invocation of Saints.


About the invocation of Saints whereof the learned of the Papists are so
ashamed that they disavow their own practice thereof Andrews stricturae p. 57.
The (...) freely confessed to M. Causabon that he had never prayed to a Saint
in all his life save only when (...) happened to follow the (...), and that
then he sung ora pro (...) with the Clerks but else not.
yet our men tell us first that the Saints in heaven are truly our mediators
with God of intercession, as Chtist is of redemption. Montag. (...). p 20. Non
(...) sanctos esse orationis and (...) ut (...) soletis mediatores sed (...)
universis: precibus suis apud Deum (...) and orationibus mediantur. Christus
(...) and absque aliis (...) mediator redemptionis and (...) (...) (...)
intercessionis (...).
Again, that we ought carefully to keep the Saints festivalls, to this end,
that we may be partakers of their intercession. Andrews (...) pa. 8. We agree
with Saint Augustine, we celebrate the memories and hold the feasts of the
blessed Martyrs as well for imitation, as that we may be (...) of their
intercession. Shelfords first sermon page 44. Upon the Saints days the Saints
in Heaven (...) with us, now if the Saints in Heaven (...) their manner (...)
us with (...), shall we be so base minded as not to (...) with them? Ibid
(...) 27. In ^ and in dedicating tem ples to God in their names these who
neglect this holy fellowship have a great loss, which none can see but they
who have spiritual eyes
3. That albeit for common their intercession be universal, yet that sundry
times they descend to particulars: They remember the estates of their friends
and acquaintance as they left at it their death, they are informed of many new
particulars by the Angels which has been upon earth, and by the Saints which
after their death has newly come to the heaven, and that according to their
particular informations they frame their intercession. Andrews answer to
Cardinal Pirron. 20. Chap. We will hope well that Theodosius might interceed
with God for his children, we see no cause to the contrary. They Idolize the
blessed Virgin as much as any Papist. Montag. antid. p. 22. Meminerunt amicorum
suoru^ and reru^ a se quonda^ in terris gesta tum quocirca ad Christum in coelo
recollecti poterint de via ordinaria per Jesum Christum apud Deum patrem
amicos, familiares (...), precibus commendare and adjuvare.


4. M. Dow p. 54. In all these (...) strains of Rhetoric (for such for the
most part they seem rather then positive (...)) Stafford has not deviat so
much to the one extreme as M Bortouns marginall has to the other in (...) and
calling her the new great goddess (...). And if it be true that he has not
digressed in any particular from D. (...) the Bishop of (...) as M. Burtoun
makes him affirm, I dare boldly say M Burtoun will never be able to find the
least point of Popery (...) For it is well known, that Bishop has approved
himself such a champion against Rome, that they who have tried his strength
durst never yet come to a second encounter.
If we were certain that the Saints in heaven knew our estate it were no fault
at all but very expedient to make our prayers to them that they might interceed
with Christ for us. And though we be not certain of their knowledge, yet all
the fault that is in our prayers to them is only some idleness and curiosity
but no impiety at all. Montag. antid. p. 229. Save all other labor in this
point. Prove only their knowledge of any thing ordinarily I promise you
straight I willl say holy S. Mary pray for me. Ib. antid. p. 23. Tu (...) proba
and demonstra posse me certum esse de scientia sanctorum particulari quocunque
tandem modo acquisita ego certe quod ad me ipsum attinet sanctos defunctos
beatam puta (...), (...) Apostolos gloriosissimos Martyrs non verebor adire
interpellare, alloqui, (...) precibus deprecari habeant me commendatum and
adjutum suis (...) apud Deum patrem per filium. Idem antid. p. 200. Perhaps
there is no such great impiety in saying holy S. Laurence pray for me.
5. That none ought to reprove our prayers unto our Angel keeper. Montag.
invocation of Saints p. 99. If thus my self resolved to do infer (holy Angel
keeper pray for me) I see no reason to be taxed with point of Popery or
superstition much less of absurdity or impiety. Ib. ant. p. 203. The case of
Angels keepers in point of advocation is much different from other Angels not
guardians, as being continually attendants always at hand though invisible,
and therefore though we may say S. Angel keeper pray for me, it follows nor,
we may say S. Gabriel pray for me.


The Saint in heaven which the Papists do most idolize is our blessed Virgin
to whom it is well known they give much more false worship, then true to the
whole Trinity, concerning her the Canterburians affirm first, that she is
created in another way then any of the race of Adam, that God did meditate
fifty ages upon the work of her perfect creation, that she did live all her
days without mortal sin yea without all actual sin, yea without all
original. Anthony Stafford Female glory. p. 3. Others of these first and
purer times not without admiration observe that God was almost fifty ages in
the meditation of the structure of this stately Palace. Mon. (...). p. 301.
Magno procul dubio opere templu^ illud (...) aparabatur, nec ut unade multis
matter Domini in hune mundum processit e materno utero. Ibid. p. 338. Utcunque
conceptum in originali peccato', vixisse tamen immunem a mortali peccato cum
(...) putaverim. Staffords Female glory in his proemiall verses, for Eves
offence', not hers she did begin, to learn repentance ere she knew to sin.
Idem p. 20. She sent forth many a sigh for sin not having committed any, and
bewailed that of which she was utterly ignorant. Idem p. 8. The Apostles
sometimes were obscured with the fog of finne, but her brightness nothing
vicious could lessen, much less alutterly extinguish.
That she is now advanced above all the Angels to the highest created
perfection that is possible to be daughter, mother, and spouse of God, and that
her very body is already translated to the heavens. Femal glory. p. 28.
Nothing in her was wanting but the (...) it self. Idem in the preface, Whether
we regard her person or her divine gifts, she is in dignity next to God
himself. Ib. Great Queen of Queens, daughter, and mother, and the spouse of
God. Idem p. 210. Her assumption by many of the Fathers, by all the Romish
Church, and some of the reformed is held for an undoubted truth.
3. That God has made her to be true Lady and Empress of the Catholic
Church, of all the earth, and of the heaven, and that all these honors she
has obtained by her due deservings and merits. Montag. apar. p. 212. Dominum
profecto indicat (...) nomen, nam revera facta est domina omnium creaturarum,
(...) ait, cum conditoris omnium effecta fuerit matter. Ibid. p. 302. Certe
nulli sanctorum dedi Deus plura, nulli majora, (...) ne omnibus quidem ne
sanctis, tanta, hoc est elogia matris Dei Deus (...) qui titulus (...), omnes
omnium creaturarum dignitates illud unicum privilegium supergreditur Recte ait
B. Thomas, beata virgo ex hoc quod est matter Dei habet quandam dignitatem
infinitam. Ex his licet colligere (inquit Baradas) sanctissimam virginem
infinitam (...) quondam dignitatem ex Deo, qui and (...) bonaventura recitat,
majorem mundum Deus facere potest, majus coelum Deus facere potest majorem
autem matrem quam est matter Dei (...) facere non potest. Fem. gl. p. 21. She
undoubtedly deserved to be rapt up, if it were possible, a story higher than
was S. Paul. Ib. p. 80. Certainly all the ancient Fathers with one consent
affirm that she deserves to be Empress of all others who humbled her self
below them all.
4. That all the Angels and Saints in Heaven, let be men upon earth are
obliged to adore her, and bow their souls unto her. Femal glory. In the
Panegyric, to whom do bow the souls of all the just, whose place is next to
Gods, to whom the Hierarchy do throng, and for whom heaven is all one (...),
Ib. p. 3. Truly our belief may easily digest this (...) his (...) would (...)
her fit to be (...) of this lower world. Ib. pa. 17 There were no doubt some of
(...) children who (...) before, and (...) to their (...) Ibid. page 32. The
(...) glorious (...).
5. That she knows all things perfectly here beneath upon the earth: For
in the face of God in the glass of the Trinity she does behold all creatures.
Femal (...). Whose place is next to God, and in his face all creatures and
delights do see as (...) of the (...).
6. That it is but profane puritans who refuse to say the Ave Mary's and to
follow the example of their pious predecessors who wont so to pray. Ibid. p.
220. The (...) of this land are (...) I mean, they reject all testimonies of
her worth as hail Mary full of (...), etc. They abhor to hear her called
Domina, because forsooth they challenge to themselves a greater measure of
knowledge but a lesser of piety, than did their (...) by (...) words and (...)
familiar to antiquity. Of one thing I will assure them till they be good (...)
they shall never be good Christians.
7. That the devotions of the present Monks, Nuns, and Princes, who have
enrolled their names in the sodality of the Virgin Mary is worthy of imitation.
page 23. My arithmetic will not serve me to number all those who have
registrate their nam (...) the (...) of the (...), of (...) our blessed Lady.
The Princes of this (...) have not been defective in doing her all possible
honor, and in consecrating Chapels and Temples to her memory. (...) holy
Orders also are of this (...) as the (...) the (...), the Franciscans, the
Cartusians, and many others. If all those testimonies and examples of great
worthy and pious people will not move us to honor her, we shall be judged both
unworthy of this life, and ignorant of that better to come.
8. That the old pious ceremony of burning of wax candels in all the Churches
of England through the whole clear day of her purification ought to be
renewed. Ib. p 153. This day the celebration whereof is institute by the Church
is called Candlemes, as much as to say, the day of lights, on which while mass
was singing very many tapers were burning in the Church. Montag. orig. p. 157.
Diem ab illa (...) cant (...) vel purificationis: nos anglue the purification
of our Lady, (...) Candlemes day a distributione (...). Couzins did put all
this in practice in the Cathedral of Durham made burn in day light some
hundreths of wax candles. Peter Smart for preaching against him was deposed and
(...), but Couzins for his devotion advanced from a Prebend to a Provest of a
College and a royal Chaplane in ordinary.
9. That the Christians obtained that famous victory over the Turks in Lepanto
by her intercession at their prayers with Christ her son. Femal glory p.
226. The original of the sodality of the blessed virgin is derived from the
battle of Naupactum gained by John of Austria and the Christians, which
victory was attributed to her intercession with her Son.
All this his Grace has permitted under his eye to be printed at London
without any censure, and when this doctrine was challenged by Burton, he was
rewarded with the loss of his ears and perpetual prison. The book which he
inveighed against let be to be recalled, is openly excused in Print at his
Graces direction as containing no evil but only innocent retorications. (...)
answer. p. 123. As for (...) book entitled the Femal glory you find not in
it that I see by your collections any thing positively or (...) delivered
contrary unto any point of doctrine established and received in the Church of
England. Some swelling language there is into it and some Apostrophees I
perceive by you to the Virgin Mary which if you take for invocations you
mistake his meaning, no innovation hitherto (...) of doctrine.
Yea M. Dow with his Graces license pronounces that book to be free of all
Popery, and that upon this reason, because the author professes his tracing
the steps of Doctor Montagu whom all England must know to be above all
suspicion of Popery.

CHAP. V. The Canterburians avow their embracing of the Popish heresies and
grossest errors.
THE nature of heresy is so subtilized by our faction, that so far as in
them lies, it is now quite evanished in the air, and no more heresies are to
be found on the earth. With the Socinian Remonstrants, they exeeme all (...)
controverted this day among any Christians, from being the Subject of heresy:
For they tell us, that the belief of the doctrines uncontroverted by all is
sufficient for salvation. (...) cites from Causabon these words: Put by
controversies these things wherein all sects universally do agree, are
sufficient for salvation.
And howsoever some of them will be content to count the Socinian Arianisme
and Macedonianisme to be true heresies; yet, as we show before, and all of
them do clearethe Popish errors of this imputation. Always not to strive for
words, our assertion is, that the grossest of the Roman errors which in the
common style of Protestants, wont to go for heresies, are maintained by the
Canterburians for Catholic truths. For to (...) this, cast over the books of
Bellarmine, and see if his grossest tenets be not by them embraced. In his
first tome, his errors about the Scriptures imperfection, and doctrinall
traditions, seems to be most weighty. In his second, besides these already
named, his defense of the monastic vows of Limbus Patrum and Purgatory are
very palpable. In the third, his ascribing too little to the Sacraments of the
old Testament, and too much to the Sacraments of the new, his making all
infants in baptism to be regenerate, and all nonbaptised to be damned, his
corporal presence of Christ's body on the altar, his sacrifice of the Mass,
auricular confession, extreme unction, are very gross corruptions. In the
last tome, his errors about faith, justification, merit, free will, are among
the chief. In all those, consider how far our party is long ago declined to
the left hand.

Begin with Scripture and traditions: The reformed They join with Rome in
(...) up traditions in prejudice of Scripture.
Churches in the harmony of their confessions lay all down one common ground,
for their mutual consent; the Scripures absolute perfection, without the help
of any doctrinall tradition: Hogh me once this pillar, the whole edifice of the
reformation must fall. To batter down this fort, the Papists plant two
Engines: One that there is diverse Apostolic and ancient traditions, both
rituall and dogmaticall, which beside Scripture with a divine faith must be
firmly believed: An other, that Scripture must not be taken in any sense by
us, but (...) wherein the ancient Fathers of the Church have understood it, or
the present Church do take it. In both these very dangerous corruptions our
party joines with Rome: They glory (...) anti. d. (...). (...). sect. 2. Things
that have been generally received in the Church of Christ are (...) to have
been derived from Apostolical tradition, without any special mandat left in
Scripture for the doing of them. Praying directly toward the East is conceived
to be of (...) condition, why may we not conclude the like of (...) up the
(...) along the (...)? Many things come into our mind by a successionall
tradition, for which we cannot find an (...) command, which yet (...) ought to
entertain, ^; of which traditions there are many, which (...) retain their
force among us in England. This Church (the Lord (...) thanked for it) has
stood more firm for Apostolical (...), than any other whatsoever of the
reformation. Samuel (...) sermon, p. 15. We yield that there are Apostolical
traditions rituall and dogmaticall, which are no where mentioned or (...) the
Scriptures, but delivered by word of mouth, by the Apostles to their followers;
for some of which these are reputed the number of Canonical books, the
Apostles creed the baptism of (...), the fast of Lent, the Lords day, the
great festivalls of Easter and Whitson day, beside these we (...), there are
and have been many ancient (...) traditions, from which as foundations grew
those noted practices of not fasting on the Sunday, of adoring toward the
East, (...) before the altar, of signing the baptized with the cross, of
exorcising the party baptized, and putting a white garment upon them, of
receiving the (...) fasting, of mixing water with the wine, of sending it to
such as were absent, of eating the confecrate bread in the Church, or carrying
it home, of crossing themselves when they went out, or when (...) went in, when
they went to bed, or when they rose, when they sat down to meat, when they
lighted candles, or had any business of moment to do, that ceremonies and
rites of this nature are (...) the power of the Church to ordain, we generally
grant to our adversaries. White on the Sabbath, page 97. The reformed Churches
reject not all traditions, but such as are spurious, (...), and no consonant to
the holy Scripture, but genuine traditions agreeable to the rule of faith,
derived from the Apostolical times by a successive current, and which have the
uniforme testimony of pious antiquity, are received and honored by us. Now
such are these which follow the historical tradition, concerning the number,
integrity, dignity, and perfection of the books of Canonical Scripture, the
Catholic exposition of many sentences of Scripture, the Apostles creed, the
baptism of infants, the observation of the Lords day, and some other (...), as
Easter, (...), etc. baptising and administration of the Supper in holy
assemblies, the service of the Church in a known language, the delivering of
the Communion to the people in both kinds, the superiority of Bishops over
Priests and Deacons in jurisdiction, and power of ordination.
and triumph above all other reformed Churches, that they do embrace
doctrinall traditions, for which in Scripture there is no ground; And of this
kind they reckon out some of great importance; such as are, the baptism of
infants, the sanctifying of the Sabbath, the Apostles Creed, the giving of the
cup to the people, praying in a known tongue, our knowledge of Scripture to be
Scripture, the names and number of the Canonical books and their distinction
from Apocrypha, of this kind they maintain large as many as Rome. For at the
first word they speak to us of six hundredth. (...) p. 396. (...) tur in
Scripturis infantes batizari, aut in coena Domini sub utraque specie
communicantes participare. 600. sunt ejusmodi in rebus sacris a Deo institutis,
(...) mandatis and usurpatis ab Ecclesia, de quibus possumus pro (...), nihil
tale docet Scriptura, Scriptura haec non aedicat.
Among these traditions, which we must embrace with an undoubted faith: They
reckon up the authority of Bishops above Priests, prostration before the
altars, worshipping toward the East, cross in Baptism, crossing of our faces
at all occasions, the standing of a crucifix upon the altar, and what else they
please to urge, for which they can get no Scripture warrant. To this head they
refer the very customs of the Popish Church in latter times, for which they
have no syllable in any writer let be in any Father: Mon. orig. p. 276. Nihil
est memoriae proditum, quod ego quidem sciam (...) apud vetustiores, sive
historicos five (...), probabile tamen est (...) receptam (...) de traditione
vetustiore, aut scriptis (...) vetustioribus nunc deperditis dimanasse. Montag.
apar. 389. Ad me quod attinet, si (...) sanctis patribus per illa tempora
inventum, primo and (...), nulla traditione priore commendatum, nullo usu
veterum, ne quidem vestigiis leviter (...), (...) per (...) annorum decursum ad
nostra usque tempora sine contradictione (...), non video cur non (...) and
(...) vim suam obtineat and authoritatem. Absit enim ut (...) Ecclesia vel in
rebus de facto, and Ecclesiasticis (...) diu aberraverit. Ibid. p. 382.
Meminerimus (...) olim statuisse cum applausu de hujusmodi consuetudinibus, si
legem expostules scriptam, nullam invenies, sed traditio praetenditur autrix,
consuetudo (...), and fides observatrix. Et Irenaeus, quid autem si neque (...)
nobis Scripturas, nonne oporteret (...) traditionis. Idem antig. p. 42. That
author says no more then is justifiable touching traditions: for thus he
(...), the doctrine of the Church is two ways delivered unto us; first by
writing, then by tradition from hand to hand. Both are of alike value or force
unto piety.
Yea, all the injunctions of the Bishops must be Ecclesiastic traditions,
whereto the conscience must submit no less then to the precepts of God. White
in his examination of the dialogue (...) not only this testimony of (...),
Etiamsi Scripturae authoritas non subesset, totius tamen orbis in hanc partem
consensus, instar praecepti obtinet, (...) and alia multa quae per traditionem
in (...) observantur, authoritatem sibi scriptae legis (...), but also that of
Eusebius, (...) in sanctis (...) decernitur, id universum divinae voluntati
debet attribui: And this of Bernards. Sive (...), (...) homo vicarius Dei
mandatum quodcunque tradiderit, pari profecto obsequendum est cura, pari
reverentia (...), ubi tamen Deo contraria non praecipit homo. (...). page 31.
Sensum Scripturarum ex patribus and doctoribus Ecclesiae (...), traditum and
conservatum in Ecclesia, and approbatum, quidni pro tali traditione agnoscamus,
in (...) veritate acquiescendum, and a qua minime (...) sit.
In the mean time Scripture must be styled the book of heretics, Montag
orig. p. 353. Eusebius de Severianis hereticis loquens, (...), (...) Prophetis
and (...) utuntur sacrarum Scripturarum sensus and sententias, ut nostri solent
puritani and novatores pro suo arbitratu interpretantur. Mon. orig. p. 318.
Neque enim insanire solent sine Scripturis haeretici and mir (...) casdem ad
suos (...), solent applicare defendendos persusdendosque.
a Lesbian (...) Mont apar. 382. Non ut nostri (...) quibus (...) est (...)
resipit and (...), and ideo (...) est vel ut amant (...) reformandum ad Dei
verbum, hoc est ad Lesbiam plane regulam ipsorum cerebrositatem amussitandum.
In no controversies no not in Sermons any use may be made of it, except so
far as we can back our deductions from Scripture, by consent of the ancient
Fathers, or present Church. (...) p. 129. The godly and learned Fathers of our
Church, give strick charge to private preachers, that they preach nothing in
their preachings which they would have the people (...) to believe and observe,
but that which is agreeable to the doctrine of the old and new Testament, and
that which the Catholic Fathers, and ancient Bishops have formerly taught and
collected from thence. White upon the (...), (...) 12. The holy Scripture is
the fountain and living spting, containing in all (...) and abundance
whatsoever is necessary to make Gods people wise unto salvation. The (...) and
unanimous (...) of the true Church of Christ (...) the primitive ages thereof
is the (...), or a (...) pipe to derive and convoy to (...) generations the
(...) water (...) in the holy Scripture. Ibid. From (...) he says, Injuriam
nobis (...), nos (...) solam (...) esse (...) and judicem (...) siarum (...),
(...) and Spiritum (...), ^ ^ p. 14. The Ecclesiastical (...) reports of
(...) and (...), that in their studying the holy Scriptures (...) collected the
sense of them, not from their own judgment or presumption, but from the
testimony and authority of the ancients, who had received the rule of the true
intelligence of Scripture from the holy Apostles by succession.


In our most important controversies anent faith, In the doctrine of faith,
justification, fulfilling of the Law, merit, they are fully Popish.
justification, fulfilling of the Law, merit, etc. they teach first, that
faith is no more but a bare knowledge, and naked assent, that in the nature of
it there is no confidence, no application at all, that the souls confidence
and application of Gods promises, are the acts only of hope and charity, that
justifying faith is the Catholic faith, a general assent to the articles of
the Apostolic Creed, that particular personal applying faith, is but
presumption and fantasy. (...) page 46. This one faith is called by Divines
the Catholic faith, contained in the three Creedes of the Apostles, Nice and
(...). The false faith is contrary to this, the private faith, or fancy rather,
by which men believe to be saved by themselves that which is the mother and
nource to vice, an enemy to all good life; and that this is not the Catholic
faith, shall appear, because that faith has not a special object, as a man's
self, or Gods special favor to this or that particular man, which is hopes
object, but Catholic object, which is the whole first truth, and every member
of Gods book, as the school teaches, this faith goes but to the truth and
esse of divine things. Faith gives these truths a being and substance in our
mind, but after hope lays hold on them in the will and affections, and
applies them to our selves, and charity goes in unto them. The Apostle says,
that he who comes to God must believe that he is a rewarder of them that
(...) him, not a (...) of me or thee, as if the article of (...) were
personal. Idem page 106. In the love of the heart lies the greatest
apprehension. The greatest mean of our apprehending of him, is by charity,
which lays hold on him in the will and reasonable affections. (...) Collect.
82. Applicatio ex part hominis; non ex alia ratione procedit, quam ex amplexu
amoris and desiderii. Ibid. page 97. (...) Deus hanc spem, and (...) hujus spei
(...).
Again, they teach that justification is ascribed by the Apostle to faith
only, by way of beginning inchoative, because assent to the truth of God, is
that first virtue which the chain of all other virtues, whereby we are
completely justified, for common, does follow. (...) collect. p. 69. Inchoative
per (...) justicfiat Deus, dat (...). propter Christum cognitionem, ex
cognitione fidem, ex fide spem sive (...), ex fiduciacharitatem, ex chatitate
adhae sionem, obediendi and complacendi desiderium, ex isto desiderio meritorum
(...) salubrium applicationem, ex (...) applicatione sanctificationem, seu
observantiam mandatorum, ex istis omnibus in actu scilicet consummato just
(...), ex illa salvationem quae omnia quum (...) per canalem Dei gratiae, ex
fide tanquam ex principio seu radice, per connaturalitatem omnium ad fidem, and
adse invicem (...), quaecunque ab aliquibus (...) ad fidem, tanquam ad omnium
originem referenda sunt, and in hoc sensu arbitramur Apostolum. 3. ad Romans
verse. 28. locutum fide homines justificatum (...) scilicet per fi lem (...) ex
(...) suis operationem.
3. That Charity is the form of Faith, and that to it, the act of
Justification is much more reasonably ascribed then to faith. Shelfoord page
(...). Charity is called of School Divines grace it self. It is that law of
the Spirit which freeth from death and sin. It is the maine refuge of a
distressed conscience. It covers a multitude of sins, It will not suffer them
to appear: Without (...) works are dead, as well as faith and other virtues.
Hence the School (...) charity the form of virtues. Ibid page 106. Faith
converteth the mind to God, but it is love that converts the heart and will to
God, which is the greatest and last conversion; for we never seck anything till
we desire it. (...) conversion is begun in the mind by faith, but it is only
half conversion, yea no conversion of the whole man, except the love of the
heart (where heth the greatest apprehension) follow it. we see salvation by
faith, but we obtain it not, till we seek it by (...) desire. Wherefore I
conclude, that for as much as charity is the most near and immediate cause of
our conversion, that it is also the most precious grace of God for our good,
and the greatest mean of our (...) him is by charity, which lays hold on him
in the will and reasonable affections, (...) his must be the greatest mean of
our justification. Ibid. p. 109. The sulfilling of the law justifies, but
charity is the fulfilling of the law, where the Apostle (...) to justifying
faith, he compares them in the most excellent way and it is most manifest that
the most excellent way, is the way of our justification and conversion to God.
4. That Saint Paul's justification whereby we stand before the bar of God is
naught, but our conversion and sanctification by our inherent righteousness.
Shelsoord page 107. Justification and conversion to God is all one. Idem.
(...). 102. Charity is the maine refuge of a distressed conscience. Montag.
(...). page 142. A sinner is then justified when he is made just, when he is
transformed in mind, tenewed in soul, (...) by (...). (...) in (...) answer
for Hall to Burtoun, is not only content to exeeme the (...) justification from
all blot of a fundamental error, but (...) also to make all our (...) in this
point to be but a juggling about words; yea, at last he seems to (...) with the
Counsel of Trent in anathematizing our doctrine: For thus, if I remember well,
does he speak. If any man shall (...) that men are so justified by the sole
imputation of Christ's righteousness, or by sole remission of sins, (...)
they are not also (...) fied by inherent grace or charity, or also that the
grace whereby we are justified is only the favor of God, let him be accursed,
and let him be so indeed for me. You will say this is nothing but mere
juggling, I grant it, (...) yet it is not the direct deny all of the foundation,
for here is both remission of sins, and imputation of Christ's righteousness
included, which though it be sufficient to justification in the Protestant
sense, yet in the Popish sense, wherein (...) is also required, it is not
sufficient.
5. That the fulfilling of Gods Law to us in this life is both possible and
easy, that if God did command us any thing which were impossible, he should
be both unjust and a tyrant. (...) page 121. That there is a fulfilling of the
Law in this life: James teaches, if you (...) the (...) law, you do will.
Were Gods Law no possible to be (...), the supposition should be idle, (...)
fit for Gods word, a caption unbeseeming a man (...) by divine inspiration. To
the keeping of this we must strain our soul, we must not flee to a naked
(...), where is required our conformation. He has predestinate us to be
conform to the image of his Son. He has fulfilled the Law and so must we too.
Ibid. page 127. Christ has merited, that the righteousness of the Law should
be fulfilled in us, not by faith only, or by sole imputation, as the ignorant
understand it, but by our actual walking in the divine precepts. Ibid. page
136. To bind a man to things impossible, were a wrong both to nature and
grace, therefore the school verse (...), (...) viri non (...) Deus ulla (...).

God can no more in (...) now require impossibilities at our hands, then he
could at first at (...): Neither does he, if we believe S. (...), who says, I
can do (...) things by Christ, who has loved me. Ibid. page 139. If God should
command things impossible, then should he be more cruel then a tyrant, who
(...) not offer to exact of his Subjects such a tribute which he knows cannot
be (...): It is tyrannical and cruel, and therefore impossible to God to
require the ability which he himself took away, and of those too that are his
friends, and in league with him. Ibid. page 147. To say that the very best
works of the Saints are unclean, (...), mortal sins, is extreme blasphemy.
Can the works of the holy Ghost be impure? The least addition of evil in a
good work makes it sinful, because Bonum est ex integracausa, malum ex (...)
defectu. White on the Sabbath, page 157. (...) those sayings, as from S.
Austine, Neque impossible aliquid (...) potuit Deus (...) justus est; neque
damnaturus est hominem pro eo quod vitare non potest, quia (...) est. Execramur
blasphemiam eorum, qui dicunt aliquid impossible homini a Deo esse praeceptum.


6. That not only manyidoelfulfill the Law without all mortal sin, but
sundry also do supererogat by doing more then is commanded, by performing the
counsels of perfection, of chastity, poverty, and obedience: (...) page 184 By
his (...) he informs us of all the means that leads toward life eternal by
his counsels, which go beyond his (...) (because G O D has given man freewill
to get what he can in the state of grace for the state of glory) he shows some
exceeding means to grow to this life's perfection, and to improve the common
reward of glory for the next life, as sell what thou have and give it to the
peore, and (...) shall have (...) in (...); here we have counsel to change
temporal riches for eternal, which are better. 2. We are counseled to
change permitted fleshly pleasures for heavenly pleasures, where it is said,
qui (...) capere (...). 3. We are counseled to deny our selves and our
lawful liberty, to follow Christ through the worlds difficulties; these are
Gods counsels which in the primitive church were put in practice, but in our
times they are put off with a non placet. Ibid. p. 129. Of the counsels of the
gospel which go beyond the counsels of the Law. S. (...). says (...) Christ
has commanded nothing impossible yea, many have gone above his commandments.
7. That our good works do truly deserve and merit eternal life: (...).
appeal. p. 233. The wicked go to enduring of torments (...), the good to
enjoying of happiness without end; thus is their estate diversified to their
deserving, (...) p. 120. sets down the comitiall verses of Cambridge which
in merit goes as far as (...), (...) and speciosa (...), salutem divine
(...) dabunt. (...) p. 18. goes yet further, that our works are as true
efficent causes of our salvation, as our wickedness can be of our damnation,
as we heard before. Montag. (...). page 153. That a work may be said to be
meritorious, ex (...), these conditions are required, that it be morally good,
that it be freely wrought by a man in this life in the estate of grace and
friendship with God, that it have annexed Gods promise of reward. All which
conditions I cannot conceive that any Protestants does deny to good works.
8. That our obeying the counsels of perfection do purchase a degree of glory
above the ordinary happiness, (...) p. 198. In that blessed estate there are
degrees of joy and glory, a star differs from another in glory, some ground
brings forth thirty, some sixty, some a hundred fold. To this agrees S.
Gregory, Quia in hac vita est discretio operum, erit procul dubio in illa
discretio dignitatum, ut quo hic alius alium merito superat, illic alius alium
retributione transcendat. And S. Cyprian, in pace coronam vincentibus candidam
pro operibus dabit in persecutio ne purpuream pro passione geminabit; Certe^t
nune sin guli ad utriusque honoris amplissimam dignitatem, accipiant coronas
vel de operibus candidas, vel de sanguine purpureas. Here shines Gods justice
in distributing rewards according to the variety of his own grace in this life
bestowed, and Christians works by their own free will to the best end employed,
and because there are certain excellencies of works in overcomming the
greatest difficulties, therefore the scoole after the former demonstration
argues privileged crowns which they call (...) to be due to them which have
conauered best to Martyes for overcomming persecutions, to virgins for
conquering the (...), qnd to Doctors for putting the Devil to flight from
their flocks:
All this lately is printed by the faction, neither that only, but (which to
us seems mavelous) when great popular grumblings and sundry public
challenges has been made against the authors of such writs. These whom
Canterbury has employed to apologize for the worlds full satisfaction, has
not yet been pleased to disavow any of those writers, nor to express the
least sign of their indignation against any of their abominations, (...) (...)
127. For Shelsoords book whatever is in that mentioned should not trouble you,
if he ascribe a special eminency unto charity in some cerraine things, it is
no more then (...) taught to him by S. Paul, who does prefer it, as you
cannot but choose to know, before faith and hope: nor does he attribute our
justification (...) in any other sense then was taught him by S. James M Dow p
52. And I believe if M. Shelsoords justification by (...) be well examined, it
will prove no other then that which S. James says, ye see how that by works a
man is justified and not by faith only, and I would demand of any reasonable
man, whether the express words of that (...) may not without aspersion of
popery be even openly and publicly maintained, if there be no sense obtruded
upon them which may cross S. Paul's doctrine, which M Burtoun can never prove
that they did whom he charged with that assertion.
but rather by sweetning all with excuses seem to vent their desire to have
all swallowed down.

In the doctrine of the Sacraments, from Bellarmins In the doctrine of the
sacraments see their Popery.
third tomb, they tell us first, that the sacraments of the old testamenr
differ from the new, that the one confers grace, the other foresignes grace to
be conferred, that the same distinction must be holden betwixt John's and
Christ's baptimse. Montag. orig. p. 72. de circumcisione quaeritur quamgratiam
(...) and primo ponitur non (...) quod (...) verum sacramentum veteris politiae
in statu legis and (...), ideo esse operativu^ illius gratiae qua ab. luuntur
(...) ut fit in baptismo novae legis. 2. Si quaeratur an ut baptismus (...) and
(...) quae figurat (...) olim peccata visua sacrame^tali ex institutione divino
opere operato, (...) operantis aut alio quovis modo abolere and mundare
poterit, qua de re sunt diversae sententiae. Hereafter he has brought at
length the Fathers, to prove that Sacrame^ta veteris testame^ti non causabant
gratiam sed came solum per (...) Christi (...) esse significabant, nostra vero
and gratiam continent and digne suscipientibus conferunt, (...) closes, inanes
(...) illae disputationes and acerbae contentiones (...) lorum, quae apud
scholasticos and doctores nonnullos ventilantur, quas sopitas optamus nos.
Ibid. p. Baptismus Joannis rudimentarius ait Damascenus: imperfectus, and
isagogicus, (...): ut and lex vetus, (...) novum baptisma post illud
necessarium inquit Augustinus, post Johannem baptizabat Paulus, post hereticos
non baptizat Ecclesia, Christi baptismo actu remittebantur peccata, non
remittebantur actu post Iohannis. Then in his own words, quid ergo? An dabat
gratiam baptismus ille; (...) visum non nullis perperam omnino, nam ubi tum
(...) baptismatis Christi and Sacramentorum novi faederis, quibus (...) gratiam
(...) quam significant, preparatorie hoc agebat non (...) in spe tantum cum re
ipsa in Domini baptismo illud (...), ab (...) sententia quae est (...) omnium
antiquorum, si Calvinus recesserit cum sequacibus, aetatem habent, ipsi
respondeant, privati cujuscunque hominis (...) non est communi protestantium
sententiae ascribendum. Obtineat ergo per me Tridentinae synodi canon primus
sessionis septimae: Si quis dixerit baptismum Iohannis habuisse eandem vim cum
baptismo Christi anathema sit.
2. They tell us that all baptized infants as well reprobat as elect are in
baptism truly regenerat, sanctified, justified, and put in that state wherein
if those who are reprobate and thereafter damned should die, they would be
infallibly saved. Mon. opeal p. 35. We (...) aught in the Liturgy earnestly to
believe, lest it should be left to men's (...), that (...) has received
favorably these infants that are baptized. And to make this doctrine (...)
more sure against our novellists, it is again repeated in the (...), that it is
certainly true by the word of God, that children being baptized have all things
necessary forsalvation, and if they die before actual sin, shall be
undoubtedly saved, according whereunto all antiquity has also taught us Let
this therefore be acknowledged to be the doctrine of our Church. White against
the (...) p. 95. avowes it as the doctrine of England, that all infants
baptized have the holy spirit, and are made the children of God by adoption,
pressing that of S. (...) of all infants baptized. Quid dicturus est de
infantibus parvulis qui plerique accepto in illa aetate gratiae sacramento, qut
(...) dubio pertinerent ad vitam aeternam (...), si continuo ex hac vita (...),
sinuntur crescere and nonnulli etia^ apostatae sunt. Albeit this same White
makes this tenet in his conserence with Fisher to be the judgment only of
Papists and Lutherans page 176. They differ from Lutherans and (...) first, in
that they (...) the grace of sanctification only to the elect. 2. In that they
deny external baptism to be always effectual at the very (...) time when it
is administrate.
And on the ot her hand they avow that all those who die in their infancy
without baptism, by whatsoever miss, by whosoevers fault, are certainly
damned so far as men can judge: For baptism is the only ordnary mean which
God has appointed for their salvation, which failing, salvation must be lost,
except we would dream of extraordinary miracles of the which we have no
warrant. Cant. relat. p. 56. That baptism is necessary to the salva tion of
infants in the ordinare way of the Church (without binding GOD to the use and
means of that Sacrament to which he has bound us) it is express in Saint
John, Chap. 3. Except a man be born again by water he cannot enter, no
baptism, no entrance, nor can infants creep in any other ordinare way. And
this is the (...) opinion of all the ancient Church infants are to be baptized
that their salvation may be certain, for they which cannot help themselves
must not be left only to extraordinare helps of which we have no assurance, and
for which we have no warrant at all in Seripture, (...). p. 66. I can show you
of none saved ordinarily without the sacraments in regard of our Saviors
exception in the 3. of John, Except a man be born again of the water and the
spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven. Montag. orig. p. 397. Adeo
huic usui inserviunt aquae ut si tollatur lavacru^ aquae alieni a Deo and
soedere promissionis aeternae excludantur illi in tenebras exteriores, cum
edicto divino (...) sit nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua and spiritu sancto non
introibit in regnum coelorum. (...) hoc elusum a novatoribus, sed and Christi
divinitatem ab haereticis negatam (...) utrumque in contemptum Dei and
dispendium animarum.
3. That the manifold ceremonies of Papists in baptism and all other
sacraments are either to be embraced as pious ancient rites, or no to be stood
upon as being only ceremonial toys. Samuel Hoards sermon supra, puts cross
in baptism and sindry other ceremonies of it among his rituall traditions.
Montag. (...). page 16. vestis alba oleum, sal, lac, chrisma, additamenta
quaedam sunt ornatus causa. Ib. p. 15. Cum concilio quodam nupero non veremur
profiteri ceremonias a majoribus hominibus religiosissimis usurpatas quod ad
varios pietatis usus valiant and exercitia quaedam fint quibus men's externaru^
rerum sensu and significatione ad divinum cultum (...) Deum attrahitur in
Ecclesia retinendas and ubi abrogatae fuerant restituendas esse statuimus.
Andrews stricturae, p. 13. Chrisme, salt, candles, (...), sign of the cross
(...), and the consecration of the water, those being all matter of ceremony,
are therefore in the Church power on good reasons either to retain or to alter,
For their tenets in the sacrament of the supper, we shall speak anon of
them in the head of the mass. 4. They tell us that our dispute about the five
bastard sacraments is a plain logomachy. Andrews (...). p. 11. The whole
matter about the five Sacraments is a mere, (...)
5. They tell us that not only infants after their baptism but even men
baptized in perfect age who before baptism gave a sufficient count of their
faith, yet they may not be esteemed full Christians while they have received
confirmation by the imposition of hands, and that alone by a Bishop. Pokling
altar p. 65. And because the competents were persons of full age they received
also confirmation by imposition of hands (...) pleni (...) inveniantar.
About the orders, they tell us that they agree with Papists in their number,
that the reason why they want their Acolits, subdeacons and the rest, is but
their Churches poverty: Andrews (...). page 12. The five orders is a point not
(...) the standing on, while the revenues of the Church were able to maintain
so many degrees it cannot be denied but that there were so many, but by the
Churches own order neither by commandment nor example of Scripture, but what
is this to the present estate of the Church scarce able to maintain two?
Which can scarce well maintain the two orders of Priests and Deacons. But
which in their questions is worst of all, they side here with the Papists in
giving to all the Protestant Churches a wound which our enemies proclaim to be
mortal, fatal, incurable. They tie the conferring of ordours by a full divine
right to the office of Bishops, they avow that the lawful use of all
ordination and outward ecclesiasticke jurisdiction is by God put in the hands
of their persons alone. Other reformed Kirkes therefore wanting Bishops, their
Ministers must preach, celebrate the Sacraments, administer discipline not only
without a lawful warrant, but also against the ordinance of God. When they are
put in mind of this great wound given by them to all other reformed Churches,
they either strive to cover it with the figtree leaves of an imagined case of
necessity which never was, or else plainly to pass over it as immedicable. No
marvel if the Bishops of England refuse to admit without a new ordination,
these who has been ordained in Holland or France, and they make no scruple to
admit without new orders, these who has been ordained at Rome. (...) antid.
sect. 3. p8. Let the Bishops stand alone on Apostolical right and no more then
so, and doubt it not but some will take it on your word and then plead
accordingly, that thingsof Apostolical institution may be laid aside. When
Bishop Andrews had learnedly asserted the (...) order to be of Christ's
institution I have heard that some who were then in place did secretly
interceed with King (...) to have had it altered, for fear forsooth of
offending our neighbor Churches. (...). 3. (...). p. 195. Dixi abesse ab (...)
aliquid quod de jure divino sit, culpa (...) vestra non (...) injuria temporum,
non enim tam propitios habuisse Reges Galliam vestram in Ecclesia reformanda
quam habuit Britannia nostra: Interim ubi dabit meliora Deus, and hoc quoque
quod jam abest per Dei gratiam suppletum iri. Relatum inter hereticos Aerium
qui Epiphanio credat vel Augustino necesse est fateatur, and tu qui (...)
Aerium quo nomine damnas? An quod se (...) consensui universalis Ecclesiae.
Idem qui sentit an non itidem se opponit ac eo nomine damnandus erit Montag.
(...). p. 138. (...) jus and autoritatem ita credimus annexam Episcoporum
personis ut a nemine non episcopo ordinato and consecrato possit aut debeat
adhiberi, (...) ordinationem vel (...) omnem pronunciamus quae non a legitimo
and canonico more (...) quod (...) se (...) and non missi ingerant caelesti
(...) and (...), viderint (...) quid sint responsuri olim summo sacerdoti cujus
parts usurpant, (...) nostros non aliorum (...) vocationes. Yea, not only they
tie ordination and jurisdict on to the person of Bishops, but of such Bishops
who must of necessity show the derivation of all their power, from the Pope as
was shown before.
6. In Matrimony they will keep not only the Popish Sacramental words and
signs, the Popish times of Lent and other dismal days, except the Bishops
give their dispensation, but also they will have the whole matrimonial causes
ruled by the Popes (...), yea, which is more, they avow that the Cannon-law by
Acts of Parliament yet unrepealled stands in vigor amongst them. Dew p. 184.
By his favor I must tell him that neither the law of God nor of the King
disallowes the use of the old Canons and Constitutions, though made in the time
of Popery and by the Pope or Popish Prelates, which are not contrary to the law
of God or the King: If he desire proof of this, let him consider whether the
Statute 25. Hen. 8 19. do not say as much as I affirm, which having regulated
diverse things touching the exercise of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. At last
the statute concludes with this (...) Provided also that such Canons
constitutions, ordinances, and synodals provincial being already made not
repugnant to the laws and customs of this Realm, nor to the hurt of the
Kings prerogative royal, shall now still be used and executed as they were
before the making of this Act, till such time as they be viewed, searched, or
otherwise ordered by the said two and thirty persons or the more part of them
according to the tenor of this present Act. It follows then that till these
thirty two persons determine otherwise, old Canons may be still executed and
retain their ancient vigor and authority, and when that will be I know not
but as yet I am sure it has not been done.


Except in some few things which are directly opposite to some late laws of the
land and that Cannon-law they will have extendit as far down as the very
Council of Basile. Femall glory, page 128. With this pious and grateful
ordinance, I conclude the visitation of our incomparable Lady, (...) means the
act of the late Council of Basile, which ordained a festival for that
visitation.
And as far up as the constitutions of the first Popes. (...) altar page 52.
There is mention madeof the dedication of Churches unde (...), An. (...) 12.
and under (...), 154. under Calixtus 221. And before them all in Saint Clemence
his Epistles. These testimonies of Roman Bishops the Centurists do suspect:
Where the doctrine and decrees of Popes, and those in the first and best times
are confirmed by the doctrine and constant practice of the holy Catholic
Church, it (...) great boldness in three or four men to condemn and to brand
their authority with the ministry of iniquity.
Which diverse of the Papists themselves acknowledge to be supposititious, yet
our men will defend them all, and with them the Canons ofthe Apostles, the
constitutions of Clemence and all such trash. Laurence, Sermon, page 18. the
Apostles in their Canons, and these too, which are undoubtedly theirs. Montag.
apart. page 390 Ex antiquissimis illum (...) principem and primariae
authoritatis, (...) erat Apostoloru^ (...) and (...) nimerum (...) non
preteribo, quem licet delicatuli nescio qui, ex (...) part contendentium falsi
postulant, and tanquam falsarium (...) Nos tamen ipsius (...) quosvis suscipere
patrocinium audemus, doctissimum post virum Turrianum.


In the sacrament of penance they (...) first, that auricular confession was
evil abolished, and is very expedient to be restored. White on the Sabbath in
the preface. There might also my reverend good Lord, be a very profitable use
of some private of pasturall collation with their (...), for their direct on
and information in (...) spiritual duties, such as was, private confestion in
the ancient Church: Now the Presbyterian censures by their paralogisme taken
from abuse have with such loud and impetuous declamations, filled the cares and
possessed the minds of many people that they are exceeding averse from this
sovereign and ancient medecin of consolation, prevention, and curing of the
(...) of the soul. He approves that of Gerardus, Privata coram Ecclesiae
ministro confessio, quam auricularem vocant, quamv is non habeat expressum and
peculiare mandatum (...) non fit absolutae necessitatis, tamen cum plurimas
praester utilitates and disciplinae Ecclesiasticae (...) sit non postrema
publico Ecclesiae consensu recepta, ideo nequaquam timere vel negligenda vel
abolenda, (...) pie and in vero Dei timore, praesertim ab (...) qui ad sacram
synoxin accedunt usurpanda. M. Sp. Sermon printed with approbation. p. 18.
Confess as the Church directs, confess to God, confess also to the Priest,
if not privately in the (...) since that is out of use. (...) says a devout
Bishop, it is almost quite lost, the more pity.
2. That God has given a judicial power of absolution to every Priest, which
every one of the people is obliged to make use of, especially before the
communion by confessing to the Priest all their sins without the concilement of
any. Dew p. 35. It cannot be denied, but that the Church of England did ever
allow the private confession of sins to the Priest, it were very strange, if
our Church ordaining Priests and giving them power of absolution, and
prescribing the form to be used for the exercise of that power upon
confession, should not allow of the private confession. M. Sp. Sermon page. 16.
Since the Priest can in the name of God forgive us our sins, good reason we
should make our confession to him: Surely God never give the Priest this power
in vain, he expects we should make the best use of it we can. He requires we
should use the means we can to obtain that blessing; now the only means to
obtain this absolution is our confession to him (...). p. 19. If we confess
in humility with grief and sorrow for them, if we confess them faithfully not
concealing any ( Ibid) p. 15. There is another confession that would not be
neglected. He that would be sure of pardon, let him seek out a Priest, and make
his humble confession to him: for God who alone has the prime and original
right of forgiving sins has delegat the Priests here upon earth his judges,
and has given them the power of absolution, so that they can in Gods name
forgive the sins of those that confess to them. But is not this Popery,
would some say, Now take the counsel that is given in the eight of Job, Ask
the Fathers, and they shall tell thee: ask then S. (...) on Esaias, and he will
tell thee, that heaven waits and expects the Priests sentence here on earth:
For the Priest (...) on earth, and the Lord follows the servant, and when the
servant binds or looses here on earth, clave non errante, the Lord confirms
it in heaven, words, says he, so clear for the judicial and formal
absolution of the Priest, that nothing can be said more plain.
3. That God in the Heaven will certainly follow the sentence of the Priest
absolving on earth. g 4. Beside a private confessor, it were very expedient to
have in every congregation a public penitentiarie, who in the beginning of
Lent on ashe-wednesday might in the Kirk sit in his reclinatory, and sprinkling
dust on the head of every parishioner, enjoin them their Lent-pennance, whereby
they may truly satisfy Gods judgment for their sins, and in the end of lent
or Shrif-thursday before Pasche give his absolution to those who have fully
satisfied. Pockl. alt. page 57. The Bishops made an addition to the
Ecclesiastic canon, that in every Church a penitentiarie should be appointed
to admit penetents in the Church, after they have done public penance. This
kind of confession (...) abolished in the Church of (...), how beit the
confession, whereof Tertullian and Cyprian speaks, was never abolished, but did
ever continue in the Greek Church, and in the Latin likewise: And to this
purpose a solemn day was set apart for taking of public penance, for open
faults, by imposition of hands, and sprinkling of ashes, namely Ashwednesday.
This is the godly discipline whereof out Church speaks, and wishes that it
might be restored. And as Ashwednesday was appointed for penetents to receive
absolution. This absolution they took upon their knees by the imposition of the
Priests hands. Ibid. p. 63. and 67. The Competents beginning on Ashwednesday in
sackcloth and ashes to humble themselves, they were all Lent long purged with
fasting and prayer: They were to stand barefoot on sackcloth, and watch on good
Friday all night. How fand a thing it is, says (...), to think to carry away
with us the (...) of sin, and not first of all to pay for our commodity. The
Merchant before he deliver his wares will look to your coin, (...) soulptilis,
ne rasus, that it be neither washed nor shaved; and do not think but the Lord
will look well to your repentances and turn it over and over, before ye
receive ^. The Church caused those to take so strict penance, that by their
great humiliation they might make some amends for that liberty which some took
to sin. Ibid. p. 24. Our Churches are a glory to our religion. To the (...)
elongeth the (...) lavaiorie and (...), (...) heating confessions. Shalfoord p.
126. If the Just shall transgress while they are within the law they are bound
to make satisfaction by penance, which is, ^ Ibid. page (...). The law is often
broken by sins of omission and commission. I answer, as it is often broken of us,
so it is as often repaired and satisfied, and so all is made whole again, and so
he is, (...) quo (...): he rises again so often as he falls; either in number
or virtue our sins of commission are repaired by repentance, our sins of
omission are supplied by prayer.
Extreme unction, if reports may be trusted, is already in practice among
them, but howsoever, they avow in Print their satisfaction with the Papists in
this point, if so be the ceremony be no made absolutely necessary. Montag.
antig. page 267. That sacramental unction is not to be used to the sick, use
it if you will, we hinder you not, nor much care or enquire what effects ensue
upon it, but obtrude it not upon us as in (...) of the Sacraments in the time
of grace.


Anent the Monastic life, consider how far our They are for the recrection
of monasteries, and placing of Monks, and Nuns therein as of old.
men are from Popery, they tell us first, that the putting down of the
Monasteries in England by Henry the eight, let be by other Protestant Princes
elsewhere, was a work exceeding impious, and very prejudicial both to the
Church and Crown: Montag. orig. p. 303. In Ecclesia anglicana sacerdotes (...)
magis gaudere, and soleant and debeant immunitatibus, tamen and frequentius and
exuberantius, and libentius quam laici decimarum decimas, subsidia, annatas
primitias, solvunt principi, ut vel inde (...) discerni possit quantum
detrimenti regiis accesserit (...) per illam desolationem monasteriis invectam
per importunum Henrici octavi rigorem, and per parliamentarias impropriationes.
Ibid. p. 384. Quales quales reformare potius, and ad normam veterum reducere
debebant, (...) non quod factum facinore flagitioso, and (...) fuerunt ad
haras, altaria ad lupanaria transferenda, sed reprimam (...). Ibid. p. 174. Sub
pretextu reformatae pietatis. Deum, Ecclesiam, pietatem, per nefandistima
sacrilegia, eversis ubicunque monasteriis, etc.
2. That the Monks for the pattern of their orders have the Prophets and the
Apostles, and specially John the Baptist: Montag. orig. p, 370. (...) primus
hanc viam insistebat, illum (...) ut in aliis sequebantur (...) and (...).
Ibid. p. 382. Ejusmodi vitae genere (...) jecisse fundamenta monasticae vitae,
cum illustrissimo Barono non abnuerim.
3. That their habits to their very tree-shoone has Scripture warrant: Montag.
orig. p 369. (...) and interula and tunica, and quocunque amictu vestiebatur,
de camelorum pilis id gestabat vestimentum, ut ipsa asperitas ad virtutem
patientiae animum exerceret, nec princeps hoc institutum (...) (...): ab omni
retro antiquitate Prophetarum filii Elias, (...) alii (...) ute bantur, quin
and positum in more qui rem quamcunque persuadere vellent, habitu ipso se
componerent ad (...) rem efficacius insinuandam. William (...) sermon p. 20.
The sackcloth and ashes they received from Daniel and the Ninivites, and to
live according to a (...) rule, and order from S. Mark and other Apostles. so
says Cossian Ibidem p. 28. Those if you censure for willworship or
superstition take heed ye condemn not the authors of them, even our blessed
Savior, with his Prophets and Apostles. Ibid. page 44. Whereas our blessed
Savior has forbidden shoes to his Disciples, he was herein obeyed by the
Primitive mortifiers, sandals were mere solls tied with strings:
4. That the Virgin Mary was truly a Nun, and that the Nuns this day are
much to be commended for the following of her pattern: Femal glory page 22.
The same author affirms that there she lived a (...) Nun. Ibid. 23. Let us
then imagine that this holy (...) confined her body to this sacred solitude,
that she might the more freely enjoy the inconceivable pleasure she took in
her (...) Virginity. Ibid. page She was a votary never to know man. Ibid. page
148. You who ply your sacred Arithmetik and have thoughts cold and clear as
the Cristall beeds you pray by. You who have vowed virginity, mental and
corporal, approach with comfort, and kneel down before the grand white
immaculate (...) of your snowie Nunries, and present the alsaving babe in her
arms with due veneration:
5. That the present Carthusians, Franciscans, and the rest of the Fraternities
are very good and holy people, worthy in their very orders of Monastic life of
our imitation: Ibid. page 236. Many holy orders also are of this sodality as
the (...), the (...), the Franciscans, (...), and many other. If these examples
of pious and worthy people will not move us, etc.
6. That their barefooted processions through the streets, that their
Canonical hours of devotion, at midnight in their Cloisters, that in great
festival Eves, their going at Midnight, with confluence of people to
Towne-churches is all commendable service. William Wats sermon. page 3. (...)
Bishop of Vienne did not uncannonically, to appoint a solemn (...) of three
days fast, and to make a Letany to be sung in a barefooted procession. (...).
page 20. To go barefooted, they received from David and Esaias. (...). page
45. (...) makes goers barefoote to be imitators of Apostolic spirited people.
Ibid. page 48. In the third, fourth, and fifth ages, are examples plentiful of
the nightly processions of the Christians; yea, they went from their houses in
the Cities to some of their Churches in the fields, singing Psalms all the way
through the streets in the hearing of the Gentiles. Ibid. Minutius Felix
mentions necturna and (...) sacra. For this purpose the night was divided
into Canonical hours or certain times of rising to prayer, whereof midnight
was one, the morning watch was another Canonical hour. I (...)
notwithstanding our devotion serves us not (...) the Prophets and Apostles,
and the Primitives, yet we will forbear to take part with the old Heretics in
reprehending them. Ibid. Before a greater Festival all the devouter sort of
Christians constantly repaired to their Churches at midnight.


In the head of Purgatory and prayer for the How near they approach to
Purgatory, and (...) for the dead.
dead, thus far long ago are they proceeded, first, they avow openly Limbus
Patrum, telling us, that the Saints before Christ were not only not in heaven,
but truly in an infernal place, even in a lake, where in one nooke the godly
were in peace, and the wicked in torments, that Abraham's bosom was here,
between which and hell a certain gulf made but a tolerable distance, that
Jacob, Samuel, and David, and other of the ancients were mourned for at their
death, because their souls went not to heaven, but truly to a kind of hell:
their mind in these things, as their custom is, they propone in the words of
some Father, that by the shelter of their authority they may keep off their
own head the indignation of the people: Montag. orig. page 286. His qui in
carcere erant spiritibus, hoc est defunct is, suo fato and inferno addict is
praedicavit, quo in loco Puritani, and novatores spiritum, non animam Christi
intelligunt Ibid. apar. p. 476. Communem esse patrum sententiam, (...)
doctissimorum scriptorum nostrae aetatis and confessionis, sanctorum animas
ante Christi resurrectionem non fuisse in Coelo. Olim (inquit Chrysostomus) ad
infernum deducebat mors, sed nunc assumit ad Christum. Ideo dicebat olim Jacob,
Deducet is senectutem meam ad infernum cum lachrymis Ideo olim lugebantur
mortui, at nunc cum Psalmis and hymnis efferuntur. Hieronymi testimonia sunt
innumera, ante adventum Christi omnes ad inferos ducebantur; inde Jacob ad
inferos discensurum se dicit, and Job pios and impios in inferno queritur
(...), and Euangelium docet magnum chaos interpositum apud inferos, and revera
antequamflammeam illam rotam, and igneam rompheam ad (...) fores Christ us
(...) one reseraret, clausa erant caelestia, Nota quoque ut (...) quoque in
inferno fuisse credas, and ante adventum Christi, quamvis sanctos (...) lege
detentos: locum esse ait, qui lacus (...) and abyssus, in qua non erant aquae
in qua animae (...), sive ad poenas.
Again they tell us that Christ before he opened heavens gate to any soul, he
went first down, and loosed the souls in prison: yea, if ye believe M.
Maxwell (who has written much for the drawing of our Church the factions way)
he went down to the lowest hells, and delivered thence a number of Pagans
such as Aristotle, Plato, Socrates, and a world of mo: Montag. a par. page 476.
Postquam eo descendit, Christus, inferorum claustra perfodit, diripuit,
vastavit, spoliavit, vinctas inde animas liberando. M. Maxwels demonstration,
page 9. Whether the places of Scripture wherein mention is made of our Saviors
spoiling of hell, and leading captivity captive, may perhaps be understood of
his powerful and merciful delivering from hell, of some of the souls of
virtuous Pagans, as of their Philosophers, lawgivers, governors, kings, queens,
and other private persons renowned for their wisdom, prudence, fortitude,
temperance, bounty, chastity, justice, mercy; and generally for their civil
carriage, and moral conversation, (...) as were Hermes Trismegistus,
Zoroaster, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, Pythagoras, Homer, Phocyllides,
Theognis, Epictetus, Cicero; and such as were Hercules, Thesem, Cyrus, Solon,
Lycurgus, Aristides, Simon, (...), Epaminondas, Tarrina, Camilla, (...),
Panthea, Penelope, Artemisia, and others the like: for my own part, I do
profess such love to those virtuous wights, for their virtues sake, as I had
rather condemn twenty such opinions as that of Limbus patrum, than to damn
eternally the soul of one Socrates, of one Cyrus.
. Our maine pillars against purgatory they hew down with the popish axes: when
we reason that Scripture makes no mention of any third place betwixt Hell and
Heaven; they reply, that there are many things whereof Scripture makes no
mention. When we reason that Scripture makes mention expressly of two places
for souls after death, they use the popish distinction, that after the
resurrection there is but two eternal places, but that before the resurrection
there may be three temporal: Montag. apar. (...). 135 Objiciunt, nullus
tertius (...) indicatur in Scriptura praeter infernum damnatorum and coelum.
Resp. Licet non indicaretur in (...) esse alium locum tertium, non tamen inde
sequeretur non fuisse tertium, quia multa sunt quae non indicantur in
Scripturis. Locus ille Matthaei 25. Loquitur non de loco aut statu animarum
ante Christum, sed de statu and loco finali post finem saeculi, cum (...)
tantum erunt absque dubio hominum societates sempiternae.
4. When papists urge upon us prayer for the dead, they will not contradict
them; yea, they commend oblations in the Lords Supper, and prayers there for
the dead in particular. Andreus stricturae, page 56. Anent offering and prayer
for the dead, there is little to be said against it, it cannot be denied but it
is ancient. Dow. page 56. That the ancient Church had commemorations,
oblations, and prayers for the dead, the testimonies of the Fathers,
ecclesiastical stories and ancient Liturgies do put out of all question.
Pokling. alt. p. 83. Commends that Canon whereby a Priest after his death was
ordained to be punished, for making another Priest his Executour, with this
pain, that at the altar for such an one, non offerretur, nee sacrificium (...)
dormitione ejus (...).


CHAP. 6. Anent their Superstitions.
IN the Church of Rome, the Canterburians use to profess corruptions of two
kinds, errors and Few of all Romes superstitions are against their stomach.
superstitions; as for heresies or Idolatries, they are loath that any such
crimes should be laid to the charge of their mother church, how many, and how
grievous errors they find Rome guilty of, they had need to declare; for in the
most of those wherein the protestants place the chief of the Romish errors,
you have heard them plainly take their part, readily it will prove no otherwise
when we come down to try them in the particular heads, wherein papists are
reputed most superstitious.

The superstitions which in papists are most remarked in their private carriage
are these four: In their frequent saining of themselves with the sign of the
cross: In wearing about their neck a crucifix or some such toy of an image or
relic: In saying their prayers on their beads: In abstaining from flesh on
friday, wednesday, lent, or some great festivalls Eave; Our men are far from
disproving of any of these practices. For the first, they avow that saining
with the sign of the cross at rising or lying down, at going out or coming
in, at lighting of candles, closing of windows, or any such action is not only
a pious and profitable ceremony, but a very Apostolic tradition. Samuel
Hoards Sermon, page 15: Reckons out among his traditions the crossing of
themselves when they went out, or when they came in, when they went to bed, or
(...) they rose, (...) they sat down to meat, or lighted candles, or had any
business of moment to do. Montag. apeal. p. 268. What hinders but that I may
sign my self with the (...) of the cross in any part of my body, at any time
when I go to bed, in the morning when I rise, at my going out, at my returning
home, the ancient Church so used it, and so may we (for ought I know) without
just scandal or superstition.
2. They avow expressly the carrying of these holy trincats about their neck,
in cases of silver or gold. Montag. antid. p. 17. Ego certe illas (...) fasciis
involvam; (...), admovebo labiis ac collo suspensas (...) oculisque (...) as
(...). (...) page 24. Imagines praesertim (...) diligenter and cum cura: sunt
apud nos per fenestras, (...), (...), (...).
3. The saying of their prayers; yea, their Ave Mary's upon their beeds is to
them an holy (...) worthy of praise and imitation. Female glory, page 148.
Among the other praises of his holy Nuns, this is one, You who ply your sacred
Arithmetic, and have your thoughts cold and clear as the crystal beeds you
pray by: And in his proemials, (...) terra revibrat ave.
4. Wednesday, Friday, and Lent-fasts, are to them not only lawdable practices
of the ancient Church, but also traditions come from Christ and the Apostles,
which for Religions cause all are obliged to embrace. Montag. antid. page 164.
Quadragesimale jejunium libenter ego concesserim ab Apostolis constitutum, and
apud vetustissimos (...) proceres usurpatum. Ibid. p. 9. Doceatur esse aliquid
ab ipsis Apostolis institutum, utpote jejunium quadragesimale; Causam non dicam
quin haereseos accuser, si non ut ab Apostolica authoritate
sancitumpropugnavero. William Wats sermon, p. 50. Most precise and severe
observers were they of Lentfast, which the whole primitive Church did believe
to be of Apostolical institution, so that they had their Saviors and his
Apostles example for that strictness. I pass their observation of Wednesdayes
and Fridayes fast weekly, which Epiphanius among many others assures to be of
Apostolical (...). (...) devotion: It has also been an ancient and religious
custom, to fast all the Fridayes in the year, except those which fall within
the twelve days of Christmasse. The Lent which now is, and ever has been
reputed an Apostolical constitution, and we add out of Chrysologus that it
is not an humane invention, as they call it, but it comes from divine
authority that we fast our forty days in Lent, page 221.


The popish public superstitions are very many, They embrace the grossest not
only of their private, but also of their public (...),
but of these which that whole Church does allow, very few comes to my mind
which stand much against the stomach of our men: Those that come first to my
thoughts are all pleasantly digested; Protestants wont to deride the popish
conceats of their holy ground, of their consecrate walls, and the sanctuary of
their Chancels, their turnings toward the East, their manifold toys in
Baptism, and the Lords supper joined with the sacramental Elements, their
gesticulations in time of public service, their hallowing above the Sabbath a
multitude of Festivals, their pilgrimages, their processions, and many such
their practices. In this behold the mind of our men, they tell us first that
Kirkyards by prayers, and conspersion of holy water must be made holy ground;
that before these episcopal consecrations, no Christian burial may be made
therein, but after that the Bishop has used the pontifical ceremonies
thereupon, no Heretic, no Schismaticke, no Excommunicate person may be
brought there, no worldly, no common action there performed without the
profanation of the holy place. Laurence sermon p 9. Christians distinguished
their oratories into an atrium, a Church yard, a sanctum, a Church a sanctum
sanctorum, a Chancell, they did conceive a greater degree of (...) in one of
them, than in another, and in one place of them than another, Churchyards they
thought profaned by sports, the whole circuit both before and after Christ was
(...) ledged for refuge, none out of the communion of the Kirk permitted to
(...) there, any (...) ground (...) for interment before that which was not
(...), and that in an higher esteem which was in a higher degree of
consecration, and that in the highest which was nearest the altar. Halls sermon
at the consecration of a burial place, p. 38. Out of the consideration of the
holy designation of these peculiar places came both the title and practice of
consecration of (...), which they say is no less ancient than the days of
Calixtus the first who dedicated the first Cemiteries, albeit it was decreed by
the Council of Arles, that if any Church were consecrated, the Churchyard of it
should require no other hallowing but by simple conspersion, p. 40. It is meet
and necessary that those places should be set aside to this holy use by a due
and religious dedication, by prayers and holy actions tending thereunto, if the
Jews used these dedications, how much more we Ib. in the preface, an act worthy
both of this common celebration and of that episcopal service of mine.
Again they show us that the church by the bishops anointing some stones
thereof with oil and sprinkling others with water, and using from the Roman
pontifical some mo prayers, some mo ceremonies upon it, becomes a ground more
holy: That before these consecrations though the people of God for many years
have met into a Church for divine service, yet it is no more holy than a (...),
a (...), a tolbooth; but after these consecrations there is such holiness in
the walls, that even when there is no divine service, men at their coming in,
and going out must adore and all the time of their presence stand discovered,
and never so much as sit down were the service never so long, except upon
great infirmity. Tedders sermon, p. 8. It is the consecration that makes them
holy and makes God esteem them so, which though they be not capable of grace,
yet receive by their consecration a spiritual power, whereby they are made fit
for divine service, and being consecrate, there is no danger in ascribing
holiness unto them, if we believe S. Bernard, quis parietes istos sanctos
dicere vereatur, quos manus sacratae Pontificu^ (...) sanctificavere mysteriis.
When we come to Church, say the holy Fathers of the devotion of those primitive
times, corpora humi (...), they that showed the least devotion did bow, all the
time that they were there none presumed so much as to sit, as being too (...)
and lazy a posture in Gods house, but only for infirmity or some other cause
were (...) with. There were some that would not have their shoes on their feet
in the temple, a shame to them that have their hats on in Gods house. Shelf p.
51. Some profane Gods house by going out with headscovered, as if God were not
present, and it were not his house when service was ended. Pokling. (...). p.
141. hurches when they were made they were consecrate, for a man may as
lawfully and Christianly administer the sacrament in a barn or town hal as in
any place that is not consecrate to such holy uses, Queen scoole p. 223. S.
Giles Church in the fields being newly repaired after two years service, sermon
and sacraments in it in D. Montary B. of Londons time, was required to be
consecrate by his successor D. Laud, the parochin refusing, the Bishop caused
sequester, and (...) up the house for a month, and forces the parish after 50
pound fine to put up a (...) upon the East window, and receive the other orders
of consecration. The foundation stons of there air of Paul's were solemnly
blessed by the Bishop, his main reason for urging of the visitation of
Cambridge was, that two chapels there was not yet consecrate, notwithstanding
of divine service in them for some score of years past.
3. That the Chancell and the Altar must not only be dedicate with prayers
and unctious, but with lighted Candles, burning Incense, and many other such
toys; that it must be divided from the Church with vailes to keep not only
the bodies, but the eyes of the Laics from beholding the arc and throne
wherein the body of the Son of God does sit, as in a chair of state, that
none but Priests must enter there, and that with their triple low adorations at
their approaching: That it is a favor for the King or the Emperor to win near
that place for the short time of his offering. Pokl alt p. 141. Was not the
altar the chiefest place which with most ceremony and devotion was hallowed?
was there not a feast annual kept in joyful remembrance of the dedication of
every Church. Does not S. Austine say, Novit sanctitas vestra fratres,
corsecrationem altaris celebrareus in quo unctus vel benedictus est lapis, as
he cites the place in his Sunday. Quenscoole, p. 198. In the collegiat Church
of Wolverhampton in the country of Stafford, the altar and clothes thereof were
consecrate 11. October. 1635. As soon as the Priests come to the Church, each of
them made a low congie at their first entering in at the church door, and after
that three congies a piece toward the altar, so they went unto the chancell,
where a basin with water and a towel was provided for the Priests to wash in,
where also was incense burning; after they returned making three (...) a piece.
After the sermon every one of them had a paper in his hand, which they termed
a censer, and so they went up again to the altar: as they went they made (...)
congies a piece, the Communion being ended they washed their hands, and
returned giving three congies as before. Ib. 220. There are diverse high (...)
solemnly dedicated of late in diverse (...) of Cambridge and Oxford, adorned
with tapers, candlesticks, Crucifixes, basins, crosses, rich altar-clothes,
crimson cushions, rich hangings. Pokl. alt. p. 24. Optatus says that Erant
Ecclesiae ex auro and argento quam plurtma ornamenta. ib p 80. At the upper end
of the Chancell was a place railed in, whereunto none were permitted to enter
but the Priests. The Canon is clear, Nulli omnium qui sit in Laicorum
numeroliceat intra sacram altar ingredi. A dispensation indeed there was for
the Emperor to enter inhither when he would Creatori dona afferre, but stay
there he might not. Laurence, p. 10. Beyond these railes duo cancelli, which
distinguished the body of the Church from the Oracle, none out of orders came.
A more awful reverence was commanded to this part being barred from common
view. Ib. p 29 We have the Grecians triple prostrations from their Liturgies,
(...), Ib. p. 12. The same God is through all the parts of the Church, but not
in the same manner through all the parts thereof, for as they are different
degrees of sanctity in them, so is there a different dispensation of his
presence in them. Ib. p. 15. This follows upon the consecration, as there was
a greater communication of the divine presence in those places than in others,
so was there a greater communication of the same presence in some part of the
temple of Solomon than in others. And as that distinction in holy places
continued after Christ, so did the reason of that distinction too. The whole
indeed is the house of God, for albeit the Lord be without these walls, yet is
he more within, as we are not presumed to be so much abroad as at home, though
the Church conceived him to be present in all parts of this house, yet it
concerved him to be present more in one part of it than another, in respect of
that (...) dispensation of his presence to that place of the Church, as of old
to that place of the temple which was within the (...), we having an altar here
answerable to a mercy (...) there, as also in respect of that union (...) this
place and (...) humane nature. (...). Star Chamber speech, p. 47. The altar is
the greatest place of Gods residence upon (...), I say the greatest, (...)
greater than the pulpit, for (...) it is hoc est corpus meum, but in the pulpit
is is (...) hoc est verbum meum, and a greater reverence no doubt is due to the
body than to the word, and so in (...) answerable to the (...) where his body
is usually (...) then to the seat whence his word uses to be proclaimed.
4. That none of the ceremonies of the popish baptism, neither their salt,
their spitle, nor exsufflation are superstitious. Vide supra cap. 5. ((...))
5. That a number of the Mass toys, which yet are not in practice in England,
yea all the guises of the Mass, which can be proven to be ancient are all to
be embraced. (...) I was showed a Latin determination (...) in one of our
universities (...) to prove, that look what ceremonies were used about the
altar before the reformation by power and force of any general custom, though
past over in deep silence by our Liturgy, are notwithstanding commanded us by
a kind of impli^^ (...), even unto us, that live under the discipline of the
English Liturgy. (...) author therein, only leaves him as a man most able to
justify that writ. (...) are his words, as for your Sally on the author of the
latin determination, I leave him to himself: He is of age to do you reason in
this, as well as in that other quarrel you have against him.
6. That who ever in the public prayers has their face toward the North,
South, and West, must be publicly called upon to turn themselves ever toward
the East. Vide supra, cap. 5. B.
7. That in the Church not only in the time of prayer, but at the reading of
the ten commands, all must fall on their knees, but when the creed is read all
must stand upright on their feet, when the epistle comes, all may sit down,
but when the gospel begins, all must again arise, during the time of sermon
all must stand discovered. That to these and all such pious practices we are
oblidged by the sole example of the bishops or some sew of them, even before
the inacting of any Law, either of church or state. (...) Bughen, sermon. page 9
We (...) not think (...) enough that we stand at the (...), except we say it
also with the (...) with a loud voice, nor is it enough (...) us to stand up at
the gospel, but ^ at the name of Jesus, not as if we were ashamed of what we
did, but ^, neither is it (...) to be bare in time of divine service, ^ kneell
on our (...) commands and letanie are (...). Shelfoord, page 20. Let us learn
of our Cathedral Churches, for there our reverend Fathers, the prelates,
maketheir reverence to God in this wise, both at their entry and their return,
wherefore to follow their good and holy pattern, we are to do the like, both
at our coming into Gods house, and at our going out. Ib. p. 22 The fifth
office of holiness is to rise up from our seats when the articles of our faith
are read, we also do more reverently to stand up at the reading of the
Psalms, before, after, and behind the holy Lessons. We are also to stand at
the reading of the Gospel. The reason that the old Lyturgick writers gives of
this superstitious standing at the Creed and Gospel more than at the reading of
the lessons and Epistles is, because these Epistles among which they put the
Revelation, the Pentateuch, and sundry other parts of the old restament,
contains more base doctrine than the Gospel which comes behind them, as the
Master comes after his servant which goes before to make way.
8. That the conscience is oblidged not only to keep religiously the greater
festivities of Yule, pasch, pentecost, and the rest which are immediately
referred to the honor of the Trinity, but also a number of the festivals of
the blessed Virgin, of the Saints and Angels: Those must not be polluted with
any work or secular affair, as we desire to be helped by these glorified
persons intercession. Couzins devotions, they offend against the fifth command
that obeyes not the precepts of the ecclesiastic Governors. The precepts of
the Church are first to observe the festivals and holy days appointed in the
Church calendar, vide supra cap.
Yet Christ's Sunday must be no Sabbath; bowling, balling, and other such games
may well consist with all the holiness it has; yea, no law of God, no ancient
Canon of the Church does discharge shearing of Corn, taking of fish, or much
other husband labor upon that day; but by the contrary acts both of church and
State do warrant such labor; yea, there is so great Jewish superstition in the
Land about Christ's Sunday, that all preachers must be obliged in their very
pulpits to proclaim the new book of sports, for encouragement of the people to
their gamings, when the short hour of divine service is ended, and that under
no less pain than ejection from the Ministry. Whits examinat. p. 118. The
injunction makes no difference betwixt Sunday and the other holy days
concerning working in harvest, no special privilege is given it more than the
(...). For King Edwards statute repeated by Queen Elizabeth says, It shall be
law full to every husbandman, labourer, fisherman, etc. upon the holy days
aforesaid in harvest, or at any other time of the year when necessity shall
require, to labor, ride, fish, or work any kind of work at their free wills and
pleasure. Ib. on the Sabbath. p. 217. In the new testament we read of no
prohibition concerning abstinence from secular actions upon the Lords day more
than upon other days, Et quod non prohibetur ultro permissum est. The
Catholic Church for more than 600 years after Christ, gave license to many
Christian people to work upon the Lords day at such hours as they were not
commanded to be present at the public service by the precept of the Church. In
S. Jeroms days the devoutest Christians did ordinarily work upon the Lords
day. In Gregory the Greats time it was reputed antichristian doctrine to make
it a sin to work on the Lords day. Helenes answer, p. 111. His Majesty having
published his declaration about lawful pastimes on the Sunday, gives order to
his Bishops that publication thereof be made in all their several Diocesses,
the Bishops hereupon appoint the Incumbent of every Church to read the
declaration to the people, and finding opposition to the said appointment,
press them to the performance of it by virtue of that Canonical obedience,
which by their several oaths they were bound to yield unto their Ordinaries;
but seeing nothing but contempt upon contempt, after much patience and long
suffering, some of the most perverse have been suspended, as well (...)
beneficio (...) (...), for an example to the rest.
9. Pilgrimages to Saints Relics, and barefooted processions to their
Churches are preached and printed. Vide supra caput 5. w.
Those Throats which are so wide as to swallow down all these it seems they
will not make great bones in all the other trash which in the Romish Church we
challenge as superstitious.

CHAP. VII. The Canterburians embrace the Mass it self.
OF all the pieces of popery, there is none so much beloved by papists, nor so
much hated by Protestants, as the Mass, since the reformation of Religion, the
Mass has ever been counted the great wall of division, keeping the parties
asunder, who ever could free that ditch, whose stomach could digest that
morsel, no man of either side was wont to make any doubt of his name, but that
with consent of all, he might pass for a true papist; and no ways in any
reason stand for a moment longer in the catalogue of protestants: If then I be
able to demonstrate the Canterburians mind to be for the Mass, I hope no man
of any understanding and equity will require of me any further proof of their
popery, but with good leave of all I may end my task, having set upon the head
thereof this cape-stone.

In the mouth of both sides reformed and Romish, preaching, and the Mass go
for real opposites, the They cry down so far as they can all preaching.
affection of Papists to their Mass makes them value our preaching at the
lesser rate; the affection of Protestants to preaching, makes the Mass to
them the less lovely: Our faction to make room for the Mass so far as they
dare, so fast as they can, are crying down preaching. They tell us first, that
much of the preaching which now is at London, and over England is not the word
of God, but of the Devil, Cant. Starchamber speech, page 47. But in the pulpit
it is at most, Hoc est verbum meum, and God hold it there at his word: for as
too many men use the matter, it is, Hoc est verbum Diaboli, this is the word of
the devil in many places, witness sedition, and the like to it.
because indeed the best and most zealous preachers in their sermons do often
tax Arminianisme and Popery, and the ways whereby his Grace is in use to
advance both: This to him and his followers is doctrinall Puritanisme, much
worse than disciplinarie; yea, it is sedition taught by the Devil: 2. They
tell us, that the most of preachers, though void of the former fault, are so
ignorant, idle, impertinent, clamorous fellows, that their silence were much
more to be wished than their speech. And. Posthuma, page 32. Ex quo nuper hic
apud nos vapularunt canes muti, exclusi sunt clamatores (...) as molesti, ex
quo pessimus (...) mos invaluit, ex quo pruriginoso (...) editus (...) bic
quicquidlibet effutiendi, Ecclesia in tonstrinam versa est, non plus ibi
ineptiarum quam bic, Theologia in battologiam, canes (...) latrantes mutati in
catulos (...), (...) fere scias (...) opt a^dum fit, illudne (...), an by
latratus absoni, illudne jejunium, an baec nausea.
Because indeed grave and gracious Ministers are not either able or willing to
stuff their Sermons with secular learning, and employ extraordinary pains
for to gather together a Mass of tinkling words, as Andrews was, and his
admirers are wont to do, for to spoil preaching of that life, spirit, and
power, which ought to shine into it. 3. That the preaching which themselves
approve and praise, is but sermonizing in pulpits, no necessary part of the
Ministerial charge, but a practice to be used of some few of singular
learning and eloquence, and that only at rare and extraordinary times, as the
Bishop, or the Star Chamber Court shall be pleased to give license. Shelfoord,
page 91. Beside these ten kinds of preaching, which are able to stop the mouth
of all itching (...) professors, there is yet another kind of preaching not
fit for every Minister, but for extraordinary and excellent men, called by God
and the Church, to reform errors and abuses, to promulge to the world new
Laws and Canons. And as this kind is to be performed by extraordinary men,
(...) it is not always so needful, but when necessity required: for when
things are settled, there needs no more settling, but only preserving. We ought
not to have many (...), or many Evangelists, nor many Apostles; Were people now
to be called and converted to the Gospel, then not (...) this kind of
preaching, but miracles also were needful, when much needless and some unsound
teaching by tract of time had sued into the ark of Christ's Church, by the (...)
and Priests thereof: (...) in the 19 year of King Henry the eighth, began
licenses to be granted by the Court of Star Chamber, to preach against the
corruptions of the time; but now the corruptions are (...) the ancient and true
doctrine of the primitive Church by settled articles is restored; Therefore this
extraordinary kind is not now so necessary, except it be upon some (...)
crimes, breaking forth among people.
4. That the only ordinary, profitable, and necessary preaching which God has
appointed, and the Church laid upon the back of Pastors, as their charge for
which their tithes and stipends is due to them, is nothing but the distinct and
clear reading of the Service Book. Shelfoord, page 35. The principal part of
the Ministers office is the true understand (...), distinct reading, and decent
Ministry of the Church service, contained in the Book of Common Prayer. This
is the pith of godliness, the heart of religion, the spina or (...), the
backbone of all holy faculties of the Christian body. Ibid. page 39. Were (...)
(...) as the Canons (...) aptly, that is, by just distinctions, and by a
sensible Reader, observing all the rules of reading, with (...) fit (...) the
matter, and with due attention of the hearer, there would be much profit and
edifing. Jbid. page 76. Gods Minister (...) thy Preacher, and the divine
service of the church book is his sermon. In this service and this sermon is
contained whatsoever is necessary for salvation. Ibid. p. 78. The (...) reading
is preaching; yea, a lively and effectual kind of preaching.
As for sermonizing in pulpits, when so it is permitted, it ought to be very
short, and after the popish form, without any prayer at all, either before or
after: That the custom of English preachers, who before Sermon pray for the
help of the Spirit of God to themselves and their hearers, or after Sermon
crave grace to practice what has been spoken is all but idle; yea,
intolerable novations to be abolished: Heylens answer, page 165. Whereas
formerly you used to mangle and cut short the Service, that you might bring the
whole worship of God to your extemporary prayers and Sermons, now you are
brought again to the ancient usage of reading the whole prayers, without any
diminishing in regard of preaching. As for your other cavils about the using of
no prayer at all after Sermon, the innovation here is on your part, who have
offended all this while, not only against the Canon, but act of Parliament, by
bringing in new forms of your own devising. As for the forbidding of any
prayer before the Sermon, if any such be, it is but agreeable unto the Canon,
which has determined so of it long ago. The Preachers in King Edwards days
used no form of prayers, but (...) exhorting which is now required in the
Canon.
Neither this only, but that the most able Pastors are not to be suffered so
much as in their private studies to recommend their souls to God in their own
words, but in their very private prayers, are to be tied precisely to the
words of the Service Book. Couzins devotions in the preface. Let no prayers be
used, but these which are allowed by the Church: what prayers (...) ever any
man has framed for himself, let him first acquaint these that are wise and
learned (...) them, before he presume to use them: and that men may not think
those rules are to be applied to public prayers only, and not to private, let
them weigh those words in the council of (...), Quascunque (...) preces, etc.
When we speak to the awful (...) of God, we would be sure to speak in the
(...) and pious language of the Church, which has ever been guided by the holy
Ghost, and not to lose our selves with confusion in any sudden abrupt or rude
dictates, which are (...) by private spirits, and ghosts of our own, in regard
whereof our very Priests and Deacons themselves are in their private and (...)
prayers enjoined to say the morning and evening devotions of the Church, and
when at any time they pray, there is a set form of words prescribed to them to
use, that they also might now it is not lawful for them to pray of their own
heads, or suddenly to say what they please themselves.
5. That the sermonizing which themselves permit, must be in the greatest
Towns in the most solemn times but once a day, that the practice of hearing
two Sermons in one day is to be corrected, that one in a month is abundant, and
all the English Canons do require. Pokling (...). Our Savior in (...) on the
Sabbath, preached but once a day, for immediately after he went to dinner. (...)
answer, (...). 168. If in the great cities and (...), Sermons are (...) to the
(...) time of the day, or as (...) own phrase is, to an (...) only, assuredly
it is neither (...) nor strange, nor need (...) be offended at it, if by that
means the people in those place, cannot hear but one sermon in the day, it
being not many, but good sermons; not much, but profitable hearing, which you
should labor to commend. Shelford, p. 93. Better were it for our Church and
people to have but one Sermon well premeditated, in a month, which is
insinuated by the Canon, than two on a day, proceeding from a rolling brain
and mouth, without due preparation. Heylens answer, page 166. Your afternoon
Sermon on the Sunday, if performed by Lecturers, are but a part of your new
fashion, and having no foundation in the Church at all, it cannot be any
innovation to lay them by, and if the Curate perform his duty in catechizing,
you have no reason to complain for want of Sermons in the afternoon.


6. That over all England, Lecturers whose Sermons wont to be the far best,
must be presently silenced, as those whose calling the Canons Ecclesiastical
of England cannot permit. Heylens answer, 163. Why count ye the suppressing of
Lectures for an innovation, whereas the name of Lecturers and Lectures are in
themselves a new and (...) invention, borrowed from the new fashions of Geneva?
In a word, that Sermons are the great occasion of the division and
heart-burnings, which now trouble the Church and State, of the presumption and
pride, and most sins among the people: That therefore it were very good to
return to the old fashion in the days of popery, before the 19. year of
Henry the eighth, where there was none, or but few preachings, that this is the
only means to reduce the land to that old honest simplicity, equity, piety,
and happiness, which was in our Antecessors days; Shelford, page 71 When men
had more of inward teaching, and less of outward, then was there far better
living; for then they lived always in fear of offending, and as (...) as they
had done any thing amiss, their conscience by and by gave them a nip, and a
memento for it, then they confessed their sins to God and their Minister, for
spiritual comfort and counsel; then they endeavored to make the best
temporal satisfaction they could by alms, prayers, and fasting, and other
good works ofhumiliation; but now outward teaching not (...) understood, has
beaten away this. Ibid. page 82. The besotted negligence of our delicate
Puritans, is that which makes them to run so after Sermons; what does this
singularity work in them, but a contempt of government? As weak stomachs
cannot well digest much meat, so the common people cannot govern much (...);
and when they can not digest it well, they vomit it up, they wax proud, and
will contest with their Ministers. At what time were most heresies broached?
Was it not in the primitive Church, when there was most preaching; (...)
thereafter they did slake it. Ibid page 99. Preaching by reading is the
ordinary preaching ordained by God himself, and his Church, and this was the
ordinary preaching in our Church before King Henry the eighth.
even to that old blindness, wherein of necessity, we must give our soul to
be led by the light of Sir John the Priest, our Father Confessor, for all this
behold on the margin their express declaration.

Preaching being thus far cried down, there will be They approve the Mass both
for word and matter.
the less ado to get up the Mass: For the word of the Mass is so lovely to
them, that they are delighted to style their Service Book by that name. (...).
Sunday, Missam facere coepi, says S. Ambrose, he began the second service, as
our Church calls it, quidam cogunt sacerdotem (...) abbreviet (...), says S.
Augustine, that is, they make the Priest to curtaile Divine Service.
And least we should think that it is but with the word of the Mass, that
they are reconciled, they show us next, that they find no fault with the very
matter of the Mass, if you will give unto it a charitable, and benign
interpretation. Montag. antid. page 10. Missam ipsam non damnamus, quoad vocem,
quin neque Missae (...) sano and recto sensu intellectum
Neither here do they stand, but go on to tell us, yet more of their mind,
that if transubstantiation only were removed from the Mass, they would make
no question, for any thing it has beside. And this, but most falsely, they give
out for King James judgment. Pockling. alt. page 138. The King would like well
enough of the Mass, if the Priests would shrive her of (...).
Yea, they go on further to embrace transubstantiation it self, so far as
concerns the word: And how much the matter of it displeases them we shall
hear anon. Montag. antid. page 10. De vocibus, ne Missae quidem, (...) ne
Transubstantiationis certamen moveremus.


But to show their mind more clearly toward the Mass, consider the Scottish
Liturgy; This unhappy book was his Graces invention: If he should deny it,
his own deeds would convince him. The manifold letters which in this
pestiferous affair have passed betwixt him and our Prelates are yet extant. If
we might be heard, we would spread out sundry of them before the Convocation
house of England, making it clear as the light, that in all this design his
hand has ever been the prime stikler; so that upon his back mainly, nill he
will he, would be laid the charge of all the fruits good or evil which from
that tree, are like to fall on the Kings Countries. But of this in time and
place; only now we desire to be considered, that to this hour, his Grace
has not permitted any of his party to speak one cross word against that
book, but by the contrary lets many ofthem commend it in word and writ for
the most rare and singular piece, that these many ages has been seen in any
Church, for all gracious qualities that can be found in any humane writ. Hear
how the personate Jesuit (...) Nicanor, that is, as we conjecture by too
probable signs his Graces creature, Lesly of Dun, and Conner extolls that
Book above the skies: Page 28. I (...) no Church (...) celebrate the Sacrament
with more purity, (...), gravitie, and none with more majestythan by thy Book:
Certainly it is purged from all (...), which you call Superstition, or the
(...) of the Mass, it is restored to the ancient (...), the least thing that
(...) to (...), being thrust out of doors, as Amnon did Tamar, without hope of
return: And if any superstitions would dare to enter, the door is so (...)
shut, that (...) must despair of any entry. What needs all such uproare then
without cause? I shall (...) my self to make good these particulars: First,
that you shall never be able to find any thing in that Book, contrary to the
Word of GOD. 2. That it contains nothing contrary to the practice of the
primitive Church, but which is most agreeable thereto. 3. That all the points
which you condemn are not contraverted between our Classical Divines and
(...), but agreed upon on both sides. 4. That there is nothing in it, contrary
to our Confession of Faith in Scotland; yea, which is much, ye shall not show
me a (...) Divine of any note, who ever did condemn this Book of the least
point of Popery, but on the contrary, did defend and commend it.
And yet we did undertake to show into it the maine, yea all the substantial
parts of the Mass, and this undertaking to the satisfaction of our Nation was
performed in our general Assembly; but to those men the judgments of
national Churches are but vile and contemptible testimonies. I have seen a
parallel written by a preacher among us, comparing all and every particular
portion of the Mass, as they are cleared by Innocent, Durand, Walfrid, Berno,
and the rest of the old Liturgick Rationalists, with the parts of our Liturgy,
as they may be cleared by the late writs of the Canterburians, which ends not,
till all the parts great and small of the Mass be demonstrate in our Book
either formally, in so many words, as the most considerable are, and that in
the very (...) (If you will join to our book the Canterburian commentars) or
virtually a necessity being laid uponus, upon the same grounds which persuades
to embrace what in those books is formally expressed, to embrace also what of
the Mass is omitted, (...) it shall be their pleasure in a new edition to add
it. This parallel is ready for the public when ever it shall be called for.

For the present, because those men make our gracious The Scottish Liturgy is
much worse than the English.
Sovereign believe, and declare also to the world in print, that what we
challenge in that book, does strike alike against the Liturgy of England, as
if the Scots Liturgy were altogether one with the English, and the few small
variations, which possibly may be found in the Scottish, were not only to the
better, but made for this very end, that this new book might better comply
with the Scots humor, which now almost by birth or at least by long education
is become naturally antipathetick to the Mass, to make this their impudent
fraud so palpable that hereafter they may blush (if it be possible for such
foreheads to blush at any thing) ever again before our King to make any such
allegiance passing all the rest of that book for shortness, we shall
consider some few lines in some three or four leafes of it at most, wherein
the world may see their malapart changing of the English liturgy in twenty
particulars and above, every one whereof draws us beyond all that ever was
allowed in England, and diverse of them lead to those parts of the Mass which
all protestants this day count most wicked. If this be made clear, I hope that
all equitable men will be the more willing to free our opposition thereto, of
all imputations, and specially of all intentions to meddle with any thing that
concerns the English Church, except so far as is necessary for our present
defense, and future peace, and makes clearly fortheir good also. For albeit we
are confident the world would have excused us to have opposed with all
vehemence the imposition upon us (a Church and Kingdom as free and independent
upon any other nation as is to be found this day in Christendom) without our
consent, or so much as our advice, the heavy burden of four foreign books,
of liturgy, canons, ordination, homilies: ofa number ofstrange judicatories;
high commission, episcopal visitations, official courts, and the like, though
they had bin urged in no other words, in no other sense then of old they wont
to be used in England: For it is well known that those things have bin the sole
ground and only occasion of the (...) schisms, and heavy troubles wherewith
almost ever since the reformation, that gracious church has been miserably
vexed. But now all those things being laid upon us in a far worse sense as they
are declared by the Canterburian imposers in their own writs, yea in far
worse words, as all who will take the pains to compare, may see: we trust
that our immovable resolution to oppose even unto death all such violent
novations shall be taken, by no good man, in evil part, let be, to be thrown,
far against our intentions, to the disgrace of our neighbor church, or any
well minded person therein. We have with the English church naught to do, but
as with our most dear and nearest sister, we wish them all happiness; and
that not only they, but all other Christian Churches this day were both
almost, and altogether such as we are, except our afflictions. We have no
enemies there but the Canterburian faction, no less heavy to her than to us.
What we have said against the Scots liturgy may well reflect upon them, and so
far as we intend, upon them alone, and that for three of their crimes
chiefly. First their forcing upon us, with whom they had naught to do, so many
novations, even all that is England at one draught, and that by mere violence.
2. Their mutation of the most of those things to a plain popish sense, which
in the best sense that ever was put upon them, did occasion always to England
much trouble. 3. Their mutation of the English books not only to popish
senses, but even to popish words, and that in a number of the most important
passages of the Mass. This last here we will show, holding us within the
bounds of our few forenamed leafes, by which, conjecture may be made of the
rest.

Of all the limbs of the Mass, the most substantious Our alteration in the
Offertorie.
for many evil qualities are those three, which lie contiguous together, the
Offertorie, the Canon, the Communion: The English at the reformation, howsoever
for reasons of their own, thought meet to retain more of the Mass words than
our church could ever be induced to follow, yet in those three portions of the
Mass they were very careful to cast out what they knew protestants did much
abhor in the church of Rome. But at this time the Canterburians having gotten
the refraiming of the Liturgy in their hands, for to manifest their affection
openly to Rome do put in expressly that, which the English reformers put out,
as wicked scandalls. That this may be seen, consider severally the three
named portions.

The popish Offertorie in it self is a foul practice, even a renovation in
the Christian church of a Jewish Sacrifice, as Durand confesses. Durand.
Ration. lib. 4. fol. 65. Ritus igitur (...) transivit in (...), and sacrificia
(...) populi (...) sunt in observantimpopuli (...).
But as it stands in the Mass, it has yet a worse use, to be a preparatorie
peace offering making way for that holy propitiatory, which in the Canon
follows. It is pretended to be a sacrifice for the benefit both of quick and
dead, for the good of the whole church universal, for the help of these in
Purgatory; but it is really intended to be a dragge, a hook to draw in money
to the Priests purses. This piece of the Mass the English did clean abolish,
but behold how much of it our present Reformers are pleased to replant in our
book: First, they profess in plain terms the reduction of the Offertorie,
and that not once alone, but least their design should pass without
observation, they tell us over again of the Offertory: 2. In the very
forefront of this their Offertory, they set up unto us whole five passages of
Scripture, whereof the English has none, all directly in the literal sense
carrying to a Jewish oblation. 3. For the waking of the Priests appetite (which
of it self uses to be sharp enough) Upon the hope of present gain to sing
his Masses with the better will, they set up a Rubric, seasing and infefting
the officiating Priest in the half of all the oblations, which he can move
the people to offer, and giving a liberty to him with his Churchwarden, to
dispose on the other half also as he thinks good, expressly contrary to the
English, which commands all the alms of the people to be put up in the poores
box. 4. They will not have us to want the very formality of a Jewish offering,
for they ordain the Deacon to put the basin with the peoples devotions in the
hands of the Priest, that he may present it before the Lord upon the Altar,
just as the papists in this place ordain to bring the paten with their
oblations unto the Priest; that he may set it before their altar. Durand. lib.
4 (...). 64. Subsequens Dtaconus ipse patinam cum hostia pontifici (...), and
pontifex seu sacerdos (...) collocat super altar. Ibid. fol 66 Sacerdos (...)
manu targit, repraesentans (...) (...), 14. 4. ponetque (...) super (...)
hostiae, and (...), and in expiationem (...).
5 The priest is ordained to place and to offer up the bread and wine upon the
Lords Table, that it may be ready for that service, just the popish offering in
that place of the Mass, of the bread and wine, as a preparatory sacrifice for
the propitiatory following. 6. The English prayer for the Catholic Church, is
in our book cast immediately at the back of the offering of bread and wine, and
that we may know it must be taken for the Offertory prayers that stands there
in the Missall, and that for the benefit not only of the living, but also of
the dead: The Mass clauses for the honor of the Saints, and help of those
who are in purgatory, which the English scraped out, they put in again: For
as the Papists say, these Offertorie prayers for the honor of the Saints,
especially of the blessed Virgin, and Apostles, and Martyrs, so they in this
their Offertorie prayer commemorat all the Saints, who in their several
generations were the lights of the World, and had wonderful grace and virtue,
they might have put in particularly, as Couzins in his devotions does, page.
371. The blessed Virgin (...), the holy Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and
Martyrs: also they mention among the dead not only these glorious Saints, but
the rest of Gods servants, who have finished their course in (...), and now do
rest from their labors, the best description that can be, if Bellarmine may be
believed, of the Souls in Purgatory, for whom not only thanks is given, but
also prayers made, as Couzins who is suspected to be one of the maine penmen
of our book, does comment this passage in his devotions, page 372. That at the
last day, we with them, and they with us may attain to the resurrection of the
Just, and have our perfect consummation both of soul and body in the kingdom
of heaven: There is no footestep of any of these things in the English book.
Our changes in the consecration.


The piece which follows the Offertorie in the Missall, and in our book also,
is the Canon, no less detested by all Protestants, then admired by papists, as
Bellarmine tells us; De missa, lib. 2. cap 17. (...) canonem ut summa
reverentia semper Catholici retinuerunt, it a incredibili furore haeretici
hujus temporis lacerant.
Many of the prefaces and prayers thereof we have word by word, and what ever
we want, these men in print are bold to justify it all, as in nothing opposite
to the truth or protestant Doctrine: So the appendix to D. Fields third Book,
Chap. 1. But we must consider the time wherein D. Field is made to utter such
speeches, it is in the twenty eight year, long after the death of that learned
and reverend Divine: It is in that year when his Grace sitting in the Chair
of London, had (...) now the full superintendence of all the presses there, and
could very easily (for the promoving of his designs) put in practice that
piece of policy among others, to make men after their death speak in print,
what they never thought in their life; or at least to speak out those thoughts
which for the good and peace of the Church, they kept close within the doors
of their own breast, and withdrew from the notice of the World; it would then
seem reason to father these strange justifications of the Mass, which are
cast to Fields book so long after his death, as also many passages in these
posthume works of Andrews, which his Grace avowedly sets out in the twenty
ninth year, and those new pieces never heard of, which in the thirty one
year are set out by M. Aylward, under the name of the English Martyrs, as also
that writ of Overall, which Montagu puts out with his own amplifications, in
the thirty six year: These and the like pieces, must in reason be
ratherfather'd on those who put them forth, then upon their pretended authors,
who readily did never know such posthume children, or else did take them for
such unhappy bastards as they were resolved, for reasons known to themselves to
keep them in obscurity, and never in public to avow them as their own.

In this Canon there are two parts most principal, which the papists call the
Heart, and Head thereof. Innocent. lib. 4 (...). 1. (...) nuno (...) summam
Sacramenti (...), ad ipsum (...) divini sacrificii penetramus.
The prayers of consecration, and of oblation, this head the English strikes
off, this heart they pull out of their Book, that the wicked Serpent should
not have any life among them. But our men are so tender and compassionate
toward that poor Beast, that they will again put in that Heart, and set on
that Head. The consecration and oblation they will be loath (...) want.
Consider then these men's changing of the English book toward both those, the
two incomparable worst parts of the whole Mass. First, the English scrapes out
all mention of any consecration: for however we delight not to strive with the
papists any where about words, yet in this place while they declare expressly,
that by consecration of the Elements they do understand not the sanctification
of the Elements by the word and prayer, but a secret whispering of certain
words upon the Elements, for their very Transubstantiation: Durand. lib. 6.
(...) non (...); sed (...): differt autem inter (...), (...) consecrare, est
(...) transubstantiare: (...) est, sanctum and reverendum efficere, ut (...) in
aqua (...).
Consecration in this place being so taken by the papists, the English rejects
it, and will have nothing to do therewith; but our men being more wise, and
understanding their own ends, put up in their rubric in capital letters
formally and expressly their prayer of consecration.

(...). The Papists to the end that their consecratory words may be whispered
upon the elements for their change, and no ways heard of the people, who
perchance if they heard and understood them, might learn them by heart, and in
their idleness might pronounce them over their meals, and so, which once they
say was done, Transubstantiate their ordinary food into Christ's body: for the
eschewing of these inconveniences, they ordain the consecration to be made in
the outmost corner of the church, so far from the ears of the people as may
be; and for the greater security, they ordain their priests in the time of
consecration, both to speak low, and to turn their backs upon the people: For
to remedy these wicked follies, the English expressly ordained their Communion
Table to stand in the body of the Church, where the Minister in the mids of the
people might read out openly all the words of the Institution. But our men to
return to the old fashion, command the table to be set at the East end of the
Chancell, that in the time of the consecration, the priest may stand so far
removed from the people, as the furthest wall of the Church can permit, and as
this distance were not enough to keep these holy words of (...) from the
profane ears of Laics, our book has a second Rubric, enjoining expressly
the priest in the time of Consecration to turn his back on the people, to
come from the North end of the Table, and to stand at such a place where be
may use both his hands with more decency and ease, which is not possible but
on the West side alone; for on the South side the commodity is just alike as
in the North. On the Eastnone can stand, for the Table is joined hard to the
Wall, and whosoever stands at the West side of the Altar, his Back is directly
to the people that are behind him. They say for this practice many things,
first, That in the good holy Liturgy of Edward the sixth, the Priest was
ordained to stand with his back to the people. Heylens antid. page 45. and 46.
The Church of Rome enjoyneth the Priest to stand in medio altaris, with his
face to the East, and back to the people; But the Church of England at the
North side of the Table, albeit (...) King Edwards Lyturgie, the Priest was
appointed to stand at the midst of the (...).
Again, that always in the ancient church the priests stood in the uppermost
end of the church, divided from the people behind them, with railes, and
vailes, and other distinctions. (...) saepe.
3. That Scripture is the ground of this practice, for so it was in the Jewish
Church, the Priest when he went into the Sanctuary to pray, and offer incense
for the people, they stood without and never did hear what he spoke, nor saw
what he did. Pokling alt. page 99. The people might see the Priest going into
the Sanctuary, they might hear the noise of his bells; himself, his gesture,
his actions (...) saw not, yet all this was done in medio (...), but not among
the people in the outward (...) inward Court, whereunto only the people were
permitted to come.
If from this practice we would infer with Bellarmine, that the priest in
the consecration might speak in latin, or in a language unknown to the
people, since God to whom he speaks understands alllanguages, the elements upon
which the consecratorie words are murmured, Scottish Service the words of (...)
may be repeated again over more either bread or wine.
understands none, and the people for whom alone the vulgar language is used,
is put back from the hearing of the consecration; we know not what in reason
they could answer: But this weknow, that the maine ground whereupon we press
the use of the vulgar language, not only in the consecration as they call it,
but in the whole service of God, I mean the warrant of Scripture, they openly
deny and for it gives no ground, but the old tradition of the Church. White on
the Sabbath, page 97. Such traditions are those that follow the Service of the
Church in a known language, etc.


3 When our priest is set under the East wall within his rail his back upon
the people, he is directed to use both his arms with decency and ease, what
use here can be made of the priests arms, except it be for making oflarge
crosses as the mass Rubricks at this place does direct, We do not understand:
only we bave heard before, that they avow the lawfulness of crossing no less
in the supper than in Baptism. 4. The prayer which stands here in the English
book, drawn from the place wherein it stood of old in the Mass to countenance
the transubstantiation of the bread and wine into Christ's body and blood, but
standing in this place before the consecration it is clear of all such
suspicion: Our men are so bold as to transplant it from this good ground to the
old wicked soil at the back of the consecration where it wont to stand before
in the old order of Sarum. 5. In the next English prayer, we put in the words
of the Mass, whereby God is besought by his omnipotent spirit so to sanctify
the oblations of bread and wine, that they may become to us Christ's body and
blood, from these words all papists use to draw the truth of their
transubstantiation, wherefore the English reformers scraped them out of their
Book, but our men put them fairly in, and good reason have they so to do: for
long ago they professed that about the presence of Christ's body and blood in
the Sacrament after consecration, they are fully agreed with Lutherans and
papists in all things that is material and needful, as for the small
difference which remains about the formalitie and mode of presence, it is but
a curious and undeterminable question, whereabout there would be no
controversy, did not the devilish humor of the Puritans and Jesuits make and
entertain it. Monr. apeal p. 289. If men were disposed as they ought unto
peace, there needed be no difference in the point of real presence: for the
disagreement is only de modo (...); the (...) it self, That there is in the
holy Eucharist a real presence, is (...) to on either side. For Andrews
professes to Bellarmine, Nobis vobiscum de objecto convenit, de modo lis est.
Praesentiam inquam credimus non minus (...) vos veram, de modo praesentiae nil
temere (...). There is no such cause therefore says he, why in this point of
the Sacrament we should be so distracted, seeing we both confess that which is
enough, This is my body, and contend merely about the mean, how it is my body,
a point of faith undeniable though it be unsearchable and incomprehensible:
From Hooker he pronounces, that there is a general agreement about that which
is alone material, for the rest he avoweth himself to be for peace and (...),
and all to be so but Puritans and Jesuits, (...) the (...) does nourish up in
a faction. (...), p. 18. I like S. Ambrose, Lombard, Roffensis and Harding, who
advise in this argument to forbear the (...) nation of the (...) of presence,
and to cloth our (...) with (...) and general expressions. As I like not those
that say he is (...) there, so I (...) not those that say his body is not
there. For S. Paul says it is there, (...) the Church (...) England says it
is there and the Church of God ever said, it is there, and that truly,
substantially, essentially. We must believe it is there. We must not know how
it is there. It is a mystery they all say. The presence they determined, the
(...) of his presence they determined not. They said he is there, but the Lord
knows how.
Yea they seem to have come a step further, to the embracing of the very mode
of the popish presence, for they (...) of a corporal presence ibi that the
body is there on the Altar, and that essentially; yea so grossly, that for its
presence there, the Altar it self, let be the elements, must be adored. 6.
They make an express rubric for the priests taking of the patin and chalice
in his hand in the time of consecration, which taking not being either for his
own participation or distribution to others, why shall we not understand the
end of it to be that, which the Mass there enjoynes the (...) and chalice,
their elevation and adoration; for the elevation it waslong ago practiced and
professed by some of our Bishops, and the adoration when the chalice and paten
are taken in the priests hands is avowed by Heylin. The practice of Wren does
declare their intention: this man as the Citizens of Ipswich complains to the
Parliament, when he consecrat at their new Altar, did always turn his back on
the people, did elevate the bread and wine above his shoulder, that it might be
seen, did set down every one of the Elements, after they were consecrate, and
adored lowly before them. (...) answer, page 137. Think you it (...) the Priest
should takeinto his (...) the holy mysteries without lowly reverence, and that
it is an innovation to do so.
7. In another rubric of our consecration we have the cautels of the Mass,
anent the priests intention to consecrate, expressly delivered unto us.

As for that wicked sacrifice of the Mass, which Our (...) about the (...).
the Canon puts at the back of the Consecration, the English banisheth it all
utterly out of their book; but the faction to show their zeal in their
reforming the errors of the English Church, their mother, puts down here in
our book; first at the back of the consecration their memento and prayer of
oblation. 2. That prayer of Thanksgiving which the English sets after the
Communion in a place, where it cannot be possibly abused, as it is in the Mass
for a propitiatory sacrifice of Christ's body and blood, they transpose and set
it just in the old place where it stood in the order of Sarum, at the back of
the consecration before the Communion. 3. The clause of the Missall, which for
its savor of a (...) presence, the English put out of this prayer ( may
worthily receive the most precious body and blood of thy Son Christ Jesus) they
have here restored. 4. That we may plainly understand, that this prayer is so
transpianted and supplied for this very (...), that it may serve as it did of
old in the Missall for a prayer of oblation of that unbloudie sacrifice by the
priest for the sins of the world. Behold the first eighth lines of it, which
of old it had in the Missall, but in the reformation was scraped out by the
English, are plainly restored, wherein we profess to make and over again to
make before (...) divine Majesty a memorial as Christ has commanded. This
making not only the Papists, but Heylene speaking from Canterbury, expones
far otherwise then either Andrews, Hooker, Montagu, or the grossest of the
English Divines for a true, proper, corporal, visible, unbloody sacrificing of
Christ, for which first the Apostles, and then all Ministers are as truly
priests though Evangelicall, and after the order of Melchisedeck, as ever the
Sons of Aaron were under the Law, and the Communion Table becomes as true and
proper an Altar, as ever was the brazen Altar of Moses. Heylens antid. (...).
6. (...). 2 (...) of our (...), as by the Lords own (...), it (...) to the
(...) in the legal ^ by Christ's (...), it is to ^ by us (...) in the holy ^. A
(...) it was in figure, a (...) in fact, (...) so by consequence a (...) the
commemorations, or immediately upon the post fact a Sacrifice there was among
the Jews, a Sacrifice (...) must be amongst the Christians: and if a Sacrifice
must be, there must be Priests also to do, and altars whereupon to do it: for
without a Priest and an Altar there can be no Sacrifice. There was a bloody
Sacrifice then, an unbloudy now; a Priest derived from Aaron then, from
Melchisedeck now; an Altar for Mosatcall Sacrifices then, for Evangelicall now.
The Apostles in the institution were appointed Priests by Christ, where they
received a power for them and their Successors to celebrate these holy
mysteries. Hoc facite, is for the Priest, who has power to consecrate; Hoc
(...), is both for Priest and people. Ibid page 17. He maintained at length,
that in the Lords Supper there is a true, proper, corporal, visible, and
external Sacrifice.
5. After the consecration and oblation they put to the Lords prayer, with the
Missalls preface, audemus dicere. Here the papists (...), that their priest by
consecration having transubstantiate the bread, and by their memorial of
oblation having offered up in an unbloody sacrifice the body of Christ, for the
reconciliation of the Father, does then close his quiet whisperings, his poor
pipings, and becomes bold to say with a loud voice, having Christ corporally in
his hands, Pater noster. The English to banish such absurdities, put away that
naughty preface, and removed the prayer it self from that place: But our men
to show their Orthodoxie, repone the prayer in the own old place, and set
before it in a fair Rubric the whole old preface. 6. The first English prayer
which stood before the consecration, where the passages of eating Christ's
body, and drinking Christ's blood, could not possibly, by the very papists
themselves, be detorted to a corporal presence, yet now in our book, it must
change the place, and be brought to its own old stance, after the
consecration and oblation, immediately before the communion, as a prayer of
humble access.

The third part of the Mass I spoke of, was the Our changes in the Communion.
Communion; see how here our men change the English book: The English indeed
in giving the Elements to the people, retain the Mass words, but to prevent
any mischief that could arise in the peoples mind from their sound of a
corporal presence, they put in at the distribution of both the elements, two
golden sentences, of the hearts eating by faith, of the souls drinking in
remembrance. Our men being nothing afraid for the peoples belief of a
corporal presence, have pulled out of their hands and scraped out of our book
both these antidotes. 2. The Mass words of Christ's body and blood in the act
of communion, being quite of the English antidots against their (...), must not
stand in our book simply; but that the people may take extraordinary notice of
these phrases, there are two Rubricks set up to their backs, obliging every
Communicant with their own mouth to say their Amen to them. 3. The English
enjoynes the Minister to give the people the elements in their own hand; ours
scrapes out that clause, and bid communicate the people in their own order,
which imports not only their removal from the Altar, their standing without
the Rail, as profane Laics far from the place, and communion of the
Priests, but also opens a fair door to the popish practice, of putting the
elements not in the profane hands, but in the mouths of the people; this as
the report goes, they have well near practiced; and no marvel, since already
they profess that the people ought not with their fingers to touch these holy
mysteries: See in the Supplement, D. Kellets Tenets. 4. The English permit the
Curate to carry home the relics of the bread and wine for his private use,
but such profanity by our book is discharged: The consecrate elements are
enjoined to be (...) in the holy place by the priest alone, and some of the
Communicants that day, whose mouths he esteems to be most holy: Yea, for
preventing of all dangers the cautele is put in, that so few elements as may,
be consecrate. 5. Our Book will have the elements after the consecration
covered with a Corporal, the Church Linnings were never called Corporalls any
where, till Transubstantiation was borne, neither carried they that name in
England, till of late his Grace was pleased by the pen of his man Pocklingtonne
and the like, to disgrace them with that style. 6 The English will have the
Ministers and people to communicate in both kinds; our book enjoynes the
Priest to receive in both kinds, but the people only in due order: This due
order of the people, opposite to the communion of the Priest in both kinds,
may import the removal of one kind from the people, so much the more may we
fear this sacrilege from their hands, since they tell us, that our only
ground for communicating of the people in both kinds is stark naught, that for
this practice there may well be tradition, but Scripture there is none. White
on the Sabbath, page 97. Such Traditions are those that follow the deliverie of
the Communion to the people in both kinds. Montag. orig. page 396. Vbi (...) in
Scripturis infantes baptizari, aut in coena Domiui sub utraque specie
communicantes participare; de his (...) profiteri, Nihil tale docet Scriptura,
Scriptura (...) non praedicat. Andrews stricturae page 5. It cannot be denied,
but roserving the Sacrament was suffered a long time in the Primitive Church,
in time of persecution, they were permitted to carry away how great a part
they would, and to keep it by them, and to take it at times to comfort them;
but for the sick, it was always sent them home, were the distance never so
great, and against the time of extremity, it was thought not amiss to have it
reserved, that if the Priest should not then be in state to go to the sick
party, and there to (...) it for him, yet at least it might be sent him, as in
the case of Serapion. Pokling. as we have heard, made it one of the matters of
that Churches glory, that they yet (...) retain in their (...) the old
Repositories.
Also that in diverse cases the ancient Church did lawfully give to the people
the bread alone, that the Sacrament after the public communion, was often
reserved to be sent to the sick, to be taken at private occasions, and laid up
in the Church in a public repository. Now it is well known, and the papists
press this upon us, when they would rob the people of the cup; that the wine
was not sent to the sick in a far distance from the Church, nor taken home
by the people to be used with the bread in the times of straight, nor set up in
the Church in the Ciboir or Repositorie. These changes of the English Liturgy,
which the Canterburians have made, in some few pages lying together of the
Scottish service, if they be either few or small, your self pronounce the
sentence.

The last chapter, containing the Canterburian maxims of Tyranny.
ONe of the great causes of Protestants separation from Rome, is the tyranny of
the Romish Clergy, whereby they press upon the very conscience of their
people, a multitude of their own devices, with the most extreme and rigorous
censures which can be inflicted either upon bodies or souls. And for the more
facilitating of their purposes, they advance the secular power of Princes, and
of all Sovereign Estates above all, that themselves either crave or desire:
alone for this end, that their Clerks may ride upon the shoulders of
Sovereignty, to tread under the feet of their domination; first the Subjects,
and then the Sovereigns themselves.

How much our men are behind the greatest tyrants The tyrannous (...) of the
Canterburians, are as many and (...) as these of the (...) Clergy.
that ever were in Rome, let any pronounce, when they have considered these
their following maxims: They tell us, first, that the making of all
Ecclesiastic constitutions does belong alone to the Bishop of the Diocese, no
less out of Synod than in Synod: That some of the inferior Clergy may be
called (if the Bishops please) to give their advice, and deliberative voice;
That the Prince may lend his power, for confirming and executing of the
constitutions made; but for the work of their making, it is the Bishops
privilege, belonging to them alone by Divine right. Samuel Hoards Sermon, page
7. By the Church I mean the Churches Pilots, who sit at the stern; Heads and
members divide al bodies Ecclesiastical and civil, what ever is to be done
in matters of direction and government, has always been, and must be the
sole prerogative of the heads of these bodies, unless we will have all
Commonwealths and Churches broken in pieces. Ibid. page 8. The key of
jurisdiction, which is a power of binding and loosing men, in foro exteriori,
in the courts of justice, and of making laws and orders, for the government of
Gods house, is peculiar to the heads and Bishops of the Church. Ibid. p. 31.
What was Ignatius and Ambrose, if we look at their authority, more than other
Bishops of the Church: That liberty therefore which they had to make new
orders, when they saw (...), have all other Prelates in their Churches. Edward
Boughanes Sermon. page 17. Submit your selves to those that are put in authority
by Kings, so then to Bishops, because they are put in authority by Kings, if
they had no other claim. But blessed be God, they hold not only by this, but
by an higher tenure, since all powers are of God, from him they have their
spiritual jurisdiction what ever it be. S. Paul therefore you see assumes this
power unto himself, of setting things in order in the Kirk, before any Prince
become Christian, 1 Cor. 11. 34. The like power he acknowledges to be in
(...). 1. 5. and in all Bishops, Heb. 15. 17. Ibid. page 18. Kings make laws,
and Bishops make canons. This indeed it was of necessity in the beginning of
Christianity, Kings made laws for the State, and Bishops for the Kirk,
because then there was no Christians Kings, either to authorize them to make
such laws, or who would countenance the when they were made. But after that
Kings became nourishing sathers to the Church in these pious and regular times,
Bishops made no Canons, without the assent and confirmation of Christians
Kings, and such are our Canons, so made, so confirmed, Chounei collect. p. 53.
Reges membra (...) and filios Ecclesiae se esse habitos, rejecisse,
contempsisse non (...) audivimus; obediunt, simulque regnant: Jura quibus
gubernari se permittunt, sua sunt, vitalitatem nativam ex praepositis
Ecclesiae, tanquam ex cord recipiunts and (...) ex ipsis tanquam ex capitibus
derivant. Sam. Hoards p. 9. Nor did they exercise this power, when they were in
Counsel only, but when they were asunder also: speaking of Apostles as they
are paterns to all Bishops.
2. That in a whole kingdom, the Bishops alone, without the privatie of any of
the Clergy, of any of the Laity, may abolish all the Ecclesiastical
judicatories, which the standing and unrepealed laws, which the constant
customs, ever since the reformation had settled, and put in their roomenew
foreign Courts, which the kingdom had never known, scarce so much as by
their name. Our Church Sessions, our weekly Presbyteries, our yearly general
Assemblies, whereof by our standing laws we have been in possession, are close
put down by our book of Canons, and in their room Churchwardens, official
Courts, Synods for Episcopal visitation, and general Assemblies to be called
when they will, to be constitute of what members they please to name, are put
in their place.
That at one stroke they may annull all the Acts of three or fourscore
National Assemblies, and set up in their room a Book of Canons of their own
devising. So is their book entitled, Canons and Constitutions Ecclesiastical
ga hered, and put in form, for the government of the Church of Scotland, and
ordained to be observed by the Clergy, and all others whom they concern.
That they may abolish all the forms used in the worship of God, without any
question for threescore years and above, both in the public prayers, in the
administration of the Sacraments, in singing of Psalms, in preaching the Word,
in celebrating of marriage, in visiting the sick, and in ordination of
Ministers: neither this alone, but that it is in their hand to impose in place
of these accustomed forms, four new Books of their own; of Service, of
Psalms, of Ordination, of Homilies. All this our Bishops in Scotland have
done, and to this day, not any of them to our knowledge can be moved to
confess in that deed, any fail against the rules either of equity or justice,
what ever slips of imprudence there may be therein. And all this they have
done at my Lord of Canterburies direction, as we shall make good by his own
hand, if ever we shall be so happy as to be permitted to produce his own
authentic autographs, before the Parliament of England, or any other
Judicatorie that his Majesty will command to cognosce upon this our
allegiance. Readily Rome it self cannot be able in any one age to parallel
this work which our faction did bring forth in one year. It is a bundle of so
many, so various, and so heavy acts of tyranny. Certainly, England was never
acquaint with the like; we see what great trouble it has cost his Grace, to
get through there one poor Ceremony of setting the Communion Table Altar
ways; for there themselves dare not deny, that it is repugnant to the
established Laws of their Church and state for any Bishop; yea, for all the
Bishops being joined, to make the poorest Canon without the voices of their
Convocation house, or national Assembly; yea, without the Parliaments good
pleasure. Whites Examination of the dialogue, page 22. By the Laws of our
Kingdom, and Canons of our Church, many learned persons are appointed to be
assistants unto Bishops, and in our national Synods, in which al weighty
matters concerning religion are determined, nothing is, or may be concluded,
but by the common vote and counsel of the major part of the convocation which
consists of many other learned Divines, besides Bishops. Andrews Sermon of
Trumpets, dedicated to the King by Canterbury. As for the Churches Laws,
which we call Canons or rules, made to restrain or redress abuses, they have
always been made at Church Assemblies, and in her own Councels, not
elsewhere. Heylens antid. page 29. I trow you are not ignorant that the Kirk
makes Canons, it is the work of (...) men in their Convocations, having his
Majesty's leave for their conveening, and approbation of their doings. His
Majesty in the Declaration before the articles has resolved it so, and the
late practice in King James his reign, what time the book of Canons was
composed in the Convocation, has declared it so too.
3. They avow that all their injunctions though so many and so new, yet they
are so holy and so just, that the whole kingdom in conscience mustembrace them
all as the commands of God. Whites Examination, page 20. tells us as it were
from Eusebius, Quicquid in Sanctis Episcoporum (...) decernitur, id universum
divinae voluntati debet attribui. And from Bernard, Sive Deus, five homo
vicarius Dei mandatum quodcunque tradiderit, pari profecto obsequendum est
oura, pari reverentia suscipiendum: ubi tamen Deo contraria non praecepit homo.
That whoever will be so peart as to affirm in any one of them, the least
contrariety to the Word of God, he must have no less censure then the great
excommunication, from which he must never be relaxed but by the Bishops own
mouth, after his public repentance and revocation of so vile an error. Book
of Canons, page 8. Whosoever shall hereafter affirm, that the form of worship
contained in the book of Common Prayer, that the rites and ceremonies of the
Church, that the government of the Church by Archbishops, Bishops, and others,
that the form of consecrating Archbishops, Bishops, Presbyters, and Deacons,
as they are now established under his Majesty's authority, do contain in
them any thing repugnant to the Scriptures, or are corrupt, superstitious, or
unlawful in the service and worship of God, let him be excommunicate, and not
restored, but by the Bishop of the place, or Archbishop of the Province, after
his repentance, and public revocation of such his wicked errors.
That his bodily and pecuniall penalty shall be at the free will and
discretion of the Bishop. Book of Canons, pa. 37. In all this book of Canons,
wheresoever there is no penalty (...) set down, it is to be understood,
that, (...) the crime or offense be proved, the punishment shall be arbitrary,
as the Ordinary shall think fittest.
That the worthiest men of any liberal profession get favor to lose but their
ears, to have their nosesslit, and cheeks burnt for contradicting their
innovations. Canterhuries Star Chamber speech in his (...) to the King, I
shall rather magnify your elemencie, that proceeded with those offenders,
Burton, Bastwick, Prinne, in a Court of Mercy, as well as Justice; since as
the reverend Judges then declared, ye might have justly called the offenders
into another Court; and put them to it in a way that might have exacted their
lives.
That the furthest banishments for term of life, is a privilege which their
indulgence may grant but to few. The world (...), that numbers who have been
flying from Episcopal tyranny out of England, to the very new found lands,
never to return, have been by violence kept back, and cast in their prisons:
and we see daily, that numbers not only of men, but even of silly women are
drawn back in Ireland from their flight out of the Kingdom, to close prisons.
That the vilest dungeons, irons, whippings, bread and water, chaining to posts
without all company, day or night in the coldest and longest winters, is but a
part of their opposers deserving. Huntly in his Breviate reports, as a known
case among many other, this one also, that M. John Hayden, a poor Devonshire
Minister, for preaching at Norwich a Sermon, wherein he let fall some passages
against setting up of images, and bowing at the name of Jesus, was apprehended
like a Traitor, with the Constables bills and halberds by D. Harsnet then
Bishop, and brought manacled to him like a Felon, and committed to the common
Jayle close prisoner, above thirteen weeks, where he was like to starve; the
Bishop having taken from him his horse, papers, and all, thereafter he was sent
by a Pursevant to London, and kept two full Terms. At last, by the high
Commission he was deprived of his orders, thereafter the high Commissioners
imprisoned him in the Gate house common dungeon, and Canterbury sent him to be
whipped to Bridewell, and there kept him all the long extreme cold winter in a
dark cold dungeon, without fire or candlelight, chained to a post in the midst
of the room, with heavy (...) on his hands and feet, allowing him only bread
and water, with a pad of straw to lie on: And since on his relief has caused
him to take an (...), and give band to preach no more, and to depart the
Kingdom within three weeks, without returning; and all this for preaching
after his first unjust deprivation, though (...) exception was taken against
his doctrine. Thu much in the Breviate is printed of Hayden: if the man be
roguish, as some indeed say he is, I am utterly ignorant of his manners: but
hereof no man is ignorant, that the Episcopal censures lets slip in men who
loves their cause, manners of the most vile villains, as appears well this day
in many a black be presented to the Committee of Parliament for scandalous
Ministers: also that the cruelty of Bishops has crushed to the very death,
with poverty, banishment, cold and famine in prisons, many whose lives were
never spotted with the allegiance of any crime, but opposition to their
ungratious Lordships; the Remonstrants can make it appear by too too many
examples.
That the greatest Nobles of the Land, ought in Law to forfeit their Life and
Estate, if they be so bold as to put their hand to a supplication unto their
gracious Prince against their practices. Sundry of our prime Earls and Lords
did present a supplication to our King, after his Coronation, wherein the
matter of their greatest complaint was, so far as ever we heard, their
challenging of the Bishops for what they had done, and were likely to do. The
double of this privy supplication being privily convoyed by an unfriend, some
two or three years thereafter, out of my Lord Balmerinochs chamber, was a
ditty for which he was condemned to dye, for an example to all other Noble Men
to beware of the like rashness, especially his Fellow-supplicants, who are all
declared to have deserved by that fault the same sentence of death. Large
Declaration, page 14. Nor could they have found the least blemish in our
justice, if we should have given warrant both (...) his sentence and execution,
whose life was now legally devolved into our hands. Ibid. p. 13. We were
graciously pleased, that the fear and example might reach to all, but the
punishment only to one of them, to pass by many, who undoubtedly had been
concluded, and involved by our Laws in the same sentence, if we had proceeded
against them.
That all this is but just severity, and the very expedient mean to advance
their cause, which they glory has well near already close undone their
opposites, Studley about the end of his wicked story avowes, that since by
severe punishment the number of the unconformists have decayed, that their
cause cannot be from God
and which they boast shall still be used. Canterbury in his Epistle to the
King before the Star Chamber speech, having magnified the Kings mercy, for
saving the life of Burton and his companions, is bold to advise the King not
always to be so merciful, in these words, Yet this I shall be bold to say,
that your Majesty may consider of it in your wisdom, that one way of
government is not always either fit or safe, when the humors of the people
are in a continual change, especially when such men as those shall work upon
your people, and labor to infuse into them such malignant principles, to
introduce a paritie in the Church or Commonwealth. (...) non satis sua sponte
(...) instigare. Heylen in his moderate answer, page 187. (...) many reasons
and examples, to prove that Bourton and his like deserved no less than public
execution: And yet these men are so gentle to Papists, that they glory in
their meekness toward them, professing that to the bitterest of the Jesuits
they have never given so much as a course word. So Canterbury in his Epistle
the other year to the King, before the relation of the conference, God forbid
that I should ever offer to persuade a persecution in any kind against the
Jesuits, or practice it in the least, for to my remembrance I have not given
him or his so much as (...) language.
But alas it is gone now beyond boasts, when they are the second time upon the
very point to kill millions of the Kings best Subjects, to dash together all
his dominions in a bloody war, as pitchers one upon another, for the
confirmation of their intolerable tyranny, where long it has been tottering,
and the reerection of it where its own unsupportable weight has caused it to
fall.

As for the power of Princes, the most of those King Charles hates all tyranny.
this day who are Christians, and especially our gracious Sovereign, are very
well content to be limited within the bounds of the laws which themselves and
their predecessors have settled in the Church and State of their dominions, to
make the preservation of those Laws and of their subjects liberties
Ecclesiastic and Civil, according to them, the greatest glory of their
prerogative Royal. His Majesty's speech in Parliament 28. p. 75. The peoples
liberties strengthen the Kings prerogative, and the Kings prerogative is to
defend the peoples liberties.
To give assurance of their resolution never to abolish any old, or bring in
any new act, either in church or state without the concurrence of Assemblies
and Parliaments. Proclamation at York, April 25. 1639. We heartily declare and
faithfully promise, that although we be now in arms, they shall be no ways
used either to force upon that our native Kingdom any innovation of religion,
or to infringe any of the civil liberties, or the laws thereof, accounting it
our glory to preserve liberty and freedom among them, according to their
Laws. Therefore we (...) once again by this renew our former promises for
the maintenance of Religion and Laws, and this we do in all sincerity of
heart, we take God the Searcher of all hearts to witness, that as we are
Defenders of the true Protestant Religion, which we from our heart profess; so
we trust, we shall by his goodness continue in the same, and never shall
permit any innovation to (...) in this, or any other of our Kingdoms. One of
the articles of Dunce pacification is this: We are further graciously pleased,
that according to the Petitioners humble (...), all matters Ecclesiastical
shall be determined by the Assemblies of the Church, and matters (...) by the
Parliament, and other inferior Judicatories established by Law, which
accordingly shall be kept once a year, or so often as the affairs of the Church
and Kingdom shall require.
Neither to impose any taxation on their subjects goods without their free
consent thereto given by their Commissioners in Parliament, Cant. relat. p.
112. In some Kingdoms there are diverse (...) of greatest consequence, which
cannot be finally and bindingly ordered, but in and by Parliament; and
particularly the Statute Laws, which must bind all the Subjects, cannot be
made or ratified but there, the supreme Magistrate in the civil State may not
abrogate Laws made in Parliament, though he may cispense with the penalty of
the Law quoad hic and nunc.
the extending of the prerogative to the making of new laws, or abolishing of
old, to the imposing of taxes by simple proclamation without Parliament, our
Prince does so far abhor, that he condemned a certain writ for importing
his Majesty's entertainment of such motions; yea, his Majesty by his Attorney
general called the Earl of Bedford and other noble personages to censure, for
keeping such a writ wherein did lie so pernicious positions. The which
seditious discourse and writing, the authors thereof intended should be
dispersed, as if the same had been entertained by your (...), with purpose to
put it in execution, and to alter the ancient Laws of this Kingdom, and to draw
all things to your Majesty's absolute will and pleasure, and to dispose of your
Subjects goods without their consent, and to make and repeal Laws by your
Majesty's Proclamation only, without consent of Parliament, which if it should
be believed by your people, could not but raise infinite discontent amongst
them, the consequence whereof might be of extreme and almost inevitable danger
to your Majesty's person, and to the whole frame of the Kingdom.
Where some Princes misled through passion and misinformation have deviat so
far from the path of justice, as to intend by violence and arms the overthrow
of the true religion and ancient liberties of their subjects, the opposition
which the subjects are forced to make in this case against the oppression of
their Prince, our gracious Sovereign has been so far ever from counting of
it rebellion, of which crime the greatest royalists in England wont always to
absolve it, Bilson of Subjection, p. 280. Neither will I rashly pronounce all
that resist to be Rebels: Cases may fall out even in Christian Kingdoms, where
people may plead their right against the Prince, and not be charged with
rebellion: As for example, if a Prince should go about to subject his Kingdom
to a foreign Realm, or change the form of the Commonwealth from Emperie to
Tyranny, or neglect the Laws established by common consent of Prince and
people, to execute his own pleasure; in those and other cases which might be
named, if the Nobles and Commons join (...), to defend their ancient and
accustomed liberty, regiment, and laws, they may not well be counted Rebels.
Ib. By superior powers ordained of God, we do not mean the Princes private
will against his laws, but his precepts derived from his laws, and agreeing
with his laws; which though it be wicked, yet may it not be resisted by any
subject with armed violence; but when Princes offer their subjects no justice
but force, and despise all laws to practice their lusts, not any private man
may take the sword to redress the Prince; but if the laws of the land appoint
the Nobles, as next to the King, to assist him in doing right, and withhold him
(...) doing wrong, then be they licenced by man's law, and so not prohibited by
Gods Law for to interposethemselves for the safeguard of equity and
innocence, and by all lawful and needful means to procure the Prince to be
reformed, but in no case to deprive him where the Scepter is inherited. Ibid.
page 94. Spoils, massacres, conspiracies, treasons, even to the destruction
and murder of Princes by their own servants, if a Priest say the word, you
count in your selves to be just, honorable, and godly war: if others do but
(...) on their guard to keep their lives and families from the blinded rage of
their enemies, seeking to put whole towns and provinces to the sword, against
all law and reason, and to disturb Kingdoms in the minority of the right
Governors, or if they defend their Christian and ancient liberties, covenanted
and agreed upon by those Princes to whom they first submitted themselves, and
ever since confirmed and allowed by the Kings that have succeeded. If in either
of these two cases the Godly require their right, and offer no wrong, neither
impugn their Princes, but only save their own lives, you cry rebellious
Heretics, rebellious Calvinists, surie, frenzy, mutiny, and I know not what,
ye may pursue, depose, murder Princes when the B. of Rome bids you, and that
without breach of duty, law, or conscience to God or man; as you vant. And that
when neither life nor limme of you is touched, we may not so much as beseech
Princes that we may be used like subjects, not like slaves, like men, not like
beasts, that we may be convented by laws before Judges, not murdered by
Inquisitors in corners, but incontinent the fume of your uncleant mouth is
ready to call us by all the names you can devise.
that his Majesty has thought meet before all Europe after the example of his
glorious Father, and renowned predecesrix Elizabeth, to give his countenance,
aid, and powerful assistance to them all, when their just grievances and
fears were laid out before his Throne. If so be King Charles had esteemed the
late wars in France of the protestants against their king, the present wars of
Holland, and of the high Duchess against the Spaniard and Emperor an unlawful
defense, let be a traiterous insurrection of Subjects against their
Sovereigns; Weepresuppone his Majesty's justice would have been loath ever to
have defiled his Scepter by supporting them all with men and moneys, as often he
has done, and yet does avow the deed.

While our gracious prince is so far inflamed with The Canterburians flatter
the King in much more power than ever he will take: And (...) him without
advice of the Clergy, to do in the Church what he pleases.
hatred against all tyranny, yet behold this wicked fiction how carefully they
go about by all the means they can, to draw his royal mind to that which
naturally it does so much abhor: For they tell us first, that the power of
all true Kings is so simply absolute and illimitate, that for any man to reason
what they may not, is a crime no less than treason; that they are far above
all Law. H (...) (...) answer, p. 28. What spirit leads you that you are (...)
with (...) Power, which men of better understanding than you, have given to
Princes. Ib. p. 32. Princes are Gods deputes, of whom should they be limited?
if ye say by the Laws of the land, those themselves have made, a prince in
(...) is above the laws, though in concreto, a just prince will not break the
laws which himself has promised to observe, otherwise we say of princes:
Principi lex non est posita, that they do not govern only by the (...), but
are above it, that he is sure and has an absolute authority. Ibid. p. (...). I
will be bold to tell you that as it is a kind of Atheism to dispute pro and
contra, what God can do, and what he cannot, though such disputes are raised
sometimes by unquiet (...); so it is a (...) of disobedience and disloyalty to
determine what a King can, and what he cannot. (...) p. 3. Hence it is, that
princes being Legislators are above their Laws, and dispense with them as they
think expedient. A prince is not bound to his own Laws, because no man can
impose a law upon himself. Aberdeen duplyes p. 22. The King is above the Law
as both the author and giver of strength thereto.
2. That the Oath which a Prince makes to keep the Laws is but a personal
deed, which cannot oblige his successor, that his Oath and promise at his
Coronation to keep the Laws, is to be exponed of his resolution to make his
laws to be kept by others: That all the oaths and promises he makes at his
coronation are but of his mere free will and arbitrament, that by them all no
true covenant or paction can be inferred betwixt the King and his subjects.
Dominus Joannes Wemius de Craigtoun, a man advanced by our Bishops to be a Lord
both of Council and Session in his book de primatu Regis printed at Edinburgh
1623. And going among them to this day with applause p. 18. Sed quid si
princeps leges statuat adhibito etiam jurisjurandi sacramento, velin sua
inauguratione promittat, se leges non (...) absque populi ordinumque non modo
consilio, sedetiam consensu ac determinante sententia, fiquidem non suerit haec
in prima regni constitutione conditio and (...) ac (...) regni (...) non sit
(quo casu dicerem non proprie esse regnum, sed (...) ocratiam, vel democratiam)
sed post regni constitutionem pactum (...) sit Regis (...), etiam si forsan
pollicentem (...) obliget, quoniam praestanda est fides data (...) sine fide
licet, non fine (...) regnet: successores tamen in regno quomodo constringet
vix intell gimus, (...) si (...) a quoque sit ut ait (...), and (...) omn is ea
pactio quae inter patrem and filium, maritum and (...). dominum and (...) regem
and (...) celebratur, quod (...) hos audientes esse. lb. p. 39. Audemus dicere
in (...) supra leges esse (...), nemo enim fibi Legislator, virdex aut (...), d
stinctio non probanda principem quoad vim legum (...) coactivam legibus
subditum esse, non enim mag is dirigere quam cogere seipsum (...) quis, (...)
actio omnis sit inter agens and patiens. lb. 41. Si (...) suas se observaturum
(...) obligaverit princeps, quod raroaut nunquam fit, eriamsi soleat princeps
quisque legum suarum observationem hoc sensu promittere, id est, (...) a (...)
observentur se effecturum, ad earum observationem teneri eum (...), (...)
religion is potius quam justitiae legalis observatione.
3. That the prince alone is the Lawgiver, both in Church and State. (...)
Wemius, p. 26. Legum latio pr (...) est supremae dominationis ac majestat is
caput. lb. p 74. Legum ecclesiasticarum principes latores sunt, nec differunt a
civilibus ecclesiastica ratione causae efficient is.
4. That in matters Ecclesiastical they themselves alone without the advice of
any of the Clergy may lawfully make what Canons they please, and compel their
Clergy to embrace them. Johannes Wemius, p. 59. Potestatem in ecclesiasticis
(...) posse a principibus jure suo extra concilia exerceri decent, quas ita
tulerunt leges (...) atque (...) Regis legibus ecclesiasticis quae legi divinae
non repugnant, nequit quis bona cum conscientia obedientiam detrectare, quam
vis non (...) ad (...) constitutionem Pastorum Ecclesiae corsensus. Ib. p. 93.
Etiamfi extra concilia jubendi autoritatem habeat Princeps, tamen libentius
obsequuntur (...) principum statut is, quibus past orum in conciliis honorantur
judicia.
5. That it is a part of the Kings prerogative to have power to impose upon all
his Subjects such Confessions of Faith, such Liturgies, such Canons as he
thinks meetest without the advice of any Church Assembly. Large Declaration, p.
222. Did not we and our Council by equal authority command these innovations
of Canons and Liturgy? Was not then the Prelates practice of them as well
warranted as this confession of faith, and the band annexed, which were never
brought in by Acts of Parliament, or Assembly; but merely by our royal
Fathers (...), and put in execution by the authority of his Council?
6. When it is his pleasure to call an Assembly, the members of that
Ecclesiastic Court are only such as he is pleased to call, whether of the
Clergy or of the Laity. Johannes Wemius, page 66. Laicos saepe a principilius
advocatos in Concilia videre est; quibus non modo consultivam, sed and
difinitiv im (...) permitterent. Iste fuit electionis mittendorum ad Conciliae
modus, ut (...) praesulibus quos (...) mittendi liberam plerumque potestatem
permitteret princeps, quod illis exploratius quam sibi esset qui ad eam (...)
aptiores: Non quod princ pi penitus neganda sit, quod autumant nonnulli,
particular is personarum quae (...) eum Leges Ecclesiasticas laturum adjuvent
designatio. (...) ud enim esset principum juri detrahere. Ex singulis (...)
moderatus (...) numerus eruditorum ac prudentiorum Presbyterorum, Diaconorum,
and Laicorum a Principe aut Metropolita Principis delegato (...).
7. That when they are called only the Princes voice is decisive, the voice of
all the rest at most but consultive, or if any of them become decisive, it is
by the Princes favor, or at least permission. Johannes Wemius, p. 89. (...)
habent vocem Pasto (...) tanqu im juris divini consulti, desinitivam princeps
ut judex; dante illis consilii, his judicii potestatem legislatore Deo, penes
quem solum summa in spiritualibus imperii residet. lb. p. 70. Vocem habere qui
congregartur Presbyteros non qua Presbyteri, (...) qua ecclesiaru^ sunt legati
a principe vocati. Ibid. page 74. Definitiva (...) dictio little est, qui a
principe summo moderatore cos corsulente, vocemque (...) dante vocantur. lb.
Asserimus non agitata in conciliis fuisse saltem quae majoris momenti essent
negotia, nisi quaterus ca princeps per legatos proponeret, aut patribus
descripta (...).
8. That Church Assemblies are only politic Conventions, not grounded upon
any Divine right, and so to be used, or disused as the prince shall think
expedient. Johannes Wemius, p. 126. (...) in Scriptura mandato (...) concilia
celebrandi mos; sed a principibus (...) curam (...) bus, and cum non essent
principes, a pastoribus ipsis volentibus ortum habuit.
9. That it is in the power of all Sovereigns, whether Monarchick,
Aristocratick, or Democratick, to appoint for the government of the Church in
their dominions such Officers and Spiritual Courts, as they find most meet,
and agreeable to their temporal estates, to erect Bishops, and put down
Presbyteries, to erect Presbyteries, and put down Bishops. Johannes Wemius, p.
78. and 79. Officiorum Ecclesiae modus (...) est, and a principe pastores
Ecclesiae non corsulente (...) posse affirmamus, (...) cum serenissimo nostro
(...) sammis quibusque imperitantibus concessum esse externam in ecclesiasticis
regiminis formam suis pra scribere, quae ad civilis administrationis modum quam
proxime accedat, dummodo a fide veraeque religionis fundamentis ne tantillum
abscedat.
10. That all this power to conclude every ecclesiastic affair which can be
subject to the jurisdiction of any ecclesiastical Synod does belong alike to
all Sovereigns, whether Turkish, Jewish, Pagan, Heretical, or Christian and
Orthodox. Johannes Wemius, p 124. (...) confertur (...) jurisdictionis potest
as per regium quod a Deo habet (...) Regi tantum Christiano aptitudo ea recte
utendi Christi gratia donetur. Tametsi primatus (...) administret Rex (...):
Primatus tamen jus, officii seu vecatioris, (...) facultatis aut exercitii
ratione Rex obtinet. Quae Regi supervenit gratia regiam in (...), non facit
potestatem, non (...), nec expellit gratiae internae, nedum professionis
externae defectus.


Concerning the Kings power in matter of State, They give to the (...) power to
do in the State what ever he will, (...) the advice of his parliament.
they teach first, that a Parliament is but his arbitrarie Council, which in
making or annulling of his Laws he may use or not use as he pleases. (...)
Wemius, page 17. (...) putandum est, quia solet (...) ex modesta and prudenti
virium suarum dissidentia non nisi de or dinum (...) leges far, absolutam
ideo ei imponiejusque successoribus necessitatem illorum (...) corsersus, ac si
nullo modo (...) perse, sine corunde^ (...), bonas edere (...), quibus qua
quaeso conscientia non parebunt omnes, (...) page 19. In Monarchia (...)
voluntas de substantialegis est: praevia cum populo (...), and si utilis imo
(...) sit, (...) tamen non est. (...) cum imperatore (...) dicendum videtur;
explosis ridiculosis ambiguitatibus, verum conditorem and interpretem legum
esse solum (...), and ligem legislatoris, non (...), non ex vi con sensus and
(...), sed ex regia (...) viobligantem. (...). page 8. Non (...) Juristarum
(...), qui (...) in (...) ron obligare legem nisi a (...) acceptetur, cum mon
(...) fit legislator, and lex (...) qua lex obliget, (...) ut ad eam (...),
dam, cogendi fint (...) post legis a (...) publicationem, temporisque quoad
populi notitiam (...) sufficientis lapsum, potest (...) publica legis
observatio praecise ingeri Heylens (...). p. 66. The declaration of his (...)
pleasure in the case of S. Gregory is to be extended to (...) other cases of
the same nature. It is a maxim in the civil law, Sententia Principis, jus
dubium declarans, jus sacit quoad omnes. Item Quodcunque imperator per (...)
constituit, vel (...) decrevit, legem esse constat. Id in his moderate answer
page 29. Only these commands of the King are to be refused, which are directly
against Scripture, or include marifest impiety. He learned this from his
opposite the Lincolneshire Minister, page 68. I say that al commands of the
King that are not upon the clear and immediate inference without all
prosyllogismes, contrary to acleare passage of the word of God, or to an
evident Sun-beame of the law of nature, are precisely to be obeyed; nor is it
enough to find a remote and possible inconvenience that may ensue.
2. When he is pleased to call a Parliament, it is his due right by his letter
to ordain such Barons to be Commissioners for the Shires, and such Citizens to
be Commissioners for Burrowes as he shall be pleased to name. (...) Wemius
page 23. (...) ut and civium ad Comitia delegatos, non ita absolute a Baronum
vel Civium (...) pendere volumus, ut non possit Rex, quos (...) maxim idoneos
censuerit eligendos (...), praesertim (...) pro legibus ferendis (...) quae
administrationis (...) publicae statuendis (...) sunt, in quibus liberum
denegare regi (...) quos (...) quibuscum deliberet sibi in (...), esset ex Rege
non (...), statuumque voluntati ad Regiae depressionem eminentiae nimis (...).
3. That he may lawsully exact when he has to do what portion of his
subjects goods he thinks meet, and by himself alone, may make such Laws for
exactions in times to come, as seems to him best. Joannes Wemius page 19 Omnia
fatemur (...) in regno sunt regis esse, quarex est, (...) est, qua (...) regui
dominus, adeoque qua (...) ipsius qua rex est, aut publica regni conditio,
posse regem de (...) bonis disponere, praesertim ubi omnes in regno terrae in
feuda concessae fuerint a rege, aliquod penes se dominium retinente. Id. p. 17.
Licet non de jure omnium bona exigendo, tamen dejure in omnes leges ferendo,
sine omnium consenso statuere potest. Montag. orig. p. 320 Omni lege, divina,
naturali, nationali, vel politica licite semper reges and principes suis
subditu tributa and (...), and licite quoque exegerunt, cum ad patriae, and
reipublicae defensionem, tum ad ipsorum and familiae honest amprocurationem.
Hanc doctrinam accurate tuetur ecclesia (...) in qua sacerdotes licet magis
gaudere and soleant, and debeant, immunitatibus tamen and frequentius, and
exuberantius, and libentius, quam (...) dec marum decimas, subsid a, annatas
primitias (...).
4. That no subject of his Kingdom can have any hereditarie jurisdiction, but
any jurisdiction that either any of the Nobility, or any other Magistrate or
Officer possesses, they have it alone during his pleasure; that at his
presence, the power of all others must cease, and at his death evanish, and be
quite extinguished, till by his successors by new gift it be renewed. Joannes
Wemius, page 136. Cum regis sit insuo regno judices, and Magistratus
constituere, qui ipsius sint in judicando, and jubendo vicarii, potest rex
(...) judicandique jus ac Mag stratus judicesque constituendt potestatem (...)
prout regno utile esse visum ei fuerit abutent (...) us auferre, and nulla
(...) est sub Rege patr monialis and haereditaria jur sdictio, Rege solo
jurisdictionem tanquim propriam habente, aliisque quibus eam non dat, sed
communicate, tanquam depositam (...). Igitur non ut terras, ita and
jurisdictionem simpliciter, and ut loquuntur privative, Rex alienare potest,
nisi Rex esse (...). Ibid. page 157. Siiudices sint principum vicarii, (...)
est eorum principe praesente potest as, cum solius absentis teneat (...) and si
quae est alicubi, and (...), ron nisi jus est, judicium regium volente Rege
declarandi; ut ita ex jud (...) ore proferatur Regis sententia. Ibid. page 17.
In (...) non tam (...) psis quam ass stent bus imperium exercet Rex,
quandoquidem praesente (...), (...) omnium (...) derivata, ut fluviorum (...)
nomen and potestas, cum in mare (...) Ibid. page 143. Principis occasu (...)
omnium tam (...) quam delagatorum jus. Negari non potest tam apud Romanos quam
altos in usu suisse, ut qui in demortuorum succederent locum reges, (...)
regnorum guberracula capesserent, (...) iudicumque (...), ut ostenderetur (...)
regibus nullam esse inferiorum authoritatem, (...), (...) tacit (...).
5. That Scotland is a subdued Nation, that Fergus our first King did conquer
us by the sword, and establish an absolute Monarchy for himself and his
heirs, giving to us what Laws he thought meetest. Corbet, p. 45. There was no
law in the Kingdom of Scotland before (...) gave it: for (...) Fergus his
(...) we were (...) hominum agreste, sine legibus, (...) imperio. He and his
Successors gave laws. ibid. (...) did conquer us.
6. That all the Lands in Scotland were once the Kings property, and what
thereof has been given out for service, yet remains his own by a manifold
right. Corbet, p. 25. Fergus and his Successors divided the whole land which
was their own, and distinguished the orders of men, and did establish a (...)
t: This is clear ex (...) regiis, ubi satis constal regem esse dominum omnium
(...) directum, omnes subditos esse ejus vassallos, qui latifundia sua ipsi
domino referant accepta, sui (...) obsequii, and servitii praemia.
7. That to deny any of the named parts of this power to the King, is to
destroy his Monarchike government, to dethrone him and make him no King, to
subject him to his people, and make them his Masters, or at least Colleagues in
the Empire. Ioannes Wemius, p. 18. Quo casu dicerem nonpreprie esse regnum, sed
ar stocratiam vel democratiam. Ibid. p. 23. Hoc esset ex rege non regem cum
facere. Ibid. p. 38. Quodsi alicubi non habeat rex potestatem leges ferendi,
nisi ex (...) comitiis consensu, and sic fundamentaliter limitata, proprie Rex
non est, ac non tam acceptans est populus quam cum Rege, (...) collega legem
ferens. Ibid. p. 53. Non est imperium illud vere (...), sed principatus quidam,
and imperans ille, non Monarcha aut. Rex, sed tantum Princeps, and ut Venetorum
Dux residente in opt matibus, aut populo (...) summa.
But thanks be to God that our gracious prince has so often declared himself
to be far from all such thoughts; yea, that my Lord of Canterbury himself,
is forced whiles to let drop from his fingers clean contrary maxims. Relat.
of the Conference, page The Statute Laws which must bind all the Subjects,
cannot be made but in, and by Parliament: the supreme Magistrate in the civil
state, may not abrogate Laws made in Parliament. Ibid. page 158. Tiberius
himself, in the cause of Silanus, when Dolabella would have flattered him into
more power than in wisdom he thought (...) then to take to himself, he put
him off thus: No, the Laws grow less when such power enlarges, nor is
absolute power to be used, where there may be an orderly proceeding by Law.


Lastly, they teach us in the matter of resistance, In no imaginable case,
(...) will have Tyrants resisted.
first, that do the Prince what he will, he may never be resisted by any or
all his Subjects, that not only a private man must give over all defense,
though most innocent of his own life against the prince his unjust violence;
Ioannes Wemius, page 21. Teneri videtur subditus seipsum fame (...), ut
principem salvaret, propter conservationem boni publici. singulis adempta est
adversus principem quae naturalis dicitur iuris defensio, scu iniuriae depulsio.
but the whole State can do naught without rebellion against GOD, but flee or
suffer, when the prince, whether by himself or his Officers does destroy the
true religion established by all Laws, and the liberties of the Land, dear
bought of old, and peaceably brooked in many ages, also the lives of many
thousands of the best Subjects, without the pretense or color of any just
cause. Canterb, relat. p. 205. Where the foundations of the faith are shaken by
Princes, there there ought to be prayer and patience, but no opposition by
force. Aberdeens Duplys, page 25. The way for all Christian Subjects to conquer
Tyrants, and the remedy provided in the New Testament against all persecutions,
is not to resist powers which God has ordained, lest we be damned, but with
all (...) to suffer that we may be crowned. It is evident by Scripture, that it
is unlawful for Subjects in a Monarchical estate, to take arms for religion,
or for any other pretense, without warrant from the Prince. The renow ned
Thebaean Legion of 6666 Christian Soldiers, without making resistance as they
had strength to have done, suffered themselves rather to be slain for their
Christian profession by the Officers of Maximinian, the Emperors executors of
his cruel commandments against them. Corbet, p. 42. For your examples from
reformed Churches, since we live not by examples but by (...), I will not stand
upon them, from facts to prove the lawfulness of resisting is ridiculous; none
of those by resisting, gained so much as by suffering, as experience too late
does thew.
Again, that all this subjection must be used, not only to our native King,
but to any foreign usurper who can get footing among us, and it were the Kings
of Spain, as their predecessors the heretical Gothish Kings got footing in
the Roman Empire. (...) (...), page 29. Such was the doctrine and practice of
many other great lights, which shined in the (...) of Julian the Apostate, and
in the days of the Arrian (...), and Gothic Arrian Kings.
That even against them, the States of a Land with a good conscience could use
no defense, though before their eyes, they should see them execute the cruel
tyrannies of Nebuchadnezzar, put out the eyes of the King, kill (...) Children,
lead himself and his Nobles away to a far land in fetters: Though with Nero,
Corbet, page 26. Qui (...), Caio (...), qui Augusto, ipse and (...), qui (...),
vel patri, vel filio, (...); and ne per (...) ire (...), qui Constantino
Christiano, ipse and apostatae Iuliano. Ibid. page 36. If the Jews in the
days of Assuerus had been of this new Scottish humor, when an utter
extirpation was intended by Haman, both of themselves and theirreligion, they
would have taken arms: but their prayers and tears were their defense in
their greatest (...).
for their mere pleasure they should set the royallcitie in a fair fire, or
execute the plot of (...) by murdering all the seed of the Jews, all zealous
protestants up and down the land in one day. Such maxims exceedingly opposite
to the honor of God, the safety of the Kings person and Crown, the welfare
of the people, these men cause to be printed and let them go athort without
any censure at these times, when by royal decreets, they have pulled into
their hands the full commandment of all the presses, and the absolute
jurisdiction over all the Booksellers shops in the Kingdom, and (...)
frequently theirzeale against any books that give but the least touch to their
mitres, by inflicting no less censure than fire upon the books, pilloring and
nose-slitting on the Authors, and whipping through the streets on the carriers.

All these extraordinary prerogatives, whereby What they give to Kings, is not
for any respect they have to Majesty, but for their own ambitious and (...)
ends.
the faction advances supreme Magistrates so near unto God, and their
favorites so far above the skies, Ioannes We (...) in his preface to the Duke
of Buckingham, Reges in (...) sortem transcripti, cute and (...) tenus homines,
reipsa boni genii censendi sunt, in quos ut bumanos Jove's divini honoris (...)
pene and consortes, oculos animosque nostros desigi convenit. Tu Heroes
nobilissime coruscas, velut inter ignes Luna minores, quem in (...) augustioris
gloriae (...) divina prorsus virgula constitutum nemo potest dissiteri.
seem to flow not from any love they carry either to their crowns or the
royal heads that bear them, but merely out of their selfe-respect to their
own ambition and greed, that Sovereignty being advanced to an unmeasurable
height, may be a statelier horse for them to ride upon, in their glorious
triumphings above all that is called God. For otherwise, ye may see how far
they depresse all Sovereigns when they are laid in the balance with
themselves; they tell us that the King can be no more the head of the Church,
than the boy that rubs their horse heels. Smart Sermon, page 1. M. Couzins
uttered these traiterous speeches in an open and affirmative manner, that the
Kings Highness is no more supreme head of the Church of England, than the boy
that rubs his horse heels, and this as we are credibly informed, has been
proved against him by the (...) of two sufficient witnesses.
2. That the heart whence the native life and vigor of the Ecclesiastic Laws
does flow, is alone the Bishops, and not the King. (...). supra cap. ult. A.
3. That Kings and Emperors ought to reverence; yea, to adore Bishops, and to
pay them tributes. (...). supra cap. 3. O.
4. That every Bishop is a Prince and a Monarch, as far in dignity above
the greatest secular Prince, as the soul above the body, or God above man.
Montag. supra cap. tertio. (z)


FINIS.
Revised according to the ordinance of the general Assembly, by me Mr. A.
Jhonston Clerk thereto.

Edinb. 1. of April 1640.


