(...) THE FAMILY OF DAVID, FOR THE SONS OF THE KINGDOM, WITH A CHROnicle
unto the redemtion.

(...) Printed at Amstelredam a city of Merchandise known unto India and all
limits of the Earth

By Zacharias Heyns. 1605.

TO THE RENOWNED IN JEWISH LEARNING, ABRAHAM RVBEN ARCHISYNAGOGE IN
CONstantinople, words of peace and truth,
FAMOVS sir, I promised to show you the vvays of our favth largely, when the
King of Scotland should be King of England. The day is come, and what I longed
for I have seen. And now I vvil declare in print what I did before in
vvriting. And I vvil beginn from the house of David, and the Chronicle For
herein the heart of the most is deceyved and wandereth. Afterward (if God
will,) I vvil show the joynctes of all the holy Bible, and the superfluity of
the Thalmud. God give you knowledge for David's house: where the sons of
Solomon fail: and where the seed of Nathan his brother does come hey^e to
the Kingdom. In Iechonias Solomon's seed fails: according to the word of
the Eternal, by Jeremy both of Iehoiachim and Iechonias, of Iehoiakim thus
speaks God. He shall have none to sit upon the throne of David* And of
Iehoiachin thus says the Eternal: O earth earth, earth hear the word of the
Eternal* write this man childles: a man that shall not prosper in his days.
For none shall ever prosper of his seed: to sit upon the throne of David;
and to rule in Judah; This is the oath of God which is never called back by no
repentance: as the repentance of Moses could not call back Gods oath for his
going into the land of Chanan

(...)

And now I will show you the two houses of David unto the captivity in the one
table, and in the second, unto the redemption.

David.
Solomon. Nathan, Roboam. Mattatha Abia. Mainan. Asa. Melea, Iosaphat. Eliakim
Ioram. Ionan. Ochozias. Joseph. Ioas. Judah. Amasias. Symeon Ozias. Leuj.
Ioatham. Matthat. Achaz. Iorim. Ezekias Eliezer. Manasses. Iose. Amon. Er.
Josias. Elmodad. Ioakim. Cosam Iechonias. Addj. Melchj. Nerj, Salathiel.

(...)

Obseruationes upon the destruction of the Kingdom.
IN the beginning of the captivity before the death of Iehoiakim Nabucadnezar
saw a great image rese^blinge the kingdoms of the heathen: as Babel, and
Paras, and Alexanders house, and the kingdoms of his princes which reigned in
Egypt, and in the north Also Christ was seen as a stone cut out without hands,
which smote the image upon the legs of iron and clay, and bruised them: and
they became as chaff from a barn flore, and the wind took them away and no
place was found for the^: and the stone which stroke the image became a great
mountain and filled all the earth. Both true is the vision and the exposition
is sure, And as the holy Ghost seven times expounds In the book of the
gracious man,
these kings, the kings that persecuted, so he records the family of
Christ by Nathan his ancestor, from Salathiel and Zorobabel (whom the kings of
Babel robbed) in two houses of Zerobbabel whose name was in Babel,
Glad-in-sorow because he was glad in sorrow, and believed (Ier. 51.) till Zaru
(they, fanned) Babel, as chaff from Corn, and Bel-she-Azar. 1. Bell L. of
store, became Bell a fire of sorrow: and fire ate him up: so his sons had two
names: Mesullam was called Abihud; and Ananias, Rhesa; and these were
persecuted by the kings of Elam, and Iauah, The house of Alexander, and the
house, of Ptolomy in Egypt: also by the house of Seleucus in the north: He
reigned over 72. kingdoms. And the same year that Christ Iehoua our
righteousness was borne in Beth-Leche^ now the Roman had bestript them from al
kingdoms under heaven: and the kingdom of heave which cannot be corrupted,
was known: and from the East Persian wisemen came to Jerusalem to worship
Christ and to kiss the son, in whom all that trust are happy. And this is
his family,

Zorobabel, S. of Salathiel.
Abiud or Mesullam Rhesa, or Ananias Eliakim* Iohanna. Azor Judah. Sadoc
Joseph. Achim. Semej Elihud. Mattathias* Eleazer. Mahath. Matthan. Nagge.
Jacob. Chesli. Joseph: the husband of Mary, the mother of Christ: therefore he
is called the son of Ely the father of Mary. Nachum. Amos. Mattathias.
Joseph. Ianna. Melcj, Leuj. Matthat. Ely. Mary. Jesus.

And this is the name vvherby they shall call him: Iehoua our righteousness Ier
23. and 33.

(...)

And now, remember the days of old consider the years of all generations.
FROM Adam unto Tharaes departure to paradise are 2083. years. And the Lord
took Thara to him before Abraham went forth unto the la^d of Chanaan. This
shines clear by the plain nes of the text. And Philo of Alexandria is a
witness, in peregrinat: fol 284, And Bresith Rabba upon genesis Also the holy ghost
in the new Testament, in the acts of the Apostles. And Abraham was seauenty
five years old when his father died at 205. And he begat Abraham at 130. as
Adam at that age begat Seth, and Jacob, at that age, went into Egypt. So god
deals in wonderful sort, for ease to our remembrance in matters of like
dignity. And al is settled, and the order goodly, and there is nothing crooked
or writhen of all this: Behold it, we have serched it hear, it and know for
thy good. And hitherto the years are fastened together. The number of the
years is sealed sure: they touch one another, and no spirit can come betwixt
them, they cleave one to an other, they hold fast and will not be separated.

Also these be equally sure. Presently after ^hara went to the Paradise of God,
the Lord said unto Abraham, Go thou etc and all families of the earth shall be
blessed in thee: meaning in Christ, the just King, and King of peace and
sacrificer for ever after the order of Melchisedek. Now then conceive the word
and perceive that which the eye may see From the calling of Abraham, unto the
Passover Kept in Egypt, are 430. years. So the Seventy interpreters ex pound.
Ex 12. 40. And the Thalmud Ierusalemy in Megila. Also these times following are
past al doubt:

In the 480. year after the children of Israel left Egypt, Solomon built an
house to the Lord. Now the days that Solomon reigned at Jerusalem over all
Israel were 40. years. At their end the years of the world were 3029. The
Silver chain will not be loosed: and the Golden revolution of time will not be
broken of: and the bucket of the holy spring will not be burst, nor the wheel
duly turning the heavens will be rent at the cisterne of the story house, for any
whit of these times. Now come and see the years of the Kingdom of Judah. The
sin of Israel was fastened to their head 390. years. For here many agree, Jews
and Christians. And these words has Don Isaak Barbinel upon Ezekiel. 4. It is
well known that since the time that the Kingdoms were divided they reigned in
Judah from Roboam unto the destruction of the temple 390. years exactly,
according to the testimony of the scriptures. And unto the same effect it is
said in cabala of David Ben* Abraham, the temple stood 427. years. Subduct
thence the 37 of Salomons kingdom, and there remain 390. for the kingdom of
Asa. And many of us Christianes have in tables set forth lernedly this just
sum with all the particulars. So the years of the world before the
destruction of the temple amount unto 3418. And then there had passed 18. of
Babels 70. Add 52. and you shall come unto the end of the transmigration in
3470 And this place makes an end of reckoning by the date of earthly kings.
Now Israel would not beleaue that all was vanity under the sun, until they
saw the kingdom of Solomon spent and rent up:

Also they saw the kings of Babel how they came to naught in a moment, ended,
wasted with horronr. And now men of sagenes would consider, and pereccaue, and
beleve, that the kingdom of Christ is a kingdom of the world to come.

And the Angel Gabriel is sent from heaven, to show the time of this kingodme
unto Daniel full of Grace. He sone told Cyrus the sone of great Sem, and told
Darius S. of Iapheth when God would persuade Iapheth to dwell in the house of
Se^. Also all their king domes had heard of this mattter that a king should be
manifested at Jerusalem which should rule from sea to sea, and from the river
to the ends of the earth: and the time was prefixed, to be 490, years, from
the decree of Cyrus to restore and build Jerusalem. And the beginning of this
time had seen the fall of Babel, the house of Nemrod, likewise the mouth of
lions was stopped, and a decree was published to worship Daniels God, and this
decree did Darius the son of Iapheth publish. Cyrus also, his fellow in
kingdom, published in letters patentes, the God of heaven, and his People, and
their return to Jerusalem, and the building of the tem ple. In the same sort,
Judah loved Jerusalem, and left the land of the north for mount Sion. All these
Poinctes renowned the beginning of the time whence rekoning should be taken,
for the kingdom showed by the Angel Gabriel. But the end was more honored fio^
God by the death of Messiah: when he powered out his soul a sacrfice for sin
and darkened the Sun at none day: and the earth trembled and quaked: and they
who slept in the dust of the earth awaked: and Christ arose the third day: who
40. days viewed the assemblies of the faithful: and was taken up into heaven:
and at Pentecost, he sent down to his disciples a fiery law: when reby the
fishers of Galilie spoke eloquently in all tongues. Their writings testify,
thatin the tongue of Iauan they passed all the dwellers in the Isles of Elisa,
and the word of God needs not mortal man's testimony.

(...)

To the most noble lady, our gracious Queen Anne.
FRom the city (most gracious Queen) of Constantin, son to Brettish Helen, a
very learned Jew wrotte unto Britanie to have Hebrew instruction of
Christianiiie. And I have in a little book comprised for him in few words, the
greatest matters to stay, Christianes in there grounds: and to stay Jews from
longer misbeliefe. And this part, in Ebrem and English for English matrones, I
commend, with all that shall come such fro me, to your Graces care and charges.
As you are engraffed into the nobility of Helens house, the spiritual,
reparing of her sons town is a kind of debt laid upon our nation: and none
in the world be so likely to drive thence the Turk, as your Majesty's family
may be thought: layng the Gospel, as Constantin did, the foundation of all
success, and teacing the east to take a better Gouvernour.

Your Graces most humble HVGH BROVGHTON*


