AN Introduction of the First Grounds or Rudiments OF Arithmetic; Plainly
explaining the five Common parts of that most useful and Necessary Art, In
whole Numbers and Fractions, With their use in Reduction, and The Rule of
three: Direct. Reverse. Double.

By way of Question and Answer, for the ease of the Teacher, and benefit of the
Learner.

Composed not only for general good, but also for fitting Youth for Trade.

By W. Iackson Student in Arithmetic.

LONDON, Printed by R. I. for F Smith, near Temple Bar. 166^

Courteous Reader,
I Have on purpose omitted Progression, as also many other Rules following,
partly because that these being well learned, not only by rote, but also by
reason, the young learner (for whose sake I wrote this) will be enabled hereby
in a good measure to understand what he finds in other books concerning such;
And if this prove but as useful, as I wish it may, and hope it will (by the
Teachers care, and Scholars diligence) I may be encouraged to add somewhat to
it hereafter, that may be of further use, or else these weak endeavors may
provoke some others of better parts to bring them to the public Treasury of
Art. In the mean time accept of this mite from him that is one that would count
it an honor to be but one of the meanest of those that might present any
thing on the behalf of this most Noble, and most Necessary Art of Arithmetic;
that might further the growth of such as are entering upon the practice of the
same, which I presume, if this small Tract may be as a small Table wherein to
see the first Rudiments in, briefly and plainly, which being by the Masters
discretion appointed the young Scholar to get by heart, may prove an ease to
both; to the Master, in that (if he please to spend some set time in examining
his Scholars, as they use to catechize little ones) he by that means may teach
the Rules to twenty in teaching one, and not only print the Rules in the memory
of such as are past such Rules, who perhaps may be apt to forget, but also
teach the Rudiments to other, even before they come to the practice of them,
whereby he may save the pains of often telling them, and may only fit them
with examples suitable to the Rule, sometimes descanting a little upon the
Rules as they lie in order, as he finds occasion; and by this course, being
observed, he will with the blessing of God find by the childrens growth in
knowledge, that the pains bestowed will not be in vain; but not to be tedious,
I leave each to use his own discretion, how to use this or any other help, only
I have thoughts, that a thing of this nature will be profitable, and have its
use; So wishing this most Noble Art, and all those that love it, to flourish in
our Land, I bid thee farewell.

W. J.

AN Introduction of the First Grounds and Rudiments of Arithmetic.
NUMERATION.
Quest. WHat is Arithmetic?

Answ. It is the Art of numbering.

Q. What is the subject of this Art?

A. The subject of it is Number.

Q. Whereof does Number consist?

A. It consists of unites.

Q. What is an unite?

A. It is the original, or beginning of number, and is of it self indivisible,
so that it still remains one.

Q. Is not one a Number then?

A. No, for Number is a collection of unites.

Q. How are Numbers said to be divided into kinds?

A. They are divided into many sorts, but vulgarly into whole numbers, and
broken numbers called fractions.

Q. Are fractions numbers?

A. Not properly, for number consists of a multitude of unites, but every
fraction is lesser than its unite.

Q. How many several parts are accounted in common Arithmetic?

A. These five, Numeration, Addition, Substraction, Multiplication, and
Division.

Q. What then is extraction of roots?

A. Although it be another part of Arithmetic, yet it is not so common.

Q. What teaches Numeration?

A. It teaches how to set down any number in figures, and also to express, or
read any such number so set down.

Q. How many figures are there?

A. Nine significant figures, and a cipher, which cipher signifies nothing of
it self, only it serves to supply a place, and thereby increases the value of
the other figures.

Q. Which be the significant figure?

A. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9.

Q. What do these signify?

A. They signify only each their own simple value being alone.

Q. What if they be joined with other figures, or ciphers, is their
signification altered?

A. Yea, their value is thereby much increased, according to the place they
stand in, removed from the place of unites.

Q. Do Ciphers then only supply places that are void, and so increase the value
of the other figures?

A. No, they do also in decimal fractions, diminish the value of those figures
that stand toward the right hand of them, according to the place they stand in
removed from the unite place.

Q. Which is the place of unites?

A. In whole numbers it is the first place toward the right hand, and any
figure standing in that place, signifies only its own simple value.

Q. Why make you a distinction here of whole numbers? does it differ infraction?

A. Yea, for in decimal fractions, the unite place stands to the left hand of
the fraction.

Q. Why say you its own simple value?

A. Because a figure by being put in the second, third, or fourth place, etc.
may signify ten times, an hundred times or a thousand times its own value, etc.

Q. What is the reason of that?

A. Because every place exceeds the place next before it ten times in value, so
that the figure that signifies but four in the first place, signifies ten times
4 in the second, and an hundred times four in the third place, and a thousand
times four in the fourth place, etc. and in that proportion increases
infinitely, according as its place is further removed from the unite place.

Q. Is the proportion of diminishing decimal fractions, like this of augmenting
whole numbers?

A. Yea; for as these are augmented in a decupled proportion, so those are
diminished, or made less, in a decupled proportion, by being removed from the
unite place.

Q. What must you do when you have a number to set down, where some have not a
significant figure to stand in it?

A. I must supply that place with a cipher (0) for no place must be void.

Q. How will you set down, one thousand six hundred and sixty?

A. First I consider the fourth place is the place of thousands, and there I
set down 1, then 6 in the third place, which betokens so many hundreds, then
6 in the second place, signifying six tens, or sixty, and because there is no
figure to set in the place of unites, I supply it with a (0) cipher, to make
the number consist of its due number of places, thus (1660)

Q. How set you down four thousand five hundred and six?

A. First I set 4 in the place of thousands, then five in the place of
hundreds, then in regard thee is no tens, I supply that place with a (0) and
lastly I place 6 in the unite place thus, (4506)

Q. How value you your places in order to the tenth place?

A. Thus, Unites, Tens, Hundreds, Thousands, Tens of Thousands, Hundreds of
Thousands, Millions, Tens of Millions, Hundreds of Millions, Thousands of
Millions.

Q. Can you repeat your places backwards?

A. Yea, thus, Thousands of Millions, Hundreds of Millions, Tens of Millions,
Millions, Hundreds of Thousands, Ten of Thousands, Thousands, Hundreds, Tens,
Unites.

Addition.
Q. Now show what Addition teaches.

A. Addition teaches of several numbers to make one total equal to them all.

Q. How is that done?

A. First I set my numbers down one right under another, observing still to set
the first place or figure toward the right hand of each number under the first
place or figure of the uppermost number, and so the second under the second,
and the third under the third, etc.

Q. After you have set down your numbers each in his due place, what do you
then?

A. I must begin at the first place toward the right hand, and count all the
figures in that place together, and if they be less than ten, set it down
under the first place, a line being first drawn under my sum to place my total
below.

Q. What if it come to ten or above?

A. Then I must consider how many tens it contains, and carry so many unites in
my mind to the next place, and set down the overplus if there be any, but if
it be even tens, then set down a (0) in that place.

Q. And what do you next?

A. I must remember to reckon the tens that I bear in mind for unites, and add
them to the figures in the next place, and then do in all points as I did in
the former place.

Q. Why do you count tens in one place, but for unites in the next?

A. because the place answers to the value thereof, being ten times the value
of the former place.

Q. What is further to be considered?

A. When I have gone through all the places, if at the last I have any Tens to
carry, seeing there are no figures to add them withal, I set a figure
signifying the number of Tens, in a place nearer the left hand.

Q. Give an example hereof.

A. Then thus, Four men owe my Master money; A. owes 4560 l. B. owes 5607 l.
C. owes 6078 l. D: owes 385 l. I would know how much these four debts amount
to in all.

Q. And how will you do that?

A. First I set the several sums right under each other thus, 4560 5607 6078
0385 16630
Then I begin with those figures next the right hand, and say, 5 and 8 is 13,
and 7 makes 20, now in regard it is just 2 times Ten, I set a cipher underneath
the line in that place, and bear in mind 2 to reckon with the figures in the
next place, and say, 2 that I bear in my mind, and 8 is 10, and 7 is 17, and 6
makes 23, then I set down the odd 3 in the second place below the line, and for
the 2 Tens, I carry 2 in mind to the next place, then I say, 2 that I carry
and 3 is 5, and 6 is 11, and 5 is 16, the odd 6 I set below the line, and carry
one in lieu of the ten to the next place, and say, 1 I carry, and 6 is 7, and
5, is 12, and 4 is 16, so I set the 6 below the line, and in regard there is
not another place to reckon the one, I bear in mind withal, I set that 1 a
place nearer the left hand, and so the total is 16630 l. the sum of those four
debts.

Q. What if you have numbers of several kinds or denominations to add together?

A. I must set down each number under the denomination of the same kind, as
pounds under pounds, shillings under shillings, and pence under pence, etc. and
the like is to be observed of weight, measure, or any other kind.

Q. And how must they be added together?

A. I must begin with the smallest denomination, which is next the right hand,
and count all those figures together, and consider how many of the next
denomination is contained in them, and carry so many unites to the next place,
and set down the overplus (if there be any) right under beneath the line, and
it there be no overplus, I set a cipher in the place; And the like I observe
in every several denomination.

Q. Show two or three examples of several denominations.

A. First, then for pounds, shillings, and pence, take this, l. s. d. 365 6 8
456 7 6 567 8 4 1389 2 6

Then beginning with the smallest denomination toward the right hand, which is
pence, I say, 4 and 6 is 10, and 8 is 18, which is 1 shilling and 6 pence, the
6 pence I set down in its place below the line, under its own denomination, and
carry the one shilling in my mind to the next place, which is the place of
shillings, and say, 1 I carry and 8 is 9, and 7 is 16, and 6 is 22, that is one
pound and two shillings, the 2 odd shillings I set in its place under its own
denomination below the line, and carry one pound in mind to reckon with the
pounds, then I come to the first place of pounds, and say, 1 I carry and 7 is
8, and 6 is 14, and 5 is 19, so I set down 9, and carry 1, then I say, one I
carry and 6 is 7, and 5 is 12, and 6 makes 18, the 8 I set down, and carry one,
and then I say, one I carry and 5 is 6, and 4 is 10, and 3 is 13, the odd 3 I
set right under, and the one ten I set one place further toward the left hand,
so the total is 1389 l. 2 s. 6. d.

Q. What is your next example?

A. Take this, of haberdupoize weight, wherein note that 16 ounces make a
pound, 28 pound make a quartern, 4 quarterns make a hundred weight, and 20
hundred make a tun weight: Example.
tun. C. q. l. o 123 9 3 16 10 234 8 2 12 8 345 7 1 08 6 703 5 3 09 8

Where as before, I begin with the least denomination next the right hand, and
say, 6 and 8 is 14, and 10 is 24, which is one pound and eight ounces, the 8
ounces I set down below, and I carry one in mind to the pounds, then I say,
one I carry and 8 is 9, and 12 is 21, and 16 is 37, that is one quartern, and 9
pound, the 9 I set down and carry one, and say, one that I carry, and one is
two, and two makes 4, and 3 is 7, that is one hundred and three quarterns, the
three quarterns I set down, and carry one, and say further, one I carry and 7
is 8, and 8 is 16, and 9 makes 25, that is one tun and five hundred, the five
hundred I set down, and carry one to the tuns, and say, one that I carry and 5
is 6, and 4 is 10, and 3 makes 13, then I set down 3, and carry one, saying,
one I carry and 4 is 5, and 3 is 8, and 2 makes 10, now being it is just 10, I
set down a cipher, and carry one, saying, one I carry and 3 is 4, and 2 is 6,
and one makes 7, which I set down in its place below the line, and so the total
is tun. C. q l. o. 703 5 3 09 8 as in the example.

A third Example shall be of liquid measure, in which note, that one tun is 4
hogs-heads, one hogs-head is 63 gallons, one gallon is 8 pints. tuns. hhd. gal.
pints. 234 3 24 6 345 2 21 4 456 1 18 2 1036 3 01 4

Here I only set down the example, and cast it up, without describing the work,
to move the learner to take some pains to do the like for his practice.

Substraction.
Q. Tell me now what Substraction teaches?

A. Substraction teaches to abate, or withdraw a lesser sum or number out of a
greater, and to show the remainder or overplus.

Q. How is that performed?

A. First I set down the greater sum or number uppermost, and under it I draw a
line, then I set the lesser sum under the line, observing to set each figure in
its due place, under the greater sum, and then I begin at the first place, and
abate the lower figure out of the higher, setting the remainder under it, a
line being first drawn to separate them.

Q. But what if the lower figure be greatest, how then shall it be abated
from the higher?

A. Then I must borrow one of the next place, which here signifies the value of
ten, and abate it from ten, and the uppermost figure added together, and set
down the overplus, or which is all one, abate it from ten, and adding the
overplus with the uppermost figure, set the same down beneath the line for
remainder.

Q. What is next to be done?

A. Then for the unite I borrowed, I add one to my lower figure in the next
place, abating the same out of the figure over it, doing in all respects as
before.

Q. Give an example hereof.

A. Then thus, If I have borrowed 4567 l. of which I have repaid 3675, what is
behind? borrowed 4567 l. repaid 3675. rest behind 0892 proof 4567

Where having placed my numbers duly under each other, I begin as before at the
right hand, and say, 5 out of 7, there rests 2, which 2 I set underneath, as in
the example, then I come to the next figure, saying, 7 from 6, I cannot,
wherefore I borrow one of the next place, which signifies ten here, and so
abate 7 out of 16, and set down the rest, which is 9 below the line; and
insomuch as I borrowed one, therefore I carry one in mind, and say, in the
next place, one that I borrowed and 6 is 7, which I should abate from 5 over
it, which seeing I cannot do, I borrow one as I did before, and say, 7 out of
15, there rests 8, which I set underneath the line, and go on as before,
saying, one that I borrowed, and 3 is 4, which being abated from the 4 above
it, rests nothing to set below, so that there remains behind 892 l. as in the
example, the proof hereof is by adding the sum paid, and the remainder
together, if they make up the sum borrowed, it is right, or else not.

Q. But when you have a sum of several denominations to substract from another,
how do you then?

A. As in Addition I began at the smallest denomination to add, so here I begin
with the same to substract, abating the lowest from the highest.

Q. What if the upper figure be the least?

A. Then I borrow one of the next denomination, and considering how many of the
smaller is contained in one of those, I abate my figure or number to be
abated, out of that which I borrowed, and the uppermost number being added
together, and set the overplus below the line for the remainder.

Q. Show by an example or two what you mean?

A. To substract 8 d. from 1 s. 4 d. I say 8 d. from 4 d. I cannot, then I
borrow one shilling, being the next place, which is 12 d. to which I add the 4
d. that is above the line, it makes 16 d. and say, 8 d. from 16 d. rests 8 d.
Again, 17 s. from 2 l. 12s. I say, 17 s. from 12 s. I cannot, but 17 s. from 1
l. 12s. or 32 s. there rests 15 s. then considering I borrowed one pound, I say
one pound that I borrowed from 2 l. rests one pound, so that there rests 1 l.
15s. to set below the line, And I must always remember to reckon the one I
borrowed to the figure that is to be subtracted in the next place.

Q. Show this by an example or two of several denominations.

A. Then here is one, if I abate 345 l. -- 16s, -- 8d. from 476 l. -- 13s. --
4d. I would see what remains.

I set my sums thus, l. s. d. 476 13 4 345 16 8 rest 130 16 8 proof 476 13 4

Then beginning with the least denomination, which is pence, I say, 8 d. from 4
d. I cannot, but I borrow one of the next denomination, which is shillings, and
say, 8 d. from 1 s. 4d. and there rests 8 d. which I set under the pence, and
then I say, one shilling I borrowed and 16 makes 17 s. from 13 s. I cannot, but
I borrow one pound, and say, 17 s. from 1 l. 13 s. rests 16 s. then I say, 1 l.
that I borrowed, and 5 l. is 6 l. from 6 l. rests nothing, so I set down a
cipher in this place under the line, and go forward, saying 4 from 7, rests 3,
which I set down, and then say, 3 from 4, rests 1, which I set beneath; and so
there rests 130 l. 16 s. 8d.

And as in Addition I left one example only cast up, for the learner to pause
upon himself, and to imitate, so here I do the like. tun C. q l. o 345 11 2 24
4 Substr. 256 13 3 20 8 rests 088 17 3 03 12 proof 345 11 2 24 4

Multiplication.
Q. What does Multiplication teach?

A. Multiplication teaches after a brief and compendious way, to increase or
augment any number, by so many times it self, as is any number propounded, as 4
times, 10 times, etc.

Q. What is considerable in this Rule?

A. Three numbers are specially considerable, to wit, the multiplicand, or
number that is to be multiplied, secondly, the multiplier, or number we
multiply by, and thirdly, the product, which is the number produced by the
multiplication of those two numbers each by other.

Q. How many times does the product contain the multiplicand?

A. Just so many times as there is unites in the multiplier.

Q. How is Multiplication done?

A. First I set down the multiplicand, which customarily is the greater number,
and under it I set the multiplier, each figure in its due place, and draw a
line underneath, then I begin at the first figure of the multiplier toward the
right hand, and multiply it by the first figure of the multiplicand, and set
the product right under it beneath the line, if it exceed not nine.

Q. If it exceed nine, what then?

A. Then I must keep in mind how many tens is in it, and carry so many unites
to the next place, and set down the odd figure that is more than even tens
underneath, but if it be even tens, then set down a cipher underneath.

Q. And what is then to be done?

A. Then I multiply the said first figure of the multiplier by the second
figure of the multiplicand, and to the product add the unites reserved in my
mind, and then do in all respects as I did before, and so I continue my work,
till I have multiplied the first figure of the multiplier by all the figures of
the multiplicand in order.

Q. And what do you next?

A. Then I multiply the second figure of the multiplier by all the figures of
the multiplicand, in like sort as I did the first, only I must observe to set
my first place in this second work, one place nearer the left hand, that it may
fall right under the figure I multiply by.

Q. What is the reason of that?

A. Because every unite in the second place signifies 10, in the third place,
100, etc.

Q. Is this order then to be kept in a sum of many figures or places?

A. Yea, the same order is to be observed in any sum, be the places never so
many, I must still set my first figure right under the figure I multiply by,
and then the rest in order toward the left hand.

Q. Having so set down all your figures, what remains further to be done?

A. Only to add the several numbers together in order, beginning still at the
first place next the right hand.

Q. Give one Example.

A. Let this be it then. 2345 234 9380 7035 4690 548730


Where first I say, 4 times 5 is 20, where I set a cipher below the line, and
carry 2, then I say, 4 times 4 is 16, and 2 that I carried is 18, the 8 I set
down below, and carry 1, then 4 times 3 is 12, and 1 that I carried is 13, then
I set down 3, and carry one, 4 times 2 (or 2 times 4, for it is all one) makes
8, and one that I carried is 9, which I set down in its place, and cancel the
first figure of my multiplier, with a dash through it, to signify that it has
done its office, then I begin with the next figure, saying, 3 times 5 is 15,
the five I set down right under the 3 I multiply by, and carry one in mind,
then I say, 3 times 4 is 12, and one that I carried is 13, the 3 I set down in
the second place, and carry one, and say, 3 times 3 is 9, and one I carried is
10, where I set down a (0) and carry one, then I say, 3 times 2 is 6, and one I
carry is 7, which I set down, and cancel my second figure of the multiplier,
and begin with the third, saying, 2 times 5 is 10, then I set down a cipher in
that place right under my multiplier 2, and carry one in mind to the next
place, then I say, 2 times 4 is 8, and one I carried is 9, which I set down in
the next place, in order, then I say, 2 times 3 is 6, which I set in its due
place, and lastly, I say, 2 times 2 is 4, which I write down also, so have I
multiplied all my figures of the multiplier, by all the figures of the
multiplicand, there remains to add up all into one sum, which to do I begin at
the right hand, and work as in Addition, and so the product is 548730, as in
the example.

Here is another Example for Imitation.

963852 3741 963852 3855408 6746964 2891556 3605770332
Q. What proof is for Multiplication?

A. The truest proof is by Division, but it is ordinarily proved thus, they
make a cross X

And then cast away so many nines as can be found in the multiplicand, and set
the remainder on the upper side of the cross, and do the like with the
multiplier, and set the remainder under the cross, then multiply the 2
remaidners 1 by another, and cast out the nines out of the product of them,
setting the rest at one side of the cross; and last of all cast out the nines
out of the product of the Multiplication, and mark the rest, if it be like that
which is placed on the side of the cross, it appears to be right, or else it
is not well done. A Table for Multiplication to be got by heart.
2 times 2 is 4 2 3 6 3 4 8 2 5 10 2 6 12 2 7 14 2 8 16 2 9 18 3 times 3 is 9 3
4 12 3 5 15 3 6 18 3 7 21 3 8 24 3 9 27 4 times 4 is 16 4 5 20 4 6 24 4 times 7
is 28 4 8 32 4 9 36 5 times 5 is 25 5 6 30 5 7 35 5 8 40 5 9 45 6 times 6 is 36
6 7 42 6 8 48 6 9 54 7 times 7 is 49 7 8 56 7 9 63 8 times 8 is 64 8 9 72 9
times 9 is 81

Division.
Q. Now show me what Division teaches?

A. Division teaches to find how many times one number is contained in
another number.

Q. How many numbers are to be noted in any Division?

A. Three, namely, the dividend, or number to be divided, secondly, the
divisor, or number dividing, thirdly, the quotient, which shows how often the
divisor is contained in the dividend.

Q. In what manner is Division performed?

A. First I set down my dividend, and under it I place my divisor, in such
sort, that the figures next the left hand stand right under one another, and so
each following place in order, except the divisor be a greater number than so
many figures of the dividend as stand over it, for then the divisor must be
removed a place nearer the right hand.

Q. And what do you then?

A. Then I draw a crooked line to the right hand of my figures, to place my
quotient beyond, and I consider how often I can take the divisor, out of the
number over it, and set the number of times in the quotient, and multiplying
the said quotient figure by the divisor, I substract the product from the
figures above the divisor, setting the remainder over head, cancelling the
other figures that were over the divisor, and also the divisor.

Q. And how proceed your further?

A. Then I remove my divisor one place nearer the right hand, and consider as
before how often I may take it out of the figures over head, and work in all
points as before.

Q. If there be many removings of the divisor, is that order still to be
observed?

A. Yea, where the divisor can be subtracted once or oftener out of the
dividend.

Q. But what if you cannot take the divisor out of the figures over it?

A. I must then place a cipher in the quotient, and cancel the divisor, and
remove it a place nearer the right hand, without cancelling the figures over
head, and continue the work as before.

Q. What else is to be observed in Division?

A. If the divisor have any ciphers in the first places, they may be placed
under the first places of the dividend, and divide only by the other figures,
till I come to those ciphers.

Q. What must be done with the number that remains after the division is ended?

A. If any remainder be, I set it after the quotient, and the divisor under it,
with a line drawn betwixt them, to express it in a fraction.

Q. Give an Example or two in Division.

A. Take this for one, to divid 30038 by 23, I set it down thus, 30038 ( 23


Then having drawn a crooked line, to set the quotient in, I consider how often
I can have my divisor, 23 in the number over it, which is 30, which I can have
but once, therefore I say, once 2 is 2 from 3 that is over it, and there
remains I, which I set over the 3, and cancel the 3, and also the 2 under it,
and it stands thus, 1 30038 (1 23


Then I say, once 3 is 3, from 10 that is over it, and there rests 7, and
stands thus, 17 30038 (1 23


Then I remove the divisor one place nearer the right hand,

And it stands thus, 17 30038 (1 233 2


Now I consider again as before, how often I can take 23 out of 70 that is over
it, which I find I may do 3 times, therefore I put 3 down in the quotient, and
say, 3 times 2 is 6, 6 out of 7, rests one, which I set over the 7, and cancel
the 7, and the 2 under it, and say, 3 times 3 is 9, from 10 over it, rests one,
and that I set over head, and cancel the 10, and the 3 under it, And then it
stands thus, 1 171 30038 (13 233 ^


Then I remove the divisor again, And it stands thus, 1 171 30038 (13 2333 22


Then I consider that I cannot take my divisor 23 out of the number over it
being but 13, so I set a cipher in the quotient, and cancel the divisor, and
remove it one place more, and let the figures over it stand as they were, And
then it stands thus, 1 171 30038 (130 23333 222


Now I consider again how often I may take my divisor out of the number over
it, which I find I may do 6 times, wherefore I set 6 in the quotient, and say,
6 times 2 is 12, from 13 that is over it, and there rests one, which I set over
head, and cancel 13, and 2 under it, And so it stands thus, 1 1711 30038 (1306
23333 222


Then I say 6 times 3 is 18, from 18 that is over it, rests nothing, And the
whole work stands thus, 1 1711 30038 (1306 23333 222


Here also I set an Example or two, for Imitation. Example.
1 4231 20673 (5 456780 (18271 255555 2222
(1 135 49253 (5 3692580 (82057 455555 4444


Q. What proof is for Division?

A. This, multiply the quotient by the divisor, and to the product add what
remained after the Division was ended, if any such remainder, if then it amount
justly to the dividend, it is well done, or else not.

Q. You said Multiplication was best proved by Division, how is that proof done?

A. By dividing the product of the Multiplication by the multiplier, if then,
the quotient comes justly to the multiplicand, it is well done, or else you
have failed.

Q Now having spoken of the five first kinds or rules of Arithmetic, let us
come to the application of them, to use, therefore now tell me what use may
be made thereof?

A The uses are so many, and so necessary, that it would require a large volume
to declare them, and I resolve brevity.

Q. Yet I desire to hear some of them, where the same may be made profitable?

A. Then for as much as many of the applications hereof require Reduction, I
think it needful to begin first with it.

Reduction.
Q. What does Reduction teach?

A. It teaches to turn or change numbers of one denomination, into another
denomination, as pounds into shillings, or shillings into pence, or pence into
farthings; or contrarily, farthings into pence, pence into shillings, or
shillings into pounds, etc. The like may be said of weight, measures, time,
etc.

Q. How do you turn pounds into shillings?

A. I consider 20 s. is one pound, therefore there must be 20 times so many
shillings, as there is pounds, so that multiplying the number of pounds by 20,
the product shows the number of shillings.

Q. Is the worth or value of the things so reduced (changed or) altered?

A. No, only the number and denomination is changed, but the first value
remains still, like as 20 s. is just equal to one pound, and 12 d. equal to
one shilling, etc.

Q. How change you a number of shillings into a number of pence?

A. For as much as 12 d. is in each shilling, there must be 12 times so many
pence as there is shillings, therefore I multiply the number of shillings by
12, and the product is my desire.

Q. How reduce you farthings into pence?

A. Seeing 4 farthings make but one penny, therefore there is but a fourth part
so many pence as there is farthings, wherefore I divide the number of farthings
by 4, and the quotient is my desire.

Q. And how will you turn pence into shillings, and shillings into pounds?

A. I divide pence by 12, to turn them into shillings, and shillings by 20 to
turn them into pounds.

Q. Why so?

A. Because 12 d. is but one shilling, and 20 s. is but one pound.

Q. Is there the like reason for weight, measures, time, etc?

A. Yea, altogether, for I am to consider how many of the one sort or
denomination will make one of the other, and so multiply by that number, to
turn the greater parts into the smaller, or divide by the same number to turn
the smaller parts into the greater.

Q. Give an Example in weight.

A. To turn 256 tuns, into C. q. l. o. I do thus,

First I multiply 256 by 20, because there are 20 C. in each tun, and then the
product is Cds. then to turn those into q I multiply by 4, and that product is
my desire; to turn that into ls. I multiply by 28, for that each q is 28 l. and
the product is pounds, then to turn those pounds into ounces, I multiply by 16,
and the product is the solution, etc. Example.
256 tuns. 20 5120 C. 4 20480 q s. 28 163840 4096 573440 l. 16 3440640 57344
9175040 o.


To turn ounces into pounds, divide by 16, the quotient is ls. divide pounds by
28, the quotient is q s, divide the q s by 4, the quotient is C. divide Cds. by
20, the quotient is tuns, as may be proved by working the Example above
backwards, and this I judge will suffice to explain this part of the Rule.

Q. Is there no kind of Reduction that requires both Multiplication and
Division?

A. Yes, when a certain number of the one sort makes another number of the
other sort; As for example, when 3 marks makes 2 pounds, then to turn marks
into pounds, I must multiply by 2, and divide by 3, the quotient is my desire,
but to turn pounds into marks, I must multiply by 3, and divide by 2, and the
quotient is my desired number.

Q. Show the like instance in long measures.

A. Four Else is equal to five Yards, therefore any number of Yards given, to
know how many Else it contains, I multiply by 4, and divide by 5, but if the
number given be Else, and I would know how many Yards it is, I multiply by 5,
and divide by 4, and the quotient is my desire.

Q. May the like Reduction be made in other things?

A. Yea, for 3 l. starling is worth 5 l. Flemmish, therefore any number of
pounds starling being multiplied by 5, and the product divided by 3, the
quotient shows the number of pounds Flemmish, or-any number of pounds Flemmish,
being multiplied by 3, and the product divided by 5, declares the number of
pounds starling in the quotient, the like proportion is in Flemmish Else, and
English Else, because 5 Else Flemmish is but 3 Else English, etc.

Q. Is there the like reason for other things?

A. Yea, whether coins, weights, measures, etc.

Q. But what if any remainder be in the Division?

A. It must be expressed in a fraction as before.

The Rule of Three.
Q. What other use is it for?

A. The next use I shall apply it to, is the Rule of proportion, commonly
called, the Rule of Three, and for the usefulnes of it, the Golden Rule.

Q. What does the Rule of Three teach?

A. It teaches by 3 known numbers to find a fourth, either in continual
proportion, or discontinual proportion.

Q. What call you continual proportion?

A. When the numbers are such as hold such proportion among themselves, that
what proportion the first has to the second, the like has the second to the
third, and the third to the fourth, as are 1, 3, 9, 27, and also 2, 4, 8, 16,
etc.

Q. How find you a number in continual proportion?

A. I multiply the second number by it self, and divide the product by the
first number, and the quotient is my desire.

Q. But how agrees this with your former words, where you said, that this Rule
teaches by three numbers to find a fourth?

A. Very well, for the second number here is taken twice, that is, both for the
second and third, and the fourth number that is found out, is the third number
in continual proportion.

Q. Show an Example.

A. Thus, if 3 give 9, what gives 9, here I multiply 9 by 9, gives 81, which
divided by 3, the first number, the quotient is 27, being the third number in
continual proportion, so that the 3 numbers are here, 3. 9. 27.

Q. And how find you a fourth number in continual proportion?

A. Here I may either multiply the third by it self, and divide by the second,
or else multiply the second and third together, and divide by the first, and
the quotient is my desire.

Q. Give an Example.

A. Take the former numbers, and first the former way, I multiply the 3 by it
self ( viz.) 27 by 27 thus, 27 27 189 0 54 729 (81 729 99 comes 81 for the
fourth.

Or secondly, multiply the second and third together, and divide by the first
thus, 27 00 9 243 (81 243 33 comes 81 as before.

Q. What is discontinual proportion?

A. Where the first and second hold like proportion each to other, as the third
and fourth do each to other, but the second and third hold not that proportion
together.

Q. How is the fourth number in discontinual proportion found?

A. By multiplying the second number by the third, and dividing by the first,
as before.

Q. What use may be made of these proportionals thus found?

A. They may be applied to many uses, according to the several employments men
are exercised in; as in Merchandising, Measuring heights or distances,
magnitudes or quantities, etc.

Q. How may they be so applied?

A. Thus, if 3 yards of cloth cost 12 s. what will 5 yards cost at that rate?
here 3 yards is the first number, and 12 s. the second, and 5 yards the third,
therefore I multiply the second by the third, comes 60, which divided by the
first, the quotient is 20 s. my demand.

Q. How shall I know which number ought to be first, that I may not mistake,
and so work false?

A. You must observe that the first number and the third are of one kind, and
are, or ought to be reduced to one denomination, and the second number is of
that kind which is sought in the question, so that the first and second
declare the proportion, and the third number is annexed with the demand.

Q. Make this plainer by Example.

A. In the former Example 3 yards and 5 yards are both of one kind, to wit,
yards, the second or middle number is 12, and is of another kind, namely,
shillings, now 3 yards and 12 s. declare the proportion, and are the first and
second numbers; Now, 5 being that with which the demand is joined (as what cost
5 yards) is the third number, and the fourth number (resolving the question) is
of the same kind the second is of, to wit, here shillings.

Q. What if the numbers be of several denominations, as of l. -- s. -- d. etc?

A. They must be reduced to one denomination first, before you apply them to
the Rule, and the second (or middle) number must be reduced into the
denomination of its smallest parts, in which parts the question is resolved by
the fourth number.

Q. Give an Example hereof.

A. If 3 yards and 3 quarters cost 11 s. 3d. what cost 16 yards; here the first
and third numbers being both measure, must be turned into q s, and the first
will be 15, and the third 64, the second or middle number must be turned into
pence, and will be 135 d. now work by the Rule, multiply the second and third
together, being set in order thus,

If 15 q s. cost 135 d. what cost 64 q s? 64 540 810 8640


Divide the product by the first. 143 3190 8640 (576 1555 11


Comes 576 for solution, which are pence, like the middle number, which I
reduce into shillings and pounds thus, 1 190 (0 576 (4 8 (2 122 (20 1


Comes for solution -- 2 l. -- 8s. ^d.

Q. And what do you further?

A. I reduce those smallest parts into a denomination of greater parts of its
own kind if I can, for the more easy estimation of their value.

The Backer Rule of Three.
Q. Is there any other manner of Work in the Rule of Three?

A. Yea, there is another manner of work called the Backer Rule of Three.

Q. Why is it called the Backer Rule of Three?

A. Because in the former we multiply the second by the third, and divide by
the first, but in this we multiply the first by the second, and divide by the
third number.

Q. What is the use of this Rule?

A. It serves to find out a number that holds proportion to the first, as the
third does to the second.

Q. Of what use is such proportional numbers?

A. The use is manifold, as by example may appear.

Show 2 or 3 Examples.

A. First, if 5 men do a piece of work in 15 days, how many men will do the
like in 3 days? here I multiply the first by the second, comes 75, which
divided by the third, yields 25 in the quotient, being the number of men
demanded.

Q. What is a second Example?

A. This, if a quantity of provision serve 40 men 30 days, how many men will
it serve 80 days? here I multiply and divide according to rule, and find 15
men.

Q. Give one example more.

A. Then thus, If 9 yards of cloth, of yard broad, make a man a suit and
cloak, how much broad cloth of yard and half broad will make another so large;
here I multiply 4 q, the breadth of the first cloth, by 9 yards the length
thereof, and divide by 6 q the second breadth, and it yields 6 yards for the
length of the second cloth.

Q. Is there any other use hereof?

A. Yea, many, which the studious may find by practice, but these shall serve
at present for an entrance.

Q. What if any thing remain after the Division is ended?

A. It must be annexed to the whole number in the quotient, with the divisor
under it, and a small line drawn between them, so expressing it in a fraction.

Numeration in fractions.
Q. Now tell me what use fractions are of in Arithmetic?

A. They are of like use with whole numbers.

Q. And are there the same kinds or species in fractions, as in whole numbers?

A. Yea, only some put a difference in the order of teaching them, that the
easiest may be first taught.

Q. But what mean you by species?

A. I mean several kinds of working, or several Rules, as some call them.

Q. Then rehearse the order of Rules as they are taught.

A. Numeration, Reduction, Multiplication, Division, Addition, Substraction.

Q. What shows Numeration in fractions?

A. It shows how to set down, or express any fraction, part or parts of an
unite.

Q. how is that done?

A. It is done by setting down two numbers one over another, with a line drawn
betwixt them, whereof the lower number signifies how many parts the whole
unite is divided (or supposed to be divided) into; and the uppermost number
shows how many of those parts the fraction contains.

Q. How are those two numbers called?

A. The uppermost, (or number above the line) is called the numerator, and the
other below the line is called the denominator.

Q. Show an Example or two to explain this.

A. Three quarters is set down, with a 4 under the line, signifying the number
of parts the unite is divided into; and 3 above the line, showing how many of
those parts the fraction expresses or signifies.

Q. Give another Example.

A. Five seventh parts is expressed by 5 above the line, and 7 below it, thus 5/7.

Q. Is the greatest number always set lowest?

A. Yea, in such as are proper fractions.

Q. Are there then any improper fractions?

A. There are sometimes whole numbers or mixed numbers expressed in form of
fractions, which are not properly fractions, because a fraction is always
lesser than an unite, but these are either equal to, or greater than an unite.

Q. Explain this by an Example or two.

A. Two halfs 2/2, three thirds 3/3, five fifths, 5/5, etc. are whole unites,
only expressed like fractions; also nine quarters is a mixed number expressed thus,
9/4, and signifies two unites and a quarter more.

Q. Why are such expressed like fractions?

A. For aptness, or for ease in working.

Q. What else is considerable in Numeration?

A. This, that as numbers increase infinitely above an unite, so fractions
decrease or grow less infinitely under an unite.

Q. I remember you mentioned decimal fractions before, how are such expressed?

A. They are expressed by an unite, and 1, 2, 3, 4. or more ciphers below the
line, according to the number of places, or parts the fraction is expressed in,
and with figures and ciphers above the line, expressing the number of such
parts that the fraction contains.

Q. Make this plain by an Example, two or three.

A. One half or 5 tenths is expressed by 5 above the line, and an unite with one
cipher, signifying ten or tenths under the line thus 5/10.

Secondly, 1/4, or 25 hundreds, is writ with 25 above the line, and 100 under
the line thus 35/100.

Q. How set you down 75 thousand parts?

A. Thus with a cipher, a 7, and a 5 above the line, and an unite and three
ciphers below the line, 075/1000.

Q. Are decimals always expressed thus?

A. They are often expressed by their numerator, only separated from the unite
place by a prick, and the denominator is understood to consist of so many
ciphers, as there are places in the numerator, and an unite before them to the
left hand.

Q. Show me one Example or two.

A. First, Five hundreths is writ with a cipher, and a 5 thus 05, where 100 is
understood for denominator.

Secondly, 34 ten thousand parts is expressed thus 0034, where 10000 is
understood for denominator.

Q. Is there any thing more herein to be noted, before we leave numeration?

A. Yea, that not an unite only may be divided infinitely into fractions or
parts, but also any of those parts or fractions may be divided also infinitely
into other parts, called fractions of fractions, and those also again
subdivided infinitely, etc.

Reduction.
Q. Now tell me what is Reduction?

A. Reduction is a changing of numbers or fractions out of one form or
denomination, into another.

Q. Why are they so reduced?

A. Either for more ease in working, or for the more easy estimation of the
value of two or more fractions, either compared one with another, or adding
them together, or substracting one from another.

Q. How are fractions of several denominations reduced to one denomination?

A. First multiply the denominators together, and set the product for a common
denominator; then multiply the numerator of the first, by the denominator of
the second, and set the product for a new numerator for the first fraction; and
multiply the numerator of the second, by the denominator of the first, and set
the product for the new numerator of the second fraction, and so are both those
fractions brought into one denomination.

Q. Give an Example hereof?

A. Two thirds and three quarters, being so reduced, make 8/12 for 2/3, and
9/12 for 3/4, which yet still retain their first value, but are now both of one
denomination.

Q. You have showed how to reduce two Fractions into one denomination, but what
if there be three or more?

A. Then I must multiply all the denominators together, and set the product
down so many times as there be fractions, for a common denominator to them;
and then multiply the numerator of the first, by the denominator of the second,
and the product by the denominator of the third, and that by the denominator of
the fourth, if I have so many, and so forward, and the product is a new
numerator for the first fraction; then multiply the numerator of the second, by
the denominator of the first, and the product by the denominators of the third
and fourth, and so forward, if you have so many, and set the product for a new
numerator for the second fraction, and multiply your third numerator by the
first and second denominators, and the product by the denominator of the
fourth, if you have to many, and that product is your third numerator; then if
you have so many, multiply the numerator of the fourth by the other three
denominators, the product is a new numerator for the fourth fraction, etc.

Q. Must this order then be observed still, when you have many fractions?

A. Yea, always multiply all the denominators together for a new denominator,
and one numerator by all the other denominators, except its own, the product is
a new numerator for that fraction whose numerator was taken to multiply by.

Q. Is there any other form of reducing to one denomination?

A. Yea, several varieties.

Q. What is one way?

A. This is one, when you have found a new denominator as above, then divide
the same by the denominator of any of your fractions, and multiply the quotient
by the numerator of the same, and the product shall be a new numerator for
that fraction, etc.

Q. What is another way?

A. If the lesser denominator will by any multiplication make the greater, then
note the multiplier, and by it multiply the numerator over the lesser
denominator, and in place of the lesser put the greater denominator, and so it
is done without any of the other fractions.

Q. What other sort of Reduction is there?

A. A second sort is when fractions of fractions are to be reduced to one
denomination.

Q. How is that done?

A. By multiplying the numerators each into other, and setting the product for
a new numerator, and in like sort multiply all the denominators each into
other, and take that product for a new denominator, and then they express it in
the parts of a simple fraction.

Q. What if I have a mixed number of unites, and parts to be reduced into
fraction form?

A. Multiply the unites or whole number by the denominator of the fraction, and
thereto add the numerator of the fraction, and set the offcome above the line
over the said denominator.

Q And how reduce you such an improper fraction into its unites and parts?

A. I must divide the numerator by the denominator, and the quotient shows how
many unites it contains, and the remainder, if any be, is the numerator of a
fraction, over and above the said unites in the quotient, to which the divisor
is denominator.

Q. How is a whole number reduced into the form of a fraction?

A. By multiplying it by that number, which you would have denominator to it.

Q. What is next in Reduction of Fractions?

A. To reduce a fraction into its smallest or least t^rms.

Q. What be the terms of a Fraction?

A. The terms be the numerator and denominator whereby it is expressed.

Q. What mean you by greatness and smalness of terms?

A. By great, I mean, when a fraction is expressed in great numbers, as 480/960
which in its smallest terms is (1/2) one half.

Q. How are such reduced into their smallest terms?

A. If they be both even numbers by halfing them both so often as you can, but
if they come to be odd, or either of them odd, then by dividing them by 3, 5,
7, 9, etc. which will divide them both, without any remainder, and take the
last numbers for the terms of the fraction.

Q. But is there no way to discover what number would reduce a fraction into
its smallest terms, but by halfing or parting in that sort?

A. Yes, thus, divide the denominator by the numerator, and if any thing
remain, divide the numerator by it, and if yet any thing remain, divide the
last divisor by it, and so do till nothing remain, and with your last divisor,
which leaves no remainder, divide the numerator of the fraction, and the
quotient is a new numerator, and divide the denominator in like sort by it, and
the quotient is a new denominator.

Q. What if no number will divide them evenly, till it come to one?

A. Then the fraction is in its smallest terms already.

Q. How reduce you fractions of one denomination, into another denomination?

A. I multiply the numerator by the denominator, into which I would reduce it,
and divide the product by the first denominator, and the quotient is the new
numerator.

Q. Give an Example of this.

A. If 3/4 be to be turned into twelfth parts, I multiply 12 by 3 comes 36,
which I divide by 4, the quotient is 9, so it is 9/12, equal to 3/4.

Multiplication in Fractions.
Q. How do you multiply in Fractions?

A. I multiply the numerators together for a new numerator, and multiply the
denominators together for a new denominator, which numerator and denominator,
so found, express the product of that multiplication.

Q. What other thing of note it observable in Multiplication of Fractions?

A. That two Fractions multiplied together, the product is lesser than either
of the fractions.

Q. How comes that to be, seeing the very name of Multiplication signifies to
augment or increase a thing manifold, or many times?

A. That is true, in whole numbers. where a number is increased by so many
times as the multiplier contains unites, but in fractions we must note, that
the multiplier being less than one, it makes the product lesser than the
multiplicand; for so often as the multiplier contains unites, just so often
does the product contain the multiplicand, therefore (in fractions) feeing the
multiplier does contain but such a part or parts of an unite, even so the
product does contain but the like part or parts of the multiplicand.

Division in Fractions.
Q. How is Division in Fractions performed?

A. Thus, I multiply the numerator of the dividend by the denominator of the
divisor, the product is a new numerator, then multiply the numerator of the
divisor by the denominator of the dividend, the product is a new denominator,
and this third fraction is the quotient of that division.

Q. Show an Example.

A. If I divide 3/^ by 1/^, the quotient is 3/4.

Q. How comes it to pass that in Division by a fraction the quotion is greater
than the dividend?

A. Because the divisor being lesser than an unite, is consequently oftener
contained in the dividend, for always the quotient shows how often the divisor
is contained in the dividend.

Q. How is a whole number divided by a fraction?

A. I multiply the whole number by the denominator of the fraction, and set the
product for numerator, and for a denominator, I set the numerator of the
fraction.

Q. How is a fraction divided by a whole number?

A. By multiplying the denominator by the whole number, setting the product for
a new denominator, without changing the numerator at all.

Q. May this be done otherwise?

A. Yea, if the whole number will evenly divide the numerator of the fraction,
then divide it by it, and set the quotient for numerator, and change not the
denominator at all.

Addition in Fractions.
Q. How are two or more fractions added together?

A. If they be of one denomination, then add the numerators together in one,
and under it place the common denominator, and that fraction represents the
total of that Addition.

Q. But what if they be of several denominations?

A. Then I first reduce them to one denomination, and then add their numerators
together.

Substraction in Fractions.
Q. How substract you one fraction from another?

A. If they be not of one denomination, I reduce them to one, and then
substract the lesser numerator from the greater, and set the rest for a new
numerator over the common denominator.

Q. But what if you be to substract a mixed number from another, or from a
whole number?

A. I may as before reduce them to one denomination, and then substract one
numerator from the other, or I may substract the fraction of it from an unite
converted into the same denomination, and carry one in mind to the whole
number, and then substract it out of the other whole number.

Several other means may be used in these works of fractions, but I forbear to
mention them, for brevity sake, and come to the Rule of Three.

The Rule of Three in Fractions.
Q. How work you the Rule of Three in Fractions?

A. First I place the numbers as was showed in whole numbers, and then multiply
the numerator of the first by the denominator of the second, and the product by
the denominator of the third, and the product thereof must be my divisor; then
I multiply the denominator of the first, by the numerator of the second, and
the product by the numerator of the third, and the offcome is my dividend, then
I divide the dividend by the divisor, and the quotient is the fourth number,
and answers the question.

Q. Is there any other way to work the Rule of Three?

A. Yea diverse, whereof this is one, find the divisor or first number, as
before, then for the second number, take the numerator of the second fraction,
and for the third number, take the number that comes by Multiplication of the
numerator of the third by the denominator of the first fraction, and then work
as in whole numbers.

Q. What proof is there for the Rule of Three?

A. Multiply the second and third numbers together, and multiply the first and
fourth numbers together, and if the products be equal, it is right, or else it
is not right.

Q. Give an Example in the Rule of Three.

A. If 4/5 of an Ell cost 3/^ of a pound, what is 1/^ of an Ell worth? here I
multiply 4 by 8, comes 32, and that by 3 comes 96 for divisor, then multiply 5
by 3 is 15, and that by 2 makes 30, for dividend or numerator, so it is 30/^6,
or in the smallest terms, 5/16 of a pound.

Q. Examine this by the proof.

A. Multiply 3/^ by 2/^ comes 6/24, or 1/4, again multiply 4/5 by 5/16 comes
20/80, or 1/4 likewise.

The Backer Rule of Three.
Q. How work you the Backer Rule of Three in Fractions?

A. Thus, I multiply the numerators of the first and second numbers together,
and the offcome by the denominator of the third, and the product is my
dividend, then I multiply the denominators of the first and second together;
and the offcome by the numerator of the third, and that product is my divisor,
wherewith I divide my dividend, and the quotient resolves the question.

Q. Show an Example hereof.

A. If my friend lend me 4/^ of a pound for 2/3 of a year, or 8 months, how
long ought I to lend him 2/^ of a pound to requite his courtesy?

A. I say, if 4/^ give 2/^, what shall 2/^ give, where I multiply 4 by 2 yields
8, and 8 by 3 comes 24 for dividend, then I multiply 5 by 3 comes 15, and that
by 2 gives 30 for divisor, and so placing the dividend over the divisor, I have
24/^^, or in the smallest terms 4/^ of a year, for the resolution of the
question, which is the time I ought to lend him 2/^ l. to requite his courtesy.

Q. I observe, that where the Rule of Three Direct would give the fourth number
more than the second, this gives it less, and where it would give it less, this
gives it more, what is the reason of that?

A. We are to consider in this Rule, that the less money lent, requires the more
time forbearance to balance the other; and in like sort, the less breadth a
thing is of, the more length it requires to make it equal with a quantity of
more breadth; in like manner, the more men that are employed to do a piece of
work in, the less time they will do it; so the fewer men that are to live upon
a quantity of provision, the longer time it will last, etc.

The Double Rule of Three.
Q. Is there any other form in the Rule of Three, besides the above said?

A. Yea, there is diverse which resolve double questions, and therefore are
called, the Double Rule of Three, or the Rule of Three composed of 5 numbers.

Q. What manner of questions does this Rule resolve?

A. Either such as are uncompound, or compound.

Q. What mean you by uncompound, or compound?

A. I mean by uncompound, such as are done by the Rule of Three Direct at two
workings, by compound, such as are done by once working by the Rule of Three
Direct, and another by the Backer Rule of Three.

Q. What is one question of the former sort?

A. If 5 men in 6 days earn 3 l. how much will 10 men earn in 12 days?

Q. And how is this done?

A. Either by two several workings by the Rule of Three, or it may be resolved
at once.

Q. First show me how it is done at two workings?

A. First I say, if 5 men earn 3 l. what will 10 men earn, it gives 6 l. for 6
days; then again, if 6 days gives 6 l. what gives 13 days? facit 12l.

Or secondly, I may say 6 days gives 3 l. what gives 12 days? comes 6 l. for
5 men; and then, if 5 men earn 6 l. what will 10 men earn? and it comes to 12
l. as before.

Q. How is this performed at one working?

A. Thus, I say according to the question, If 5 men in 6 days earn 3 l. what
earn 10 men in 12 days, then I multiply the first by the second, viz. 5 by 6
comes 30, which I keep for my divisor, then I multiply the other three numbers
each into other, comes 360 for my dividend, which being divided by my divisor,
gives 12 in the quotient, which signifies so many pounds, being of the
denomination of the middle number.

Q. Now show an Example of a compound question.

A. Take this, if 5 men in 6 days earn 3 l. in how long time will 3 men earn 5
l. where first I say, if 3 l. give 6 days, what will 5 l. give? comes 10
days; then by the Backer Rule of Three, If 5 men be 10 days in earning it,
how long will 3 men be? and it gives 16 2/^ days.

Q. And how is this done at one working?

A. I say, if to earn 3 l. 5 men be employed 6 days, then to earn 5 l. by 3
men, what time is required? where I multiply the first number and the fifth
number together (being the least sum of money, and the least number of men)
comes 9 for divisor, then I multiply the other three numbers together, comes
150 for my dividend, which being divided, gives 16 in the quotient, and 6
remains, which abreviated or reduced to the least terms, is 2/3 so the whole is
16 2/3 days, as before.

Q. What is another question of this sort?

A. This, 30 men work 40 yards of Arras in 6 days, in how long time will 15
men work 80 yards of the like Arras?

Q. How is this done at two workings?

A. First I say, if 40 yards require 6 days, how long time will 80 yards
require? (by the Rule of Three Direct) comes 12 days; then I say, if 30 men
be 12 days about it, how long will 15 men be about it by the Backer Rule?
and it comes to 24 days.

Q. How is this performed at one working?

A. I say thus, if 40 yards require 30 men for 6 days, then to do 80 yards by
15 men, how long time will it require? where I multiply the first number, being
40 yards, by the fifth number, being 15 men, that is the least number of yards,
and the least number of men together, that is, 40 by 15 comes 600 for my
divisor, then I multiply the other three numbers together, ( viz.) 30 by 6
comes 180, and that by 80 comes 14400 for my dividend, which I divide by my
divisor, the quotient is 24 as before, being so many days, according to the
denomination of the middle number.

Thus having briefly and plainly explained the Rules, I shall set down some
questions, with their resolutions, omitting the work, that the young learner
may practice himself in them, or such like, to make himself the more ready in
this Art.

In Reduction.
In 264 l. how many shillings is there? facit 5280s.

In 10560 s. how many pence is there? facit 126720d.

In 63360 d. how many shillings is there? facit 5280s.

In 10560 s. how many pounds is there? facit 528l.

In 2650 Else Flemmish, how many Else English? facit 1590.

In 3180 English Else, how many Flemmish Else is there? facit 5300.

In the Rule of Three.
If 42 yards cost 28 l. what cost 30 yards? facit 20l.

If 20 l. buy 30 yards, how much will 28 l. buy? facit 42 yards.

If 30 yards cost 20 l. what will 42 yards cost? facit 28l.

If 28 l. buy 42 yards, how much will 20 l. buy? facit 30 yards.

I have varied this question purposely to show the learner how he may do the
like with any other.

If 3 marks be worth 2 l. what is 369 marks worth? facit 246l.

If 20 nobles be worth 6 l. 13s. 4d. what is 1000 nobles worth? facit 333l. 6s.
8d.

If 6 o. of cloves cost 2 s. 6d. what cost 16 o. facit 6s. 8d.

If 1 C weight cost 18 s. 8d. what cost 12 l. facit 2s.

If 6 l. cost 1 s. 6d. what cost 112 l. facit 1l. 8s.

For the Backer Rule of Three.
If 5 men do a piece of work in 8 days, how many men will do the like in 2
days? facit 20 men.

If 20 men do a piece of work in 2 days, in how long time will 8 men do the
like? facit 5 days.

If a quantity of provision serve 360 men 45 days, how long will it serve 288
men? facit 56 ^^/^^^ days, or 65 1/4 days.

If 5 yards of cloth that is yard and half broad, make a man a gown, how much
baize of yard broad will line it throughout? facit 7 1/2 yards.

If a foot of board be 12 inches long, and 12 inches broad, how much will make
a foot of that board that is but 9 inches broad? facit 16 inches in length.

If I have a plot of ground that is 36 foot broad, and 64 foot long, which I
would exchange for so much of another field that is 48 foot broad, how much
ought I to have in length of the second? facit 6^ foot.

FINIS.

