A DISCOVERY OF THE TRVE Causes why IRELAND was never entirely Subdued, nor
brought under Obedience of the Crown of ENGLAND, until the Beginning of his
Majesty's happy Reign.



Printed for John Iaggard, dwelling within Temple Bar, at the Sign of the Hand
and Star.

1612.

Dedicated TO THE KING, By his MAJESTY'S Attorney General, of IRELAND.

PRINCIPIS EST VIRTUES MAXIMA, NOSSE SVOS

A Discovery of the true causes, why IRELAND was never entirely subdued, and
brought under Obedience of the Crown of ENGLAND, until the beginning of his
MAJESTY'S happy reign.
DVring the time of my Service in IRELAND (which began in the first year of
his Majesty's reign) I have visited all the Provinces of that Kingdom, in
sundry iournies and circuits. Wherein I have observed the good Temperature of
the Air; the Fruitt^iness of the Soil; the pleasant and commodious seats for
habitation; the safe and large Ports and Havens lying open for Traffic, into
all the West parts of the world; the long Inlets of many Nauigable Rivers, and
so many great Lakes, and fresh Ponds within the Land; (as the like are not to
be seen in any part of Europe) the rich Fishings, and Wild Foul of all
kinds; and lastly, th Bodies and Minds of the people, endued with
extraordinary abilities of Nature.

THe observation whereof, has bred in me some curiosity, to consider, what
were the true causes, why this Kingdom, whereof our Kings of England have
borne the Title of Soueraign Lords for the space of four hundred and odd
years (a period of time wherein diverse great Monarchies have risen from
Barbarism to Ciuillitie and fallen again to ruin) was not in all that space
of time, thoroughly subdued and reduced to Obedience of the Crown of England,
although there has been almost a continual war between the English and the
Irish; and why the manners of the mere Irish are so little altered since the
days of King Henry the second, as appears by the description made by
Giraldus Cambrensis, who lived and wrote in that time) albeit, there have bin
since that time, so many English Colonies planted in Ireland, as that, if the
people were numbered at this day by the Poll, such as are descended of English
race, would be found more in number, then the ancient Natives.

AND truly, upon consideration of the conduct and passage of affairs in former
times, I find, that the State of England ought to be cleared of an imputatio^,
which a vulgar error has cast upon it, in one point; namely, That Ireland long
since might have been subdued and reduced to Ciuility, if some statesmen in
policy, had not thought it more fit to continue that Realm in Barbarism.
Doubtless, this vulgar Opinion (or report) has no true ground, but did first
arise either out of Ignorance, or out of Malice. For it will appear by that
which shall hereafter be laid down in this Discourse, that ever since Our
Nation had any footing in this Land, the State of England did earnestly desire,
and did accordingly endeavor from time to time, to perfect the Conquest of this
kingdom, but that in every age there were found such impediments and defects in
both Realms, as caused almost an impossibility, that things should have bin
otherwise then they were.

THe Defects which hindered the Perfection Two maine impediments of the conquest.
of the Conquest of Ireland, were of two kinds, and consisted; first, in the
faint prosecution of the war, and next, in the looseness of the civil
Government. For, the Husbandman must first break the Land, before it be made
capeable of good seed: and when it is thoroughly broken and manured, if he do
not forth with cast good seed into it, it will grow wild again, and bear
nothing but Weeds. So a barbarous Country must be first broken by a war,
before it will be capeable of good Government; and when it is fully subdued and
conquered, if it be not well planted and governed after the Conquest it will
est-soones return to the former Barbarism.

TOuching the carriage of the Martial The faint prosecution of the war.
affairs, from the seventeenth year of King Henry the second, when the first
ouerture was made for the Conquest of Ireland (I mean the first after the
Norman Conquest of England) until the nine and thirtith year of Queen
ELIZABETH, when that Royal army was sent over to suppress Tirones Rebellion,
which made in the end an universal and absolute conquest of all the Irishrie:
it is most certain, that the English forces sent hither, or raised here from
time to time, were ever too weak to subdue and master so many warlike Nations
(or Septs) (...) the Irish, as did possess this Island; and besides their
weakness, they were Ill paid, and worse Governed. And if at any time there
came over anarmy of competent strength and power, it did rather terrify, then
break and subdue this people, being ever broken and dissolved by some one
accident or other, before the perfection of the Conquest.

FOr, that I call a Perfect Conquest of a Country, which does reduce all the
What is a perfect Conquest.
people thereof to the Condition of Subjects: and those I call Subjects, which
are governed by the ordinary Laws and Magistrates of the Sovereign For,
though the Prince does bear the Title of Soueraign Lord of an entire country
(as our Kings did of all Ireland) yet if there be two third parts of that
Country wherein he cannot punish Treasons, Murders, or Thefts, unless he send
an Army to do it; if the Jurisdiction of his ordinary Courts of Justice does
not extend into those parts to protect the people from wrong and oppression; if
he have no certain Reuennew, no Escheats or Forfeytures out of the same, I
cannot justly say, that such a Country is wholly conquered.

FIrst then, that we may judge and How the war has bin prosecuted since the
17. year of Henry the second.
discern whether the English forces in Ireland were at any time of sufficient
strength, to make a full and final Conquest of that Land, let us see what
extraordinary armies have bin transmitted out of England thither, and what
ordinary forces have been maintained there, and what service they have
performed from time to time, since the seventeenth year of King Henry the
second.

IN that year, Mac Murugh Lord of In the time of Henry the second.
Leinster, being oppressed by the Lords of Meth and Conaght, and expelled out
of ^s Territory, moved King Henry the second to invade Ireland, and made an
ouerture unto him for the obtaining of the Sovereign Lordship thereof. The
King refused to undertake the War himself, to avoid the charge (as King
Henry the seventh refused to undertake the discovery of the Indies for the
same Giraldus Cambrenfis.
cause) but he gave license by his Letters Patents, that such of his Subjects
might pass over into Ireland, as would at their own charge become adventurers
in that enterprise.

SO as the first attempt to conquer this The first attempt but an adventure of
private Gentlemen.
Kingdom, was but an adventure of a few private Gentlemen. Fitz-Stephen, and
FitzGirald, first brake the ice, with a party of three hundred ninety men. The
Earl Strongbow followed them with twelve hundred more, whose good success
upon the Seacoasts of Leinster and Mounster, drew over the King in person the
next year after, cum quingentis With what forces the K. himself came over.
Militihus, as Giraldus Cnmbrensis reports, who was present in Ireland at
that time. Which if they were but five hundred soldiers, seems too small a
train for so great a Prince. But admit they were five hundred knights, yet
because in those days every Knight was not a Commander of a Regiment or
Company, but most of them served as private men, (sometimes a hundred Knights
under a Spear) as appears by the Lists of the Archiu. Remem. Regis apud
Westminster.
ancient armies, we cannot conjecture his army to have been so great, as might
suffice to conquer all Ireland, being divided into so many Principalities, and
having so many Hydraes heads, as it had at that time.

For albeit, Tacitus in the life of Agricola does report, that Agricola having
subdued the greatest part of Great Britain, did signify to the Senate of Rome,
that he thought Ireland might also be conquered with one Legion, and a few ayds:

I make no doubt, but that if he had attempted the conquest thereof with a
far greater army, he would have found himself deceived in his conjecture.
For, a Barbarous Country is not so easily conquered, as a Civil, where of
Caesar had experience in his wars against the Gauls, Germans, and
Britains, who were subdued to the Roman Empire, with far greater difficulty,
then the rich kingdoms of Asia. And again, a Country possessed with many
petty Lords and States, is not so soon brought under entirely, as an entire
Kingdom Governed by one Prince or Monarch. And therefore, the late King of
Spain could sooner win the Kingdom of Portugal, then reduce the States of
the Low Countries.

But let us see the success of King What manner of Conquest King Henry the
second made of Ireland.
Henry the second, doubtless his expedition was such, as he might have said
with Caesar: veni, vidi, vici, For, upon his first arrival, his very Presence
without drawing his sword, prevailed so much, as all the Petty-Kings, or Great
Lords within Leinster, Conaght, and Mounster, submitted themselves unto him,
promised to pay him tribute, and acknowledged him their chief and Sovereign
Lord. Besides, the better to assure this inconstant Sea-Nimph (who was so
easily won) the Pope would needs give her unto him with a Ring; Coniugio
iungam stabili, propriamque dicabo. But as the Conquest was but slight and
superficial, so the Popes Donation, and the Irish Submissions, were but weak
and fickle assurances. For, as the Pope had no more interrest in this kingdom,
then He which offered to Christ all the kingdoms of the earth; so the Irish
pretend, That by their Law, a Tanist might do no Act that might bind his
successor. But this was the best assurance he could get from so many strong
Nations of people, with so weak a power: and yet he was so well pleased with
this title of the Lordship of Ireland, as he placed it in his Royal Style,
before the Dutchies of Normandy and Aquitaine. And so, being advertised of
somestirs raised by his unnatural sons in England, within five months after
his first arrival he departed out of Ireland, without striking one blow, or
building one Castle, or planting one Garrison among the Irish, neither left he
behind him one true subject more then those he found there at his coming
over, which were only the English Adventurers spoken of before, who had gained
the Port Towns in Leinster and Mounster, and possessed some scopes of land
thereunto adjoining, partly by Strongbowes alliance with the Lord of Leinster,
and partly, by plain invasion and Conquest.

And this is that Conquest of King Henry the second, so much spoken of, by so
many Writers, which though it were in no other manner then is before expressed,
yet is the entire Conquest of all Ireland, attributed unto him.

But the troth is, the conquest of Ireland was made piece and piece, by slow
steps and degrees, and by several attempts, in several ages. There were
sundry reuolutions, as well of the English fortunes, as of the Irish;
some-whiles one prevailing, somewhiles the other, and it was never brought to a
full period, till his Majesty that now is, came to the Crown.

As for King Henry the second, he was far from obtaining that Monarchy
Royal, and true Soueraignetie which his Majesty (who now reigns) has over
the Irish. For the Irish Lords did only promise to become Tributaries to King
Henry the second. And such as pay only Tribute, though they be placed by
Bodin, in the first Bodin de Repub.
degree of Subjection, are not properly Subjects but Sovereigns. For, though
they be less and inferior unto the Prince to whom they pay Tribute, yet they
hold all other points of Sovereignty; and having paid their Tribute which
they promised, to have their peace, they are quit of all other duties, as the
same Bodin writes. And therefore, though King Henry the second had the title
of Sovereign Lord over the Irish, yet did he not put those things in
execution, which are the true marks and differences of Sovereignty.

For, to give Laws unto a people, to The true marks of Sovereignty.
institute Magistrates and Officers over them; to punish and pardon Malefactors;
to have the sole authority of making war and peace, and the like; are the
true marks of Soueraignetie; which King Henry the second had not in the Irish
Countries, but the Irish Lords did still retain all these prerogatives to
themselves.

For they governed their people by the Brehon Law; they made their own
Magistrates and Officers; they pardoned and punnished all Malefactors within
their several Countries; they made war and peace one with another, without
controulment; and this they did not only during the reign of King Henry the
second, but afterward in all times, even until the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth: And it appears what manner of subjects these Irish Lords were, by
the Concord made between K. Henry the second, and Rodericke o Connor the
Irish King of Conaght, in the year 1175. which is recorded by Houeden in this
form: Hic Houeden in Henrico secundo. sol. 312.
est finis and Concordia, inter Dominu^ regem Angliae Henricu^, filiu^
Imperatricis, and Rodoricum Regem Conactae, scilicet, quod Rex etc. Angliae
concessit praedict Roderico Ligeo hominisuo, vt sit Rex sub eo paratus ad
seruitium suum, vt homo suus, etc. And the Commission, whereby King Henry the
second made William Fitz-Adelme his Lieutenant of Ireland, has this
direction; Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Regibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, and
omnibus fidelibus suis in Hibernia, Salutem. Whereby it is manifest, that he
gave those Irish Lords the Title and style of Kings.

King John likewise did grant diverse 6. Iohannis Claus. membrana. 18.
Charters to the King of Conaght, which remain in the Tower of London. And 17.
(...) Chart. m. 3.
afterward in the time of King Henry the third, we find in the Tower, a
grant made to the King of Thomond, in these words. Rex Regi Tosmond 6. Hen. 3.
chart. m. 2.
salutem. Concessimus vobis terram Tosmond quam prius tenuistis, per firmam
centum and triginta marcarum; Tenendum de nobis vsque ad aetatem nostram: And
in the pipe Rols remaining in Bremighams Tower, in the Castle of Dublin, upon
sundry Accounts Archiu. in (...) Dublin.
of the Seneshal of Vlster (when that Earldom was in the Kings hands, by
reason of the minority of the Earl) the entry of all such charges as were made
upon Oneale, for RentBeeues, or for aids toward the maintenance of the Kings
wars, are in this form. Oneal Regulus 400 vaccas 42. Hen. 3. Compotus, Will.
de la Zouch.
pro arreragio Reddit; Oneal Regulus, 100 li de Auxilio Domini Regis ad guerram
suam in wasconia sustinendam. And in one Roll 36. Hen. 3. compotus Huberti de
Rouly.
the 36. of Henry the third, Oneale Rex, 100 li. de auxilio domini Regis ad
guerram suam in VVallia sustinendam. Which seemed strange to me, that the Kings
civil Officer should give him that style upon Record, unless he meant it in
that sense as Maximilian the Emperor did, when speaking of his disobedient
Subjects; The Title (said he) of Rex Regum, does more properly belong to me,
then to any mortal Prince, for all my subjects do live as Kings, they obey me
in nothing, but do what they list. And truly, in that sense these Irish Lords
might not unfitly be termed Kings. But to speak in proper terms, we must
say with the Latin Poet, Quirexest, Regem, Maxim non habeat. But touching
these Irish Kings, I will add this note out of an ancient Manuscript, the
black Book of Christ-Church in Dublin. Isti Reges non fuerunt ordinati
solemnitate alicuius ordinis, nec vnctionis Sacramento, nec iure baereditario,
vel aliqua proprietatis successione, sed vi and armis quilib^t Regne^ suum
obtinuit: and therefore, they had no just cause to complain, when a stronger
King then themselves, became a King and Lord over them. But let us return to
our purpose, and see the proceeding of the Martial affairs.

King Henry the second, being returned How the war was prosecuted in the time
of King John.
into England, gave the Lordship of Ireland unto the Lord John his youngest
son, sur-named before that Giraldus Cambrensis.
time, Sans Terre. And the Pope confirming that gift, sent him a Crown of
Pea-cockes feathers (as Pope Clement the eight, sent the Feather of a Phoenix
(as he called it) to the Traitor Tirone.) This young Prince the Kings son,
being but twelve years of age, with a train of young Noblemen and Gentlemen, to
the number of 300. but not with any maine army, came over to take possession of
his new Patrimony, and being arrived at Waterford, diverse Irish Lords (who had
submitted themselves to his father) came to perform the like duty to him. But
that youthful company using them with scorn, because their demeanors were but
rude and barbarous, they Giraldus Cambrensis.
went away much discontented, and raised a general rebellion against him.
Whereby it was made manifest, that the Submission of the Irish Lords, and the
Donation of the Pope, were but slender and weak assurances for a kingdom.

Hereupon this young Lord was revoked, and Sir John de Courcy sent over, not
with the kings army, but with a company of Voluntaries, in number four
hundred, or thereabout. With these he atempted the conquest of Vlster, and in
four or five encounters, did so beat the Irishry of that Province, as that he
gained the Maritime Giraldus Cambrensis.
Coasts thereof, from the Boyne to the Bann; and thereupon, was made Earl of
Vlster. So as now the English had gotten good footing in all the Provinces of
Ireland. In the first three Provinces of Leinster, Mounster, and Conaght, part
by the sword, and part by submission and alliance. And lastly, in Vlster, by
the invasion and victories of Sir John de Courcy.

From this time forward, until the seventeenth year of King John (which was a
space of more then 30. years) there was no army transmitted out of England, to
finish the Conquest, Howbeit in the mean time, the English Adventurers and
Colonies already planted in Ireland, did win much ground upon the Irish;
Namely, the Earl Strongbow, having married the Daughter of Mac Murrogh, in
Leinster; the Lacies in Meth; the Giraldines, and other Adventurers in
Mounster, the Audeleyes, Gernons, Clintons, Russels, and other Voluntaries of
Sir John de Courcies retinue, in Vlster; and the Bourkes (planted by william
Fitz-Adelme) in Conaght. Yet were the English reputed but Part-Owners of
Ireland at this time, as appears by the Commission of the Popes Legate in the
time of King Richard the first, whereby he had power to exercise his
Jurisdiction, in Anglia, wallia, ac illis Hiberniae partibus, in Matthew. Paris
in Richardo primo so. 1519.
quibus Johannes Moretonii Comes potestatem habet et dominium, as it is
recorded by Mat. Paris.

King John, in the twelfth year of his reign, came over again into Ireland:
the Stories of that time say, With a great army, but the certain numbsrs are
not recorded: yet it is credible, in regard of the troubles wherewith this
King was distressed in England, that this army was not of sufficient strength
to make an entire Conquest of Ireland; and if it had bin of sufficient Matthew,
Paris.
strength, yet did not the King stay a sufficient time to perform so great an
action, for he came over in June, and returned in Septem. the same year
Howbeit in that time, the Irish Lords for the most part, submitted themselves
to him, as they had done before to his Father: which was but a mere mockery
and imposture. For his back was no sooner turned, but they returned to their
former rebellion: and yet this was reputed a second Conquest. And so this King
giving order for the building of some Castles upon the Borders of the English
Colonies, left behind him the Bishop of Norwich, for the civil government of
the Land; but he left no standing army to prosecute the conquest: only the
English Colonies which were already planted, were left to themselves to
maintain what they had got, and to gain more if they could.

The personal presence of these two great Princes, King Henry the second, and
King John, though they performed no great thing with their armies, gave such
countenance to the English Colonies, which increased daily by the coming over
of new voluntaries and adventurers out of England, as that, they enlarged their
Territories very much. Howbeit after this time the kings of England, either
because they presumed that the English Colonies were strong enough to root out
the Irish by degrees, or else because they were diuerted or disabled otherwise
(as shall be declared hereafter) never sent over any Royal army, or any
numbers of men worthy to be called an army into Ireland, until the thirty six
year of king Edward the third, when Lionell Duke of Clarence, the kings
second son, having married the daughter and heir of Vlster, was sent over
with an extraordinary power in respect of the time (for the wars betwixt
England and France, were then in their heat) as well to recover his Earldom
of Vlster, which was then ouer-run and possessed by the Irish, as to reform the
English Colonies, which were become strangely degenerate throughout the whole
kingdom.

FOr though king Henry the third, gave the whole Land of Ireland to Edward the
Prince, his eldest son, and his heirs, Ita quod non Separetur a Cona This
Charter yet remains perfect, with an entire Scale in the Treasury at
Westminster.
Angliae. Whereupon it was styled the Land of the Lord Edward, the kings
eldest son: and all the Officers of the Land, were called the Officers
Archiu. in Castro Dublin. and Archiu. Turr. 52 Hen. 3. Patent. m. 9.
of Edward Lord of IRELAND; and though this Edward were one of the most active
Princes that ever lived in England, yet did he not either in the life time of
his father, or during his own reign, come over in person, or transmit any army
into Ireland, but on the other side, he drew sundry ayds and supplies of men
out of Ireland, to serve him in his wars in Scotland, wales, and Gascoigne.
And again, though king Edw: the second sent over Piers Gaueston with a great
retinue, it was never intended he should perfect the Conquest of Ireland; for
the K. could not want his company so long a time, as must have been spent in
the finishing of so tedious a work.

So then, in all that space of time, between the twelfth year of king How the
martial affairs were carried from the 12. year of king John, to the 36 year
of King Edward the 3.
John, and the 36. year of king Edward the third, containing 150. years, or
thereabouts, although there were a continual bordering war between the English
and the Irish, there came no royal army out of England, to make an end of the
war. But the chief Governors of the realm, who were at first called
Custodes Hiberniae; and afterward Lords Justices, and the English Lords, who
had gotten so great possessions and Royalties, as that they presumed to make
war and peace without direction from the State, did levy all their forces
within the land. But those forces were weakly supplied, and Ill Governed, as I
said before. Weakly supplied with men and Money; and governed with the worst
Discipline that ever was seen among men of war. And no marvel, for it is an
infallible rule, that an army ill paid, is ever unruly, and Ill governed. The
standing forces here, were sildome or never re-enforced out of England, and
such as were either sent from thence, or raised here, did commonly do more hurt
and damage to the English Subjects, then to the Irish enemies, by their
continual Sesse and Extortion. Which mischief did arise, by reason that
little or no Treasure was sent out of England, to pay the soldiers wages: Only
the Kings reuennew in Ireland was spent, and wholly spent in the public
service; and therefore, in all the ancient Pipe-Rols Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
in the times of Henry the third, Edward the first, Edward the second, and
Edward the third, between the Receipts and allowances, there is this entry;
In Thesauro nihil. For the Officers of the State and the Army, spent all; so,
as there was no surplusage of Treasure; and yet that All was not sufficient.
For in default of the Kings pay, as well the ordinary forces which stood
continually, as the extraordinary, which were levied by the chief Governor,
upon iourneyes, and general hoastings, were for the most part laid upon the
poor subject descended of English race; howbeit this burden was in some
measure tolerable in the time of King Henry the third, and King Edward the
first; but in the time of King Edward the second, Maurice Fitz-Thomas of
Desmond, being chief Commander of the army against the Scots, began that
wicked extortion of Coigne and Livery, and pay, that is; He and his army took
Horse meat and Manfmeate, Statut. 10 H. 7. cap. 4. Rot. Parliam. in Castro
Dublin.
and money, at their pleasure, without any Ticket, or other fatisfaction. And
this was after that time, the general fault of all the Governors and
Commanders of the army in this Land. Only the Golden saying of Sir Thomas
Rookesby, who was Justice Annals Hibernie in Camden.
in the thirtieth year of king Edward the 3. is recorded in all the Annalles
of this kingdom, That he would eat in wodden dishes, but would pay for his
Meat, Gold and Silver. Besides, the English Colonies being dispersed in every
Province of this kingdom, were enforced to keep continual guards upon the
Borders and Marches round about them; which Guardes, consisting of idle
soldiers, were likewise imposed as a continual burden upon the poor
English Freeholders, whom they oppressed and impouerished in the same manner.
And because the great English Lords and Captains had Baron Finglas. Manus.
power to impose this charge, when, Stat. 10. H. 7. cap. 4. Rot. Parliam in
Castro Dublin.
and where they pleased, many of the poor Freeholders, were glad to give unto
those Lords, a great part of their Lands, to hold the rest free from that
extortion: And many others, not being able to endure that intolerable
oppression, did utterly quit their freeholds, and returned into England. By
this mean, the English Colonies grew poor and weak, though the english Lords
grew rich and mighty: for they placed Irish Tenants upon the Lands
relinquished by the English; upon them they levied all Irish exactions; with
them they married, and fostered, and made Gossips: so as within one age, the
English, both Lords and Freeholders, became degenerate and mere Irish in their
Language, in their apparel, in their arms and manner of fight, and all other
Customs oflife whatsoever.

By this it appears, why the extortion of Coigne and Liuory, is called
Statut. 11. H. 4. cap. 6. Baron Finglas. M. S.
in the old Statutes of Ireland, A Damnable custom; and the imposing and
taking thereof, made High Treason. And it is said in an ancient discourse Of
the De^y of Ireland, that though it were first invented in Hell, yet if it had
been used and practiced there, as it has been in Ireland, it had long since
destroyed the very kingdom of Beelzebub. In this manner was the war of
Ireland carried, before the coming over of Lionel Duke of Clarence.

This young Prince, being Earl of Vlster, and Lord of Conaght, in right of his
wife (who was daughter and heir of the Lord William Bourke, the last Earl of
Vlster of that family, slain by treachery at Knockfergus) was made the Kings
Lieutenant of Ireland, and The Army transmitted with Lionell Duke of Clarence,
the 36. of Edw. the 3.
sent over with an army, in the 36. year of King Edward the third. The Roll and
List of which Army, does remain of Record in the Kings Remembrauncers Archiu.
Remcm regis apud. westminster.
Office in England (in the press de Rebust augentibus Hiberniam) and does not
contain above fifteen hundred men by the Poll; which because it differs
somewhat from the manner of this age, both in respect of the Command and the
Entertainment, I think it not impertinent to take a brief view thereof.

The Lord Lionel was General and under him Raulf earl of Staffora, James
Earl of Ormond, Sir John Carew Banneret, Sir William winsor, and other knights
were Commanders.

The entertainment of the General upon his first arrival, was but six
shillings eight pence, per diem, for himself; for five Knights, two shillings
a piece, per diem; for 64. Esquires, xij. d a piece, per diem; for 70 Archers,
vj. d. a piece, per diem. But being shortly after created Duke of Clarence
(which honor was conferred upon him being here in Ireland) his entertainment
was raised to xiij. s. iiij. d. per diem, for himself, and for 8. Knights, ij
s. a piece per diem, with an increase of the number of his Archers, viz: 360
Archers on horseback, out of Lancashire, at vjd. a piece per diem, and 23.
Archers out of Wales, at ij d. a piece per diem.

The earl of Staffords entertainment, was for himself vi s. viij d. per diem,
for a Banneret, iiij s. per diem, for xvij. Knights, ij s. a piece per diem,
for 78. esquires, xij d. a piece per diem, for 100 Archers on horseback, vj d.
a piece per diem. Besides, he had the command of 24. Archers out of
Staffordshire, 40. Archers out of worcestershire, and six Archers out of
Shropshire, at iiij d. a piece per diem.

The entertainment of James earl of Ormond, was for himself iiij s. per diem,
for two Knights, ij s. a piece per diem, for 27 esquires xij d. a piece per
diem, for 20 Hoblers armed (the Irish Horsemen were so called, because they
served on Hobbies) vj d. a piece per diem, and for 20. Hoblers not armed, iiij
d. a piece per diem.

The entertainment of Sir John Carew Banneret, was for himself iiij s.
perdiem, for one Knight, ij s. per diem, for eight squires, xij d. a piece, per
diem, for ten Archers on horseback, vj d. a piece per diem.

The entertainment of Sir william winsore, was for himself ij s. per diem:
for two Knights, ij s. a piece per diem: for 49. Squiers xij d. a piece per
diem, for six Archers on horseback, vj d. a piece per diem.

The like entertainment rateably, were allowed to diverse Knights and Gentlemen
upon that List, for themselves and their several retinewes, whereof some were
greater, and some less, as they themselves could raise them among their
tenants and Followers.

FOr in ancient times, the King himself did not leuy his armies by his The
manner of leuying Soldiers in former ages.
own immediate authority or Commission, but the Lords and Captains did by
Indenture Covenant with the King, to serve him in his Wars with certain
numbers of men, for certain wages and entertainments, which they raised in
greater or less numbers, as they had favor or power with the people. This
course has been changed in later times upon good reason of State: For the
Barons and Chief Gentlemen of the realm, having power to use the Kings
prerogative in that point, became too popular; whereby they were enabled to
raise forces even against the Crown it self, which since the Statutes made for
leuying and mustering of soldiers by the Kings special Commission, they
cannot so easily perform, if they should forget their duties.



THis Lord Lieutenant, with this small What service Lionel Duke of Clarence
performed.
Army, performed no great service; and yet upon his coming over, all men who
had Land in Ireland, were by Proclamation re maunded back out of England
thither, and both the Archiu. Turr. 36. Edw. 3. Claus. m. 21 in dorso. and m.
30.
Clergy and Laity of this land, gave two years profits of all their Lands
and Tithes, toward the maintenance of the war here: only he suppressed some
Rebels in Low Leinster, and recovered the Maritime parts of his erldome of
Vlster. But his best service did consist in the well-gouerning of his army, and
in holding that famous Parliament at Kilkenny; wherein the extortion of the
soldier, and the degenerat manners of the English (briefly spoken of before)
were discovered, and Laws made to reform the same: which shall be declared
more at large hereafter.

THe next Lieutenant, transmitted Sir William Winsor Lieutenant, 47. Ed. 3. His
forces and service.
with any forces out of England, was Sir William winsore; who in the 47 year
of King Edward the third, undertook the Custody, not the Conquest, of this
Land (for now the English made rather a Defensive then an inuasiue war) and
withal, to defray the whole charge of the kingdom, for eleauen thousand two
hundred thirteen pounds, six shillings and eight pence, as appears by the
Indenture between him and the King, remaining of Record in the Tower of
London. But it 47. Edw. 3. Claus. m. 1.
appears by that which Froissard reports, that Sir william winsore was so
far from subduing the Irish, as that himself reported: That he could never
Stow in Rich. 2.
have access to understand and know their Countries, albeit he had spent more
time in the service of Ireland, then any Englishman then living.

ANd here I may well take occasion, The State of the Reuennue of Ireland, in
the time of Edward the 3.
to show the vanity of that which is reported in the Story of walsingham,
touching the reuennue of the Crown in Ireland, in the time of king Edward the
third. For he setting forth the State of things there, in the time of King
Richard the 2. Writes thus: Walsingham in Richard the 2.
Cum Rex Angliae illustris, Edwardus tertius illic posuisset Bancum suum at^
Iudices, cum Scaccario, percepit inde ad Regalem Fiscum annuatim triginta
millia librarum; modo propter absentiam ligeorum, and hostium potentiam, nihil
inde venit: sed Rex per annos singulos, de suo Marsupio, terrae defensoribus
soluit Triginta millia marcarum, ad regni sui dedecus et fisci grauissimum
detrimentu^.

If this Writer had known, that the Kings Courts had been established in
Ireland more then a hundred years before King Edw. 3. was borne, or had seen
either the Parliament Rols in England, or the Records of the Receipts and yssues
in Ireland, he had not left this vain report to posterity. Archiu. Turr.
For both the Benches and the Exchequer were erected in the twelfth year 11. H.
3. patent m. 3.
of King John. And it is recorded in the Parliament Rols of 21, of Edward the
21. Ed. 3. m. 41
third, remaining in the Tower, that the Commons of England made petition that
it might be enquired why the King received no benefit of his land of Ireland,
considering he possessed more there, then any of his Ancestors had before him.
Now, if the King at that time, when there were no Standing forces maintained
there, had received 30000. pound yearly at his Exchequer in Ireland, he must
needs have made profit by that land, considering that the whole charge of the
kingdom in the 47. year of Edward the third (when the King did pay an army
there) did amount to no more then eleven thousand and two hundred 47. Ed. 3.
claus. pers. 2. m. 24. and 26.
pounds, per annum, as appears by the contract of Sir William winsore.

Besides, it is manifest by the PipeRolles of that time, whereof many are yet
preserved in Breminghams Tower; and are of better credit then any Archiu. in
Castro Dublin.
Monks story, that during the reign of King Edward the third, the reuenew of
the Crown of Ireland, both certain and casual, did not rise unto 10000. li.
per annum, though the Medium be taken of the best seven years that are to be
found in that Kings time. The like Fable has Hollingshead Hollingshead in R.
2.
touching the reuennue of the Earldom of Vlster; which (says he) in the
time of king Richard the second was thirty thousand Marks by the year;
whereas in truth, though the Lordships of Conaght and Meth (which were then
parcel of the inheritance of the Earl of Vlster) be added to the account,
the reuennew of that earldom came not to the third part of that he writes.
For the Account of the profits of Vlster yet remaining in Breminghams Tower,
made by william Fitz-warren, Seneshall and Farmour of Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
5. Edw. 3.
the Lands in Vlster, seized into the Kings hands after the death of walter de
Burgo, Earl of Vlster, from the fifth year of Edward the third, until the
eight year, do amount but to 900. and odd pounds, at what time the Irishry
had not made so great an invasion upon the earldom of Vlster, as they had
done in the time of King Richard the second.

As vain a thing it is, that I have seen written in an ancient. Manuscript,
touching the Customs of this realm in the time of King Edward the third, that
those dutics in those days should yearly amount to 10000. Marks, which by
mine own search and view of the Records here, I can justly control. For
upon the late reducing of this ancient inheritance of the crown which had
been detained in most of the Port-Townes of this Realm, for the space of a
hundred years and vpwardes, I took some pains (according to the duty of my
place) to vis^ all the Pipe-Rolles, wherein the Accounts of Customs are
contained, and found those duties answered in every Port, for 250. years
together, but did not find that at any time they did exceed a thousand pound,
Per annum; and no marvel, for the subsidy of Pondage was not then known, and
the greatest profit did arise by the Cocquet of Hides; for Wool, and
Wooll-fels were ever of little value in this Kingdom.

But now again let us see how the Martial affayrs proceeded in Ireland. Sir
william winsor continued his government till the latter end of the reign of King
Edward the third, keeping, but not enlarging, the English borders.

IN the beginning of the reign of King How the war proceeded in the time of K.
Richard the 2
Richard the second, the State of England began to think of the recovery of
Ireland: For then was the first Statute made against Absentees, commanding al
such as 3. Rich. 2. Archite. T^ Rot. Parliam. 42.
had Land in Ireland, to return and reside thereupon, upon pain to forfeite
two third parts of the profit thereof. Again, this King, before himself
intended to pass over, committed the Government of this Realm to such great
Lords successively, as he did most love and favor: first to the Earl of
Oxford his Chief Minion, whom he created Marquess of Dublin, and Duke of
Ireland: next to the Duke of Surrey his half Brother: and lastly, to the Lord
Mortimer, Earl of March and Vlster, his Cousin and heir apparent.

Among the Patent Rolls in the Pat. 2. pars. 9. Rich. 2. m. 24.
Tower, the ninth year of Rich. the 2. we find five hundred men at Arms at
xij. d. a piece, Per diem; and a 1000. A chers at vi. pence a piece, per diem,
appointed for the Duke of Ireland, Super Conquestu illius terrae per duos
annos: for those are the words of that Record; But for the other two
Lieutenants, I do not find the certain numbers, whereof their armies did
consist. But certain it is, that they were scarce able to defend the English
borders, much less to reduce the whole Island. For one of them; namely, the
Earl of March was himself slain upon the borders of Meth; for revenge of
whose death, the King himself made his second voyage into Ireland, in the last
year of his reign. For his first voyage in the eighteenth year of his reign
(which was indeed a VoyageRoyall) was made upon another motive and occasion,
which was this; Walsingham in Richard the 2.
Upon the vacancy of the Empire, this King having married the King of Bohemiaes
Daughter (whereby he had great alliance in Germany) did by his Ambassadors
solicit the Princes Electors to choose him Emperor: but Annals. Tho.
Otterbourne Manuscript.
another being elected, and his ambas sadors returned, he would needs know of
them the cause of his repulse in that Competition: they told him plainly, that
the Princes of Germany did not think him fit to command the Empire, who was
neither able to hold that which his Ancestors had gained in France, nor to
rule his inso lent Subjects in England, nor to Master his rebellious people of
Ireland. This was enough to kindle in the heart of a young Prince, a desire to
perform some great enterprise. And therefore finding it no fit time to attempt
France, he resolved to finish the Conquest of Ireland; and to that end, he
levied a mighty army, consisting of four thousand men at Arms, and 30000.
Archers, which was a sufficient power to have reduced the whole Island, if he
had first broken the Irish with a war, and after established the English
Laws among them, and not have been satisfied with their light submissions
only, wherewith, in all ages they have mocked and abused the State of England.
But the Irish Lords knowing this to be a sure policy to dissolve the forces
which they were not able to resist (for their Ancestors had put the same trick
and imposture upon King John, and King Henry the second) as soon as the King
was arrived with his army, which he brought over under S. Edwards Banner (whose
name was had in great veneration amongst the Irish) they all made offer Stow in
Rich. 2.
to submit themselves. Whereupon the Lord Thomas Mowbray, Earl of Nottingham,
and Marshall of England, was authorized by special Commission, Archiu. in
officio Remcmorat. regis apud Westmon.
to receive the homages and Oaths of fidelity, of all the Irishrie of Leinster.
And the King himself having received humble Letters from Oneale, (wherein he
styleth himself Prince of the Irishry in Vlster, and yet acknoledgeth the King
to be his Soueraign Lord, and perpetuus Dominus Hiberniae) removed to
Droghedab, to accept the like submissions from the Irish of Vlster. The men of
Leinster, namely, Mac Murrogh, O Byrne, O Moore, O Murrogh, O Nolan, and the
chief of the Kinshelaghes, in an humble and solemn manner did their homages,
and made their Oaths of fidelity to the Earl Marshall, laying aside their
girdles, their skeins and their Caps, and falling down at his feet upon their
knees. Which when they had performed, the Earl gave unto each of them, Osculum
pacis.

Besides, they were bound by feueral Indentures, upon great pains to be paid
to the Apostolic Chamber, not only to continue loyal subjects, but that by
a certain day prefixed, they and all their Sword men should clearly
relinquish and give up unto the King and his successors all their Lands and
possessions which they held in Leinster, and (taking with them only their
mooueable goods) should serve him in his wars against his other Rebels. In
consideration whereof, the King should give them pay and pensions during their
lives, and bestow the inheritance of all such lands upon them, as they should
recover from the Rebels, in any other part of the Realm. And thereupon, a
pension of eighty Marks, per annum, was granted to Art'Mac Murrogh, chief of
the Kauanaghes; the enroulement whereof, I found in the White Book of the
Exchequer here. And this was the effect of the service performed by the Earl
Marshall, by virtue of his Commission. The King in like manner received the
submissions of the Lords of Vlster, namely; O Neal, O Hanlon, Mac Donel, Mac
Mahon, and others; who with the like Humility and Ceremony, did homage and
fealty to the Kings own person; the words of O Neales homage as they are
recorded are not unfit to be remembered: Ego Nelanus Oneal Senior tam pro
meipso, qua^ pro filijs mels, and tota Natione mea and Parentelis meis, and pro
omnibus subdit is me is deuenio' Ligeus homo vester, etc. And in the Indenture
between him and the King, he is not only bound to remain faithful to the
Crown of England, but to restore the Bonaght of Vlster, to the Earl of
Vlster, as of right belonging to that Earledomc, and usurped among other things
by the Oneales.

These Indentures and submissions, with many other of the same kind (for there
was not a Chieftaine or head of an Irish sept, but submitted himself in one
form or other) the King himself caused to be enrolled and testified by a
Notary public, and delivered the enroulments with his own hands to the
Bishop of Salisbury, then Lord Treasurer of England, so as they have been
preserved, and are now to be found in the Office of the Kings Remembrancer
there.

With these humilities they satisfied the young King, and by their bowing and
bending, avoided the present storm, and so brake that Army, which was prepared
to break them. For the King having accepted their submissions, received them
in Osculo pacis, feasted them, and given the honor of Knighthood to diverse of
the^, did break up and dissolve his army, and returned into England with much
honor, and small profit, (says Froissard.) For though he had spent a huge mass
of Treasure in transporting his army, by the countenance whereof, he drew on
their submissions, yet did he not increase his reuennew thereby one sterling
pound, nor enlarged the English borders the breadth of one Acre of Land; neither
did he extend the Jurisdiction of his Courts of Justice one foot further then
the English Colonies, wherein it was used and exercised before. Besides, he was
no sooner returned into England, but those Irish Lords laid aside their maskes
of humility, and scorning the weak forces which the King had left behind him,
began to infest the borders; in defense whereof, the Lord Roger Mortimer
being then the Kings Lieutenant, and heir apparent of the Crown of England,
was slain, as I said before. Whereupon the king being moved with a just
appetite of revenge, came over again in person, in the 22. year of his
reign, with as potent an army, as he had done before, with a full purpose to
make a full Conquest of Ireland: he landed at waterford, and passing from
thence to Dublin, through the wast Countries of the Murroghes, Kinshelaghes,
Cauanaghes, Birnes, and Tools, his great army was much distressed for want of
victuals and carriages, so as he performed no memorable thing in that journey;
only in the Cauanaghes Country, he cut and cleared the paces, and bestowed
the honor of Knighthood upon the Lord Henry, the Duke of Lancasters son, who
was afterward King Henry the fifte, Hollingshead in Richard the 2.
and so came to Dublin, where entering into Counsel how to proceed in the
war, he received news out of England, of the arrival of the bannished Duke
of Lancaster at Rauenspurgh, usurping the Regal authority, and arresting and
putting to death his principal Officers.

This advertisement suddenly brake off the kings purpose touching the
prosecution of the war in Ireland, and transported him into England, where
shortly after he ended both his reign and his life. Since whose time, until
the 39. year of Q Elizabeth, there was never any army sent over of a
Competent strength or power to subdue the Irish, but the war was made by the
English Colonies, only to defend their borders; or if any forces were
transmitted over, they were sent only to suppress the rebellions of such as
were descended of English race, and not to enlarge our Dominion over the Irish.

DVring the reign of king Henry Henry 4.
the fourth, the Lord Thomas of Lancaster the Kings second son, was The Lord
Thomas of Lancaster his service.
Lieutenant of Ireland, who for the first eight years of that Kings reign,
made the Lord Scroope, and others his Deputies, who only defended the Marches
with forces levied within the Land. In the eight year that Prince came over in
person with a small retinue. So as wanting a sufficient power to attempt or
perform any great service, he returned within seven months after into
England. Yet during his personal abode there, he was hurt in his own person
within one mile of Dublin, upon an encounter with the Irish enemy. He took the
submissions of O Birne of the Mountains, Mac Mahon, and O Rely, by several
Indentures, (...) Rememorat. regis apud westminster.
wherein O Birne does Covenant, that the King shall quietly enjoy the Manor of
New Castle; Mac Mahon accepts a State in the Ferny for life, rendering ten
pound a year; and O Reley does promise to perform such duties to the Earl of
March and Vlster, as were contained in an Indenture dated the 18. of Richard
the second.

IN the time of K. Henry the fifth, there Henry 5.
came no forces out of England. Howbeit the Lord Furniual being the kings The
Lord Furniuall his service.
Lieutenant, made a martial circuit, or journey, round about the Marches and
Borders of the Pale, and brought all the Irish to the Kings peace, beginning
Alb. libr. Scacc. Dublin.
with the Birnes, Tools, and Cauanaghes on the South, and so passing to the
Moors, O Connors, and Offerals in the West; and ending with the O Relies, Mac
Mahons, O Neales, and O Haulons in the North. He had power to make them seek
the Kings peace, but not power to reduce them to the Obedience of Subjects:
yet this was then held so great and worthy a service, as that the Lords and
chief Gentlemen of the Pale, made certificate thereof in French unto the King,
being then in France: which I have seen Recorded in the white Book of the
Exchequer at Dublin. Howbeit his Army was so ill paid and governed, as the
English suffered more damage by the Sesse of his Soldiers (for now that
Monster ( Coigne, and Liuerie) which the Statute of Kilkenny had for a time
abolished, was risen again from hell) then they gained profit or security, by
abating the pride of their enemies for a time.

DVring the minority of King Henry Henry 6.
the sixth, and for the space of seven or eight years after, the Lientenants
and Deputies made only a bordering war upon the Irish, with small and
scattered forces; howbeit, because there came no treasure out of England to pay
the Soldier, the poor English fubiect, did bear the burden of the men of
war in every place, and were thereby so weakened and impouerished, as the
State of things in Ireland, stood very desperate.

Whereupon, the Cardinal of winchester (who after the death of Humfrey Duke of
Gloucester, did wholly sway the State of England) being desirous to place the
Duke of Somerset in the Regencie of France, took occasion to remove Richard
Duke of York from Richard Duke of York his service.
that government, and to send him into Ireland, pretending that he was a most
able and willing person, to perform service there, because he had a great
inheritance of his own in Ireland; namely, the Earledom of Vlster, and the
Lordships of Conaght and Meth, by descent from Lionell Duke of Clarence.

We do not find that this great Lord came over with any numbers of waged
soldiers, but it appears upon what good terms he took that Government, by
the Covenants between the King and him, which are recorded and confirmed by
Act of Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
Parliament in Ireland, and were to this effect:

1. That he should be the Kings Lieutenant of Ireland, for ten years.

2. That to support the charge of that Country, he should receive all the kings
reuennewes there, both certain and casual, without account.

3. That he should be supplied also with treasure out of England, in this
manner; he should have four thousand Marks for the first year, whereof he
should be imprested 2000. li. before hand; and for the other nine years, he
should receive 2000. li. per annum.

4. That he might Let to Ferme the Kings Lands, and place and displace all
Officers at his pleasure.

5. That he might leuy and wage what numbers of men, he thought fit.

6. That he might make a Deputy, and return at his pleasure.

We cannot presume that this Prince kept any great army on foot, as well
because his means out of England were so mean, and those ill paid, as
appears by his passionate letter written to the Earl of Salisbury his brother
in Law; the Copy whereof, is Registered in the Story of this time: as also
Hollingshead in Henry the sixth.
because the whole Land, except the English Pale, and some part of the
Earldom of Vlster, upon the Sea Coasts, were possessed by the Irish. So as the
Reuennew of the Kingdom, which he was to receive, did amount to little. He
kept the Borders and Marches of the Pale with much adoo; he held many
Parliaments, wherein sundry Laws were made, for erecting of Castles in Louth,
Meth, and Kildare, to stop the incursions of the Irishrie. And because the
soldiers for want of pay were sessed and laid upon the subjects against
their wills; upon the prayer and importunity of the Commons, this extortion
was declared to be High Treason. But to the end, that Rot. Parliam. in Castro
Dublin
some means might be raised to norish some forces for defense of the Pale, by
another Act of Parliament, every twenty pound Land was charged with the
furnishing and maintenance of one Archer on horseback. Archiu Tur. 17 Hen. 6.
Claus. m. 20.


Besides, the native subjects of Ireland seeing the kingdom utterly ruined,
did pass in such numbers into England, as one Law was made in England, to
transmit them back again; and another Law made here to stop their passage in
every Port and creek. Manuscript of Baron Finglas.
Yet afterward, the greatest parts of the Nobility and Gentry of Meth, past
over into England, and were slain with him at wakefield in Yorkshire.

Lastly, the State of England was so far from sending an army to subdue the
Irish at this time, as among the Articles of greeuances exhibited Hollingshead
in Hen. 6.
by the Duke of York against K. Henry the sixte, this was one; That diverse
Lords about the King, had caused his Highness to write Letters unto some of
his Irish enemies; whereby they were encouraged to attempt the conquest of the
said Land. Which Letters, the same Irish enemies had sent unto the Duke;
maruailing greatly, that such Letters should be sent unto them, and speaking
therein great shame of the Realm of England.

After this, when this great Lord was returned into England, and making claim
to the Crown, began the War betwixt the two Houses; It cannot be
conceived, but that the kingdom fell into a worse and weaker estate.

WHen Edward the fourth was settled Edward 4
in the kingdom of England, How the war was maintained in the time of King
Edward the 4
he made his Brother George Du. of Clarence, Lieutenant of Ireland. This Prince
was born in the Castle of Dublin, during the Government of his father the Duke
of York; yet did he never pass over into this kingdom, to govern it in
person, though he held the Lieutenancie many years. But it is manifest, that
King Edward the fourth did not pay any army in Ireland during his reign; but
the men of war did pay themselves by taking Coigne and Livery upon the
Country: Holling shead in Edward the 4
which extortion grew so excessive and intolerable, as the Lord Tiptoft Book
of Howth. Manus.
being Deputy to the Duke of Clarence, was enforced to execute the Law upon
the greatest Earl in the Kingdom; namely, Desmond; who lost his head at
Drogheda for this offense. Howbeit, that the State might The fraternity of
Saint George in Ireland.
not seem utterly to neglect the defense of the Pale, there was a fraternity
of men at arms, called the Brotherhood of S. George, erected by Parliament,
the 14. of Edward the fourth, 14. of Edw. 4. Rot Parliam. Dublin.
consisting of thirteen the most Noble and worthy persons within the four
shires. Of the first foundation, were Thomas Earl of Kildare, Sir Rowland
Eustace, Lord of Port-lester, and Sir Robert Eustace for the County of Kildare;
Robert Lord of Howth, the Mayor of Dublin, and Sir Robert Dowdall, for the
County of Dublin; the Vicount of Gormauston, Edward Plunket, Seneshall of Meth;
Alexander Plunket, and Barna be Barnewale, for the County of Meth; the Mayor of
Drogheda, Sir Lawraunce Taaffe, and Riehard Bellewe, for the County of Lowtb.
These and their successors, were to meet yearly upon S. Georges day; and to
choose one of themselves to be Captain of that Brotherhood, for the next
year to come. Which Captain, should have at his command, 120. Archers on
horseback, 40. horsemen, and forty Pages, to suppress Out-lawes and rebels.
The Wages of every Archer, should be vj. pence, Per diem; and every horseman,
v. d. Per diem; and four Marks, Per annum. And to pay these entertainments,
and to maintain this new fraternity, there was granted unto them by the same
Act of Parliament a subsidy of Pondage, out of all Marchandizes exported or
imported thoroughout the Realm (hydes, and the goods of Freemen of Dublin and
Drogheda only excepted.) These 200. men were all the standing forces that were
then maintained in Ireland. And as they were Natives of the kingdom, so the
kingdom it self did pay their wages without expecting any treasure out of
England.

But now the wars of Lancaster and Henry 7.
York being ended, and Henry the How the war was prosecuted in the time of
King Henry the 7.
seventh being in the actual and peaceable possession of the kingdom of
England, let us see if this King did send over a Competent Army to make a
perfect Conquest of Ireland. Assuredly, if those two I dolles or counterfets
which were set up against him in the beginning of his reign, had not found
footing and followers in this Land, King Henry the seventh had sent neither
horse nor foot hither, but let the Pale to the Guard and defense of the
fraternity of Saint George, which stood till the tenth year of his reign. And
therefore, upon the erection of the first I doll, which was Lambert the Priests
Boy, he transmitted no forces, Archiv. Rimem. Regis apud. Westminster.
but sent over Sir Richard Edgecomb, with Commission to take an Oath of
allegiance of all the Nobility, Gentry, and Citizens of this kingdom; which
sernice he performed fully, and made an exact return of his Commission to the
King. And immediately after that, the King sent for all the Lords of
Parliament in this realm; who repayring The Book of Howth. Manus.
to his presence, were first in a Kingly manner reproved by him; for among
other things he told them, that if their King were still absent from them, they
would at length Crown Apes; but at last entertained them, and dismissed them
graciously. This course of clemency he held at first. But after, when Perkin
warbecke, who was set up, and followed chiefly by the Giraldines in Leinster,
and the Citizens of Cork in Mounster; to suppress this counterfaite, the
King sent over Sir Edward Poynings, with an Army (as the Histories call it)
which did not Hollingshcad in Henry the 7.
consist of a thousand men by the Pol; and yet it brought such terror with it,
as all the Adherents of Perkin warbecke were scattered, and retired for Sir
Edward Poynings service.
succor into the Irish Countries: to the Marches whereof, he marched with his
weak forces, but eft-soones returned and held a Parliament. Wherein Rot.
Parliam. in Castro Dublin
among many good Laws, one Act was made; That no subject should make any war
or peace within the Land, without the special License of the Kings Lieutenant
or Deputy. A manifest argument, that at that time the bordering Wars in this
kingdom, were made altogether by Voluntaries, upon their own head, without any
pay or entertainment, and without any Order or Commission from the State. And
though the Lords The Book of Howth.
and Gentlemen of the Pale, in the 19. year of this Kings reign, joined the
famous battle of Knocktow in Conaght; The battle of Knoctow.
wherein Mac william, with 4000. of the Irish, and degenerat English were
slain; yet was not this iourny made by warrant from the King, or upon his
charge (as it is expressed in the Book of Howth) but only upon a pri^ quarrel
of the Earl of Kildare: so loosely were the martial affairs of Ireland
carried, during the reign of King Henry the seventh.

IN the time of King Henry the eight, Henry 8.
the Earl of Surrey, Lord Admiral, was made Lieutenant; and though he How
the war was carried, during the Reign of K. Henry the 8.
were the greatest Captain of the English Nation the living; yet brought he with
him rather an honorable Guard for his person, then a competent army to recover
Ireland. For he had in The Earl of Surries service.
his retinue, 200. tall Yeomen of the Kings Guard: But because he wanted
means to perform any great action, he made means to return the sooner: yet
in the mean time he was not idle, but passed the short time he spent here, in
holding a Parliament, and diverse iournies against the Rebels of Leinster;
insomuch as he was hurt in his own person, upon the borders of Leix. After the
reuocation of this honorable personage, King Henry the eight, sent no forces
into Ireland, till the rebellion of the Giraldines, which happened in the 27.
year of his reign. Then sent he over Sir william Skeuington, with five hundred
men only to quench that fire, and not to enlarge the border, or to rectify
the Government. This Deputy dyed in the midst of the service, so as the Lord
The Lord Leonard Grayes service.
Leonard Gray was sent to finish it: who arriving with a supply of 200. men, or
thereabouts, did so prosecute the Rebels, as the Lord Garret their Chiefetaine,
and his five Uncles, submitted themselves unto him, and were by him
transmitted into England.

But this service being ended, that active Nobleman with his little army, and
some ayds of the Pale, did oftentimes repel O Neale, and O Donel, attempting
the invasion of the Civil Shires, and at last made that prosperous sight at
Belahoo, on the Confines The sight at Bealahoo.
of Meth; the memory whereof, is yet famous, as that he defeated (well-nie) all
the power of the North; and so quieted Book of Howth. Manus.
the border for many years.

Hitherto then it is manifest, that since the last transfretation of King
Richard the second, the Crown of England never sent over, either numbers of
men, or quantities of treasure, sufficient to defend the small Territory of the
Pale, much less to reduce that which was lost, or to finish the Conquest of
the whole Island.

After this, Sir Anthony S. Ledger, was Sir Anthony Stliger.
made chief Governor, who performed great service in a civil course, as shall
be expressed hereafter. But Sir Sir Edward Bellingham, in the time of K. Edw.
the 6.
Edward Bellingham, who succeeded him, proceeded in a Martial course against
the Irishry, and was the first Deputy, from the time of K. Edward the third,
till the reign of king Edward the sixth, that extended the border beyond the
limits of the English Pale, by beating and breaking the Moors and Connors, and
building the Forts of Leix and Offaly. This service he performed with six
hundred horse; the monthly charge whereof, did arise to 770. li. And 400.
foot, whose pay did amount to 446. li. per mensem: as apeareth Archiu. Remem.
Regis apud westminster.
upon the Treasurers account, remaining in the Office of the Kings
Remembrauncer in England. Yet were not these Countries so fully recovered by
this Deputy, but that Thomas Earl of Sussex did put the last hand Tho: Earl of
Sussex, in the time of Qu. Mary.
to this work; and rooting out these two rebellious Septs, planted English
Colonies in their rooms, which in all the tumultuous times since, have kept
their Habitations, their Loyalty, and Religion.

And now are we come to the time Queen Elizabeth.
of Queen ELIZABETH, who sent over more men, and spent more treasure to save
and reduce the Land of Ireland, then all her progenitors since the Conquest.

DVring her reign, there arose three How the War was prosecuted in the time of
Qu. Elizabeth.
notorious and maine Rebellions, which drew several armies out of England.
The first of Shane O Neale; the second, of Desmond; the last of Tyrone; (for
the particular insurrections of the Vicount Baltinglasse, and Sir Edmund
Butler; the Moors; the Cauanaghes; the Birnes, and the Bourkes of Conaght,
were all suppressed by the standing forces here.)

To subdue Shane O Neal, in the hight Shane O Neales Rebellion.
of his rebellion, in the year, 1566. Captain Randal transported a Regiment
of 1000. men into Vlster, and planted a Garrison at Loughfoile. Before the
coming of which supply (viz:) in the year, 1565. the List of the standing
army of horse and foot, English and Irish, did not exceed the number of 1200.
men, as appears by the Treasurers account of Ireland, now Archiu. Remem.
Regis apud Westminster.
remaining in the Exchequer of Eng land. With these forces did Sir Henry Sidney
(then Lord Deputy) march into the farthest parts of Tirone, and joining with
Captain Randal, did much distress (but not fully defeat) O Neale, who was
afterward slain upon a mere accident by the Scotts, and not by the Queens
army.

TO proseeute the Wars in Munster, Desrnonds Rebellion.
against Desmond and his Adherents, there were transmitted out of England at
several times, three or four thousand men, which together, with the standing
Carrisons, and some other supplies raised here, made at one time, an army of
six thousand and upwards: which with the Virtue and lour of Arthur Lord Gray,
and others the Commanders, did prove a sufficient power to extinguish that
rebellion. But that being done, it was never intended that these forces should
stand, till the rest of the kingdom Tyrones Rebellion.
were settled and reduced: only, that army which was brought over by the Earl
of Essex, Lord Lieutenant and Governor general of this kingdom, in the 39.
year of Queen Elizabeth, to suppress the Rebellion of Tirone, which was spread
universally over the whole Realm; That army, I say (the command whereof, with
the government of the Realm, was shortly after transferred to the command of
the Lord Montioy, afterward Earl of Devonshire, who with singular wisdom,
valor, and industry, did prosecute and finish the War) did consist of such
good men of war, and of such numbers, being wel-ny 20000. by the Pol, and was
so royally supplied and paid, and continued in full strength so long a time, as
that it brake, and absolutely subdued all the Lords and Chiefetaines of the
Irishry, and degenerate or rebellious English. Whereupon, the multitude, who
ever loved to be followers of such as could master and defend them, admyring
the power of the Crownc of England, being brai'd (as it were) in a Mortar, with
the Sword, Famine, and Pestilence altogether, submitted themselves to the
English government, received the Laws and Magistrates, and most gladly
embraced the Kings pardon and peace in all parts of the Realm, with
demonstration of joy and comfort; which made indeed, an entire, perfect, and
final Conquest of Ireland. And though upon the finishing of the war, this
great army was reduced to less numbers, yet has his Majesty in his
wisdom, thought it fit, still to maintain such competent forces here, as the
Law may make her progress and Circuit about the Realm, under the protection
of the sword (as Virgo, the figure of Justice, is by Leo in the Zodiac) until
the people have perfectly learned the Lesson of Obedience, and the Conquest be
established in the hearts of all men.

THus far have I endeavored to make it manifest, that from the first
adventure and attempt of the English (to subdue and conquer Ireland) until the
last war with Tyrone, (which as it was royally undertaken, so it was really
prosecuted to the end) Four maine defects in the prosecution of the war.
there has bin four maine defects in the carriage of the martial affairs
here. First, the armies for the most part, were too weak for a Conquest:
Secondly, when they were of a competent strength (as in both the iournies of
Richard the second) they were too soon broken up and dissolved: Thirdly, they
were ill paid: And fourthly, they were ill Governed, which is always a
consequent of ill payment.

But why was not this great work Why none of the Kings of England, before
Queen Elizabeth, did finish the conquest of Ireland.
performed, before the latter end of Queen Elizabeth's reign, considering
that many of the Kings her Progenitors, were as great Captains as any in the
world, and had elsewhere larger Dominions and Territories? First, who can tell
whither the Divine Wisdom, to abate the glory of those Kings, did not reserve
this Work to be done by a Queen, that it might rather appear to be his own
imediate work? And yet for her greater Honor, made it the last of her great
actions, as it were, to Crown all the rest? And to the end that a secure peace
might settle the Conquest, and make it firm and perpetual to posterity;
caused it to be made in that fullness of time, when England and Scotland
became to be united under one imperial Crown; and when the Monarchy of Great
Britainy was in league and amity with all the world. Besides, the Conquest at
this time, does perhaps fulfill that prophecy, wherein the four great Prophets
of Ireland do concur, as it is recorded by Giraldus Cambre^sis; to this effect:
That after the first invasion of the English, they should spend many ages, in
crebris conflictibus, longoque Giraldus Cambrensis.
certanime and multis coedibus. And that, Omnes fere Anglici ab Hibernia
turbabuntur: nihilominus orientalia maritima semper obtinebunt; Sed vix paulo
ante diem Iuditij; plenam Anglorum populo victoriam compromittunt; Insula
Hibernica de mari vsque ad mare de toto subacta and incastellata. If S. Patrick
and the did not utter this prophesy; certainly Giraldus is a Prophet, who has
reported it. To this, we may add the prophesy of Merlin, spoken of also by
Giraldus. Sextus moenia Hiberniae subuertet, and regiones in Regnum redigentur.
Which is performed in the time of King James the sixth; in that all the paces
are cleared, and places of fastness laid open, which are the proper Walls and
Castles of the Irish, as they were of the British in the time of Agricola; and
withal, the Irish Countries being reduced into Counties, make but one entire
and undivided kingdom.

But to leave these high and obscure causes, the plain and manifest truth is;
that the Kings of England in all ages, had bin powerful enough, to make an
absolute conquest of Ireland, if their whole power had been employed in that
enterprise: but still there arose sundry occasions, which divided and di^ted
their power some other way.

Let us therefore take a brief view How the several Kings of England were
diuerted from the conquest of Ireland.
of the several impediments which arose in every Kings time, since the first
ouerture of the Conquest, whereby they were so employed and busied, as they
could not intend the final Conquest of Ireland.

KIng Henry the second, was no sooner King Henry 2.
returned out of Ireland, but all his four Sons conspired with his enemies,
rose in Arrnes, and moved war against him, both in France and in England.

This unnatural treason of his sons, The Book of Howth. Manus.
did the King express in an Emblem painted in his Chamber at winchester,
wherein was an Eagle, with three Eglets tyring on her breast; and the fourth
pecking at one of her eyes. And the troth is, these ungracious practices of his
sons, did impeach his journey to the Holy Land, which he had once vowed,
vexed him all the days of his life, and brought his gray hairs with sorrow to
the grave. Besides, this king having given the Lordship of Ireland to John his
youngest son; his ingratitude afterward made the king careless to settle
him in the quiet and absolute possession of that kingdom.

RIchard the first, which succeeded Henry the second in the kingdom Richard 1
of England, had less reason to bend his power toward the Conquest of this
Land, which was given in perpetuity to the Lord John his brother. And
therefore, went he in person to the holy war; by which journey, and his
captivity in Austria, and the heavy ransom that he paid for his liberty, he
was hindered, and utterly disabled to pursue any so great an action as the
Conquest of Ireland; And after his delivery and return, hardly was he able to
maintain a frontier war in Normandy, where by hard fortune he lost his life.

KIng John his Brother, had greatest K. John.
reason to prosecute the War of Ireland, because the Lordship thereof was the
portion of his inheritance, given unto him, when he was called, John
Sans-Terre. Therefore, he made two iournies thither; one, when he was Earl of
Morton, and very young, about twelve years of age; the other, when he was King,
in the 12. year of his reign. In the first, his own youth, and his youthful
company, Roboams C^sellours made him hazard the loss of all that his father had
won. But in the later, he showed a resolution to recover the entire Kingdom,
in taking the submissions of all the Irishry, and settling the estates of the
English, and giving Order for the building of many Castles and Forts, whereof
some remain until this day. But he came to the Crown of England, by a
defeasible Title, so as he was never well settled in the hearts of the people,
which drew him the sooner back out of Ireland into England: where shortly
after, he fell into such trouble and distress; The Clergy cursing him on the
one side; and the Barons rebelling against him on the other, as he became so
far unable to return to the Conquest of Ireland, as besides the forfeiture
of the territories in France, he did in a manner loose both the kingdoms.
For he surrendered both to the Pope, and took them back again to hold in
Fee-farme; which brought him into such hatered at home, and such contempt
abroad, as all his life time after, he was possessed rather with fear of
loosing his head, then with hope of reducing the kingdom of Ireland.

DVring the infancy of Henry the 3. Henry 3
the Barons were troubled in expelling the French, whom they had drawn in
against King John. But this Prince was no sooner come to his maiority, but the
Barons raised a long and cruel war against him.

Into these troubled waters, the Bishops of Rome did cast their Nets, and drew
away all the wealth of the realm by their provisions, and infinite exactions,
whereby the kingdom was so impouerished, as the King was scarce able to feed
his own household and train, much less to nourish armies for the conquest of
foreign kingdoms. And albeit he had given this Land to the Lord Edward his
eldest son, yet could not that worthy Prince ever find means or
opportunity to visit this kingdom in person. For, from the time he was able to
bear arms, he served continually against the Barons, by whom he was taken
prisoner at the battle of Jews. And when that rebellion was appeased, he made
a journey to the Holy Land (an employment which in those days diuerted all
Christian Princes from performing any great actions in Europe) from whence he
was returned, when the Crown of England descended upon him.

THis King Edward the first, who was Edward 1
a Prince adorned with all virtues, did in the mannaging of his affairs, show
himself a right good husband, who being Owner of a Lordship ill husbanded,
does first enclose and mannure his demeasnes near his principal house, before
he does improve his wastes a sarre off. Therefore, he began first to establish
the Commonwealth of England, by making many excellent Laws, and instituting
the form of public Justice, which remains to this day. Next, he fully
subdued and reduced the Dominion of Wales; then by his power and authority he
settled the kingdom of Scotland; and lastly, he sent a royal army into
Gascoigne, to recover the Duchy of Aquita^ These four great actions, did take
up all the reign of this Prince. And therefore, we find not in any Record, that
this King transmitted any forces into Ireland; but on the other side, we find
it recorded Archiv. in Castro Dublin.
both in the Annalles, and in the PipeRolles of this kingdom, that three
several Annals Hiberbinae in Camde^.
armies were raised of the Kings subjects in Ireland, and transported one into
Scotland; another into wales; and the third into Gascoigne; and that several
aids were levied here, for the setting forth of those armies.

THe son and successor of this excellent Edward 2
Prince, was Edward the second, who much against his will sent one small army
into Ireland; not with a purpose to finish the Conquest, but to guarde the
person of his Minion, Piers Gaueston, who being banished out of England, was
made Lieutenant of Ireland, that so his exile might seem more honorable.

He was no sooner arrived here, but he made a iourny into the Mountains of
Dublin; brake and subdued the Rebels there; built New Castle in the ^irnes
Country, and repaired Castle Annals Hiber^ Camder.
keuin; and after passed up into Mounster and Thomond, performing every
Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
where great service, with much Virtue and valor. But the King, who could not
live without him, reuokt him within less then a year. After which time, the
invasion of the Scots, and rebellion of the Barons, did not only disable this
King to be a Conqueror, but deprived him both of his kingdom and life. And
when the Scottish Nation had ouer-run all this land under the conduct of Edward
le Bruce (who styled himself King of Ireland) England was not then able to
send either men or money to save this Kingdom. Only Roger de Mortimer then
Justice of Ireland, arrived at Manuscript of Friar Cliun.
Youghall, cum 38. milite, says Friar Cliuu in his Annalles.

But Bremingham, Verdon, Stapleton, and some other private Gentlemen, rose out
with the Commons of Meth and Vriell, and at Fagher near Dondalke, a fatal
place to the enemies of the Crown of England, overthrew a potent army of them.
Et sic (says the red Book of the Exchequer, wherein the Rubr. libr. Scac.
Dublin.
victory was briefly recorded) per manus communis populi, and dextram dei
deliberatur populus dei a seruitute machinata and praecogitata.

IN the time of King Edward the third, Edward 3
the impediments of the Conquest of Ireland, are so notorious, as I shall not
need to express them; to wit, the war which the King had with the Realms
of Scotland, and of France; but especially the Wars of France, which were
almost continual for the space of forty years. And indeed, France was a
fairer mark to shoot at, then Ireland, and could better reward the Conqueror.
Besides, it was an inheritance newly descended upon the King; and therefore, he
had great reason to bend all his power, and spend all his time and treasure in
the recovery thereof. And this is the true cause why Edward the third sent no
army into Ireland, till the 36. year of his reign, when the Lord Lionell
brought over a Regiment of 1500. men, as is before expressed: which that wise
and warlicke Prince did not transmit as a competent power, to make a full
conquest, but as an honorable retinue for his son; and withal, to enable him
to recover some part of his Earldom of Vlster, which was then ouer-run with
the Irish. But on the other part, though the English Colonies were much
degenerate in this kings time, and had lost a great part of their possessions,
yet lying at the siedge of Callis, he sent for a supply of men out of Ireland,
which were transported under the conduct of the Annals Hibern^e in Camden.
Earl of Kildar, and Fulco de la Freyn, in the year, 1347.

ANd now are we come again to the Richard 2
time of King Richard the second; who for the first ten years of his reign,
was a Minor, and much disquieted with popular Commotions; and after that, was
more trobled with the factions that arose between his Minions, and the Princes
of the blood. But at last, he took a resolution to finish the Conquest of this
Realm. And to that end he made two Royal voyages hither. Upon the first, he
was deluded by the feigned submissions of the Irish; but upon the later, when
he was fully bent to prosecute the war with effect, he was diuerted and drawn
from hence by the return of the Duke of Lancaster into England, and the
general defection of the whole realm.

AS for Henry the fourth, he being Henry 4.
an Intruder upon the Crown of England, was hindered from all foreign
actions, by sundry Conspiracies and Rebellions at home, moved by the house of
Northumberland in the North; by the Dukes of Surrey and Exceter in the South;
and by Oxen Glendour in Wales; so as he spent his short reign in establishing
and settling him self in the quiet possession of England, and had neither
leisure nor opportunity to undertake the final conquest of Ireland. Much less
could Henry 5.
King Henry the fifth perform that work: for in the second year of his
reign, he transported an army into France, for the recovery of that kingdom,
and drew over to the siedge of Harflew, the Priour of Kilmaincham, with 1500.
Irish. In which great action Annals Hiberniae in Camden.
this victorious Prince, spent the rest of his life.

ANd after his death, the two Noble Princes his Brothers, the Duke of Bedford
and Gloucester, who during the Henry 6.
minority of King Henry the sixte, had the Government of the Kingdoms of
England and France, did employ all their Counsels and endeavors to perfect the
Conquest of France, the greater part whereof being gained by Henry the fifth,
and retained by the Duke of Bedford, was again lost by K. Henry the sixth; a
manifest argument of his disability to finish the Conquest of this Land. But
when the civil War between the two Houses was kindled, the Kings of England
were so far from reducing all the Irish under their Obedience, as they drew
out of Ireland to strengthen their parties, all the Nobility and Gentry
descended of English race, which gave opportunity to the Irishry, to invade
the Lands of the English Colonies, and did hazard the loss of the whole
kingdom. For, though the Duke of York did, while he lived in Ireland, carry
himself Hollingshead in Hen. 6.
respectively toward all the Nobility, to win the general love of all,
bearing equal favor to the Giraldines and the Butlers (as appeared at the
Christning of George duke of Clarence, who was borne in the Castle of Dublin,
where he made both the Earl of Kildare, and the Earl of Ormond his Gossips:)
And having occasion diverse times to pass into England; he left the sword
with Kildare at one time, and with Ormond at another: and when he lost his life
at wakefield, there were slain with him diverse of both those families. Yet
afterward, those two Noble houses of Ireland, did severally follow the two
Royal houses of England; the Giraldines adhering to the house of York, and
the Butlers to the house of Lancaster. Whereby it came Manuscript of Baron
Finglas.
to pass, that not only the principal Gentlemen of both those Sur-names, but
all their friends and dependants did pass into England, leaving their Lands
and possessions to be ouer-run by the Irish. These impediments, or rather
impossibilities of finishing the Conquest of Ireland, did continue till the
Wars of Lancaster and York were ended: which was about the 12. year of King
Edward the fourth.

Thus hitherto the Kings of England were hindered from finishing this Conquest
by great and apparent impediments: Henry the second, by the rebellion of his
sons: King John, Henry the third, and Edward the second, by the Barons
wars: Edward the first by his wars in wales and Scotland: Edward the third,
and Henry the fifth, by the wars of France: Richard the second, Henry the
fourth, Henry the sixth, and Edward the fourth, by Domestic contention for the
Crown of England it self.

But the fire of the civil war being Edward 4
utterly quenched, and K. Edward the fourth settled in the peaceable possession
of the Crown of England, what did then hinder that warlicke Prince from
reducing of Ireland also? First, the whole Realm of England was miserably
wasted, depopulated and impouerished by the late civil dissentions; yet as soon
as it had recovered it self with a little peace and rest, this King raised an
Army, and revived the Title of France again: howbeit, this Army was no sooner
transmitted and brought into the field, but the two Kings also were brought to
an interview. Whereupon, partly by the fair and white promises of Jews the
11. and partly by the corruption of some of King Edwards Minions, the english
forces were broken and dismissed, and King Edward returned into England, where
shortly after finding himself deluded and abused by the French, he dyed with
melancholy, and vexation of spirit.

I Omit to speak of Richard the Usurper, Richard 3
who never got the quiet possession of England, but was cast out by Henry the
seventh, within two years and a half, after his Usurpation.

ANd for King Henry the seventh Henry 7.
himself, though he made that happy union of the two houses, yet for more then
half the space of his reign, there were walking Spirits of the house of York,
as well in Ireland as in England, which he could not conjure down, without
expense of some blood and Treasure. But in his later times, he did wholly
study to improve the Reuennues of the Crown in both Kingdoms, with an intent
to provide means for some great action which he intended: which doubtless, if
he had lived, would rather have improued a iourny into France, then into
Ireland, because in the eyes of all men, it was a fayrer enterprise.

THerefore King Henry the eight, in Henry 8
the beginning of his reign, made a Voyage Royal into France; wherein he
spent the greatest part of that treasure, which his Father had frugally
reserved; perhaps for the like purpose. In the latter end of his reign, he made
the like journey, being enricht with the Reuennewes of the Abbey Lands. But in
the middle time between these two attemptes, the great alteration which he
made in the State ecclesiastical, caused him to stand upon his guard at home;
the Pope having solicited all the Princes of Christendom to revenge his
quarrel in that behalf. And thus was King Henry the eight, tained and diuerted
from the absolute reducing of the kingdom of Ireland.

LAstly, the infancy of King Edward K. Edward 6. and Qu. Marie.
the sixth, and the Couerture of Qu. Mary (which are both Non abilities in the
Law) did in fact disable them to accomplish the Conquest of Ireland.

SO as now this great work did remain Quee Elizabeth.
to be performed by Queen ELIZABETH; who though she were diuerted by
suppressing the open rebellion in the North; by preventing diverse secret
Conspiracies against her person; by giving ayds to the French, and States of
the Low Countries; by maintaining a Nauall war with Spain for many years
together: yet the sundry rebellions, joined with foreign invasions upon this
Island, whereby it was in danger to be utterly lost, and to be possessed by
the enemies of the Crown of England, did quicken her Majesty's care for the
preservation thereof; and to that end, from time to time during her reign, she
sent over such supplies of men and treasure, as did suppress the Rebels, and
repel the inuaders. Howbeit, before the transmitting of the last great army,
the forces sent over by Queen Elizabeth, were not of sufficient power to break
and subdue all the Irishry, and to reduce and reform the whole Kingdom; but
when the general defection came, which came not without a special providence
for the final good of that kingdom (though the second causes thereof, were the
faint prosecution of the War against Tyrone; the practices of Priests and
Jesuits, and the expectation of the ayds from Spain) Then the extreme peril
of loosing the Kingdom; the dishonor and danger that might thereby grow to
the Crown of England; together with a just disdain conceived by that
greatminded Queen, that so wicked and ungrateful a Rebel should prevail
against Her, who had ever been victorious against all her enemies, did move,
and almost enforce her to send over that mighty army: and did withal inflame
the hearts of the Subjects of England, chearefully to contribute to wards the
maintaining thereof, a Million of sterling pounds at least: which was done
with a purpose only to Save, and not to Gain a kingdom; To keep and retain
that Soueraignetie, which the Crown of England had in Ireland (such as it was)
and not to recover a more absolute Dominion. But, as it falls out many times,
that when a house is on fire, the Owner to save it from burning, pulls it
down to the ground; but that pulling down, does give occasion of building it
up again in a better form: So, these last wars, which to save the Kingdom
did utterly break and distroy this people, produced a better effect then was
at first expected. For, every Rebellion, when it is suppressed, does make the
subject weaker, and the Prince stronger. So, this general revolt when it was
ouercom, did produce a general Obedience and Reformation of all the Irishrie,
which ever before had been disobedient and unreformed; and thereupon ensued
the final and full conquest of Ireland.

And thus much may suffice to be spoken, touching the defectes in the martial
affairs, and the weak and faint prosecution of the war; and of the several
Impediments or employments, which did hinder or divert every King of England
successively, from reducing Ireland to their absolute subjection.

IT now remains, that we show 2. The defects in the civil poilicy and
government.
the defects of the Civil Policy and Government, which gaueno less impediment
to the perfection of this Conquest.

THe first of that kind, does consist 1. The Laws of England were not given
to the mere Irish.
in this: That the Crown of England did not from the beginning give Laws to
the Irishry; whereas to give Laws to a conquered people, is the principal
mark and effect of a perfect Conquest. For, albeit King Henry the second,
before his return out of Ireland, held a Counsel or Parliament at Lissemore;
Vbi Leges Angliae ab omnibus sunt gratanter receptae, and Iuratoria Cautione
Matthew. Paris Histor. mayor. fol. 121.
Prastita confirmatae, as Marth. Paris writes;

And though King John in the 12. year of his reign, did establish the Matthew.
Paris Histor mayor. 220. b.
English Laws and Customs here, and placed Sheriffs and other Ministers to
rule and govern the people, according to the Law of England: and to that end,
Ipse duxit secum viros discretos and legis peritos, quorum communi consilio 11.
Hen. 3. pat. m. 3.
statuit and praecepit, leges Anglicanas teneri in Hibernia, etc. as we find
it recorded among the Patent Rolls in the Tower. 11. Hen. 3. m. 3. Though
likewise, King Henry the third did grant and transmit the like Charter of
liberties to his subjects of Ireland, as himself and his Father had granted
to the Subjects of England, as appears by another Record in the Tower, 1.
Hen, 3. Pat. m. 13. And afterward, by a special Writ, did command the Lord
Justice of Ireland, Quod conuocatis Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Comitibus,
Baronibus, etc. Coram eis legi faceret Chartam Regis Iohannis; quam ipse fecit
and iurari a Magnatibus Hiberniae, de legibus and Constitutionibus Angliae
obseruandis, and quod leges illas tencant and obseruent. 12. Hen. 3. Claus. m.
8. And after that again, the same King by Letters Patents under the great
seal of England, did confrime the establishment of the English Laws made by
King John, in this form: Quia pro Communi vtilitate terrae Hiberniae, ac
vnitate terrarum, de Communi Consilio prouisum sit, quod omnes leges and
consuetudines quae in regno Angliae tenentur, in Hibernia teneantur, and eadem
terra eiusdem legibus subiaceat, ac per easdem regatur, sicut I^hanes Rex,
cumiliuc esset, Statuit and firmiter mandauit; ideo volumus quod omnia breuia
de Communi Iure, quae currunt in Anglia, similiter current in 30. H. 3. pat. m.
20.
Hibernia, sub nouo sigillo nostro, etc. Test meipso apud woodstocke, etc.
Which confirmation is found among the PatentRolles in the Tower, Anno 30. Hen.
3. Notwithstanding, it is evident by all the Records of this Kingdom, that
only the English Colonies, and some few Septs of the Irishry, which were The
mere Irish not admittedto have the benefit of the Laws of England.
enfranchised by special Charters, were admitted to the benefit and protection
of the Laws of England; and that the Irish generally, were held and reputed
Aliens, or rather enemies to the Crown of England; insomuch, as they were not
only disabled to bring any actions, but they were so far out of the
protection of the Law, as it was often adjudged no felony to kill a mere
Irishman in the time of peace.

That the mere Irish were reputed The mere Irish reputed Aliens.
Aliens, appears by sundry Records; wherein Judgment is demanded, if they
shall be answered in Actions brought by them: and likewise, by the Charters of
Denization, which in all Ages were purchased by them.

In the common plea-Rolles of 28. Edward the third (which are yet perserued in
Breminghams Tower) this case is adjudged. Simon Neal brought an action of
trespass against william Newlagh Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
for breaking his Close in Claudalkin, in the County of Dublin; the Defendant
does plead, that the plaintiff is Hibernicus, and non de Quinque sanguinibus;
and demands judgment, if he shall be answered. The Plaintiff replieth; Quod
ipse est de quinque sanguinibus (viz) De les Oneiles de Vlton, qui per
Concessionem progenitoru^ Domini Regis; Libertatibus Anglicis gaudere debent
and vtuntur, and proliberis hominibus reputantur. The Defendant reioyneth; that
the Plaintiff is not of the Oneales of Vlster, Nec de quinque sanguinibus. And
thereupon they are at issue. Which being found for the Plaintiff, he had
Judgment to recover his damages against the Defendant. By this Record it
apeareth that five principal bloods, or Septs, of the Irishry, were by special
grace enfranchised and enabled to take benefit of the Laws of England; And
that the Nation of O Neales in Vlster, Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
was one of the five. And in the like case, 3. of Edward the second, among the
Plea-Rolles in Breminghams Tower: All the 5. Septs or bloods, Qui gaudeant lege
Anglicana quoad breuia prota^da, are expressed, namely; Oneil de Vltonia; O
Molaghlin de Midia; O Connoghor de Connacia; O Brien de Thotmonia; and Mac
Murrogh de Lagenia: And yet I find, that O Neale himself long after, (viz.)
in 20. Ed. 4. upon his marriage with a daughter of the house of Kildare (to
satisfy the friends of the Lady,) was made denizen by a special Act of
Parliament. 20. Ed. 4. C. 8.

Again, in the 29. of Ed. 1. before the Justices in Eire at Drogheda, Thomas
le Botteler brought an action of Detinuc against Robert de Almain for certain
goods. The Defendant pleads, Quod Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
non tenetur ei inde respondere, eo quod est Hibernicus, and non de libero
sanguine. Et praedictus Thomas dicit, quod Anglicus est, and hoc petit quod
inquiratur per patriam, Ideo fiat inde Jurat. etc. Iurat' dicunt super
Sacrament' suum, quod praedict' Thomas Anglicus est, ideo consideratum est quod
recuperet, etc.

These two Records among many other, do sufficiently show, that the Irish were
disabled to bring any actions at the common Law. Touching their denizations,
they were common in every Kings reign, since Henry the second, and were
neucr out of use, till his Majesty that now is, came to the Crown.

Among the Pleas of the Crown, 4. of Edw. 2. we find a confirmation made by
Edw. 1. of a Charter of Denization granted by Henry the second, to certain
Oostmen, or Easterlings, who were Inhabitants of Waterford long before Hen. 2.
attempted the conquest Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
of Ireland. Edwardus dei gratia, etc. Iustitiario suo Hiberniae Salutem: Quia
per Inspectionem Chartae Dam. Hen Reg. filij Imperatricis quondam Dom.
Hiberniae proaui nostri nobis Constat, quod Ostmanni de Waterford legem
Anglicorum in Hibernia habere, and secundam ipsam legem Iudicari and deduci
debent: vobis mandamus quod Gillicrist Mac Gilmurrij, Willielmum and Iohannem
Mac Gilmurrij and alios Ostmannos de ciuitate and Comitatu Waterford, qui de
predictis Ostmannis praedict. Dom. Henr. proauinostri originem duxerunt, legem
Anglicorum in partibus illis iuxta tenorem Chartae praedict. habere, and eos
secundum ipsam legem (quantu^ in nobis est, deduci faciatis) donec aliud de
Consilio nostro inde duxerimus ordinand. In C^ius rei, etc. Test meipso apud
Acton Burnell. 5. Octobris anno regni nostri vndecimo.

Again, among the Patent Rolls Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
of 1. Ed. the fourth, remaining in the Chancery here, we find a Patent of
Denization, granted the 13. of Edward the first, in these Words; Edwardus Dei
gratia, Rex Angliae, Dom. Hiberniae, Dur Aquitaniae, etc. Omnibus Balliuis et
fidelibus suis in Hibernia, Salutem: Volentes Christophero filio Donaldi
Hibernico gratiam facere specialem, concedimus pronobis et haeredibus nostris,
quod idem Christopherus hanc habeat libertatem, (Viz.) Quod ipse de caetero in
Hibernia vtatur legibus Anglicanis, et prohibemus ne quisquam contra hanc
concessione^ nostram dictum Christopheru^ vexet in aliquo vel perturbet. In
c^ius rei Testimonium, etc. Test meipso apud Westminster. 27. die Iunij. annoregni
nostri. 13.

In the same Roll, we find another Charter of Denization, granted in the
first of Edw. 4. in a more larger and beneficial form. Edw. Archiu. in Castro
Dublin.
Die gratia, etc. Omnibus Balliuis, etc. Salutem. Sciatis quodnes volentes
Willielmum O Bolgir capellanum de Hibernica Natione existentem, fauore prosequi
gratioso, de gratia nostra speciali, etc. Concessimus eidem Willielmo, quod
ipse liberi sit Status. et liberae conditionis, et ab omni seruitute Hibernica
liber et quietus, et quod ipse legibus Anglicanis in omnibus et per omnia vti
possit et gaudere, eodem modo, quo homines Anglici infra dictam terram eas
habent, et ijs gaudent et vtuntur; quodque ipse respondeat, et respondeatur, in
quibuscumque Curijs nostris: ac omminod. terras, tenementa, redditus, et
seruitia perquirere possit sibi et haeredibus suis imperpetuum, etc.

If I should Collect out of the Records, all the Charters of this kind, I
should make a Volume thereof; but these may suffice to show, That the mere
Irish were not reputed free subjects; nor admitted to the benefit of the Laws
of England, until they had purchased Charters of Denization.

Lastly, the mere Irish were not That the mere Irish were reputed enemies to
the crown.
only accounted Aliens, but Enemies; and altogether out of the protection of
the Law; so as it was no capital offense to kill them; and this is manifest by
many Records. At a Gaol-deliuery at waterford, before John wogan Lord Justice
of Ireland, the 4. of Edw. the second, we find it recorded among the pleas of
the Crown of that year, Quod Robertus le VVayleys rectatus de morte Iohannis
filij Iuor Mac Gillemory felonice Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
per ipsum interfecti, etc. Venit et been cognouit quod praedictum Iohannem
interfecit: dicit tamen quod per eius interfectionem feloniam committere non
potuit, quia dicit, quod praedictus Johannes fuit purus Hibernicus, et non de
libero sanguine, etc. Et cum Dominus dicti Iohannis (cuius Hibernicus idem
Johannes fuit) die quo interfectus fuit, solutionem pro ipso Iohanne Hibernico
suo sic interfecto petere voluerit, ipse Robertus paratus erit ad respondend'de
solutione praedict prout Iustitia suadebit. Et super hoc venit quidam Johannes
le Poer, et dicit pro Domino Rege, quod praedict. Johannes filius Iuor Mac
Gillemory, et antecessores sui de cognonime praedict. a tempore quo Dominus
Henrions filius Imperatricis, quondam Dominus Hiberniae, Tritavus Domini Regis
nune, fuit in Hibernia, legem Anglicorum in Hibernia vsque ad hunc diem habere,
et secundum ipsam legem Iudicari et deduci debent. And so pleaded the Charter
of Denization granted to the Oostmen recited before; All which appears at
large in the said Record: Wherein we may note, that the killing of an Irish
man, was not punnished by our Law, as Manslaughter, which is felony and
capital, (for our Law did neither protect his life, nor revenge his death) but
by a Fine or pecuniary punishment, which is called an Ericke, according to the
Brehon, or Irish Law.

Again, at a Gaol-deliuery before the same Lord Justice at Limericke, in the
Roll of the same year, we find, that willielmus filius Rogeri rectatus de morte
Rogeri de Cauteton felonice per ipsum interfecti, venit et Archiu. in Caflro
Dublin.
dicit, quod feloniam per interfectionem praedict a^ co^mittere non potuit,
quia dicit and praedict. Rogerus Hibernic. est, et no^ de libero sanguine;
dicit etia^ quoth. praedict. Rogerus fuit de Cognomine de Ohederiscal et non de
cognonime de cautetons, et de hoc ponit se super patriam, etc. Et Iurati dicunt
super Sacram. suum quod praedictus Rogerus Hibernicus fuit et de cognonime de
Ohederiscall and pro Hibernico habebatur tota vita sua Ideo praedict.
Willielmus quoad feloniam praedict. quietus. Sed quia praedictus Rogerus
Ottederiscall suit Hibernicus Domini Regis, praedict. Willielmus recommittatur
Gaolae, quovsque plegios inuenerit de quinque marcis soluendis Domino Regi pro
solutione praedicti Hiberntci.

But on the otherside, if the Jury had found, that the party slain had been
of English race and Nation, it had bin adjudged felony; as appears by a
Record of 29. of Edward the first, in the Crowne-Office here. Coram Waltero
Lenfant et socijs suis Iustitiarijs Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
Itinerantibus apud Drogheda in Comitatu Louth. Johannes Laurens indictat. de
morte Galfridi Douedal venit and non dedicit mortem praedictam: sed dicit quod
praedict. Galfridus fuit Hibernicus, et non de libero sanguine, et de bono et
malo ponit se super patriam, etc. Et Jurat. dicunt super Sacram. suum quod
praedict. Galfridus Anglicus fuit, et ideo praedict. Johannes culpabilis est de
morte Galfridi praedict. Ideo suspend. Catalla 13. s. vnde Hugo de Clinton
Vicecom. respondet.

Hence it is, that in all the Parliament Rolls which are extant from the
fortith year of Edward the third, when the Statutes of Kilkenny were enacted,
till the reign of King Henry the eight, we find the degenerat and disobedient
English, called Rebels; but the Irish which were not in the Kings peace, are
called Enemies. Statute Kilkenny, c. 1. 10. and 11. 11. Hen. Archiu. in Castro
Dublin.
4. c. 24. 10. Hen. 6. c. 1. 18. 18. Hen. 6. c. 4. 5. Edw. 4. c. 6. 10. Hen. ^.
c. 17. All these Statutes, speak of English Rebels, and Irish Enemies; as if
the Irish had never bin in condition of Subjects, but always out of the
protection of the Law; and were indeed in worse cafe then Aliens of any foreign
Realm that was in amity with the Crown of England. For, by diverse heavy
paenall Laws, the English were forbidden to marry, to foster, to make
Gossippes with the Irish; or to have any Trade, or commerce in their Markets
or Fayres; nay, there was a Law made Stat. de Kilkenny c. 2. and 3. 10. Hen 6.
c. 1. 28. H. 8. c. 13.
no longer since, then the 28. year of Henry the eight, that the English
should not marry with any person of Irish blood, though he had gotten a Charter
os Denization, unless he had done both homage and fealty to the King in the
Chancery, and were also bound by Recognisaunce with sureties, to continue a
loyal subject. Whereby it is manifest, that such as had the Government of
Ireland under the Crown of England, did intend to make a perpetual separation
and enmity between the English and the Irish; pretending (no doubt) that the
English should in the end root out the Irish; which the English not being able
to do, did cause a perpetual War between the nations: which continued four
hundred and odd years, and would have lasted to the Worlds end; if in the
end of Queen Elizabeth's reign, the Irishry had not been broken and conquered
by the Sword, And since the beginning of his Majesty's reign, had not bin
protected and governed by the Law.

But perhaps, the Irishry in former times did wilfully refuse to be subject to
the Laws of England, and would not be partakers of the benefit thereof, though
the Crown of England did desire it; and therefore, they were reputed Aliens,
Out-lawes, and The Irish did desire io be admitted to the benefit and
protection of the English Laws, but could not obtain it.
enemies. Assuredly, the contrary does appear, as well by the Charters of
Denization purchased by the Irish in all ages, as by a petition preferred by
them to the King, Anno 2. Edward the third: desiring, that an Act might pass
in Ireland, whereby all the Irishrie might be enabled to use and enjoy the
Laws of England, without purchasing of particular Denizations. Upon 2. Ed. 3.
claus. 17
which petition, the King directed a special Writ to the Lord Justice; which
is found amongst the CloseRolles in the Tower of London, in this form; Rex
dilecto and fideli suo Iohannis Darcile Nepieu Justice. suo Hiberniae, Salutem.
Exparte quorundam hominum de Hibernia nobis extitit supplicatum, vt per
Statutum inde faciendum concedere velimus, quod omnes Hibernici qui voluerint,
legibus vtatur Anglicanis: ita quod necesse non habeant super hoc Chartas
alienas a nobis impetrare: nos igitur Certiorari volentes si sine alieno
praeiudicio praemissis annuere valeamus, vobis mandamus quod voluntatem
magnatum terr. illius in proximo Parliamento nostro ibidem tenendo super hoc
cum diligentia perscrutari facias: et de eo quod inde inueneritis vna cum
Consilio et aduisamento nobis certificetis, etc. Whereby I collect, that the
great Lords of Ireland had informed the King that the Irishry might not be
naturalized, without damage and prejudice either to them selves, or to the
Crown.

But I am well assured, that the Irishrie did desire to be admitted to the
benefit of the Law, not only in this petition exhibited to king Edward the
third; but by all their submissions made to King Richard the second, and to the
Lord Thomas of Lancaster before the wars of the two Houses; and afterward to
the Lord Leonard Gray, and Sir Anthony Saint-Leger, when K. Henry The Counsel
Book of Ireland. 34. Hen. 8
the eight began to reform this kingdom. In particular, the Birnes of the
Mountains, in the 34. of Henry the 8 desire that their Country might be
made Shire-ground, and called the County of wicklow: And in the 23. of Henry
the eight, O Donnel does Covenant with Sir William Skeffington, Quod si
Dominus Rex velit reformare Hiberniam, (whereof it should seem he made some
doubt) that he and his people would gladly be governed by the Laws of
England. Only that ungrateful Traitor Tirone, though he had no color or
shadow of Title to that great lordship, but only by grant from the Crown, and
by the Law of England (for by the Irish Law he had been ranked with the
meanest of his Sept) yet in one of his Capitulations with the State, he
required that no Sheriff might have jurisdiction within Tirone; and
consequently, that the Laws of England might not be executed there: Which
request, was never before made by O Neale, or any other Lord of the Irishry,
when they submitted themselves: but contrariewise they were humble suitors to
have the benefit and protection of the English Laws.

THis then I note as a great defect in What mischief did grow by not
Communicating the English Laws to the Irish.
the Civil policy of this kingdom, in that for the space of 350. years at
least after the Conquest first attempted, the English laws were not
communicated to the Irish, nor the benefit and protection thereof allowed unto
them, though they earnestly desired and sought the same. For, as long as they
were out of the protection of the Law; so as every Englishman might oppress,
spoil, and kill them without controulment, how was it possible they should
be other then Out-Lawes and Enemies to the Crown of England? If the King
would not admit them to the condition of Subjects, how could they learn to
acknoledge and obey him as their Sovereign? When they might not converse or
Commerce with any Civil men, nor enter into any Town or City without perrill
of their Lives; whither should they fly but into the Woods and Mountains, and
there live in a wild and barbarous manner? If the English Magistrates would not
rule them by the Law which does punish Treason, and Murder, and Thest with
death; but leave them to be ruled by their own Lords and Laws, why should
they not embrace their own Brebon Law, which punnisheth no offense, but with
a Fine or Ericke? If the Irish be not permitted to purchase estates of
Free-holds or Inheritance, which might descend to their Children, according to
the course of our Common Law, must they not continue their custom of
Tanistrie? which makes all their possessions uncertain, and brings Confusion,
Barbarism, and Inciuility? In a word, if the English would neither in peace
Govern them by the Law, nor could in War root them out by the sword; must they
not needs be pricks in their eyes, and thorns in their sides, till the
worlds end? and so the Conquest never be brought to perfection.

BVton the other side; If from the beginning, the Laws of England What good
would have ensued, if the mere Irish had bin governed by the English laws.
had been established, and the Brehon or Irish Law utterly abolished, as well
in the Irish Countries, as the English Colonies; If there had been no
difference made between the Nations in point of Justice and protection, but al
had been governed by one Equal, Just, and Honorable Law, as Dido speaks
in Virgill; Tros, Tyriusue mihi nullo discrimine habetur. If upon the first
submission made by the Irish Lords to King Henry the second; Quem in Regem
Three general submissions of the Irish.
and Dominum receperunt, says Matthew. Paris; or upon the second submission made
to King John, when, Plusquam viginti Reguli maximo timore perterriti homagium
ei and fidelitatem fecerunt, as the same Author writes; or upon the third
general submission made to King Richard the second; when they did not only do
homage and fealty, but bound themselves by Indentures and Oaths (as is before
expressed) to become and continue loyal subjects to the crown of England; If
any of these three Kings, who came each of them twice in person into this
kingdom, had upon these submissions of the Irishry, received them all, both
Lords and Tenants, into their mediate protection, divided their several
Countries into Counties; made Sheriffs, Coroners, and Wardens of the peace
therein: sent Justices Itinerants half yearly into every part of the
Kingdom, as well to punish Malefactors, as to hear and determine causes
between party and party, according to the course of the Laws of England;
taken surrenders of their Lands and territories, and granted estates unto
them, to hold by English Tenures; granted them Markets, Fayres, and other
Franchises, and erected Corporate Towns among them; all which, has bin
performed since his Majesty came to the Crown,) assuredly, the Irish Countries
had long since been reformed and reduced to Peace, Plenty, and Ciuility, which
are the effects of Laws and good Government: they had builded Houses,
planted Orchards and Gardens: erected Towne-shippes, and made provision for
their posterities; there had been a perfect Union betwixt the Nations, and
consequently, a perfect Conquest of Ireland. For the Conquest is never perfect,
till the war be at an end; and the war is not at an end till there be peace and
unity; and there can never be unity and Concord in any one Kingdom, but where
there is but one King, one Allegiance, and one Law.

TRue it is, that King John made xii. The English Laws were executed only in
the English Colonies.
shires in Leinster and Mounster: namely, Dublin, Kildare, Meth, Vriel,
Catherlogh, Kilkenny, Wexford, waterford, Cork, Limeric, Kerrie, and
Tipperary. Yet these Counties did stretch no farther then the Lands of the
English Colonies did extend. In them only, were the English Laws published and
put in Execution; and in them only did the Itinerant Judges make their circuits
and yisitations of Justice, and not in the countries possessed by the Irishry
which contained two third parts of the Kingdom at least. And the ^re King
Edward the first, before the court of Parliament was established in Ireland,
did transmit the Statures of England in this form: Dominus Rex mandauit Breue
suum in haec verba: Edwardus Dei Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
gratia, Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, etc. Cancellario suo Hiberniae,
Salutem. Quaedam statutaper nos de assensil Praelatorum, Comitu^, Baronu^ and
Communitat. regni nostri nuper apud Lincoln, and quaedam alia statuta
postmodum apud Eborum facta, quae in dicta terrae nostra Hiberniae ad Communem
vtilitate^ populi nostri eiusdem terrae obseruari volumus, vobis mittimus sub
sigillo nostro, mandantes quod statuta illa in dict a Cancellaria nostra
Custodiri, ac in rotulis eiusdem Cancellariae irrotulari, and adsingulas place
as nostras in terra nostra Hiberniae, and sing ulos Commitatus eiusdem terrae
mittifaciatis ministris nostris placearum illa. rum, et Vicecomitibus dictorum
Comitatuu^: mandantes, quod statuta illa coram ipsis publicari and ea in
omnibus et singulis Articulis suis obseruari firmiter faciatis. Test meipso
apud Nottingham, etc By which Writ, and by all the PipeRolles of that time it
is manifest, that the Laws of England were published and put in execution
only in the Counties, which were then made and limited, and not in the Irish
Countries, which were neglected and left wild; and have but of late years bin
divided in one and twenty Counties more.

Again, true it is, that by the Statute of Kilkenny, enacted in this kingdom,
in the fortith year of King Edward the third, the Brehon Law was condemned
and abolished, and the use and practice thereof made HighTreason. But this Law
extended to the English only, and not to the Irish: For the Law is penned in
this form: Item, Forasmuch as the diversity Statut. de Kilkenny. c. 4.
of Government by diverse Laws in one Land, does make diversity of ligeance and
dehates between the people, It is accorded and established, that hereafter no
Englishman have debate with another Englishman, but according to the course of
the Common Law; And that no Englishman be ruled in the definition of their
debates, by the March-Law, or the Brehon Law, which by reason ought not to be
named a Law, but an evil Custom; but that they be ruled as right is, by the
common Law of the land, as the Lieges of our Sovereign LORD the King; And if
any do to the contrary, and thereof be attainted, that he be taken and
imprisoned and judged as a Traitor: And that hereafter there be no diversity of
ligeance between the English borne in Ireland, and the English borne in
England, but that all be called and reputed, English, and the Lieges of our
Sovereign Lord the KING, etc. This Law, was made only to reform the degenerat
English, but there was no care taken for the reformation of the mere Irish; no
ordinance, no provision made for the abolishing of their barbarous Customs and
manners. Insomuch as the Law then made for Apparel, and riding in Saddles,
after the English fashion, is penal only to English men, and not to the Irish.
But the Roman State, which conquered so many Nations both barbarous The
Romans did communicate their Laws to the nations, which they conquered.
and Civil; and therefore knew by experience, the best and readiest way of
making a perfect and absolute conquest, refused not to communicate their Laws
to the rude and barbarous people, whom they had Conquered; neither did they put
them out of their protection, after they had once submitted themselves. But
contrariwise, it is said of Julius Caesar: Qua, vicit, victos protegit ille,
manu. And again, of another Emperor: Fecisti patriam diuersis gentibus vnam,
Profuit invitis te dominante capi;
Dumque offers victis proprij consortia Iuris,
vrbem fecisti, quod prius orbis erat.
And of Rome it self; Haec est, in gremium victos quae sola recepit,
Humanumque genus communinomine fouit,
Matris, non dominae, ritu; Ciuesque vocavit,
Quos domuit, nexuque pio longinqua reuinxit.
Therefore (as Tacitus writes) Julius Tacitus in vita Agricolae.
Agricola the Roman General in Brittany, used this policy to make a perfect
Conquest of our Ancestors, the ancient Britains; They were (says he) rude,
and dispersed; and therefore prone upon every occasion to make war, but to
induce them by pleasure to quietness and rest, he exhorted them in private,
and gave them helps in common, to build Temples, Houses, and places of
public resort. The Noblemens sons, he took and instructed in the Liberal
Sciences, etc. preferring the wits of the Britains, before the Students of
France; as being now curious to attain the Eloquence of the Roman Language,
whereas they lately rejected that speech. After that, the Roman Attire grew to
be in account, and the Gown to be in use among them; and so by little and
little they proceeded to curiosity and delicacies in Buildings, and furniture
of Household; in Bathes, and exquisit Banquets; and so being come to the
height of Ciuility, they were thereby brought to an absolute subjection.

LIkewise, our Norman Conqueror, William the Conqueror governed both the
Normans and the English under one Law.
though he oppressed the English Nobility very sore, and gave away to his
seruitors, the Lands and possessions of such, as did oppose his first invasion,
though he caused all his Acts of Counsel to be published in French; and some
legal proceedings and pleadings to be framed and used in the same tongue, as
a mark and badge of a conquest; yet he governed Al, both English and Normans,
by one and the same Law; which was the ancient common Law of England, long
before the Conquest. Neither did he deny any Englishman (that submitted
himself unto him:) The benefit of that Law though it were againsta Norman of
the best rank, and in greatest favor (as appeared in the notable Controversy
between Warren the Norman, and Sherburne of Sherburne Castle in Norfolk; for
the Conqueror had given that Castle to warren; yet when the Inheritors
thereof, had alleged Causden in Northfolke.
before the King, that he never bore Arms against him; that he was his
subject, as well as the other, and that he did inherit and hold his Lands, by
the rules of that Law, which the King had established among all his Subjects;
The King gave judgment against Warren, and commanded that Sherborn should hold
his land in peace. By this mean, himself obtained a peaceable possession of
the kingdom within few years; whereas, if he had cast all the English out of
his protection, and held them as Aliens and Enemies to the Crown, the Normans
(perhaps) might have spent as much time in the Conquest of England, as the
English have spent in the Conquest of Ireland.

THE like prudent course has bin King Edw. I. did communicate the English
Laws to the Welshmen.
observed in reducing of Wales; which was performed partly by King Edward the
first, and altogether finished by King Henry the eight. For, we find by the
Statute of Rutland, made the 12. of Edward the first, when the Welshmen had
submitted themselus, De alto and Basso, to that King, he did not reject and
cast them off, as Out-lawes and Enemies, but caused their Laws and Customs to
be examined, which were in many points agreeable to the Irish or Brehon Law.
Quibus diligenter audit is and before intellectis, quasdam illaru^ (says the
King in that Ordinance) Consilio procerum dileuimus; quasdam permissimus;
quasdam correximus; ac etia^ quasdam alias adijciendas et faciend. de creuimus;
and so established a Commonwealth among them, according to the form of the
English Government. After this, by reason of the sundry insurrections of the
Barons; the Wars in France; and the dissension between the houses of York
and Lancaster, the State of England, neglected or omitted the execution of this
Statute of Rutland; so as a great part of Wales grew wild and barbarous again.
And therefore King Henry the eight, by the Statutes of the 27. and 32. of his
reign, did revive and recontinue that Noble work begun by King Edward the
first; and brought it indeed to full perfection; For he united the Dominion of
Wales, to the Crown of England, and divided it into Shires, and erected in
every Shire, one Borough, as in England; and enabled them to send Knights and
Burgesses to the Parliament; established a Court of Presidency; and ordained
that Justices of Assise, and Gaol-deliuerie, should make their half yearly
Circuits there, as in England; made all the Laws and Statutes of England, in
force there; and among other Welsh Customs, abolished that of Gauel-kinde:
whereby the Heyres-Females were utterly excluded, and the Bastards did inherit,
as well as the Legimate, which is the very Irish Gauelkinde. By means whereof;
that entire Country in a short time was securely settled in peace and Obedience,
and has attained to that Ciuility of Manners, and plenty of all things. as
now we find it not inferior to the best parts of England.

I will therefore knit up this point with these conclusions; First, that the
Kings of England, which in former Ages attempted the Conquest of Ireland, being
ill advised and counseled by the great men here, did not upon the submissions
of the Irish, communicate their Laws unto them, nor admit them to the state
and condition of Free-subiectes: Secondly, that for the space of 200, years at
least, after the first arriual of Henry the secound in Ireland, the Irish would
gladly have embraced the Laws of England, and did earnestly desire the
benefit and protection thereof; which being denied them, did of necessity
cause a continual bordering war between the English and the Irish. And
lastly, if according to the examples before recited, they had reduced as well
the Irish Countries, as the English Colonies, under one form of civil
government (as now they are,) the Meres and Bounds of the Marches and Borders,
had been long since worn out and forgotten, (for it is not fit, as Cambrensis
writes) that a King of an Islande Giraldus Cambrensis. lib. 2. de Hibernia
expugnata.
should have any Marches or Borders, but the four Seas) both Nations had been
in corporated and united; Ireland had been entirely Conquered, Planted, and
Improoued; and returned a rich Reuennew to the Crown of England.

THE next error in the Civil policy 2. The Lands conquered from the Irish
were not well distributed.
which hindered the perfection of the Conquest of Ireland, did consist in the
Distribution of the Lands and possessions which were woonne and conquered from
the Irish. For, the Scopes of Land which were granted to the first
Adventurers, were too Large; and the Liberties and Royalties, which they
obtained therein, were too great for Subjects: though it stood with reason that
they should be rewarded liberally out of the fruits of their own Labors,
since they did Militare proprijs stipendijs, and received no pay from the
Crown of England. Notwithstanding there ensued diverse inconuiences, that gave
great impediment to the Conquest.

FIrst, the Earl Strongbow was entitled The proportions of Land granted to
the first Adventurers, were too large
to the whole Kingdom of Leinster; partly by Invasion, and partly by Marriage;
albeit, he surrendered the same entirely to King Henry the second his
Sovereign; for that with his license he came over; and with the Aid of his
Subjects, he had gained that great inheritance; yet did the K. G iraldus
Cambrensis. lib. 2. de Hibernia expugnata
re-grant back again to him and his heirs all that Province, reserving only
the City of Dublin, and the Cantreds next adjoining, with the Maritime In
Archiu. Tur. 5. Edw. 3. Escheat nume to 104.
Towns, and principal Forts and Castles. Next, the same King granted to
Robert Fitz-Stephen, and Miles Cogan, the whole Kingdom of Cork, from Lismore
to the Sea. To Phillip le Bruce, he 2. Iohannis Chart. m. 15. and m. 38.
gave the whole Kingdom of Limericke, with the Donation and Byshopprickes and
Abbeyes (except the City, and one Cantred of Land adjoining.) 6. Johan. Chart.
m. 1.
To Sir Hugh de Lacy, all Meth. 7. Johan. Chart. m. 12. andn.109
To Sir John De Courcy, all Vlster: to william Burke Fitz-Adelm, the greatest
part 6. Ed. 1. Chart. m. 19.
of Conaght. In like manner, Sir Thomas de Clare, obtained a grant of all
Thomond; and Otho de Grandison of all 18. Ed. 1. m. 29
Tipperary; and Robert le Poer, of the territory of Waterford, (the City it
self, and the Cantred of the Oastmen only Girald. Cambr. lib. 2. de Hibernia
expug.
excepted.) And thus was all Ireland Cantonized among ten persons of All
Ireland distributed to ten persons of the English Nation.
the English Nation; And though they had not gained the possession of one third
part of the whole Kingdom, yet in Title they were Owners and Lords of all, so
as nothing was left to be granted to the Natives. And therefore we do not
find in any Record or story for the space of three hundred years, after these
Adventurers first arrived in Ireland, that any Irish Lord 6. H. 3. Chart. m. 2.
obtained a grant of his Country from the Crown, but only the King of
Thomond, who had a grant but during King Henry the third his Minority: and
Rotherick O Connor, King of Conaght, to whom King Henry the second, before
Houeden in H. 2. fol. 302.
this distribution made, did grant (as Archiu. turr. 17 Iohannis Chart. m. 31.
is before declared.) Vt sit Rex sub eo; and moreover, Vt teneat terram suam
Conactiae it a been and inpace, sicut tenuit antequam Dominus Rex intravet
Hiberniam And 6. Iohannis Claus. m. 18.
whose successor, in the 24. of Henry the third, when the Bourkes had made a
strong plantation there, and had welny expelled him out of his territory, he
came over into England, (as Matthew. Matthew. Paris in Hemy the third.
Paris writes) and made complaint to King Henry the third of this invasion
made by the Bourkes upon his Land, insisting upon the g^auntes of King Henry
the second, and King John; and affirming, that he had duly paid an yearly
tribute of five thousand marks for his Kingdom. Whereupon, the King called
unto him the Lord Maurice Fitz-Girald, who was then Lord Justice of Ireland,
and President in the Court; and commanded him that he should root out that
unjust plantation, which Hubert Earl of Kent had in the time of his
greatness, planted in those parts; and wrote withal to the greatmen of
Ireland to remove the Bourkes, and to establish the King of Conaght in the
quiet possession of his Kingdom. Howbeit I do not read that the King of
Englands commandment or direction in this behalf, was ever put in execution.
For, the troth is; Richard de Burgo had obtained 3. Henry 3.
a grant of all Conaght, after the death of the King of Conaght, then living.
For which he gave a thousand pound, as the Record in the Tower recites, the
third of Henry 3. claus. 2. And besides, our great English Lords could not
endure that any Kings should reign in Ireland, but themselves; nay, they could
hardly endure that the Crown of England it self, should have any Jurisdiction
or power over them. For The Liberties granted to the first adventurers were too
great.
many of these Lords, to whom our Kings had granted these petty kingdoms,
did by Virtue and color of these Grants, claim and exercise Iura Regalia
within their Territories; insomuch, 8. Counties Palatines in Ireland at one
time.
as there were no less the^ eight Counties Palatines in Ireland, at one time.

For William Marshall, Earl of Pembroke, who married the daughter and heir
of Strongbow, being Lord of all Leynster, had Royal Jurisdiction thoroughout
all that Province. This great Anna'es Hiberniae in Camden.
Lord had five sons, and five daughters; every of his sons enjoyed that
Seigniory successively, and yet al died without Issue. Then this great Lordship
was broken and divided, and pertition made between the five daughters, who
were married into the Noblest Houses of England. The County of Catherlogh was
allotted to the eldest; Wexford to the second; Kilkenny to In Archiu. Tur. 11.
Edw. 3. Escheat n. 28.
the third; Kildare to the fourth; the greatest part of Leix, now called the
Queens County, to the fifth: In every of these portions, the Coparceners
severally exercised the same Jurisdiction Royal, which the Earl Marshall and
his Sons had used in the whole Province. Whereby it came to pass, 5 Coun^
Palatines in Leinster.
that there were five County Palatines erected in Leinster. Then had the Lord
of Meth the same Royal liberty in all that Territory; the Earl of Vlster in
all that Province; and the Lord of Desmond and Kerry within that County.
Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
All these appear upon Record, and were all as ancient as the time of Archiu,
Turr. pat. 3. E. 3. m. 28
King John; only the liberty of Tipperarie, which is the only Liberty that
remains at this day, was granted to James Butler the first Earl of Ormond,
in the third year of King Edward the third.

These absolute Palatines made Barons and Knights, did exercise high Justice in
all points within their Territories, Archiu. in Castro Dublin.
erected Courts for Criminal and civil Causes, and for their own Reuennews;
in the same form, as the Kings Courts were established at Dub lin; made their
own Judges, Seneshals, Sheriffs, Corroners, and Escheators; so as the Kings
Writ did not run in those Counties (which took up more then two parts of the
English Colonies) but only in the Church Lands lying within the same, which
were called the Cross, wherein the K. made a Sheriff: And so, in each of
these Counties Palatines, there were two Sheriffs; One, of the Liberty; and
another of the Cross: As in Meth we find a Sheriff of the Liberty, and a
Sheriff of the Cross: And so in Vlster, and so in wexford: And so at this
day, the Earl of Ormond makes a Sheriff of the Liberty, and the King a
Sheriff of the Cross of Tipperary. Hereby it is manifest, how much the
Kings Jurisdiction was restrained, and the power of these Lords enlarged by
these High Privileges. And it does further appear, by one Article among
others, preferred to King Edward the third, touching the reformation of the
state of Ireland, which we find in the Tower, in these words; Item les
francheses grantes in Ireland, que sont Roialles, tells come Duresme and
Cestre, vous oustont cybien de les profits, Come de graunde party de Obeisance
des persons enfrancheses; and en quescu^ franchese est Chancellerie, Chequer
and Conusans de pleas, cybien de la Coronne, come autres communes, and grantont
auxi Charters de pardon; et sont souent per ley et reasonable cause seisses
envostre main, a grand profit de vous; et leigerment restitues per maundeme^t
horse de Englettere, a damage, etc. Unto which Article, the K. made answer; Le
Roy voet que les francheses que sont et serront per just cause prises en sa
main, ne soent my restitues, auant que le Roy soit certify de la cause de la
prise de icelles. 26. Ed. 3. Claus. m. 1. Again, these great Undertakers, were
not tied to any form of plantation, but all was left to their discretion and
pleasure. And although they builded Castles, and made Freeholders, yet were
there no tenures or services reserved to the Crown; but the Lords drew all the
respect and dependancie of the common people, unto Themselves. Now let us see
what inconveniences did arise by these large and ample Grants of Lands and
Liberties, to the first Adventurers in the Conquest.

ASsuredly by these Grants of whole The inconveniences which grew by the large
graunts of Lands and Liberties.
Provinces and petty Kingdoms, those few English Lords pretended to be
proprieters of all the Land, so as there was no possibility left of settling the
Natives in their possessions, and by consequence the Conquest becam impossible,
without the utter extirpation of all the Irish; which these English Lords were
not able to do, nor perhaps willing, if they had bin able. Notwithstanding,
because they did still hope to become Lords of those Lands which were
possessed by the Irish, whereunto they pretended Title by their large Grants;
and because they did fear, that if the Irish were received into the Kings
protection, and made Liege-men and Free-subiectes, the state of England would
establish them in their possessions by Graunts from the Crown; reduce their
Countries into Counties, ennoble some of them; and enfranchise all, and make
them amesueable to the Law, which would have abridged and cut off a great
part of that greatness which they had promised unto themselves: they persuaded
the King of England, that it was unfit to Communicate the Laws of England unto
them; that it was the best policy to hold them as Aliens and Enemies, and to
prosecute them with a continual war. Hereby The English Lords in Ireland,
made war and peace at their pleasure.
they obtained another Royal prerogative and power: which was, to make War
and peace at their pleasure, in every part of the Kingdom. Which gave them an
absolute Command over the Bodies, Lands, and Goods of the English subjects
here. And besides, the Irish inhabiting the Lands fully Conquered and reduced,
being in condition of slaves and Villains, did render a greater profit and
Reuennew, then if they had bin made the Kings Free-subiects.

And for these two causes last expressed, they were not willing to root out all
the Irishry. We may not therefore marvel, that when King Edward the third,
upon the petition of the Irish (as is before remembered) was desirous to be
certified, De voluntate magnatum suorum in proximo Parliamento in Hibernia
tenend si sine alieno praeiudicio co^cederepossit, quod per statut. inde fact.
Hibernici vtantur legibus Anglicanis, sieve chartis Regijs inde Impetrandis,
that there was never any Statute made to that effect. For the troth is, that
those great English Lords did to the uttermost of their power, cross and
withstand the enfranchisement of the Irish, for the causes before expressed;
Wherein I must still clear and acquit the Crown and State of England, of
negligence or ill policy, and lay the fault upon the Pride, Covetousness,
and ill Counsel of the English planted here, which in all former ages have bin
the chief impediments of the final Conquest of Ireland.

Again, those large scopes of Land, The war and dissension of the English
Lords one with another.
and great Liberties, with the absolute power to make war and peace, did
raise the English Lords to that height of Pride and Ambition, as that they
could not endure one another, but grew to a mortal war and dissension among
themselves: as appears by all the Records and Stories of this Kingdom.
First, in the year, 1204. the Lacies of Meth, made War upon Sir John Courcy;
who having taken him by treachery, sent him prisoner into England. In the
year, 1210. Annals Hiber^ in Camden.
King John coming over in person, expelled the Lacies out of the Kingdom, for
their tyranny and oppression of the English: howbeit, upon payment of great
Fines, they were afterward restored. In the year, 1228. that family being
risen to a greater height (for Hugh de Lacy the younger, was created Earl of
Vlster, after the death of Courcy without issue) there arose dissension and
war between that house, and william Marshall Lord os Leinster; whereby all
Meth was destroyed and laid wast. In the year, 1264. Sir walter Bourke having
married the Daughter and heir of Lacy, whereby he was Earl of Vlster in right
of his Wife, had mortal debate with Maurice Fitz-Morice the Geraldine, for
certain Lands in Conaght. So as all Ireland was full of Wars between the
Bourkes and the Geraldines (say our Annalles.) Wherein Maurice Fitz-Morice grew
so insolent, as that upon a meeting at Thistledermot, he took the Lord Justice
himself, Sir Richard Capell, prisoner, with diverse Lords of Mounster being
then in his Company. In the year, 1288. Richard Bourke, Earl of Vlster,
(commonly called the Red Earl) pretending title to the Lordship of Meth, made
war upon Sir Theobald de Verdun, and besiedged him in the Castle of Athloue.
Again, in the year, 1292. John Fitz-Thomas the Geraldine, having by
contention with the Lord Vesci, gotten a goodly inheritance in Kildare, grew
to that height of immagination (says the Story) as he fell into difference
with diverse great Noblemen; and among many others, with Richard the Red Earl,
whom he took prisoner, and detained him in Castle Ley; and by that dissension,
the English Annals Hiberniae in Camden.
on the one side, and the Irish on the other, did wast and destroy all the
Country.

After, in the year, 1311. the same Red Earl (coming to besiege Bonratty in
Thomond, which was then held Annals Iohannis Clynne. Manuscript.
by Sir Richard de Clare as his inheritance) was again taken prisoner: and all
his Army (consisting for the most part of English) ouerthrown and cut in
pieces, by Sir Richard de Clare. And after this again, in the year, 1327.
most of the great Houses were banded one against another, (viz:) The
Giraldines, Butlers, and Breminghams, on the one side, and the Bourkes and
Poers on the other. The ground of the quarrel being none other, but that the
Lord Arnold Poer, had called the Earl of Kildare, Rimer: But this quarrel was
prosecuted with such malice and violence, as the Counties of waterford and
Kilkenny were destroyed with fire and sword, till a Parliament was called of
purpose; to quiet this dissension.

Shortly after, the Lord John Bremingham, who was not long before made Earl of
Louth, for that notable service which he performed upon the Scots, between
Dundalke and the Faher, was so extremely envied by the Gernons, Verdons, and
others of the ancient Colony, planted in the County of Louth, as that in the
year, 1329. they did most wickedly betray and murder that Earl, with diverse
principal Gentlemen of his name and Family; using the same speech that the
Rebellious Jews are said to use in the Gospel: Nolumus hunc regnare super
nos.



After this, the Geraldines and the Butlers being become the most potent
families in the Kingdom (for the great Lordshippe of Leinster was divided
among Coparceners, whose heirs for the most part lived in England; and the
Earledom of vlster, with the lordship of Meth, by the match of Lionell Duke of
Clarence, at last descended upon the Crown) had almost a continual war one
with another. In the time of king Henry the sixth (says Baron Baron Finglas,
Manuscript.
Finglas in his Discourse of the Decay of Ireland,) in a fight between the
Earls of Ormond and Desmond, almost all the Townes-men of Kilkenny were
slain. And as they followed contrary parties during the Wars of York and
Lancaster, so after that civil dissension ended in England, these Houses in
Ireland continued their opposition and feud still, even till the time of K.
Henry the eight; when by the Marriage of Margaret Fitz-Girald to the Earl of
Ossory, the houses of Kildare and Ormond were reconciled, and have continued in
amity ever since.

Thus these great Estates and Royalties granted to the English Lords in
Ireland, begat Pride; and Pride, begat Contention among themselus, which
brought forth diverse mischiefs, that did not only disable the English to finish
the Conquest of all Ireland, but did endaunger the loss of what was already
gained; And of Conquerors; made them slaves to that Nation which they did
intend to Conquer. For, whenever one English Lord had vanquished another,
the Irish waited and took the opportunity, and fell upon that Country which
had received the blow; and so daily recovered some part of the lands, which were
possessed by the English Colonies.

Besides, the English Lords to strengthen their parties, did ally themselves
with the Irish, and drew them in, to Sta. 10. H. 7. c. 4
dwell among them, gave their Children Rot. Parliam. in castro Dublin
to be fostered by them; and having no other means to pay or reward the^,
suffered them to take Coigne and Livery upon the English Freeholders; which
Oppression was so intolerable, as that the better sort were enforced to quit
their freeholds and fly into England; and never returned, though many Laws
were made in both Realms, to remaunde them back again: and the rest which
remained, became degenerat and mere Irish, as is before declared. And the
English Lords finding the Irish exactions to be more profitable then the
English Rents and services; and loving the Irish tyranny, which was tied to no
Rules of Law or Honor, better then a just and lawful Seigniory, did reject and
cast off the English Law and Government, received the Irish Laws and Customs,
took Irish Surnames, as Mac william, Mac Pheris, Mac Yoris, Baron Finglas,
Manuscript.
refused to come to the Parliamentes which were summoned by the King of
Englands Authority, and scorned to obey those English Knights which were sent
to command and govern this Kingdom; Namely, Sir Richard Capel, Sir John
Morris, Sir John Darcie, and Sir Raphe vsford. And when Sir Anthony Lucie, a
man of great Authority in the time of King Edward the third, was sent over to
reform the notorious abuses of this Kingdom, the King doubting that he should
not be obeyed, Archiu. Turr. 5. Ed. 3. claus. m. 4
directed a special Writ or Mandate to the Earl of vlster, and the rest of
the Nobility to assist him. And afterward, the same King (upon good advise and
Counsel) resumed those excessive Grants of Lands and Liberties in Ireland, by
a special ordinance made in England, which remains of Record in the Tower, in
this form: Quia plures excessi^ and donationes terrarum et libertatum in
Hibernia ad subdolam machinationem Archiu. Tur. 15 Ed. 3. claus. m. 4
petentium factae sunt, etc. Rex deluserias huiusmodo machinationes volens
elidere, de consilio peritorum sibi assistentium, omnes donationes Terrarum et
libertatum praedict. duxit reuocandas quovsque de merit is donatarioru^ et
causis ac qualitatibus donationu^ melius fuerit informat et ideo mandatum est
Iusticiario Hiberniae quoth. seisirifaciat, etc Howbeit, there followed upon this
resumptio^, such a division and faction between the English of birth, and the
English of blood and race, as they summoned and held several Parliaments apart
one from the other. Whereupon, there had risen a general war betwixt them, to
the utter extinguishing of the English Name and Nation in Ireland, if the Earl
of Desmond, who was head of the faction against the English Annals Hiberniae
in Camden.
of birth, had not been sent into England, and detained there for a time: yet
afterward, these liberties being restored by direction out of England, the
26. of Edw. 3. complaint was made to the King of the easy restitution;
whereunto the King made answer, as is before expressed: so as we may conclude
this point with that which we find in the Annalles, published by Master
Camden: Hibernici debellati and consumpti fuissent, nisiseditio Anglicorum
impedivisset. Whereunto I may add this note, that though some are of opinion,
that Grants of extraordinary Honors and Liberties made by a King to his
subjects, do no more diminish his greatness, then when one Torch lights
another; for it has no less light, then it had before, Quis vetat apposito
lumen de lumine sumi? Yet many times, inconveniences do arise thereuppon: and
those Princes have held up their Sovereignty best, which have been sparing in
those Graunts. And truly, as these Graunts of little Kingdoms, and great
Royalties, to a few private persons, did produce the mischiefs spoken of
before: So the true cause of the making of these The first Adventurers obtained
these liberal grants, because the Kings of England did not prosecute the war
at their own charge.
Grants, did proceed from this; That the Kings of England being otherwise
employed and diuerted, did not make the Conquest of Ireland, their own work,
and undertake it not royally at their own charge; but as it was first begun by
particular Adventurers, so they left the prosecution thereof, to them, and
other voluntaries, who came to seek their fortunes in Ireland; wherein if they
could prevail, they thought that in reason and honor they could do no less,
then make them proprieters of such scopes of Land as they could conquer,
people, and plant at their own charge, reserving only the Sovereign
Lordshippe to the Crown of England. But if the Lion had gone to hunt himself,
the shares of the Inferior Beasts had not been so great: If the invasion had
been made by an army transmitted, furnished, and supplied only at the kings
charges, and wholly paid with the Kings Treasure, as the Armies of Queen
ELIZABETH, and King James have been; as the conquest had been sooner atchiued,
so the seruitors had been contented with lesser proportions.

For, when Scipio, Pompey, Caesar, How the State of Rome rewarded their men of
war.
and other Generals of the Roman Armies, as Subjects and Servants of that
State, and with the public Charge had conquered many Kingdoms and
Commonweales, we find them rewarded with Honorable Offices and Triumphs at
their return; and not made Lords and proprieters of whole Provinces and
Kingdoms which they had subdued to the Empire of Rome. Likewise, when the Duke
of Normandy William the Conqueror.
had conquered England, which he made his own work, and performed it in his
own person, he distributed sundry Lordships and Manors unto his followers,
but gave not away whole Shires and Countries in demesne to any of his
seruitors, whom he most desired to advance. Only, he made Hugh Lupus County
Palatine of Camden in Chester.
Chester, and gave that Earldom to him and his heirs, to hold the same, It a
libere ad gladium, sicut Rex tenebat Angliam ad Coronam. Whereby that Earldom
indeed had a royal Jurisdiction and Seigniory, though the Lands of that
County in demesne, were possessed for the most part by the ancient Inheritors.

Again, from the time of the Norman Wales distributed to the L. Marchers.
Conquest, till the reign of King Edward the first, many of our English Lords,
made war upon the Welshmen at their own charge; the lands which they gained
they held to their own use, were called Lords Marchers, and had Royal
Liberties within their Lordshippes. Howbeit, these particular Adventurers,
could never make a perfect Conquest of Wales.

But when King Edward the first, came in person with his army thither, kept his
residence and Court there; made the reducing of wales, an enterprise of his
own; he finished that work in a year or two, whereof the Lords Marchers had
not performed a third part, with their continual bordering war, for two
hundred years before. And withal we may observe, that though this King had
now the Dominion of Wales in Iure propriet atis, as the Statute of Rutland
affirms; which before was subject unto him, but in Iure feodali: And though
he had lost diverse principal Knights and Noblemen in that War, yet did he
not reward his seruitors with whole Countries or Counties, but with particular
Manors and Lordships: as to Henry Lacy Earl of Lincoln, he gave the
Lordship of Denbigh; and to Reignold Gray, the Lordship of Ruthen, and so to
others. And if the like course had been used in the winning and distributing
of the Lands of Ireland, that Island had been fully conquered before the
continent of wales had been reduced. But the troth is, when Private men
attempt the Conquest of Countries at their own charge, commonly their
enterprises do perrish without success: as when, in the time of Queen
Elizabeth, Sir Thomas Smith undertook to recover the Ardes: and Chatterton, to
reconquer then Fues and Orier. The one lost his Son; and the other, Himself;
and both their Adventures came to nothing. And as for the Crown of England, it
has had the like fortune in the Conquest of this Land, as some purchasers
have; who desire to buy Land at too easy a Rate: they find those cheap
purchases so full of trouble, as they spend twice as much as the Land is
worth, before they get the quiet possession thereof.

And as the best policy was not observed in the distribution of the conquered
Lands; so as I conceive, that the first Adventurers intending to make a full
Conquest of the Irish, were deceived in the choice of the Fittest places for
their plantation. For they sat down, and erected their Castles and
Habitations in the Plains and open Countries; where they found most fruitful
and profitable Lands, and turned the Irish into the VVoods and Mountains:
Which, as they were proper places for Out-Lawes and Thieves, so were they their
Natural Castles and Fortifications; thither they drove their preyes and
stealths; there they lurkt, and lay in wait to do mischief. These fastplaces
they kept unknown, by making the ways and Entries thereunto impassable; there
they kept their Creaghts or Heardes of Cattle, living by the Milk of the Cow,
without Husbandry or Tillage; there they increased and multiplied unto infinite
numbers by promiscuous generation among themselves; there they made their
Assemblies and Conspiracies without discovery: But they discovered the weakness
of the English dwelling in the open plains; and thereupon made their sallies
and retraites with great advantage. Whereas, on the other side, if the English
had builded their Castles and Towns in those places of fastness, and had
driven the Irish into the Plains and open Countries, where they might have had
an eye and observation upon the^, the Irish had been easily kept in Order, and
in short time reclaimed from their wildness; there they would have used
Tillage, dwelt together in Towne-ships, learned Mechanical Arts and Sciences.
The woods had bin wasted with the English Habitations, as they are about the
Forts of Mariborough and Phillipston, which were built in the fastest places in
Leinster, and the ways and passages throughout Ireland, would have boene as
clear and open, as they are in England at this day.

A Gain, if King Henry the second, The English Lords did not reduce the woods
and wastes in Forests and Parks.
who is said to be the K. that Conquered this Land, had made Forests in
Ireland, as he did enlarge the Forests in England (for it appears by Chart.
de Forest. c. 2 and 3.
Charta de Foresta, that he afforrested many woods and wastes, to the Greeuance
of the Subject, which by that Law were disaforrested,) or if those English
Lords, amongst whom the whole Kingdom was divided, had been good Hunters,
and had reduced the Mountains, Bogges, and woods within the limits of
Forests, Chases, and Parkes; assuredly, the very Forest Law, and the Law de
Malefactoribus in parcis, would in time have driven them into the Plains and
Countries inhabited and mannured, and have made them yield up their fast
places to those wild Beasts which were indeed less hurtful and wild, then
they. But it seems strange to me, that in all the Records of this
Kingdom, I seldom find any mention made of a Forest; and never of any Park
or Free Warren; considering the great plenty both of Vert and Venison within
this Land; and that the chief of the Nobility and Gentry are descended of
English race; and yet at this day, there is but one Park stored with Dear in all this kingdom: which is a Park of the Earl of Ormonds, near Kilkenny. It is
then manifest, by that which is before expressed; that the not communicating of
the English laws to the Irish; the ouer-large Grants of Lands and Liberties to
the English; the plantation made by the English in the Plains and open
Countries, leaving the Woods and Mountains to the Irish, were great Defects
in the Civil policy, and hindered the perfection of the Conquest very much.
Howbeit, notwithstanding these Defects and Errors, the English Colonies stood
and maintained themselus in a reasonable good estate, as long as they retained
their own ancient Laws and Customs, according to that of Ennius: Moribus
antiquis res stat. Romana virisque. But when the civil Government The English
Colonies rejected the English laws and customs, and embraced the Irish.
grew so weak and so loose, as that the English Lords, would not suffer the
English Laws to be put in execution within their Territories and Seigniories,
but in place thereof, both they and their people, embraced the Irish Customs:
Then the estate of things, like a Game at Irish, was so turned about, as the
English, which hoped to make a perfect Conquest of the Irish, were by them
perfectly and absolutely conquered; because Victi victoribus leges dedere. A
just punnishment to our Nation, that would not give Laws to the Irish when they
might: and therefore now the Irish gave Laws to them. Therefore, this Defect
and failing of the English Justice, in the English Colonies; and the inducing
of the Irish Customs in lieu thereof, was the maine impediment that did arrest
and stop the course of the Conquest; and was the only mean that enabled the
Irishrie to recover their strength again.

FOr, if we consider the Nature of The nature of the Irish Customs.
the Irish Customs, we shall find that the people which does use them, must
of necessity be Rebels to all good Government, destroy the commonwealth
wherein they live, and bring Barbarism and desolation upon the richest and
most fruitful Land of the world. For, whereas by the just and Honorable Law
of England, and by the Laws of all other well-gouerned The Irish laws and
Customs, differing from the Laws and Customs of al civil Nations
Kingdoms and Commonweals, Murder, Manslaughter, Rape, Robbery, and Theft,
are punnished with death; By the Irish Custom, or Brehon Law, the highest of
these offenses was punished only by Fine, which they called an Ericke.
Therefore, when The Irish Law in Criminal causes.
Sir William Fitz-williams, (being Lord Deputy) told Maguyre that he was to
send a Sheriff into Fermaunagh, being lately before made a County; your
Sheriff (said Maguyre) shall be welcome to me, but let me know his Ericke,
or the price of his head before hand; that if my people cut it off, I may cut
the Ericke upon the Country. As for Oppression, Extortion, and other
trespasses, the weaker had never any remedy against the stronger: whereby it
came to pass, that no man could enjoy his Life, his Wife, his Lands or Goods
in safety, if a mightier man then himself had an appetite to take the same
from him. Wherein they were little better then Canniballes, who do hunt one
another; and he that has most strength and swiftnes, does eat and devour
all his fellows.

Again, in England, and all well ordered Commonweals, men have certain
estates in their Lands and possessions, and their inheritances descend from
Father to Son, which does give them encouragement to build, and to plant, and
to improoue their Lands, and to make them better for their posterities. But by
the Irish Custom of Tanistry, the Cheefetanes of The Irish Custom of Tanistry.
every Country, and the chief of every Sept, had no longer estate then for
life in their Cheeferies, the inheritance whereof, did rest in no man. And
these Cheeferies, though they had some portions of Land allotted unto them,
did consist chiefly in cuttings and Cosheries, and other Irish exactions,
whereby they did spoil and impouerish the people at their pleasure. And when
their Chieftanes were dead, their sons or next heirs did not succeed them,
but their Tanistes, who were Elective, and purchased their elections by strong
hand; The Irish Custom of Gauelkinde.
And by the Irish Custom of Gauellkinde, the inferior Tennanties were
partible amongst all the Males of the Sept, both Bastards and Legittimate: and
after partition made, if any one of the Sept had died, his portion was not
divided among his Sons, but the chief of the sept, made a new partition of
all the Lands belonging to that Sept, and gave every one his part according to
his antiquity.

THese two Irish Customs made all The mischiefs that arise by these two
Customs.
their possessions uncertain, being shuffled, and changed, and removed so often
from one to another, by new elections and partitions; which uncertainty of
estates, has bin the true cause of such Desolation and Barbarism in this land,
as the like was never seen in any Country, that professed the name of Christ.
For, though the Irishry be a Nation of great Antiquity, and wanted neither wit
nor valor; and though they had received the Christian Faith, above 1200.
years since; and were Lovers of Music, Poetry, and all kind of learning;
and possessed a Land abounding with all things necessary for the Civil life
of man; yet (which is strange to be related) they did never build any houses
of Brick or stone (some few poor Religious Houses excepted) before the reign
of King Henry the second, though they were Lords of this Island for many
hundred years before, and since the Conquest attempted by the English: Albeit,
when they saw us build Castles upon their borders, they have only in
imitation of us, erected some few piles for the Captains of the Country: yet I
dare boldly say, that never any particular person, either before or since, did
build any stone or brick house for his private Habitation; but such as have
lately obtained estates, according to the course of the Law of England.
Neither did any of them in all this time, plant any Gardens or Orchards,
Enclose or improve their Lands, live together in settled Villages or Towns, nor
made any provision for posterity; which being against all common sense and
reason, must needs be imputed to those unreasonable Customs, which made
their estates so uncertain and transitory in their possessions.

For, who would plant or improoue, or build upon that Land, which a stranger
whom he knew not, should possess after his death? For that (as Solomon notes)
is one of the strangest Vanities under the Sun. And this is the true reason
why Vlster, and all the Irish Countries are found so wast and desolate at this
day; and so would they continue till the worlds end, if these Customs were not
abolished by the Law of England.

Again, that Irish Custom of Gauel-kinde, did breed another mischief; for
thereby, every man being borne to Land, as well Bastard, as Legitimate, they al
held themselves to be Gentlemen. And though their portions were never so small,
and themselves never so poor ( For Gauelkind must needs in the end make a
poor Gentility,) yet did they scorn to descend to Husbandry or Merchandise,
or to learn any Mechanical Art or Science. And this is the true cause why
there were never any Corporate Towns erected in the Irish Countries. As for the
Maritime Cities and Towns, most certain it is, that they were built and
peopled by the Ostmen or Easterlings: for the natives of Ireland never
performed so good a work, as to build a City. Besides, these poor Gentlemen
were so affected unto their small portions of Land, as they rather chose to
live at home by Theft, Extortion, and Coshering, then to seek any better
fortunes abroad: which increased their Septs or Syrnames into such numbers, as
there are not to be found in any Kingdom of Europe, so many Gentlemen of one
Blood, Family, and Syrname, as there are of the O Neales in Vlster; of the
Bourkes, in Conaght; of the Geraldines, and Butlers, in Munster and Leinster.
And the like may be said of the Inferior Bloodes and Families; whereby it
came to pass in times of trouble and Dissension, that they made great parties
and factions adhering one to another, with much constancy; because they were
tied together, Vinculo sanguinis; whereas Rebels and Malefactors which are tied
to their Leaders by no band, either of Duty or Blood, do more easily break
and fall off one from another. And besides, their Coe-habitation in one
Country or Teritory, gave them opportunity suddenly to assemble, and Conspire,
and rise in multitudes against the Crown. And even now, in the time of peace,
we find this inconvenience, that there can hardly be an indifferenttriall had
between the King and the Subject, or between party and party, by reason of
this general Kindred and Consanguinity.

But the most wicked and mischeeuous The wicked Customs of Coigne and Livery.
Custom of all others, was that of Coigne and Livery, often before mentioned;
which consisted in taking of Mansmeate, Horsemeat, and Money, of all the
inhabitants of the Country, at the will and pleasure of the soldier, who as the
phrase of Scripture is, Did eat up the people as it were Bread; for that he
had no other entertainment. This Extortion was originally Irish, for they used
to lay Bonaght upon their people, and never gave their Soldier any other pay.
But when the English The mischiefs that did arise by Coigne and Livery.
had Learned it, they used it with more insolency, and made it more
intolerable; for this oppression was not temporary, or limited either to place
or time; but because there was every where a continual war, either
Offensive, or Defensive; and every Lord of a Country, and every Marcher made
war and peace at his pleasure; it became Universal and Perpetual; and was
indeed the most heavy oppression, that ever was used in any Christian or
Heathen Kingdom. And therefore, Vox Oppressorum, this crying sin, did draw
down as great, or greater plagues upon Ireland, then the oppression of the
Isralites, did draw upon the Land of Egypt. For the plagues of Egypt, though
they were grievous, were but of a short continuance. But the plagues of
Ireland, lasted 400. years together. This extortion of Coigne and Livery, did
produce two notorious effects. First, it made the Land wast; Next, it made the
people, idle. For, when the Husbandman The cause of Idleness in the Irish.
had labored all the year, the soldier in one night, did consume the fruits
of all his labor, Long^ perit labor irritus anni. Had he reason then to
mannure the Land for the next year? Or rather might he not complain as the
Shepherd in Virgil: Impius haec tam culta noualia miles habebit? Barbarus has
segetes? En quo discordia Ciues Perduxit miseros? En queis co^sevimus agros?

AND hereupon of necessity came depopulation, banishment, and extirpation of
the better sort of subjects; and such as remained became idle, and lookers on,
expecting the event of those miseries and evil times: So as this extreme
Extortion and Oppression, has been the true cause of the Idleness of this
Irish Nation; and that rather the vulgar sort have chosen Why the Irish are
Beggars in foreign. Countries.
to be Beggars in foreign Countries, then to manure their own fruitful Land
at home.

Lastly, this oppression did of force Why the Irish are reputed a crafty people.
and necessity make the Irish a crafty people: for such as are oppressed and
live in slavery, are ever put to their shifts; Ingenium mala saepe mouent; And
therefore, in the old Comedies of Plantus and Terence, the Bondslaue does
always act the cunning and Crastie part. Besides, all the Common people have a
whyning tune or Accent in their speech, as if they did still smart or suffer
some oppression. And this Idleness, Why the Irish are inquisitiue after News.
together with fear of iminent mischiefs, which did continually hang over
their heads, have bin the cause, that the Irish were ever the most inquisitiue
people after news, of any Nation in the world. As S. Paul himself made
observation upon the people of Athens; that they were an idle people, and did
nothing but learn and tell News. And because these Newes-Carriers, did by
their false intelligence, many times raise troubles and rebellions in this
Realm, the Statute of Kilkenny, does punish Newestellers (by the name of
Skelaghes) with Fine and ransom.

This Extortion of Coigne and Livery, was taken for the maintenance of their
men of war; but their Irish exactions extorted by the Chieftanes and Tanists,
by color of their barbarous Seigniory, were almost as grievous a burden as
the other; namely, Cosherings, which were visitations and Cosherings.
progresses made by the Lord and his followers, among his Tenants: wherein he
did eat them (as the English Proverb is) Out of house and home. Sessings
Sessings.
of the Kerne, of his family, called Kernety, of his Horses and Hors-boyes; of
his Dogs and Dog-boyes, and Cuttings.
the like: And lastly, Cuttings, Tallages, or Spendings, high or low, at his
pleasure; all which, made the Lord an absolute Tyrant, and the Tennant a very
slave and villain; and in one respect more miserable then Bondeslaues. For
commonly the Bondslaue is fed by his Lord, but here the Lord was fed by his
Bondslaue.

Lastly, there were two other Customs proper and peculiar to the Irishry,
which being the cause of many strong combinations and factions do tend to the
utter ruin of a Commonwealth: The one, was Fosteriug; the other, Gossipred;
both which have ever bin of greater estimation among this people, then with any
other Nation in the Christian world. For Fostering, I did never hear or read,
that it was in that use or reputation in any other Country, Barbarous or
Civil, as it has been, and yet is, in Ireland: where they put away al their
children to Fosterers: the potent and rich men Selling; the meaner sort Buying,
the alterage of their Children; and the reason is, because in the opinion of
this people, Fostering has always been a stronger alliance then Blood; and
the Foster-Children do love and are beloved of their foster-fathers and their
Sept, more then of their own natural Parents and Kindred; and do participate
of their means more frankely, and do adhere unto them in all fortunes, with
more affection and constancy. And though Tully in his Book of Friendship does
observe, that children of Princes being sometimes in cases of necessity for
saving of their lives delivered to Shepherds to be nourished and bred up, when
they have bin restored to their great fortunes, have still retained their love
and affection to their Fosterers, whom for many years they took to be their
Parents: yet this was a rare case, and few examples are to be found thereof.

But such a general Custom in a Kingdom, in giving and taking children to
Foster, making such a firm Alliance as it does in Ireland, was never seen or
heard of, in any other Country of the world besides.

THE like may be said of Gossipred or Gossipred.
or Compaternitie, which though by the Canon Law, it be a spiritual affinity,
and a Iuror that was Gossip to either of the parties, might in former times
have bin challenged, as not indifferent by our Law, yet there was no nation
under the Sun, that ever made so Religious account thereof, as the Irish.

Now these two Customs, which of themselves are indifferent in other Kingdoms,
became exceeding evil and full of mischief in this Realm, by reason of the
inconveniences which followed thereupon. For, they made (as I said before)
strong parties and factions, whereby the great men were enabled to oppress
their Inferiors, and to oppose their Equals: and their followers were borne
out and countenanced in all their lewd and wicked actions: For Fosterers and
Gossips by the common Custom of Ireland, were to maintain one another in all
causes lawful, and unlawful; which as it is a Combination and Confederacy
punishable in all well-gouerned Commonweals, so was it not one of the least
causes of the common misery of this Kingdom.

I omit their common repudiation of their Wives; their promiscuous generation
of Children; their neglect of lawful Matrimony; their uncleanness in
Apparel, Diet, and Lodging; and their contempt and scorn of all things
necessary for the Civil life of man.

These were the Irish Customs, which the English Colonies did embrace and use,
after they had rejected How the English Colonies became degenerate.
the Civil and Honorable Laws and Customs of England, whereby they became
degenerate and metamorphosed like Nabuchadnezzar: who although he had the face
of a man, had the heart of a Beast; or like those who had drunk of Circes
Cup, and were turned into very Beasts; and yet took such pleasure in their
beastly manner of life, as they would not return to their shape of men again:
Insomuch as within less time then the Age of a man, they had no marks or
differences left amongst them of that Noble nation, from which they were
descended. For, as they did not only forget the English Language, and scorn
the use thereof, but grew to be ashamed of their very English Names, though
they were Noble and of great Antiquity; and took Irish Surnames and
Nicke-names. Namely, the two most potent families of the Bourks in Conaght
(after the house of the Red Earl failed of Heyres-males) called their Cheefes,
Mac william Eighter, and Mac william Oughter. In the same Province, Bremingham,
Baron of Athenrie, called himself Mac Yoris. Dexecester, or De'exon, was called
Mac Jordan. Mangle or de Angulo, took the name of Mac Costelo. Of the Inferior
families of the Bourkes, one was called Mac Hubbard, another Mac David. In
Munster, of the great Families of the Geraldines planted there; One was called
Mac Morice chief of the house of Lixnaw; and another, Mac Gibbon, who was also
called the white Knight. The chief of the Baron of Dunhoynes house, who is a
branch of the house of Ormond, took the Surnames of Mac Pheris. Condon of the
County of waterford, was called Mac Maioge: and the Archdeacon of the County
of Kilkenny, Mac Odo. And this they did in contempt and hatred of the English
Name and Nation; of these degenerate families became more mortal enemies, then
the mere Irish. And whereas the state and Government being grown weak by
their defection, did to reduce them to Obedience, grant them many protections
and Pardons ( The cheapenesse whereof, in all ages, has brought great dishonor
and damage to this Commonweal) they grew so ungrateful and unnatural, as in
the end they scorned that grace and favor, because the acceptance thereof, did
argue them to be subjects, and they desired rather to be accounted Enemies,
then Rebels to the Crown of England.

Hereupon was that old Verse Alb. libr. Scacc. Dublin.
made, which I find Written in the White Book of the Exchequer, in a hand as
ancient as the time of King Edward the third.

By granting Charters of peace,
To false English withouten les,
This Land shall be mich undo.
But Gossipred, and alterage,
And leesing of our Language,
Have mickely holp theretoo.
And therefore, in a close Roll in the Tower, bearing this Title; Articuli in
Hibernia obseruandi: we find these two Articles among others. 1. Iusticiarius
Hiberniae non concedat perdonationes de morte hominis, nec de Roberijs, seu
incendijs, and quod de 5. Ed. 3. m. 25.
caetero certificet dominum regem de nominibus petentium. 2. Item, Quod nec
Iusticiarius nec aliquis Magnas Hiberniae concedat protectiones alicui contra
pacem Regis existent. etc. But now it is fit to look back and consider when
the old English Colonies became so degenerate; and in what Age they fell away
into that Irish barbarism, rejecting the English laws and Customs.
Assuredly, by comparing When and how the English Colonies became degenerate.
the ancient Annalles of lrelaud with the Records remaining here, and in the
Tower of London, I do find that this general defection, fell out in the latter
end of the reign of king Edward the second, and in the beginning of the reign
of King Edward the third. And all this great innovation, grew within the
space of thirty years: within the compass of which time, there fell out diverse
mischievous accidents, whereby the whole kingdom was in a manner lost. For
first, Edward de Bruce The Scots ouerrun Iceland
invaded Ireland with the Scottish Army, and prevailed so far, as that he
possessed the Maritime parts of vlster, marched up to the walls of Dublin,
spoiled the English Pale, passed thorough Leinster and Munster, as far as
Limericke, and was Master of the field in every part of the kingdom.

This happened in the tenth year of King Edward the second, at what time the
Crown of England was weaker, and suffered more dishonor in both kingdoms, then
it did at any time since the Norman Conquest. Then did the State of England
send over John de Hotham Annals Hibernie in Camden.
to be Treasurer here, with commission to call the great Lords of Ireland to
gether; and to take of them an Oath of Assoacition, that they should loyally
join together in life and death to preserve the right of the King of England,
and to expel the commonenemy. But this Treasurer brought neither men, nor
money, to perform this service.

At that time, though Richard Bourk Earl of Vlster (commonly called the
Redde-Earle) were of greater power then any other subject in Ireland, yet was
he so far stricken in years, as that he was unable to manage the martial
affairs, as he had done during all the reign of King Edward the first: having
bin General of the Irish forces, not only in this kingdom, but in the Wars of
Scotland, wales, and Gascoigne. And therefore, Maurice FitzThomas of Desmond,
being then the most active Nobleman in this realm, Desmond chief Commander in
the war against the Scots.
took upon him the chief command in this War: for the support whereof, the
Reuennue of this Land, was far too short, and yet no supply of Treasure was
sent out of England.

Then was there no mean to maintain When and how the extortion of Coign and
Liuery-began among the English.
the Army, but by Sessing the soldiers upon the Subject, as the Irish were
wont to impose their Bonaught. Whereupon, grew that wicked Extortion of Coigne
and Liuerie spoken of before, which in short time banished the greatest part of
the Freeholders out of the County of Kerrie, Limerick, Cork, and waterford;
Into whose possessions, Desmond and his Kinsmen, Alies, and Followers, which
were then more Irish then English, did enter and appropriate these Lands unto
themselves, Desmond himself taking what scopes he best liked for his demesnes
in every Country, and reserving an Irish Seigniory out of the rest. And here,
that I may verify and maintain by matter of Record, that which is before
delivered touching the Nature of this wicked Extortion, called Coigne and
Livery; and the manifold mischiefs it did produce, I think it fit and
pertinent to insert the preamble of the Statute of the 10. of Henry 7. c. 4.
not printed, but recorded in Parliament Rols of Dublin, in these words: At the
request and supplication of the Commons of this Land of Ireland, that where of
long time there has bin used and exacted by the Lords and Gentlemen of this
Land, many and diverse damnable customs and vsages, which bin called Coigne,
and Livery, and Pay; that is, Horsemeat, and Mansmeat, for the finding of their
Horsemen and Footmen; and over that, 4. d. or 6. d. daily to every of them to
be had and paid of the poor Earth-Tillers, and Tenants, inhabitants of the
said Land, without any thing doing or paying therefore. Besides, many
Murders, Robberies, Rapes, and other manifold extortions and oppressions by the
said Horsemen and Footmen, daily and mightily committed and done; which bin
the principal causes of the desolation and destruction of the said Land, and
has brought the same into Ruin and Decay, so as the most part of the English
Freeholders and Tenants of this land bin departed out thereof, some into the
Realm of England, and other some to other strange Lands; whereupon the
foresaid Lords and Gentlemen of this Land, have intruded into the said
Freeholders and Tenants inheritances; and the same keeps and occupies as
their own inheritances; and setten under them in the same Land the Kings Irish
Enemies, to the diminishing of Holy Churches Rites, the disherison of the
King, and his obedient subjects, and the utter ruin and desolation of the
Land. For reformation whereof, be it enacted, That the King shall receive a
Subsidy of 26. s. 8. d. out of every 120. acres of arrable land manured, etc.
But to return to Tho: Fitz-Maurice of Desmond; By this extortion of Coigne and
Livery, he suddenly grew from a mean, to a mighty estate; insomuch as the
Baron Finglas in his discourse of the Decay of Ireland, affirms; that his
ancient inheritance being not one thousand marks yearly, he became able to
dispend every way, ten thousand pounds, per annum.

These possessions being thus unlawfully gotten, could not be maintained by
the just and honorable law of England, which would have restored the true
Owners to their Land again. And therefore, this Greatman found no means to
continue and uphold his ill-purchased greatness, but by rejecting the English
Law and Government, and assuming in lieu thereof, the barbarous customs of the
Irish. And hereupon, followed the defection of those four shires, containing
the greatest part of Munster, from the obedience of the Law.

In like manner (says Baron Finglas) the Lord of Tipperary) perceiving how
well the house of Desmond had thriued by Coigne and Liuerie, and Other Irish
exactions) began to hold the like course in the Counties of Tipperary and
Kilkenny; whereby he got great scopes of Land, specially in Ormond; and raised
many Irish exactions upon the English Freeholders there; which made him so
potent and absolut among the^, as at that time they knew no other Law, then
the will of their Lord. Besides, finding, that the Earl of Desmond excluded
the ordinary Ministers of Justice, under color of a Royal Liberty, which he
claimed in the Counties of Kerry, Cork, and waterford, by a grant of King
Edward the first (as appears in a Quo warranto, brought against him, Anno 1.
Edw. 1.) the Record whereof, remains in Breminghams Tower, among the common
Plea-Rolles there.

This Lord also, in the third of Edward the third, obtained a Grant of the
like Liberty in the County of Tipperary; whereby he got the Law into his own
hands, and shut out the Common Law and Justice of the Realm.

And thus we see, that all Munster fell away from the English Law and
Government, in the end of King Edward 2. his reign; and in the beginning of
the reign of King Edward the third. Again, about the same time, (viz:) in the
20. year of King Edward the second, when the State of England was well-ny
ruined by the Rebellion of the Barons, and the Government of Ireland utterly
neglected, there arose The rising of Mac Murrogh, and O Moore in Leinster.
in Leinster, one of the Cauanaghes, named Donald Mac Art, who named Annals
Hiberniae in Camden.
himself Mac Murrogh, King of Leinster, and possessed himself of the County
of Catherlogh, and of the greatest part of the County of wexford. And shortly
after, Lisagh O Moore, called himself Annals Johan. Clynne. Manus.
O Moore, took 8. Castles in one Evening, destroyed Dunamase the principal
The defect and loss of a great part of Leinster.
house of the L. Mortimer in Leix, recovered that whole Country, De seruo
Dominus, de subiecto princeps effectus, says Friar Clynne in his Annalles.

Besides, the Earl of Kildare, imitating his Cousin of Desmond, did not omit to
make the like use of Coigne and Livery in Kildare, and the West part of Meth,
which brought the like Barbarism into those parts. And thus a great part of
Leinster was lost, and fell away from the Obedience of the Crown, near about
the time before expressed.

Again, in the seventh year of King Edward the third, the Lord William
Bourke, Earl of Vlster, and Lord The Earl of Vlster murdered.
of Conaght, was treacherously murdered by his own Squires at Knockefergus,
leaving behind him, Vnicam and vnius Annals Johan. Clynne. Manus.
annifiliam (says Friar Clynne.) Immediately upon the murder committed, the
Countess with her young daughter, fled into England; so as the Government of
that Country, was wholly neglected, until, that young Lady being married to
Lionell Duke of Clarence, that Prince came over with an Army, to recover his
wives inheritance, and to reform this Kingdom, Anno 36. of Edward the third.
But in the mean time, what became of that great inheritance both in Vlster,
and Conaght? Assuredly, in Vlster, the Sept of The Earldom of Vlster recovered
by the Irish.
Hugh Boy O Neal, then possessing Glaucoukeyn and Killeightra in Tyrone, took
the opportunity; and passing over the Banne, did first expel the English out
of the Barony of Tuscard, which is Abridgement of Salus populi. Manuscript.
now called the Rout; and likewise, out of the Glynnes and other Lands up
Baron Finglas, Manuscript.
as far as Knockfergus, which Country or extent of Land, is at this day
called, the lower Clan Hugh-Boy. And shortly after that, they came up into the
great Ardes, which the Latin writers call, Altitudines Vltoniae, and was then
the inheritance of the Savages; by whom, they were valiantly resisted for
diverse years: but at last, for want of Castles and fortifications (for the
saying of Henry Savage mentioned in every Story, is very memorable; That a
Castle of Bones, was better then a Castle of Stones) the English were ouer-run
by the multitude of the Irishry: So as about the thirtith of K. Edw. Annals
Hibermae in Camden.
3. some few years before the arrival of the Duke of Clarence, the Savages
were utterly driven out of the Great Ardes, into a little nooke of land near
the River of Strangford; where they now possess a little Territory, called the
little Ards; and their greater patrimony took the name of the upper Clan
Hugh-Boy, from the Sept of Hugh-Boy O Neale, who became Inuaders thereof.

FOr Conaght, some younger branches The defectio^ of Conaght.
of the Family of the Bourkes, being planted there by the Red-Earle and his
Ancestors, seeing their Chief to be cut off, and dead without Heire-male, and
no man left to govern or protect that Province, intruded presently into all the
Earls Lands, which ought to have bin seized into the kings hands, by reason
of the minority of the heir. And within a short space, two of the most potent
among them, divided that great Seigniory betwixt the^: the one taking the name
of Mac william Baron Finglas, Manuscript.
Oughter; and the other of Mac william Fighter; as if the Lord william Bourk
the last Earl of Vlster, had left two sons of one name behind him to
inherit that Lordship in course of Gauelkinde. But they well knew, that they
were but Intruders upon the Kings possession during the minority of the heir;
they knew those lands were the rightful inheritance of that young Lady; and
consequently, that the Law of England would speedily euict them out of their
possession; and therefore, they held it the best policy to cast off the yoke
of English Law, and to become mere Irish: and according to their example, drew
all the rest of the English in that Province, to do the like; so as from
thenceforth they suffered their possessions to run in course of Tanistry and
Gauel-kinde. They changed their names, language, and apparel, and all their
civil manners and Customs of living. Lastly, about the 25. year of King
Edward the third, Sir Richard de Clare was slain in Annals Hiberniae in
Camden.
Thomond, and all the English Colonies there, utterly supplanted.

Thus in that space of time, which was between the tenth year of king Edward
the second, and the 30. year of King Edward the third (I speak within
compass) by the concurrence of the mischieses before recited, all the old
English Colonies in Munster, Conaght, and Vlster; and more then a third part of
Leinster, became degenerat, and fell away from the Crown of England; so as
only the four Shyres of the English Pale, remained under the Obedience of the
Law; and yet the Borders and Marches thereof, were grown unruly, and out of
order too, being subject to Blacke-Rents and Tribute of the Irish; which was a
greater defection, then when ten of twelve Tribes departed, and fell away
from What courses have bin taken to reform this kingdom, since the English
Colonies became degenerate.
the Kings of Judah.

But was not the State of England sensible of this loss and dishonor? Did
they not endeavor to recover the Land that was lost, and to reduce the subjects
to their Obedience?

Truly King Edward the second, Edward 2
by the incursions of the Scottish Nation, and by the insurrection of his
Barons, who raised his wife and his Son against him, and in the end deposed
him, was diuerted and utterly disabled to reform the disorders K. Edward the
third, did first endeavor a reformation.
of Ireland. But as soon as the crown of England was transferred to K. Edw. 3.
though he were yet in his minority, the State there began to look into the
desperate estate of things here. And finding such a general defection,
Letters were sent from the Archiu. Turr. 2. E. 3. claus. pers. 1. m. 16.
King, to the great men and Prelates, requiring them particularly to swear
fealty to the Crown of England.

Shortly after, Sir Anthony Lucie, a Sir Anthony Lucie.
person of great authority in England in those days, was sent over to work a
reformation in this Kingdom, by a severe course; and to that end, the King
wrote expressly to the Earl of Vlster, and others of the Nobility to assist
him, as is before remembered; presently upon his arriual, he arrested Maurice
Fitz-Thomas Earl of Desmond; and Sir william Bremingham, and committed them
prisoners to the Castle of Dublin: where Sir william Bremingham Annals
Hiberniae in Camden.
was executed for treason, though the Earl of Desmond were left to Mainprize,
upon condition, he should appear before the King by a certain day, and in the
mean time to continue loyal.

AFter this, the King being advertised, that the ouer-large Graunts of Lands
and Liberties, made to the Lords of English Blood in Ireland, made them so
insolent, as they scorned to obey the Law, and the Magistrate, did absolutely
resume all such Crants, as is before declared. But the Resumption of Liberties.
Earl of Desmond above al men, found himself grieved with this resumption, or
Repeal of Liberties; and declared his dislike and coffeehouse: insomuch, as
he did not only refuse to come to a Parliament at Dublin, summoned by Sir
william Morris, Deputy to the L. John Darcy the kings Lieutenant: But (as we
have said before) he raised such dissension between the English of blood, and
the English of birth, as the like was never seen, from the time of the first
planting of our Nation in Ireland. And in this factious and seditious humor,
he drew the Annals Hiberniae in Camden.
Earl of Kildare, and the rest of the nobility, with the Citizens and
Burgesses of the principal Towns, to hold a several Parliament by
themselves, at Kilkenny; where they framed certain Articles against the
Deputy, and transmitted the same into England to the King.

Hereupon, Sir Raphe Vfford, who Sir Raph Vfford.
had lately before married the Countess Annals Johan. Clynne. Manus.
of Vlster; a man of courage and severity, was made Lord Justice: who forth
with calling a Parliament, sent a special commandment to the Earl of
Desmond, to appear in that great Council; but the Earl wilfully refused to
come. Whereupon, the Lord Justice raised the Kings Standard, and Annals
Hiberniae in Camden.
marching with an Army into Munster, seized into the Kings hands, all the
possessions of the Earl, took and executed his principal followers, Sir
Eustace le Poer, Sir william Grant, and Sir John Cotterell; enforced the Earl
himself to fly and lurk, till 26. Noblemen and Knights, became Mainpernors
for his appearance at a certain day prefixed: But he making default the second
time, the uttermost advantage was taken against his sureties. Besides, at the
same time, this Lord Justice caused the Earl of Kildare to be arrested and
committed to the Castle of Dublin, indicted and imprisoned many other
disobedient subjects, called in, and cancelled such Charters as were lately
before resumed; and proceeded every way so roundly and severely, as the
Nobility which were wont to suffer no controulment, did much distaste him; and
the Commons who in this Land have ever bin more devoted to their immediate
Lords here whom they saw every day, then unto their Sovereign Lord and King,
whom they never saw; spoke ill of this Governor, as of a rigorous and cruel
man, though in troth he were a singular good Iusticer; and, if he had not dyed
in the second year of his government, was the likeliest person of that Age, to
have reformed and reduced the degenerate English Colonies, to their natural
obedience of the crown of England.

THus much then we may observe by the way, that Maurice Fitz-Thomas, the first
Earl of Desmond, was the Maurice FitzThomas the first Earl of Desmond, the
author of the great oppressions and dissentions which distroyed the English
Colonies.
first English Lord that imposed Coign and Livery upon the Kings subjects; and
the first that raised his estate to immoderate greatness, by that wicked
Extortion and Oppression; that he was the first that rejected the English Laws
and Government, and drew others by his example to do the like; that he was the
first Peer of Ireland that refused to come to the Parliament summoned by the
Kings Authority; that he was the first that made a division and distinction
between the English of blood, and the English of birth.

AND as this Earl was the only The fortune of the house of Desmond.
Author, and first Actour, of these mischiefs, which gave the greatest
impediment to the full Conquest of Ireland; So it is to be noted, that albeit
others of his rank afterward offended in the same kind; whereby their
Houses were many times in danger of ruin, yet was there not ever any Noble
house of English race in Ireland, utterly destroyed and finally rooted out by
the hand of Justice, but the house of Desmond only; nor any Peer of this
Realm ever put to death (though diverse have bin attainted) but Tho: Fitz-Iames
the Earl of Desmond only, and only for those wicked Customs brought in by
the first Earl, and practiced by his posterity, though by several Laws they
were made High Treason. And therefore, though in the 7. of Edward the 4. during
the Government of the Lord Tiptoft, Earl of worcester, both the Earls of
Desmond and Kildare were attainted by Parliament at Drogheda, for alliance and
fostering with the Irish; and for taking Coign and Livery of the Kings
subjects, yet was Desmond only put to death; for the Earl of Kildare received
his pardon. And albeit the son of this Earl of Desmond, who lost his head at
Drogheda, were restored to the Earldom; yet could not the kings grace
regenerate obedience in that degenerate house, but it grew rather The
CounselBooke of Ireland. 32. H. 8.
more wild and barbarous, then before. For from thencefoorth they reclaimed a
strange privilege: That the Earls of Desmond should never come to any
Parliament or Graund-Counsell, or within any walled town, but at their will
and pleasure. Which pretended Privilege, James Earl of Desmond, the Father of
Girald the last Earl, renounced and surrendered by his Deed, in the Chancery of
Ireland, in the 32. of Henry the eight. At what time, among the mere Irishry,
he submitted himself to Sir Anthony Saint-Leger, then Lord Deputy; took an
Oath of Allegiance; Couenanted that he would suffer the law of England to be
executed in his Country; and assist the Kings Judges in their Circuits: and
if any Subsidies should be granted by Parliament, he would permit the same to be
levied upon his Tenants and followers. Which Covenants, are as strange as the
privilege it self, spoken of before. But that which I conceive most worthy of
Observation, upon the fortunes of the house of Desmond, is this; that as
Maurice Fitz-Thomas, the first Earl, did first raise the greatness of that
house, by Irish exactions and oppressions; so Girald the last Earl, did at
last ruin and reduce it to nothing, by using the like extortions. For certain
it is, that the first occasion of his rebellion, grew from hence; that when he
attempted to charge the Decies in the County of waterford, with Coigne and
Liuerie, Black Rents and Cosheries, after the Irish manner, he was resisted by
the Earl of Ormond, and upon an encounter, overthrown and taken prisoner;
which made his heart so unquiet, as it easily conceived treason against the
Crown, and brought forth actual and open Rebellion, wherein he perished
himself, and made a final extinguishment of his house and honor. Oppression
and extortion did maintain the greatness: and oppression and extortion, did
extinguish the greatness of that house. Which may well be expressed, by the old
Emblem of a Torch turned downwards, with this word; Quod me alit, extinguit.

NOw let us return to the course of reformation, held and pursued here,
after the death of Sir Raphe Vfford, which happened in the twentieth year of K.
Edward 3. After which time, albeit all the power and Counsel of England was
converted toward the Conquest of France, yet was not the work of reformation
altogether discontinued. For, in the 25. year of K. Edward the third, Sir
Thomas Rookeby, another worthy Governor (whom I have once before named) held a
Parliament at Kilkenny, wherein many excellent Laws were propounded and enacted
for the reducing of the English Colonies to their Obedience; which Laws we
find enrolled in the Remembrauncers Office here; and differ not much in
substance, from those other statutes of Kilkenny, which not long after (during
the Government of Lionell Duke of Clarence) were The course of Reformation
pursued by Lionel Duke of Clarence.
not only enacted, but put in execution. This Noble Prince having married the
Daughter and Heir of Vlster; and being likewise a Coparcener of the County of
Kilkenny, in the 36. year of King Edward the third, came over the Kings
Lieutenant, attended with a good retinue of martial men, as is before
remembered, and a Grave and Honorable Counsel, as well for peace, as for war.
But because this Army was not of a Competent strength to break and subdue all
the Irishry, although he quieted the borders of the English Pale, and held all
Ireland in awe with his name and presence. The principal service that he
intended, was to reform the degenerate English Colonies, and to reduce them to
obedience of the English Law, and Magistrate. To that end, in the fortith
year of King Edward the third, he held that famous Parliament at Kilkenny;
wherein many notable laws were enacted, which do show and lay open ( For the
Law does best discover enormities) how much the English Colonies were corrupted
at that time, and do infallibly prove that which is laid down before; That
they were wholly degenerate, and fallen away from their obedience. For first, it
appears by the Preamble of these Laws, that the English of this Realm,
before the coming over of Lionel Duke of Clarence, were at that time become
mere Irish in their Language, Names, Apparel, and all their manner of living,
and had rejected the English Laws, and submitted themselus to the Irish, with
whom they had many Marriages Archiu. in Castro Dublin. Statutes of Kilkenny.
and Alliances, which tended to the utter ruin and destruction of the
commonwealth. Therefore alliance by C. 2.
Marriage, Nurture of Infants, and Gossipred with the Irish, are by this
Statute made High Treason. Again, if any C. 3.
man of English race, should use an Irish Name, Irish Language, or Irish
Apparel, or any other guise or fashion of the Irish; if he had Lands or
Tenements, the same should be seized, til he had given security to the
Chancery, to conform himself in all points to the English manner of living. And
if he had no Lands, his body was to be taken and imprisoned, til he found
Sureties, as aforesaid.

Again, it was established and commanded, C. 4.
that the English in all their Controversies, should be ruled and governed by
the common Law of England: and if any did submit himself to the Brehon Law,
or March law, he should be adjudged a Traitor.

Again, because the English at that C. 10.
time, made war and peace with the bordering enemy at their pleasure; they
were expressly prohibited to leauie war upon the Irish, without special
warrant and direction from the State.

Again, it was made paenall to C. 12.
the English, to permit the Irish to Creaght or graze upon their Lands: to
present them to Ecclesiastical Benefices; C. 13.
to receive them into any C. 15.
Monasteries, or Religious Houses, or to entertain any of their Minstrels,
Rimers, or Newes-tellers: to impose C. 17.
or sesse any Horse or Footvppon the English Subjects against their wills, was
made felony. And because the C. 22.
great Liberties or Franchises spoken of before, were become Sanctuaries for
all Malefactors, express power was given to the Kings Sheriffs, to enter
into all franchises, and there to apprehend all Fellons and Traitors. And
lastly, because the great Lords, C. 24.
when they levied forces for the public service, did lay unequal burdens upon
the Gentlemen and Freeholders, it was ordained, that four Wardens of the
peace in every County, should set down and appoint what men and Armor every
man should bear, according to his Freehold, or other ability of estate.

THese, and other Laws, tending The Statutes of Kilkenny, did much reform the
degenerat English.
to a general reformation, were enacted in that Parliament. And the Execution
of these Laws, together with the Presence of the Kings Son, made a notable
alteration in the State and Manners of this people, within the space of seven
years, which was the term of this Princes Lieutenancy.

For, all the Discourses that I have seen of the Decay of Ireland, do agree
in this; that the presence of the Lord Lionel, and these Statutes of Kilkenny,
did restore the English govern meant, in the degenerate Colonies, for diverse
years. And the Statute of the Sta. 10. H. 7. c. 8
tenth of Henry the seventh, which reuiueth and confirms the Statutes of
Kilkenny, does confirm as much. For it declares, that as long as these Laws
were put in we and execution, this Land continued in prosperity and honor:
and since they were not executed, the Subjects rebelled and digressed from
their allegiance, and the Land fell to ruin and desolation. And withal, we
find the effect of these Laws in the Pipe-Rolles, and PleaRolles of this
Kingdom: For, from the 36. of Edward 3. when this Prince entered into his
Government, till the beginning of Richard the second his Reign, we find the
Reuennue of the Crown both certain and casual in Vlster, Munster, and
Conaght, accounted for; and that the Kings Writ did run, and the Common Law was
executed in every of these Provinces. I join The presence of the Kings son,
did much advance the reformation.
with these Laws, the personal presence of the Kings Son, as a concurrent
cause of this Reformation: Because the people of this Land both English and
Irish, out of a natural pride, did ever love and desire to be governed by
great persons. And Absence of our Kings and great English Lords, a chief cause
why the Kingdom was not reduced.
therefore, I may here justly take occasion to note, that first the absence of
the Kings of England; and next, the absence of those great Lords, who were
inheritors of those mighty Seigniories of Leinster, Vlster, Conaght, and Meth,
have bin maine causes why this kingdom was not reduced in so many ages.

TOuching the absence of our Kings, Absence of our Kings.
three of them only since the Norman Conquest, have made royal iournies into
this Land; namely, K. Henry the second, King Iobn, and king Richard the
second. And yet they no sooner arrived here, but that all the Irishry, (as if
they had bin but one man) submitted themselves; took Oaths of fidelity, and
gave pledges and hostages to continue loyal. And, if any of those Kings had
continued here in person a competent time, till they had settled both English
and Irish in their several possessions, and had set the Law in a due course
throughout the Kingdom; these times wherein we live, had not gained the honor
of the final Conquest and reducing of Ireland. For the King (says Solomon)
dissipat omne malum intuitu suo. But when Moses was absent in the Mount, the
people committed Idolatry: and when there was no king in Israel, every man did
what seemed best in his own eyes.

And therefore, when Alexander had conquered the East part of the world, and
demanded of one what was the fitest place for the seat of his Empire, he
brought and laid a dry hide before him, and desired him to set his foot on the
one side thereof; which being done, all the other parts of the Hide did rise
up: but when he did set his foot in the middle of the Hide, all the other parts
lay flat and even: Which was a lively demonstration, that if a Prince keep his
residence in the Border of his Dominions, the remoate parts will eafily rise
and rebel against him: but if he make the Center thereof, his seat, he shall
easily keep them in peace and obedience.

TOuching the absence of the great The absence of the great English Lords.
Lords: All Writers do impute the decay and loss of Leinster, to the absence
of these English Lords, who married the five Daughters of william Marshall Earl
of Pembroke (to whom that great Seigniory descended) when his Baron Finglas,
Manuscript.
five sons, who inherited the same successively; and during their times, held
the same in peace and obedience to the Law of England, were all dead without
Issue: which happened about the fortith year of King Henry the third: for the
eldest being married to Hugh Bigot Earl of Norfolk, who in right of his
wife, had the Marshalship of England; The second, to Warren de Mountchensey,
whose sole daughter and heir, was matched to william de Valentia half Brother
to K. Henry 3. who by that match, was made Earl of Pembroke; The third, to
Gilbert de Clare, earl of Gloucester; The fourth, to william Ferrers, Earl of
Darby; The fifth, to william de Bruce, Lord of Brecknocke: These great Lords,
having greater inheritances in their own right in England, then they had in
Ireland in right of their Wives (and yet each of the Coparceners, had an entire
County allotted for her purparty, as is before declared) could not be drawn
to make their personal residence in this Kingdom; but managed their estates
here, by their Seneschals and Servants. And to defend their teritories against
the bordering Irish, they entertained some of the Natives, who pretended a
perpetual Title to those great lordships. For the Irish after a thousand
Conquests and Attainders by our law, would in those days pretend title still,
because by the Irish Law no man could forfeit his Land. These natives taking
the opportunity in weak and desperate times, usurped those Seigniories; and so
Donald Mac Art Cauanagh, Baron Finglas, Manuscript.
being entertained by the Earl of Norfolk, made himself Lord of the County
of Catherlogh; And Lisagh O Moore, being trusted by the L. Mortimer, who
married the Daughter and Heir of the Lord Bruce, made himself Lord of the
Lands in Leix, in the latter end of king Edward the seconds reign, as is
before declared.

Again, the decay and loss of Vlster and Conaght, is attributed to this; that
the Lord William Bourke, the last Earl of that name, died without issue Male;
whose Ancestors, namely, the Red-Earle, and Sir Hugh de Lacy, before him, being
personally resident, held up their greatness there; and kept the English in
peace, and the Irish in aw: But when those Provinces descended upon an Heir
Female, and an Infant, the Irish ouer-ran Vlster, and the younger branches of
the Bourkes, usurped Conaght. And therefore, the Ordinance Archiu. Turr. Rot.
parlia^. n. 42
made in England, the 3. of Richard 2. against such as were absent from their
Lands in Ireland; and gave two third parts of the profits thereof unto the
King, until they returned, or placed a sufficient number of men to defend the
same, was grounded upon good reason of state: which Ordinance was put in
execution for many years after, as appears by sundry seizures made
thereupon, in the time of King Richard 2. Henry 4. Henry 5. and Henry 6.
whereof there remain Records in Archiu. in offic. Remem. Dublin
the Remembrancers Office here. Among the rest, the Duke of Norffolke himself
was not spared, but was impleaded upon this Ordinance, for two parts of the
profits of Dorburies Island, and other Lands in the County of wexford, in the
time of K. Heury 6. And afterward, upon the same reason of State, all the
Lands of the house of Norfolk, of the Earl of Shrewesburie, the Lord
Barkley, and others (who having Lands in Ireland, kept their continual
residence in England) were entirely resumed by the Act of Absentees, made in
the 28. year of king Act of Absentees, 28. H. 8.
Henry the eight.

But now again, let us look back and see, how long the effect of that
reformation did continue, which was begun by Lionel Duke of Clarence, in the
fortith year of K. Edw 3. and what courses have bin held, to reduce and
reform this people by other Lieutenants and Governors since that time

The English Colonies being in some good measure reformed by the Statutes of
Kilkenny, did not utterly fall away into Barbarism again, till the wars of
the two Houses had almost destroyed both these Kingdoms; for in that miserable
time, the Irish found opportunity, without opposition, to banish the English
Law and government, out of all the Provinces, and to confine it only to the
English Pale: Howbeit, in the mean time, between the Government of the Duke of
Clarence, and the beginning of those civil Wars of York and Lancaster, we
find that the State of England did sundry times resolve to proceed in this
work of reformation.

For first, King Richard 2. sent over The reformation intended by K. Richard 2
Sir Nicholas Dagworth, to survey the possessions of the Crown; and to call to
account the Officers of the reuennue; Archiu. Turr. 3 Rich. 2. cl. m 3.
Next (to draw his English Subjects to manure and defend their lands in
Ireland) he made that Ordinance against 3. Rich. 12. Rot. Parliam. 11. 42
Absentees, spoken of before. Again, he showed an excellent example of Justice,
upon Sir Phillip Courtney, 9. Rich. 2. claus. m. 1.
being his lieutenant of that kingdom, when he caused him to be arrested by
special Commissioners, upon complaint made of sundry grievous oppressions and
wrongs, which during his Government, he had done unto that people.

After this, the Parliament of England did resolve, that Thomas Duke of
Walsingham in Rich. 2. 349. a.
Gloucester the Kings Uncle, should be employed in the reformation and reducing
of that Kingdom: the Fame whereof, was no sooner bruted in Ireland, but all the
Irishry were ready to submit themselves before his coming: so much the very
Name of a great personage, specially of a Prince of the blood, did ever
prevail with this people. But the King and his Minions, who were ever jealous
of this Duke of Gloucester, would not suffer him to have the honor of that
service. But the King himself thought it a work worthy of his own presence
and pains: and thereuppon, Himself in person, made those two royal iournies
mentioned before: At what time, he received the submissions of all the Irish
Lords and Captains, who bound themselves both by Indenture and oath to
become and continue his Loyal Subjects. And withal, laid a particular
project, for a civil plantation of the Mountains and Maritime Counties,
between Dublin and wexford; by remoouing all the Irish Septes from thence, as
apeareth by the covenants between the Earl Marshall of England, and those
Irish Septs: which are before remembered, and are yet preserved, and remain of
Record in the Kings Remembrancers Office at westminster. Lastly, this King
being present in Ireland, took special care to supply and furnish the Courts
of Justice with able and sufficient Judges; And to that end, he made that
Grave and Learned Judge, Sir william Hankeford, Chief Justice of the kings
bench here (who afterward for his service in this Realm, was made Chief
Justice Plac. coram Rege in Hibernia. Hillar. 18 Ric. 2
of the Kings Bench in England, by K. Henry 4.) and did withal, associate unto
him, william Sturmy, a well Learned man in the Law; who likewise came out of
England with the K. that the legal proceedings (which were out of order too, as
all other things in that Realm were) might be amended, and made formal,
according to the course and Presidents of England. But all the good purposes
and proiects of this King, were interrupted and utterly defeated, by his
sudden departure out of Ireland, and unhappy deposition from the Crown of
England.

HOwbeit, King Henry the fourth, The reformation intended by Hen. 4.
intending likewise to prosecute this Noble work in the third year of his
reign, made the Lord Thomas of Lancaster, his second son, Lieutenant of
Ireland: Who came over in person, and accepted again the submissions of diverse
Irish Lords and Captains, as is before remembered; and held also a Parliament,
wherein he gave new life to the Statutes of Kilkenny, and made other good
Laws tending to the Reformation of the Kingdom. But the troubles raised
against the King his Father in England, drew him home again so soon, as that
seed of reformation, took no root at all; neither had his service in that
kind, any good effect or success.

After this, the State of England had no leisure to think of a general
reformation in this Realm, till the civil dissentions of England were
apeased, and the peace of that kingdom settled, by K. Henry 7.

For, albeit in the time of King Henry 6. Richard duke of York, a Prince of the
blood; of great wisdom and valor, and heir to a third part of the Kingdom
at least, being Earl of Vlster, and Lord of Conaght and Meth, was sent the
Kings Lieutenant into Ireland, to recover and reform that Realm where he was
resident in person for the greatest part of 10. years, yet the troth is, he
aimed at another mark, which was the Crown of England. And therefore, he
thought it no policy to distaste either the English or Irish, by a course of
reformation, but sought by all means to please them, and by popular courses to
steal away their hearts, to the end, he might strengthen his party, when he
should set on foot his Title (as is before declared.) Which policy of his took
such effect, as that he drew over with him into England, the Flower of all the
English Colonies, specially of Vlster and Meth, whereof many Noblemen and
Gentlemen were slain with him at wakefield (as is likewise before remembered.)
And after his Death, when the wars between the Houses were in their heat,
almost all the good English blood which was left in Ireland, was spent in those
civil dissentions: so as the Irish became victorious over all, without Blood,
or Sweat. Only, that little Canton of Land, called the English Pale,
containing 4. small Shires, did maintain a bordering war with the Irish, and
retain the form of English Government.

But out of that little Precinct, there were no Lords, Knights, or Burgesses,
summoned to the Parliament; neither did the Kings Writ run in any other part
of the kingdom: and yet upon the Marches and Borders, which at that time were
grown so large, as they took up half Dublin, half Meth, and a third part of
Kildare and Lowth; there was no law in use, but the MarchLawe, which in the
Statutes of Kilkenny, is said to be no Law, but a lewd Custom.

So, as upon the end of these civil wars in England, the English Law and
Government was well banished out of Ireland, so as no foot-steppe or print was
left, of any former Reformation.

THen did King Henry 7. send over The course of Reformation held by Sir Edward
Poynings, in the time of k. H. 7.
Sir Edward Poynings to be his Depuputy, a right worthy seruitor both in war
and peace. The principal end of his employment, was to expel Perkin warbecke
out of this kingdom; but that service being performed, that worthy Deputy
finding nothing but a common misery, took the best course he possibly could,
to establish a Commonwealth in Ireland: and to that end, he held a Parliament
no less famous, then that of Kilkenny; and more available for the reformation
of the whole Kingdom. For whereas all wise men did ever concur in opinion,
that the readiest way to reform Ireland, is to settle a form of Civil
Government there, conformable to that of England: To bring this to pass, Sir
Edward Poynings did pass an Act, whereby all the Statutes made in England
before that time, were enacted, established, and made of force in Ireland.
Neither did he only respect the time past, but provided also for the time to
come. For, he caused another Law to be made, that no Act should be propounded
in any Parliament of Ireland, but such as should be first transmitted into
England, and approved by the King and Counsel there, Poynings Act
as good and expedient for that Land, and so returned back again, under the
Great Seal of England. This Act, though it seem Prima facie to restrain the
liberty of the subjects of Ireland; yet was it made at the Prayer of the
Commons, upon just and important cause.

For the Governors of that realm, specially such as were of that Contry Birth,
had laid many oppressions upon the Commons: and amongst the rest, they had
imposed Laws upon them, not tending to the general good, but to serve
private turns, and to strengthen their particular factions. This moved them to
refer all Laws, that were to be passed in Ireland, to be considered,
corrected, and allowed, first by the State of England, which had always bin
tender and careful of the good of this people, and had long since made them a
Civil, Rich, and Happy Nation, if their own Lords and Governors there, had not
sent bad intelligence into England. Besides this, he took special order, that
the summons of Parliament should go into all the shires of Ireland, and not to
the four shires only; and for that cause specially, he caused all the Acts of
a Parliament, lately before holden by the Viscount of Gormanston to be repealed
and made void. Moreover, that the Parliamentes of Ireland, might want no
desent or honorable form that was used in England, he caused a particular Act
to pass, that the Lords of Ireland should appear in the like Parliament
Robes, as the English Lords are wont to wear in the Parliaments of England.
Having thus established all the statutes of England in Ireland, and set in
order the great Counsel of that Realm, he did not omit to pass other Laws,
as well for the increase of the Kings Reuennue, as the preservation of the
public peace.

To advance the profits of the Crown; First he obtained a subsidy of 26. s.
8. d. out of every six score Acres manured, payable yearly for 5. years.
Next, he resumed all the Crown land, which had been aliened (for the most part)
by Richard Duke of York: and lastly, he procured a subsidy of Pondage, out of
all Merchandises imported and exported, to be granted to the Crown in
perpetuity.

To preserve the public peace, he revived the statutes of Kilkenny. He made
wilful murder High Treason; he caused the Marchers to book their men for whom
they should answer; and restrained the making War or peace, without special
Commission from the State.

These Laws, and others as important as these, for the making of a
commonwealth in Ireland, were made in the Government of Sir Edward Poynings. But
these Laws did not spread their Virtue beyond the English Pale, though they
were made generally for the whole Kingdom. For the Provinces without the Pale,
which during the war of York and Lancaster, had wholly cast off the English
Government, were not apt to receive this seed of reformation, because they
were not first broken and maistered again with the sword. Besides, the Irish
Countries, which contained two third parts of the Kingdom, were not reduced
to Shire-Ground, so as in the^ the Laws of England could not possibly be put
in execution. Therefore, these good Laws and provisions made by Sir Edward
Poynings, were like good Lessons set for a Lute, that is broken and out of
tune; of which Lessons, little use can be made, till the Lute be made fit to
be played upon.

And that the execution of al these Laws, had no greater Latitude then the
Pale, is manifest by the Statute of 13. of Henry 8. c. 3. which recites, that
at that time, the Kings Laws were obeyed and executed in the four shires
only; and yet then was the Earl of Surrey Lieutenant of Ireland, a Governor
much feared of the Kings Enemies, and exceedingly honored and beloved of the
Kings subjects. And the instructions given by the state of Ireland, The
Counsel Book of Ireland. 16. H. 8.
to John Allen, Master of the Rols, employed into England, near about the
same time, do declare as much; wherein among other things, he is required to
advertise the King, that his Land of Ireland was so much decayed, as that the
Kings Laws were not obeyed twenty miles in compass. Whereupon, grew that
Byword used by the Irish, (viz:) That they dwelt Bywest the Law, which dwelt
beyond the River of the Barrow, which is within 30. Miles of Dublin. The same
is testified by Baron Finglas, in his Discourse of the decay of Ireland, which
he wrote about the 20. year of King Henry 8. And thus we see the effect of
the Reformation which was intended by Sir Edward Poynings.

THE next Attempt of Reformation, The reformation intended by the L. Leonard
Gray, 28. Hen. 8.
was made in the 28. year of King Henry 8. by the Lord Leonard Gray, who was
created Viscount of Garny in this Kingdom, and held a Parliament, wherein
many excellent Laws were made. But to prepare the minds of the people to obey
these Laws, he began first with a Martial course: For being sent over to
suppress the Rebellion of the Giraldines, (which he performed in few months)
he afterward made a victorious Circuit round about the Kingdom; beginning
Annals Hiber^ Manus.
in Offaly, against O Connor, who had aided the Giralaines in their Rebellion;
and from thence passing along through all the Irish Countries in Leinster, and
so into Mounster, where he took pledges of the degenerate Earl of Desmond,
and thence into Conaght, and thence into Vlster; and then concluded this
warlicke Progress with the Battle of Belahoo, in the Borders of Meth, as is
before remembered. The Counsel Book of Ireland. 28. H. 8.


The principal Septs of the Irishry being all terrified, and most of them
broken in this journey, many of their chief Lords upon this Deputies return
came to Dublin, and made their submissions to the crown of England; Namely, the
O Neales, and O Relies of Vlster, Mac Murrogh, O Birne, and O Carrol of
Leinster, and the Bourks of Conaght.

This preparation being made, he first propounded and passed in Parliament these
Laws, which made the great alteration in the State Ecclesiastical; Namely, the
Act which declared King Henry the eight to be supreme Head of the Church of
Ireland. The Act probibiting Apeales to the church of Rome: the Act for first
fruits, and twentieth part to be paid to the King: the Act for Faculties and
Dispensations: And lastly, the Act that did utterly abolish the usurped
Authority of the Pope. Next, for the increase of the Kings Reuennew: By one
Act, he suppressed sundry Abbeyes and Religious Houses; and by another Act,
resumed the Lands of the Absentees, (as is before remembered.)

And for the Civil Government, a special Statute was made, to abolish the
Black-Rents and tributes, exacted by the Irish, upon the English Colonies; and
another Law enacted, that the English Apparel, Language, and manner of
living, should be used by all such, as would acknoledge themselves the Kings
Subjects. This Parliament being ended, the Lord Leonard Gray, was suddenly
reuokt, and put to death in England, so as he lived not to finish the work
of Reformation which he had begun: which notwithstanding, was well pursued by
his successors, The course of Reformation pursued by Sir Anthony Saint-Leger.
Sir Anthony Saint-Leger; Unto whom, all the Lords and Chiefetanes of the
Irishry, and of the degenerate English throughout the Kingdom, made their
several submissions by Indenture Four general Submissions of the Irish.
(which was the fourth general submission of the Irish, made since the first
attempt of the Conquest of Ireland) whereof the first was made to King Henry 2.
the second to k. John, the third to K. Richard 2. and his last to Sir Anthony
Saint-Leger, in 33. of Hen. 8.

IN these Indentures of submission, all The Counsel Book of Ireland. 32. 33.
and 34. of H. 8
the Irish Lords do acknowledge K. Henry the eight to be their Soueraign Lord
and King, and desire to be accepted of him as subjects. They confess the
Kings supremacy in all causes, and do utterly renounce the Popes Jurisdiction,
which I conceive to be worth the noting, because, when the Irish had once
resolved to obey the king, they The Irish and degenerate English, renounce the
Pope.
made no scruple to renounce the Pope. And this was not only done by the mere
Irish, but the chief of the degenerate English Families did perform the
same: as Desmond, Barry, and Roche, in Mounster; and the Bourkes, which bore
the Title of Mac william, in Conaght.

These submissions being thus taken, the Lord Deputy and Counsel for the
present Government of those Irish Countries, made certain Ordinances of state,
not agreeable altogether with the Rules of the Law of England; the reason
whereof, is expressed in the preamble of those Ordinances; The Counsel Book of
Ireland. 33. H. 8.
Quia nondum sic sapiunt leges and Iura, vt secundu^ ea iam immediate viuere
and regipossint. The chief points or Articles of which Orders registered in the
Counsel Book are these: That King Henry the eight, should be accepted,
reputed, and named King of Ireland, by all the Inhabitants of the Kingdom;
that al Archbishops and Bishops should be permitted to exercise their
Jurisdiction in every Diocese throughout the Land: that tithes should be duly
set out, and paid: that Children should not be admitted to Benefices: that for
every Manslaughter, and theft above 14 d: committed in the Irish Contries, the
offender should pay a fine of 40. li. twenty pound to the King, and 20. li. to
the Captain of the Country; and for every theft under 14. d. a fine of five
marks should be paid, 46. s. viij. d to the Captain, and 20. s. to the
Tanister: That Horsemen and Kearn should not be imposed upon the Common people,
to beefed and maintained by them: That the Master should answer for his
servants, and the Father for his Children. That Cuttinges should not be made by
the Lord upon his Tenants, to maintain war with his neighbors, but only to
bear his necessary expenses, etc.

These ordinances of state being made and published, there were nominated and
appointed in every province, certain Orderers or Arbitraters, who instead of
these Irish Erehons, should hear and determine all their Controversies. In
Conaght, the ArchBishop of Tuam, the Bishop of Clonfert, Captain wakeley, and
Captain Ouington. In Munster, the Bishop of Waterford, the Bishop of Cork
and Rosse, the Mayor of Cork, and Mayor of Youghhall. In Vlster, the
Archbishop of Ardmagh, and the Lord of Lowth. And if any difference did arise,
which they could not end, either for the difficulty of the cause, or for the
obstinacy of the parties, they were to certify the Lord Deputy and Counsel,
who would decide the matter by their authority.

Heereuppon, the Irish Captains of lesser Territories, which had ever bin
oppressed by the greater and mightier; some, with Risings out; others, with
Bonaght, and others, with Cuttings, and spendings at pleasure, did appeal for
Justice to the Lord Deputy; who upon hearing their Complaints, did always
order, that they should all imediatly depend upon the King; and that the weaker
should have no dependancy upon the stronger.

Lastly, he prevailed so much with the greatest of them; Namely, O Neale, O
Brien, and Mac william, as that they willingly did pass into England and
presented themselus to the king, who thereuppon was pleased to advance them to
the degree and honor of Earls, and to grant unto them their several Contries,
by Letters patents. Besides, that they might learn Obedience and Ciuility of
manners, by often repairing unto the State, the K. upon the motion of the same
Deputy, gave each of them a house and Lands near Dublin, for the
entertainment of their several trains.

This course, did this Governor take to reform the Irishry; but withal, he
did not omit to advance both the honor and profit of the King. For in the
Parliament which he held the 33. of Henry 8. he caused an Act to pass,
which gave unto K. Henry 8. his heirs and successors, the name, style, and
Title of King of Ireland; whereas before that time, the Kings of England were
styled but Lords of Ireland: albeit indeed, they were absolute Monarks thereof,
and had in right all Royal and Imperial Jurisdiction and power there, as they
had in the Realm of England. And yet because in the vulgar conceit the name of
King, is higher then the name of Lord. Assuredly, the assuming of this title,
has not a little raised the sovereignty of the K. of England in the minds of
this people. Lastly, this Deputy brought a great augmentation to the Kings
Revenue, by dissoluing of all the Monasteries and Religious Houses in Ireland,
which was done in the same Parliament: and afterward, by procuring Min and
Cauendish, two skillful Auditors, to be sent over out of England. Who took
an exact survey of all the possessions of the Crown, and brought many things
into charge, which had been concealed and subtracted for many years before.
And thus far did Sir Anthony Saint-Leger proceed, in the course of Reformation;
which though it were a good beginning, yet was it far from reducing Ireland to
the perfect Obedience of the Crown of England. For all this while, the
Provinces of Conaght and Vlster, and a good part of Leinster, were not reduced
to ShireGround. And though Mounster were anciently divided into Counties, the
people were so degenerate, as no Justice of Assise, durst execute his
Commission amongst them. None of the Irish Lords or Tenants were settled in
their possessions, by any Grant or Confirmation from the Crown, except the
three great Earls before named; who notwithstanding, did govern their Tenants
and Followers, by the Irish or Brehon Law; so as no treason, murder, rape, or
theft, committed in those Countries, was inquired of, or punished by the Law of
England; and consequently, no Escheat, Forfeiture, or Fine; no Revenue (certain
or casual) did acrew to the Crown out of those Provinces.

The next worthy Governor that The course of Reformation prosecuted by Thomas
Earl of Sussex, in the time of Q. Mary.
endeavored to advance this Reformation, was Thomas Earl of Sussex; who
having thoroughly broken and subdued the two most rebellious and powerful Irish
Septs in Leinster; namely, the Moors and O Connors, possessing Leix and Offaly
made two Counties, 3. and 4. Phil. and Mariae.
the territories of Leix and Offaly, did by Act of Parliament, 3. and 4. Phil.
and Mariae, reduce those Countries into two several Counties; naming the one,
the Kings; and the other, the Queens County; which were the first two
Counties that had been made in this Kingdom, since the twelfth year of King
John; at what time the Territories the^ possessed by the English Colonies, were
reduced into 12. Shires, as is before expressed.

This Noble Earl, having thus extended the Jurisdiction of the English Law
into two Counties more, was not satisfied with that addition, but took a
resolution to divide all the rest of the Irish Countries vnreduced, into
several Shires; and to that end, he caused an Act to pass in the same
Parliament, authorizing the Lord Chancellor, from time to time, to award
Commissions to such persons, as the Lord Deputy should nominate and appoint, to
view, and perambulate those Irish territories; and thereupon, to divide and
limit the same into such and so many several Counties as they should think
meet; which being certified to the Lord Deputy, and approved by him, should
be returned and enrolled in the Chancery, and from thenceforth be of like
force and effect, as if it were done by Act of Parliament.

Thus did the Earl of Sussex lay open a passage for the Civil government into
the unreformed parts of this Kingdom, but himself proceeded no further then
is before declared.

HOwbeit afterward, during the The course of Reformation followed by Sir
Henry Sidney, in the time of Qu. Elizabeth.
reign of Queen Elizabeth, Sir Henry Sidney, (who has left behind him many
Monuments of a good Governor in this Land) did not only pursue that course
which the Earl of Sussex began, in reducing the Irish Countries into Shires,
and placing therein Sheriffs, and other Ministers of the Law; (for first he
made the Annaly a Territory in Leynster, possessed by the Sept of Offerralles,
one entire Shire by it self, and called it the County of Longford; and after
that he divided the whole Province of Conaght into six Counties more; namely,
Clare (which contains all Thomond) Gallaway, Sligo, Mayo, Roscomon, and
Leytrim:) But he also had caused diverse good Laws to be made, and performed
sundry other services, tending greatly to the reformation of this Kingdom. For
first, to diminish the greatness of the Irish Lords, and to take from them
the dependancy of the Common people, in the Parliament which he held 11. Eliz.
He did abolish their pretended and usurped Captain-ships, and all exactions,
and extortions incident thereunto. Next, to settle their Seigniories and
possessions in a course of Inheritance, according to the course of the Common
Law, he caused an Act to pass, whereby the Lord Deputy was authorized to
accept their Surrenders, and to re-grant estates unto them, to hold of the
Crown by English tenures and services. Again, because the Inferior sort were
loose and poor, and not amesnable to the Law; he provided by another Act,
that five of the best and eldest persons of every Sept, should bring in all the
idle persons of their sur-name, to be justified by the Law. Moreover, to give a
civil education to the Youth of this Land in the time to come, provision was
made by another Law, that there should be one Free-schoole, at least, erected
in every Diocese of the Kingdom. And lastly, to invre and acquaint the people
of Mounster and Conaght, with the English Government again (which had not been
in use among them, for the space of 200. years before:) he instituted two
Presidency Courts in those two Provinces, placing Sir Edward Fitton in
Conaght, and Sir John Perrot in Mounster.

To augment the Kings Reuennew in the same Parliament, upon the attainder of
Shane O Neale, he resumed and vested in the Crown, more then half the
Province of Vlster: He raised the Customs upon the principal commodities of
the Kingdom: He reformed the abuses of the Exchequer, by many good orders and
instructions sent out of England; and lastly, he established the composition of
the Pale, in liewe of Purueyance and Sesse of Soldiers.

These were good proceedinges in the work of Reformation, but there were many
defects and omissions withal; for though he reduced all Conaght into Counties,
he never sent any Justices of Assize to visit that Province, but placed
Commisioners there, who governed it only in A course of discretion; part
Martial, and part Civil. Again, in the Law that does abolish the Irish
Captain-ships, he gave way for the reviving thereof again, by excepting such,
as should be granted by Letters Patentes from the Crown; which exception did
indeed take away the force of that Law. For no governor during Queen
Elizabeth's reign, did refuse to grant any of those Captain-ships, to any
pretended Irish Lord, who would Desire, and with his thankfulness Deserve the
same. And again, though the greatest part of Vlster were vested by Act of
Parliament, in the actual and real possession of the Crown; yet was there
never any seizure made thereof, nor any part thereof brought into charge, but
the Irish were permitted to take all the profits, without rendering any duty
or acknowledgement for the same; and though the Name of O Neale were damned by
that act, and the assuming thereof made High Treason; yet after that, was
Tirlagh Leynnagh suffered to bear that Title, and to intrude upon the
possessions of the Crown, and yet was often entertained by the State with
favor. Neither were these lands resumed, by the Act of 11. of Elizabeth
neglected only (for the Abbaies and religious Houses in Tirone, Tirconnell,
and Fermannagh, though they were dissolved in the 33. of Henry 8. were never
surueied nor reduced into charge, but were continually possessed by the religious
persons) until his Majesty that now is came to the Crown: and that which is
more strange, the Donations of Byshopprickes, being a flower of the Crown
(which the Kings of England did ever retain in all their Dominions, when the
Popes usurped Authority was at the highest.) There were three Bishopprickes in
Vlster; namely, Derry, Rapho, and Clogher, which neither Queen Elizabeth, nor
any of her Progenitors did ever bestow, though they were the undoubted Patrons
thereof. So as King James was the first king of England that did ever supply
those Sees with Bishops, which is an argument either of great negligence, or of
great weakness in the State and Governors of those times. And thus far
proceeded Sir Henry Sidney.

AFter him, Sir John Perrot, who held The Reformation advanced by Sir John
Perrot.
the last Parliament in this Kingdom, did advance the Reformation in three
principal points. First, in establishing the great composition of Conaght; in
which service the wisdom and industry of Sir Richard Bingham did concur
with him: next, in reducing the unreformed parts of Vlster into seven shires;
namely, Ardmagh, Monahan, Tirone, Coleraine, Deuegall, Fermannagh, and Cauan;
though in his time the Law was never executed in these new Counties by any
Sheriffs or Justices of Assize, but the people left to be ruled still by their
own barbarous Lords and Laws: And lastly, by vesting in the Crown, the Lands
of Desmond and his Adherents in Mounster, and planting the same with English,
though that plantation were imperfect in many points.

AFter Sir John Perrot, Sir william Fitzwilliams The Service of William Fitz
Williams, tending to reformation.
did good service in two other points. First, in raising a composition in
Mounster; and then, in settling the possessions both of the Lords and Tenantes
in Monahan, which was one of the last Acts of State, tending to the reformation
of the Civil Government that was performed in the reign of Queen ELIZABETH.

Thus we see, by what degrees, and what policy and success the Governors of
this Land from time to time, since the beginning of the reign of King Edward
3. have endeavored to reform and reduce this people to the perfect obedience of
the Crown of England: And we find, that before the Civil Wars of York and
Lancaster, they did chiefly endeavor to bring back the degenerate English
Colonies, to their Duty and Allegeaunce, not respecting the mere Irish, whom
they reputed as Aliens or Enemies of the Crown. But after King Henry 7. had
united the Roses, they labored to reduce both English and Irish together: which
work, to what pass and perfection it was brought in the latter end of Queen
Elizabeth's reign, has bin before declared.

Whereof sometimes when I do consider, I do in mine own conceit compare these
later Governors, who went about to reform the Civil Affairs in Ireland, unto
some of the Kings of Israel, of whom it is said; That they were good Kings,
but they did not cut down the Groves and High places, but suffered the people
still to burn Incense, and commit Idolatry in them: so Sir Anthony
Saint-Leger, the Earl of Sussex, sir Henry Sidney, and sir John Perrot, were
good Governors, but they did not abolish the Irish Customs, nor execute the
Law in the Irish Countries, but suffered the people to worship their barbarous
Lords, and to remain utterly ignorant of their Duties to God and the King.

AND now am I come to the happy How the Defects and errors in the govern meant
of Ireland, have bin supplied and amended since the beginning of his Majesty's
Reign.
reign of my most Gracious Lord and Master K. James; in whose time, as there
has been a concurrence of many great Felicities: so this among others may be
numbered in the first rank; that all the Defects in the Government of Ireland
spoken of before, have been fully supplied in the first nine years of his
reign. In which time, there has bin more done in the work and reformation of
this Kingdom; then, in the 440. years which are past since the Conquest was
first attempted.

Howbeit, I have no purpose in this Discourse, to set forth at large all the
proceedings of the State here in reforming of this Kingdom, since his Majesty
came to the Crown, for the parts and passages thereof are so many, as to
express them fully, would require a several Treatise. Besides, I for my
part, since I have not flattered the former times, but have plainly laid open
the negligence and errors of every Age that is past, would not willingly seem
to flatter the present, by amplifying the diligence and true Judgment of those
Seruitours, that have labored in this Vineyard since the beginning of his
Majesty's happy reign.

I shall therefore summarily, without any amplication at all, show in what
manner, and by what degrees, all the defects which I have noted before in the
Government of this Kingdom, have bin supplied since his Majesty's happy reign
began; and so conclude these observations concerning the State of Ireland.

FIrst then, touching the Martial affairs, Errors in the carriage of the
martial affairs amended.
I shall need to say little, in regard that the War which finished the
Conquest of Ireland, was ended almost in the instant when the crown descended
upon his Majesty; and so there remained no occasion to amend the former errors
committed in the prosecution of the war. Howbeit, sithence his Majesty has
still maintained an Army here, as well For a Seminary of Martial Men; as to
Give strength and countenance to the Civil Magistrate; I may justly observe,
that this army has not bin fed with Coigne and Livery, or Sesse (with which
Extortions the soldier has bin norished in the times of former Princes) but
has bin as justly and royally paid, as ever Prince in the world did pay his
Men of war. Besides, when there did arise an occasion of employment for this
army against the Rebel Odoghertie; neither did his Majesty delay the
re-inforcing thereof, but instantly sent supplies out of England and Scotland;
neither did the Martial men dally or prosecute the Service faintly, but Did
forthwith quench that fire, whereby themselves would have bin the warmer the
longer it had continued, as well by the increase of their entertainment, as by
booties and spoil of the Country. And thus much I thought fit to note,
touching the amendment of the Errors in the Martial affairs.

SEcondly, for the supply of the Defects How the Defects in the civil
Government, have bin supplied.
in the civil Government, these courses have been pursued since his Majesty's
prosperous reign began.

First, albeit upon the end of the war, whereby Tyrones universal Rebellion 1.
By establishing the public peace.
was suppressed, the minds of the people were broken and prepared to Obedience of
the Law; yet the State upon good reason, did conceive, that the public peace
could not be settled, till the hearts of the people were also quieted, by
securing them from the danger of the law, which the most part of them had
incurred one way or other, in that great and general confusion.

Therefore, first by a general Act of State, called the Act of Oblivion,
published by Proclamation under the great Seal; Al offenses against the Crown,
and all particular Trespasses between subject and subject, done at any time
before his Majesty's reign, were (to all such as would come in to the Justices
of Assise by a certain day, and claim the benefit of this Act) pardoned,
remitted, and utterly extinguished, never to be revived or called in question.
And by the same proclamation, all the Irishry (who for the most part, in former
times, were left under the tyranny of their Lords and Chieftanies, and had no
defense or Justice from the Crown) were received into his Majesty's imediate
protection. This bred such comfort and security in the hearts of all men, as
thereupon ensued, the calmest, and most universal peace, that ever was seen in
Ireland.

The public peace being thus 2. By establishing the public Justice in
every part of the Kingdom.
established, the State proceeded next to establish the public Justice in
every part of the Realm: And to that end, Sir George Carry (who was a prudent
Governor, and a just, and made a fair entry into the right way of reforming
this Kingdom) did in the first year of his Majesty's reign, make the first
Sheriffs that ever were made in Tyrone and Tirconnell; and shortly after, sent
Sir Edmund Pelham Chief Baron, and my self thither, the first Justices of
Assise that ever sat in those Countries: and in that Circuit, we visited all
the shires of that Province: Besides which visitation, though it were somewhat
distasteful to the Irish lords, was sweet and most welcome to the Common
people; who, albeit they were rude and barbarous, yet did they quickly
apprehend the difference between the tyranny and oppression under which they
lived before, and the just government and protection which we promised unto
the^ for the time to come.

The Law having made her Progress into Vlster with so good success, sir
Arthur Chichester (who with singular Industry, Wisdom, and Courage, has now
for the space of 7. years and more, prosecuted the great work of Reformation,
and brought it well-neere to an absolute perfection) did in the first year of
his government, establish two other New Circuits for Justices of Assise; the
one in Conaght, and the other in Mounster. I call them New Circuites, for that,
although it be manifest by many Records, that Justices Itinerant have in
former times been sent into all the shires of Mounster, and some part of
Conaght; yet certain it is, that in 200. years before (I speak much within
compass) no such Commission had bin executed in either of these 2. Provinces.
But now, the whole Realm being divided into Shires, and every bordering
Territory, whereof any doubt was made in what County the same should ly, being
added or reduced to a County certain (among the rest, the Mountains and
Glynnes on the South side of Dublin, were lately made a Shire by it self, and
called the County of wicklow; whereby the Inhabitants which were wont to be
Thorns in the side of the Pale, are become civil and quiet Neighbors thereof,)
the streams of the public Justice were derived into every part of the
Kingdom; and the benefit and protection of the law of England communicated to
all, as well Irish as English, without distinction or respect of persons; By
reason whereof, the work of deriuing the public Justice, grew so great, as
that there was Magna messis, sed Operarij pauci. And therefore, the number of
the Judges in every Bench was increased, which do now every half year (like
good Plannets in their several spheres or Circles) carry the light and
influence of Justice, round about the Kingdom; whereas the Circuits in former
times, went but round about the Pale, like the Circuit of the Cinosura about
the Pole. Quae cursu niteriore, breui conuertitur orb.



Upon these Visitations of Justice, The good effects which followed the
execution of the law thoroughout the Kingdom.
whereby the just and honorable Law of England was imparted and communicated
to all the Irishry, there followed these excellent good effects.

First, the Common people were taught by the Justices of Assise, that they were
free subjects to the Kings of England, and not slaves and vassals to their
pretended Lords: That the Cuttings, Cosheries, Sessings, and other Extortions
of their Lords, were unlawful, and that they should not any more submit
themselves thereunto, since they were now under the protection of so just and
mighty a Prince, as both would and could protect them from all wrongs and
oppressions: They gave a willing ear unto these lessons; and thereupon, the
greatness and power of those Irish Lords over the people, so dainly fell and
vanished, when their Oppressions and Extortions were taken away which did
maintain their greatness: Insomuch, as diverse of them, who formerly made
themselves Owners of al (by Force;) were now by the law reduced to this point;
That wanting means to defray their ordinary charges, they resorted ordinarily
to the Lord Deputy, and made petition, that by License and warrant of the
State, they might take some aid and contribution from their people; as well to
discharge their former debts, as for competent maintenance in time to come: But
some of them being impatient of this diminution, fled out of the Realm to
foreign Countries. Whereupon, we may well Observe; That, as Extortion did
banish the old English Freeholder, who could not live but under the Law; So
the Law did bannish the Irish Lord, who could not live but by Extortion.

Again, these Circuits of Justice, did (upon the end of the war) more
terrify the loose and idle persons, then the execution of the martial law,
though it were more quick and sudden: and in a short time after, did so
clear the Kingdom of Thieves, and other Capital Offenders, as I dare
affirm, that for the space of five years last past, there have not bin found
so many Malefactors worthy of death in all the six Circuits of this realm (which
is now divided into 32. shires at large) as in one Circuit of six Shires;
namely, the Western Circuit in England. For the troth is, that in time of
peace, the Irish are more fearful to offend the Law, then the English, or any
other Nation whatsoever.

Again, whereas the greatest advantage that the Irish had of us in all their
Rebellions, was, Our Ignorance of their Countries, their Persons, and their
Actions: Since the Law and her Ministers have had a passage among them, all
their places of Fastness have been discovered and laid open; all their paces
cleard; and notice taken of every person that is able to do either good or
hurt. It is known, not only how they live, and what they do, but it is
foreseen what they purpose or intend to do: Insomuch, as Tirone has been heard
to complain, that he had so many eyes watching over him, as he could not
drink a full Carouse of Sack, but the State was advertised thereof, within
few hours after. And therefore, those allowances which I find in the ancient
Pipe-Rolles, Proguidagio, and spiagio, may be well spared at this day. For the
Vnder-Sheriffes and Bayliffes errant, are better guides and Spies in the time
of peace, then any were found in the time of war.

Moreover, these civil assemblies at Assizes and Sessions, have reclaymed the
Irish from their wildenesse, caused them to cut off their Glibs and long Hair;
to convert their Mantles into Cloaks; to conform themselves to the manner of
England in all their behavior and outward forms. And because they find a great
inconvenience in moving their suites by an Interpreter; they do for the most
part send their Children to Schools, especially to learn the English language:
so as we may conceive an hope, that the next generation, will in tongue and
heart, and every way else, become English; so as there will be no difference or
distinction, but the Irish Sea betwixt us. And thus we see a good conversion,
and the Irish Game turned again.

For heretofore, the neglect of the Law, made the English degenerate, and
become Jrish; and now, on the other side, the execution of the Law, does make
the Irish grow civil, and become English.

Lastly, these general Sessions now, do teach the people more obedience, and
keep them more in awe then did the general hostings in former times. These
Progresses of the Law, renew and confirm the Conquest of Ireland every half
year, and supply the Defect of the kings absence in every part of the Realm;
In that every Judge sitting in the seat of Justice, does represent the person
of the King himself.

These effects, has the establishment of the public Peace and Justice
produced, since his Majesty's happy Reign began.

Howbeit, it was impossible to 3. The settling of the States and possessions of
the Irishry, aswelas of the English
make a Commonweal in Ireland, without performing another service; which was,
the settling of all the Estates and possessions, as well of Irish, as English,
thoroughout the Kingdom.

For, although that in the 12. year of Queen ELIZABETH, a special Law was made,
which did enable the Lord Deputy to take surrenders, and regrant Estates unto
the Irishry (upon signification of her Majesty's pleasure in that behalf;) yet
were there but few of the Irish Lords that made offer to surrender during her
reign: and they which made surrenders of entire Countries, obtained Graunts of
the whole again to themselves only, and to no other, and all in demesne. In
passing of which Graunts, there was no care taken of the inferior Septes of
people, inhabiting and possessing these Countries under them, but they held
their several portions in course of Tanistry and Gauelkind, and yielded the
same Irish Duties or exactions, as they did before: So that upon every such
Surrender and Grant, there was but one Freeholder made in a whole Country,
which was the Lord himself; all the rest were but tenants at Will, or rather
tenants in villenage, and were neither fit to be sworn in Iuries, nor to
perform any public service: And by reason of the uncertainty of their
Estates, did utterly neglect to build, or to plant, or to improve the Land. And
therefore, although the Lord were become the Kings Tenant, his Country was no
whit reformed thereby, but remained in the former Barbarism and Desolation.

Again, in the same Queens time, there were many Irish Lords which did not
surrender, yet obtained Letters Patents of the Captaine-ships of their
Countries, and of all Lands and Duties belonging to those Captainships: For the
Statute which does condemn and abolish these Captain-ries, usurped by the
Irish, does give power to the Lord Deputy to grant the same by Letters
pattents. Howbeit, these Irish Captains, and likewise the English, which were
made Seneschalles of the Irish countries, did by color of these Grants, and
under pretense of Government, claim an Irish Seigniory, and exercise plain
tyranny over the Common people. And this was the fruit that did arise of the
Letters Patents, granted of the Irish Contries in the time of Q. Elizabeth,
where before they did extort and oppress the people, only by color of a lewd
and barbarous Custom; they did afterward use the same Extortions and
Oppressions by warrant, under the great seal of the Realm.

But now, since his Majesty came How the Co^missions for Surrenders, and
defective Titles, have bin put in execution.
to the Crown, two special Commissions have bin sent out of England, for the
settling and quieting of all the possessions in Ireland; The one, for accepting
Surrenders of the Irish and degenerate English, and for regranting Estates unto
them, according to the course of the Common Law; The other, for strengthening
of defective Titles. In the Execution of which Co^missions, there has ever bin
had a special care, to settle and secure the Vnder-Tennants; to the end, there
might be a repose and establishment of every Subjects Estate; Lord and Tenant,
Freeholder and Farmer, thoroughout the Kingdom.

Upon Surrenders, this course has bin held from the beginning; when an Irish
Lord does offer to surrender his Country, his surrender is not immediately
accepted, but a Commission is first awarded, to enquire of three special
points. First, of the quantity and limits of the Land whereof he is reputed
owner. Next, how much himself does hold in demeasne, and how much is possessed
by his Tennants and Followers. And thirdly, what Customs, Duties, and
services, he does yearly receive out of those lands. This Inquisition being
made and returned, the Lands which are found to be the Lords proper
possessions in demesne, are drawn into a Particular; and his Irish Duties; as
Cosherings, Sessings, Rents of Butter and Oatmeale, and the like; are
reasonably valued and reduced into certain Sums of Money, to be paid
yearly in lieu thereof. This being done, the surrender is accepted; and
thereupon a Grant passed, not of the whole Country, as was used in former
times, but of those Lands only, which are found in the Lords possession, and of
those certain sums of Money, as Rents issuing out of the rest. But the Lands
which are found to be possessed by the Tenants, are left unto them, respectively
charged with these certain Rents only, in lieu of all uncertain Irish
exactions.

In like manner, upon all Grants, which have past by virtue of the commission,
for defective Titles, the Commisioners have taken special Caution, for
preservation of the Estates of all particular Tenants.

And as for Graunts of Captaineshippes No Grant of Irish Captain ships, or
Seneschalships, since his Majesty's reign.
or Seneschal-shippes, in the Irish Countries; albeit, this Deputy had as much
power and authority to grant the same, as any other Governors had before him;
and might have raised as much profit by bestowing the same, if he had respected
his private, more then the public good; yet has he bin so far from passing
any such in all his time, as he has endeavored to resume all the Graunts of
that kind, that have bin made by his Predecessors; to the end, the inferior
subjects of the Realm, should make their only and imediate dependancie upon
the Crown. And thus we see, how the greatest part of the possessions, (as well
of the Irish as of the English) in Leinster, Conaght, and Mounster, are settled
and secured since his Majesty came to the Crown: whereby the hearts of the
people are also settled, not only to live in peace, but raised and encouraged to
build, to plant, to give better education to their children, and to improve
the commodities of their Lands; whereby the yearly value thereof, is already
increased, double of that it was within these few years, and is like daily to
rise higher, till it amount to the price of our Land in England.

LAstly, the possessions of the Irishry The plantation of Vlster.
in the Province of Vlster, though it were the most rude and unreformed part of
Ireland, and the Seat and Nest of the last great Rebellion, are now better
disposed and established, then any the Lands in the other Provinces, which have
bin past and settled upon Surrenders. For, as the occasion of the disposing of
those Lands, did not happen without the special providence and finger of God,
which did cast out those wicked and ungrateful Traitors, who were the only
enemies of the reformation of Ireland: so the distribution and plantation
thereof, has bin proiected and prosecuted, by the special direction and care
of the K. himself; wherein his Majesty has corrected the Errors before spoken
of, committed by K. Henry 2. and k. John, in distributing and planting the
first conquered Lands. For, although there were six whole Shires to be
disposed, his Majesty gave not an entire Country, or County, to any particular
person; much less did he grant lura Regalia, or any extraordinary Liberties.
For the best British Undertaker, had but a proportion of 3000. Acres for
himself, with power to create a Manor, and hold a Court Baron: Albeit, many of
these Undertakers, were of as great birth and quality, as the best Adventurers
in the first conquest. Again, his Majesty did not utterly exclude the Natives
out of this plantatio^, with a purpose to root them out, as the Irish were
excluded out of the first English Colonies; but made a mixed plantation of
British and Irish, that they might grow up together in one Nation: Only, the
Irish were in some places transplanted from the Woods and Mountains, into the
Plains and open Countries, that being removed (like wild fruit trees) they
might grow the milder, and bear the better and sweeter fruit. And this truly,
is the Maisterpiece, and most excellent part of the work of Reformation, and
is worthy indeed of his Majesty's royal pains. For when this Plantation has
taken root, and bin fixed and settled but a few years, with the favor and
blessing of God (for the son of God himself has said in the Gospel, Omnis
Plantatio, quam non plantauit pater meus, eradicabitur) it will secure the
peace of Ireland, assure it to the Crown of England for ever; and finally,
make it a Civil, and a Rich, a Mighty, and a Flourishing Kingdom.

I omit to speak of the increase of the Reuenew of the Crown, both certain
and casual, which is raised to a double proportion (at lest) above that it
was, by deriuing the public Justice into all parts of the Realm; by settling
all the possessions, both of the Irish and English, by re-establishing the
compositions; by restoring and resuming the Customs; by reviving the Tenures
in Capite, and Knights-Seruice; and reducing many other things into charge,
which by the confusion and negligence offormer times, became concealed and
subtracted from the Crown. I forbear likewise to speak of the due and ready
bringing in of the Revenue, which is brought to pass by the well-ordering of
the Court of Exchequer, and the Authority and pains of the Commissioners for
Accounts.

I might also add heereunto, the encouragement that has bin given to the
Maritime Towns and Cities, as well to increase their trade of Merchandise, as
to cherrish Mechanical Arts and Sciences; in that all their Charters have bin
renewed, and their Liberties more enlarged by his Majesty, then by any of his
Progenitors since the Conquest. As likewise, the care and course that has been
taken, to make Civil Commerce and enter course between the Subjects, newly
reformed and brought under Obedience, by granting Markets and Faires to be
holden in their Countries, and by erecting of corporate Towns among them.

Briefly, the clock of the civil Government, is now well set, and all the
wheels thereof doemoue in Order; The strings of this Irish Harp, which the
Civil Magistrate does finger, are all in tune (for I omit to speak of the
State Ecclesiastical) and make a good Harmony in this Commonweal: So as we
may well conceive a hope, that Ireland (which heertofore might properly be
called the Land of Ire, because the Irascible power was predominant there, for
the space of 400. years together) will from henceforth prove a Land of Peace
and Concord. And, though heretofore it has bin like the lean Cow of Egypt,
in Pharaohs Dream, devouring the fat of England, and yet remaining as lean as
it was before, it will hereafter be as fruitful as the land of Canaan; the
description whereof, in the 8. of Deutronomie, does in every part agree with
Ireland; being, Terra Riuorum, aquarumque and Iontium; in cuius Campis, and
Montibus, erumpunt fluviorum abyssi; Terra frumenti, and hordei; Terralactis,
and mellis; vbi absque vlla penuria comedes panemtuum, and rerum abundantia
perfrueris.

And thus I have discovered and expressed the Defects and Errors, as well in the
mannaging of the Martial Affairs, as Of the Civil; which in former Ages gave
impediment to the reducing of all Ireland, to the Obedience and Subjection of
the Crown of England. I have likewise observed, what courses have bin taken,
to Reform the Defects and Errors in Government, and to reduce the People of
this Land to Obedience, since the beginning of the reign of King Edward 3. til
the latter end of the reign of Q. Elizabeth.

And lastly, I have declared and set forth, How all the said Errors have bin
corrected, and the Defectes supplied under the prosperous Government of his
Majesty; So as I may positiuely conclude in the same words, which I have used
in the Title of this Discourse; That until the beginning of his Majesty's
Reign, Ireland was never entirely subdued, and brought under the Obedience of
the Crown of England. But since the crown of this kingdom, with the undoubted
right and Title thereof, descended upon his Majesty; The whole Island from Sea
to Sea, has bin brought into his Highness peaceable possession; and all the
Inhabitants, in every corner thereof, have bin absolutely reduced under his
immediate subjection. In which condition of subjects, they will gladly continue,
without defection or adhaering to any other Lord or King, as long as they may
be Protected, and Justly Governed, without Oppression on the one side, or
Impunity on the other. For, there is no Nation of people under the sun, that
does love equal and indifferent Justice, better then the Irish; or will rest
better satisfied with the execution thereof, although it be against
themselves; so as they may have the protection and benefit of the Law, when
upon just cause they do desire it.

FINIS.
Errata.
FOl. 16. Linea. 6. dele etc. fol. 18. for regnem, read regnum. fol. 54. for
offerals; O Farals. for Haulon, Hanlon, fol. 62. for Gormauston, Gormanston.
fol. 86. for Gliun, Clinn. fol. 95. for improued, proved. fol. 102. for illuc,
illie. fol. 103. for Clandalkin, Clan-dalkan. fol. 109. for Cautetan; Canteton.
fol. 120. for mediate, immediate. fol. 134. for donation and; donation of. fol.
166. for Fermaunagh; Fermannagh. fol. 183. for Mangle; Nangle. for the
Archdeacon; Arohdeacon. fol. 191. for mightily; nightly. fol 231. for well
banished; welny banished. fol. 238. for Garny; Grany. fol. 256. for Deuegal;
Dongall. fol. 265. Read Provinces besides.


