A Seasonable Expostulation WITH THE NETHERLANDS.

Declaring their Ingratitude To, and the Necessity of their Agreement With the
Commonwealth of ENGLAND.

OXFORD, Printed for Thomas Robinson, Anno Dom. 1652.

To the Reader.
IF in this Conjuncture of Affairs, you think I have said too little, as things
now stand between us and the Dutch, I wish, all my faults were as capable of
amendment; if too much, it is out of a partiality I was never found guilty of in
relation unto them: it being my project, To vindicate my Countries Interest as
modestly, as such high provocations, multiplied by the weight of so many
Obligations may justly bear. However, I shall be more ready to ask pardon,
then offend by being too Censorious. And if inclined to the same humor, it is
possible you may be pleased; if otherways, I am resolved not to be angry;
intending only to persuade Peace, no way so advantagiously obtained from
others, as by keeping in Unity amongst our selves, under those God has placed
over us; Nothing increasing foreign Enemies so much as Domestic feuds,
amongst such as ought to be servants to the State, as I am, though never in
their Pay.

A Seasonable Expostulation with the NETHERLANDS.
CAESAR endured without exclamation the Senators Poniards, as whetted by
interest or revenge; but when that of his own Imp Brutus, was presented against
him he covered his face, leaving the World, with no less shame then
indignation, against so much unnatural ingratitude. The like might we do in
relation to the Dutch; whose part I have been hitherto, so far ready to take,
as to impute the assistance they contributed toward the loss of Rochell, And
the fomenting the Royal party against the Parliament of England, only to the
sordidnesse of their Merchants; who have not only been known, to sell ammunition
to the Mahumetans, the blasphemers of their Religion (if they own any by
retaile) but even to his Catholic Majesty, bound in Honor no less then
interest, to be their enemy in gross. Neither had I ever wished the charming
of those Froggs, but that I see them so ready to become an Egyptian plague unto
us, by croaking against us in our own Waters. Yet though most of their Gentry
were buried in the Cruelty of such as formerly governed them, And all marks of
Honor almost blended amongst them, in those of Profit, they shall find so much
civility in me, as to endeavor rather to Bind up, then Enlarge the rupture,
their indiscretion has made with this State; to whom, I shall in modesty show,
how far they stand obliged, And offer reasons to dissuade them from these
wild courses, by which they do no less tickle, the hearts of their enemies
with delight, then wound, those with shame and fear, who do affect them.

Here then let me crave leave, to address my speech to this our Neighbor
State, and thus expostulate with them.

After that France, tired with the labor, the striving of her own, Children
had caused in the Bowels of her Estate, And child by the cold distrust
conceived of your success, had deserted you in Despair, you may remember how
England opened her arms to receive your fugitives, And her purse to pay your
Soldiers; so that a foot of ground cannot be called yours, that owes not a
third part to the expense, Valor, or Counsel of the English; Of whom such
spirits have expired in your defense, as have been thought, at a mean rate, to
double the value of what they fought for: Brave Sidney falling upon such
ground, as his glorious Mistress thought too base to bury him in; Though you
offered to purchase that honor, at the price of the richest Monument, you were
then able to erect.

Did not the English dispute your title to Ostend, till they had no earth left
to plead on, The Ground failing them before their valors? Yet whilst fighting
there, not only against the flower of the Spanish Army, But the Plague, Hunger
and cold Despair; Their fellows put you in possession of Sluice, beyond your
hopes; So as it may be said without Hyperbole, the Nobility and Gentry, Q.
Elizabeth lost, doubled the number, the cruelty of Philip had left you.

Do not the Maritim Towns of Kent, Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, etc. abound at
this day, with the issue of those Swarms, the sound of their fellows misery,
had driven out of their Hives? Have you not had liberty to trade, And to become
free Denizons, with power to buy Land, and inhabit upon the same terms with
the Natives, both in City and Country; no mark of distinction being imposed in
relation either to Honor, Profit, or Justice?

The Parliament, have been always so tender of your preservation, whilst you
needed it, and Friendship since God has enabled you to subsist; As their
Speaker could scarce make an impression upon his Cushion, before the sense of
your safety, no less then their own Nature and Religion, Inspired them with an
earnestness to renew or strengthen their Alliance with you; not so observeable
in respect of any Neighbor beside; Doubling, no less in their Retaliations,
then acceptance, the few marks of gratitude, have dropped from you; Rather then
expunging them, with your more frequent injuries; as being more willing to
impute your failings to the less courtly nature of the soil and people, Then
the want of gratitude and Civility in so prudent a State, to a Potent
Neighbor; who next to God, may justly be styled her maker, in dispensing with
so many dangers and inconveniences for your sake.

Can you think so wise a Council as this Nation was steered by, did not
apprehend; That though the making you Free might fortify the Queens
out-workes, it could not but as much dismantle the Royal fort of Monarchy; By
teaching Subjects, they might depose their Prince, and be no loosers by the
bargain? Which (by the way) will render you unacceptable to all Neighbor
Monarchs; furnishing their Subjects with a pretense, upon all occasions of
advantage; Therefore prudence might tempt you, rather to advance then depresse,
the like endeavors in others; observed by your elder (I dare not say, Wiser)
Sister, Venice, In whose proceedings partialities on this side are rarely
found. But to return to what is in this place more material.

Was not the assisting you, an occasion of our Invasion in Eighty eight, by a
Navy held Invincible in the Creed of Rome; Till the more Canonical Valor of
the English (assisted by the Iowder arguments of Heaven) had clearly confuted
the Popes title? The Reason that kept King Philip from heading an Army in his
own person, was a fear he did apprehend of being cast in his passage out of
Spain; (as his father Charles the 5th was) upon the British shore; knowing the
English more cordial to your preservation, then to suffer him to come and go
on so bloody an errand.

And though he did often desire his Sister of England to hear (as he
pretended) his just defense for his so rigorous proceedings; She refused to
dispute the truth of your Complaints; presuming it more probable for a stranger
to be a Tyrant, then that the natural Inhabitants should, upon a slighter
cause, cast themselves into the no less bloody, then scorching flames of a
Civil, and uncertain War: Seeming rather to forget the Obligations she
owed him, as a private person, when he was King of England, then her Neighbors
oppressions; I shall not here draw blood in your faces by application.

Yet I do not find any tumults raised before the gates of your Messengers; who
were then too modest to own higher titles, then of poor Petitioners; casting
themselves prostrate at the feet of a no less potent tribunal, then you have
been admitted to, in the quality of Ambassadors; An honor you could never have
attained, but through the mediation of those who have been so far from
receiving a like Retaliation; as, to their grief, they perceived most of the
storms and Thunders, fell upon this Nation, were first formed in your Region,
by which houses and Churches were demolished, wherein your Ancestors had
received shelter, and Contribution.

And instead of opposing our Enemies, and screening us by the power you must
own under God from England, You rendered your selves Arbitraters of our cause;
And to which side you did propend, appears by the titles of Honor your
Messengers partiality was branded with by the other Party; One made a Lord, the
other a Knight at Oxford.
Besides what a less respective. Relator might suppose they carried home in
their Portmantos; Covering under the glorious habit of Ambassadors; An
ingratitude so ugly, as can not be represented to the world without shame.

Were not the promises of Neutralitie (extorted from you by our Agents, at the
expense of so much trouble, treasure and time) drawn up so ambiguously, as if
they had come from juggling Delphos, not the deeply engaged Hague? whose repute,
in relation to a just repayment of former debts, has been, next her alliance
with England, the greatest security for her future hopes.

Did not the disaffection of some, transport them so far beyond all extent of
prudence, (as to avoid the countenancing of so much Ingratitude in their own
persons) by conniving at the liberty, the Prince of Orange took, The
inestimable Banck at Amsterdam was almost surprised; And Fetters ready to be
formed for them out of the States Silver; so as they were in a fair way of
loosing their own Liberty in seeking to impede ours?

For this branch of the House of Nassau was so deeply rooted in this fourth
descent, as he began to struggle for more room, and overshadow the power of
the State; And apprehending this Nation too full of Gallantry, and Policy, to
let a Servant inslave a people they had redeemed from his Master by their
blood, he rendered himself, First our late Kings Son in Law, and so our
enemy; till Providence had bound him up with the rest of our Opposers; By what
mediation we are not inquisitive; our business being only to participate of
our Neighbors felicities, without arraigning the cause by which they attained
them.

And here I desire leave to mingle my thoughts with some reports made by no
strangers in the affairs of those times, to whom it appeared, that Queen Mary
did not at first, Cordially intend the Match with Holland, unless the Prince
of Orange was able to attain the Regality, which the Catholic King was so
far from being likely to hinder, That a small acknowledgment would have
persuaded him out of his part, long looked upon by that wise Nation, as a
trouble to keep: And after she had by the contemplation of this Marriage,
assured her self not only to receive no opposition in her design, from that
corner, but all the assistance his money and power could afford; she had the
young Ladies consent ready, either to break, or confirm it; who was then under
years; And to show they feared foul play, in case K. Chapter had prospered, the
Princess was bedded something sooner, then stood with ordinary custom, and the
Lady Stanops protests, who married a Dutchman, and was assigned her Gardionesse.

And if any consider how unsuitable this was to the high mind and Religion of
the Queen of England; What plenty of freer and richer Princes resided in
Germany; And that she never had been put in to their hands, but that those new
breaches, called for new Counsels; He cannot blame the conjecture; though as
things fell out, she could not have been sold to a greater advantage.

Neither can it be rejected out of any great difficulty resides in raising a
considerable party in the Netherlands, by one less powerful then the Prince
of Orange; because every several Province, or chief Town, has free Liberty of
conceding or rejecting what propositions they please; that in a manner they are
so many free States independent one of the other; Therefore not likely to
combine against England; who yet is as well Able to spare their Alliance, as
willing to Embrace it.

And that this Match sprung rather from the Sinister and clandestine ends, then
any palpable affection, The Queen carried to the Dutch, is more then probable,
by the faint reception she formerly gave them upon all occasions, suffering the
Buffoons at Court to gibe their Ambassadors, as if they were not able to afford
themselves Cuffs, out of the mass of Holland they sold to others: And upon
consideration of the severe justice they met with, in the Star Chamber, for
transporting of Gold, it might have obliged them rather to have assisted the
Parliament (whose indulgence enabled them to committ the fault) then the
Crown, that had so severely punished it.

Yet you were so far from managing this Partiality within the ordinary Carere
of prudent Princes, (who upon a less desertion of Fortune then you observed,
withdraw their assistance from all parties looked upon, but with an unbiased
aspect; That you adhered to the King of Scots, after providence had measured
out the Land in quiet before us; As if nothing were more indifferent to you,
then who were happy, so England were miserable. Nay after our good God had
broke their Swords, and knapt their Spears in sunder, you let the ribald Pen
vomit out floods of reproaches, in hope to destroy this Nation, who was then in
strong labor with peace, amongst a wilderness of distractions: Forgeting that
nothing could be said to their disparagement, that would not, in an indifferent
light, delineate your own: No Indecency being observable, during our
proceedings, that is not easily to be matched with an Enormity in Yours.

So as the Pope proved by accident, more our friend, and made better use of
reason of State; For finding his faction here was able to return him no more
then a bare compliance in Church Ceremonies, withont the welcome addition of
profit; (The English Miter, no less then the Crown, resolving to retain an
absolute power to dispose of all dignities both Ecclesiastical and Temporal)
wheeled about, and was never found by any I could be informed from, to foment
the adversary with considerable supplies, though earnestly solicited both by
Letters and Messengers.

In which the wise Conclave, avoided both the horns of this dangerous Dilemma,
Either to own so high a conceived impiety, as the rejecting the return of one
of the mightiest Kingdoms in Christendom, for worldly respects, thought by few,
of those who pay them, his due: or by leaving to this Sheep that was lost, a
full fruition of his fleeces, to give the other Ninety and nine Catholic
Potentates a just occasion to make the like demands: A fatling of more value in
that Luxurious Court, then would be parted with, for the conversion of all the
world.

But to return; I cannot in zeal to the conscience, and duty I owe to the
honor of this Nation, but ask who made you so far our Survayers, as to limit
out the extent of Their conveniences, that are found to have laid out them
selves to purchase Yours?

Was ever so high an Intrusion offered, as for a Neighbor to prescribe how
another should be regulated in matter of Trade; And what Bottoms are fittest to
be imployd? would you not scorn the like Usurpation, though made by your --
France, or new sworn Allye, Denmark, who for so many years, has ground your
faces with a Tole, never yet imposed upon you in our Seas?

For the proof of whose Propriety, I leave you to learned Seldom in his Mare
Clausum, and a book entitled Dominium Maris etc. lately translated out of
Italian by an Honorable Person. And if you were not unwilling to bribe Our
Kings and their Minions so long for your Fishing, why should you be so tetchy
now, with such as inquire whether it was worth your cost? and though I was
pleased to hear so rich a Town as Amsterdam could be Founded on Herring-Bones,
the Lord of Hosts is my faithful witness, how afflicted I should be, to see
it hazard the reducing into its first principle by a War with England.

And thus much I understand of your Trade, that the late Kings did not only
give you the Fish, but bayts to catch them, laden by Boats full out of the
Thames, Lampries.
which they would never have done, had they been as full of Circumspection, as
that creature is reported to be of eyes.

Now this considered, I pray why may not we assume to our selves the Rights of
Disposure, and Regulating that which undoubtedly is our own? and why may not
we take the humble style of a Parliament, and Council of State, as well as
you, That strive with your Maker, who shall be most High and Mighty?

If only the time of the Change of Government be made Umpier of Precedence,
Geneva must take the right hand of You; And many poor small Towns in Germany,
That freely sent their demands to King Philip; When your Messengers escaped
hanging hardly, if at all, for only delivering your most humble Petitions.

There are three things principally insisted upon, by which the United
Provinces, pretend to have fixed an Obligation upon England, and expunged their
former score; which nevertheless upon an impartial debate, will rather prove
wholly chargable, upon their own account, then Ours; so far are they from
having given a full satisfaction for all the Love; Cost and blood expended by
us in their Preservation.

The first is, the assistance lent us in 88. which was no more, then the
professed Antagonists to the quiet of Italy, did freely contribute against the
common enemy, in the battle at Lepanto, who did there oppose the Grand
Signior, in relation to their respective safeties: Besides it was a true
received Maxim in the wise Counsel of Spain, and holds so still; that he that
desires to subdue the United Provinces, must first Conquer England, or draw her
from their succor: And finding the latter unpossible, they fell upon the
other, as more feacible.

The Second is, your Entertainment given to the distressed King and Queen of
Bohemia: which according to the rest of your pretended courtesies unto England,
you have strained far higher then the string is able to bear, in its natural
extent; Therefore I shall take leave to tune it right in the ears of all
impartial judgments; and after setting open the Cabinet, give men free leave
to value the Jewel, which in truth amounts to no more then giving house-roome
to a Virtuous Princess, undone by your Counsels, and the rest of the Union,
that had most unsuccessefully chosen James of England for their Head; who
proving totty, They thought to ballast him by Imbarking his Son in Law in this
desperate design; especially the Netherlands, finding the twelve years Truce
spent little to their advantage, and knowing the whole weight of Spain, would
fall upon them, unless they could waken us, whose King was clogged with too
much Fleagme, to harken to the voice of any thing but ease and pleasure. And I
cannot but take notice here of the Spaniards ingratitude, that has so long
deferred erecting his Statue in Gold; since upon a strict account it may
appear, that the wise Council of the Catholic King, did not contribute so
much to his greatness, as the Folly and Corruption of Ours.

For the 3d which is a Navall Victory obtained in our Sleeve, Ao 1639. (the
depth of which design, remains yet in the pocket of the King of Spain, and
some few confidents in England:) I can say but this, that if their errand was
Hither, Our King betrayed Us; if to Holland, You; for which you were tied in
reason, rather to have assisted the people that exclaimed against the
partiality they observed, then the King that owned it; Therefore this cannot be
put up on the Parliaments account.

For the business of Amboyna cast into the Balance (by such as bear you less
respect) against all things urged in your favor; I am so charitable, as to
look upon it as the Cruel, and inconsiderate act of a private person, rather
then a true Scheme of the States Motion.

Not doubting, but upon a serious reflection of your Wisdoms, on your own
Interest, you will easily return to a more straight Alliance with this Nation,
unless God in his anger, has suffered you, to mingle Lethe with the rest of
your Liquor.

And since it may seem impossible for you, to subsist without contracting a
straight Alliance, with England, France, or Spain; give me leave humbly to
propose, which in reason is likeliest to disturb your Counsels with the least
jealousy, from whence may be the easier deduced the fittest choice, not only
for convenience, but safety; it being very hard to be securely protected, by
those you cannot cordially trust: which cannot be Spain or France; one laying
claim to what you possess, the other to what you are ambitious to obtain;
whereas England stands free from all such pretenses; Queen Elizabeth refusing
to hold you in gross, only accepting of Flushing and the Brill, which King
James was so weary of, as he returned them for a far less sum then they
were pawned: Neither as a free State, are we likely to embrace contrary
Counsels, because we have more Marish grounds already of our own, then we well
knew how to dispose of, till some of your Countrymen came and inhabited them.
Besides it were madness for those who may live quietly in Ireland, to venture
fighting for an estate in Holland.

Neither is our alliance likely to change, if once firmly established, Whereas
there is no longer hold with France, then whilst the two potent factions of
Protestant and Papist shall subsist; by the clashing of which, you are, no
less then the Spaniard, able to kindle the fire of a Civil War: so as when
you have thoroughly scanned your alliance with France, you shall find it signify
more danger then Protection: It having been always the humor of that People,
to swagger with their Neighbors for room, upon the least enjoyment of quiet;
being seldom or never willing to serve their Allies, but when they are in the
worst case to help themselves.

If this afflicted people were sensible of their own condition, that the most
scorching Slavery in all Christendom, lies under the Line of their Kings, And
animated by our example and yours, should procure their freedom, Yet you would
be worsted on that hand too; for after their Liberty attained, the conquest of
you or your Neighbors, were likeliest to be their next employment: there being
no Peace with them at home, unless they be at War with other States; Which
makes it none of Englands smallest blessings, that they are not able to come
hither on horseback.

The French are not so suitable to your Nature as the English, who look upon
Merchants as Gentlemen, they as Pedlers.

I know you are too wise to expect real friendship from Spain, or a
continuance of the agreement made with Him, if you break with Us; It not being
likely he should oversee the advantage will be offered him of catching Gudgeons
in your inland Waters, whilst we are out at Sea scuffling for Spratts.

If you be prohibited trading hither; I pray what will you do with French
Wines, the most staple commodity they have to barter for? The East countries,
being as unable to take them off, by reason of cold, as you to consume them in
Brent Wine.

Monarchs neither do, nor can look upon you, under a milder aspect then
Traitors, without a tacit consent, of the like power resident in their People
to explode them, as conscious of giving the same cause; Whereas England cannot
but esteem you in a more honorable Relation: For though you, like the Dial of
Ahaz, recoyled so many degrees back in the Sphere of Policy, It is naturally
more proper for the hand of power in a Free State, to be touched with an
inclination toward a Commonwealth, then a Monarchy.

Though the advantage that may accrue to you from an English confederacy, is
made apparent from by-gon experience, yet if you consider how honorable it
would be to Spain, who has long endeavored it; And convenient to France, in
regard of her claim to Artoys and Hannault, to convert you into a Colony, you
would not be so intent upon Profit, esteemed by all prudent Nations inferior to
safety: Therefore let your pretenses be what you will, The encroachments you
made through the remissness of our Kings, and corruption of their Council, are
the Silver Smiths, that do really raise all these clamours; it being
otherways unpossible, that Monarchy should be such a Diana in your eyes.

Your Alliance with Denmark, is likelier to add number then weight to your
Frindship; being liable to be whisled off or on, according to the inclination
of his Imperial Majesty, so twisted in Marriages with the Catholic King, That
the difficulty is as great to distinguish between their Interests, as
Consanguinity: Besides those Eastern Countries have ever been looked upon, not
only as a storehouse wherein God hords up the miseries of Winter, But also the
cruel Plagues of Incursions; apparent in the Goths and Vandals, whose
barbarous hands, assisted Time, in the destruction of such Monuments in Italy,
as she alone had not been able to demolish.

To conclude with a few Queries.

Let me humbly desire you to consider; First, whether such as may or shall
foment this division, do not act the policy of the Wolf in the Fable, that
persuaded the Sheep to give over their Mastives? 2ly What other Alliance can
afford you so safe Harborage in case of foul weather at Sea, as England,
Scotland, and Ireland? if none; whether Contingencies driven in by storms,
under our shelter, may not exceed all the English prizes, you shall make by Van
Trump? 3ly In case the match with the Infanta, had proceeded, or Prince Charles
miscarried in Spain, through detention; whether your old patrons our Kings,
might not easier have been persuaded to have renounced your friendship, or
delivered up the Cautionary Towns, had they been then in their power; then etc.
4ly If Venice may not unproperly be called the Signet on Neptunes right hand,
whether England and the Netherlands being in a straight Confederacy, may not be
styled his two arms, by which in relation to their Shipping, he imbraceeth the
universe? 5ly Whether your Maiden Towns, as you call them, May not longer
enjoy that title under the Alliance of England, who has many as rich and
beautiful, Harbors; as of France, that cannot justly brag of the like
plenty, or convenience for situation? 6ly Whether a breach between us, may not
conjure up a third party of Pirates, formidable to us both, Dunkirke being in so
wavering a condition and fit to make an Argiers of, etc. 7ly Whether in case a
difference should happen; some of your Provinces irritated by the
inconveniences must in Reason follow, may not be tempted to divide, and adhere
to the stronger part; and which that is, may be easily resolved from the great
assistance, England has given you, and the small damage she has (through the
mercy of God) received from yours, through out the whole Series of our War?
8ly Whether, during our Monarchs, They, or the English Parliaments, were aptest
to put a more favorable construction upon your worse or better actions, in
relation to-us? if the Kings; what signified the bleating of such of your
Countrymen as they daily fleeced? if the Parliaments, (who ever rendered
themselves, rather partial then severe on your side) Are they not well
requited? Lastly, Whether the World may not afford Us and You sufficient Trade
without intrusion; or in case our Heardsmen should foolishly differ, is not
Abraham's answer ready, are we not Brethren, in Language, Nature, and Religion?


If you add to this the Parallel of the causes, of your and our taking Arms;
you shall find your King a stranger by Birth, wilful by nature, and apt to be
led away by the seldom Auspicious counsel of Churchmen. The Peoples advice
neglected; Petitioners Imprisoned. All dear-sold to the Natives by Courtiers,
so as Injustice it self, could scarce be afforded without Money.

There a Woman made an ingredient in the Court; Here the Regent of our
Councels. Yours the wisest King in his time, in all things but thinking
himself so; Ours no less prudent, had he but known it. Yours happy in all,
but the loss of you; Ours successful in nothing, but his return from
Spain. Yours inscrutable to all, but tried friends; Ours patent to none, but
such as deserved the name of Enemies. Yours spent immense treasure, in such
buildings as may strive with Time for continuance; Ours in Plays and Maskes,
more transitory then a Winters night. Tours a better King then a Man; Ours a
better Man then a King. You won freedom, by mingling patience with the valor
of Strangers in long Sieges, which spun out the War to a chargeable length; Our
liberty the Natives obtained in the Field, with a miraculous celerity, by
trusting providence with their endeavors.

Our wants were, So true a friend as you found of England, and at first such
trusty Commanders as your Prince: Borne to those titles, which our present
General has more abundantly deserved, having been followed with so
uninterrupted success, as you are no where able to sing of thousands, but may
be matched by us with ten thousands. But for this, as all good things else, let
glory, praise, and honor, be first given to God, next all thankful obedience,
to those who have or shall be isntrumental in reforming what is amiss in both.

FINIS.

