NEWS FROM HELL ROME AND THE INNS OF COURT WHEREIN Is set forth The Copy of
a letter written from the Devil to the Pope. The true copy of the Petition
delivered to the King at York.

The copy of certain artikles of agreement between the Divill. the Pope, and
diverse others.

The description of a feast, sent from the Devil to the Pope together with a
short advertisement to the high court of Parliament, with sundry other
Particulars.

Published for the futuar peace and tranquillity of the Inhabitants of great
BRITANY. By J M.

Printed in the year of grace and reformation. 1641.

TO OUR DEERLY BELOVED SON THE MOST PIEOUS AND MOST RELIGIOUS PRImate of the
Roman Church and to all our dearly beloved children the Cardinals and Lordly
Bushops in Europe Haste: Haste: Post: Haste. Your entire Prince and God of
this world, Lucifer, Prince of Darkness, and Superstition, King of s^^ks and
Phlegeto^, Suppreame Lord of Ghehenna, Tartaria, Colmakia, Samoyedia, Lappia,
Cor^lia, and Colmagoria, Prince abissus, and sole commander of Seeberia,
Alteenia, Pecheora, and of all the Infernal furies and their punise, the
Jesuits, Priests, and Semenaries.
Sends Greeting,
Most Dearly beloved Son, and you our dutiful childeren, whose sanctity we
reverence whose persons we adore whose wisdoms we admire* at whose Pollicis
we wonder at whose power we muse, and at whose iunincible stratagems we stand
amazed.

Nor can we in the first place, but extol, aplaud, and most highly commend
thee our dear son for the extreordinary care in the advancement of our
Kingdom.

And as next in place the extreordinary dilligent and vigilant care of all our
beloved children the Lordly Bushops, in the advancement of our Regal power to
the great enlardgment of our infernal dominions, by their rare and Subtle
plots, and stratagems.

And in a more spetial manner we are pleased through our infernal grace and
favor to extol them for this their present and excellent invention, in sowing
discord amongst the English heririkes, as also in provoking the Scots heririkes
to an apparent oposition against their King, yea so far as to an invasion of
the Teritories of England, al which services are most dear and axceptable unto
us.

Jnrespect of which services, as also for their fidellity to us and our
kingdom, we have caused our princepall secretary of estate, Don Antonio Furioso
Diabelo* to make an especial Jnroullment of their names in our Callend amongst
those our dear servants the plotters of the gunpowder treason, and the most
renowned the complloters of the former invasion of England, in the year of
grace 1588. and since the creation of the world 5609 both which services
although their events were no ways answerable to our royal expectation, yet
those instruments that so freely adventured themselves in them, shall be ever
renouned in our Court infernal, and most acceptable to our person.

And for the better encouragement of these our trusty and well beloved servants
in the speedier advancement of this work, now intended for the utter
extirpation of all heritikes and increace of our regal power, we are pleased
by this our royal manuell to give unto them assureance of our aid and best
assistance in the most efficatious manner that our Princely power can extend
unto, And because our former sttatagems put in excecution by our beloved Cosen
and Councelor the King of Spain were by him nowayes effected according to our
princely expectation, We have now therefore imposed our princely command upon
our beloved servant the King of France; at the humble sutemade unto us, by our
children the Lordly Bushops and by some of our servants of greatest quality in
the Realm of England, as also by our servants the Jesuits and Roman
Catholics of England, To have a Puisant army in readiness, for the Invasion of
England, at such a time, as those our children and servants, shall conceive it
most convenient, and efficatious.

And further our will and pleasure is, that you our dear Son shall still
parsist to stir up and Encourage our children the Archbishops, as also thy
disiples and our Loyal Subjects and servants, the Jesuits, Priests, and
Semenaries, to this work, that they with all their might together with our
powrefull policis granted unto them may strive to effect this work with all
Celerity, That we may once more see our Kingdom of Superstition Reestablished:
in the Monarchy of great Britayne, and Ireland,

The motives to be pressed, iuducing them to the expeditious effecting of the
same is principali, their respect to our Kingly honor next their own increace
of greatness for we promise and assure them by the word of a King Jnfernall,
That every of them shall reign as Princes under us, not only over the bodies
and estates of men but also over their Souls, by and through the many
infernal graces by us most freely and beningnly Conferred on them, and hreeby,
to make them the more sensible of these our several graces confered on them, we
are pleased therefore here at present to expres but some few of them in
particular (as namely) pride, vain, glory, hipocricy, self-love of themselves
and of this present world, love of will worship, and advancement of Idolatary,
Together with that spetiall gift of couetuousnesse The only pillar to all the
rest of our infernal garces conferred on them.

Thirdly. In respect of the clear passadg by us made for them, by setting the
heritikes for this long time at varience amongst themselves, By our trusty
servants the Lawyers, and advancement of Idolitary amonst them, The only
means in our Princely wisdom conceived to be to the breakeing of the bond of
unity and peace, thereby to provoke the great God of heaven to leave them to
themselves and to our powrfull stratagemse, We are likewise pleased to take
spetiall Notice of that service done by our children the Lordly Bushops, in
working the dissolution of the assembly of Parliament, in May last past 1640 by
which means nothing was efected for the good of heritikes either concerning
their church or commonwealth, so as the sucses of this dissigne of ourse was
thereby no ways hindered you are likewise to let them know from us, that the
Noblemen of Engand are dishartened, the the Gentry, daunted, the Comunality
divided, the number of our servants the Romman Catholics infinitely increased,
and the Realm in Genrall greatly oppressed not only by the sundry Monapolies
but also by the invinceable opressing power of our children the Lordly Bishops,
the multitude of our servants the corrupt Judges, bace minded Lawyers,
seditious Aturnnies, and woden headed Docters of our Siuil laws, Procters,
Prothonotaries. Regist^rs, Advocates, Solissitors, and Apparrators, whom we
have caused to swarm, like to the Egiptian Locusts, over all the land for the
sowing of discord and blowing the coals of contention amongst all the
Jnhabitants of the same, they haueing al of them long since received
instructions by some of our infernal spirits sent forth from us to that effect.

You are likewise to let them know, that out of our princely respect to them
and their dambenable actions for our honor, We are pleased to take spetiall
notice of that service which they most willingly endeauored to efect for the
confusion of all the heritiks: Jnhabiting England, Scotland, Ireland, and the
Netherlands, by the late (conceived) Jnvincible Armado procured from Spain in
the year of our reign 5660. Which through the providence of the Celestial
powers then over them.

And the dissturbance of Martain Harper Trump, here below, Fail^ed of that
Sucses which we together with them expectod and hoped for, To our no less
sorrow then theirs.

Nor can we but aplaud the dilligent care taken by our Children, and servants
of greatest quality in that Kingdom, In preventing the discovery of that
Jnvasiue plott, by the heritikes, and their small well-meaneing State. Through
their speidy flight to dover Rode, and private Conference there with Don
Oquindo, the Generalissimo of Spain to that effect, All which was most
exquesitly performed, especially by our hispaniolized lacklatine Lord, our
dearly beloved Servant.

And lastly our hope is, that this presant plott set on foot by these our
trusty and well-beloued chlldren, and Servants aforenamed, and by their earnest
endeavors and our assistance once effected, will Crown all our labors to our
unspeakeable Terrestrial glory, and their eternal favors by us to be
conferred on them in our Royal palace of perdition where we have already
Imposed our Royal command upon our trusty and wellbeloued cozen and councelor,
Peot^r Tretyacoue Chancellor Evane Becklemeesheue our Knight Marshall, Richardo
Slow Treasurer, and Don Serborus grand Porter of our said Palace, to give
them free admittance into our Royal Presence.

Thus, no ways doubting of your singular care and diligence in fullfilling
this our Royal will and Pleasure hereby expressed, we do further impose our
Royal favor and Princely respect to be by you presented unto our trusty and
wellbeloued cozen and counselor your present ^untio in the Court of England,
as also unto our beloved children, and servants, the Bishops, Jesuits,
Priests, and Semenaries, our faithful, agents in this invinceable plott, and
also to all our faithful subjects and servatns the Roman Catholics of
England.

We are pleased to remain. Your Royal Sofferraigne and Patron of all your
dambenable plots and stratagems now in hand.
Given at our Infernal palace of perdition this 1. of September, and in the
5661 year of our most dambnable reign, Post Scripte.
Since the above written we are creadibly informed of the intention of a most
scandelous petition to be delivered by asmall number of heriticall Lords unto
their King at York, which does not a little touch our honor, and the
discovery of this our present stratagem. Our express will and pleasure is,
that there be some speedy course taken for the suppressing of the same, And the
authors thereof sevearely punnished, and Pomfret Castle allotted unto them for
their abode, until our will and pleasure be further known and this our dissigne
be effected, of which fail you not, as you tender our Royal favor the
suckses of this our dissigne, and your own safety. Farewell.

Antonio Furioso Diabelo: Principalio Secretario.



Cousider this and marck the substance well
It seems a letter from the finnd of hell.
What er the form or method seem to be
The intent thereof, was quite the contrary
Had this not rung a knell in some men's ears
The had near bin freed from their slavish fearse,
Of tyrany, opression, and th Bishops pride;
Judges, and Lawyers; a wicked crewe beside,
Of Docters? procters, that the Realm did swaye,
Trod under foot, Gods truth turned night to day.
Strove to coufound great Brittayns Monarchy,
Justice, and truth pervert, advance, t, i m Piety,
And all, by this, Romse doctrine to prefer,
Obey the Pope; and serve King Lucifer,
That is the cause, why them he does aplaud,
That he thereby, with them, may have the, LAVD,
And honor due, unto his servants all,
That striu by him, to work great Brittaynes fall.
A TRVE COPPJE OF THE PETITION WHICH WAS BY THE LORDS PRESENTED UNTO THE KING
at York Seprember the 12. 1640.
To the Kjngs most Excelent majesty.
THe humble petition of your Ma'ties most Loyal subjects, whose names are here
under subscribed, in the behalf of themselves, and diverse others. Most
gracious Sofferaigne The sense of that duty we owe to Gods sacred Majesty, and
our nearest affection to the good and welfare of this your Realm of England,
have moved us in all humility, to beseech your Royal Ma'ty, to give us leave
to offer to your princely wisdom, the apprehencion which we and others your
faithful subjects have conceived, of the great distemper and danger now
threatnig this Church and state, and your royal person, and of the fittest
means to remove and prevent the same. The evils and dangers whereof your Ma'ty
may be pleased to take notice of, are these.

That your Ma'ties sacred person, is exposed to hazard and danger, in this
present expedition against the Scottish Army, and that by ocasion of this war,
your Ma'tys revenuse are much wasted, your subjects burdened, with cote and
conduct money, billiting of soldiers, and other military charges, and diverse
rapinse and disorders (committed,) in several parts of this your realm, by
the soldiers raised for that service, and the whole realm full of fearse and
discontentments.

The sundry innovations in matters, of Religion, the oath of (...) lately
imposed upon the clergy and others of your Ma'ties subjects, the great
increase of popery, and employing of popish recusants and others ill affected
unto religeon-are established in places of power and trust* especially in
comanding of men and armse, both in the feeld, and in sundry other Coumpties of
this your Realm, which by the lawse, they are not permitted to have any arms
in their own houses, The great mischief that may fall upon this Kingdom, if
the intention which has been creadibly reported, of the bringing in of Irish
and foreign forces should take effect, The heavy charge of merchants, to the
great discouragement of trade, The multitude of monapolies and other pattents,
whereby the commodities and manufactures of this Kingdom are much burdened,
to the great and universal grivances of your people, The great grief of your
subjects, with the long Intermission of Parliaments, and the late and former
disoluing of such as have bin called, without the happy effects which otherwise
they might have produced, For remedy whereof, and prevention of the danger that
may ensue to your Roy all person and the whole state. They do in all humility
and faithfullnes beseech your Ma'ty, that you will be pleased to summon a
Parliament in some short and convenient time, whereby the causes of these and
other great grivances, which your people suffer under, may be taken away, and
the Authors and councelors of them, may be brought to such legal trial, and
condign punnishment, as the nature of their offenses shall require, and that
the present war, may be composed by your Ma'ties wisdom without bloodshed,
in such a manner as may conduce to the honor of your Ma'ts person and safety,
the comfort of your people and vnyting of both the Realms, against the common
enemies of the reformed religion.

and your Ma'ts petitioners shall etc. The names of such Earls and Barrons as
subscribed this petion. vi'zt
Earls. Bedford. Hartford. Essex. Mougraue. Warwick. Bullingbrooke. Rutland.
Lincoln Exetor.
Uicecomptes. Lord: Say and Seal. Mandifeeld. Brook. Harford. North. Willoby.
Sauell. Wharton. Loveles. Saint John.



Articles of agreement, made, concluded, and done* this 28 of Sep'ter in the
year of grace, 1641. and of the world 5662. By and between the high and
mighty Prince, Lucifer, King of sticks and Phlegeton, the holy and most
superstcious Primate of the roman Church, the Cardinals Bishops, Jesuits,
priests, and Semenaries. (of the one party) And Judge bribery, Lawyer
corruption, Aturny contencion, Solissitor Sedition, Justice Conivence, Iaylor
opression and, State Negligence, of the other party, In manner and form
following.
Imprimis, IT is this day mutually agreed, by and between the several
parties, above named, That there shall be a league offenciue, and defenciue,
concluded and confirmed by both parties, at or before, Holy roode day next
ensuing the date hereof. Item. That whereas there has binn lately by the
subtle practices of some Parliamentary reformists, a discord and discension
raised between the state ecleasiasticke, and the State of the Inns of court,
whereby there has happened no small prejudice unto the eclesiasticke state, the
likes whereof, is to be doubted, may also fall upon the state of the Inns of
Court, and so concequently upon the Crown and dignity of our Sofferaigne Lord,
King Lucifer It is therefore mutually agreed, that all former controvercies and
contentions between both parties shall sease, and that all unity, peace, and
concord shall be embraced on either side, according to the expressions in the
precedent artickel, to the honor of our Sofferaigne Lord King Lucifer, his
crown and dignity-

Item. It is agreed that the said state of the Inns of Court, and the state
Eclesiasticke before said, Shall jointly and severally, use the uttermost of
their strength, power, and policy, To resist and suppress all such proceedings
of this present parliament, which shall any way tend to the Reformation and
suppression, (of) Opression, Extortion, Bribery, Contention, and Tradition, And
that they shall and will, with all their might* power, and policy, endeavor
and strive to broche, Advance, and maintain, All the said several impietise
again To the honor of our Sofferaigne Lord King Lucifer; his Crown and dignity

Item. It is agreed by and berweene our Sofferaigne Lord King Lucifer, and the
whole state ecclesiasticke of the one part. And Judge bribery, That forthwith,
upon the dissolution of this present Parliament, He the said Judge bribery, is
then again, to put in practice, the taking of bribes, passing of falls
judgment, and maintaining his false and corrupt centences, and decreese, to be
things sacred, and infaliable, Oppressing the innocent, by clos imprisonment,
and also favoring all Jesuits, Priests, and Semenaries, if any of them happen
by the Instruments of Justice, to be laid hold on, Animating and instructing
all Aturnies Soliceters, and Clerks, for and to the sowing of strife; and
contention amongst the people of the land, To the honor of our Sofferaign Lord
King Lucifer: his Crown and dignity.

Item It is agreed by and between our Sofferaigne Lord King Lucifer, and
Lawyer corruption: that he the said lawyer corrupcion, shall, notwithstanding,
any powerful Parliamentary reformation, still parsist in taking fees, both of
playntiue and defendant, nor shall ever bring, any honest cause to its period,
until he has (in fees) devoured the whole substance, both of plaintiue and
defendant, neither shall he the said Lawyer corruption ever at any time, give
any true and preualent advice to any his clyents, but shall delude, and delay
them, until he has draynd them as afores^id, to the utter ruin of them,
their wives and children, to the honor of our Sofferaigne Lord King Lucifer,
and the propagation of his Crown and dignity.

To their own present, rich impiety, and asured sucsesefull pardition.

Jtem. It is agreed and concluded, by and between our Sofferaigne Lord King
Lucifer, and Aturny Contention, That he the said Atturny contention, shall and
will, at all times, in all places, and upon all occasions, use his best
diligence, to sow debate, strife, varience, and contention amongst the people
of the land without exception of persons, yea, he shall not omit to set the
father against the son and the son against the father, as also one Brother
against the other, to the utter ruin of their estates houses and families, to
that end, he shall dispose of himself and all his imphes, into all the
quarters and several corners of the Kingdom, neither shall there be any
market town or place of habitation, but he shall seat himself there, to the
intent and purpose aforesaid, To the honor of our Sofferaigne Lord King
Lucifer. his Crown and dignity, and to the advancement of the said sience of
iniquity,

Jtem. It is agreed by and between our Sofferaigne Lord King Lucifer, and
Solissetor Sedition, That he the said Solissetor Sedition, shall and will at
all times use his best endeauovr to stir up animate and encourage all people of
what condition, degree, and profesion soever, unto suits in the law and that he
the said Solisetor Sedition, shall and will prove faithful unto all Lawyers
and Aturnies, and shall and will be slow in the prosecution of any man's cause
whatsoever, and spin out the thread thereof to its full length, espeacially in
the Courts of equity, by multiplicity of (Begeting orders) and by not omitting
to have this clause incerted into every of his orders, videliset (unless cause
be showed to the contrary at the next court day by the defendant) as also by
falsifiing of orders Through the corrupting of registers, and corrupting of
council in an honest cause, by deceiueing his clyants through false and unjust
bills of charges by brybing the Judges of the several courts, and the masters
of the Chancery, Richly, to the honor of our Sofferaigne Lord King Lucifer his
Crown and dignity, and the eternal damnation of Solissetor Sedition.

Jtem. It is agreed and concluded, in Perpetuum, between our Sofferainge Lord
King Lucifer, and Iaylor oppression, that whereas through the rigor of the
law, many poor Christian souls are committed unto his keeping and safe custody
for sundry causes, and sometimes for no just cause at al He the said Iaylor
opression, shall and will, by himself, his Clerks, and servants, be void of
all mercy, and compassion toward them, and shall and will as much as in him
lies: endeavor to work the utter ruin of the estates and lives of all such
as shall be committed to his custody, and to that end he the said Jailer
oppression, shall nor will not be slack in giving bribes, otherwise styled
new-yeares gifts yearly unto all the Judges of the courts of Justice for and
toward the better encouragement and annimation of them, to the commitment of
all such to prison, as are or shall be brought before them on the least
ocasion, and that he the said Iaylor oppression shall be ever ready to yield his
daily atendance on the Judges in their Courts, thereby to stir them up to be
mindful of him to that effect, and lastly it is agreed and coucluded, that he
the said Iaylor oppression, shall and will by himself and his servants, set
such snares and gins for all those committed to his costody, that they being
once intrapped within his prison doors, shall never find the way out, dureing
the continuance of their lives, or of there estates at the least. To the honor
of our Sofferaigne Lord King Lucifer his Crown and dignity* and to the
eternal perdition of Iaylor opression.

Item. It is agreed by and between our Sofferaigne Lord King Lucifer, and
justice Conniuence, That he the said justice conniuence, shall not nor will have
any regard or respect, to the iustnes of any poor man's cause, nor shall ever
incline his ear to any his just complaints, but shall and willeuer conniue and
bear with the oppressor, defrauder, and deceiuer, and that he the said justice
conniuence, shall and will ever prefer, the vallue of a Gooce, a pig, a Capon,
a brace of Partriges, a good fatt sheep, a bore at Christmis, or a letter from
a friend, written in favor of Sir Opressor, Mr defrauder, and dick deceiuer.
far before justice it self, or the justness of any honest man's cause
whatsoever, nor that he the said justice conniuence shall ever excecute justice
in any poor man's cause, but on the contrary he shall opresse them, and have
his miltimuses ready written, by his clarke, M', duble fees, for the speedy
commitment of them to prison, neither shall he ever incline his ear to hear
their just complaints against the several goulden persons of worship before
said. To the honor of our Sofferaigne Lord king Lucifer his Crown and
dignity, and the benifit of Iaylor opression.

Item. It is agreed by and between our Sofferaigne Lord king Lucifer, and
state Negligence that he the said state Negligence, shall ever prefer his own
peace and present benefit, before the welfare and futuar prosperity of his
king and country, and also that he the said state negligence shall not at any
time, take notice of any the Ill legal proceedjngs in any, the Courts of
justice, nor shall adict himself or ever endeavor to suppress nor prevent by
any good or hollsome laws the practice of, tirrany, oppression, in justice
extortion, bribery, contentjon, idolitry, and the like, But shall and will soly
adict himself unto the pastimes, of hunting, hauking, gaming, and whoring, and
the utter reiection of the present and futuar benefit and welfare of his
native country, to the honor of our Sofferaigne Lord king Lucifer: the
prosperity of his Religeous vicegerent, and the peace and tranquillity of all
his servants the Jesuits: priests: Semenaries: and Roman Catholics of
England.

In witness of the truth of these presents and of every particular contained in
the same: the parties above named have hereunto set their hands and Seals the
day aforesaid and in the 5662 year of the reign of our most dambnable
Sofferaigne Lord, king Lucifer. Etcetera.

Signed. Sealed. and dilivered in the presence of us. William Laud. Bishop.
Jsopprise Crauly. Judge. Bribeing Long. Justice. Corrupt Fountain. Lawyer.
Iumping Jumper. Aturney. James In Grain. Jailer. Robert Kilfart. Solissiter.
And Rudine Haphudibrass Cytin kycloparius, Notarius Publicus


HERE FOLLOWS A BRIEF RELAtion of a great feast which from Lucifer Prince of
hell was by the hands of Cardinal pegusious presented to the view disposal
and abrobation of the Pope of Rome in the year of Iubely, 1641.
Pope MY Lord Cardinal pegusious, and you the rest of my holy brethren, I
beseech you, view these excelent varieties and variety of excelencies, well
dressed, and most exquisitely set forth and Garnished. But the contents of
every dish, I believe is best known to you my Lord Pegusious, from whom I
desire to be satisfied, concerning the contents, qualities, and opperation, of
every several dish.


Card'i. May it please your Holiness, These varieties of dishes, which your
holiness here sees thus set sorth, Were all of them prepared, for the only
Table, of our high and mighty Monarch, king Lucifer, your holiness sole Patron,
and protector, A certain number of which dishes his Mat'iy has graciously bin
pleased, to cause them to be presented to your holiness disposal, and the
resudue of them, only, to your holiness view and approbation, being to be
preserved for his Ma'ties own peculiar palate.


Pope. I beseech you my Lord Cared, let me have them brought hither before me
in order, according to the appointment of my Sofferaigne, and most munificient
Patron,


Cared, Your holiness will and pleasure shall be accomplished, and here in the
first place may it please your holiness to take notice, that the first dish by
his Ma'ties appointment to be presented to your holiness disposal, is this
large (Lattin charger) containing twenty two, Lordly English Bishops, stued
with the fire of contention, on the chafindish of exasperation and seasoned
with the several spices of man's invention, as with the spice of the mass,
Priesthud, holy days, Altars, Candles, Rayles, holy-bread, holy water,
holy-ashes, devout prayer for the dead, invocation of Saints, offerings at the
Altars, exc^mmnnications, and the strong and opperatiue spice, of the high
commision. It is also garnished about, with the several heritickall Doctrines
of all the New entitled, priests of England, and this dish his Ma'ty has
appointed to be disposed of by your holiness.


Pope. I will surely taste of it, (it looks lovely) Oh Admirable? it is a most
LAVD able dish of meat: I can find nothing wanting in this dish: but only
three grains: of the spice of accomplishment: and then it had bin devoutly
seasoned for my pallatt: but J pray what is the next dish my lo'


Card', The next dish may it please your holiness: is a silver charger,
comprehending all the contrivers, and complotters of the dissension between
England, and Scotland, os the last Spainish invasion of England, and the
practisers with the French for the subvertion of all the heritiks in England,
Scotland, and Jreland, it is seasoned with all our Iesuitical practices, Church
policies and al our Euglish Roman Catholic tretcheries, and garnished with all
our English Roman statistes: this dish of meat is now almost could, and
therefore at this present unfit for your Holiness pallatt, it only wants the
breath of the Earl of Straffords fiery zeal to heat it, by a Laudable blast or
two.


Pope. However I pray let me taste of it. Oh the: lamentation of a sinner,
pity, pity, yea a thousand pities is it, that this dish had not bin kept hott
and seasoned to the proof, that we might have sung most Laudably, te Lucifer
Laudamus. But my lo' Card' what is the next dish.


Card', May it please your holiness, this dish contains, a certain number of
falce and corrupt Judges, it is seasoned with the spice of aged detestable
couetuousnes, bribery, extortion, oppression, injustice, unmercifullnes, and
with parvertion of all the statute laws, garnished with ship money, forest
money, lone money, and a multitude of Jsoprises but this dish is by his ma'ties
special order to be preserved for his own peculiar palate.


Pope. His Majesty's will be done, J shall be ever ready and obedient to all
his Ma'ties, commands, nor will I presume to taste of it: but only pass my
judgment on it, that it is a Princely dish, fit only for his Majesty's table.

What is the next J pray my Lord,


Card'i, The next may it please your holiness is a large Golden charger:
containing a very great number of bace minded covetuous unjust: extorting and
oppressing Lawyers who value every word by them uttered at a bar of justice,
at a far higher price, then your holiness does your Bulls, issued forth for
remission of sins, and these caterpillars, his ma'ti king Lucifer: has brought
into such great esteem, with all the Jnhabitants of England, as that no man of
quality thinks his house to stand, unless it be supported by one of those
vermin pillars and broud of contention this dish is seasoned with the spice of
extorting fees from one twenty-shillings-peece. to 5. to 10. yea to 20.
espeacially by those who are styled the judges favorites, all this is given
some times but for the speaking of 2. or 3. words. it is likewise seasoned with
the taking fees on both sides, deluding clyents, spining out the thread of an
honest cause to its full length, until the purs-strings both of plaintiff and
defendant crack, and then they are tied together, by a commission into the
country, where these catterpillers are reverenced and feared like so many Gods,
by all the people, this dish is garnished with some 10000. pestifferous petty
fogging, sedicious 10-groat Atturnnies, one of whose parfidious bills of
charges, in one term advances it-selfe sometimes unto the sum of 5. 10. 20.
yea 30 pounds. espeacialy when he finds his clyent naturally inclyned to the
conditions of an ass. And on every of these garnishes ha^gs 5 ^onny-catching
deceaitful Solissitors properly termed Lawyers-limetwigs, traps, or nets, to
catch the poor silly creatures caled clyents, and this dish his Ma'ty has
also reserved for his own table.


Pope, It is a Princely dish indeed, and fit only for the peculiar table of so
great a Monarch, as is our most dambnable Sofferaigne King Lucifer, the
opperation and virtue of which dish, is able to season a whole kingdom, to be
fit meat for his Ma'ties palate, espeacially if there be but the opperatiue
spice added to it, called the (action of the case)

But what is this dish my lord Card'i.


Card', may it please your holiness, this dish contains a certain num^er of
bace muck-wormes, styled, Docters of our sivill law. Chancelors and Officials,
this dish is also seasoned with the unjust spice of extortion, oppression,
fraud, and deceit, and granished, about with a most dambnable crew, of
Procters, Notaries, Registers, Deligates, Advocates, Sumners, and petty
apparaters, these have for many years, proved noteable instruments of strife
and vexsation, unto the inhabitants of England, and through their deceaueabl
ways have mightily oppressed the people: being not much inferior unto the
preceadent Golden charger.

But to this dish: may it please your holiness, there has happened this year a
very great mischance in the kooking, for when we thought it should have bin
most Laudably boiled up to its greatest hight of Catholic operation, there
happened a Spider to fall into it, through a sudden blast of Reformation which
has made it somewhat dangerous now for your holiness to taste of, For, the Lamb
that was most richly seasoned in it, is now through this sudden and
unexpected, misfortune, Putrified, and the Duck being a watery foul, is quite
disolved and this dish by his Ma'tys special order, is to be left now to your
holiness disposal.


Pope, J am much bound to his Ma'ty for his gracious favor to me herein, J
shall be very careful through deliberation and mature consideration to study
for the most fittest disposal thereof during the time of my vicegerency here
and then return it again to his Ma'ties disposal. But I pray you my lord
Cardinal what do those coper vessels contain


Cared, May it please your holiness: this covered mess is a gallimofre or as
the Fleamine calls it a Hutchepot, wherein are sundry meats stued together: it
contains a certain number of beasts called, corrupt masters of the chancery:
and half a dozen corrupt clerks of the chancery, also 150. Of their puni
clerks commonly termed Aturnies in chancery. it also contains 6 new Aturnies
of the Court of reqvests and some 60 of their puny Clerks this Hutchepot is
seasoned with the spice of bribery, fallswittneses stieled Knights of the
post, a spice greatly in request in those Courts, especialy in the examiners
offices and the late Couentry, affidavit office but his Ma'tys special command
is to have this covered mess preserved in its present condition; least
contention should sease amongst the inhabitants of England: and unity and peace
take place: which cannot but tend much to his Ma'tys dettryment and loss of
dominion in that Kingdom: and to that end he has caused the same to be sealed
up: and to be convayed from Couentry to Manchester by the G^ulden Finche.


Pope. Good my Lord Cardjnal J beseech you, let his Ma'tys will and pleasure
herein be very carefully accomplished, for it concerns much his Ma'ties honor
and our safety.

But what is in this dish my Lord?


Card': this may it please your holiness is likewise a Hutchpot, containing
meats of sundry sorts and operations, it contains a certain number of
Prothonotaries, Registers, and Clarks of the Starrechamber, chancery, court of
requests King's Bench, common please, and the excheckquer, this galimofre is
seasoned with, subbornation of falce-witneses, falcyfiing of orders, and
decrees, it is garnished with the subtle practices of the renter warden of the
fleet and his imphes, as also with Killvert, killfart, killbennet, kill Bishop
and the like instruments of Lawyers gain, the opperation of this dish chiefly
consists, in the confusion of men's estates, to extract Gold out of all men's
purses, to suppress virtue and peace, and to advance eniquity and contention,
to wrong and oppress every man, and to do right to no man.

And this mess is also to be reserved for his Ma'tys Table.


Pope. Good my Lord Cardinal, J pray you let me taste of this mess, the
opperation whereof by your relation appears to be admirable, J wish from my
heart that J might also grow capeabel of that virtue. of extracting Gould out
of the English nation, as some of my predisessors have done before me, (J
confess) the study of this Art was begun by my Physician, most Laud ably, but
alas and we' is me, it was marred by a robustious storm of wind out of the
North and quite spoiled by a vehment shower of puritanical rain, And what is
this next mess my Lord.


Card' May it please your holiness, this is also a Hutchpot, containing sundry
course meats, as scriveners, brokers, vserres, iaylors, balifs sergeants,
informers, perjured Churchwardens, iustlers of the peace, and bumbalifs, this
mess is seasoned with parcehment, deceit, extortion, vsery opression,
murdering of Christian souls in prisons, through famine, false information,
injustice, neglect, and tirrany, and is garnished with a number of irreligious
Majors, Sherefs, Feoderies, escheaters, Clerks of the syse, Clerks of the
peace, Constables and headboroughs. But this mess is by his Ma'ties order to be
disposed of unto his servants.


Pope. Jndeed my lord Cared, my'thinkes this mess has a very bitter relish
with it, elce my mouth is quite out of taste, I conceive it to be a mess fit
only for his Ma'ties hell hounds, But What is this last mess.


Card'. I conceive this mess to be very well known to your holiness, for it is
seasoned with most of those operative spices that all the meat dresed in you
holiness kitchen is seasoned with, this mess contains diverse iusticiall birds
of midlesex as namely the long the hearne, the snape, the hooker the geaye, and
the likes of them. Seasoned with the fees and bribes of all the whores, and
theefes that live in Westminster, Coven-Garden, Hollborne, Grub-street,
Clarckenwell. Rosemary-lane. Turnbull-street, Rattcliff, Southwarke,
banke-side, and kent-street, this dish is also garnished with the
new-yeares-gifts, of the whores, theefes, and cutpurses, dwelling in the
forenamed several places, but this mess is by his Ma'ty, reserved for his
own peculiar pallatt.


Pope. Oh venerable Bead, Oh holy Garnet, O sanctified Fauxe, O reverent
Beckett, O beloved Raviliack, Campion, Watson, Parsons, Moorton, Sands, and
Admired Bellermine, I call you all to witness this day, wether you or any of
you: have ever as yet bin capeable of such a delicious feast: adorned with so
many varieties: beautified with so many several rareties, and seasoned with
such delectable spices. Sancte benedicto Ora pronobis.


And thus rendering all hvmble and hearty thanks: with all Reverence in all
obedience: unto his Ma'ty: our most dambenable prince and Protector: Lucifer:
king of sticks: and Phleget'on:

I remain his Ma'tys humble servant: and vicegerent: at his Ma'tys sole
disposal dureing life. PAPA. ROMANORUM. 666.


Advices and motives, to the honorable assembly in Parliament.
E. S. I.

E. W. J. S.

The stake's three Crowns, four nations gamsters are
There Is three to one, and yet no man that dare
Take these great odds, the cause is as they say,
The fourth, know's both our stock, and cards we play,
This turns the odds, and makes most gamsters think,
Wee'r but in jest, and play our cards and winck.
The set goes hard, when gamsters think it best,
Though three men vie it, the fourth setts his rest.
My Masters, you that undertake the game,
Look to it, your conutryes safety and her fame
Are now at stake, be careful how you cut
And deal, as known occasions put you to it.
The cards are strangely shufled, for your parts,
It Is odds, you ever get the ace of hearts.
Yet the five finger, and some helps beside,
Lie in the pack dispersed, be those your guide,
That you posess, to tell you what you want,
Least the mistake of one poor trick should daun^,
Your spirits quite, and make you fling away,
Your liberty, not to be lost by play,
Detest foul iugling, now it is in your powers,
Let none but square play pass, the game is youers.
For here you see, hell, Rome, and all their, trayn,
Plott to confound, all your good laws again.
Then have a care, expel Romes imphes, make sure,
Your laws and Liberties may still endure
To future ages, posterities then may,
Have cause to bless your memories for aye.
Lament Lament you Bushops all,
each wear his blackest gown:
Hang up your Rochets on the wall,
your pride is going down.
2
It needs must grieve each Romish heart,
to hear this sadd relation:
All Cannons are not worth a fart,
made in the Convocation.
3
The Bishops holy sinod, and
the Priests of Baal, that there:
Concented, and concluded all,
are now in griviovs fear,
4
To be deprived, of Priestly style,
of Coat Cannonicall:
And quite be banished this I Will,
they fear they must be all.
5
Ah, poor, ( Etcetera,) is now dead,
which greeues the Bishops most,
What they would have immortal made,
has now given up the Gostes
6
Alas, that new begotten oath,
like snow against the sun,
It did begin to melt away,
When the Parliament begun.
7
All Ceremonies are good cheap,
and I will tell you how:
The, Tippit, Hood, and Surpliss eke,
are good for nothing now.
8
And which I wis more woeful is,
and most their courage quayles:
There was a grievious murder made,
among their holy rayles.
9
Oh, when this sadd and heavy news,
unto that Synod came,
The Birds and beasts were in a muse,
ass, Wren, and Duck, and Lamb.
10
And then a dollfull ditty these,
did thus lament together:
Alaff* we must all run away.
when shall we run, and whether,
11
Shall we? with Windibanck to France,
or fly to Holland, where
The Finch is flone, for us a place,
before hand to prepare*
12
No quoath the Duck, we will Fly to Rome
and there rest without fear.
Of Parliament, and then the Lamb:
may come up in the rear.
13
And there we will drink a health to all
the puritans confusion,
That have thus strongly wrought our fall
by parliament conclusiou.
The Judges, and the Lawyers all,
Aturnies, procters Clarckes,
Soliciters, and Advocates,
Must now stand in their Sarks,
And penuance do for all their faults,
Their bribes they must restore,
Their cheates and tricks which they did use*
They practice must no more.
The people, long they have beguild,
And many a' one undonn,
Gods curss, their wealth for this does mel
As show is by the sun.
Their childrne and posterity,
The Gallous does devour
Themselves, have made a league with hell*
To reign still by his power.
God is the God of unity.
Of love and peace alone,
But these men, for deceit and strife,
The lik's of them there is none.
(...)probatum est.
Received by me, fountain of inquity this 22th of September 1641. By the help
of Judge Bribery: and the furtherance of Lawyer impiety: of Romanus Tretchery:
The Sum of 10 pounds of dambnable simplicity: 9 pounds of Supersticious
ignorance: 7 pound of idolatrus Folly, 6 pounds of wilful Stupidity: and 3
pounds of perverssnes: to and for the use of impatience: And by his appointment
to be delivered unto Gentiel prodigality: to and for the vce of Mistress
inconstancy, Daughter and sole-heyre unto Mistress Letchery: the grandchild of
Mistress Baudery: dwelling next door unto Mistress Beggary.

By the new Prison near the whipping thong:
At no great distance from Mr Justice Long.
Long has a long time bin a knave:
Receiving bribes from every slave.
Long ever has a shelter bin full sure:
For every thief: a Cutpurss: and a whore.
Long knows full well his Christmas how to keep:
On Cost of whorse, those are his only sheep.
His Capons: wood-Cocks: Herns: Snites: and Geayes:
Providers of good cheer on all assayes.
Long may he feast his body: fill his purss:
By such a crew of hellish imphes. Gods curss
Asuredly will fall on him and his:
And prove his fatal recompense for this.
Long may he be a knave: of such great fame
To all whores glory: his own eternal shame.
FINIS.

