A SERMON, Preached at St. PAUL'S Church in London, April 17. 1659.

And now Published at the desire of the Lord MAYOR, and the COURT of ALDERMEN.

By NATH. INGELO D.D. and Fellow of Eton Coll.

(...). Justin. Martyr. Printed for L. Fawn, at the Sign of the Parrot in S.
Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

Dr. Ingelo's Sermon.

TO THE Right Honorable The Lord MAYOR, And the Court of ALDERMEN, of the City
of London.
Right Honorable and Right Worshipful,
IT was an excellent saying of a Martyr, (...) (...): That is, Of all things,
by which we most industriously design the advancement of Gods service, there is
none so acceptable unto him, as those endeavors, by which we strive to make
men better. He needs not any of our services, but he accepts what we do in
conformity to his God-like actions: And as they do naturally terminate
themselves in the happiness of his Creatures, in which the Divine goodness
pleases it self: So He takes our hearty diligence in good part, when we show
our selves true Co-workers with Him. This is the greatest Honor, of which a
Creature is capable, and the highest instance of subserviency to our Maker. Our
Savior has said this in other words, John 5.17.
My Father works till now, and I work: My Father, though He rested upon the
Sabbath day from the works of Creation, having made the world, such as He had
designed it to be, yet He continues the work of the gracious preservation of
his Creatures; And I, having nothing of my own to do, V. 19.
work with Him: In his great love to me, He has shown me what He does, made me
partaker of his Counsels, and is always with me in rare instances of His
Presence, because I ever do what pleases him. John 8.29.


Our Lord knew with what great desire of restoring the state of the fallen
Creation, He was sent into the World; And being fully fatisfied in the
worthiness of the divine appointment, rejoicing that it was so acceptable to
the Father, that He should become a Savior, He omitted no fit means to bring
that purpose to effect; For which He received publicly great approbations from
above, declared not only in words, but other most significant Testimonies.

It was my design to throw a mite into this Treasury by the preaching of this
Sermon; which exhorts us unto the pursuit of Goodness, that by it we may
attain a noble conformity to God, and do honor to Him by the lively
expressions of it in our actions. As men can be made good only by resemblance
of that Archetype Image, so I know nothing, by which one may so plainly
manifest the excellency of Goodness, as by making it appear to be the Glory
of God, and that none do truly worship him, but such as are like Him in
disposition and practice.

All the world has acknowledged the Imperfection of Humane Nature: And those
which have had the happiness to understand better than others, have perceived
that its defects are only to be made up by a participation of a Divine Nature.
Neither have they more clearly discerned, that the perfections of God are the
infallible patterns of all worthy imitation, then they have confidently
pronounced, that the chief thing in Divinity is Goodness.

In the early days of the Heathen world, this notion was so deeply implanted
in their minds, that when Pythagoras had raised the Italians out of the
miseries of vice by his excellent precepts, and formed them into the happiness
of a well-governed life; whilst their neighbors wondered at their felicity,
which they themselves perceived to be true by their inward sense, and general
experience; what said they? (...) (...), ^amblich. de vita^ Pythag. cap, 6.
etc. Thenceforth they reckoned him among their Gods, they took him for a good
Doemon, and lover of mankind: And whilst every body gave their opinion; some
said, he was one of the heavenly Gods come down in the shape of men to teach
the world, and to reform humane Naure, being (...), an happy spur to prick on
sluggish men to virtue and happiness, than which a greater good could not come
to men. So the Lycaonians, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles, seeing one
of Lystra, Act. 14.11.
which was a creeple from his Mothers womb, enjoy the use of his feet by the
charity of Saint Paul; cried out: The Gods are come down to us in the likeness
of men. As they esteemed God to be the Author of all Good, they were right;
but thinking every good thing to be God; by a gross mistake they brought in
Idolatry; being not able to distinguish between the giver, and receiver, or
between Him, that was the Original spring, and such, as by the Fountains leave,
derived the streams to others, taking every good thing for the best of all.

Whether there had a tradition continued to them from the beginning, That God
in the similitude of mortal man, should bestow great blessings upon the world,
I know not; If they had, it was made good in Christ, or God manifest in the
flesh: But they plainly declared, How much they believed Goodness convertible
with God, as also, in that, rather than they would attribute any evil to Him,
as indeed they ought not, being ignorant to answer the Question; (...); they
would needs set up another Principle for the Author of ^vill: not discerning,
it seems, that the Creature, upon which goodness is derived, but not immutably
fixed, might degenerate into evil by its own will, and so bring in mischief
without setting up an Anti-God.

As these things do sufficiently declare that inseparable connection, that is
between the Nature of God, and supreme Goodness: So concerning his worship, it
has been pronounced on all hands, that there is no instance so considerable
and proper, as the imitation of his goodness. They said of old, (...), Then we
worship God best, when we imitate him most. This is a most reasonable service;
For, how highly must they needs honor the Divine Nature, that count
themselves, and all things else utterly contemptible, so far as they are unlike
unto it? And have no Standard, by which they estimate worth, besides the
resemblance of that Holy Image, and knowing that to be such, do carefully
endeavor to make themselves and others partakers of it.

By these things we see what need we have to acquaint our selves well with the
Divine Nature, and to take care, that we understand God aright: (not only)
because true apprehensions of Him are necessary to bottom a good confidence,
and are the roots upon which Love, and Adoration grow, but also, because if we
form wrong imaginations concerning God, we shall quote him for a defense of our
own unworthiness, and make the blasphemy of our error very hardly curable. It
was an unanswerable Argument, by which the ancient defenders of christian
Religion reproved the folly of the Heathen world, for attempting to introduce
virtue into men, Just. Martyr, Theophilus, Antiochenus, Athenagoras.
and yet acknowledged vices, and enormities in the Gods, whom they adored: For
when they had said all they could to shame a sinner, which was guilty of the
worst crimes, (...), that is, He will make a fair evasion of punishment by
alleging, that it is no sin to imitate the Gods. Clemens Alexandrinus quoting
against the Greeks that ugly passage in Homer concerning Mars and Venus, says,
(...), (...). Away with your song Homer, it is not good, it teaches Adultery.
So the wicked Hypocrites in David's time, utterly unwilling to raise their low
souls up unto God, would needs call him down to themselves; And that they
might continue more securely, what they were, they would needs persuade
themselves, that God was such as themselves. So the Dirty Ranters of our times,
that they might wallow more quietly in filthiness, thought they had Apologized
sufficiently for their villainies, by saying, That every thing is God.

It is not impertinent to this matter also, that we take notice, that there are
many things in God, which are not imitable by us; because they suit not our
Nature, or else transcend our State. Which is no wonder at all, for there are
diverse things in the created world, which though they are in themselves
Excellencies, yet do not fit our constitutions: A man cannot shine as the Sun
does, nor is he strong as an Oak.

How shall we guide our selves then? Easily. Such as will be at leisure to
think, will soon perceive many imitable Perfections in God: And, that we may
miss none, God manifest in the flesh, both by word and deed, has showed us,
what is good, and what the Lord requires us to follow; And, having commanded us
to do nothing, but what he has done before us, He has both given us
encouragement by showing us the practicablenesse of God-like virtues in our
Nature, and has excellently taught us the performance of our Duty.

By his Gospel, that commands us to be perfect, as our Heavenly Father is
perfect; it is plainly revealed, wherein that perfection consists, as in Love,
Charity, Mercifulness, Forgiveness, Righteousness, Purity; and indeed the
complete beauty of all Holiness. I need not transcribe the Scriptures, which
have pointed out this truth to the life, you have them before you. I shall only
write an excellent passage out of Justin Martyrs Epistle, which he wrote to
Diognetus, in which they are very well summed up; His words are these, (...),
etc. It is not blessedness to have dominion over others, nor to seek the
advantages of a worldly condition, nor to oppress those, which are below us;
neither can any man by such things imitate God; For they belong not to his
Greatness. But to bear your neighbors burdens, and by how much you are above
others, so much the more to do good to those, which are below you; and to
relieve those which want, with such things, as you have received from God,
makes you a God to those, who receive them from you: This is to be a true
follower of God.

To conclude, since by the premises we see laid before us, the divine pattern
of necessary Duties, God grant, that none of us be like the man, of whom Saint
James speaks; Who looking into the Law of Liberty, the Royal Law of our King,
that frees us from the slavery of sin, and death, takes notice of his face, and
peradventure of many spots there, but having beheld himself goes away, and
forgets what manner of man he was, nor remembers to wash them off: But rather,
that we may look carefully upon our selves, as we are represented by this holy
mirror, and continue, till we understand perfectly, what we ought to be, and
then not forget to reform our selves wholly according to the prescriptions,
that are there, and so attain the blessedness of the Gospel, of which none but
obedient Christians are capable. You have great abilities, and constant
opportunities, Let the same mind be in you, that was in Christ Jesus, who in
the fullness of time put on the form of a srevant to save the world. By being in
the world, as he was, that is in the same temper, and practice, ((...)) you
shall know, That you are of the truth, and secure your confidence in God for
the present, and afterward, through his unspeakable mercies, you shall be
counted worthy to stand before the son of Man in the great day of his most
glorious appearance: Which Grace that you may obtain, is the prayer of

Eaton Coll. July 26. 1659. Your affectionate Servant in Christ Jesus, NATH.
INGELO.

1 Cor^ 10. 31. Whether therefore ye eat or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all
to the Glory of God. SAint Paul having received a Question in a Letter from the
Corinthians, viz. Whether it was lawful to be present at an Idol Feast, or to
eat any thing that was sold in the Shambles, if it had been offered to an Idol
before (either by the Owner, who having offered a part, devoted the whole; or
the Priest peradventure having brought his portion to the market) gave an
answer to it, Chap. 8. and in this Chapter explains himself a little further.

As to the first branch of the Question, he answers expressly, That they might
not be present at an Idol Feast, it being a part of the worship, or at least
such an Appurtenance, as none could partake of without sin, the Heathens
offering part to the Devils, and feasting upon the rest. Those which pretend
fellowship with Christ, as all Christians do in the Feast of the Holy
Eucharist, must take heed of this Idolatrous Communion, lest they put Devils in
Competition with Christ, who came to destroy their works.

As to the other part of the Question, concerning things offered to Idols, and
afterward sold in the Shambles; he says they might eat without scruple,
because they knew an Idol to be nothing, and that the Earth, with the meats and
fruits thereof (as also the Sea, Psalm. 95. 5.) belong to God, and are held of
us in his right, not of Ceres, or any other heathenish God, or Goddess.
Therefore a good man need make no question; but if any guest at the Table say,
This or that portion was offered to an Idol, then he must forbear to eat of
it; Why? he accounts an Idol nothing; what is it the worse? It Is true, it is
not; yet forbear for his sake, for he esteems an Idol something, and worships
it as a God, with the oblation of meat: and will by thy eating, after he told
thee what it was, be confirmed in his sin, and so through thy true knowledge
uncharitably managed, thy brother perishes, whom Christ in love died to save.
Thy Master preferred the salvation of a sinner before his own life, and thou will not forbear the tasting of a little meat, it may be but once to prevent
thy brothers damnation. Besides, thou do indiscreetly admini^ter an occasion
to confirm his foolish estimation of an Idol, above the true God, to whose
Honor we are to refer the actions of our whole life, and whose Glory can
scarce by any thing be so advanced by us, as by a prudent charity: so much may
serve for the explication of the Coherence of the Text.

The verse contains one of those two comprehensive principles, which divide the
substance of Religion between them, and are of such important use to a good man
in all his ways, that he can never neglect either of them, but he must needs
miscarry.

The first is Dependence upon God, that is, a constant clasping about Almighty
Goodness, which has given us a Being, but not without an absolute necessity
of cleaving still to it; without which, we cannot support our selves, as we
perceive by that Impotency and feebleness, which we often feel in our selves.
Alas! we should sink down into nothing, and so would the whole Creation, were
it not for that omnipotent life, which penetrates through all things, to
comfort and sustein them. Whosoever cease this duty to God: the first Cause
of all things, tears himself off from his root; withers, and becomes
unprofitable to God and himself, and grows as stupidly as the Trunks of
senseless Trees, upon roots that afford them sap and juice, though they know
it not.

The second is a sincere ordination which is a consequent of the former: for it
is as absurd morally, not to live to God, as it is impossible naturally to live
of our selves.

This Latter is the exhortation of Saint Paul in the Text, and I have the
rather chosen it for the subject of this discourse, because though it is by
many much talked of, yet few things are more mistaken, and none more neglected.

In the explication of this great point, I shall endeavor to 1. State the true
notion of Gods glory. 2. Show how we may glorify God in all we do. 3.
Demonstrate that we ought to do so. 4. Give notice of some things by which God
and Christian Religion, have been much dishonored.



excellent Philosopher, who going to describe Gods nature, says thus; (...);
Max. Tyr. Dissert.
i. e. Now what manner of thing should I be whilst I speak of God? what beauty
of speech, what light of apprehension revealing it self in clear expressions,
what harmony of well chosen words, is needful to describe to my self and
others, so great a matter? This he might well say, considring that by reason of
the excellency of Gods Nature, the darkness of our minds, and the poverty of
speech, it is difficult to think or speak any thing worthy of him. Some by
reason of the unworthiness of their souls, are apt extremely to debase the
glory of God, and it is possible so far to mistake, that, in stead of praising
him, we may blaspheme. And it is an acknowledged truth, that our Religion
depends not upon a slight extramission of ill grounded expressions, or shallow
affections, but upon a deep intramission of Gods real excellencies.

That we might not mistake the Divine Glory, he, who only could, has told us
what it is. When a worthy man, and one very familiar with God made this prayer
to him, Exodus 33. 18, 19.
I beseech thee show me thy glory: he received a grant of his prayer in these
words, I will make my goodness pass before thee; which is called the Glory of
God, Verse 22. Thou shall see my back parts, for my face cannot be seen: thou
shall see as much as can be shown, or is fit for thee to see; my Name shall be
told thee, by which I glory to be known. In the next Chapter, when the Divine
Glory passed by, this proclamation was made, Verse. 5. 6.
The Lord, the Lord, God, Merciful and Gracious, long-suffering, abundant in
goodness, and truth, etc. This was a glorious Name indeed, and worthy of God.

Moses saw God appearing after this manner more then once, for God showed
himself to him decked with the Glory of his goodness, when he came forth in
the Creation of all things, and rejoiced to see every thing made good. Genesis 1.
ult
And God saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good: as if
he had said, God having in rich benignity made all things in a decent
correspondency to his own goodness, pleased himself as an artificer does, when
his work answers the beautiful Idea's of his own mind.

Psalm. 104.
The Psalmist has expressed this in plain words; After he had taken an exact
view of God, as he appeared decked with the Glory of his works, for so he
begins; My God, thou art great, clothed with Honor and Majesty, thou coverest
thy self with light, as with a Crystal robe; etc. He adds, ver. 31. The Glory
of the Lord shall endure for ever, the Lord shall rejoice in his works. Verse.
31.


From the forementioned Scriptures, we perceive that Gods Glory is the Divine
Goodness, which shines forth in his works, and those merciful condescensions
by which he seeks to make his creatures partakers of his own blessedness,
according to their capacities. Whilst this goodness passes before our eyes,
we see God as a bright Sun incircled with his own out-spread rays of Light and
Love, being capable indeed of no other Glory, but what accrues to him from the
displaying of his own goodness, no more than the Sun can be seen but by his
own Beams. He which can receive nothing, if he will have Glory, must give. That
which may be known of God, shining in Nature, taught the Philosophers the same
truth. Hierocles speaks very well to this purpose, (...), etc. i. e. There can
be no reasonable cause given for the Creation of all things, but the essential
goodness of God, for he is good by Nature, and perfectly free from envy.
Other causes besides this may be assigned, but they savor more of humane
imperfections, then correspond with Gods blessedness, and perfection.

So Simplicius, (...), etc. i. e. God having an omnipotent power and infinite
good will, made nothing evil, but all things good; as much as could be, that
is, as much as every thing is capable of his goodness.

So that if we take notice of the world, (...), the free efflux of the Divine
goodness, we may easily perceive the design of God in the Creation, to have
been like that of an excellent Limner, who having filled a large Room with
diverse Tables, some bigger, some less; beautifies them all according to their
proportions, with his skilful hand. Here also we may receive an account of the
difference that is in the degrees of goodness and perfection among the
Creatures. The variety is a great piece of the beauty of this lovely frame.
There is one glory of the Sun, another of the Moon, another of the Stars. A
suit of Arras Hangings cannot be made without several colors, and those laid
differently upon worsted, silk, silver, and Gold, formed into diverse Images.
Music would be a pitiful thing, if there were but one note or tone; without
higher and lower sounds; we should want the delectablenesse of Harmony, which
is more grateful, as the notes of which it consists are not the same, but
tunably different.

Those things which seem but little, in comparison of others, have much as to
their own capacity, and are often more admirable then greater, for in instances
where it was not expected, as he said, (...), i.e.

They show an Almighty skill in little.



In the highest things God ascends far above the reach of our eyes, and in the
lowest he stoops to the remotest proportions of possibility, and his Glory
shines through them all, whilst he fills each measure of reception with due
participations of goodness, which is his own Image; and his goodness is over
all his works.

By this we see, That God made the world for his glory, out of mere grace,
willing to bestow happiness upon others. He was not oppressed with the
fulness of his blessedness, but like a voluntary spring poures forth the
waters of life upon the world. I will rejoice over them to do them good. He is
pleased wi^h being a Benefactor, and is delighted, when he makes others happy.

Hence God was most justly worshipped by the Church throughout all generations,
as the Benign Father of the Creation; Father, being a known name of Love,
which he expressed in his uninterrupted care of all things in the respective
ages of the world, but especially in the fullness of time, when to make up the
sad ruins of the lapsed, Creation, he put the breaches of it under the hand of
his beloved Son, who came upon the stage, as the express image of his
person, and the brightness of his glory, which has been mentioned, for in him
it shined most clearly. He brought salvation in his Name, Good will in his
Nature; His Errand, which we call the Gospel, what was it but the Love of the
Father proclaimed by his beloved Son? As we have it epitomized by the
Evangelist, Ioh. 3. 16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten
son, that whosoever believes on him, should not perish, but have everlasting
life.

This word our Savior verified with works of transcendent charity, for he went
up and down doing good, expressing a great pity to the bodies, but much more to
the souls of men, and after the service of his whole life, which was an
Exemplary performance of charity, he made his death also a great proof of his
love, which being stronger then sin and death, he offered himself upon the
Cross by a powerful spirit of benignity, and became the Redeemer of miserable
sinners, so that the Angels Hymn was extremely pertinent, when they sung Glory
to God on High, for the good will which was expressed below, by the appearance
of Christ Jesus, whom not only Angels, but wise and good men, saw, and
acknowledged his glory to be as the glory of the only begotten Son of God, full
of Grace and Truth. The fullness of true goodness was the glorious Image of the
Father, shining in the face of the Son. When he went away, just upon his
return, he said; Joh. 17.4.
Father, I have glorified thee, and verse 26^ he tells us how, I have declared
thy Name; what name but that which was proclaimed long before, as the glory of
God? withal, he leaves this title Love, as his own remembrance, by which he
would be acknowledged in the world, and the badge of his Disciples: Hereby
shall all men know you to be mine, if you love one another.

One that well knew the truth of this Glory, as a genuine follower of Christ
his Lord, adorns himself with it. Having expressed all love and good will in
endeavoring the salvation of the Gentiles, he pleases himself in the good of
others, which he had furthered after this manner; What is our Hope, or Crown of
rejoicing? are not even you in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his
coming? for you are our Glory and Joy. Divine Paul, but never more then now
Divine! for the glory of God shined out of his mouth, (as Porphyrie said, that
Plotinus his soul did) when he spoke.

So much being premised or do all things to his glory.

Divines use a distinction of glorification, which is not improper to be
mentioned in this place.

One is, Perfectio objecti glorificati, and thus God does glorify his
creatures.

Perfectio subjecti glorificantis, a perfection in the person who is said to
give glory, by which he is able to take a due notice of the excellencies which
are in the glorified object, but adds nothing to it; and thus we are said to
glorify God.

By which we see that the word glorify is of a quite different signification,
when it is applied to God, and to us. For it is a true rule, Talia sunt
praedicata; qualia permittuntur a subjectis. What is said of God and us in the
same words, puts on a vast difference of sense, when it is referred to his acts
and ours. What belongs to God I have discoursed already, that small matter that
we reach to, I shall explain in a few particulars.

1. We do honor to God, Father said, God may be represented to his
disparagement by the unwise. Therefore whenever we think or speak of God, we
should be sure to use no (...), no poor grovelling expressions, or creeping
imaginations, which fall utterly below the worthiness of so glorious a person.
Since he can receive no glory by addition of any thing to what he is, let us
not foolishly endeavor to take away from him, by obscuring that which he has
revealed himself to glory in, by attributing to him any Temper, Disposition, or
Design, that is unworthy of him. Let us raise our thoughts of God as high as we
can, for by that which has been said already, it appears how far all
unworthiness is removed from God. He neither made the world at first, or
preserves it now for any self-interest: what Julian said of AEsculapius (in his
fortieth Epist.) (...) (...), may be justly applied to the true Savior, viz.
That he does not heal men in hope of reward, but does every where express his
own goodness, by way of discipline.

He gains nothing by the exercise of his native goodness, but whilst he
relieves those that need him, he teaches them to do likewise. What glory or
loveliness is in the Creation, which he had not before in himself? what could
he attain out of himself?

It is true, the works of God do praise him; it is but decent that they should,
it is impossible that they should not. All excellent things honor their
Author. The heavens declare the glory of God. Wheresoever the voice of the
Creatures is heard, they sing his praise. This is no greater wonder, then that
the fire burns. Who can conceal the light of the Sun, or confine the sent of
sweet odours? (...). The beauty of excellent good things cannot be hid. But
though all wise beholders will praise God, the Author of all good works, yet
we must not think, that God aimed at such a thing, as being ambitiously
desirous of his creatures applause, which is below the Temper of a virtuous
man. Clemens Alexand. has informed us better. Orat. ad Graec.
(...), i.e. God shows himself freely to his Creatures he does not sell his
truth. It is true, he accepts the love of his creatures, and is well pleased
with just adorations, not that he receives any advantage thereby, or is tickled
with praise, but he rejoices that his creatures do as they should, and conform
to original goodness and truth. We pay what we owe: though he needs it not,
as the same Father, (...), i. e. We return to God, who needs it not, the
worship of well-composed souls, as a grateful acknowledgement of the great
Landlord, and a small rent for the habitation which he has given us in this
world.

Whatsoever we do in affectionate worship of God, is but a just employment, and
a rare improvement of our faculties. What are our understandings and affections
good for, but to know and love God? He accepts our gifts, not that he wants
them, but to comfort us with his acceptance, and that he may have opportunity
to reward sincere expresses of duty, when, as we ought, we give him his own.
Our most spiritual devotions add nothing to God, but they do enlarge our
capacities for him; whilst we worship God as we ought, (...), said the
Philosopher, we grow bigger, and are filled with God. The more we submit our
selves to God in due posture of obedience, the more we are exalted in wisdom
and goodness.

Our Saviors words are incomparable to this purpose, Mark 2.27
when the blind Pharisees made such a show of zeal for the religious observation
of the Sabbath in honor of God, that they would needs look at it as a great
crime in the Disciples, who when they were hungry, pulled ears of corn to
satisfy the necessities of Nature; our Lord answers, The Sabbath was made for
man, not man for the Sabbath: i. e. Though the Law of the Sabbath, and other
exercises of Religion, s cem to be made for the glory of God, yet they were
indeed designed and appointed by God for man's bodily and spiritual good. For
neither man, nor Sabbath can advance his glory a jot, but the great Lord of the
Sabbath has respected our happiness in all his institutions.

It is fit that all the world should appear before God in humble reveren^e, by
the right of his nature, He is to be had in reverence of all that dwell round
about him, but all the use which he makes of such opportunities, is to bestow
his blessings. It is a vain thing to offer ought but empty Pitchers to the
Fountain of Life. (...), i. e. Thou can not honor God by giving any thing
to him, but by making thy self meet to receive from him. If we think to pour
out our own fullness upon his Altar, we make our selves richer then God, and
him beholden to us. So the Apostle convinced the Heathens of vanity, in
thinking that they did God a courtesy by presenting their oblations; He is not
worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, seeing he gives to
all life, and breath, and all things.

A good man adores God the more affectionately, because that, though he needs
not us, yet he was so good, as to make all things happy, and then takes delight
to see their natures made partakers of his beauty, and to rejoice in the
proportions, which they bear to his goodness, and symmetries with his truth.

Neh. 9.3.
It is a great part of our doing honor to God, to think that he is exalted
above all blessing and praise, as Nehemiah said. What are all our names of
praise to God. Just. Martyr has expressed this in my mind excellently, (...),
i. e. as it was the custom to honor God with the most precious of material
things, so also in names of praise: not that God does need them, but we do, to
declare our thoughts of him. And he needs not them neither. It was a noble
saying of Simplicius (...), i. e. God needs not our good life, nor our best
apprehensions of him. In our best thoughts we do not comprehend him, and if we
could think more honorably of him by an hundredfold, what is he better for
our thinking of him? neither does he need our holy life: If thou do well,
what profit is it to him? Thou may do good to a man as thy self, but thy
goodness extends not to him. And if he need not our holiness, much less does
he want our sins to advance his glory. If thou sinnest, what is it to him? Thy
disobedience will hurt thy self, and may prejudice thy neighbor, but it
reaches not to him; and if he lose nothing by our sin, what can he get by our
punishment? It is true, sin is in the world, but God brought it not in. It is
as he said, (...), and men and devils had never been permitted to bring it in,
but that God can make a good use of evil; but that use is not to advance
himself. They are pitiful people that need the faults of others, to set off
their own low perfections. But he will get glory by punishing it, that is, by
making the sinner miserable. Truly it is fit that sin should be punished, but
alas! if God need not our happiness to make him glorious, much less will our
misery contribute any thing to such a purpose. What glory is it to the God of
Israel to hunt a flea upon the Mountains? It was Domitian only that pleased
himself with killing flies, God delights not in the death of a sinner. His
goodness leads us to repentance. Its Cruelty, not Justice, to love punishment,
except to defend righteousness, to reclaim the corrigible, and to make
examples of the impoenitent. God is so far from taking pleasure in our
miseries, that as he said, (...), i. e, he is careful of us, as his kindred,
when we fall.

Destruction is in the world, but it came not from above, it is of our selves,
as the Prophet says. It is no plant of Gods setting, and has its roots only
in sin: when God strikes, though the blows are just, yet he counts the act
strange. Goodness is natural to him, he does most willingly help; when he
hurts, he is forced to it. So Tertullian, Lib. 2. contra Marcion.
Vsque ad delictum hominis, Deus a primordio tantum bonus, exinde judex and
severus. Ita prior bonitas Dei secundum Naturam, severitas posterior secundum
Causam. Illa ingenita, haec accidens, etc. God was good from the beginning,
till sin came, after that he became a severe Judge, so that the goodness of
God was first, being his Nature, severity later by reason of sin. That inbred,
this accidental: Yet this severity is good too, Illum enim bonum, judicares
Deum, etc. For would you count him a good God, who should make men worse for
want of punishment?

As he does not strike, Hosea 11. 7, 8.
till he be highly provoked, so then he is loath to do it. My people are bent
to backsliding from me: though they called them to the most High, none at all
would exalt him. For all this God is loath to destroy them. How shall I give
thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee Israel? How shall I make thee as
Admah! etc. We will not think that these were Rhetorical flourishes, or
Court-like expressions, but that a real truth of affection was declared by
them. So in other places he says he did not punish, till there was no remedy.
It is so necessary, that Righteousness should not be forgotten, or thrust out
of the world by impudent sinners; that we must needs acknowledge the root of
punishment to be goodness, as he said, for he strikes because we have
transgressed the law of indispensible right, and grieved the indwelling God. Is
it not goodness to hinder us, though with afflictions, from grieving and
quenching the spirit, which has planted it self in us as a root of holy light
and joy? If God should indulge us in sin, we might cry out, o Deum veritatis
praevaricatorem! Hoc erit bonitas imaginaria: disciplina, phantasma.

Since we see by these things how far God is exalted above all unworthiness,
let us take heed, lest by carelessness, impotency of mind, and lowness of
soul, we reproach God, when we think to magnify him. Let us take heed lest we
bring down the hight of the divine glory by making it conform to our
Idiopathies. Clem. Alexand. reports out of Posidippus, how Praxiteles, when he
was to make the Image of Venus, expressed in the picture the form of one
Cratina whom he loved, by which means the miserable Idolaters worshipped the
painters Mistress for a Goddess. It is a rule in Divinity, that we are to
remove all imperfections from God. We misrepresent God, if we report any thing
of him, that makes him not the most noble object of Love, Trust, and Admiration
to his creatures, but rather makes him to be hardly thought of by them. Let us
beware of harboring any conceit that there is the least of Craft, Cruelty, or
Injustice in his disposition, designs, or providence. In so doing, we shall
both blaspheme him, and indispose our selves to love, trust, or obey him. It
were a mad impertinency in a child to praise his Father by reporting, that he
was a man of such parts, that he could easily outwit poor people, and that he
did use to do it. Shall that go for the praise of wisdom, which was only an
accusation for vile craft? It is not only Ambition, but cruelty to seek to rise
by the fall and ruin of others.

It was a heathen that said, God makes a play of humane affairs, and sports
with men as balls. It is a disgrace to the merciful Creator and just Governor
of all things, to despise the concernments of his creatures. If we represent
God, as unjust in his praescriptions, cruel in his designs, or unequal in his
providence; we do as much as say, that the Fountain of light sends forth
darkness, that the spring of sweetness is bitter, and endeavor to make
Heaven and Hell meet. We talk of Cannibals, with abhorrence for greedy eating
of men's flesh, and shall we think that God takes pleasure in the destrustion of
souls?

There were three pieces of Atheism, which men by the light of Nature
condemned of old.

The first was a direct denial of the Deity, which very few ever stooped unto.

The second a denial of Providence; which was laid to the charge of Epicurus.

The third, that God governs, but without goodness and justice; and of this
many have been guilty, who could find no other cause of their afflictions, but
Gods carelessness to save good men, as they supposed themselves to be, from
suffering. Those which make God the Author of sin, overthrow the
righteousness of his nature and providence, and if we at any time quarrel with
his dispensations toward us, and think God deals hardly with us, do we not
accuse him of injustice, and the want of benignity? when the guilt of our sins
begins to encompass us, and the iniquity of our doings treads upon our heels,
if we attempt an evasion by laying our sins upon God, for not giving us garce,
or suffering us to be tempted, or I know not what, do we not accuse his
administration, that he is rigorous, or has outwitted us? It is the greatest
disgrace of a Governor, as the Philosopher observed long agone, (...), to lay
snares for those whom he governs. But this cannot be said of God, for his
Nature being goodness, that must needs be the measure of his providence. This
is the first way to honor God, in all things to preserve worthy thoughts of
him.

we carefully take heed lest we worship him in such a manner, or with such
oblations, as make our service rather complement and flattery, then true love
and solid Adoration. Throughout the Holy writ God has declared a deep
detestation of such worship and worshipers, and seeks only such as worship him
in spirit and truth; that is, which present no outward instance of worship, but
they put also their heart and soul in it. When it is otherwise; what says
God? These people worship me with their mouths, and honor me with their lips,
but their hearts are far from me. If such worshipers had nothing else base in
them; it is bad enough to make them odious to God, that they think he does not
know or hate such spirits. He being a spirit full of truth and goodness, will
be worshipped only in Spirit and Truth. Hypocrites are not only impotent in
their thoughts, but sordid extremly, if they should think that God is of such a
Make, that he is pleased with flatte^ies, or that he does not see and contemn
the wickedness of such as feignedly court him.

The Heathen world looked sometimes upon their gods as implacable Tyrants, and
reviled them at their pleasure; which was a strange foolery, to daigne to
worship, what they durst reproach. At other times they looked upon them, though
as angry things, yet easily to be pleased again, and then they would kill a
swine or a sheep, and all was well. In which they showed themselves wicked,
ignorant of God, and base flatterers. This absurd Religion was by some wise men
of their own condemned and rejected for vain superstition.

Maximus Tyrius, in the Chapter which he wrote of the difference of friendship
and flattery, has these words in reference to Religion, (...), etc. i. e. if
there be any fellowship between God and men, we may say that a truly good man
is the friend of God, but the superstitious a flatterer only. The true lover of
God is blessed, but the superstitious is miserable. For the first, knowing his
true love to God comes boldly to him, him, the other dejected with the
conscience of his Hypocrisy, comes with servile fear, devoid of trust, and
dreads God, no otherwise then as a Tyrant.

When such worshipers come to God, will he accept them? no: neither will any
wise man receive a Gift, which he knows to be given with a wicked mind. Those
which with feigned submission in outward ordinances, pretend to acknowledge
God, but do not love and obey him in their souls, are superstitious
flatterers, no true lovers or worshipers of God. And as they have small comfort
in their souls, (for what is the Hope of an Hypocrite?) so with God they have
no estimation, for he accounts their applications, as they are, a dising^nuous
flattery, and a mere superstitious address.

The Emperor was not out, when he said, we should not (...), that we should
not flatter God, but worship him discreetly; and in another place he gives a
very good reason, (...), i. e. for God regards not fine words, but truth.

It is very observable, that when David became sensible of the abuse which he
had put upon the Divine Majesty, by his scandalous disobedience, he attempted
not to make reparation of Gods honor by slaying a beast, more worthy to live
then himself, yet a very poor compensation, but says expressly, for he knew
Gods mind; Psalm. 51. 16.
Thou desire not sacrifice, else would I give it: thou delightest not in
burnt offering. An hypocrite would have made his cattle bleed, and thought he
had made good sarisfaction for his own with the lives of others, and have
pleaded the commands given in this point to Moses. But David understood his
duty better, and was loath after so grievous sins, to make such an unacceptable
repentance, and therefore he offered his own broken heart, crushed with
ingenuous shame and sorrow.

If any demand why David waved external oblations, and made so light of outward
applications, since the Ceremonies of the Jewish Religion were instituted by
God, and as yet the Laws which enjoined them, were in force. I answer, his
meaning was, that they were never appointed or accepted for the principal
instances of Gods worship, or so to be looked upon by religious persons.

They were not from the beginning. Enock was not circumcised, neither was Noah,
yet one of them was translated to glory without seeing of death, which was an
eminent Testimony that he was acceptable to God, and the other was saved in an
Ark of wood, when all the world besides his family, perished by water. Romans 4
10.
Abraham himself was declared blessed, before he was circumcised. Upon which
consideration the Father told Tripho the Jew, who thought himself somebody,
because he was under the discipline of Abraham. I. Mart. Dial. cum Tryph.
(...), etc. If one be a Scythian, or Persian, and have the knowledge of God
and Christ, and observe the indispensable rules of everlasting righteousness;
(...), He is circumcised with a good and profitable circumcision, so that when
Christ pulled down the Jewish hedges, he brought things to the first state, and
made external ceremonies of no less value, then they were at the first.

We may add to this, that When they pleased themselves highly in their
external rights, they were so far wide of the divine intention, that he tells
them that it were all one if they had let them alone; Psalm. 50.8.
I will not reprove thee for thy sacrifices, etc. I am so far from demanding a
scrupulous account concerning these performances, that I am rather cloid with
them. So he told them by the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 1.11.
To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices? I am full of burnt
offerings of Rams. Jer. 7.22.
Bring no more vain oblations, etc. And because they urged the Divine command,
by Jeremiah he tells them, that he spoke not to their Fathers, nor commanded
them in the day that he brought them out of the land of Egypt, concerning
burnt-offerings or sacrifices. One would think that these words should
strangely amuse the people, and that they thought the Prophet mad to speak
against the known precepts, wherein God had commanded these things.

Unto this, two things may be said.

God accepted them by way of condescension, and in regard of the hardness of
their hearts; they were a stiff-necked people, and therefore God put a hard
yoke upon their necks, which as the Apostle says, they were not able to bear,
(...), I. Mar^yr.
i. e. neither does God receive sacrifices from you, neither did he command you
from the bebeginning to offer them, as if he needed them, but for your sins.
What he meant by sins he expresses (...), by reason of their idolatries.
Since they had such a mind to offer sacrifices, that they would offer them to
God or Idols, he commanded them to offer them to him.

Chrysostom.
This Chrysostom takes notice of, and says it is no wonder that he abolished
them quite by Christ Jesus, for he did not care for them from the beginning,
(...), How then did he require them? by way of condescension to their weakness.

The Author of the Constitutions affirms, that till the provocation of the
golden Calfe, and their other idolatries, sacrifices were not imposed, and then
it was only, (...), that being clogged with these troublesome yokes, they might
be forced from Idolatry.

He never did allow of them as commutations or dispensations for inward
goodness, true righteousness, the Love of God, Charity, Humility, and such
like; which are (...), everlastingly good, of their own nature excellent;
(...), as our Savior calls them, the weightier matters of the Law, upon which
God looks with a regard suitable to their intrinsecall value and worth. The
externals were at the best but figures of heavenly things, and shall God accept
of the sign for the thing signified? they are at the best but carnal, and
therefore poor rudiments, as the Apostle calls them; but when they are
separated from inward goodness, they are not only beggarly, but false, like
wooden boxes, with nothing in them.

If God made no more account of external significations, when they were so
many, so pompous, so costly; shall we think that he will now accept those few,
which he has left in his Church, and has revealed to us the necessity of a
spiritual worship? since the new Law has required a perpetual Sabbath, or rest
from elvill works, shall we reckon it godliness to be idle one day in a week?
shall we think our selves clean from sin, which we affect and practice, by
being once baptized with water? This made the Jewish oblations and rites so
abominable to God, they made account by the performance of externals, to make a
supply of inward disobedience, and ungodliness. When you fasted, did you fast
to me? no, but to themselves; for by the bodily fast, they thought to commute
for the spiritual, which was, to relieve the oppressed, to feed the hungry, to
cease from sin, to mortify the old man. When they thought by carnal
circumcision to dispense with themselves for the inward, which is the purifying
of the soul from all foul affections, God declared constantly to them by his
Prophets, that he would punish them in the same rank with the wicked Gentiles,
because they also, that is, the Jews, were uncircumcised in heart.

God is so far from accounting himself honored with fair pretenses, that he
does abominate them, as the coverings of Hypocrites, who being loath to be at
the pains of true goodness, think to put off God, whom they pretend to
worship, with that which costs them nothing. The forementioned Jew being hard
put to it in this point, confessed ingenuously, (...), etc. The precepts of
your Gospel are so wonderful great, that l suppose no body is able to keep
them. No Hypocrite can, because he has not resigned his heart to God, but to a
truly good man they are easy, so the Apostle, and his Commandments are not
grievous. But he that does not love God, nor has submitted his will to the
divine government, being conscious to himself of base defects, would make them
up in an easier way. This is manifest in the Pharisees, whom our Savior has
branded for notorious Hypocrites: they were more scrupulous then others
concerning Gnats, that they might more quietly swallow Camels. That they might
be thought not to omit, what was indeed indispensable, they made great
conscience of the Ceremonial. Matthew. 12. 1, 2, 3. for the keeping a ceremony,
they would have an act of mercy omitted, whilst our Savior does reprove their
Hypocrisy, he does also convince them of ignorance, for, have you not read what
David did when he was an hungered, and they that were with him? Verse 3,4.
how he entered into the house of God, and did eat the Shewbread, which was not
lawful to be eaten, but by the Priests? If you had known what this means, I
will have mercy and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless.
At that time when those Rites were most in force, God permitted his bread to be
taken off from his Table to relieve the hungry, always preferring mercy and
goodness before a ceremonial observance, and if you had understood what God
would teach you by such his actions, you would find your selves much reproved
for your Hypocrisy. So it is still the way of Hypocrites, with pretenses of
regard to God, whom they have not seen, to neglect known duties to their
brethren, whom they do see, to stand in need of them. But they are grossly
mistaken, for God is content that positive rites and institutions, should give
way to moral eternal duties; but that outward should be put in the room of
inwards, is most odious to him: Does any wise man prefer a show to the
substance? Therefore when these deceivers thought to impose upon God on this
fashion in Malachy's time, he bids them offer their corrupt sacrifice to the
Governor. See if you can delude any man of place and understanding, and make
him believe you have done him much honor by fair words, though you think
unworthily of him in your minds, and are disaffected toward him in your hearts.

we choose instances that are fitly expressive of regard to him, and then
perform them in the best manner that we can. Though when we have done all, we
are unprofitable servants; that is, we have not in the least enriched our
heavenly Master, yet if we choose the fittest instances we can find, to do
honor to God, and present the performances of our duty with all integrity of
soul, though we do not then reach his height of glory, yet he will accept us,
because he does regard his creatures according to what they have: Though we
present nothing that is strictly worthy of him, yet we are accepted, because we
have no better. God is so gentle, that he does often accept less then the very
best from Honest souls: and if he would not take our best addresses in good
part, we could have no intercourse with him in worship.

I will name five instances, by which we may do honor to God acceptably.

First, If we carefully labor for such a knowledge of Gods sufficient
foundation for those many acts of Religion, by which we are to acknowledge him.
True Religion has many excellent things in it, which have no support in
ignorant souls, as for example, The highest Love, the most perfect Trust, the
greatest submission of our wills, etc. How shall a man perform these, if he be
ignorant of that Goodness, which makes God most lovely, that Truth, which
makes him faith-worthy, that Authority and Righteousness, which require our
perfect obedience? God has made it one characteristical expression of
irreligious persons, They know not the Lord. Ignorance is a note of wicked
carelessness in men, because they seek not the knowledge of so Noble a
Benefactor, and it carries along with it all Irreligion in other instances. And
therefore it was well said by the Philosopher, the true worship of God is
founded upon a right apprehension of him. The Argument of our Savior, by which
he disproved the Samaritan worship, goes upon the same ground. You worship that
which you do not know, Joh. 4. 22. It is no ways likely that the sacrifice
should be proper, when the Altar is inscribed, To an unknown God^ Religious
expressions, which are not founded in true knowledge, are always ridiculous,
and sometimes sadly blasphemous. Those which have not a right understanding of
God, pray madly to him, and speak foolishly of him. Religious affections, that
are not bottomed upon a good understanding, are framed childishly, and continue
accordingly.

Those which would be truly religious, should take a serious Notice of those
Attributes by which God has discovered his nature. We must not make excuses
for our Ignorance, by pretending, that God is incomprehensible, the greater he
is, the sooner we may find and apprehend him, as you may sooner find the Sea
then a River: or, that we cannot behold the naked Essence or Being of God, no
more can we of any thing else. What is there in the world, which we know, but
by its properties and effects? And by them God is sufficiently knowable to us.
The (...), the nanatural knowledge of God is implanted in men's souls, as an
inbred light in the eye to enable them to see him, and he has made the
Creation a fair glass to reflect his proper attributes, for the invisible
things of him, which we talk of, his eternal power and Godhead, his goodness
and wisdom, powerfully declared, which express the Divity of God, are clearly
seen by the world which he has made, and in his actions whereby he does
continually show himself, he is so discernably revealed, that those which do
not see, and serve him, are without all apology of their ignorance and
disobedience.

The works of God, especially of benignity and goodness. are called his
witnesses, Acts 14. 17. Nevertheless he left himself not without witness, in
that he did good, etc. And the son of God, who came out of the Fathers bosom,
out of an intimate acquaintance with God, he has revealed him.

Having all these assistances, let us improve our knowledge of God, lest we
mistake extremely in our devotions, and present an impertinent service.

If the unworthy Jews had but well considered the nature of God, they would
have offered a reasonable and living service, and not have been contented with
brutish dead worship. They would have known that it was an affront, rather then
an oblation, so to mistake God, as to think that he could be pleased with flesh
and smoke, and to undervalue him to others by their misbecoming services,
giving bystanders occasion to think, that the true God smiled upon such
impertinencies, and gladly received such absurd votaries.

He which nourishes ignonorance and unbelief in his mind, will be ungodly in
his heart and life; I must confess, I think this so far true, that I am of his
mind who said, that the root of all wickedness is Atheism. He which
dishonours his Maker, and despises the Law of his Benefactor in a wicked life,
would not do so if he believed that God made him, and that all the blessings of
his life were his mere bounty, and that God was infinitely more lovely then any
of his creatures, and that the time will come, when God will judge the wicked
for their Idolatrous life, (for they sin by loving the creature more then the
Creator) and that he will abandon them to torments for their wilful
disobedience. But wicked men either persuade themselves that there is no God,
or that he is not such, as he has declared himself to be in the Scriptures.

The exclamation of the Poet was rational, Heu primae scelerum causae
mortalibus aegris, Silius Ital.

Naturam nescire Deum! i. e.


Men would not sin as they they do, but that they are ignorant of the Nature of
God.

We do honor to God, if after we have got a right knowledge of his Nature, we
do conform our seves unto it, when, as the Apostle says, 2 Cor. 3. 18.
we beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same
Image from Glory to Glory, by the Spirit of the Lord. When we become imitators
of God, as dear children, putting on the same Image, Temper, and Spirit,
following God (...), as far as it is possible for a man to follow God.

The reason of this is plain, for by our careful conforming our selves to God,
we do manifestly acknowledge him to be the absolute pattern of all Excellency,
and the Primitive copy of all beauty and perfection. Then we honor God in an
effectual instance, when we do in disposition and life, show and hold forth the
virtues, or powerful goodnesses of God, who has called us out of darkness
into his mavelous light. When the light of wisdom, goodness, 1 Pet. 2.9.
and righteousness shines before men in the lives of the children of God, then
will they, much taken with that goodly Image, Matthew.
glorify their heavenly Father, who is the Archetype Exemplar of all goodness.

Clemens Alexand. has said this in proper words, (...), i. e. It is the only
way at once to imitate and worship the best of all Beings; for we cannot
imitate God, but by such things as will make our worship holy; nor worship him
but by imitation. Marcus in Julian being asked, what was the most worthy end of
our life, having answered, to imitate God, it was said to be an answers not
only (...), i. e. not only that he had answered nobly, but that he had said all.

This imitation must be performed with all plainness and simplicity, and with
an universal regard to all Gods imitable perfections, lest that be said to us,
which was replied to an unworthy Emperor, when he made the imitation of Apollo
his plea, (...), i. e. But for all this, I will take off his Crown; for he has
not conformed himself to me in all things, and in those things wherein he
pretends to resemble me, he has not done it as he should. That is a just
imitation, when we follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes.

God is not so pleased with Temples made with hands, and he has forbidden to
attempt the making of foolish Images, but he is well pleased with every good
man and woman, that make themselves the habitation of the Holy Spirit, that
offer their souls to God, being made acceptable sacrifices through the
participation of the divine Image and Nature. When such a worshiper appears
before God, he may bring what other sacrifice he will, he shall be accepted, --
vel far litabit.

There is no Temple in which God will converse with a wicked man, his oblations
are the sacrifice of fools. His gifts may maintain the flames upon a visible
Altar, and his offerings present something that Church-robbers will be glad to
steal, but his soul is so unlike to God, whom he pretends to worship, that he
abhorres him and his offerings. He counts his name rather blasphemed, than
honored by the mouths of the ungodly, when they presume to make mention of
it, though with a great deal of seeming devotion.

But those which really put out his Spirit, and express his Image, do truly
glorify their Lord, and so our Savior says he was glorified in his true
followers, Joh. 17. 10. and he says, that in his next coming, he will be
glorified in them again, 2 These. 1. 10. when he will reveal to all the world,
that his admirable holiness was the only pattern of all true worth and
excellency.

The true appearances of this divine Image, are of such wonderful effect
sometimes, that they dazzle the eyes of those which behold them, and make them
confess, as Marcus Antonius says in his Epistle of the Christians of his
time, (...), i. e. That they had an in-dwelling God formed in their souls.

We do honor to God, if we do heartily promote his knowledge and love in the
world. The words of Galen are excellent to this purpose, which he has in the
speech which he makes as a hymn in praise of the Creator; (...), etc. This I
esteem to be true worship, not to sacrifice to him Hecatombs of Bulls, -- but
if I know him my self, and declare to others the greatness of his wisdom,
power, and goodness. The Italian gloss is much to the same purpose, in which,
doing all to the Glory of God, is thus expounded; Rendendogliene voi ogni
honor, e procurando che tutti gli altri facciano il simile, i. e. Giving all
honor to him your selves, and endeavoring that all others may do the same.
But of this I shall speak more largely in the fifth instance.

We glorify God if we resign; for by so doing, we honor it above our own
selfwill, and the examples of all others that contradict it. This is performed
in two things.

In following the divine precepts, Then we truly give honor to God, when we
obey his Laws, as the orders of the great Father and Governor of all things,
and, as he said, (...) simply co-will with God, and plainly sympathize with his
pleasure. The Commentator upon Pythagoras his golden verses, does excellently
interpret that precept of performing all due rites to our Ancestors, thus. If
children do follow those holy directions, which their parents left them, they
do them more honor then if they offered solemn sacrifies. When Achan had
sinned, and through covetousness slighted the Commandment of God, he was bid
to confess, and give glory to God. Men give glory to God, when they confess
the folly of their wilful deviations from the righteous commands of God. but
they honor him much more, when, for the regard which they bear to the wisdom
and goodness of his most just appointments, they will not deviate.

By cheerfully submitting to If we quarrel with his dispensations toward us,
we accuse him of rigor and harshnesse in his government, and when we have begun
to think that God uses us hardly in his dealings, with us, we think
dishonourably of him and have prepared our selves to hate him. What honor and
preference did our Savior give to the Divine will, when in such famous
instances of trial; he said, not my will, but thine be done? How well did his
Scholar great Paul, follow his steps, who had learned in every condition to be
content with Gods allowance? I may fitly add to these the golden words of
Epictetus, which Arrianus has recorded, (...), Lib. 2. Dissert. 16.
etc. And now o Lord do what thou will with me, I will find no fault with thy
appointments. If thou will have me sick I am content, or well, or poor, or
rich, or public, or private, to stay, or go; and adds, (...). I will not only
submit unto thee, but also defend the righteousness and wisdom of thy doings.

if we endeavor as much as we can, to further all the noble designs, and
excellent works of God in the world; by this we shall declare that we value his
ends, as the most worthy and desirable things in the world. What is his chief
design, but to advance Goodness, Righteousness, Knowledge, Equity, Charity,
Purity, Benignity, Peace, and Love? The righteous Lord loves righteousness.
The Kingdom of God is in Righteousness, Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost. His
delight is in goodness, and mercy pleases him, above all burnt offerings and
sacrifices. He rejoices in the prosperity of the children of men. O that there
were such a heart in them, as that they would fear me, that it might go well
with them, and their children after them.

The counsels of God do show a plain way to these ends, and he facilitates our
correspondence with his advice by taking in our interest; and he takes himself
hon^red, when we become Co-workers with him, as the Apostles word is, or as the
Philosopher varies it but a little, (...), Co-workers of all good, which is all
one, for his works are all good. He is righteous in all his ways, and holy in
all his works. This is to honor God, when in correspondence with him in his
God-like^ designs, a man makes account of it as his proper office in the world
to do good to all men, to take care of all men, and as a common father,
teacher, and helper, to further them in the participation of God, to promote
their happiness and comforts. It is worthy of a good man, to make himself as
it were a common Priest, to offer up prayers continually for all the world.

It is observable, that when our Savior commended the imitation of his fathers
perfections, he instanced only in Charity, Mat. 5. And when he condemned the
world for their ungodlike carriage, he mentioned only uncharitableness, Mat.
25.

By this spirit and practice we make a return to God of what we have received
from him, and employ his liberality to his honor, by making it redound to his
praise, not from the second or third, but from many hands. When thou art
converted, go and strengthen thy brethren Or if there be any thing done to
thee, for which thou owe a love to me, pay it by feeding my sheep, and who
are Christ's sheep? all poor miserable creatures, for he was the good shepherd,
that came to seek, and to save what was lost.

There is a passage in Trismegistus, that is a lively representation of this
point. After he had been made partaker of the divine light, he heard a voice
saying to him, (...), be thou a guide to such as will follow thee, that mankind
may be saved by God; upon which he began presently, as he says; (...), to
discover the beauty of holiness, and to preach, (...), etc. O worldly men
repent. Those which have known God, and do inwardly adore that goodness which
shines in his nature and works, will imitate the same works, and endeavor to
convince this ungodly world, that only such works are worthy of God.

And though they cannot yet raise them up with themselves to the height of
goodness, yet they keep themselves up from falling into the lowness of
ungodly spirits, and practices. and therefore are far from contriving the
miseries of others, taking away their liberties, ensnaring their consciences,
depriving them of their estates, blasting their names; but rather teach the
ignorant, forgive offenses, and relieve the wants of the afflicted, being
ashamed that their neighbors should be destitute of any thing in which he may
be helped by them.

Our Savior has said this plainly, Joh. 15. 8. Herein is my Father glorified,
if you bring forth much fruit. What fruit but of the divine spirit. Love,
Charity, Goodness? How does this glorify the Father? Thus, by bringing forth
much of this fruit, you show you are united with the root of goodness, to
which you do honor; growing upon it like the branches of a Tree laden with
plenty of excellent fruit.

The forementioned fruits are the grapes of the generous vine, whose blood
rejoices the heart of God and man. All other frutis of wickedness,
unrighteousness, and uncharitableness, are such, as all men ought to be ashamed
of, and grow only upon the degenerate plants of Sodom and Gomorrah.

Having shown how we may do all things to Gods glory; it remains to
demonstrate, that we ought to do so, which I will perform briefly in two
particulars.

This is a necessary correspondence We offer violence to the beautiful order of
the world, if we do not ordinate and refer all our actions to God. If he be
the fountain of all Being, Truth and Power, the Cause of Causes, the Spring of
life and happiness, we should make what have we can to return to him, uniting
our selves with the first cause, in all which we do; and so we shall, as one
says; Iambl. Pro^^ept. c. 4.
(...), join the end to the beginning.

The order which God has implanted in the Natures of all things created, Hier.
is by one likened to an Oath, which God took of all his works, when they went
out of his hands, that they should return to him again. It is fit that all
reasonable creatures should keep it, for they know it is their duty, and their
disobedience is a kind of perjury. It is but just that all things should be for
him, since they are all of him.

It is not only violence, but folly, to attempt the perverting of this order;
for one way or other God will be acknowledged at length. Cleanthes understood
himself well, when he said to God, (...), i. e. I will follow thee willingly;
if I should not, I must unwillingly. Shall a drop divide it self from the Sea?
Shall the whole, nay he that is more then the whole, follow a poor contemptible
part? All things created, by the Law of their creation, should observe the
first agent, but much more intelligent creatures, who know their Creator and
themselves.

If we neglect this duty, we contract a guilt of the most horrible ingratitude
in the world, and if we do it habitually, we draw a foul stain upon the course
of our life, and do as much we can Apo^^atize from the Founder and Parent of
the Creation. As other things according to their spheres do move, gratefully,
toward God, and so urge us with their examples, to do obeisance to God: so
they do administer to us manifold occasions, are in several cases, means and
instruments, and in diverse respects are great obligations put upon us, so that
if we stop the return of Gods glory, we are not only in regard of our selves,
the worst thing that can be named, that is, ungrateful; but we would make God
to have bestowed his benefits upon other things in vain, and so prove bad to
God, by making other things useless, in which he has been good to us. A mean
man being preferred by one of quality, came in time to such place as set him
above his Benefactor, and he making use of his power to throw him down, who had
raised him up; the Gentleman, to reprove him by showing him his unworthiness,
sent him a picture, in which the Sun was eclipsed by the Moon, with this word
upon it,

Totum adimit quo ingrata refulget, i. e. It ingratefully puts out the light by
which it shines.

The acknowledgement of God is interwoven with the Nature of man, and is, as
Des Carts says, Notae Artificis operi impressa, The Artificers mark set upon
his work. He which choakes the resentments of God in his soul, and neglects
this duty, does tear off the Founders Arms from the expressions of his charity,
and raze the Donors name out of his Gifts.

The whole foregoing discourse being of it self practical, and all along
particularly referred to our life, it will be less needful to make any
application: only I shall speak a word or two by way of Caution against some
things, by which God and Christian Religion, which is the greatest
manifestation of him, have been, and are much dishonored. We are to give no
offense to Jew or Gentile, to those that are within or without the Church.
There are four notorious offenses given to both.

The first is, when those that things of Revelation are above reason, but none
are contrary to it.

The light of the Sun is no contradiction to the light of the Moon. We cannot
deal with God or man, but by reason, which because the beasts want, we judge
them incapable of Religion. How will you come near to a man that is not a
Christian, but by such things as you both agree in? That is Reason, by whose
mediation you may get within him, and prove the Scriptures to be the word of
God; He will find reason to believe that, by the same principles, by which he
gives credit to all other things. When you are so far, you have another
principle to deal upon; but you shut that door, if you talk absurdly. Will you
teach him greater things, who are out your self in less? It is a great
advantage to your cause, when he sees you can say truly, with the Father, I.
Martyr. Apolog. 1.
(...). i.e. that Christian Religion contains whatsoever others profess,
that is true, and that you do not join such ill-agreeing matters with this,
which he can demonstrate to be false.

I have often thought, that among the many hindrances of Christian Religion,
which the more ingenuous part of the unbelieving world stumble at, we may
reckon the extravagant opinions, that have crept into the books of Christians,
and will needs be looked upon, as the Dictates of our most wise Master, when as
they are the mistakes of his weakest disciples, and it may be thrust in by
pretenders, and which he owns no more then he deserved the Titles, which the
Jews put upon him.

The first Ministers of Christian Religion were very wary lest they delivered
their own errand in their Masters name, and therefore made distinction between
his mind and their private opinion, to prevent his disparagement. Those which
pretend to follow them, should be more careful, because all the world knows,
that they have no new message to deliver. By this means when they relate
things, which they never received from Christ, the single blame of their odd
conceits, would ly only upon the weakness of their own brains, or the guilt of
some other infirmities; but when they blend them with Christ's institutions,
they are forced to suffer for company. So that their mistaken Expositions, and
unreasonable consequences, and hurtsull additions, by which they pretend to
illustrate or perfect the Mysteries of God, are of no more courteous effect to
the Gospel, then the wild embraces of the Ivy are to the Oak, which is deformed
and weakened, whilst they grow up by it.

It is well known how horribly guilty the Papists are in this point: and no
doubt they will one day pay dear for the scandal, and others are to be blamed
besides them.

How shall we avoid this Rock? If we neither deliver or receive any thing for
Christ's undoubted mind, but what is plainly set down in the holy Scriptures.

The second offense is, when those which pretend to Grace and Holiness, fall
below Moral virtues, by sordid practices. There is no answering of this
Question to one that is without the Church: Are you a Christian, and yet below
a man? Do you love God whom you have not seen, and hate your brother, whom you
see in need of your love? Leave off the pretense of Christianity, or keep real
Humanity faster about you.

Irenaeus long ago observed, that when the filthy Gnostics, a Band of
Ranters, had disgraced Christian Religion with their abominable lives, the
Heathens avoided the conversation of those which professed themselves to be
Christians, thinking they were all such. If those who are really wicked do
perceive such as pretend to Christianity, to be as proud, cruel, and
revengeful; as covetous and base spirited, or as intemperate, or to fail in
other immoral instances; they may well say, that Christian Religion is
abominable, if it make its disciples such; and it is a pitiful poor thing, if
it do not change them from being such, and make them otherwise.

The third offense is, when foolish and bitter zeal destroys the Wisdom,
Moderation, and Charity of true Religion. When men do not only make new
additions, but will needs compel others to receive them as old Truths. Upon
this Root grows the Romish Persecution. They impudently, as well as falsely,
because against common sense, Conc. Trid. Sess. 22.
and express Scripture, in the Council of Trent, affirm the Church of Rome to
be Omnium Ecclesiarum Matrem and Magistram; i. e. Mother and Mistress of all
Churches. Luke 24. 47. The teaching of Repentance, and remission of sins in the
Name of Christ, by his own order, began at Jerusalem. How could it then begin
at Rome? and yet they have pronounced their Anathema or Curse upon such as do
not believe it, and declared them for that reason out of the state of
salvation, for they add, Loco supradicto.
Extra hanc fidem nemo potest esse salvus.

Such a spirit as this wrought long before in Victor the proud Bishop of Rome,
when he excommunicated all the Eastern Churches for not keeping Easter upon the
same day with him. He would, it seems, have had the same extent of Jurisdiction
over the Church, as Rome civil had over the world.

Orbem jam totum, Victor Romanus haberet.

Rome had, and Victor would subdue the world.

How he was reproved for this, I shall have occasion to say by and by; But it
is manifest from the Scriptures, and the writings of those Holy men, that
succeeded the Apostles, that this spirit was not in the beginning, as also how
it came in.

In the beginning of the Gospel times, the spirit of Love flourished; Christ
having made it the badge of his disciples, they wore it always, and kept true
to that command of Love, even to enemies. The heights of Love were expressed by
Christians.

Jews, who were mortal enemies to Christ, and all that received his doctrine,
and did what mischief they could to them, after they had crucified Christ
Jesus, they brought his disciples before Judgment seats, accounting it a great
service to God, if they could rid them out of the world; blasphemed their
Religion; for by their means, Christianity was the Sect every where spoken
against. They denied all offices of friendship toward Christians, as indeed to
all, but to their own, even though they were in necessity, which
barbarousnesse, the Heathen Poet does justly reprove.

Nec monstrare vias, etc. They would not show a Traveller the way, or if he
were thirsty, direct him to a spring. Notwithstanding all this, the Christians
expressed a great affection toward them; Saint Paul, as far as the bounds of
truth would permit him, became all to them, to save their souls; and was so
far from the Hellish temper of those which rejoice to see others fall, that
in imitation of Christ, who died by the hands of sinners to save them, he
wished that he might procure their union with Christ, Romans
by his own separation from him.

And that this spirit died not with Saint Paul, is very manifest afterward,
for when Trypho demanded of Justin Martyr, what he thought as to their state of
salvation, thinking probably that he would have pronounced them damned; the
Martyr did not so, but told him, he hoped they might be saved, if with their
Ceremonials, they did keep also (...) the eternal and natural rules of
indispensable Holiness; and notwithstanding the Jewish uncharitableness,
which they expressed in their carriage, of which he admonishes Trypho, he
shows him the invincible love of Christians toward them, being ready, as he
says, (...), i.e. to receive them friendly, and to communicate all things to
them, as brethren or affectionate friends.

mutual love was great, when they were so friendly to enemies, and that
appeared in rare instances, they made all things common, that were capable of a
friendly copartnership, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles, dwelt together
in one accord, did eat and drink together with unspeakable content, rejoicing
in each other with a great singleness of heart. And when this rare friendship
began to be hurt, through the Devils envy and hatred, and men's weakness and
passions, and the One Church began to crumble into many factions, and besides
the common name, by which they were joined, Christ, to distinguish themselves
by other names never given for marks of such distinction, as Paul, Apollo,
Cephas: with what earnestness does Paul put himself in this breach? 1 Cor. 2.
10. etc.
Now I beseech you brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you. -- Is christ
divided? was Paul crucified for you? or were ye baptized in the name of Paul?
Clemens Romanus in his Epistle to the same Corinthians, speaks excellently to
the same purpose, cur inter nos sunt contentiones, irae, simultates, schismata,
etc. Why should there be contentions, anger, and war amongst us? Have we not
one God, and one Christ? Is not the spirit of Grace one which is poured forth
upon us all? and is not our vocation one in Christ Jesus? why do we pluck off
the members of Christ, and by moving sedition against our own body, show that
we are come to that madness, that we have forgotten that we are members one of
another? so he.

By means of the great precept of our Lord, to love one another, and the
industry of some of his wisest disciples, the practice of love held out so
eminently downwards, till Tertullians time, that he says, Tertul. Apolog.
Dilectionis operatio notam nobis meruit penes quosdam, vide inquiunt, ut
invicem se diligant, i. e. Their exercise of love made them remarkable with
many, see, say they, how the christians love one another.

Then christian Religion was in Honor, but when the professors of it grew
disobedient to the fundamental law of Love, and became fierce, they tore off
their Masters Badge, and, by hating one another, became odious to Heathens.

But what made them so quarrelsome?

Four things are manifest.

They were not content with and therefore when they began to wax wanton,
against the doctrine of Christ, in the Apostles days, Col. 2.18. 20,21.
intruding into things which they had not seen, they would needs bring in a
voluntary humility, as the worship of Angels, and through the pretense of great
wisdom, and free will offerings, and austerity to the flesh, brought in many
foolish doctrines, and perverted the institutions of Christ, both in point of
marriage and meats, and being vainly pufft up with fleshly imaginations,
swerved from the infallible Rule of wisdom and holiness, into foolish
enormities, by which they separated themselves from Christ and his Church both
at once, as appears in their story at large, written by Irenaeus, Epiphanius,
and others.

Eusebius in the fifth book of his Ecclesiastical History, cap. 25. gives an
account of the cause of that great schism between the Eastern and Western
Churches, out of Irenaeus, that it was long of those of the West, who not
holding simply what was delivered from the beginning, that is by Christ, fell
into other observations, either through ignorance or carelessness.

Ignatius in his Epistle to the Ephesians, praising their Unity, of which he
had heard by Onesimus, gives this for the great reason of it, (...), i. e. they
all lived according to the truth of the Gospel, neither had they any distinct
sect among them; neither did they hearken to any, but only Christ Jesus, the
true Shepherd and Master; and yet there were such among them, as he says a
little after, that would have brought in amongst them things unworthy of God,
and contrary to the doctrine of Christ.

When that Holy Rule is neglected, which whilst it is kept to, brings peace
upon all that walk according to it, men fall into bypath, and when one takes
one way, and another a different; they fall to disputing which is the right.
But whilst they have abandoned the only rule, they may dispute long enough,
before they be resolved, and unless they will rest in the plain determinations
of the Scripture, their controversies about Gods will, can never be decided.
For if there were no other hindrances, yet that self-love which swayes men so
strongly to their own opinions, would make their mutual consent impossible.
That, which a learned man said in another case, is very true here, (...), etc.
It is not any mortal man, but God only that can judge concerning those
differences, because the self-love which is bred in every one, will not permit
them to give way to another. Men being apt to admire themselves, and to despise
others. To prevent the inconveniences which arise from this ground in matters
of Religion; God has not only instructed our ignorance, but restrained our
curiosity by the revelation of his will, but when we have once passed that
bound: it is no wonder at all, if we wander into infinite differences, and make
Religion contemptible, by multitudes of uncertain pronunciations.

They would not bear with one another in the exposition of doubtful places of
Scripture, nor allow that difference of opinion which is not dangerous in
things not necessary, nor allow difference of practice in things indifferent,
nor indeed permit to others the liberty, which they took to themselves in these
matters, and this must needs administer occasion for quarrels, and break the
peace of the Church.

The Primitive christians were aware of this danger, and knowing how easily the
Devil would take occasion by their difference in opinion to divide their
hearts, beat him where he most hoped for victory; for so the peaceable Irenaeus
told the angry Pope Victor that he had pitifully consulted for the good of the
Church, or the honor of Christianity by his excommunicating of such as
differed from him, and therefore with many other sober Bishops advised him to
study the peace of the Church, and that he might perceive their advise
practicable, acquainted him that there had bin differences before amongst good
men both about Easter day, and also the manner of Fasts, and yet they agreed in
love both among themselves, Hist. Ecclesiast. lib. 5.
and with others; which Eusebius expresses thus, (...), i.e. and the
difference of their fasting did not break off, but commend the unity of their
faith. Epist. ad Ephesians.
So Ignatius compared the Church to a Chorus, where all do not sing one part,
but with different voices; some higher, some lower, being tuned into good
harmony by love, make sweet melody to God. So Just. Martyr in his Epistle to
Zena and Serenus, (...), etc. We must take care that we maintain peace and love
with those which differ from us, lest being carried away with the heat of
anger; we say we are of that nature, that we cannot but be angry, and sometimes
break the communion of prayers. And a little after, We know some that have
advanced this angry humor to such a height, that drawing the Gospel toward
this peevishness, they would accommodate the Oracles of our Savior to their
own rash opinion, and if they had obtained power to deliver men over to hell,
they would have destroyed the world: nay as much as in them lies they condemn,
and kindle the fire. Therefore let us not be such: Thus he.

But when this counsel was rejected, what did they do? Then immoderate spirits
tore the perfect bond, and to use the Philosophers words, did (...), tore in
pieces the God of Love, that was among them; I am sure I may say, they used the
Body of Christ with less mercy, then the very soldiers expressed to his
Garments. But the false mother would still have the child divided.

When it so falls out by the Providence of God, that there are differences in
opinion as to some things, when each party refuses, charitably to bear with
those which cannot embrace their opinions, they cast the Dice for the peace of
the Church, and appoint each to be content with their lot, till they can get
the greatest power, or else offer peace upon such terms, as Nahash propounded
to Iabesh Gilead; that is, if others will be content to have their right eye
put out. So Nilus the Greek Bishop, says plainly, that the Greek schism was
made between them and the Romans, because they would not let the Romans, (...),
Sit as Lords and Masters of their faith, nor set themselves as obedient
Scholars at their feet. What mischief befell christianity by means of this
spirit in Iulians time, is to the eternal disgrace of its professors, recorded
by Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. 22. That Julian might weaken the christian power,
which he feared, he knew no way so easy, as to endeavor their destruction by
themselves, and therefore recalled the Bishops banished by Constantius, and
gave them and the people leave to be christians, though he himself was turned
Heathen. How could he hope to gain by this? The Historian tells us, Nullas
infestas hominibus bestias, ut sunt sibi ferales plerique christianorum,
expertus, i. e. because he had never found beasts so cruel to men, as he had
seen christians implacable toward one another, and therefore as he traveled
through Palestine, cried out; O Marcomanni, O Quadi, O Sarmatae, tandem alios
vobis inquietiores inveni! This was a horrible shame brought upon the Gospel of
our Savior, by such professors, as had put off every thing of christianity,
but the name. One may well cry out with Tertullian, In Apol.
O melior fides Nationum in sectam suam! The Heathens are more true to their
profession. Nay, they were more merciful to christians, then christians to
themselves; for Julian, though he was Heathen and Apostate; yet he professed in
one of his Epistles to Iamblichus, that he thought it was not fit for him to
persecute the christians, (...), i. e. I think it fit to teach, but not to
punish fools. When christians laid aside the spirit of love, they became
ridiculous to the world, those which admired them before for loving one
another, and said, ut pro alterutro mori sunt parati? might now say, Not, how
ready are they to die for one another? but, how ready are they to kill one
another? How far this spirit is removed from the Nature of Religion, Lactantius
has expressed very well, Divin. Instit. lib. 5. cap. 20. Long diversa sunt
carnificina and pietas; defendenda enim religio est, non occidendo, sed
monendo, non saevitia, sed sapientia. Nam si sanguine, si tormentis, si malo
religionem defendere velis: jam non defendetur illa, sed polluetur atque
violabitur, nihil enim tam voluntarium est ac Religio, etc. Piety has nothing
to do with cruelty, neither can truth be joined with violence. Religion is not
to be defended with killing, but admonishing: when blood and torments are used
for its defense, it is not defended, but polluted and violated. So the
forementioned ingenuous Historian, having it seems read our Bible, when he saw
Georgius the turbulent Bishop of Alexandria fill Constantius his broad ears
with accusations of diverse persons, he says, he had forgotten the Religion
which he professed, quae nihil nisi justum suadet and lene, which does command
us nothing but gentleness and equity.

I am afraid that christian Religion will not recover for a good while, that
honor which is lost by the uncharitableness of the present age. God grant
that we may return speedily to the sincerity of the Protestant principles. We
know not what the christian Religion is but by the Scriptures, and by them we
may know, for there it is plainly and fully set down. In things doubtful, if
every christian may not interpret for himself; how shall we justify the
Protestants separation from the Roman Church, not to have been a schism, and
as the Papists say, an Apostasy from the true Church? They interpret one way,
and we another. And was not the rigid imposition of their interpretations as
infallible, one of those good reasons for which we departed from them? But when
we read these Scriptures, They shall kill you, and think they do God service,
and, By zeal I persecuted the Church, and, They have a zeal, but not according
to knowledge; we may perceive that hot zeal may be accompanied with gross
ignorance, and great cruelty. Some that mean mean well, perhaps, may do shroud
mischief, and through impotence of spirit, inconsiderateness, ill nature,
narrowness of soul, want of experience, and converse with wise men; etc. may
throw firebrands into the House of God.

It is a strange device of pleasing God, to sacrifice his friends to him, when
as he desires not the death of his enemies. But those which kill them say, O,
but they are in error. Really it may be so, for it is a very hard matter for
such fallible creatures as we are, not to err in some things, etc. But those
are unmerciful guides, which kill plain-hearted passengers, because they have
missed the way, when as it is likely that they, poor men, could not help it. I,
but they will not go into the way when they are bidden. Well, but will they do
it, when you have killed them? If they were out of the way, you have made them
for ever coming into it again. Since the wanderer did not hearken to you, it
may be that he knew nothing to the contrary, but that you were as ignorant of
the way, as himself. No, you had a book of it, wherein it was fairly mapp'd
forth. That is, the Bible and he had it too. But you understand it better then
he did. I cannot tell that. However, are you infallible also? If you be not,
you may be out of the way your self, and if it should chance to prove so, you
would be loath to be cudgelled into it again.

If you will glorify God, do as he does. What is that? He declares his will,
teaches us his Truth, engages us with a thousand mercies, to do our duty; and
notwithstanding we continue our disobedience, he awaites our repentance with a
God-like patience. Will thou go and do likewise? No, because they receive not
Jesus Christ, I will call for fire from heaven upon them. Poor man! thou art of
a hot spirit, and would thou have it increased with flames from above? that
fire enlightens, warms, and so melts, but does not burn and fry men for their
salvation. Take heed what thou do to others, but be sure that God has
forbidden thee his presence, unless thou do come with a cool and charitable
spirit.

They put Religion to disgrace, when, leaving off the practice of undoubted
piety, and the diligent performance of uncontroverted duties, they employed
their wits in spinning niceties, and perplexing the faith with foolish and
endless Questions. Then Religion began to dwindle into vain words, and lost
its glory, which consists in a good life, managed by a wise and holy soul. It
is true, our Savior said, that from the days of John Baptist the Kingdom of
heaven suffered violence, and the violent took it by force. But what was that
violence? Strom. 5.
Clemens Alexandrinus tells us, (...), etc. i.e. They took the Kingdom of
Heaven, not by the violence of words, but by the constancy of a holy life, and
continual prayer. For other things they let alone, they contended not in a
worldly way, (...), they armed themselves peaceably; how was that? (...), as
the Apostle did most peaceably train them, and direct them; Ephesians. 6. 14,15,16.
having bid them to put on the knowledge of the truth, then Righeousness, or
Obedience; then Peaceablenesse, Faith, Hope, and Prayer. Those which are thus
armed, as they hurt not others, so they are invulnerable themselves; (...), but
those other strifes about words and opinions, left them exposed to all sin and
danger, and the Religion which they professed to shame and dishonor. As Am.
Marcellinus said of Constantius, Christianam religionem absolutam et
simplissimam anili superstitione confudit, i. e. he spoiled the Christian
Religion, which is most simple and perfect, with foolish superstition. What did
the impertinencies of the Schoolmen, and all their great industry about
trifles, their (...)? If the whole Church should unanimously busy themselves
about such things, the Devil would have cause to laugh, and say, as he did
scoffingly; (...), I can willingly allow you this concord, you do well to be
one in this respect. These things overthrow not his Kingdom, neither do they
establish or honor our Saviors, but give occasion to the world to think
Christianity an intricate thing, and Christians, genus hominum controversum, a
perplexed people. They added sometimes to all this unworthy scuffles for
Ecclesiastical dignities, which was then too apparent, when the cloud of
persecution was blown over, and the profession of christianity by the
favorable aspect of the times grown profitable, and Honorable.

When Damasus and Vrsinus contended to blood for the Episcopal Seat, a hundred
thirty seven being slain about it in one day, Am. Marc, lib. 27.
what said the Heathen which stood by? Omni contentione laterum jurgari debere,
etc. They deserved the most severe reprehension; They might have been happy, if
despising the greatness of the City, which now they only oppose with vices,
they had, according to the Example of some of the country Bishops, by
temperance and humility, purity and modesty, approved themselves to the eternal
God, and his true worshipers: but they could never walk lovingly together
toward heaven, when they fell out by the way for Earth.

The fourth and last offense is, When men say Gods glory, but mean their own,
Religion has the same honor and use with a Stalking-Horse. It is almost the
same matter, when men talk of Christians, but regard none but their own party,
persuasion and pronunciation; by degrading others in spirituals, they advance
their own worldly interest. It is but a poor business, when men stickle
vigorously for Christ's Kingdom, having assured themselves before of sitting
upon his right hand and left. He was a notorious selse-designer that bragged,
Come see the zeal that I have for the Lord. These men will hug such as fondly
or craftily, call their unworthy principles, and actions, by splendid names,
whilst the ingenuous sons of Truth condemn their Hypocrisy, and grieve to see
how the workers of iniquity please themselves, to have such famous Accomplices.
There is little or nothing done for the Honor of God by Christians, when by
uncharitableness, and quarrelsom controversies, ambition and covetousness,
howsoever disguised, they give examples of sin in contradiction to their
Profession, and so tempt those, that need no such furtherance, to Incredulity
and Atheism. For they will think, if those which pretend Religion neglect to
be conformed to it, they may well enough slight the name, when the others
despise the thing. If we compare the practice of Piety, which is found in these
days, with that of the first ages of Christianity; Christians are now of so
poor a growth, and contemptible stature, that when they dare compare
themselves, they cannot but be in their own eyes, as the Israelites were in
comparison of the Giants, Grasshoppers; and those which have no good will to
Christianity, seeing it do no great matters now adays, are apt to judge the
narrations of the High piety, and noble charity of the Primitive times fabulous.

To shut up all, That which has been said should kindle a zoal in all the true
lovers of God, to vindicate the Honor of his suffering Gospel. Take up,
Christians, the spiritual weapons of which his Armory is full, and conquer this
present world. Throw down sin by despising it in all Tentations. Chase away
evil Angels into their own dark den; abhor all invitations that proceed from a
spirit of disobedience; Recover the beauty of Holiness, by unblameablenesse of
life, and expressing the lovely Image of Christ, in all heavenly conversation.
Be afraid to be bad, when you may securely, as to this world, and with
encouragement of much ill company. Bring Charity into fashion again by acts of
mercy in despite of Covetousness. Disgrace that well-favoured Harlot, painted
Hypocrisy, by practicing all manner of plainness, truth, and sincerity. Redeem
lost time, and be revenged upon sloth, and sinful omissions by a doubled
diligence. In what you have particularly dishonored God, endeavor to make the
greatest reparation you can, knowing that we can never make a sufficient amends
for the least sin. Live by faith, and show that some dare trust God, neither
make any doubt of the Happy immortality, which he has promised to his faithful
servants. Since the world will not be otherwise taught, for words avail
nothing, do what you can to mend it, and by Example to prepare it for the
participation of God, till he come in pity and repair the ruins of his decayed
work, and to throw all wickedness into the bottomless pit.

In the mean while, think it comfort enough to your private capacity, to know,
That he which offers to God the forementioned praises, does glorify him, and
that he which orders his own conversation aright, shall not fail in due time,
to see the salvation of God.

FINIS.

