BENTIVOLIO AND URANIA, IN FOUR BOOKS.

By N. I. D. D.

LONDON: Printed by J. G. for RICHARD MARRIOT, and are to be sold at his shop
in Saint Dunstans Churchyard Fleetstreet.

MDCLX.

TO THE HONORABLE WILLIAM BRERETON Esquire Eldest Son of the Right Honorable
WILLIAM Lord BRERETON of Brereton In CHESHIRE.
SIR,
I Have not placed your Name before these Papers, that from thence I might take
an Occasion to flatter you with that sort of lavish Praise by which many make
their Epistles Dedicatory Romances. The Notices of your Generous Temper which I
have received in your Acquaintance would forbid that Vanity, if nothing else
hindered me; For they have assured me that you are rai'sd far above such a
Lowness of Spirit as will be taken with Adulations. The Worth which deserves
highest Praises does most scorn Flattery.

Neither do I design the Patronage of my Imperfections by devoting to you the
Book in which they are discovered. If I should have forgotten my self so far as
to have made such an unworthy Application of your Name, I should have abused
you, I confess: For, as he said, Ne si deve chiamar un Giove per (...) un'
Pigmeo, and my Expectation would have been frustrate; for the world is not so
foolish as to think it a part of the Homage which it owes to Illustrious
Persons, to judge every thing Excellent which has put on their Livery.

My desire is to manifest a sincere Resentment of the Civilities which I have
received from you, and to reveal the inward Sense of my Heart in which I do
unfeignedly honor your True Worth, which is made up of a Great Wisdom and
Much Goodness. Not that I presume so much upon the Value of these Leaves, as to
think that they either carry any Obligation or pay much respect: but I send
them as Instances of that Good will, which wanting more acceptable Expressions
bespeaks your favorable Reception for these.

If they had any Worth, I should have thought none fitter to whom I might
commend them then your self, who have patronized Wisdom with your Noble Choice,
and honored Virtue with an Exemplary Life. As you are graced with the Nobility
of your Birth, so you are deservedly loved by many who accompany their
Affections with Judgment, because you have adorned your Quality with those
Excellent Accomplishments, by whose absence Nobility is dishonored.

Those which unwisely lean upon the Fame of their Ancestors, and make boasts of
Honor which is not supported with their own Virtues, but only derived with the
Blood which they received from others, whilst they are themselves destitute of
those Heroic Graces for which their Fathers or Grandfathers were justly
admired; they overturn their Statues, profane their Urns, and blast the Glory
of their Memories by Ignoble Practices: as the Poet reproved the degenerate
Roman, Squalentes traducit Avos, emptorque veneni
Frangenda miseram funestat Imagine Gentem.


It afflicts Ingenuous Persons when they see the Ancient Splendor of Great
Families eclipsed by those which should make them more Illustrious; especially
when they consider those slight Motives by which they suffer themselves to be
withdrawn from the Pursuit of true Glory. For, as the Philosopher observed
concerning such in his Time, (...), they are cheated with soft Pleasures,
specious Evils. But no body must tell them of it. For though they condemn, and,
it may be, punish their own Sins, when they are committed by Pesants; At vos
Trojugenae vobis ignoscitis, and quae
Turpia Cerdoni, Volesos Brutumque decebunt.


By which means though they might in regard of the Advantages of their Higher
Condition be most like unto God, that is, Saviors of their Country, which
Title is not unjustly given to some; yet many slighting the Deserts of Noble
Virtues, augment the Miseries of the World both with the particular Harms which
necessarily go along with Vicious Actions, as also by the Contagious Influence
which falls from the evil Examples of Great Persons.

But what do I talk to you of this Mischief, who have so advanced your Mind by
the Study of the best Knowledge, and perfected your Faculties with those
Virtuous Habits which become a Christian and a Gentleman, that I may not only
call you, as the Emperor modestly limited his own Praises, (...), a Lover of
Philosophy, but rather, in regard of your rare Seize, the Love of
Philosophers?

I will not be further troublesome unto you. That you may enjoy a good Health
and a long Life; that you may increase the Honor of your Family and promote
the Good of Your Country, and at length be received into the Regions of
Immortal Glory, is the hearty Prayer of

Sir, Your most Humble and Affectionate Servant N. INGELO.

A PREFACE TO THE READER, CONCERNING The DESIGN of this BOOK.
IT is justly esteemed by those which know themselves, as the only work that
is worthy of wise men, so to employ their better faculties and improve their
time, that at last they may obtain an End, in which they may rejoice eternally:
After a sincere intention of this End, to prosecute it with a constant use of
fit means, is the Character of a Prudent and Good man. Those which govern not
their life by this Principle, do either suffer themselves to be benumbed with
Idleness, or abuse the activity of their Souls in some vain employment.

The first of these two out of their great love to do nothing, can make no
better wish for themselves, then that they might sleep out the other half of
their time; and it is rational to do so, if his Rule were good for any thing,
who said, He values his life at a just rate, who would be content to forgo it
for a Dream.

The other make their bargain but a little better; far whilst they entertain
themselves with things which correspond not with the Dignity of Reasonable
Souls, instead of perfecting those rare Capacities with which their Natures are
invested, by a generous endeavor to obtain that Happiness which God does not
envy us, they lessen themselves, clip the wings of their Souls, and bring them
down from those degrees of Excellency which they actually enjoy, and make them
degenerate into a brutish incapacity, though many times they take no notice of
the weakness of their judgments: till they meet it in the miserable
Consequences of their Actions.

It is not my purpose here to reckon up all the impertinencies of Mankind,
which are the several instances of the forementioned folly, I would only give
a charitable notice of one, viz. the VVriting and Reading of Romances. This I
put into the number, because for the most part it is verified in them what
Justin Martyr said of Homers Poetry, (...), i.e. The whole Rhapsody of Homers
Iliads and Odysseis, beginning and end, is but a Woman. Yet they dote so much
upon that subject, that they think with those amorous Trojans, that Helen was
not only worthy of all the labors of Homers Quill, but alfo of the sharp
contentions of the Greek and Trojan swords. (...)
(...):
i.e. A ten years War is no unworthy sight,
When Greece and Troy for such a Woman fight.
She was a brave Woman indeed, and it was but fit that so many Gallant men
should destroy one another in the Revenge and Defense of her Adultery. But
Maximus Tyrius in his 15th. Dissertation does justly reprove the folly of their
opinion, and condemn the unreasonablenesse of that lavish praise.

I am not ignorant that Homer wrote upon another design, then to tell so many
tales of Helen and Paris, and that Horace has said in his Commendation, Qui
quid sit pulchrum, quid turpe, quid utile, quid non,
Before ac melius Chrysippo and Crantore dicit:
i.e. He what is fair, what foul, what good, what not,
Better then Crantor and Chrysippus wrote.
It may be so; for though Chrysippus was so great a man, that he was esteemed
the only support of the Stoic School, according to the Proverbiall speech
recorded by Diogenes Laertius, (...). Yet quite contrary to the virtuous design
of prudent Socrates, he spoiled the Doctrine of good manners, and unwisely
changed the substantial precepts of a moral life for the useless subtilties
of nice disputation. Or what if Crantor, whom he yokes with him in the
disparagement, made no great proficiency either by Plato, to whose School he
belonged, or Homer himself, who was his delight? For all this fair verdict,
which Horace has passed in favor of his Brother Poet, the Moral Virtues,
which so highly concern the felicity of the World, ought to be discoursed in
another manner then he uses; for he, as it may be said also of other
Romancers, has made the fabulous rind so thick, that few can see through it
into the useful sense. I do not deny what Plutarch says, that his Verses were
not written only for pleasure, (...), i.e. but that a deeper meaning is hid
under his Poems; but he has sunk it so deep, that very few can come at it. And
some of those who applaud him for a Philosopher, confess that such only can
make a gain of him, that have already attained a mature judgment by long
study; that is, such may possibly learn of him, who are able to teach him: But
he is so unfit for others, that Plato desired they might not see him, (...), i.
e. for fear they should think that the Hero wrote fables, which he had good
reason to expect upon the perusal.

Besides this, as many others do, he has so formed the representations of
Virtue and Vice, that it is hard to say, which is commended and which reproved;
whilst the Gods are frequently brought in practicing Immoralities, he does at
least equal Vice to Virtue, and nourish that which he should eradicate. For,
why should men endeavor to be better then their Gods? So he in the Comedy made
the Adultery of Jupiter an apology for his lust.

-- Et quia consimilem luserat
Jam olim ille ludum --
Ego homuncio hoc non facerem.
Terent. Eunuch. By these and such like instances the Greek Fathers did
convince the Heathens of the imperfection of their best Authors. So one may
perceive in some Romances of a later date, that the pictures of Heroes, which
they have drawn for exact patterns of the most raised virtue are often blotted
with notorious defects, as Impatience, Revenge, and the like.

But this sort of Books is most to be blamed, because for the greater part, as
I said before, their chief Design is to put fleshly Lust into long stories, and
sometimes not without very unhandsome mixtures, tending only to the service of
brutish Concupiscence, the nourishment of dishonorable affections, and by
exciting in the Readers muddy fancies, to indispose them for their attendance
upon God by their better part. For some such reason, I suppose, the great
Sidney before his death charged his friend Sir Fulk Grevill, who had the only
Copy of his Arcadia, that he should never permit it to be made public.

The other pieces, which fill up the intervalls of the story, and grace it with
pleasing varieties, are commonly frivolous devices of wit in some contemptible
matter, and serve but to some such slight purpose, as does the writing of
Verses in the form of an Egg or Hatchet, where the measures of words and sense
are constrained to suite with the odd proportions of such figures. These are
fine varities of no use, the intertexture of the by-accidents being as trivial
as the principal Design.

It Is true, some of these Authors written in diverse Languages, are applauded
for the Elegancy of each particular Tongue, and are here and there interspersed
with good Sentences: but they are so deeply infected with noisome words,
immodest Tales and Discourses, which do fatally corrupt the manners of Youth,
that I cannot but assent to the Opinion of many wise men, who judge them, for
all that, well worthy of the fire. Neither do I think it improper to use the
words, which the old Sages of Troy silently muttered, when they perceived the
dangers which attended the beauty of Helen, which the young men extolled as
equal to that of the heavenly Goddesses. (...),
(...),
i. e. But though She Is such, let her return, and make
An end of what we suffer for her sake.
I could easily name them, but that Labor is needless to such as know books:
and to those which do not, I ought not, by making a Catalogue, to give notice
of such as I could wish burnt. If they were, they would not be greatly missed,
as to that propriety of speech unto which they lay claim, and for which they
are magnified by their Readers; because the best Languages used in the world,
may as well be learned from Authors that are as Elegant as Chaste.

For these reasons I think the Noble Mountaigne gave a great proof of his early
wisdom, in that, as he says, Quant aux Amadis, et tells sorts d'escrits,
ils n' ont pas eu le credit d' arrester seulement mon enfance, i.e. Amadis and
such like trash of VVritings had not so much credit with him, as to allure his
youth to delight in them. And upon the same considerations one may well judge
some Excellent Wits thrown away in writing great stories of Nothing; and that
others lose their unvaluable Time whilst they read them. And the rather,
because, besides the direct loss, they leave the Memory so full of
fantastical Images of things which are not, that they cannot easily dismiss
them: the Fancy being held in the amusement of those foolish Dreams, as we are
in Sleep with the various representations of several things, which never were
nor will be in such Ridiculous Conjunctions. And when the Reader considers how
prettily he has abused himself, yet cannot he presently dispossess his fancy
of those vain Imaginations which he has entertained, but is still haunted with
them, and much indisposed in Mind for more worthy Considerations; as
troublesome Dreams often leave the Body not so well affected.

There is no doubt but that most Readers of such things, ingenuously examining
what beneficial use they could make of the gains reaped from their Studies,
would find themselves hard put to it to name a better then the Great Wit was
forced to, who said, when he thought to retire from his Extravagancies, and to
repose his wearied Spirit, and it still pestered him with an orderlesse rabble
of troublesome Chimaeras, he resolved to keep a Register of them, hoping by
that means one day to make it ashamd, and blush at it self.

It is no wonder that these Fooleries are not easily thrown off, because of
that deep impression which they make upon the affectionate part, through the
cunning inveglements of Fancy. For men having indulged Imagination, and played
carelessly with its Fantasms, unawares take vehement pleasure in things which
they do not believe, and weep for such inconsiderable reasons, that afterward
they laugh at themselves for it, and read Fables with such affections, as if
their own or their friends best interest were wrapped up in them. What strong
Expectation have they for the Issue of a doubtful Design? How unsatisfied are
they till the End of a paper Combat? What fears possess them for the Knight
whose part they take? How passionately are they delighted with the Description
of a Castle built in the air? How ravished upon the conceit of Beauties which
owe themselves only to the paint which came out of the Poets Ink-pot? How are
they taken with pleasure and sorrow for the good and bad success of the
Romantic Lovers? They are apt also to draw to themselves or their friends such
things as they read in far-fetched references: if the resemblances suite in
some little points, they seem to do and suffer such things; and what fits not
they endeavor to patch up with some feigned coherency.

But if in the midst of this busy Idleness they would admit a severe
consideration of more important duties neglected the while, a few disentangled
thoughts would rout the Troop of their fond Imaginations.

Some peradventure not altogether satisfied with that which I have said, may
reply, What, then is Fancy useless? Is it not one of the natural faculties of
the Soul? Were any of them made to no purpose? Is there any more proper
entertainment for it then the Conceit and Language of a well-form'd Romance?
Many books, which pretend to declare better matters to us, do it so jejunely,
that it is a work of more then ordinary patience to give them the reading; and
we are put into a doubt, whether or no those who wrote them did intend any
should make use of their Understandings in the perusal of them, or whether
they were able to give that which others would expect as a reasonable
satisfaction. Besides, we perceive many Books of grave Titles so afflicted with
Disputes about troublesome niceties and trifling Capriccio's, that wise persons
find the books as little of kin to their Names, as the Contents are of small
Furtherance to their best Concernments.

To these things I answer; Fancy is not useless, and may as lawfully be
gratified with excellent forms of Invention, as the Eye may entertain it self
with the Beauty of well-plac'd Colors, or the Sense of Smelling please it self
with the odours of a delicious Rose. But though it be a Natural Faculty, yet
it is under discipline of the Supreme Governesse of Soul and Body, Reason; and
when it wanders without its Keeper, out-staying its time in allowed diversions,
or transgressing the limits of such Subjects as sound Judgment permits, it
returns abused with hurtful delight, and instead of being used decently, is
unworthily prostituted: in whose behalf the Rational Guide, which is not far
off, will take notice and complain, as it does often, and whip the Vagrant, and
not spare to reproach it with the cheap reward of foolish recreation, for the
enjoyment of which she misspent the time which she took from her Prayers, and,
it may be, for the reading of an Idle Story neglected the Examination of her
Conscience; and afterward is made to understand that the same pleasure which
was pretended to be sought abroad, is to be found at Home. For Reason is no
such severe Mistress as to detain us with Awe that is void of Love and Joy;
but besides the solid Complacencies of Virtue, allows also the cheerful
entertainments of Wit and Fancy. There are Books good store where Truths of
greatest Importance are presented neither besmeared with loathsome Nonsense,
nor blended with unprofitable Disputes, which add nothing to Religion, but
trouble and darkness, and where Excellent sense and good words offer
themselves in such lovely Embraces, that they are a perfect content to all
beholders but such as cannot Fancy, Understand and Love. Wit and ability of
mind do so shine in many Religious Discourses, that we cannot justly make that
pretended defect an Excuse for our deserting of sober studies. Now God forbid
that we should think his Gifts so imprudently thrown amongst men, that none
should be able to get them that would use them to the adorning of that which
most deserves it, Virtue; which, though by reason of its innate beauty it least
needs any adventitious ornament, yet does not scorn the light veil of Romance,
if it be of that fashion which I shall by and by describe.

It were a thing to be wondered at, that by many nothing is esteemed witty,
except Poetry and Romances, but that want of Judgment does notoriously
discover it self in those persons who are highly pleased with pitiful things.
`Divers of their admired Authors are so empty of true worth, that if the entire
sense of their books were summed up, it would only amount to some small matter
as trivial as useless: And if most of them, whether Ancient or Modern, were
examined with a Judicious Eye, they would appear to be full of the grossest
Indecorum's of Invention, as odious misrepresentations of Divinity, unnatural
Descriptions of Humane Life, Improper and Profane Allusions to Sacred Things,
frequent and palpable Contradictions, Sottish stories, and in short, all the
absurdities of wild Imagination. I need not verify this by bringing together
those great multitudes of Instances which abound in that sort of books written
in the Greek, Latin, Italian and French Languages. If any desire, they may see
it done largely in the Extravagant Shepherd, especially in the Speech of
Clarimond in the 13th. book, not long since translated by Mr. Davies.

For my own part I do not desire that all books should be as dull as many are,
and none composed, as all are not, to delight; but I would have that delight
true, and the quickness not evaporate into Lightness and Vanity. Is there no
joy but laughter? Does nothing recreate but what is fabulous? Such as do not
like true happiness, because it is a serious thing, have a reasonable Soul
bestowed upon them in vain, and would have been better pleased if God had made
them worse, and more content if God had not designed them to so Noble an End.
But those which like nothing except what goes in a plain Rode of talk, may as
reasonably desire every body to spell, when they read. Such as would not have
Truth presented in ingenious Schemes of Discourse, do foolishly condemn the
wisdom of the Ancients, some of which we may not reprove without a kind of
Blasphemy: and whilst they understand not the Excellent use of Apologues,
Parables, and such like Modes of signification, they are sufficiently answered
by the Confession of their own Ignorance. There are several spirits in the
World; some will take a thing one way, that will not another. A Physician will
not wisely quarrel with his Patient, because he refuses to take the Pill
unless it be gilded. There are also some persons that need to have some
things told them, which because they are guarded with the stately Circumstance
of Worldly Quality, one cannot so easily come near them as in a Disguise.

There are some brave minds, in whom Riches of Conceit are attended with
incomparable Expression: and Truth is not unwilling to be dressed by such; and
those which revile them for their pains, are justly abhorred for their Envy,
or pitied for their Ignorance. Its a mischief that distresses most little
Capacities, impotently to desire that all others should be constituted after
their size; and having passionately, but foolishly, wished such a thing a great
while, at last they begin to believe that what they desire is so indeed.

It is an ungrateful folly and a pride to be laughed at, when men are
unwilling that others should endeavor to further their Good, because they gave
them not leave to prescribe them the way for doing of it: but they should
consider, that there may be such in the world which understand that which
themselves do not, and are delighted with such things as they contemn.

But some that mean well, and think they are not mistaken in the sense of their
proposition, humbly desire that those Excellent Wits would lay their design of
Romance deeper then the Shallows of Fancy; that so the Reader may not stick
upon every Shelf of Fiction, and that the streams of Wit be made navigable for
the Importation of such Wisdom as is necessary for our best life. The design
to please is then as well accomplished; but not terminating in the surface of
Recreation, it is improved into a higher advantage of those nobler faculties
which God has given us.

They think also that the Way to this End is missed, when the Authors account
their Contrivance poor, unless they can sail under water too. As when there is
no moral design of making men better, the Work is done but by the Halves, as
we say: so if that lie under ground in such deep conceits as but few can dive
into the bottom of them, their labor is so far only not lost, as that some who
are more ingenious will take the pains to understand what they meant.

To conclude, I have not all this while spoke my own Hopes concerning what I
have performed in this work, but my wishes were hearty that it might neither
displease nor be unprofitable. Whereas I have in several places reproved some
things frequently found amongst men, I only plead, that since they make no
scruple of acting unworthily, I thought I might much more justly take liberty
to talk of it. And since you have had the Patience to be acquainted with what
I would have done, if any body be pleased with that which is written, I shall
not be discontented; but if they be profited too, then I shall think that I
have not labored in vain.

AN ALPHABETICAL INDEX, In which the obscure Words of this Book are explained.
Though I do not think the Meaning of this Treatise any abstruse business; yet
because the sense of some Words may peradventure be locked up from some
Readers, who understand Things better then Names, I have put this Key with the
Book. Since the Treasure is but small which is hid here, I am unwilling that
any body should be at much trouble in seeking after it.

A
ABinoam, (...), the Father of Pleasures, God, the Spring of Delight. page 283
Abulus, (...), an Inconsiderate, rash man, one that acts without due
deliberation. He appears to be such by his Story; for upon a weakly-grounded
suspicion he would needs fight with one that never wronged him. 59 Acolaftus,
(...), an Unmerciful, Cruel man, Bentivolio's Jailour. Good will is imprison d
in hard Hearts. 117 Acolastus, (...), an Intemperate person, undisciplined and
of unsubdued Passions. 80 Acrasia, (...), Intemperance, Incontinence, Impotency
of Soul. 83 Adynaton, (...), Impossibility: one of the Hypocrites false Pleas,
who when he sins, thinks to excuse the matter by saying that it is not Possible
to keep God's Commands, and that Christ's yoke is heavy and pincheth his neck.
153 Aganacton, (...), one that is Offended and angry. 167 Agape, (...), Love,
the Daughter of Phronesia or Prudence. True Wisdom is never destitute of Divine
Charity. 201 Agathorryton, (...), flowing with Goodness: a proper Epithet for
God, who is an inexhaustible Fountain continually sending forth waters of Life.
(...)
(...).
Synes. Arise, my Soul, drink of the Spring
Which overflowes with Goodness, etc.
Plotin calls him (...), the Spring of Life, the Beginning of Being, the Cause
of Goodness, the Root of the Soul: as Pythagoras before, (...),
The Fountain of everlasting Nature.
200 Agazelus, (...), full of Emulation. In the III. Book it is put to express
those intemperate Heats which do often scorch men's Spirits when they are set on
fire with Uncharitable Contentions about matters which are of less moment in
Religion. 115 Agerochus, (...), a Proud and Insolent person. 167 Agnoea, (...),
Ignorance. 122 Agon, (...), Strife. The Valley of Tentation is so called in the
beginning of the IV. Book, in which there is a large Description of the Contest
and Victory of a truly-Good man over bodily and spiritual Tentations. 178
Akeraea, from (...), Vnmix'd, pure. Here put for Simplicity, the inseparable
Concomitant of true Godliness. 137 Alazon, (...), a vainglorious Boaster. 167
Alethalogus, (...), True Reason, the loving Brother of Pistalethes, i. e. True
Faith. Their good agreement is described 203 Alethea, (...), Truth, the Sister
of Charinda, Charity. 158 Alypia, (...), Indolentia, Freedom from all Trouble
and Care; the Goddess of Piacenza. It signifies the chief desire of the
Voluptuous. 78 Amaranth, (...), never withering. An Herb so called from the
lasting Vigor of its Flowers. Pliny says that is bears purple ears or
flowers, of which, because they would keep fresh a good while, they used to
make Garlands, lib. 21. cap. 11. It is used here to signify the ever
flourishing Glory of Perseverance in Virtue. 280 Amasia, a Lover. 80 Amerimnus,
(...), one free from troublesome Cares. A Priest of Eusebia, serving God (...)
without distraction. An undivided Soul, wholly devoted to Heavenly studies and
employments, which are broken with Worldly Sollicitudes. 237 Ametameletus,
(...), a thing not to be repented of. Such a Repentance is, when one that has
sinned, does with shame and sorrow forsake Vice. 200 Amiantus, (...),
Immaculate, free from blame. 246 Amphilogia, (...), Ambiguity of Speech,
Controversy. 158 Amphisbeton, (...), one given to Controversy and Debate. 157
Anaescuntus, (...), Impudent. 80 Ananephon, (...), one that returns to Sobriety
and soundness of Mind. 173 Ananke, (...), Necessity. It is muchwhat the same
Excuse with Adynaton. He which pleads that the Divine Commands cannot be
kept, induces a Necessity of Sin. 153 Anaxanacton, (...), King of kings; a
title of our Savior, who is also called by diverse names of the same Import,
(...), and (...). 161 Anchinous, (...), one of a ready Wit, the Servant of
Prudence. 136 Anteros, the Rival of Eros, from (...), which signifies Rivalry
in Love. 80 Anthropia, the state of Humanity, from (...), a Man. 2 Antilegon,
(...), one that contradicts others, and who is not without employment in
Logomachia. See Logomachia. 156 Antimater, a Stepmother. 63 Antinomus, (...),
that opposes the Law, an Irregular Person. 167 Aphrodite, Venus, from (...),
Froth, because, as the Poets say, she was born of the Foam of the Sea. Book II.
it denotes frothy Pleasures. 78 Aphron, (...), a Fool. 80 Apiston, (...), one
that does not rashly assent, but doubts till he see reason for his belief. 102
Arete, (...), Virtue, deservedly beloved of Nicomachus and all worthy spirits.
178 Argentora, from Argento and Oro, Silver and Gold. The Title of the I. Book,
which conteins a Description of Covetousness and Ambition, where Force and
Fraud bear sway. 1 Argus, a careless fellow and neglectfull of his duty. (...).
47 Asmodeus, a Lustful Genius. 144 Asotus, (...), a Prodigal or Waster. 80
Aspasia, from (...), to salute or embrace. ibid. Asphaltites, from (...), a
pitchey, sulphurous Clay. The Lake called the Dead Sea, supposed to be the
place where Sodom and Gomorrah stood. 149 Aspremont, A rough Hill full of
Bushes and uneven way, very passable to Good men, and which leads to Happiness;
and therefore they call it Roccabella. See Roccabella. 86 Astorges, (...),
Destitute of Natural Affections. 92 Ate, (...). Harm, mischief. It denotes a
state of prevailing violence in the I. Book. 3 Atimia, (...) Disgrace, which
with Sorrow does usually follow a Voluptuous life. 80 Authades, (...), one that
pleases and admires himself, as all Proud persons do; who are also offended if
others do not observe them. 196 Autocatacritus, (...), Self condemnd. 131
B
BEllezza (Ital.) Beauty. 80 Bentivolio here denotes Good will, from the (...)
Ben ti voglio. It is used by them for a Proper name; and so it is here for the
Brother of Urania, i. e. Heavenly Light, from (...) Heaven, or (...) Light. By
celestial Wisdom and true Love the Soul passes through all states in this
World to Immortal Perfections and Glories. 1 Bevenda, from Bevere, to drink. 83
Biocalon, (...), a Good Life, which is the true way to Heaven, and is therefore
called the great Rode extended according to the whole length of Theoprepia. 202
Borborites, from (...), Mud. A name by which the filthy Gnostics were of old
disgraced, a Sect that wallowd in fleshly Lusts, Ranters. 197
C
CAcodaemon, (...), an Evil Spirit. 139 Carezza, Caresses. 80 Catasarkus,
(...), Fleshly, Corpulent. It signifies the Jew in the I. Book, because their
Religion does much consist in Bodily observances. 131 Centaurus, (...) a
Horseman driving away Cattle, from (...) pungo, and (...) taurus. 170 Charinda,
from (...), Charity. 158 Colax, (...), a Flatterer, the great friend of
Tuphlecon. See Tuphlecon. 153 Contrapart is taken in a Musical sense. As in the
composition of a Song of several Parts, the Harmony is perfected by the
supplies of different Notes which each Part administers both when they sound
together, or one after another by the interposition of fit Rests: So it has
pleased the Divine Wisdom to checker the Creation with Blacks and Whites, to
set off Day with Night, to relieve Winter by Summer; and having made his Work
double, and set one thing over against another, he has made Charity the
Antistoichon to Want. The Septuagint considering the Congruity that in this and
other respects is ^etween Prosperity and Adversity, have used the forementioned
Notion, and translate (...), Eccles. 7. 15. (...), God has tun^d one to
another. 262
D
DEisidaemon, (...) a Superstitious person; or one that is apt to have dreadful
Apprehensions of God, and yet thinks he may be appeased with a small matter.
167 Distoma Romphaea, (...), a twoedged Sword: an instrument of great use in
Exosemnon. 138 Doulogynes, (...), a Woman's slave, Antimater's servant. Such
Stepmothers must use such Assistants. 58 Dysarestus, (...), one hard to be
pleased. 167 Dyscolus, (...), properly one of a weak Stomach; here one that is
of a morose Temper, and apt to take Offense. 117 Dyselpis, (...), one that is
ready to despair. 92 Dysemeria, (...), Affliction, Adverse Fortune. 27
Dyspithea, (...), Obstinacy, Difficulty of being persuaded. A Disease incident
to most Ignorant and to all Conceited people. 122
E
EKnephon, (...), one that grows sober. Book II. a Young man returning to
himself out of the Madness of a Vicious life. 89 Elpicale, (...) Good Hope.
After a constant Perseverance in well-doing we come directly into the Valley of
Elpicale or Good Hope. And there is no Rode by which we can arrive in Elpicale
but Biocalon or a Good life. 202 Elpis, (...), Hope, the Daughter of Eupistis,
True Faith. Hope is the Expectation of the Soul in time to enjoy the Object of
its Faith. 203 Empsychon, (...), Living, or Inspired with Life. In the II. Book
it signisies the Rational Soul examining Doctrines by its discerning Faculties,
and approving for True and Good what agrees with them and the other Rule
Grapton, or the Revelation of the Divine Will committed to Writing. See
Grapton. 103 Engastrimuthus, (...), one that speaks out of the Belly, called
also (...), because of that immodest way by which the Pythones pronounced their
Oracles. This trick was used of old. The Woman which Saul consulted is called 1
Samuel 28. 7. (...) Domina Pythonis, from (...) Bottles, because the Devil used
to speak out of her swollen Belly, as out of a Bottle; and is well rendered by
the Lxx (...). Aristophanes bragging in his Vespae, that he helped other Poets
to make their Comedies, says that after the manner of (...), one that was
famous for this (...), he did (...), i.e. entering into their bellies pour
forth Verses. Some of the Heathens ashamed of this obscene business, allowed
the Devil a more honorable place, the Breast, and called him (...), as if he
spoke the same way that some late Juglers have used, who form an articulate
sound, though those which are present cannot perceive that they open their
Mouth. Here it is put only for one troubled with Hystericall fits, by which
some in these days have put tricks upon the Ignorant. 142 Enthusiasm, (...),
Divine Inspiration, by which Holy men of old were enabled to speak and do
extraordinary things. Here it is taken for the mere pretense to it, by which
device Religious Mountebanks have often abused the credulous world. Eristes,
(...), a contentious person. 2 Eros, (...), Love. 80 Erotocleus, (...), the
Glory of Love. 27 Eucharist, (...), Thanksgiving; by which name the Greek
Church did properly express the nature of our Lord's Supper; that Sacrament
being appointed to make a thankful and honorable Commemoration of his Death.
165 Euergesia, (...), Beneficence, the Twinsister of Philothea or the Love of
God. 259 Eumenes, (...), Benign. 118 Eupathus, (...), one that is easily
affected with things, of a gentle Disposition. 77 Eupistis, from (...) and
(...), a Good Faith or True Belief; which is described Book IV. 201 Euprepon,
(...), Comely or Decent. In the III. Book it signifies one that was not
inamourd with the gaudy outsides of Exosemnon, yet abhorred the baseness of
Pseudenthea. 131 Euprosopon, a fair Show, from (...) and (...). One that sets a
fair face upon things. 150 Eusebia, (...), Piety. 201 Euthanatus, from (...)
and (...), a Good Death, the Happy close of a good Life. 281 Exetazon, (...),
one that Examines or tries things. It is here put for Inquiry, and is therefore
called Apiston's File, because by ingenuous Examination and diligent Search we
find out the Truth. 103 Exorcista, (...), a Conjurer. Those which would see
more such like Pranks, or think those very uncouth which I have related
concerning Exorcista in the III. Book, may be satisfied if they will read a
Book called Tres Energumenae Belgicae; where they will soon perceive whether I
or the Exosemnians have abused the Popish Exorcisms. 139 Exosemnon, (...),
outwardly Venerable; which all grant that Church to be upon whom that Name is
bestowed. 133
F
FOrzario, from Forza, a Violent Person that makes Power his Law, the Husband
of Inganna, Craft; for Power associates it self with Cunning the better to
accomplish its Designs. 31
G
GAlenepsyches, (...), a Calm of Soul, Tranquillity of Spirit, one of those
three invaluable Jewels which a true Lover of God does possess. See Ommelion
and Terpsithea. 239 Gelosia, Jealousy. 2 Gnothisauton, (...), Know thy self. I
have call d the Governor of Tapinophrosyne by that name, because the Knowledge
of ones Self is the natural Root of Humility. 195 Grapton, (...), Written, the
Revelation of the Divine Will committed to Writing. See Empsychon. 103
Gynicaeus, (...), Womanish. It denotes a man imprudently Uxorious. 63
Gynopicrene, from (...) and (...), a Womanish bitterness, or feeble
Peevishness. 2
H
HAmartolus, (...), a Sinner. 199 Harpagus, from (...), Rapacious; the Servant
of Plutopenes. Covetousness is usually attended with Rapine. 24 Heautus, one
that does (...), Selfinterest, which disturbs the common Happiness of the
World. 167 Hedonia, from (...) Pleasure, the name of the Voluptuous Queen of
Piacenza. 79 Hemicalus, (...), half Good, one that is in a small measure
persuaded to be Virtuous. 251 Hermagathus, (...), a good Mercury or happy
Messenger. 11 Hesychia, (...), Quietness, Tranquillity. 159 Hierographon, from
(...) and (...), the Holy Scripture. 206 Hydraula, (...), a Musical Instrument
that sounds by Water. 193 Hyla, (...), Matter. In the IV. Book it imports the
Hindrances which arise to a Good man out of this Bodily state: That (...),
which the learned Bishop in his Hymns so often prays against under the several
names of (...), etc. the Tempting Bawd, the Corporeal Cloud, a Dog that barks
and bites the soul, Tempests that rise from the body. 197 Hylotes, from the
same (...) in the III. Book signifies the dull Sympathy which the grossly
Ignorant have only with Bodily things. 121 Hypernephelus, (...), above the
Clouds; no unfit name for such as take such wild flights of fancy that sober
judgment cannot reach them. One that speaks or writes Mysterious Nonsense.
167 Hyperoncus, (...), very Proud. 155 Hypnotica, from (...), Sleepy. Sleep and
Idleness are the supporters of Ignorance. 121 Hypsocardes, from (...), Height,
and (...), the Heart. It notes Arrogance and overweening thoughts, by which a
man is lifted up above a just estimation of himself. See Megalophron. 195
Hysterica, from (...), the Womb. A Woman troubled with Suffocations commonly
called the fits of the Mother. 142
I
IConium, from (...), an Image. It is used in the III. Book to express that
sort of Religion which is made up of Outsides: not reproving those who would
have God served with Bodily instances, (for so he ought to be, as is declar 'd
in the IV. Book;) but those who neglect the Spirit of Religion. For a Good man,
as Hierocles says most excellently, (...), i. e. Offers himself for a
Sacrifice, makes his own Soul the Image of God, and prepares his Mind, and
makes it a fit Temple for the reception of Divine Light. 131 Idiopathy, from
(...) and (...). It denotes men's particular Affections, peculiar Tempers,
Inclinations and Persuasions, with which they are so enamored that many times
with much Passion and little Reason they condemn others that are not prone to
sympathize with them. 171 Inganna, Craft. See Forzario. 31 Irene, (...), Peace;
a Virgin which toward the further end of the Holy Rode presents the Travailers
with Garlands of Amaranth. Peace and Tranquillity are the fruits of
Perseverance in a good course of Life. 280
K
KAlobulus, a Good Counselor, from (...) and (...). 32 Kenapistis, Vain
Faith, from (...) and (...), at large described in the III. Book. 115
Kiskildrivium, an insignificant word used by Erasmus in one of his Epistles,
and is of as much sense in Speech as Transubstantiation is in Religion. 166
Krimatophobus, from (...) and (...), Fear of Judgment, an inseparable
Companion of Hypocrisy. 155
L
LAbargurus, from (...) and (...), one that greedily receives Money, and will
do nothing without it. The name of a Corrupt Judge. 32 Lampromelan, (...),
partly bright, partly dark. So is Death, which is represented by the River so
called Book IV. for it is dark as it obscures the Bodily Life, and bright as it
draws the Curtains of Eternal Light which shines upon good Souls in the other
World. 281 Lerocritus, a Judge of Trifles, from (...) and (...), one that is
zealously busy about little arts and things. 156 Lestrygon. The Lestrygones
were a barbarous sort of People, which Thucydides (lib. 6.) says he knew not
whence they came nor whither they went. They infested Sicily, and Campania in
Italy. Homer in Odyss. 10. tells us how they used Ulysses and his Companions.
25 Leucas, (...), a white Rock or Promontory of Epirus, not far from Actium,
from which Lovers used to throw themselves that they might be freed from the
madness of impotent Love. They failed not of their Cure, for they commonly
broke their necks. Of this Ausonius in his Cupido cruci adfixus makes mention,
Et de (...) Leucate minatur
(...) Lesbiacis Sappho (...) sagittis:
of whom Menander in Stobaeus lib. 10. -- (...)
(...)
(...).
87 Logomachia, Controversy about Words, by which true Philosophy is made only
(...) a vain noise, and (...) a (...) vain talk, as Saint Paul says. 160
Lusingha, Flattery. 80 Lymanter, (...) a Destroyer. 155
M
MAngibella, a good Eater. 83 Mantimanes, a Mad Prophet. 139 Mataeoponus,
(...), Labor in vain. 156 Megabronchus, one that has a great Throat, from
(...) and (...). 105 Megalophron, (...), properly one that has a Great Mind;
but here it signifies one that has high Thoughts concerning himself, and does
much relish his own Worth. 195 Melita, (...) Care. 179 Metamelusa, from (...)
and (...), one that takes thought afterward, and signifies in the II. Book Late
Repentance. 91 Metanoea, (...), Repentance, Change of Mind, Second thoughts.
199 Miasmasarkos, (...), Defilement of the Flesh with bodily Sin, which the
Ranters, Modern Gnostics, have patronized as a more raised strain of Religion,
as their Predecessors of old. 168 Microcheires, from (...) and (...),
Smallhanded. The old name of Polyglotta, which had much Religious Talk, but few
Good Deeds. 114 Misokalon, (...), one that hates Goodness. 59 Moira, (...),
Fate, Destiny, to which Hypocrites are apt falsely to attribute their
Wickedness, which arises from the choice of their own Wills, and is confirmed
by many voluntary Acts. 153 Morophila, from (...) and (...), one that loves
foolishly, as some Parents do their Children, whilst they take much care of
their Bodily accomplishments, but neglect to perfect their Souls with Virtue.
92 Morosophus, from (...) and (...), a halfwitted man; one that has some Wit
which is in a Fool's keeping, and of which he makes a perverse use. 123
Morpheolus, from Morpheus, the Minister of Sleep, an Attendant upon Luxury,
whom I have described in a part colored Mantle, according to that form (...)
Habit in which Philostratus (in Amphiar.) says he was painted of old, (...),
in a careless garb, having a white garment upon a black one, to signify, as he
thought, the Vicissitudes of Night and Day, which follow one another at no
great distance: for except those which dwell near the Poles, that of Homer is
applicable to all the World. (...).
83
N
NArcissus, One that was in love with his own Shadow. It is but a common Story,
but it is too pertinent where it is applied; for, as Philostratus says in his
Icones, (...), He (...) over the Spring, taking pleasure in the contemplation
of his own Beauty. What else do they, who spend their time between the Comb and
the Glass? as (...) says. 80 Narke, (...), the Cramp-fish, which benums the
hands of those that touch it. Here it signifies Dull Sloth, which throws the
Powers of the Soul into a heavy kind of Sleep, and makes it unactive. 178
Nemesia, and Nemesis, from (...), Indignation and Revenge. 42.66 Neurospasts,
(...), Puppets, or things which though they seem to act of themselves, are only
moved by unseen Wires or Strings. 148 Nicomachus, from (...) and (...), one
that Conquers in fight. In the IV. Book he represents a Good man vanquishing
all sorts of spiritual and fleshly Tentation. 178 Nynhapanta, from (...) and
(...), All at present. One that tempted Nicomachus with the Pleasures of this
present World. 178
O
ODax, form (...) a Tooth. It signifies in the III. Book the sharp Remorse of
an Evil Conscience. 155 Oictirmon, (...), a Merciful person. 15 Ommelion, from
(...) an Eye, and (...) the Sun; a Sun like Eye or clear Understanding. None
have such visions of God as Holy Souls. For, as Plotin says Ennead. 2. lib. 9.
(...), i.e. To what purpose (...) we talk of looking toward God? That is worth
nothing, unless we show how we may come to see him But Virtue joined with
Prudence, when it is brought to perfection, will let us see God. 239 Ononeirus,
(...), the Dream of an Ass: The Captain of the Levellers, who bottom their
Designs upon Dreams and foolish Thoughts. 29 Ontagathus, (...), a truly Good
man. 149 Orexis, (...), Appetite. By Orexis Nicomachus was strongly solicited:
for most Tentations receive power against us from that Interest which they have
in the Sensitive Appetite. 178 O: gilus, (...), an Angry man; one of
Bentivolio's Accusers. Anger, when it is a little humored, destroys Good will.
117 Orphana, (...), an Orphan. The Story is too applicable to many, who by the
Infidelity of their Guardians are used after the same manner. 55
P
PAmmachia, (...), Altogether Contentious, or Full of Strife and War. 2
Pammelaena, from (...) and (...), All-dark. By this name the state of Ignorance
is represented Book III. 121 Panaretus, from (...) and (...), All-Vertuous, the
Brother of Bentivolio and Urania. Where Heavenly Light and Holy Love inhabit,
they are accompanied with every other Virtue. 18 Pancratus, from (...) and
(...), One that has got an absolute Dominion over his Passions; one that can
contein himself within the bounds of Temperance in all Instances. 74 Pangelos,
from (...) and (...), one wholly given to Laughter. 80 Panstriblus, from (...)
and (...), Altogether Perverse. I have bestowed this name upon the filthy
Ranters, the Gnostics of these days, who turn Religion into Atheism, and the
Grace of God into Wantonness. 139 Pantheon, (...), A Temple at Rome common to
all the Gods. It is put in the III Book for Gentile Idolatry. 133 Parelton,
(...), the Sun reflected; a round Cloud glistring with the Image of the Sun.
273 Parresia, (...), Freedom of Speech, Confidence. 118 Pathus, (...), Passion,
Affection, Softness. 153 Peirasmus, (...), Tentation. ibid. Peirastes, (...), a
Tempter. 178 Penia, (...), Poverty. 10 Perilype, (...) Grief, the Consequent of
foolish (...). 80 Philadelphia, (...), Brotherly Love. 201 Philapant as, from
(...) and (...), a Lover of all men. 28 Philopseudes, (...), a Lover of
Falsehood, one that makes Lies. 155 Philothea, (...), a Lover of God and Divine
things. 259 Philoxenus, (...), a Lover of Strangers, Hospitable. 116 Phrictus,
(...), Dreadful, Terrible; one of Tuphlecon's Tormentors. The discovery of
Hypocrisy produces Amazement. 155 Phronesia, (...), Prudence. 201 Phronimus,
(...), Prudent. ibid. Piacenza, Pleasure, the Title of the II. Book, wherein a
Voluptuous Life is described and reproved. 69 Picrudor, (...), Bitter Water,
the Emblem of bitter Zeal. 156 Pigerrimo, a Sluggish person. 79 Pinodipson,
(...), Hungry and Thirsty. Poverty. 2 Pistalethes, (...), True Faith. 203
Pithopseudes, from (...) Suadela, and (...) false, one that persuades others to
believe what is false. 208 Planaster, from (...) and (...), a Wandering Star.
140 Pleonecton, (...), one that desires to have too much, an Avaritious person.
114 Plutopenes, from (...) and (...), a poorrich man, who never has Enough,
nor enjoys or makes any good use of what he has. 15 (...), (...). In the III.
Book it denotes Spiritual Wickedness, Pride, Contention and Wrath, which puff
up men's Minds and swell their Thoughts. 168 Polyglotta, (...), much Tongue.
Religion is distressed when it is environed with Words, but destitute of
suitable Performances. 114 Polymachus, (...), much given to Contention. 167
Polytheus, (...), one that believes or worships many Gods. 133 Pseudenthea,
from (...) and (...), False Inspiration, with which these latter times have
been troubled. 115 Pseudognosis, (...), Knowledge falsely so called. 208
Pseudorces, a Perjured person, from (...) and (...), a false Oath. 50
R
RHexinous, (...), that enervates the Mind: a proper Epithet of Jealousy, which
breaks and discomposes the Spirit. 2 Rhipsaspis, (...), one that throws away
his Shield, and flies at the sight of an Enemy, as Demosthenes was reported to
do. 125 Roccabella, The fair Rock. The lovely Mount of Temperance, upon which
the Soul enjoys the delights of Serene Contemplation. 86
S
SDegna, Disdain and Revenge. 3 Skiamelluses, (...), the Shadow of that which
was to come. The Jewish Temple is not unfitly called by that Name, because that
and the Jewish Economy were but an External Shadow of better and more
substantial good things, which they did for a time (...), represent as by Types
and Shadows. 131 Sophron, (...), Temperate. 225 Sophrosyne, (...), Temperance,
described at large in the IV. Book. 201 Staurus, (...), a Cross; but is used
in the III. Book particularly for the Cross of Christ, upon which when he
offered himself to God, he abrogated all the Jewish Oblations. 132 Synaxis,
(...), a Convention or Congregation. It is taken Theologically for a Company of
Christians met together to eat the Lord's Supper, and to make a joint
Commemoration of our Savior's Death.
T
TAano, (...), those things which are above. 201 Takato, (...), those things
which are below. These two Streams of the Spring Agathorryton signify the Good
things which God gives with his Right hand, as Wisdom and Virtue, and with his
Left, as Strength of Body, Worldly Quality, Riches, etc. For he is (...), the
Spring of Springs, the first and best Good from whence all Goodness is derived,
as Synesius calls him in one of his Hymns. See Agathorryton. ibid. Talaepora,
(...), Miserable. 11 Tapinophrosyne, (...), Humility. 192 Temperanza,
Temperance, which is the great Panpharmacon, the true All-heal: it both
prevents Sickness, and restores Health. 14 Terpsithea, (...), Delight in God.
See Galenepsyches. 239 Thanatus, (...), Death. 155 Tharraleus, (...),
Confident, Presuming. ibid. Theophila, (...), a Lover of God. Theoprepia,
(...), a State worthy of God. The Title of the IV. Book, wherein some things
belonging to that State are discoursed, as far as the Nature of such a Work as
this is would handsomely permit. 177 Theorus, (...), one that contemplates,
from (...), or one that takes care of Divine things, from (...) and (...). I
placed Agathorryton in this Hill, because the Spring of Life does pour forth
its Streams most plentifully upon careful and holy Souls. 200 Theosebes, (...),
a Religious person, one that worships God. 201 Therodes, (...), Brutish, as the
Poor frequently are for want of Education. 11 Thrasymachus, (...), Bold in
fight 36 Timautus, (...), one that seeks his own Honor. 114 Trimalcio, (...),
a very soft and Effeminate person. Under this name some think that Petronius
Arbiter did describe the Luxuries of Nero. 79 Tuphlecon, from (...) and (...),
wilfully Blind. 150 Tuphlotharson, from (...) and (...), blindly Confident. 122
V
VAghezza, Beauty, Loveliness. Vanasembla, a Vain Show. The Title of the III.
Book, in which many things which are extolled in some places as eminent parts
of Religion, are discovered to be no such matters. 111 Vendetta, Revenge. 3
Veneriola, from Venus, a Wanton. 83 Urania signifies Celestial Light, from
(...) Heaven, or (...) Light. See Bentivolio. 18
ERRATA.
PAge 70. line 12. for well read real. p. 114. l. 13. read Timautus. p. 208. l.
5. read (...). p. 249. l. 25. for designs read deigns.

THE FIRST BOOK: OR, ARGENTORA.
IT was many years after that time when the Rusty Brass and baser Iron had
given too great an assurance of the full determination of the Golden and Silver
Ages, when Bentivolio appeared to the astonishment of the degenerate world,
which could not remember to have seen any Gentleman equal to him in Complexion
or Stature. He was so perfectly made up, that one might easily perceive Wisdom,
Goodness and Courage to have done their utmost in his Composure. The esteem of
his Perfections did not rise by the measure of those disproportions in which
the corrupt Age fell below him, but by such degrees as the exact rules of
Virtue set up for an infallible standard.

After a full acquaintance with the customs of his own Country, by which he
arrived at great perfection, and would have outdone them, but that they were
such as could not be exceeded, (for he was born in the higher Theoprepia,) he
had a great desire to see other Countries; not to make Experiments by his
Travel to satisfy Curiosity, which in him was very little; but to deserve such
Honor as does naturally accompany virtuous attempts, and leave most real
Benefits upon the bestowers of it.

He had now gone over diverse Kingdoms which administered variety of trials, and
matched variety with difficulty; but in each he was so happily successful,
that every ones Admiration strove with Love, which should do him the most
Honor. His singular Good Will being the bottom of his Engagements, and those
ever answered with equal performances, the people would take notice of him
under no meaner Character then a Father to mankind. He could go no where but
Fame was his Harbinger, and took up for him the best Rooms in the Worthiest
Expectations, and provided all possible welcome in the most Noble Hearts. The
Report of his atcheivements ran through the world with like speed, and the same
awful noise, with which the Thunderclaps follow the flashes of Light. He
subdued several Bravo's, which infested the Regions of Anthropia; in
particular Eristes, who ranged up and down the Country of Gynopicrene:
Rhexinous, who made his abode in the darksome valleys of Gelosia: and
Pinodipson, who took an unworthy pleasure in afflicting the meaner sort of
people; he used to cut them with a poisoned sword, and those which were
wounded, seemed afterward to dye so many deaths as they lived hours, and at
last dyed indeed cursing.

He met Bellona in the rough Deserts of Pammachia, and she being enraged at the
presence of her sworn Foe, running upon him with a Womanish fury, chanced to
wound her self in her right hand upon the point of Bentivolio's sword;
whereupon she let her own fall. Bentivolio took it up, and casting his eyes
upon the innocent blood with which it had been often besmeared, as he was going
to break it, she fell down upon her knees, and beseeching him to hold his hand,
promised if he would restore her beloved Sword, she would submit to any
conditions which he should appoint. Bentivolio knowing that she was provided
with other Weapons of as unmercifull effect, called for the scabbard, and
having sheathed the cruel blade, he took an oath of her never to draw it more
in any Country where he should happen to be, and so dismissed her, to the great
joy of the people, who could never live in peace for her.

These and such like accidents caused diverse conjectures in men's minds
concerning Bentivolio, who he should be; and whilst some said one thing, and
others another, some stick'd not to affirm with confidence that Hercules was
risen from the dead, and having changed his Lions skin for the Lambs, and
thrown away his Club, did more without it then with it.

Having passed several nations, he came at last to the forlorn Kingdom of Ate,
which he judged the most loathsome that ever he saw, and did before esteem it
impossible that any could be so bad, knowing well that God never made any such.
He was no sooner entered within the Borders, but the unhealthfulness of the Air
had almost choked his Vital Spirits; and being removed from the gladsome Sun
by a chain of Hills, that lifted up their heads so high, that they intercepted
the least glance of his comfortable beams, it was dark and ruefull. He
happened to light upon an obscure path which led to Ate's house, which was
encompassed with the pitchy shade of Cypress and Ebon Trees, so that it looked
like the Region of Death: as he walked he perceived the hollow pavement made
with the skulls of murdered wretches. At the further end of this dismal walk he
espied a Court, whose gates stand open night and day, in the midst whereof was
placed the Image of Cruelty, with a Cup of poison in one hand, and a dagger all
wet with reeking blood in the other; her hairs crawled up and down her neck,
and sometimes wreathed themselves about her head in knots of snakes, fire all
the while sparkling from her mouth and eyes. Upon this he returned, guessing it
to be rather the Temple of some infernal Goddess, then the Palace of a
Terrestrial Queen. At the entrance of this cursed place, by a way which leads
to a duskish wood, he met two women, which by their habit seemed to be Furies
of Hell, but were indeed attendants of Ate. Their names he learned to be Sdegna
and Vendetta: and they, expressing their hearts in words which did not fit
them, would needs entreat him to accept of such accommodation as that place
would afford. Bentivolio well knowing what that must needs be, if the inside
corresponded with what he had seen, and the entertainment were to be given by
such Ministers, made at first such refusal as might be interpreted Modesty and
Complement; but at length appearing to be plain Denial, after the vain
repetition of many entreaties, they appeared like themselves: For after some
ill language, they hastened away through the dark shade of the thick Grove,
designing a Revenge of their slighted offer; though it was not so much a
neglected Civility as a frustrated Malice.

Bentivolio being thus delivered from an ugly Invitation, made haste to seek a
place where better people might more probably be expected: being come to a
neighboring Town, he had been there but a little while before he found that
the subjects were too like the Devilish Tyrant that commanded them. After some
indignities received, for which he knew no reason, but that those which offered
them had nothing else to give, as he was casting in his mind what to do, and
after many thoughts resolved to abandon that den of Devils; he received a
Letter from Astraea, who the day before was sent thither to take vengeance of
such a Villainy, as the Divine Justice, without a seeming neglect of Government,
could not suffer to be unpunished, and that hastened the Execution of his
purpose. The Letter contained these words.

BENTIVOLIO,
I am not ignorant who you are, and whence you come, and peradventure know
where you are better then you do, having been here longer then your self. In
this place dwells keen Hatred and unrelenting Spite. The Inhabitants, as I
understand, by order of the most wicked Ate, have a design to murder you. I
have sent you herewith a Sword, which you will need before you come into your
own Country; if you forgo it not, you will perceive in time, that it was not
an unfit expression of a friends good will. As soon as you have read this
Letter, be gone from this Earth, which I also will immediately leave.

ASTRAEA.


Bentivolio having returned such an answer as so great a Civility required,
deeply grieved with the cries of the oppressed, and more with the incorrigible
misery of those who esteemed all wrongs lawful, which furthered their own
interest, retired to a Port which was not far off, (intending, if he might, to
imbarke himself from thence for Argentora, for he meant to return home that
way, having received strange reports concerning that Country, of whose Truth he
desired to be certified,) and there he found a ship which was driven in by
storms, weighing anchor, not only because the wind blew fair to carry them
off, but because the inhospitable temper of the people made their stay
undesired. Bentivolio giving them notice of his desire, and making it
acceptable with offers of money, they took him in. Before they had sailed many
leagues a new Storm arose, and the West wind blew so tempestuously that they
could not manage the ship; after a while the wind being somewhat appeased, they
had also the comfort to make land, and a Port happily presented it self.
Bentivolio hoping that it might possibly be Argentora, urged the Pilot by all
means to put in; which they had no mind to do, fearing that it was the place
from which not above a year before they had stolen a ship, where they were sure
to find such welcome as that kind of guests does deserve. Bentivolio not
knowing the grounds of their unwillingness, offered to their Consideration the
uncertain event which this Storm might have; it had a bad beginning, and for
ought they knew might make a worse conclusion: however it would be a great
consolation and security to see it blow over in a Harbor. The Mariners neither
minding his reasons, nor regarding the worth of his person, for they knew him
not, stood off, till at last the Boatswaine came running up into the Masters
Cabin, and told them that the Ship had sprung a leake which he could not stop,
and that the water came in so fast, that they must either seek preservation
ashore, or sink. Upon this they changed their minds, and made what way they
could to get into the Harbor; where they were no sooner arrived, but the
vessel was almost full of water, and by that time the Passengers and Sailors
were got ashore, it sunk before their eyes.

Bentivolio understanding by one of their Confessions the justness of the
Punishment, which, by reason of the place where they suffered, did soon call to
mind their Sin, gave them his charitable directions to help them to make the
best of so bad a matter; and discovering the place to be Argentora, after he
had received notice of his way, went up to a high cliffe, that he might from
thence please himself with a view of the Country, which was hid from his Eye by
a row of Hills which ran along the seacoast; and when he had reached the top
he found a place fit for his purpose.

It was that season of the Year when the Earth puts on her most gorgeous
Apparel to entertain the Sun, which does then bestow longer visits upon that
then the other Horizon, and that presented him with the loveliest Prospect that
Imagination acquainted with such kind of things can desire. It was so far
beyond ordinary Perfection, that he thought sure he was deceived, and that in
stead of some true piece of Natures work, he beheld a delectable Contrivance of
Curious Art; or else that Sleep, which had abandoned him for some nights
before, had unawares surpised him, and that he was now in a Dream, where his
Fancy taking those rare works which he had seen any where in pieces, and adding
such others to them as she could devise, had united them all in one Glass, to
represent the bravest show of a fair Country that is possible either to exist
or to be fancied. Having pleased himself a while with these amusements, at last
he recollected himself, and by such ordinary tokens as do assure us that we are
awake, he perceived that this was no Dream: and remembering that Art does but
imitate Nature, and is so far from out-doing, that it can never equal it, he
was satisfied as to the reality of the sight; but withal from the newness of
it, so incomparably perfect beyond all that he had seen before, he concluded
that this was the Original exemplar of Prospect, and therefore comprehended
and exhibited all the possibilities of its Excellence at once.

Looking strait forward, he saw a Valley set forth with all the Embellishments
that low ground is capable of. The rich fields of Corn and green Meadows lay in
several divisions interchecker'd like great beds of Flowers and fresh
Grasse-plots in a large Garden. The Corn-sields looked as if the Roots which
were hid in them complained that, by mistake of their own strength, through a
great desire to be fruitful, they had sent forth more stalks then they could
well support, and the overladen Ears increased the oppression. The sweet
Grass grew up so thick in the Meadows, that it seemed to be straightened for
want of room, and yet crowded closer to make way for those fragrant Flowers of
all sorts which grew up with it; and these mingling their various colors as
they best fitted the several greens which they found there, made a show like a
rich Carpet, where Grass was the Ground, rarely made up with beautiful
Embroderies of Flower-work. A little removed he saw brave Pastures, which
though they were oppressed with the feet and mouths of daily guests that lived
upon them, yet the inexhaustible soil sent forth Grass, and upheld its growth
both in thickness and height in spite of their Teeth. The humble Rivers, in the
lowest places they could sind, crept amongst these in such proportionable
windings and careful distances, as if they designed to carry their streams
about with that Universal respect to the ground, that they would leave no place
unwater'd; and then they slid away with such gentle slowness, as showed that
they either doubted whether they had performed their duty, or if they had, yet
were loath to leave those pleasant banks, but being driven forward by such
streams as came to supply their places, they murmured along to murmured the
unwillingness of their departure. Toward the rising of the Hills, upon that
side which is beloved of the Sun, he saw most noble Houses, whose several
forms, though something different from each other, did all bear a well-agreeing
Witness of greatest Art in the rare polishing and Excellent conjunctions of the
best materials of Edisice. Those sides which are visited with colder winds were
no less defended then adorned with well-grown Woods, which had stood there
beyond the memory of man; and amongst those, the glory of that Countries
Plants, Old Oaks lift up their stately heads supported with strong bodies, so
invelopp'd with thick branches, that each Oak was more like a whole Wood then
one single Tree. Under this guard, in places fit for them, stood all other
Trees famous for bearing of Fruit, in such orderly rows, that if you looked
upon them in right lines or transverse, you should not see one of them out of
his Rank. In Summer these had most pleasant emulations; for whilst each Branch
vied with its neighbor for numbers, the Fruits themselves showing a full
growth, and adding also beautiful colors, endeavored with a lovely sight to
anticipate the sweetness of relish, but by so doing made the Taste more
acceptable, it being an addition of pleasure when that which delights looks
handsomely. So the Virtues of accomplished Souls are more graceful when they
shine through Comely Bodies. The inferior Trees, which had not the Glory of
Fruits, spread their leafy boughs to contrive cool shades, and made themselves
safe cages for Musical Birds, whose daily work was to sing for joy, that even
so they should contribute something to the happiness of such a Blessed (...).

Amongst these varieties he saw Fair Towns and little Villages scattered up and
down, but in such convenient distances, that they seemed like Bee-hives of
diverse sorts orderly placed in several Gardens; and he could not but take
notice how the numerous Inhabitants went out and in like swarms of busy Bees.

It gave him great delight to observe how through the middle of each Town, or
not far from it, the streams which had been driven from the fields came down in
silver Brooks; but much more, when he was told afterward that they brought
along with them great plenty of excellent Fishes, which the people needed not
to trouble themselves to catch, for they desiring to take themselves prisoners,
swam voluntarily every day into their Nets and Weels; or if they did but throw
a Hook into the water, they would hang themselves upon it, and give them notice
that they might draw them out.

His eyes being glutted with the Luxuriant Pleasantness of the Valley, he
turned them toward the Ground, which by its situation is lifted up somewhat
higher, and so more moderately moist, and there new Sights encountered him;
namely such numerous multitudes of well-fleec'd Sheep upon large Walks, that
made it a question whether the Grounds were overgrown with Sheep or the Sheep
with Wool; which what it wanted of the color of the Golden Fleece, it did
more then compensate with Softness. Near to these he pleased himself to behold
the large Parks, wherein goodly herds of comely Deer ranged up and down, whilst
the little Fawnes tripp'd after them.

But as by the long hearing of Excellent Music the powers of attention are
tired; the Body having joined with the Soul in the freeyielding of its self to
the melodious Sympathy of grateful Notes, the wearied Spirits, gathered
together with a soft sweetness, repose themselves in their cells by a silent
slumber, just as the troubled Bees are wooed to cluster themselves upon the
Branch of a Tree by the to-them-acceptable noise of Basins:

So it was with Bentivolio. For being ravished with so many pleasing Sights
which he had attentively considered, his Eyes, enfeebled with seeing, began to
shut themselves, and gave him leave to fall into a gentle slumber. Out of which
he was soon awakened, and entered into a serious Meditation of the Design of
such an extraordinary Work: not doubting but so much costly care was bestowed
for a most considerable purpose. After many thoughts, he resolved that Liberal
Nature, having so accomplished each part, that none could say which was best,
intended in the Constitution of the whole to bestow such an unparalled
Plenty upon the Country, as to put it beyond all necessity of beholdingness to
Foreigners, and vvithall took care that no Inhabitant should be in danger of
Want at Home, without a sordid disingenuity of the Natives.

Bentivolio upon this Consideration enamored with the Divine Benignity, fell
down upon his knees and said, Blessed be thou, Most Bountiful Creator; the
several Kingdoms of the World are thy little Families, and thou comprehendest
in thy Fatherly care all things which thou have made. I thank thee for that
fair Portion of Earthly Blessings which thou have bestowed upon this Island.
Grant them also of thy Grace such Wisdom and Charity, that none may so (...)
engrosse thy Gifts, as to make those Poor for whom thou have provided enough,
and so instead of giving thee due praises for their own Fulness, make
themselves guilty of the Unthankful murmurings of others occasioned by want.



After this he began to think how the people bestowed this abundance, and
concluded that, since it did in so great a measure exceed their necessities, a
great part of it must needs perish for lack of use: and turning toward the
South, where the Sea presented it self, he perceived under sail a great (...)
of Ships, with the advantage of a prosperous gale making way into the Haven:
and he would certainly have concluded that those Vessels came to setch away the
surplusage, but that he remembered, in the Port where he first landed they came
from other parts of the World, laden with Goods of sorreigne growth in great
Quantities, as rich Wines, excellent Fruits, good Corn, and with these, Silks
and Stuffs, (...) and Jewels. Thereupon he imagined that provident Nature had
appointed this Island as the Magazine of her Treasures, and having laid up all
the riches of the World here as in a Storehouse, that they might be secure
against a general Dearth, had moated it round and strengthened it with a wall
made of Sand and Water, besides a floating Bulwark, that was removeable to any
place as occasion served.

In the midst of these thoughts he went down the Hill, to know if the
Inhabitants equaled the Place: but before he came at the bottom, he found that
they did not make that use of the Divine Goodness to which they were abundantly
obliged; for he saw presently, what he expected never to have been, in a little
Cave or hole in the side of the Hill, a miserable couple lying upon the ground,
which were Husband and Wife; he was called (...), she (...): and whilst he
stood astonished with the misery of their looks, which were so wan, that no
body could (...) by that which appeared in their faces that they were alive,
there came in two Children, a Boy and a Girl; his name was Therodes, hers
(...). They were naked, except where Nature is ashamed to be uncovered; their
carriage (...), only they could speak. Upon so sad a sight he could not abstein
from tears, mingled with a passionate Exclamation against the uncharitableness
of mankind. These were some of his words, O (...) Covertousnesse! thou have no
pleasure but in too much: nay it is a pleasure to thee if others have too
little. Cursed root of Inhumanity, which have taken away the Commiseration of
others sorrows! Thou, have of Hell, have hardened the hearts of men which are
naturally soft. It Is thou have let that ill favored Hagge, (...), into the
Word. Thou have brought in the poor to fill the World with Discontents and
Curses against God, whom by thy persuasions they believe to have taken no (...)
of them. Thou have made them to envy and hate those which are better provided
for then themselves, which they would never have done, but that they see them
destitute of Charity. Thou (...) forced (...) to rise out of Hell, and to
associate with the Needy, who steal that they may not starve. unreasonable
Desire! which have so besotted men, that they have forgot Civility, understand
no proportions of Competency, nor can trust God though they do see him. Thou
perverter of all Good, God has provided more then enough to supply the wants
of all his (...) which made them knew how much they would lack, and has given
perfect directions concerning the use of his provisions, which if they were
observed, would turn Misery out of the World. O Enemy of (...) Charity! that
great band of the Universe, which if it were broke, would cause the Heaven to
sall in pieces.

The trouble of this unpleasant Meditation was broke off by the coming of a
sprightly youth, which made haste up the Hill, and calling at Lazarillo's Cave,
said, Lazarillo, my name is (...), and I am sent from a Charitable Lady which
dwells not far off, who has heard of your afflictions, to bring your Wife and
Children to her house, where she will take care of you all.

Bentivolio startled at such an unexpected accident, and being one that counted
all men's Happiness his own, as much pleased with hearing the acceptable
contents of the (...), as the poor folks to whom it was directed, presently
accosted the young man, whom he could not but love, for that blithe
cheerfulness with which he delivered the Expressions of his Ladies Charity, and
asked him, how his Lady understood that these poor folks dwelt in this wild
place. My Lady, said Hermagathus, has a sincere joy in relieving the wants of
the poor, and that affection will enable any to discover where they are.
Bentivolio asked him how he knew the way to this place, or whether he had been
here before or no. No, said Hermagathus, for my Lady has not been long in this
Country: but I have gone many such errands, and whithersoever I am sent, she
always gives me such perfect directions that I never lose my way. Upon this
Hermagathus looked round about to view the Cell, and seeing nothing but a
little Book in the Rock side, for that was all the goods they had, except an
earthen Pot, in which they boiled Roots and Herbs, he asked them what it was.
They said they could not tell. Now it was an old Prayerbook of their
Grand-mothers: and Hermagathus bad them bring it with them, for his Lady would
have the Children taught to read it. So having told them his Ladies name, and
given them directions to find her house, he left the poor people, who began
gladly to prepare for their journey.

Bentivolio hoping to gain some intelligence of the Country from this young
man, however desirous to be informed more fully concerning that Excellent Lady,
went along with him, pretending that his journey lay that way: as indeed it
did, for he desired to see nothing so much as those surviving examples of
Charity, which were yet left in the Unmerciful Age. Hermagathus not a little
glad of such Company, expressed an extraordinary, but very real, desire of
knowing whether, in any thing which he could perform, he might make himself
less troublesome to so Noble a Companion. You need not doubt your
acceptableness to a lonesome Travailer, said Bentivolio; but you may also
greatly oblige me, if you will give me a larger account of your Lady, her
House, and the manners of it. That I will do with all my heart, replied
Hermagathus. And by this time they were come to the brow of a Hill, from which
they might easily discern the Houses and as they walked along in sight of it,
Hermagathus began thus.

Upon the further side of that pleasant River stands my Ladies House: it takes,
as you see, the advantage of a little Ascent: the way which leads to it from
the River is paved with smooth stones: it has a fair Frontispiece, and may be
seen at a great distance: the Gates are broad, and stand always open: they
lead into a fair Court, where two Servants constantly attend to conduct all
comers into a large Hall; where the Steward of the house takes notice of their
respective Conditions, and makes provision for them according to their several
necessities.

The House is two Stories high; the Lower is appointed for Offices, the Upper
is divided into two parts, with a fair Gallery between the Divisions: upon each
side every Guest has a Room by himself furnished with all necessary
accommodations. The Officers which administer such things as they want, do
their work with such exact Care and loving Willingness, that none can be served
better in their own houses by the best-tutor'd and most ready servants. Every
Guest may stay as long as he pleases; and when any desires to be gone, they
give him free leave, but never send him away empty. When those that come Sick
have regained their Health, they are employed sutably to their dispositions and
abilities; and in the time of their Sickness they are accompanied by such as do
not only take care of their Bodily health, but entertain their Minds with
Excellent discourses of the Concernments of their Souls, especially about
their Spiritual Nature, Immortality, and the just preparations for a Better
Life.

That you may understand how they accomplish all this, the House is, as you
see, placed in the midst of rich Lands, and they supply it with all needful
Provisions. The Tenants pay but a small part of their Rents in Money, and in
stead of that, they bring in Corn of all sorts, Wool and Flax, Sheep and oxen,
Wood and Coals: and when the Provisions exceed, as they do in plentiful
years, we lay up for times of Scarcity, for which we have convenient
Storehouses. The River, besides good store of Fish, brings up from other
places with great facility such things as we are not supplied with at Home.

Our Store is not only preserved, but exceedingly increased, by reason of that
frugal way of living which my Lady uses, not only her self, but her Retinue,
content with a little for their own share, desirous to be rich only in Good
works, and to abound in such things of which they can never be deprived.

Before the House lies a Physick-garden, well stored with Medicinal Herbs, as
likewise with such as are good for Food. Those which come in healthful, are
usually kept so by an herb called Temperanza, which also is of great use to
recover those which are sick; but if it prevail not alone, she joins with it
some Cordial and sudorifick Plants, which are not hard to be had, for there is
great plenty of them, and all the servants know both which they are and how to
use them, and so does every Patient after the first time. Those which have
received the benefit of Health by such easy means, do something suspect the
tedious methods of some Physicians as guilty of unworthy Artifice, and more
accommodated to their own Benefit then their Patients Relief, as I have
sometimes heard them say; and that God has not so wholly deserted us in the
days of our Calamity, as to lay those things which should help us so far to
seek, as that we cannot tell where to find them. But I will not trouble you
with any longer discourse of our affairs, but rather, since I perceive by your
cheerful acceptance of my report, that it is not ungrateful to you to
understand the way of our life, humbly entreat you to bestow a visit upon my
Lady; where, as I am sure you will receive perfect welcome, so I make no doubt
but one of your worthy disposition will be well content to gain the
acquaintance of such an Excellent Person.

Bentivolio, taking great Consolation that Charity was not wholly banished from
the Earth, as he perceived by this Relation, and desiring much to see the
prudent Government of a House, where a Stripling had learned such Discretion,
told Hermagathus, that he would not fail to call there as he passed by: and
being now come to the Rivers side, he desired Hermagathus to go over, for that
he himself would stay a while, not so much to repose himself, as to know what
was become of the poor Travailers. Having dismissed Hermagathus, and stayed
longer for them then he thought the measuring of so much ground, though with a
slow place, would have required, he went back to meet them, fearing some
mischief had befallen them, or that they had lost their way: which indeed they
had, for, as one that met him gave him notice, they mistaking their directions,
had gone out of the rode toward a house which belonged to a Gentleman of a far
different Temper from the Ladies, whither they should have gone; and there
Bentivolio found them knocking at the Gate. The Porter looking sourly through
the Bars of a little Window which was in his Lodge, told them, those Gates were
made to shut, not to open; to keep out Strangers, not to let them in. His
Master being by chance near the Gate, and fearing, as he did always, that some
were come to rob him, ventured to peep upon the Thieves, but shut the little
Loop-hole presently, saying, they are Ghosts; as he might well have called
them, if they had had no more bones then flesh. They still continued knocking,
desiring entrance for God's sake; a phrase of small regard at that house.
Plutopenes pretending not to understand the Language, asked his Porter what
they said, and away he went. I wonder, says another Servant that stood by,
that our Master is so dull to day, that he understands not his Mothers Tongue.
There is no reason for that, quoth the Porter, since you know, let the Language
be what it will, he never understands more then he lists, nor hears what any
body speaks, nor knows what they say, if they ask any thing of him.

Bentivolio, having seen the fruitless event of this vain attendance, called to
the poor people, Come, Come, said he, you have knocked at a wrong door; you
went to a house unto which you were not invited; there is a River between this
and that which you are to seek: I will direct you. When he had accompanied them
almost to the Ferrie, he went a little before to provide the (...) against
their coming. The Ferrie-man with meek words and courteous behavior demanded
if he would pass over. Very willingly, quoth Bentivolio; only I expect the
coming of some other Passengers, who are not far off. However, says Oictirmon,
for that was his name, I will put you over first; for by that time they will be
here, more may chance to come then my Boat will well transport. To this
Bentivolio consented, and the Ferrie-man landed him safe upon the further side;
where he stayed to awaite the arrival of his seeble followers. oictirmon had
not been long returned, but they came, whom with careful hand he placed in his
Boat: and as he was ready to put off, there came a fellow hollowing as he ran,
and puffing cried, Hold, hold. oictirmon, taking notice of his grim Visage and
clutch'd fingers, What, says he, you are one of Plutopenes his servants. Yes,
says he, and my Master is hard by, who comes to make a Visit to your Lady. I
desire you, since there is room, to take him in with you. I wonder at this,
replied oictirmon, for he never passed this way in all his life, that I
remember. God grant his coming be for good: I am much afraid what it will be:
but if he will go over, he shall; our custom is to be civil to all; I have
order to take in as many as my Boat will hold. By this time Plutopenes was
come, being out of breath with unusual walking; for he had not been out of his
house for many years, and had a great bunch of heavy Keys upon his back,
having locked up all the doors of his house, lest his servants should run away
with his money; and by chance he was fat and sweated extremely. In goes he to
the Boat, but with such an unluckie have, that the weight of his body and the
suddenness of the swag overturned the Vessel upon the Passengers. Plutopenes
sunk to the bottom of the River near the bank-side, and his man, something
doubting whether he should endeavor to save him or no, yet seeing him come up,
caught hold of his left Arm, and he with his right hand, sufficiently taught
to catch and hold fast, got the Post to which the Boat was fastened, and so
with much ado scrambled out. Never minding what was become of the rest, or so
much as once looking back, away he trudged, inwardly glad to think that they
would never trouble his gate more; yet pretending to his man a great rage
against oictirmon, and that he would have his life, but that he had lost it
already, for having designed to drown him. Lazarillo and his sorry family were
drowned; though oictirmon would fain have saved them. Alas! it was not in his
power: for as the Boat was overwhelmed, Plutopenes having hold of his hand,
pulled him so deep under water, that he had much ado to get clear of him: so
that though he could swim, by which means he saved himself, yet the swiftness
of the stream having carried away their bodies, who, being weak and unskilful,
could do nothing to help themselves, they were quickly so far gone, that before
oictirmon was able to offer it, they were past the recovery of his assistance.
Swimming over to Bentivolio, he wept so heartily all the way, that the good
Gentleman could not but bear him company, having seen the lamentable occasion
of those tears, which was not in his power to help.

As they went along toward the House, oictirmon told Bentivolio, that his
misgiving heart presaged this or some such unhappy event of Plutopenes his
approach, it having been his constant practice to break all the Designs of
Charity which he could hear of. He told him of several young men, whose lands
he had got into unjust possession by the rigorous forfeiture of some petty
Mortgage; how many Widows he had defrauded of their small portions of money,
and whose houses he had devoured; and how many poor Housekeepers he had
brought to plain beggary, with an extortionate loan of a little money, so that
this was not the first time he had sunk the Poor.

By that time he had made an end of a few stories, they were come to the House;
where the Lady awaited his arrival with such expectations as she had only for
an Extraordinary Guest: which were partly occasioned by those high praises
wherewith Hermagathus had extolled both the Excellency of Bentivolio's person,
and the equal sweetness of his manners; but chiefly upon a Conceit which she
kept secret in her own Breast, that he was her Brother: and walking up and down
the Hall as Bentivolio came in, she found her divination true.

Here I dare not offer to undertake the relation of those excessive joys which
were kindled in both their hearts upon this happy Interview: those glorious
Flourishes wherein the passions of Romantic Lovers are described, are but
faint shadows of that substantial Contentment which these two Virtuous
persons really experimented; and therefore I lay them by as useless. Neither
are they suitable to this Pleasure, which grew so much greater, and exceeded in
reality, as it was grounded upon nothing but such Goodness and worth as is of a
Spiritual and more raised Nature; and indeed was the same kind of Solace which
Holy Souls enjoy in the Eternal World.

The bystanders equaled this Joy with Wonder; and well knowing the great
Prudence and unparalled Goodness of the Lady, and seeing nothing but a most
fair appearance of all Perfections in the Gentleman, as the Cause of such
extraordinary affections was more inevident, they found themselves fixed in
Silence and Admiration. Some which were more ingenious, thought they had a rare
Vision of such Gods as Homer talks of, which know one another whenever they
meet, though they live in diverse Countries. But these doubts were suddenly
resolved, when urania (for that was the Lady's name) having performed all
civility which belonged to the first salutations, said, Come, Brother, let us
withdraw from this place, lest by staying here too long to indulge our
affections, we neglect such duties as ought to be performed in regard of your
present state, which I desire to understand.

They retired into a Summer Parlor, and after a short repose sweetened with
pleasant Conferences, in which they gave and received an interchangeable report
of such things as had happened to them since their parting, urania desired her
Brother to take notice of a Gentleman whom she had sent for, with such respect
as she might bespeak for one whom she judged not unworthy of his Friendship.

He was called Panaretus; and though he was her Brother, she concealed his
name, desiring to surprise Bentivolio with a new joy, for he knew not that
Panaretus was there. As soon as Panaretus was come into the Room, Bentivolio
perceived the Pleasure, which he thought before swelled to all possible
Extents, to grow yet bigger, and was forced to act over again that delightful
Part which he had but even then performed. Panaretus received this most
acceptable encounter with such a passionate joy, as the sight of a Brother who
had been long absent, and whom he had always endeared to himself with the
greatest affections, must needs produce. Then they entertained each other with
glad Salutes, and reflected mutually the same Love in various Expressions.

When they had spent some time in this sort of Intercourse, all Three pleasing
themselves to consider in what equal proportions an Extraordinary Happiness was
bestowed among them all, Oictirmon fearing that the extremity of such
unexpected Joys had quite put out of Bentivolio's mind the remembrance of the
late accidents, with which he thought others ought to be affected, measuring
their duty by those strong sentiments of Pity which he found in his own Breast,
had a great desire to impart the troubles of his mind to urania; that so though
the Wrongs could not be relieved, yet his Grief might be something allayed by
her Sympathy, whilst she received a sad account of the miscarriage of her
charitable intendments. Bentivolio, who was before unwilling to mix such sad
notes with the pleasantness of the foregoing Harmony, having been an
Eyewitness, was forced now to bear his part by attesting Oictirmon's too true
Relation. After they had made such Moral improvements as a Calamity in it self
incapable of reparation would allow, the night being come, they resolved to put
off the determination of what was to be done in the case till Morning; and
after the repast of a moderate Supper, each of them betook themselves, though
with an unwilling willingness, to their necessary repose.

In the morning urania, rising not long after the Sun, went out of her Chamber,
and understanding that Bentivolio was walking in the Garden, having gone down a
little before, she sent a servant to desire him to come to her. After the
passing of mutual gratulations and good wishes, she acquainted him with her
Purpose, which she would not put in Execution without his advise, which was to
see Plutopenes; not so much to repay the Visit which he pretended to have made
to her the day before, or to condole his Misfortune, which she deemed too (...)
a Punishment for the mischievous rashness by which he fell into it, but to take
this opportunity of administering some Counsel which she had to give him,
doubting whether she might ever meet with the like again.

Bentivolio approved her Design, and having accompanied her over the River, she
desired him to trouble himself no further, for that she and Panaretus would
soon accomplish that small business which she had to do, and return to him ere
many hours were expired. As soon as they were gone out of sight, Bentivolio
employed himself in Enquiry after the dead bodies of Lazarillo and the rest
which were drowned. He had not gone far before he understood that they were
stopped at a Bridge, being caught in nets not laid for such purposes; and
having given order for their decent burial, he returned toward the Ferrie,
intending to divert himself upon the banks of that fair River till urania's
return.

The thoughts of the niggardly Plutopenes being fresh in his mind, he employed
the remainder of his time to draw the ugly Picture of Covetousness in a Copy
of Verses, which I am willing to insert here, because in them he has shown how
Poverty comes into the World, not withstanding Gods bountiful provisions, and
proved that the Benignity of his Intentions is made ineffectuall to our
Happiness only by the Uncharitableness of Men. They began thus, It is but
just: We (...) since that; I cease
From quarrels: 'Twas a Blessing to increase,
Though now a Curse. The teeming Earth does breed
More then the Fruits which it brings forth will feed.
It seems of late God has resumed the Curse,
And for our Sins grown greater made it worse.
Then we had Bread, though it was bought with Sweat:
We sweat still, but it does not earne our Meat.
Men live too long perhaps, or some too soon
Come, before those which should make room are gone.
If Death were not grown Idle, we should thrive:
We are too many all at once alive.
No, that is not it. They had Enough of Old,
Yet lived till our short Age they ten times told.
He which made All things, knew what they would want,
And did not give Allowances so scant,
That men could think their Maker was but Poor,
Or, which is worse, through Envy hid his Store.
No, no, Rich Bounty, thy kind hands did make
Thy Gifts Great, like the Giver, for our sake.
The Measures are large-siz'd, which thou do fill;
And though they are pressed down, run over still.
But we are greedy, and through Avarice carve
Such Portions to our selves, that others starve
Whilst we are glutted: nay, though they complain
Whom we have robbed, we count their loss just gain;
And jostling others cry, All scrambling's fair,
Some All, some Nothing is an Equal share.
Thus our Sins further others Faults and Woe,
Whilst God is Cursed by us and for us too.
And with our Wants we falsely charge the Earth:
Engrossers Barns are full in Years of Dearth.
Thus wicked Murmurs, which seem just, by such
Are caused who seek more, though they have too much,
But part with Nothing. You with far more ease
Might rob the Gardens of the Hesperides.
In The Dragons stead had we looked to the Fleece,
The Argon auts had sailed in vain from Greece.
We make an Iron Chest the fatal Urne
Whence Gold once buried never does return.
The Love of Having is that Wide-mouthed Pit
Which has no ground; God's Plenty's lost in it.
Or, like those Monsters which fat Kine destroyed,
Is Hungry and Lean still; filled, but not cloyed.
For when our true Necessities are suppli'de,
Rather then we will the Overplus divide,
We frame fantastic needs, and so desraud
Those Stomachs which for want of Meat are gnawed:
And think we do a good Excuse devise,
We have our Bellies filled, but not our Eyes.
Then Luxury makes Artificial Feasts,
As if we meant to pose, not feed our Guests;
Having contrived such curious sorts of Meat,
They know not what they do, which they should Eat.
Then Gold, which answers all the Poore's behoofes,
Shines to small purpose in the glistring Roofes
Of Stately Dining-Roomes; or on the Door
Where they ask Alms it is bestowed before.
Our Native Wool, which made that Homespun stuff
Which our Brave Ancestors thought good enough,
When Hospitality was clad in freeze,
Does not become such handsome times as these.
Though we might know it fits our Climate best,
It must be shipped to fetch us from the East
What fits our Humors. We find Silks too full
Of Heat, when some are Cold for want of Wool.
Thus we affront the Grounds of Ancient Praise,
And scorn the Patterns of more sober days.
Hydropick Beast! will nothing quench thy Thirst?
Here, try a Recipe. Drink Tagus first,
And then Pactolus: if these will not do,
Then take the Ocean and drink that up too.
But all the Virtue of Unfathomed Seas
Cannot relieve the Thirst of this Disease.


Urania being come to the Gate, Panaretus knocked. The Porter looking forth of
his little Window, they demanded entrance, as having some business of
importance to communicate to Plutopenes, and withal gave him some money, which
was current at the same value with the servants that it was with the Master,
and was a general key which opened any lock of the house. When they came
almost to the Hall door, Plutopenes alarmed with the opening of his Gates, came
forth like one frighted with Thunder; but seeing only a Woman and one man, and
having some servants in the house, he made a shift so far to subdue his fears
as to bid them come into his Hall; where Urania began thus to accost him. Sir,
said she, I come not to beg any thing of you (he was very glad of that) but to
repay you a Visit, (he had been as well pleased if she had said nothing) and to
inform you of what may make to your singular benefit. I shall acquaint you with
some particulars in which you suffer a great Damage, which no body does reveal
to you, and give you some advice concerning the Improvement of your Estate. At
these words, which he understood to speak Profit, he lift up his (...), and
partly to show a little forced civility, partly to be out of his servants
hearing, lest they should cheat him of the benefit of so good news, by
understanding it as well as himself, he prayed them, after his fashion, to walk
into a Parlor, which indeed was more Cave then Parlor. She, not knowing what
might happen, desired that Panaretus might come in along with her, telling him
that the design of his Profit was wholly laid by that Virtuous Gentleman. Upon
those words he consented, though with no small jealousy of being robbed.
Through a dark entry, where no light ever came but what was cast by a Torch,
which was held by a grim Porter, who faced them, as if he would have knocked
them down with his looks, they came to an Iron door, which had many locks: this
being opened, they came into a kind of a Vault enlightened with a rusty Lamp, by
which they perceived a great company of Iron Chests where he kept his Gold and
Silver close prisoners; only for want of room there, some had a little more
liberty, lying in heaps in several corners of the Grott or Grave, where he and
his money were buried together. Knowing well that he expected not, nor ever
offered Complement, Sir, quoth Urania, General Report speaks of you as a man
of vast Riches: but I have heard some few, which pretend to better knowledge of
you, to say, that you are very poor; and now I find it to be true. I am sorry
for you; (but he was glad, thinking, because she esteemed him poor, that she
came to give him something.) Its true, some would esteem this a great Treasure
which you possess: but alas! what is it to your necessities, who want both
this and a thousand times more? Your wants lie in the greatness of your
Desires, and I am afraid it is next to impossible to provide so much as a
Competency for you. That which I am able to bestow is a very small Alms; but
such as it is I will impart it (...) Though I have not Moneys or Lands to give
you, yet I will endeavor to show you a way infinitely to improve your own
Estate, and to discover to you, as I said before, what keeps you so poor.
First, you have no use of your Money, which indeed these thievish Chests have
stolen and keep from you. Many of your Houses fall down, because no body
dwells in them; your Manors and Lands return but to an improfitable account,
because you have (...) then you know what to do with. I perceive you want the
assistance of excellent Stewards, that might improve your fortunes exceedingly,
by relieving with them the necessities of the poor neighborhood, and advance,
by the prudent disposal of superfluous sums, Mechanical Arts and ingenuous
Sciences, which would return into your Coffers, with an unspeakable increase,
the Comforts of the Poores Prayers, the Blessings of Charity, and the true
honor of being a Benefactor to Mankind. Besides the avaritious Rust which eats
out your Money, there is a Canker also which preyes upon your Estate, which is
the Fraud by which you have gotten it, and the Curse of those evil Counsels and
Principles with which you hinder others from doing any Good.

As for Example, You persuade them to build no Almeshouses, because others will
sell what they give: and when they tell you they have so settled their Gifts by
Law, that if they be converted to any other use, they shall immediately return
to their heirs; you tell them, they will not. When you are asked concerning
that proportion of Estate which one may call a Competency, you answer, All that
one can scrape together is but a Competency; and that the way to come to it is,
to spend nothing upon such improfitable businesses as Charity. So that no good
Design can be propounded, but you are ready to Contradict it with such Reasons
as you are ever framing in this shop of Covetousness: and besides that your
constant Example has corrupted thousands who had better inclinations, you
drowned four miserable Wretches yesterday, as they were upon their way to one
that would have relieved them. --

Plutopenes much galled with this talk, hoping she would end, as she began,
with some Comfortable word, made a shift to endure it all this while; but now
being unable to hope or hear further, cried out, as if his throat had been cut,
(...), Harpagus. At which unexpected noise in he rusheth with his club;
Plutopenes still crying, Knock them down Harpagus, knock them down. Panaretus,
seeing the fellow too ready to obey such a vile command, having drawn his
sword, said, Lay down your club, we offer no wrong; (...) if you will not, I
shall disinable you for ever taking it up again. So interposing his body
between him and urania, whilst the Villain made ready to fetch a blow,
Panaretus gave him such a stroke upon his right arm as he lift it up, that his
club fell backward, and guarding urania out of the House, where no body was
willing to detein them, they made have toward the Water. But they were much
startled with a cloud of Smoke which they saw about urania's House; and when
they came to the River, they found Bentivolio in the same perplexed guesses
concerning it: but they were soon resolved with the cries of a dismal
messenger, one of urania's servants, who running and making as loud a noise as
one could that was half dead with fear, called, Oictirmon, oictirmon. They had
no sooner perceived him to be Hermagathus, but urania and both her Brothers
prepared to go into the Boat: which he seeing, cried out vehemently, No no; I
must come over to you. Thereupon urania bad oictirmon fetch him over, being
assured some extraordinary disaster had put the youth into this passion. As
soon as he was come, he begins, Alas! Madam, you had not been gone half an
hour, before a Troop of Horse begirt the House round; having killed the
Pilgrims, and plundered it thoroughly, they have burnt it down, of which yonder
smoke is a sad witness. They intend, as I overheard some of them say, to
possess themselves of the Lands, by an Order that they have for it from one
whose name I cannot remember, and expressed a great vexation when they could
not find your person, against which they vented their fury in outrageous
threatenings. This Troop was commanded by one called Lestrigon, who pretended
that he was sent to search the house for some Conspirators, which were reported
to be harbored there, and to demolish it.

urania not much abashed at that which she had in some measure expected,
bearing up against a great affliction with a greater Courage, expressed her
self thus; My dear Brother, Now, now you are in Argentora; you begin to see
what kind of people dwell in this Country. I have received many affronts in
that little time which I have sojourned here, and that which besides they had
often threatened, as I was informed, they have now paid. Let Us retire to yonder
Wood, where we may with safety consult what course to take.

When they were sat upon a green Bank which offered it self under the cool
shade of an old Beech, urania said it was her opinion, that they should return
into Theoprepia. Bentivolio, out of extreme Good will to those which little
deserved it, was much troubled that so rare an Example of Divine Charity should
be removed, knowing well that a dark Night would follow the setting of such a
Sun; and that the Unworthy might by kindness yet be conquered into a better
Temper, with such arguments as he could he persuaded her Stay. She alleged the
small success of her former pains, and having no habitation left her though
she would attempt further: She continued her resolutions to stay no longer, to
receive more Wrongs where she could do no good; telling him withal, that she
would take her journey home through the Kingdom of Piacenza, which was then
governed by a Voluptuous Queen, and that if occasion served she would endeavor
their Reconciliation to Virtue.

Bentivolio finding his hopes of Reformation quite overthrown by urania's
despair, consented to her intendments, only with this earnest entreaty, that
he might have leave to wander a while through the borders of Argentora, after
which he would meet her in the Metropolis of Vana sembla; where they would give
and receive an account of each others Travells. urania having signified her
consent, they parted after mutual Farwells, which were performed with less
Ceremony and repetitions, because they hoped to meet again in a few days.

Bentivolio took the lower rode which goes through the Southern parts of
Argentora, accompanied only with Hermagathus, whom he loved not only for those
handsomenesses which he saw in him the day before, but also for a new
Experiment of his Ingenuity: for when urania's house was encompassed with
Soldiers, he stole down into a shady part of the Garden, where he lay hid till
he perceived they had withdrawn themselves into the House, and then by a
back-way which led privately to the River, brought along with him urania's
Cabinet of Jewels, and Bentivolio's Sword which Astraea gave him.

They came after some hours Travail into a pleasant Grove, not far from the
way which lay through it; and Bentivolio espying a shady Walk furnished with a
convenient seat, he sat down to rest himself awhile. Behind him at a small
distance was a Thicket of Bushes, and in them a close Arbor, where a young
Gentleman was newly retired, who in a Tune between pleasant and sad,
accommodated to a Theorbo a ditty which was his own Story. He seemed with his
Song to entertain the Wise Lady Dysemeria, with whom of late he had contracted
an intimate acquaintance.

The Song being ended, he laid by his Lute, intending to take his usual Walk,
and then return home to Supper. Bentivolio espied him as he came forth of the
Thicket, and having received great content in his Music, being never last in
courtesy, though he had committed no fault, he began immediately to crave
pardon of the Gentleman for having unawares invaded his privacy, since that
seeking the comfort of his own Retirements, he was brought, without designing
any thing else, to the knowledge of his presence there, which if he had known
before, Civility would have deprived him of those Joys which now he had gladly
stolen with an involuntary Theft. Erotocleus (for that was the Gentleman's
name) though something surpised, yet as much pleased with the high civility of
words delivered by a person of most gentile presence, answered, Sir, you are as
far from the necessity of making Excuses, as you are from having performed any
thing that does deserve them. Nothing needs an Excuse but a Fault; and if you
have offended any body, I suppose you meant my self: All that I have to blame
you for is, that you have made me to find one unawares whom I should have
sought in vain throughout all this miserable Country. Bentivolio, a little
blushing, replied, Sir, I perceive amongst your other Perfections you have
entertained a great Charity for Strangers, and are apt to frame the best
thoughts of others that you can, till you see reason to the (...), and to
withhold your Assent to plausible grounds of suspicion till you have examined
them; and therefore I pray you (...) excuse me if I be further so bold with
you, as to desire that Happiness in your Acquaintance, unto which your benign
deportment has given me so fair an invitation. You ask, answered Erotocleus,
so small a thing that it is not worth your having: yet I should make no scruple
of obeying your Command, but that peradventure the discovery of my self and the
relation of my Condition would give you the knowledge of such Misfortunes as
might occasion your grief, since I judge you not incapable of Compassion; and
therefore I desire you would let me perform that which I think to be my duty in
this point by Silence. No, I beseech you, said Bentivolio: for as it is
impossible I should ever undervalue one of your Worth upon so inconsiderable a
ground as Adversity; it may be also that my knowledge of your Wrongs may be
some furtherance to your Vindication: for how poor soever I am in ability, yet
I am provided of so much Good will, that, what I cannot by my assistance take
off from you wholly, I shall not refuse to bear in part with you by Unfeigned
Sympathy.

Erotocleus overcome with the resentments of such a generous Charity, was
content to make known his Afflictions. I am, says he, Erotocleus, the
unfortunate son of Philapantas, who was Lord of a fair Baronrie in this
Country. No Father was ever more loved by his Children, then he was honored by
his Tenants: His Universal Charity was so plentifully bestowed among them all,
that they called him by no other Name then Father; His Exemplary Righteousness
was so publicly known, that they feared to do Wrong, not so much because they
were sure he would punish their Sin, but he made Righteousness so lovely by his
own practice that they hated to do Wrong. His seat was Magnificent, his Lands
situated between Pleasantness and Riches, and so became the Object of Envy to
the Covetous, as his Holy Life was grievous to all wicked persons, who were
constantly upbraided and condemned by it. He was diverse times assaulted, and
put in mind by rude attempts of the Uncertainty of Worldly State, which he
never forgot hovvever; for he made the daily consideration of it the reason of
his true contempt of such things, which others bestow their best Affections
upon with great Admiration.

He was once troubled, I remember, with a Company of rude fellows, beggarly in
their Condition, and worse in their Temper, which was composed of
Covetousness, Discontent and foolish Arrogance; who pretending the Injustice
which is in the unequal Division of the World, would needs attempt to reduce
it into just Allotments: and in prosecution of their wise Design, would needs
begin to parcel out his Lands into several distinct proportions; promising to
allow him a share sufficient for himself and Family, and to assign his Tenants
their parts, and take to themselves only so much as they needed and he could
well spare, and of these measures they would be judges: and so they began with
their Spades to cast up little marks of Division.

They undertook this business more confidently, because of some Dreams which
one or two of them had concerning this Mode of Reformation, by which they made
their Neighbors believe that it was revealed to them, and that as the Benefit
of the Design was Universal, so the Success was out of Doubt.

Philapantas wondering at such a strange device, of which he was informed by
some of his Tenants, made have to know the bottom of the business. As soon as
he was come to this wild company, he desired to talk with their Leader, if they
had any, for that he had something to communicate unto him. They not doubting
but it was some Vision, received him the more contentedly, and brought him to
one ononeirus, who was made their Chief, because he dreamed that he should lead
them; and having found that trick so serviceable, made constant use of it, to
dream in the night what he would have done the next day: They never daring to
disobey what themselves had approved of for a Divine guidance; though it was
such as by which they might be made to do or suffer any thing. Philapantas
having asked him the Reason of their present Undertakings, ononeirus hearing
that word Reason, was ready to have commanded his Myrmidons to slay him, which
of themselves they were willing enough to have done, for they could not abide
Reason neither: but the fear of (...) his attendants restraining his Zeal, he
answered, that they had a Revelation for it, of which he was not to receive an
account. Say you so? quoth Philapantas; If you have a Revelation concerning
these Lands, I am interested in it; and therefore I do desire some assurance of
the truth of your Allegation, that I may warrant my obedience to it. The matter
which you are upon is of great moment, and concerns so many besides your
selves, that you have need of a good Commission for what you do. All that know
God perceive him to be a lover of Righteousness, and those which pretend
Communion with him must be just. Many Wise men, who see you invade others
Proprieties, will fear that you are rather driven by the Disturber of mankind,
and instigated with covetous desires, then inspired by God, who has no where
given encouragement to make havoc of the Interests of our Neighbors: He has
commanded us to be content with our own, though it be but little, acknowledges
the distinctions of poor and rich, and has called the taking away of other
men's goods without their consent, Theft. He does allow Propriety as a fountain
of Charity, and Nurse of civil Commerce and Industry. And although some men do
neglect the duty of relieving others necessities with their superfluity, and
oppress the poor to enrich themselves, yet this is not the way to reform; the
Remedy being manifestly worse then the Disease.

Then offering the assistance of his particular Charity, as far as he should be
able to supply those wants which might oppress some of them, he advised them
to return to their Homes, not doubting but many honest-minded people were
seduced by the Delusions of cunning Hypocrites.

These last words made the slame break out which his whole Discourse kindled in
their hearts; and then without any warning they fell upon him with their
Spades, making their tools instruments of war, which they pretended to have
brought for other uses. But philapantas his Retinue soon chastised their folly;
and having killed ononeirus and a few more of them, the rest vanished with his
Dreams, and left their Mattocks to dig graves for their Companions, who were
then content with a less share of Earth then before they had measured out.

This Mist being thus cleared up, we lived in great serenity for a good while,
till new clouds arose from the Covetousness of two envious Neighbors, potent
in Argentora, who had a great desire to become possessors of other men's
Estates, though their own was too much for them, especially because it gave
them ability more effectually to disturb the Innocent.

One was a Gentleman called Forzario, of a fierce Temper, who used to satisfy
his greedy mind with a lawless Force. He would compel all those which held any
thing of him, to do whatsoever his surly disposition appointed; and this
produced a continual Vexation to my Fathers Tenants. He stopped up the ways
which led to their grounds, if they lay among his, (pretending they were but
granted upon sufferance) to make them go two miles about for the quarter of
one; and if they offered to break his unjust Hedges, they should be sure to be
well beaten. He would make his men drive our Tenants Cattle upon his grounds,
and then sue them for Trespassers; and they not daring to go to Law with him,
were fain to compound with him, and so obtain at unreasonable rates a
forgiveness of those Trespasses which he himself committed. It were insinite to
speak of his Wickedness, but one thing I may not omit which he did to day: He
armed diverse of his Tenants which were most suitable to his wicked designs, and
made them burn down the house of an Excellent Lady which dwelt not very far
off, for no reason but that he had heard great reports of her Excellent
Virtues, especially Charity. He is of a bloody Temper naturally, and trusts so
much in his strength, that he will fight with any one, has challenged many,
and killed some; but by corruption of a great Courtier or two he saves his own
most unworthy life.

The other was a Lady, whose name is Inganna, and she took another way more
agreeable to her sex; what he did by Force, she effected by Fraud, cheating the
people with crafty Bargains, counterfeit Deeds, and Promises, which she kept no
longer then till she had opportunity to break them. But in all her transactions
she made such fair show of desiring to promote their good, and got so far
within them by their plain Credulity, that they were never more perniciously
hurt then when they thought their Welfare most secured.

The Tenants of these two vile persons made use of those unworthy ways in
their converse with others, which they had not only learned from their
Superiors, but saw warranted by their greater Examples. And when they could not
secure themselves under one Landlord, they would forthwith turn Tenants to the
other, and sometimes served Forzario, and sometimes were all for Inganna. In
fine the two Oppressors jealously emulating each others adherents, a Marriage,
which, I dare say, was none of those which are made in Heaven, was contrived
between Forzario and Inganna, which was speedily accomplished, but to our
unspeakable discomfort; for now they began to try all the arts which Fraud
united with Force can put in execution, to work our ruin. After many attempts
made in vain, partly by reason of my Fathers perfect Innocence, and partly by
the prudent advice of a faithful friend called Kalobulus, yet at last they
brought it about, by the assistance of a corrupt Judge called Labargurus, whom
they kept in such constant pay to serve their turns, that he counted their
annual Bribes a great part of his Salary. He either with the pretense of
obsolete Laws, which no body remembered ever to have been made, or with wrested
senses of known Statutes, had done them many notable services.

The Design of my Fathers Destruction was laid thus: Labargurus, you must know,
was one who made it his constant practice to betray unwary people for speaking
dishonourably of the Duke by whom that Country was then governed: those which
are discontented are apt to speak against any body; and those which provoked
them to talk, and were also witnesses of their speeches, were his false-hearted
Spies. By these he was informed of some Words which my Father should say, in
Company of which he was less careful, not because he thought all that were
present were just, but because he did never speak any thing unjust. It seems my
Father complained of some Wrongs that Labargurus had done, and said that if the
Duke did but know, of them, he was confident they would soon be redressed, and
the Judge punished. Labargurus having heard this, in stead of washing away the
guilt of his Crimes with true Repentance, took Sanctuary against the fears of
his Conscience in Revenge; and giving money to two of his Creatures that could
swear lustily, he framed this Accusation, That Philapantas did say, The Duke
had done the people such Wrongs, that he was confident if they did but know
their power, they would soon be redressed, and the Duke deposed. So with the
change of a few words, which perverted the sense of the rest, he drew up a
Charge against Philapantas. Though this was incredible to most Good men, who
knew Philapantas to be a most wary person and a loyal Subject; yet his
constant absence from the Court made the pretense plausible to such as loved to
think ill of any. Though indeed my Father absented himself not for any private
grudges which he harbored in his bosom, but because he saw great insecurity
for an honest man to be, where through false representation of persons and
things, Friends could not be distinguished from Foes: And also for that whilst
others multiplied their Titles, and swelled their heaps of Money with hellish
toils, he desired to enjoy the heavenly Tranquillity of his private life, and
thereby take opportunity to provide for his Immortal security, which is in
dreadful jeopardy through the various Tentations of Princes Courts.

Now though these dangers be common to all Courts, yet they were less avoidable
in this then some others, because of Two great Imperfections to which the Duke
was subject, which had such an unbenigne influence upon Court and Country, that
he was happy that could enjoy himself quietly in a corner. One was, that he
despised true Religion: for though to please the people, which were that way
given, he made a show of some such thing; yet he vilified it both by the
constancy of an irreligious life, as also by such speeches which could become
none but an Atheist; for he would commonly call them Fools which pretended to
put their whole trust in God, and laugh at the opinion of such as asserted the
Immortality of the Soul, especially when they talked of our being Judged in
another World. Another was, that he carelessly disposed places of Government and
Justice, not much looking after Wisdom and Integrity in the choice of his
Ministers, whose only Qualification was, their Willingness to serve his
Designs; neither did he trouble himself to take any account of their good or
bad Administration, to give them Encouragement or Punishment as they deserved:
and from this fountain an Universal Corruption derived it self upon all Orders
of men. By means whereof the Country, which before was deservedly renowned
throughout the World for Righteousness, is now despised of all its Neighbors,
and commonly called a Nation of degenerate Supplanters.

The Ministers of Justice, not abandoning the established forms of Law, have
made them however both useless to any good purpose, and also instruments of
great Affliction: partly by the unmercisull delays of process in Law, which
commonly continue till both parties being impoverished can go no further, or
one of them at least be so tormented, that he is come to the same pass with
poor wretches upon the Rack, who are willing to say or do any thing to come
off; partly whilst their Estates are squeezed into the Lawyers purses by large
Bribes for the forementioned delays and unjust Sentences.

The Grandees trample upon all below them, and count it the duty of the Poor to
be oppressed; living much according to the rule of those Beasts, the greater of
which devour the (...) the Poor desire any thing of them, they count it a kind
of Robbery, and order the same punishment for them that other Countries do for
Cut-purses; and when through intolerable Miseries they wish they had never been
born, they bid them kill themselves, and say that then they shall enjoy the
same Comfort.

The Epidemical Degeneracy has infected also the Ministers of Religion, who
being fallen from the true Knowledge and exemplary Virtue of their Predecessors,
the Holy Fathers and Pious Martyrs, have completed the scorn of their
Ignorance with vicious practices; and are grown so unlike their Books, that
even the rude multitude wonder upon what grounds they have set their confidence
of giving Counsel, which they themselves render ineffectuall. But good men
which live undiscerned among them are much grieved, whilst they see those in
whom Wit is depraved make a judgment of Religion by those foolish Opinions
with which it is blended, and that many are tempted by the evil lives of
Hypocrites, to think Goodness it self but a Show, and Christian Religion a
(...), and so sall into (...), the plague of humane Nature; which besides the
Unreasonableness of it in other respects, is also desiled with the baseness of
Ingratitude, choaks in men all sense of the Divine presence, and (...) to the
Great Father of the World that affectionate Adoration which is due from all his
children. Having thus lost the Love of God, they can never love one another;
for after they have broken those strong ties which he fastened in the roots of
their Souls, they make nothing of mutual obligations to Love, Courtesy,
Charity, Friendship or Justice, and at last are become Beasts and Devils, the
very face of Humanity being lost. And this appears too plainly in the practice
of the Vulgar also, who have no understanding of Charity further then
Self-love, which begins and ends at Home: They count it all lawful gain that
they can (...) from others; and when it is done (...), it goes for Honest
Cunning and Ability of Parts.

But I have been too long in the description of an unlovely matter. The day for
my Fathers Trial being come, the Witnesses were produced and sworn: and
notwithstanding all that my Father alleged for the desence of his spotless
Innocence, and though diverse Persons of Quality who were present offered their
testimony in the most solemn manner, that no such words were spoken at the
place and time mentioned by the Witnesses, (...) being Judge, my Father was
condemned to dye. His (...) were given to Forzario, who had some (...) of
desert to the Traitors Estate, having been a means to discover the Treason, as
(...) made the Duke believe: but the true reason of his doing so was a secret
Compact made between him and Forzario, that if he could effect a Grant of the
Estate, Labargurus should enjoy a fair Manor which joined to his own Lands.
The unjust Sentence was soon executed; and lest further mischief should (...)
me, (for the Cruel and Coverous are never satisfied) (...), of whom I told you
before, commanded two of his trusty servants to convey me on Horseback by
night to his Castle, whence I have (...) sometimes to repair unto the shades of
this Grove, where I had the happiness to (...) you, and where I enjoy present
safety, till God and Time shall bring the Truth to light.

I hope it will not be long before that be done, answered Bentivolio, who had
fixed his Eye upon Erotocleus all this while with careful attention, and now
found his heart deeply grieved for the unparalleled afflictions which by this
Story he understood; and esteeming no Glory like unto that which comes by
relieving the oppressed, he breathed forth this passionate Wish, O God, that I
might be the happy instrument to serve Righteousness in so fair an opportunity,
and that I might have the Honor of procuring Punishment for two Wicked Persons
that have so highly deserved itland withal desired Erotocleus to bring him to
Kalobulus, saying, I doubt not but after a short conference we shall find out a
way to vindicate your Wrongs. Erotocleus despairing of that, yet receiving his
courteous Sympathy with many thanks, began to direct him toward the Castle.
They had gone but few steps before they met Kalobulus and his son (...), who
were come forth to seek Erotocleus, wondering what was become of him, because he
had stayed longer abroad then he was wont to do: and before they could express
their doubts concerning Bentivolio, he presented him to Kalobulus, and prayed
him to receive a Friend of his into his knowledge, and desired that between them
two he would equally divide the Love which he had hitherto bestowed upon him
singly. Kalobulus was ready at first to make question of such expressions
concerning a Stranger; but beholding in his Countenance and Carriage more then
ordinary Characters of great Worth, he welcomed his happy arrival in that
place with all affectionate Congratulations; expressing also a great hope which
sprung up in his breast, that he was come to them by the Benignity of some
Divine direction. So having enquired his name, and commended his Son to his
acquaintance, they went into the Castle.

They had stayed there but a while before Kalobulus brought into the room his
Virtuous Lady and two beautiful Daughters; and it gave them all extreme
content, whilst Bentivolio by the civility of his excuses for coming into their
Company, made them well to perceive that he was not unworthy of it. At Supper,
which came in presently, they expressed their friendship in seasonable Viands
of all sorts, handsomely served up, though without Curiosity; which they
perfected with Courtesy and excellent Discourse: Insomuch that Bentivolio
could not but fancy that Goodness had taken Sanctuary in this Ark, till the
Deluge of Wickedness, that overflowed that little World, should be abated.
After Supper they entertained themselves with mutual conference, not knowing
how to leave such vigorous joys for the dull repose of Sleep, which now begun
to offer it self. But Nature requiring obedience to her indispensable Laws,
Kalobulus attended Bentivolio to his Chamber, where being left by them all with
many good wishes, he retired himself to little sleep and less rest.

The several discourses of Erotocleus his case, though they differed not from
his own relation, yet they filled it with more instances of Cruel Wrongs, and
seemed to endeavor to boil up Bentivolio's Courage, which was at a height
already. He needed no spurs, who went as fast as Prudence gave him leave; for
having affectionately desired so noble an End, he could not cease to cast about
in his mind how he might accomplish it. But being not able at present to obtain
the End which he passionately desired, for want of fit Means, he slack'd the
intensiveness of his deliberation, and let his thoughts run adrift. After a
wearisome Expectation, the Light, in mere pity, brought him the joyful news of
Day; upon which he left his bed, and was scarce dressed before the good
Kalobulus knocked at his door; which he opened with the greater cheerfulness,
because he hoped by his assistance to find that which he had sought in vain all
night. Having acquainted Kalobulus with his mind; Alas, Sir, quoth he, though
Erotocleus his Yoke is heavy, yet it does not so pinch him as at the first; he
having worn it so long that Custom has fitted it to his neck: but this measure
of Pity which you express will add to his Afflictions, who is so sensible of
all Circumstances that aggravate a Calamity, and of such an ingenuous regard to
his friends, that he will more deeply resent the adversity of his present
estate, if he understand that you are oppressed with his Sufferings. Lay aside
the trouble of your thoughts, Worthy Sir, and make not this Castle your Prison,
nor the love which you have for others your own Fetters, but rather enjoy the
freedom which so mean a place may afford, and take not from us that relief
which the cheerfulness of your Converse does bestow upon us in such plentiful
measures of Consolation, that we have almost forgotten that we are afflicted
since your arrival. I would not urge those requests, but that I see your
Charity does design Courtesies for us, which are so great that we are not
capable of them: For nothing can make a price for the redemption of Erotocleus
but the ruin of Forzario; and as we know that Destruction is unacceptable to
your Temper, so we know no means to accomplish it but one, which is as
Unpleasant as the thing it self.

To this Bentivolio replied, I think my self not so much concerned as to make
answer to the former part of your discourse, because I would not go about to
magnify so small a thing as my Love is; and I suppose the influences which you
pretend it may reflect upon Erotocleus are but direct expressions of your own
Civility to me: but if it be true that no other price is current to redeem
Erotocleus but such as will hurt Forzario if it be paid, I know not why we may
not purchase so great a good with the just harms of so vile a person. I ever
esteemed Justice to be founded in Goodness, because Punishment was invented by
God as a Guard to Righteousness; and since Impunity would drive Goodness out
of the World, and make it unhabitable for Righteous and Meek persons, I count
that Indulgence by which Malicious persons are saved from suffering, to be an
injust punishment inflicted upon the Innocent. Clemency indeed is an
incomparable imitation of the Divine Mercifulness: but it must be exercised in
due instances, or else it may degenerate into Cruelty. If there were no
occasion to strike at any time, the sword of Justice was made in vain. Those
who have lived to destroy the public good of mankind, ought by their Death to
make a Compensation for their Wrongs: and as they are no less odious to God
then men, because they do notoriously rebel against his Government, we are not
to think that he has taken so little care of the welfare of his Creatures, as
that he does not allow and require the removal of such Monsters. In this
respect therefore I see nothing that does discourage my hopes of Erotocleus his
restoration; and I trust the particular way, which you have not yet mentioned,
is not of such an unhandsome nature, but that a good man may make use of it.

Unto this Kalobulus answered, Our forces are not so numerous as to storm the
strong Tower of Forzario; and if they were, we might not make use of them, for
we have learned that Just men can then only warrant their actions whilst they
are regulated by known Laws: and though when others break them, one that is
wronged may suffer honorably; yet he cannot violate them himself, whilst he
seeks reparation, but his endeavor will be sullied with Injustice. Our Law
permits not one Subject to demand satisfaction of another in that way. The
means which I thought of is allowed by Law, I confess; but I believe the
Execution of it is as unsuitable to the Mercifulness and Patience of your
disposition, as it is contrary to our desire that you should undertake it. It
is this, When any person is wronged, and by the Violation of Law unjustly
suffers the loss of his Life and Estate, the Law permits any man, that is not
akin to the party wronged, nor concerned by friendship, nor ever had any
quarrel with the person who did the wrong, out of mere love to Justice, to
challenge the Violator of Law to a single Combat, in which if he be killed,
the former sentence of the Law is reversed.

If this be all the difficulty, quoth Bentivolio, I doubt not but to satisfy
you and my self as to the honorablenesse of the undertaking, and with God's
help to procure satisfaction to Erotocleus by the good success of it. I
perceive your scruple is the Unlawfulness of Duells; which as they are
commonly practiced, I do as much abhor as you do, and think that they are
infinitely below the Temper of a Gentleman and a Christian. As they rise for
the most part from dishonorable grounds, so they proceed by unreasonable
means. Who knows not that though Honor is talked of as the reason of the
Challenge, that the true occasion of the quarrel was but some slight affront
received in a Tavern or some such place? Those which had not the Wisdom and
Virtue to avoid unworthy actions, must needs pretend to a generous Choler,
which will not permit them to live unrevenged of such wrongs as peradventure
they procured to themselves. Having never understood what true Courage
signifies, much less expressed it upon any just occasion, they undervalue
their lives which are not worth much, that they may be Masters of other men's as
useless as their own; and think it a Bravery to rush upon Damnation, but durst
never expose themselves to the hazards of a public service, to save those who
are more worthy to live then themselves. Such Persons as have abandoned
Patience, divested themselves of Humility, cashiered all inclinations to
Forgiveness, and count the neglect of Revenge Cowardice, must needs find the
belief of their Salvation impossible, if these things be other then Devilish
qualities. And whilst they look upon it as an ungentile thing to suffer wrong,
they never scruple the doing of it, though that be a hundred times more base:
and they stand so upon a false notion of Reputation, that they cannot endure to
be thought patient; that is, they undervalue the estimation of God and the
opinion of Wise men, because they are unwilling that a few Fools should take
them for Cowards. The Heavenly Angels might with as good reason be angry,
because many times in great buildings they are represented by little Boys with
wooden wings. They have another humor of which I cannot but take notice, and
that is, These Bravado's will take it in great scorn if you should not think
them Christians, whilst they ridiculously take their name from him whose nature
did abominate such practices, and whose Life and Death was the most perfect
contradiction to such a lowness of Temper that can be imagined. They should
rather derive their Pedigree from Lamech, who would not stick to kill any body
for the least scratch of his skin.

By this which I have discoursed, Kalobulus, you may perceive how unwilling I
am by my example to patronize those murderous Duells, in which hot young men
engage, when Wine, Women and mutual provocations have begun such quarrels as
accept of no determination but by the sword. No, I undertake this piece of
Justice, only as the Magistrates servant, warranted by Law, which at present
needs this Vindication, without any desire of Revenge, for I have suffered no
Wrong; but to take off the guilt of Philapantas his blood which lies upon
Argentora, that he which afflicted the Good in his life, may (...) the Wicked
by his death, and by this means, which is all that is left, to right Erotocleus.

Kalobulus perceiving the zeal of Bentivolio's Good will, nothing doubting his
skill in arms, assured of the Justice of the Cause by his own Knowledge, and
convinced of the lawfulness of the redress propounded, by Bentivolio's
discourse, struck with admiration by the Contemplation of his unparalled
Accomplishments, replied that he could not but approve of his (...) design,
undertaken with so much Wisdom and Valor. But do you think Forzario will
accept a Challenge, said Bentivolio? There is no doubt of that, quoth
Kalobulus, for he loves to fight with any body, and is possessed with such
great thoughts, that in Comparison of himself he despises all the World: And
withal he desired Bentivolio to permit a Second to attend him: to which he
agreed. And whilst Kalobulus was consulting with himself whom to appoint,
Thrasymachus whispering in his ear, desired him to nominate himself: which his
Father did, and prayed Bentivolio to accept of his Sons offer, who was
ambitious to serve under so great a Captain in the behalf of Erotocleus.
Bentivolio giving great thanks to the Young Gentleman, called for a Pen and
paper; which being brought, he wrote these Words:

FORZARIO,
Your Wickedness has made you odious to the World, and the instances upon
which your Infamy is raised are so full of Cruelty and Injustice, that you
cannot wonder if the Revenge which they have long called for come at last.
Though you have attempted the security of your first Wrongs with greater, which
were all the means you could find; yet this paper will let you know, that there
are some in the world who dare reprove you, and will make you at length see
that your Crimes are punishable, if your guilty Fears will permit you, armed on
Horseback with Sword and Lance, to meet me to morrow by Sunrise, attended
only with a Second and Trumpet in the plain of Nemesia which adjoyns to the
great Wood; where you shall make some amends for your Sins with your fall, by
the hand of one who has a Good will for all but such as you are.

BENTIVOLIO.


A Trumpeter which waited upon Kalobulus speedily conveyed it according to his
directions. Forzario had no sooner read it, but he commanded to stay the
Messenger for his answer, which he should have presently. So never making
questions concerning Bentivolio, because he disdained to take any notice of one
that durst affront him but by Revenge, he wrote this following Answer.

BENTIVOLIO,
I need no informer to make me understand what kind of person is signified by
that odd name; your Paper has revealed your Imperfections. I am forced to
judge you one of no Virtue, because you have learned to revile those whom you
do not know but by misreport. And though I do not think you worthy of the Honor
to be Chastis'd by my hand, yet I will condescend to meet you according to your
appointment: to give you such punishment, as may teach other Wanderers better
manners when they pass by this Country, and that no troublesome Fellow for the
time to come may be so foolishly impudent as to provoke

FORZARIO.


Bentivolio was not a little glad when by the answer he understood that he
should have opportunity to make good his profer of assistance to violated
Justice, and awaiting the early dawn of the following Morn, was guided by the
first approches of light, and accompanied with the Valiant Thrasymachus, being
unwilling by delay to give occasion to the disdainful humor of Forzario to
return, if he should come first and miss him at the Place appointed. But he
stayed not long before his expected Adversary appeared like himself, and
according to the descriptions by which he was painted in Bentivolio's Fancy.

Forzario seeing his Adversary upon the place, thought to answer his readiness
with such a payment as it deserved; and therefore not to make him stay any
longer, without attending the Trumpets, spurring his Horse, who was not
unwilling to such exercises, rode with a full Careere, aiming a rough salute
with his Lance at Bentivolio: who being well skilled in receiving and (...)
such Civilities, made what haste he could to meet him, and returned him one of
like Nature, though not of the same Effect. Bentivolio's Lance pierced
Forzario's Arm: Forzario's, though it lighted upon such a piece of
Bentivolio's armor as defied the sharpness of the point, yet as it broke, it
made him bow so far backward, that he had almost lost the possession of his
Saddle; which he having presently recovered, they fell to their Swords. Though
none could tell who drew first, Bentivolio received the first blow, and that
followed with so many more, that his action lay chiefly in the Defensive; which
part he was the rather willing to act for the present, because he knew the
shower which fell in such thick drops would soon be over. This he performed with
such accurate Skill, that it made up whatsoever he wanted of Force; of which
also he had sufficient store to let his Enemy know by what he felt, that he
could hurt as well as ward.

When they had spent some time in giving and receiving blows, often
accompanied with Wounds, their loss of blood made each of them perceive that
both were in earnest: but the business they had in hand so filled their
thoughts, that they took notice of their Hurts with such an undiscernable
resentment, as wise men receive the Wrongs of disingenuous People.

Forzario boiling with desperate Rage, confident of his Strength, and pricked
with a disdain of so unequal a match as he esteemed Bentivolio, having given
many such strokes as signified a strong Arm enforced with stronger desires of
Revenge, (which for all that he saw still uneffected) vexed that he should be
so long troubled with one whom he had dispatched in his thoughts a hundred
times before he saw him; now having, as he thought, an advantage of a slack
guard, which he greedily snatched, bestowed a blow upon Bentivolio, with which
he had great hopes to strike off his Head.

But Bentivolio, whose Courage was rooted in a Temper unacquainted with base
Fear, though principally supported with the Nobleness and Justice of his
undertakings, and fully acquainted with all manner of defense against an
overmatch which exceeded him only in Strength, being well aware of Forzario's
purpose, easily avoided that foreseen danger, and summoning his whole power to
assist him in an eminent piece of service, reached such a stroke as would have
saved him the labor of any more, but that (...) Horse raising up the forepart
of his body, by reason of a sharp prick of his Masters spurs, which he used to
make him go nearer to his Enemy, received it for him: but it was the last
service he could perform, for it fell upon his neck, and cut so deep into it,
that he could neither bear up his head nor his Master; and falling he lay so
heavy upon Forzario's thigh, that he could not rise from under him. Bentivolio
perceiving what disadvantage had happened without his intention, spoke
presently to Forzario, Wicked Man, That which was justly threatened may now
easily be accomplished: but I never engaged for bloody Revenge, but took this
way, since no other was left, to attempt the reparation of unspeakable Wrongs;
not wherein my own Interest suffered, but such as made a public Violation of
Justice. If thou will yield to Right, and submit to the just duty of
Repentance, I will prevent that speedy Vengeance which otherwise must needs
await thee in the Infernal shades. To this Forzario scornfully answered, No,
Villain, use the advantage of a baseblow; I am not so low as to receive my life
by way of alms from thee. Upon this Bentivolio lighted from his Horse (to give
him assurance, that his Custom was not by using ignoble odds to destroy that
Honor which he doubted not with a little more patience to receive
unblemished;) intending to pull off Forzario's Horse, that he might try his
Fortune once more on foot. As he came to him, he perceived he had cleared his
leg himself, and was rising up. Bentivolio willing to understand what he would
yet do before he struck at him again, perceived a Company of Horsemen rush out
of a Wood which was not very far off. It seems, Inganna seeing her Husband
fall, not knowing what was the cause, but much fearing that of which she saw so
bad an effect, which she also judged worse then it was, commanded a Troop of
Horse to fall in, which she had laid in Ambush in the Woods the night before,
intending by them basely to recover what her Husband had dishonorably lost.

Bentivolio suspecting some such thing, having heard of Inganna, heightning his
desires of ending with One, by the foresight of Villainy and Danger which
attended him from Many more, (though they made a stop after they perceived
Forzario and Bentivolio both upon their feet) and imploring the Divine aid,
struck Forzario such a blow upon the head, that made him bow it a little on one
side; his Helmet being raised withal, Bentivolio with such agility as that
opportunity required, ran his sword into his Throat through his Neck: upon
which Forzario falling down, made such haste out of the world, that he took his
leave of it without speaking one word.

Erotocleus, placed with a select Troop of Horse behind a Hill, not far from
the place of the Fight, to prevent all base attempts, by the prudence of
Kalobulus, who imagined what Inganna would do, made sufficiently careful by
his love to Bentivolio, and now perceiving plainly what was past and coming,
made speed to his friend, and having assisted Thrasymachus to catch his horse,
(the other Second having refused to strike in a Cause which he knew to be as
unjust as Forzario was unsuccessefull) Bentivolio mounted, and before the
joyful Erotocleus could express his thanks to Bentivolio, Inganna's Horse
were come up to them. And now the single Fight was converted into a bloody
Battle, where many began to try, on one side if they could regain what a
single person had lost, and the other side to keep what one had won.

Erotocleus desired Bentivolio to retire and look to his Wounds, of which
Kalobulus would gladly have taken care; but he refused their entreaties, making
no question but this would prove a short business: and finding his spirits
hold out still, though much wearied, resolved to accompany his friends till the
work was done. Erotocleus perceiving his resolution, troubled him no further,
and having stood idle all this while, desiring to go and warm himself a little,
spurred his Horse to charge that forlorn Company so basely engaged, and to show
them the dreadful face of just Revenge; whose first effects he bestowed upon
the Captain of that Wicked Band, who had been a servant to his Father, but
revolted to Forzario, by the persuasions of Inganna and his own ambitious
Hopes: carrying death in each look, he rode up close to him, and with the first
blow clest his Head in two equal pieces. A just punishment for him, who had so
dishonorably divided his false Heart between two so contrary Masters.

Thrasymachus making way with his sword into the midst of the Troop, where
Inganna was, having killed those which offered to guard her, took her prisoner:
Erotocleus, hewing down those which made resistance, came into the Confirmation
of Thrasymachus his safety, who was surrounded with Enemies.

Bentivolio seeing the rest of the Troop follow their Leader courageously
through the Wounds and death of their adversaries, thought it was no great
matter if he fought a while, to shorten the trouble of his friends, though it
was needless to the procurement of Victory, which did voluntarily attend them.
The Forzarians fell so easily before him that by the effects of his Courage one
would think he had but now begun to fight.

Here one might have taken a full notice what Feebleness and Fear a guilty
Conscience forces into the actions of men. For though Inganna's numbers were
so unequal, that they judged themselves two to one of the other side; yet
their hearts so failed them, that by their fighting one would have thought them
not one to ten. After the first brunt, in which some few were slain, they soon
discovered what would become of the rest. These Forzarians having approved
their Valor in former undertakings, showed that now their Courage wanted a
Cause, not their Cause a Courage. The thoughts which they reflected upon their
unworthy engagement, which were more piercing by reason of the presence of
Erotocleus whom they unjustly opposed, disanimated them, for they were appalled
as people besieged in a Castle use to be, when the enemy is not only got within
the walls, but a great party rises up against them amongst themselves; so that
not knowing who is for them, who against them, they neglect the use of their
Arms, through a great uncertainty of killing their Friends or their Enemies.
Bentivolio took speedy notice of it, and as soon as a few were punished to make
Examples of unhappy Wickedness, he being always merciful where it was not
necessary to be severe, desired Erotocleus that they might have Quarter given
them: which was as soon granted as asked. Inganna was brought before them by
Thrasymachus, and she had suffered death already in her Expectations; which
Bentivolio perceiving, No, Wicked Woman, No, says he, you shall live a little
longer then you think, you shall be reserved to satisfy Justice by an
Exemplary suffering; and in the mean time committed her prisoner to Argus, one
of Kalobulus his servants, commanding him to look well to her, and to keep her
in some safe place of the Castle.

It were too tedious to report the affectionate Embraces which Erotocleus
bestowed upon Bentivolio, the courteous gratulations of Kalobulus, and the
passionate love of Thrasymachus: but they made their Complements the shorter,
considering that it was necessary to retire to the Castle, and take order for
the cure of Bentivolio's Wounds; which was accomplished in a short time by the
excellent skill of Kalobulus his Lady.

The news of Forzario's death was soon spread over Argentora, and put the
Court into a great Wonder: only Labargurus was observed above all others to be
possessed with a particular Grief; which was increased, as also the Cause of it
discovered, by an Accident that happened. One of the Witnesses which had sworn
against Philapantas, being tormented with the conscience of his Villainy, upon
the news of Forzario's death, which he knew to be inflicted by Divine
Vengeance, felt his pains so intolerable, that he was weary of his life, and
immediately hanged himself. The Other hearing of it was not able to conceal the
Wickedness any longer, but went to the Duke, and confessed to him, that by the
Instigation of Labargurus he and his Partner had forsworn themselves, by which
Perjury Philapantas was condemned. Labargurus being in presence, and confounded
with the discovery of his Villainy, fell down upon his knees and begged pardon
for his Life. You shall not die, said the Duke, till I shall receive such a
discovery of your Wickedness, as that by it I may understand to appoint you
such a death as you deserve. For it is but fit that you should die miserably,
who by perverting Justice have made others live so. This the Duke said more
willingly to give content to the people, who loved Philapantas; and forthwith
he sent for Kalobulus, and desired him to bring Erotocleus and Bentivolio,
assuring him that his meaning was only to be better informed in the late
action, and to make such reparation of Erotocleus his Wrongs as the late notice
of them which he had received did require. The Gentleman who carried the
Message, instructed them fully in the particulars. Each of them giving thanks
to the Divine Providence, which takes care of the Oppressed, they came to the
Duke, who condol'd with Erotocleus for the unfortunate death of his Worthy
Father, with resentment of his own loss of such a Faithful Subject; assuring
him of the re-possession of his Lands; and withal added, that though he could
not recall Philapantas his Life, yet he would perfect the Revenge of his Death,
which was in part inflicted upon the Wicked Forzario: and immediately gave
order that Labargurus should be brought to his Trial. Turning toward
Bentivolio, he expressed the great Joy which he had for the arrival of a
person so Honorable in his Country, as also a high admiration of his skillful
Courage, and much more of his great Good will, which made him undertake such a
dangerous relief of a wronged Gentleman; and having signified much content in
the death of one that was so unworthy to live, he saluted Kalobulus, much
praising the constancy of his Love to his Friend in Distress, and his prudent
conduct in the late Action.

As they were talking, a messenger brought word that Labargurus was come. The
Duke, accompanied with his chief Lords, as also with Bentivolio and Erotocleus,
whom he desired to go along with him, sat down in the Judgment Seat, and
caused Proclamation to be made, that whosoever could justly accuse Labargurus,
should have free Liberty to do it. Whereupon abundance of Witnesses of his
unparalled unrighteousness, silenced before with fear of his Power, and
frequent experiences of his Malice, came in and spoke freely against him; some
accusing him of the Wrongs which they had suffered from him, others of such as
he had made them do. Justice complained that he had banished her out of the
Courts of Judicature and the Assemblies of Merchants, and commanded her to
absent her self from all places of Civil Contracts. Authority said that he had
prostituted her to every unjust design. Simplicity accused him for making a
disgraceful show of her in his crafty undertakings. Order laid to his charge,
that she was ever put out of place when it served his Interest. Equity affirmed
that she could never obtain leave to speak against the least quillet in Law.
Religion challenged him for defiling the profession of Holiness with
Covetousness, for which purpose only he had courted her with a false Heart.
Some Widows which stood by alleged against him, that he had made their Tears
more Salt with the Wrongs of Fatherless Children. On the other side, Bribery
confessed that she was his Creature, and had not been but that she was begotten
by his Dishonesty. Partiality acknowledged that she used to incline contrary to
the right side for his friends sake. Delay said that she would not have
way-lay'd expedition when poor people expected her coming, but that Bradion,
his chief Clerk, bad her do it, till he had got more money. The Jury denied not
that they had often given wrong Verdicts, but that it was by private directions
from Labargurus. Rapine excused her self, that she would have been gone, but
that she could not get out of his hands. False-witnesse testified against her
self, but added, that she would have been silent, but that she saw he loved not
the Truth. Revenge avowed that she was wearied, and would have taken her leave,
but that he bad her stay, for he could make good use of her. Craft protested
that she would have been ashamed to have shown her face, but that he helped her
to a vizard, and sometimes gave her an old Lawbook to hold before her. Strife
contended that she would never have come, but that he solicited her. Power
mantain'd that she would have omitted much which she had done, but that he said
it was right. The surviving Witness called Pseudorces confirmed his first
acknowledgment, that the death of Philapantas was plotted between Labargurus
and Forzario, and that he took a false oath with his Companion, now dead,
against his Conscience, merely at their instigation, and for a small sum of
money, which yet Labargurus never paid him. The Duke astonished at these
wickednesses, Labargurus having before confessed his Guilt, he condemned him
and Pseudorces to be hanged both together upon one gallows; and that, for a
terror to such as should succeed in Labargurus his place, his Hands should be
cut off and nailed upon the seat where he had perverted right.

A little after Execution was performed, the messenger which was sent for
Inganna returned with very unwelcome news, to wit, that she had made an
escape; and though they had pursued her very hard, they could not overtake her,
nor meet any that would discover where she was. The manner of her escape was
thus: Argus her keeper one Evening being about to drink, one came running
hastily toward the Prison door, crying Fire, Fire, near to the Magazine of
Powder, make haste to quench it, or else we shall all be blown up. Argus
fearing that Inganna had corrupted some of the House to play this wicked trick,
sets down his Cup near the grate of the Prison Window, and hastened to assist
the rest in preventing the danger which threatened them. Inganna espying his
Cup, took her time and put therein some Opiate Ingredients, which she carried
about her for ill uses. The fire being quenched by the Diligence of the
servants, Argus makes haste to his charge, not knowing what was done, and being
more then ordinarily thirsty, he drinks, and sits down by the Grate. But the
powder working upon his Senses, he falls asleep. She takes the key of the Door
out of his Pocket, quietly opens the Grate, and pulls him in, cuts his throat,
pulls off his clothes, and puts him in her bed, and her own clothes upon it,
which she had changed for his; so locking the door, when it was dark went away.
No body at first suspecting her to be gone, though they missed Argus,
especially because for two days before she pretended to be sick: but when they
could not find her keeper, nor make her answer at the door, they supposed that
she was dead. But remembering that it was Inganna, they suspected something
worse, and so breaking open the door they found what had happened.

The Relation of this unfortunate Accident was troublesome to them all, but
especially to Bentivolio, who had entertained so much Good will for others,
that he had a natural grief for their afflictions, and he counted Inganna's
Liberty to be one of the greatest imaginable, and indeed no less a mischief to
mankind, then the raging Sea is to a Country when it has broke through the
guard of the Banks. But well knowing how comfortless that Pity is which does
not relieve those of whom we have compassion, he resolved to undertake the
pursuit of Inganna, and, if he possibly might, to take her once more, or to
hunt her so close as to drive her out of the Country, and at least, as he went
along, to undo her works, to undeceive the people, and having tried his
utmost, to hasten according to his promise toward Vanasembla. That he might
overtake the Fox before she had Eathed her self, he thought it was not amiss
to send Hue and Cry after Inganna; and that she might be more easily known,
one of Kalobulus his servants put into it this short Description of her Person
and Manners: If any chance to meet the famous Inganna, lately broke loose from
her Keeper, let them take heed they be not cheated themselves; and for the
benefit of others, bring her prisoner to the Castle of Haplotes, where they
will find a great reward for their pains. She is known by these marks. She
has such squint Eyes, that none can tell which way she looks. She has two
Tongues, and a great faultring in her speech. She is covered with a
partycolor'd Mantle, which she changes continually into diverse fashions. She
often wears a Religious Mask, and goes very seldom with naked Breasts, (but it
is not for Modesty sake) yet sometimes she does. She loves to walk in the
night, and is never without a dark Lanthorn. In the daytime she may be seen in
Tradesmens shops, especially such as have half-lights. She attends all sorts of
Manufactures, and teaches Artificers to adulterate every second pattern of
their works. She frequents all places of Commerce, for few bargains are made
without her. You will not fail of her, where you see any take up great sums of
money with an intention to break. If you hear any man give another such Counsel
as serves his own ends, but hurts his friend that asked it, no doubt he is one
of her acquaintance. There is no servant that has learned to cheat his Master,
but is one of her Disciples. If you meet any that complain of divulging their
secrets, or the denial of money which they bad entrusted with a false friend,
they can tell you where she dwells. If you find broken promises scattered upon
the ground, you may track her by them. Be sure to enquire for her of such as
speak with many protestations, and forget not to search where you perceive
great shows of Honesty.



So having sent a discreet messenger, to raise the Beast which he purposed to
Hunt, in order to his design he declared his Resolutions to Erotocleus and
Kalobulus; and having given them thanks for the noble Courtesies with which
they had entertained him, he prayed them to dismiss him with the same good
Affection, assuring them that wherever he should be, he would never forget the
Obligations which their Friendship had put upon him.

Whosoever had been present when Erotocleus and Kalobulus heard this unwelcome
news, they might have seen in a lively Representation how hard a thing it is
to Ingenuous Spirits to part with such a Friend, whose singular Virtues have
engaged their Affections. For they having placed Bentivolio in the most inward
room of their Hearts, when they saw that the time of his departure was come,
complained against the rigid Laws of Place, which confine us to such a narrow
compass, that many times we have not liberty to be where we most desire. They
resented a separation from Bentivolio not only as a straight Imprisonment, but
as a Cruel sort of Death. But though by reason of their Passion they forgot
that it is not by Chance but Design that Good men are disper's upon the Earth,
that like greater Stars mingled with smaller they may Illuminate and Adorn the
ruder parts of the World; yet when they recollected themselves, they made use
of their Philosophy, and were Obedient to those Precepts which require us to
preserve an Equality of Temper in all the Changes of our Life; lest by repining
when we are deprived of some Benefits which we formerly enjoyed, we take an
unjust Occasion to neglect our Gratitude for having been happy so long: And
perceiving that Bentivolio's stay was burdensome, where he thought his presence
not so useful, they gave him a constrained leave to prosecute his own most
noble Resolutions; only Thrasymachus, who could not so suddenly bear a Divorce
from one whose Virtues had stolen away his heart, had leave to accompany him
so long as till Bentivolio should desire him to return.

Inganna kept on her former Course, being entertained by some of her old
Acquaintance, where she remained undiscovered a great while, and by her secret
negotiations corrupted the Inhabitants of Argentora; of which Bentivolio was
forced, as he went along, to be sad a Witness.

As he and Thrasymachus were riding through the Woods, with which that Country
does abound, in a place where the Bushes were thick and tall, they heard a
doleful cry, which by reason of the feeble softness of it, they guessed to be
the last breathings of some dying person. Spurring forward, as they were
directed by that sad call, they soon perceived a dismal occasion of such a
lamentable sound, which was a young Virgin in the hands of two cruel
Murderers, who were appointed for the Concernments of another to take away her
life, and hide her Body where it should be in vain for any to seek it. Being
come to a place which they judged meet for the purpose, one of the Villains,
having base desires of another sort which he meant to satisfy first, was
attempting that dishonor which the Hangmen of Rome used to perform upon
Virgins before they were executed, because till then their Law permitted them
not to be put to death. The Lady was so enfeebled with crying and striving and
fear, that she was scarce able to defend her self any longer. Bentivolio with a
loud voice called to the Traitor, saying, Hold thy hands, or I will cut them
off. At these words he being somewhat startled, and forced at present to give
an unwilling obedience, without the least respect to one whom he judged much
unworthy to speak after that manner to him, resolved to make him eat them up
again: but a few blows which he received made him very sensible of the folly
of his thoughts, though the death that went along with them made Repentance too
late for him. The other Villain would have saved himself by flight; but
Thrasymachus pursuing him, spoiled his running by a blow upon his right Leg.
They preserved his life, both that he might be a Witness of the Wrongs
intended, and a means to discover the Wicked Authors of such a barbarous Plot.

The Gentleman who had appointed this Murder, had ordered three Horsemen to
follow at an undiscerned distance, to know whether the design took effect,
which they were to secure, if it failed in the others hands; Wickedness being
ever suspicious: and they rushing out of a Thicket, made a weak essay to
perfect what was so ill begun by the other two. But being encountered much
contrary to their expectation, they soon repented of their appearance in such a
wicked business: for Bentivolio ran the first through the belly; and as he was
falling off his Horse, Thrasymachus made a second headless; the third betook
himself to flight, but before Bentivolio could overtake him, he had broke his
neck, having in his fearful haste misguided his Horse into a place which was
full of Pits.

The Lady, when they were gone out of sight, began to take up her fears again,
which she had laid aside before, and not knowing whither to go, went however
where she thought she might best be sheltred with the darkest shades. They
examined the lame fellow, who was crawling up and down, and he did them one
more service then they reserved him for, by telling them which way she was
gone. Making speed after her to perfect her Deliverance, they soon overtook one
that could not go very fast, though Fear drove her on beyond her ordinary pace;
and being amazed at the first noise of the Horses feet, she could scarce
believe her self out of danger, when she saw the faces of those which rescued
her: as one that has been troubled with a perplexed Dream of Death, is ready
to think when he awakes that he is but in a new Dream of Life. But assured by
their words of their Compassion for her Sufferings, and offers of their best
assistance to carry her where she desired to be, and having had as much
experience as that small portion of Time could allow of their Virtuous
disposition, she recovered her spirits, and declared at their request the
reason of that calamitous state in which they found her, and in which she had
perished but for their seasonable approach. Thanking Heaven and them for her
deliverance she began thus; I am called Orphana, my Father was a Gentleman of
good Quality in this Country, who dyed when I was much younger then I am now.
My Mother having placed her life wholly in his, took such a deep impression of
his death into her heart, that she dyed so soon after him that they were both
buried in one grave. My Father by his Will made a kinsman of his my Guardian,
hoping much by reason of a great Friendship which had been between them, and
because of many obligations which he had put upon him in his lifetime; as also
thinking that he had such a love to the sacred right of Trust, that he would
faithfully preserve my Estate, and do his best for my happy Education. I my
self thought so a great while, till I found my self deceived with the outside
of a fair Carriage, which in time wore off, and his inside then appeared to be
of another Nature. He had a Son of Gentile Carriage, but unworthy Conditions,
whom he would have made my Husband; for which purpose he had endeavored for a
long time by diverse Artifices to gain my affections for him. Having used many
other means to no purpose, at last he tried Menaces, threatening in general
that it should be worse for me, without adding the particular significations of
his meaning: but I understood them too soon; for after I had urged him with the
performance of his Faith engaged to my Father, by settling my Estate according
to his Gift; he stooped to a most barbarous means of enjoying his will another
way, and made use of the Villain who had been my servant to persuade me to take
the air in this Forest. What else they intended you know without my relation,
having been Ey-witnesses of unspeakable Wrong. But if you will conduct me to
the City where I dwell, the Judge, (who knew my Father, and, as they say, is
returned to an exact care of Justice, by reason of some late Accidents which
gave him a sad notice of his former Neglects) I make no doubt will deliver me
from my cruel Jailer, and restore me to my Estate with the enjoyment of my
Liberty. Though I esteem you not such as do good that you may be requited, yet
you shall ever be remembered with such Honor as I can possibly give to the
Restorers of my Life and the Preservers of my Chastity.

Bentivolio receiving a Confirmation of her Story from the lamed Villains
confession, saw, as he thought, a fair opportunity to send Thrasymachus back
again: for though he took a true delight in his Company, yet he knew by this
time he began to be expected by such as dismissed him only upon condition of
his Return: so entreating him to perform such a Civility as the Ladies
necessity required, and as his own affairs would not well permit him to show,
he prayed him to accept of this occasion to return to Kalobulus, giving him a
thousand thanks for his Love. Thrasymachus encompassed with a double necessity,
both of performing what he had promised, and of what was fit to be done, though
it was not promised, constrained himself to leave Bentivolio against his will,
and to keep his word; which did as much grieve him, as comfort the Lady, seeing
the inforcement of his affectionate Tears a means destinated to the perfecting
of her Joy. Having tied the lame fellow to his horse, that he might give an
account of his Errand, and mounted the Lady upon her own Beast, not brought
thither to carry her back again, Thrasymachus took his leave of Bentivolio.

Bentivolio receiving no other content from his stay in a Country which
presented him only with new instances of Inganna's Malice, except the pleasure
of relieving some that were outwitted by her Craft, resolved to pursue her a
little further; though he had sought her in many places to no purpose, because
those which knew where she lurked would not discover her. He heard often where
she had been, but all denied her presence, when he came to enquire for her
where she was. At last being well wearied, he left off his Pursuit, and took
the nearest way to Vanasembla, wishing heartily that he might travail quietly
without the disturbance of such undesirable occurrences: though he had some
reason to suspect the Event of his Wishes amongst such people as willingly
concealed Inganna.

That we do more easily meet the Evils we fear, then obtain the Goods we
desire, he presently found by a new Experience: for coming down into a lonesome
Dale, he spyed a very unequal Fight: Three gave so many blows to One, that it
was a great wonder he was able to receive them; yet having so many more then he
desired, made him give them some again. One of the Three seeing Bentivolio come
upon the Gallop, and suspecting what he was, being taught to fear by his guilty
Conscience, never asking for what he came, he gave him such a Welcome with his
Sword, that he received not much thanks for it. But Bentivolio having drawn his
Sword so soon as he began to see he should have use of it, gave him such a
requital upon his right Arm, that he utterly spoiled him for that sort of
Complement; and that he might not be troubled with him when he should have less
leisure to attend him, he cut off his other Hand too, having but a little
before seen them both very ill employed. So coming in to take part with the
wronged Gentleman, the match was equal; though he saw by what was done, that
the two which oppressed one had not only a Mind to hurt, but also a great
Ability to do it ill bestowed upon them. After a short debate, Bentivolio
decided the Controversy; for one of them, through a rash haste to do harm, not
taking sufficient care to prevent it, left his body not so well guarded as the
greatness of his present danger required. Bentivolio not slighting such an
advantage, struck him such a blow under the Ribs, that his Guts came forth, and
disenabled him from fighting any more. And refusing to pursue his Victory
further, when two should fight with one, he turned toward the wronged
Gentleman; and supposing by the Modesty of his looks that it was no proud fury
of a mad Challenge, he demanded what strange accident had brought him to such
an unequal engagement, and who they were that had so unworthily set upon him.
Good Sir, said he, be content that I delay to give you an answer so long as
till I may secure yonder fellow whom you have justly deprived of his wicked
hands, from killing himself: for though I esteem his life as little as he does,
yet I think he may die more seasonably, and his death may be used to some
better purpose then now it can. He, it seems, was running his head forcibly
against the ground to have broke his Neck: but that failing, he was making full
butt against a Tree to dash out his Brains. The Gentleman having rescued him
from himself, who came thither to destroy him that saved him, began to give an
account to Bentivolio of what he asked. Sir, said he, it is but just that I
should obey whatsoever you command, to whom I must ever owe my life. This
Fellow whose Hands you have cut off, is called Doulogynes; and though he was a
Gentleman born, I may not falsely call him a Woman's slave, for he has
unworthily devoted himself to the unjust pleasure of a cruel Stepmother of
mine, and I am afraid that (...) hither to day by her order to do the last of
many disservices which I have received from her by his hands. The other whom
you have unbowell'd is named Misokalon. I never wronged him, that I know of, or
gave him any such provocation that required satisfaction by my Ruin; only I
took notice of a great change in his carriage toward me, after I had reproved
him for his Intemperate life, and refused to assist him once in a most
unrighteous design of betraying an Innocent person. This other Gentleman I do
not know so well as to be able to tell you who he is, having seen him very
seldom, if more then once in all my life: and I cannot but wonder how he came
engaged in this unexpected quarrel with me, who never wronged him in the least
instance.

Sir, said the Gentleman, I would you had for ever been ignorant of me, for
then I should not have been found in this unworthy Action: But if you will so
far forgive me as to hear the Cause, you will more easily pardon the Effect. My
name is Abulus: I have for some time made love to a young Gentlewoman, which
dwells in a house where you have sometimes visited her Brother. One of the
servants, this Misokalon here, pretended a great love to me, and would needs
take me aside one day to impart something to me which did nearly concern me;
which was, that you were my Rival, but managed your Affections so unhandsomly,
that when you visited her under pretense of seeing her Brother, you had given a
Character of my self which fitted none but the Basest of persons; laying
several things to my charge which I did never so much as think of before. He
told me, if I desired the usual satisfaction, I might have opportunity to ask
it in this place; for that he knew you had appointed to be here to day upon
some other occasions. This brought me hither alone: but what Misokalon came
for, or how that man knew of my inrentions, I understand not. Only after I had
engaged, they came in barbarously upon some design of their own, though I
earnestly desired them to desist, as you know. Doulogynes seeing the truth so
far revealed, and not caring what effects the full discovery might work upon
one that was weary of his life, confessed that he and Misokalon had plotted the
business; but that it was wholly to gratify the Gentleman's Mother-in-Law, who
had applied Misokalon's hatred against him to serve her own Revengeful heart:
upon promise of Rewards they had engaged Abulus to do that which they durst not
undertake of themselves, by making him an enemy upon his own score with feigned
Stories.

Bentivolio being well assured that this Mystery had many considerable pieces
not yet related, desired the wronged Gentleman to perfect the report, that he
might more fully understand the Particulars of that Cause, of which he knew so
much in the General, that he was sure he had taken his part justly. The
Gentleman answered, I am an unfortunate instance of the unhappiness of Second
Marriages. As the World has so far understood the mischief of Polygamy, which
ruineth Families with a promiscuous brood of several Wives, and keeps them in
the everlasting fire of Emulations and Hatred, that it has wisely turned it
out of most Nations by severe punishments, and usually death enjoined by
wholesome Laws: so I should think they did prudently, if they took a little
more care to prevent the hurt of Second Marriages, where the deceased Parent
has left a considerable number of Children. For in that case it is accompanied
with most of the forementioned mischiefs, jealous Fears, Suspicions increased
by suspicions, mutual Hatreds, and cruel undermining of the Interests of the
former Brood. By which means a Step dame is become a name of Reproach and
dishonorable Application, being seldom destitute of an ill Nature; except in an
inconsiderable number, who are endued with rare Virtue. I did never wonder that
the King of Glory required the honorable Ministers of his Kingdom to be such as
could govern their own Families well; for it was fit they should give a proof
of their abilities for his service by the exemplary order of their own Houses:
but I understood not why he would have them the Husbands of one Wife: but when
I considered the difficulty of Exemplarinesse in any thing but Disorder, in
Families which confounded two distinct generations of Children, whose interests
are much separated by the Second Wife, I admired the excellent coherence of his
most prudent Rules.

Pardon, Good Sir, If I speak more feelingly, where I am too much concerned:
for not only this days Intentions, but the rest of my Misfortunes began in a
Stepmother. My own Mother having departed this World not many years after she
had brought into it my self and a Sister, my Father in a short space married a
young Woman, of competent Beauty, and reported for Virtuous, more then our
Observation can make good; by whom he had diverse Children. She being, as most
of them are, very covetous, endeavored what she could to advance their Estate
above ours; and finding that task something hard, unless she could remove us
out of the way, she resolved to try what might be done as to that. She soon
dispatched my Sister, partly with the abuses of evil Servants, which were so
far acceptable to her as they were offensive to my Sister, and partly by
framing malicious Representations of her to my Father: by which means she was
often reproved for no other cause, but that my Mother-in-Law hoped that it
would help to break her heart. When she was gone, there was but one more to
dispose of, and that was my self. Of this Design she made small show by any of
her actions which lay open to common Censure; her public Carriage was as
affectionate as the natural love of Mothers uses to put on, and something
more, that the overplus of Appearance might shade the defect of Reality: and
though she tried by all means, which she thought available, to disaffect my
Father toward me, yet her more public speeches seemed wholly to be directed
to procure and maintain a very good opinion of me in his mind. But she had
Servants tutored to make him believe that I was a scorner of his Choice, and a
hater of his Marriage: and they made me the Author of Reports against her,
which he knew to be false, that he might believe every thing to be true which
was said against me. To be short, the disaffections which they had planted in
him toward me, by their incessant improving them with fresh arguments of their
reasonableness, grew to that height, that I was disinherited: which though it
was most afflictive, arising from such groundless causes, and brought on by a
most hateful person; yet upon consideration of my Fathers Innocence abused,
and the relation by which I was taught indispensable Obedience, I made a shift
to swallow it; and having been for a good while accustomed to such Diet, I
began more easily to digest it. My Adversary enraged to see every envenomed
Dart cast in vain by the forementioned hands, resolved to take another course,
fearing lest her Plot should be discovered, since it was so long before she
could put it in act; and therefore, as I now perceive, to dispatch the
business, she had by poisonous insinuations endeavored to make this Innocent
Gentleman thirsty for my guiltless blood. They made a fine Tale indeed of my
being his Rival in affections to a Lady with whom I never talked privately in
my life; and indeed by reason of the discouragements which I apprehended from
being disinherited, I abandoned all thoughts of Love to her or any else.
Misokalon, to procure this unhappy Meeting, invited me to a private Hunting in
this place; and perceiving this Gentleman, whom they had abused, not come, in
whose courage it seems they trusted more then their own, they pretended to go
to a Gentleman's House to hasten his coming, and to fetch away the Dogs,
desiring me to entertain my self in the Valley; where from some Stand which
they had, they had no sooner espied me engaged, but they came in with
dishonorable assistance, not to help this Gentleman, but to ruin me and
satisfy my Wicked Mother. And was I, said the woeful Abulus, the only
Instrument which this Devilish Woman could single out for her last act of
Villainy? All-knowing Power, which art Witness of my Innocence, take not
Vengeance of my Ignorance, forgive my Rashness, and grant me with more sober
Prudence to guide my future undertakings. And for the wrong which I have
through indiscretion done to you, said he, turning his speech to the Gentleman,
I offer besides the hearty repentance of my Error, such other satisfaction as
you shall require. Nothing else, replied he, but that for the future you would
continue to love one whom you would not have hated but for Misinformation. I do
also beseech you, said he to Bentivolio, of whom I know nothing but Courage and
Pity, to accompany me to the Town which is not far off, that you may be a means
to procure me that Justice which I doubt not may be had easily through the
assistance of your Testimonies: both because my Father is of so good a Nature
that he loves Truth, and has so much reason left as to understand it, when it
is aptly revealed to him; and because the Judge who is lately sent hither is
such a true lover of Justice, that he will spare no Offender for any Personal
Considerations. His coming was occasioned by the removal of his Predecessor,
who was so over-awed by the Interest of a great Courtier, called (...), that no
Cause was ever heard till he knew his Opinion of it; or if it was, and the
Evidence never so clear, yet they could get no Sentence against Forzario's
friends: by which means poor men, crucified with Expectation, cared not what
became of their Causes, since they could bring them to no conclusion
notwithstanding their most constant endeavors. But when his Patron Forzario
was gone, the wronged people procured a Punishment to be appointed for him with
some resemblance of his Sin; for he was hung up alive with a line run through
the Ankles of both his Feet, to be tormented between Life and Death, as others
had been by his means between Hope and Doubt.

When they were come to the City, they went directly to the President,
accompanied with multitudes of people, who were astonished at the lamentable
sight of persons besprinkled with blood, and the Fellow with his hands cut off.
The President seeing Bentivolio with the rest, received him in most courteous
manner, as well remembering what kind of Person he had discovered himself in
Erotocleus business: but he desiring the President to omit all Ceremonies
concerning himself, prayed him to take cognizance of an eminent piece of
Wickedness which would require a most severe Castigation. So having produced
Abulus, who related all that he knew, and Doulogynes, who was willing to say
any thing which might help to put him out of his pain, having accused Antimater
for contriving the business, and hiring them to do it, she was forthwith sent
for: the people being much startled, that one esteemed very Virtuous should
appear by her Actions so contrary to the general opinion.

Gynicaeus, the Gentleman's Father, who was present, was equally troubled with
the Perfidiousnesse of his Wife and the Innocence of his Son. Antimater vexed
with the ill success of her Design, which she now gave for lost, took a glass
of Poison which she had kept as her last remedy, for her Son, if the plot
failed and she not discovered, or for her self, if she should happen to be
revealed. So doing Execution upon her self with this, she prevented the Judges
Sentence. The Father was cleared as to the murderous Plot, only rebuked for a
doting Credulity, and ordered, for a prevention of such other mischiefs as his
Son had already suffered, to settle his Estate upon him, and to marry no more
whilst he lived. Bentivolio interceded for Abulus, because he was betrayed,
whom the young Gentleman also freely forgave. Doulogynes was condemned to be
put into a Sack with the companion of his treachery, and to be thrown down from
the Tower of the City into a great Lake which was before it.

Bentivolio having seen a good conclusion of a troublesome business, and being
now near the borders of Vanasembla, his desires to meet his Friends grew
vigorous, much after the manner of Travailers, who mend their pace when they
come within sight of their wished Home. But the Heat of the day having spent
his spirits, he was compelled by weariness to make a small stay upon the way;
and spying a Rock out of whose side a Spring poured it self upon a broad Stone,
which with a continued Stream it had hollowed into the form of an Artificial
Cistern, and kept it still full with liquid Crystal in stead of the stone
which it had worn away; and seeing a Poplar which invited him with a delectable
shade, he sat down: and as he was considering the beauty of his solitary
Retirement, and giving thanks to the benign Lord of the World, who had by his
merciful Wisdom made so many comfortable Receptacles for the weary, he was
diverted by the sound of a Voice from the further side of the Rock, so formed
that it was a lively Expression of Sorrow and Anger. A Gentleman and his Wife,
great sharers in those sufferings which very few could escape in that unjust
Country, had by chance reposed themselves in that place. The Gentlewoman deeply
affected with their present Calamity, which was much increased with a fresh
remembrance of their former Happiness, and looking upon the Impunity of their
Oppressors as a great scandal to the Divine Government, she transcended the
common affectionatenesse of her Sex, and delivered the resentment of her own
and others Afflictions in such unusual Language, that it did sufficiently
declare that she was transported with extraordinary Passion. Her Words were
these: O sluggish Earth! can thou bear the Unrighteous with so much Patience?
Open thy mouth and swallow up the Wicked. O dull Sea! why do thou not, as of
old, break through thy Flood gates, and drown the Ungodly? Hide these sinners
in your Ruins, ye mighty Hills. But these Rocks are deaf. Fall down from
Heaven, thou Fire of God. Where are you, Hot Thunderbolts? You mortal Plagues,
wherever you sleep, awake and seize upon Hypocrites not worthy to be spared a
minute longer. Rise up, you wildest of the Beasts, and make your prey of such
as are more Beasts then any that range in Forests. How slow they come? Alas!
Alas! O Horrible and general Revolt of the Ungrateful and Cowardly Creation,
when none dare appear to revenge the wronged Creator! O foolish Sun! do thou
vouchsafe to shine, and warm such as sin in defiance of Patience? O Moon, be
thou turned into a Sea of Blood, and then fall down upon the Incorrigible
Earth. Ye fiery Stars, pour out your most destructive influences upon such as
solicit punishment with the last proofs of extreme Disobedience. But sinners
must be confirmed by Impunity, when those which ought to inflict Punishment
have joined in their lewd Conspiracy. O God! O God!



There she ceased, for her Husband interrupted her with a voice which was
gentle in it self, and carried such words as one would never have expected for
an answer to the foregoing Exclamations, which seemed not only passionate, but
just. He spoke thus: Hold, hold, Nemesis. Let none be so angry in Gods behalf.
It becoms him to be merciful, and also to endure the Unthankful. Must He
strike just at those Minutes which Sinners point to with the follies of
disobedience? Feeble Woman, He can bear with Fools more easily, it seems, then
thou can consider it. Those Unrighteous people, of whom thou do complain,
have abused Goodness: but that Goodness is not so impotent as to fly to
immediate Revenge. He takes not the forfeitures of careless debtors, but will
accept of payment, though it come after the day when it is first due. He will
not ruin the Trespasser as soon as he has given him Cause; no, though he have
put Wilfulness into the offense; if he break his heart with the consideration
of his Unworthiness, and seek Mercy with a changed soul. It becoms him to
forgive, who has commanded others to do so; and what He remits, who shall
require? He knows when it is fit to punish the Impenitent; and if they sin
longer, have they not suffered a great part of their Misery? He will (...) this
Wicked World: the Prosperity of the Ungodly has its Period. Before He end all
things, He will overcome the Evil spirit which now reigns. All-powerfull
Goodness and invincible Charity shall cast Force and Fraud into a bottomless
pit: but because He has not a mind to do these things presently, let us depart
with silence.



Bentivolio discerning the Reasonableness of this Answer to have taken off all
those Objections which disquieted his mind, when he considered the vile state
of Argentora, dismissed his troublesome thoughts, and was now only sollicitous
how he might sind the nearest way to the Metropolis of Vanasembla.

THE SECOND BOOK, OR PIACENZA.
URania having dismissed Bentivolio, taking with her the most Virtuous
Panaretus, in whose company she had perfect confidence, went the higher way
which leads toward the pleasant Hills of Piacenza. The fresh Breezes of
healthful Air, joined with the pleasure of a most delectable Situation and
the fertility of rich Fields, assured them that the Country was called by a
most proper name. When they were come a few miles within the Borders, Urania
began to be oppressed with such an extraordinary Drowsiness, that she could
very hardly keep her eyes open. Whilst they wondered what should be the cause,
they spied the Grounds before them all covered with Opium, which grew there in
such plenty that it was sufficient to cast all the World into a dead sleep. To
keep themselves awake they were forced to mend their pace, which soon brought
them to the edge of a Plain from whence they might behold a City, which was one
of the most beautiful, as they could guess at that distance, that ever they
beheld. That they might understand the Conditions of the People, and furnish
themselves the better for a wary Passage through the Country, Urania desired
Panaretus to goa little before, to try what discovery he could make. She
reposed her self in the meanwhile under the covert of some broad Sycamores,
whither she appointed him to return to her. Having sat down upon the root of a
Tree that formed it self into a natural seat, either through weariness of her
Journey, or that her brains were affected with the sent of soporiferous Herbs
which grew hard by her, she fell asleep, and dreamed That she received deadly
Poison in a Cup of pleasant Liquor, which one had given her to quench a violent
thirst which had seized upon her; and as she had drank part of it, Panaretus
struck the rest out of her hand, and knowing well the Effects which would
shortly follow, if not timely prevented, gave her an Antidote which preserved
her from all Danger. The Dream was too well a representation of her present
Case: for just as Panaretus returned, a Serpent had crept out of the
neighboring Grass, and was making toward her; which Panaretus espying, made
what haste he might after her, calling, Urania, Urania, save your self. By that
time he had drawn his sword, the Serpent well aware of her pursuer turned head,
and contracting her long Neck into a shorter compass, bolted her self at his
Face. Panaretus defeated that malice, and withal bestowed such a blow upon
that part of the Neck where the Head is joined immediately to it, that he
divorced one from the other.

By this praeludium they guessed to what Key the rest of the Music was set
which they were to expect in Piacenza; of which they were more assured by what
happened to Panaretus. Before he could reach the City, he came to a beautiful
Walk where shady Trees were so decently placed, that his Eyes stayed his Feet,
that he might have more time to behold in a most excellent instance Nature made
perfectly obedient to the Orders of Art, and both conspiring to make one stand
still with the allurements of a Walk. As he was entertaining his Fancy with
the lovely order, proportionable growth, and vvnderfull height of green Trees,
he was surpised with a doleful Voice, which seemed to come from one whom
Violence made to complain: and it was so exquisitely formed to shovv extremity
of Grief, that any which heard it would imagine that one not far off suffered
something worse then Death. The Courteous disposition of Panaretus drew him out
of his way to relieve, as he intended, the distressed Wight. The Bushes through
which he was to pass were intricate as a Labyrinth; but the Voice served for a
Clue, and by that direction he arrived, where he saw a Woman of more then
ordinary Beauty, which displayed it self more openly, as she seemed despoiled
of her Garments, which were torn off so artificially, that one might well
perceive those shreds that remained on were not intended to hide her body.
Panaretus was amazed at this uncouth Vision, for she had scarce so much use of
Clothing as even Cruelty does often leave in pity to Modesty. She pretended by
tearing her Hair, Weeping and many passionate words to continue the former
Tragic Lamentation. Of which when Panaretus demanded the cause, she said, a
Villain had surpised her as she was in a lonesome Walk, and after such usage
as he might perceive bestowed upon her, hearing some body come through he
bushes, he ran away: and since he had so happily arrived to her succor, she
prayed him, lest her Enemy had only retreated to watch his advantage, that he
would accompany her to a Lodge which belonged to a House of hers not far off.
Panaretus believing all this to be real, conducts her to the Lodge, which he
found more like a Palace then such a mean Appurtenance as Lodges use to be to
the principal Mansion. For it was situate in the midst of a fair Garden,
adorned with rich Statues, and watered with pleasant Rivulets, which seemed to
have slid into it unawares, and went up and down winding to seek their way out
again. Within there were large Rooms so nobly furnished, that he thought if
this was a Lodge, he was utterly ignorant of proportions by which he might
guess at the Palace.

He had been there but a little while before he was made to understand where he
was, and to what end he was brought thither: which did so rectify his
Apprehensions, that he saw plainly now that he had more need to relieve himself
then others. The Gentlewoman having brought him into her Bedchamber, offered
him such uncivil Courtesies, that he was fain to tell her he should much rather
choose to die then to receive them. She replied, And one of the two you must
choose. And is it possible, said he, that any Woman can be so Ungrateful, as to
threaten to take away life from one who was willing but a little before to have
given it for her preservation? Can any Woman be so Immodest, as to offer
Violence to his Chastity who offered his service with his own utmost peril, as
he thought, in the defense of hers? It cannot be that you should speak these
words as an unworthy demand, but with an intention of making a trial of my
Temper; and that I shall further assure you to be much averse from all
Unchastity by speedy abandoning the danger of Tentation. With which words he
hastily turned about and went out of the room, not doubting but they are the
most Wicked of Sinners which do also tempt others. Before he could reach the
stairs he was accosted with two Armed men, whom she had ca'lld up with the
sound of a shrill Whistle which was tied at her wrist; and then he was forced
to produce Arguments of another sort to defend himself. Having drawn his Sword,
he retreated to one side of the Room, that he might have both his Enemies
before him. They being very confident that they had to do with a young
Soldier, his face bearing yet but very little show of years, made more bold
with him then was to their Comfort: for he guarded himself so well, and watched
their ill-managed Fierceneffe so narrowly, that he had opportunity to strike
one of the Villains so full over the face, that he made both his Eyes useless;
and though he could not see what he did, he had a great mind to do something,
and would needs run in upon his adversary, who held his Sword so
advantagiously, that the Assassinate put his Heart upon the point of it. His
Companion seeing himself singly engaged, despaired of safety any way but by his
Feet, and therefore betook himself to them: but before he got the second
staire, Panaretus struck off his Head, which was soon at the bottom of the
steps, and the Body keeping its former pace, made what haste it could after it.
The Gentlewoman something angry that her men were so long about a short work,
as she esteemed this, came forth to chide them: but finding her expectations
utterly undone, she began to sink with fear, lest in a rage Panaretus should
send her to Hell after them. Though she had little Strength by reason of fear,
and no Goodness, she made a shift to light upon her knees; and as she was
going to beg her life, Panaretus desiring to be free from her wicked language,
in what form soever she should express her impure soul, interrupted her thus;
No, devilish Woman, who have married shameless Lust and barbarous Cruelty in a
crafty Soul, do not think that I will be thy Executioner: The ground will not
receive thy filthy Blood, though it were not dishonorable for me to kill a
Woman; and Death is too easy a punishment for thee. I abandon thee to be
tormented alive with thy own wicked Conscience: when the time shall come that
Death must transmit thee to other Tormenters, being weary of thy intolerable
self, I doubt not but thou will cut off thy own loathed life.

So returning to seek the way out of this cursed place, he was much assisted by
a sudden bright shining of the clear Sun, which but a little before was
over-clouded; and having found the former path, he utterly gave over all
thoughts of going any further at present, having too much news already to
report to Urania of his dangerous Journey.

The consideration of these unhappy Prognostics made her demurre a little
concerning their progress. Where Danger is manifest, it is the greatest folly
in the World to rush upon it. And where the consequence of being worsted is
most extremely important, it is good to examine ones strength. It is no piece
of Valor to court Tentations. Sometimes they began to bethink themselves of
the grounds of their journey; and though they sound them correspondent to true
Wisdom, yet they doubted whether their way lay through Piacenza: then casting
in their minds what Hazards they should run of being overcome where invitations
were so potent, and what Outrages they might suffer where the resistance would
be violent, they began to take counsel how to avoid this Country, and go some
other way to Vanasembla; especially when they (...) how many had miscarried in
this unfortunate Country. But being gone so far that they knew not well how to
turn out of the way, being (...) on one side with a high Rock called Hylotes,
and on the other side with a deep River (...) (...), and knowing the way was
passable, though it (...) care (...) been used to dangers with good (...) and
(...) upon the purity of their Intentions, their spotless Innocence and fixed
Resolutions, trusting in the assistance of the God of pure Love, unto whom they
had devoted their Souls, after hearty prayers for his happy guidance, they
resolved to venture forward. So leaving the beaten Rode, they came to a place
where steep Rocks, dark Shades, and perfect Silence struck them with a sacred
horror. As they wandered up and down to please themselves with the simplicity of
that neglected place, near to a silver Brook which crept along by the feet of
the Rocks they spied a little Cottage, where one Pancratus had retired to make
his solitary dwelling, and to enjoy the freedom of that peaceful life which is
not to be found in tumultuous Towns. He was at first something in doubt of the
meaning of this unexpected Visit, because he thought himself discovered in the
secure privacy of his lonesomenesse by some of Piacenza, who hated him and his
way of life. Whilst they stood as much wondering at the sober countenance of a
poor man, and the cheerful looks of one that seemed very meanly accommodated,
he demanded of them the reason of their access into that Solitude, to which no
common Path gave them direction; or what they could expect in a place which all
others shunned, because it seemed utterly barren of Delight. Urania made
answer, We came not hither, Father, either because we lost our way, or that we
desire our presence should give you any Interruption. We have never met with
any great satisfaction in common paths, nor are altogether unacquainted with
those Contentments that are most easily had where the Multitude does least
think. We know that the pleasures of Retirement are covered with the rough
surface of Austerity and outward appearances of sad Melancholy, from such as
have chosen Sensuality for their portion: but the Joys which are concealed
under those unlikely appearances are easily found out by the Lovers of God, for
whom they are reserved, and who know that they are the Substance of that
Felicity of which all other things, which the easy part of the world admire,
are scarce a Shadow Pancratus hearing them speak after that fashion, was no
otherwise affected with their words then a Musical care is with some select
Harmony; and perceiving they had another presence then the vain slightness of
Piacenza does produce, he had as great a desire to entertain discourse with
them, as they had to understand how he passed his time in that silent desert.
He invited them into his Cell, which was homely, but clean; and besides one
Room which served him for all ordinary occasions of life, he had another where
he performed his Religious Affairs. He gave them Bread, Herbs and Water; a
great repast to such who never cared for Dainties, and were at present very
hungry and thirsty. Having learned of them their purpose, at their request he
told them where they were, the conditions of the People amongst whom they were
to travail, and said, if they would not despise the humble Counsel of a poor
man, he would direct them to escape some dangers which they must expect: and
with a Modest but Erect Countenance he began after this manner.

This Country is called Piacenza, and most justly, for the Inhabitants count
Pleasure the chief Good. They make account that the Body is much better then
the Soul, whose Seat they esteem to be the Belly, having no great sense or
regard of any of its operations, but what they perceive there: they suppose it
was put into the Body only to keep it sweet, and to make it capable of enjoying
Pleasure, for which they would not think it beholden to the Soul neither, but
that they judge the dead deprived of Joy. They acknowledge no other definition
of the Soul but, a springhtly Temper of Body. They judge that there are but two
chief Affections in the Soul, which they call Joy and Grief; and that the first
is Virtue, and the second Vice. They believe all things which have Joy, Love
and Delight in them, and where the Objects are sensual, to be Good; and that
whatsoever has Care, Fear or Labor in it, is Naught, and that it was made by
the Devil, if there be any; of which sometimes they will express themselves
very doubtfully. They affirm considently that all Pleasant things were made
only to allure us, and that we ought not to think any thing Unlawful which
pleases us. They assert the Soul to be Mortal; which they do with the more
earnestness, because they would have it so; and deny that there is any happy
state to come after this life, because they know they shall have no share in
it. They are so immersed in Flesh, that they understand not what they should do
out of the Body; and therefore deny that there are any Spirits. It is a
received opinion with them all, that what is not Body is Nothing. They stick
not to say openly, that the name of God was invented by Fear, and made use of
by Politicians to keep Superstitious people in awe: the Reason of which is,
they are so stupefied by a brutish life, that they neither mind the soft voice
of God, which speaks concerning him in the bottom of their own Souls, nor hear
the loud testimony of his Goodness, Wisdom and Power, which his most Excellent
Creation, the well-ordered World, does constantly give. There are two things
which they cannot endure to think of, Old age and Death; but when they do, it
is to improve their Luxury by a more greedy fruition of that which will not
last always. Pleasure being the End of their Hopes, they take some pains to
accomplish it; all the rest of their life being spent in Idleness: and they
are so in love with it, that they count it a great pleasure to do nothing; and
indeed it is but little that they are good for. They spend their time in
lascivious Dances and amorous dalliance, and talk frequently of such things as
Nature, where it is not perverted, blusheth at. They drink so far beyond all
reasonable measures, as if Temperance were a thing capable of being drowned;
and they do so perfectly abhor all moderate allowances in eating, that they
despise that Health for which they must be beholden to restrained Appetite.
They sin in defiance of the Creators Liberality; for he has for bidden nothing
but that which hurts us. With these and other Instances of furious Lust they do
so oppress the Body, that it is wearied out with their Excesses. They sleep
away the rest of their time, that they may be fitter to fin; and it serves some
of them for a diversion, because it draws a thin curtain between them and the
remembrance of their daily (...). They vex that part of the morning that they
are awake, with making it a tedious attendant upon their dressing themselves;
which they perform in a manner so ridiculously gaudy, as if they feared their
vanity would not be known but for the superfluity of slight Ornaments. They
know no absurdity but a want of outward behavior, which they, not contenting
themselves with the natural decencies of prudent carriage, do vary many times
according to the contemptible humor of their fantastical dancing-masters.
They are much given to the emptiness of Complement, and Flattery is a
Cardinal Virtue. Lust is the Root of their slight Loves, for they acknowledge
no Friendship but Concupiscence. They are ignorant of Choice, being afraid
that Knowledge would torment them. In short, they live to no purpose, but to
kill that Remainder of life which is in them; and their Sins are their own
Punishments.

For your safe passage it will be requisite that you keep a strict guard upon
your Eyes and Ears: for they will attempt by wicked Arts to make them
Instruments of your harm. Drink nothing presented to you in a Golden Cup; for
they give their deadly Poison in the form of Delicious Wine. When your Senses
begin to be seized upon with delectable Objects, hearken presently to a soft
Voice, which from within your bosoms will tell you what you should do. Be sure
you never retire into any of their privacies; for there they have such a sort
of Nets, made of invisible Wires, as Vulcan used to entangle Mars and Venus
when he made a sport of them to the Gods. If you accept of any entertainment,
or taste the Fruits of the Country, be as quick and wary as the Dogs of
Egypt when they drink of the River Nilus. In the close of his talk he said,
There is one thing that I might further remember, though I need not inform such
as are instructed by their own Prudence, That the thoughts of the Country
whither you are going are of such rare virtue, that if you repeat them often,
you will never endure to stay long in Piacenza, much less be taken with the
muddy delights of it..

Thus Pancratus ended his talk. Urania and Panaretus having stayed here two
days, being much pleased with the Wisdom of Pancratus his Discourses and the
sincerity of his plain Love, as they were taking their leave and expressing
their Resentments of the Civility which they had received, Pancratus not
knowing to what lodgings they might unawares betake themselves to their great
prejudice, commended them to a friend of his called Eupathus, and gave them
directions concerning the way to his house, which is not easily found in that
Country.

Here the Travailers had a clear Demonstration of the Imperfection of this
World, where Joys are shown to us and then snatched away. For they began to be
afflicted with the consideration of those things which but a little before did
much content them, and they found that the Pleasures which were bestowed upon
them in Pancratus's company, attended them only to prepare their Spirits for a
greater Grief which they were to sustain in the loss of it. Pancratus guessing
at their Thoughts by their Deportment, which was more Melancholic then
ordinarily it used to be, and being himself as wiling to go with them as they
were unwilling to leave him behind, he attempted to give them that Comfort
which he wanted for himself. We must go on, quoth he, and not be startled when
we meet one Dissatisfaction, where we look for many: and since the general
Rendezvous of good friends is only there to be expected where our Journey ends,
let us comfort our selves all the way with the Hope of what we shall enjoy when
we come Home. Thus the good Man dismissed his Guests, having accompanied them
part of their way, and returned to his holy Solitude. They came in a few Hours
to the chief City of Piacenza, which was so placed, that it was manifest they
had no regard to any thing else but Pleasure in the situation. Upon the South
side, which they saw first, in the midst of a Grove planted thick with Laurells
and Myrtills stood a Magnificent Temple which was dedicated to Alypia, a jocund
Goddess, whom all the Piacenzians devoutly worship: in the middle stood a
large Altar, from which ascended great Clouds, being the continual smoke of
delicious Odors. Upon the East Wall was placed the Picture of Aphrodite,
sitting wantonly in a Chariot drawn, not as she used to be, with Doves and
Sparrows, but with an Hee-goate and a Boar; which at first they judged very
ill-favored, but considering the reason of the Device, they thought it would
serve well enough. The rest of the Walls on all sides were covered with the
pictures of Naked Women and Boys, Cupid playing many apish Tricks among them.
A multitude (...) Priests attended, all clad in Venus Liveries; their work
was to make Orations in the praise of Beauty, or to write stories of Idle
Lovers. The chief of them, clothed with a Silken Vest and an Asian Mitre upon
his head, was called Trimalcio; and whilst he sung their Amorous Songs,
which it was his Office to compose, the rest accorded to him with an
effeminate sort of Lydian Music.

The Queen of the Country, called Hedonia, went every day to the Temple to
present Oblations to the Goddess. Urania and Panaretus happened to arrive at
the time as she was just come forth of her Palace, and so had opportunity to
behold the form of their Solemnities. The Van of this vvanton company was led
by the Master of Ceremonies with a slow pace, which fitted their Voluptuous
March. He was called Pigerrimo, and was of such a sluggish Temper, that he
would never rise till some body pulled him out of his Bed: he was such a
lover of Rest, that he would complain many times because he could not go
without Motion: he was unwilling to be at the trouble of feeding himself,
and therefore would wish that men might live the life of Trees, and being
invers'd have their Mouths always fastened to their Meat. There was hung upon
his arm a slight Bow, and a Quiver of goldenheaded Arrows; which he would not
have carried, but that he would not be at the pains of throwing them down. He
was followed by a great company of Gallants, who had so attired themselves,
that one would think they had made themselves a perfect Outside: and they
attended upon diverse Ladaies, which were Hedonia's Maids of Honor, who had
attempted by immodest Habit to pervert the Primitive institution of Clothes;
for they affected only transparent Garments tinctured with variety of light
colors; and yet they found fault with them still, because they did too much
hide their Bodies. Only their Faces they did desire to be a little more
concealed from common view, and therefore had covered them almost quite over
with spots, and signified that they would not be known by the natural features
of their Faces, but by the curious Figures of their Patches. In this, as in all
other things, they did but follow the humorous example of Hedonia; for she
seemed to have woven the Rainbow into a loose Robe, which being so rarefied
that she might be seen through it, and also spatter'd with radiant Jewels in
the forms of Stars, one might well say that she was an Embellished Cloud. The
names of the Gentlemen were Asotus, Narcissus, Acolastus, Aphron, Anaescuntus,
Pangelos, and many others who had left the study of Wisdom and the practice of
Virtue, and were now so corrupted that they pleased themselves only in that
which was a reproach to them; and had so far advanced their distempers beyond
puny Wickednesses, that they despised Pleasure unless it was mixed with Theft
and Adulteries. The Gentlewomen were named Bellezza and Lusingha who went
foremost; and they were followed by Aspasia, Carezza and Amasia, with many more
which made up that light Retinue. After these at some distance came in a
disguise Perilype and Atimia: but we knew them well though they covered their
faces, for they were ashamed to be seen, and would not be known to belong to
that company. Hedonia her self was led between two brothers called Eros and
Anteros: their looks were so discontented when they eyed one another, that they
were a lively Image of the Jealousy of Rivalls. Their Gesture, besides all
other defects, made a plain signification that they esteemed themselves the
Glories of the World; and the Ladies made no doubt but that the whole Splendour
was but the reflection of their unparalleled Beauties: and these they measured
by such a vast size of estimation, that they believed if the Sun should have
fallen they could supply his place and make day; and in the night, they did not
think it possible that any Stars could appear but themselves and Venus. But
Panaretus, who had observed them judiciously, thought them the most deformed of
all that he had seen. The defects of their Beauty were as good as confessed by
the Artificial correction of the fashion of their Eyes, the addition of false
Hair, the borrowed color of their Lips and Cheeks, their ingrafted Teeth and
painted Breasts. If they had not been poor, they would not have borrowed such
(...) and they were not very Virtuous, because they could not be content
without them. The Simplicity of excellent Beauty is witnessed by a careless
neglect of adventitious Ornament; and Worthy Lovers despise Beauty when it
stoops to such mean Condescensions as, it may be, they would think proper to a
Thais.

As they were in the middle of their vain Orisons (for they pray for such
things as Holy Souls abhor to think of) Bellezza pulled out a Song which
Trimalcio had set the day before to a Treble Voice, and one of the Ladies sung
it in Honor of Hedonia. It is not worth recording, but only to give notice of
what poor things they make Hymns.

Fair Queen, the Sun for Thee takes pains to rise,
But shines with Beams he borrowes of Thy Eyes.
The Air both warmed and sweetened in thy Breast
Goes still to come, and does in Motion rest.
The Springs, were not for Thee, would cease to flow:
Were not thy Walk, Earth would a Desert grow;
Which whilst Dame Nature paints with gaudy Flowers,
Th obsequious Trees grow of themselves in Bowers.
And whilst thou smil'st upon her Fruits, her gain
Is, then to know, she has not toiled in vain.
Anteros seeing them well pleased, desired that they would have the patience to
hear him sing a few verses which he had set to a Base, in which he did magnify
the Happiness of Hedonia's Courtiers. Hedonia giving her consent with a
stately nod, he began.

Whilst greedy Merchants plow the boistrous Seas,
We laugh ashore, they venture for our Ease.
Our Boores, yoked in like labor with their beasts,
Shall make the fields pay Tribute to our Feasts.
Whilst Bookish men for Wisdom sweat, that thence
They may fetch Reasons to disparage sense,
We sit above, and by Experience know
What Is only talked of in the World below.
Trimalcio having fitted their fine Songs with a suitable Chorus, gave them
their Parts; and so they ended that days Music with these Words, Since
Envious Time, to spite us, posts away,
Let us improve each Minute of our day.


After the Music they entered upon another manner of converse, which was so
impertinent that I shall not trouble my self to give any account of it. Urania
taking the advantage of their absence from the Palace, and their busy
attendance upon these most irreligious Rites, went with more security to view
the Gardens, so great in report, that the Fabulous Paradise of the Hesperides
seemed to have been but an imperfect Description of these incomparable Delights.

Behind the Temple they perceived fair Walks filled with great companies of
proud Peacocks with their Trains spread, and the boughs of the Trees laden
with salacious Sparrows. Upon one side was planted a large Vineyard, and in the
midst was set a Priapus, which, by the Manners of the owners, they guessed to
be the Guardian of the Vines. Upon the other was a spacious Garden adorned with
all Varieties of Flowers, and those put into such orderly plots, divided with
smooth Walks, that they gave and received mutual Ornament from each other. In
convenient shades they had pleasant Bathes, whither to cool or heat, they knew
not; but from what they heard, they understood that they defiled the Soul more
then they washed the Body. Amongst other Rarities they observed a Grott, which
had many Caverns furnished with rare waterworks; where the streams did not only
show themselves in all variety of delectable forms, but conveyed melodious
Tunes through several Pipes, and making a (...) of pleasure between the Eye and
the Ear, put the Soul in a suspense to determine which had the superiority,
which being not able to see and hear at once with due Intention to both, gave
judgment for each by turns. The chief imperfection of which they took notice
was in the Flowers and Fruits: for they had no sooner gathered a Rose or a
Gilly-flower, but by a sudden withering in their hand they confessed the
Infidelity of their Vigor; and the Fruits, which grew both upon the walls and
in other places, though they looked most lovely to the sight, yet upon the
least touch of their fingers they fell into Ashes; as it is reported of those
Apples which grow upon that Lake by which Sodom has but a dishonorable
remembrance in History.

In the midst of the Garden, as they were led by the windings of an intricate
Wilderness, they came to a fair Banqueting House, which was so raised upon an
Artificial Mount, that besides all the delights of the Garden it received the
pleasure of a gallant Prospect. Here sat an overgrown Woman reading the loves
of Venus and Adonis; which by her excessive bulk, swollen out of all measure
with intemperance, they guessed to be Acrasia. She was attended by a drowsy
fat Boy called Morpheolus, clothed with a part colored mantle, where black and
white were so interchangeably placed, that one might see the Workman had a mind
to bestow upon it the colors of Day and Night in equal divisions. She called
up her servants by the names of Bevanda and Mangibella. It seems Bevanda was
drunk in the Cellar; but Mangibella came up with a basket of most delicate
Fruits, which Urania putting by with her hand, Morpheolus went out of the
room, and called Veneriola. Urania and Panaretus suspecting the worst, where
they had no reason to hope for any good, made haste out of the Room, and
shutting the door after them, with the benefit of a spring-lock they freed
themselves from two great lumps of Flesh; and Veneriola declaring by her
carriage, that she had learned more sorts of Intemperance then what consisted
merely in eating and drinking, Panaretus threw her into a fish pond which was
hard-by, to cool her Lust. As Morpheolus was seizing upon Urania, he gave him
such a blow on the right Ear, that left him in a dead sleep.

Having escaped this troublesome Foolery, for fear of worse they made haste
from this nest of Dangers. Before they could get out of the Garden, Hedonia
returned from the Temple, and was come into it, and, as it happened, was
entered into a private Walk, accompanied only with Carezza. Urania espied a
door which opened toward a River, out of which she thought they might make an
escape: and though they made such haste as people do when prudent Fear gives
them wings, Hedonia met them before they could reach the door, and perceiving
nothing in their first looks but what give her hopes of most excellent Company,
she courteously saluting Urania desired her to answer the civility which her
presence made show of, by a gentle acceptance of such Welcome as she could
present. Then whispering in Carezza's Ear, and having dimiss'd her to perfume
her Chamber, she took a Garland of Roses which was in her hand, deeply poisoned
with venomous Herbs, and offered it to Urania; which she waved, and made
answer, That they were upon a journey, which they had not only hindered already
by the entertainments of her Gardens, but doubted also that they had been so
uncivilly bold, that they had need to ask pardon for faults already committed,
rather then to add more to them. Hedonia pressing her Civilities with such
words as self Interest taught her to multiply, they were come to the door;
which being but gently shut, Panaretus struck it open with his foot, and seeing
a Boat fastened to the bank of the River, he desired Urania to hasten into it,
whilst he guarded her from the pernicious embraces of Hedonia: who seeing her
self half disappointed, to prevent Panaretus from imbarking, flung her self
into his Arms; who knowing what little time he had to disintangle himself
ashore, before any might come to put more fetters upon him, threw himself with
these into the Boat. Oictirmon, who attended them, having loosed the rope, let
the Boat go with the swift stream. Panaretus commanded Hedonia to hold her
peace; vowing to her that if she made any noise, he would immediately throw her
into the River. Hedonia partly astonished with this sudden surprise, but more
struck to the heart with the pain of being resisted, (for the knew no life but
the licentious joys of an unbridled Will and uncontrolled Luxuries) fell into
a swoune; in which she continued till they had passed her House, not daring to
bring her to life to effect their own death. So they passed as the Stream and
the Boat agreed to carry them: and as they were hindered from minding their way
by the trouble which Hedonia, come to her self, did now put them to, they fell
amongst most dangerous Rocks, some of which lay undiscerned under water, and
the rest were scattered with the ribs of broken Vessels. But Urania taking hold
of the Rudder, and Oictirmon rowing according to his own skill and Panaretus
directions, they came into more safe water, and the stream being but slow, and
Hedonia a little more composed in her carriage, the Heavenly Urania thought she
had an opportunity to administer such Counsel which onelost in Sin did
extremely need, and thereupon with Prudence set off with an admirable Courtesy
began thus to accost her:

Fair Lady, the reports I have heard of your Condition, joined with that
knowledge which I have my self received of your Person, make me sorry that you
should enslave your youthful life to dishonorable pleasures. Though I know how
unacceptable a service it is to reprove, and am not ignorant that you think it
strange in me to undertake it; yet I hope you will pardon me when you perceive
that Charity occasions your trouble. I perceive that your miscarriage arises
from a false opinion which you have entertained of the Happiness of Bodily
pleasure, and know no motives of Love but Fleshly Beauty. Alas Madam! How small
a matter is the ornament of a wellcolour'd Skin, and the due proportions of
Bones and Flesh handsomely joined; especially when by the neglect of Virtue it
becoms a fine prison to the depressed Soul? Beauty is but Mortality painted by
Nature, that the Soul coming into a well-favour'd Receptacle, might be provoked
to answer the outward Decency with correspondent realities of spiritual
Loveliness: never intending the external Comeliness for a lying signification
of what is really absent within, or for an handsome lodging for a deformed
Guest. Hedonia, never knowing what belonged to Reproof, permitted her to go no
further, and being utterly ignorant but in the customs of Piacenza, at first
reproached her for talking impertinently to her of the fooleries of Virtue, and
scornfully told her, Lady, you may preach this Doctrine to one that thinks she
has a Soul of that sort which you pretend to, but I have not; and I protest
that I desire not to have any such, lest it should trouble me with these
Virtuous Fancies of yours. However at present, if you will hold your peace as
to these matters, I shall more willingly stay with you till I shall know what
you mean to do with me. We intend, answered Panaretus, to take you along with
us into (...), if you will accept of our company, and there to dispose of you
with the same regard that we have to our selves: or if you be not so content,
we will dismiss you when you shall come so near the borders of your
Jurisdiction that we may escape safe out of your Territories, being well
assured that when you have left us, you will find Conduct enough to bring you
back again. Hedonia making no answer but disdainful silence, Urania minding
Pancratus his directions, spied a cliffe which by all marks was Roccabella,
which the Hedonians call Aspremont; which though it was steep and craggy, was
not unpassable to courageous Travailers: and up that they were directed to
climb, as being the only way by which they might go to Eupathus his House.
Pancratus had told them of pleasant Meadows which lay upon the Waters side: but
as they crossed the River which ran by Hedonia's Palace, he charged them not to
land there, both because it was much about, the way difficult to find, and full
of Serpents, which lay in the Grass; and that the other, though it had a
discouraging appearance, yet was but short, and easily to be ascended after
they had passed a few steps, which would be a little troublesome at first. Here
they put ashore, and as they were just landed upon the foot of the Rock,
Hedonia watched her opportunity, intending with a sudden push of her arm
against the bank to put off the Boat: which Panaretus espying, and willing that
she should stay till they could part more handsomely, got hold of her hand and
pulled her ashore; by which means the Boat was sent adrift.

Having escaped over the water they began their Land-journey. Panaretus was fain
to put Hedonia before him, and lending Urania his hand as the necessity of the
way required, they passed some of the worst steps. But Hedonia, having no joy
in them or the way, pretended extreme weariness, and sitting down upon the
side of the Rock where she espied it to hang very much over the River, before
they were aware of her desperate purpose, having also reposed themselves merely
in respect of her, she leapt into the Water. Urania frighted with the forlorn
temper of an Impenitent, O God, says she, Panaretus, what a sad period has
this wicked Woman put to the bad progress of a voluptuous life! I cannot but
think of the Fatal stone Leucas, from which, they say, impotent Lovers were
wont of old to throw themselves, hoping by their fall to cure their brutish
affections.

The Stream being quick, they had soon lost the sight of the now-irrecoverable
Hedonia; and being freed from the hinderance with which unsuitable company does
usually afflict their fellow-travellers, they held on their course up the Hill.
The steepness of the Ascent and roughness of the craggy Rocks, together with
the uncouthnesse of an untroden Path, ofttimes perplexed with thorns and
briers, put them to a good trial of their Constancy: but as it held firm, and
showed the fixedness of their Resolutions, so it brought them into a way which
gave them opportunity to reflect with Comfort upon their past endeavors; and
by reason of its plainness made the remainder of the Ascent very facile. They
were no sooner come to the Top, but the Sun having seen them pass the
difficulties of the Hill, went down to perform what was necessary for the
occasions of the other world: so that for want of light they were fain to
commit themselves to such a Booth as Panaretus could make of the boughs of
Green Trees; where being accompanied with God and Virtue, they found no want of
a better Lodging, and feasted themselves with a bottle of Water and some small
viands that their faithful attendant Oictirmon carried in a basket.

The Sun had no sooner peeped over the Tops of the Mountains, but they were
ready to begin their Journey, having a great desire to be at a further distance
from Hedonia's Court, as also to see Pancratus his friend, the good Eupathus,
of whom they had no ordinary Opinion. A good while before night they arrived at
the House, which was placed under the guard of a great Oak toward the North,
and upon the South had a little Garden with a Rivolet running through one end
of it. His Garb and Manner of life was much the same with that of Pancratus. He
received them with Joy, not doubting but they were his true Friends that would
come through such troublesome paths to see him. After they had acquainted him
with Pancratus his recommendations, they gave him some account of the Accidents
which had happened in their Journey, and in particular of the miserable end of
Hedonia. Do not wonder at that, Dear Guests, replied Eupathus; for on the
further side of these Woods I have a private Walk upon the brow of a Hill, from
whence I have beheld many such Accidents to have befallen her chief Courtiers,
and I thought in time some great Calamity would light upon her self. Hereupon
Urania desired him to report some of them; for though they are sad in
themselves, yet they are useful to others, who may learn Prudence from the
unfortunate instances of voluptuous Witchcrast, which, though it makes very
promising Beginnings to weak judgments, is ever attended with the experience
of contrary Conclusions.

Eupathus consented to their demand, and began after this manner. A young man
having lost himself in these Woods, stumbled upon my House: he was clad with a
most pitiful form of Beggary; his looks were so dejected, that I shall never
dislodge them out of my fancy whilst I live. He told me that he was a
Gentleman's Son, brought up with the greatest care that is possible to a
Father, who well knew the principles of Education, and believed nothing more
then that the foundations of all happiness in after-life must be laid in the
first years of Children; and therefore after the incapablenesse of his
Infancy, engaged his first abilities with early instruction; and to make him
acceptable to Wise and Good men, endeavored to possess him with Virtuous
Principles and the Rules of Wisdom, according to which he might also accomplish
his own happiness as to any measure that is attainable in this life, and make
himself fit to serve the World in some worthy undertaking. He informed him
accurately in the Moral part of Philosophy, accounting it a foul defect in
Education to leave him imperfect in the main point of ingenuous Discipline,
which is to make one Good. He would often tell him that if he secured not this
Interest, all other endeavors were as much in vain as the diligence which is
bestowed in fraughting of a leaking Ship. His Father had life bestowed upon him
to see the Harvest, which he had labored for in the hopeful bud, and then
dyed, having charged him as he would hope to endure his fight when they should
meet in the other World, to perfect what he had begun, and that he should think
of setting up no Monument for the preservation of his memory but the Imitation
of his Virtuous Example; for that he should live whilst his Son composed his
conversation according to that, and that it would be an immortal Grief to him
in the other World, if they have any Cognizance of the affairs of such as they
leave behind them, if he proved an Apostate from his young beginnings. Adding
that if it were lawful for him to appear after separation from this Body, in
some other which would be visible, as it has been for some others, that he
would not fail to come and upbraid him in such a manner that his Degeneracy
should be but uncomfortable. These and many more affectionate expressions of a
Fathers desire, kept fresh in his memory, and improved by the faithful skill of
a wise and honest Tutor, unto whose Trust his Father had committed him, kept
him in the way for a time; and having made a good Progress which filled all
his Relations with joyful hope, at last he met a Gentleman that used to
frequent Hedonia's Palace, (I would the death of either of them had hindered
such an unlucky acquaintance) and by his persuasions he went thither where none
can be with safety. (Absence being the best Antidote against the Poison of
infected places.) There he grew into friendship with Amasia, then Aspasia, and
then the rest; and was at last so intoxicated with Voluptuousness, that he
wholly abandoned his good beginnings of a Virtuous life. After he had been
there some time, his Father's Ghost appeared to him, which was more dreadful
than any Devil could have been: It frowned upon him and vanished. As soon as he
was gone, one called Eknephon came to him, and opening his chamber door, called
him out. He followed Eknephon, who would fain have rescued his companions also;
but some would not awake, others were amazed, and all unwilling: however he
conducted the young man to the water side, and bad him swim over, and so
vanished. He threw himself in, and made way to the other shore: and though he
knew not whither to go at that time, yet he knew it was better to go any
whither then stay where he was. As he was come near the adverse bank, the
Stream ran something strong, and being weakened with his vicious life, he
permitted the Stream to carry him down as it listed: upon which Eknephon with
stern looks showed himself again upon the surface of the water; and then
resuming Courage, and employing his arms afresh, he soon got ashore at the
bottom of Roccabella. Seeing the Rock steep he fate down; but Eknephon called
to him to rise, and having helped him up a few difficult steps, bad him go on:
after which he never appeared to him more. Fear made him advance a little way,
but his feet being tender were very much hurt with sharp stones; and whilst he
endeavored to creep up on his hands and feet, he was scratched with the briers
which grew upon the Hill side. Having gone half way to his great pain, he lift
up his eyes toward the Top, to see how much he wanted yet; and there he spied,
as he thought, a great company of people, and they threw stones at him, which
gave him such blows upon the Head, that he tumbled down again to the bottom of
the Hill: and as he lay there, all torn, and scratched, and senseless, a
Gondola came by which was full of Hedonia's Courtiers; and they were going to
make a Day of it in Sports and Music upon the Water. They seeing one lie in
that unusual manner, put toward the Shore, and perceiving who it was, they
took him into the Gondola, and having brought him to the use of his senses,
they asked him how he came there, and what had brought him into that woeful
plight. He durst not tell them: but they imputing his silence to his present
astonishment, went on in their design for a while; but finding him
extraordinary unchearfull, frequently sighing, and perpetually silent, they
received some disgust of their Jollities from his company, and therefore agreed
to carry him home; and seeing his head disturbed, they laid him upon a Bed,
and went to consummate those Delights to which he had given an unpleasant
Interruption.

When they were gone, he was tormented with infinite representations of his
misery which he received from restless thoughts: and though he fell into a
sleep, it oppressed him rather then administre'd any ease, being but like those
troublesome slumbers which unhealthful fumes do force into the heads of
feverish people. But his distempers were the greater, because of an unquiet
Fancy, a disease that in him took not its rise from his Body. Amongst other
afflictive Phantasms, he dreamed that his Fathers Ghost appeared to him again,
and with a sharp blow of an Ax cut open his Breast, upon which a Vultur
presently flew in and gnawed his Heart, in such cruel manner, that he could
not imagine himself to be any thing but Titius. Sometimes he endeavored to
recollect himself, and to lift these thoughts out of his mind; but they
recoiled upon him with a burdensome weight, like the Stone of Sisyphus.

In the midst of these troublesome strugglings he awaked, and leaping off from
his bed, he stole privately to the River again, to attempt an escape: and as he
was throwing himself into the Stream the second time, they were aware of his
design, and threatened to send after him. He got away; but with the
consideration of his ruined Estate, (for he had spent it all, partly by paying
the debts of his hateful Friend, and partly with buying Trifles and making
Treatments for the wanton Hedonians) and with the stinging remorses of his
Conscience, as also with the fearful expectation of Disgrace, he trembled like
the leaf of an Asp that is moved with the Wind. After he had given me this
account of his forlorn Condition, he went away, and what became of him
afterward I know not.

As Eupathus spoke these words, the Tears ran down his cheeks so fast, that
they were a lively expression of that affectionate Pity with which he related
the miserable case of a foolish Young man.

Eupathus having ended his Story, and perceiving his Auditors rather desirous
of more than weary of one, continued his discourse. I need not, quoth he, have
gone further then the experience of this day, to have given you full
satisfaction of the miserable state of Piacenza: for as I was meditating in my
accustomed Walk, I saw a young Gentlewoman, for the most part of her body
naked, driven through the Meadows which are on this side of Hedonia's House by
two devilish Women's one was called Metamelusa, her Eyes were swelled with
weeping, her Looks sad and ever cast down, her Carriage averse to all
Complacency; the other was named Dyselpis, and she looked more ghastly, tore her
hair, and cried out like one that is surpised with a sudden fright: they both
laid unmerciful blows so thick upon the young Gentlewoman, that my heart is
affected with the sight to this hour.

Having left her not far from the Hill for dead, as they thought, they returned
toward Hedonia's Palace, where they give constant attendance. She came to her
self in a little space of time, but had such small content in her life, that
with a Knife which they had left behind she resolved to kill her self, and to
cut off those few minutes which were yet unravelled. But she accomplished not
her purpose so hastily as to hinder me from knowing some part of her Condition,
which she discovered in this manner; Sir, said she, I guess by your looks that
you are not made to despise Adversity: and though the relation of my
Misfortunes will administer no Comfort to you, and reflect much Dishonor upon
my self; yet if you can suffer the exercise of your Patience, it may be the
recounting of my Ill may further others Good, as the Masts of Ships appearing
upon the Quicksands where they were sunk do many times save others from being
cast away.

I am the unhappy Child of Astorges and Morophilia; and though I desire not to
reproach my Parents, being so conscious to my self of the connection which my
Misery has with my own voluntary Wickedness, yet I may say too truly that
those who were the causes of my Being, were also in a great part accessory to
my Ruin: for if they had to my Nativity, which they furthered not knowing whom
they should help to bring into the World, added also of choice, knowing upon
whom they bestowed it, a voluntary care of my Education, and made such
expressions of parental love as they might easily see my Condition needed, (for
it was the same with all Children,) they might have through Gods blessing,
which is never wanting to such as do their duties, have prevented my Misery,
which is so great, that I esteem it perfect Damnation. But they not only
neglected to give me Rules of good Manners, but also administre'd such Examples
as were a Contradiction to them: not so much in their own practice, lest I
should seem to accuse my Parents; but what was wanting in them was too
abundantly supplied by such Company as were frequent Guests at our house, and
they being Persons of Quality and esteemed as the principal Friends of our
Family, their Conversation was eyed by us as a Rule, and I being but young and
of small Experience in the World, though I saw many things which grated
unpleasantly upon something which I felt in my Soul, yet durst I not presume to
be a Censurer of others Actions, thinking the dislike in me might proceed not
from innate principles of Virtue, which God has bestowed upon us that we might
be enabled to examine what we meet withal, but rather from Ignorance and
Childishness. And as we are most apt to be hurt by the bad we see, though the
Ugliness of Sin is manifest enough in most actions that it produces, and so is
a sufficient invitation to loathing and hatred; yet being palliated from
Examination by the alleviations of several foolish Conveniences, I among other
fools became partaker of ill Dispositions, which in length of time became
Habitual: for whilst they licensed Intemperance in their Diet, Discourses and
Carriage, and brought us books so destructive of Virtue that they profaned the
Invention of Letters, and continually entertained the company with filthy
Tales, loose Songs, obscene Jests and impure Proverbs, I began to suffer
damage in my Modesty, which I had heard, but forgot it, that it is the
faithful Guardian of pure Chastity, which is the necessary support of a Woman's
Honor.

Amongst others I was invited by some young Gentlemen to see Hedonia's Court,
where they talked of a Beauty so far beyond all that former times durst ever
boast of, that Venus would be content to be drawn by her picture: they affirmed
her Wit to be no whit inferior, and that her Courtesy equaled them both; they
praised her Music for such, that one could not endure to hear any other after
it; they talked of her House, Gardens and Entertainments, as patterns for all
the World to imitate. Their discourses made me willing to see such things as by
them were not to be expected any where else. Having been there sometimes, I was
at last so bewitched with their cunning enchantments, especially by means of a
Lady that excelled in Complement, called (...), that I had no mind to return
home any more, utterly disrelishing those small portions of Soberness that
were not banished out of my Fathers house. And then my Parents vexed with my
disobedience to their orders, for they sent diverse times to me to return, began
too late to resent the effects of their Negligence, in my Ruin and their
Dishonor. My Mother especially took to heart my miscarriage, which she could
not but lay to her own charge, both because she had used me to an unwise
indulgence, and had been a means of my corruption by vicious Servants; who
notwithstanding she knew them to be void of excellent qualities, and so unfit
to teach us the good which they knew not themselves, yet they gave her
sufficient content, if they dressed us handsomely.

But to be short, for my time is not long, the Company being this morning in
the midst of a lascivious Dance, one brought in word that Hedonia had, through
weariness of her wicked life, cast her self into the River, where she spent a
great part of her (...) time, and was taken up dead. Which unexpected News
gave me such a smart Reproof for my own Follies, that it took away all sense of
Joy in those things which I thought before to be the only Heaven. Destitute of
Comfort and Hope I endeavored to run away from my self. As soon as I had set
my foot without the Threshold of the House, those cruel Women hurried me over
the River in a Boat, and then persecuted me in that unmerciful manner, which I
suppose you saw from the Hill. I being not able to endure the lashes which I
received from them, which were answered also with worse from within my own
Conscience, have resolved to do that by which I shall procure a Rescue from my
present (...), although I fear I shall but make way for those which are far
more unsufferable. However the Effects of my Wickedness begin to draw this
miserable life to an uncomfortable Period.

Having gone so far, she seemed to be assaulted with a fresh storm of Passion,
which vented it self in these words, And, O Lord, must I now be thrust into the
other World when I am so ill prepared for it? Alas! I have been asleep all my
life, and now I find my self to awake when it is least to my Comfort. How
foolish have I been? what Harvest could I expect but late Repentance and
Hellish Despair, when I knew that all the World does reap as it sowes? O God,
my (...) Soul is no sacrifice for thee: thy Holy Kingdom receives not the
daughters of Sodom. No, no, I must go into the lake of fire, where Lust is
burnt out with brimstone, and the Sinner tormented with the Eternal
remembrance of dishonorable misdeeds. I am so far in Hell already, that I
despair of Pardon; and since I cannot Hope, I will Despair and die.

As she pronounced that word, with a sudden blow she performed what she said,
and fell a most miserable Spectacle of the sad Catastrophe of a Wicked life.
Lord! what a Vision of Hell did then display it self before mine Eyes! There I
saw the Cruelty of careless Parents, the Folly of indulgent Mothers, the
effects of ill Example, the Miseries which attend bad Company, the dregs of
bitter Pleasure, the discomfort of an ungoverned life, and the difficulties of
late Repentance. But I have forgot my self; it is no reason that I should
longer trouble you with relating what was an extreme (...) to my self to see.

Urania, fearing that he might think them weary of his discourse, because they
had now attended a good while to hear the relations of strange Afflictions,
assured him that though it was impossible for humanity not to be grieved for
examples of such extreme Calamities, yet they perceived the connection with
their particular Causes so punctually made known by his discourse, to be of
singular benefit, as they did give notice to all that could consider them, That
God is not to be blamed for the Miseries of Mankind, which they unjustly
attribute in their furious resentments of pain to the imperfection of the World
and those conditions unto which he has particularly consigned them; whenas
they pull upon themselves innumerable Sorrows which he was so willing they
should not have known, that if they had kept the directions of his Wisdom, they
would not have met with them. It is not the Divine Goodness, but we that envy
ourselves our own happiness. And though sometimes we meet with such instance
of (...), as we must think God had a particular design in the bringing of them
upon us; yet what a vast content do Virtuous persons find in the unreproachable
entrance into their Sufferings? and how infinitely more easy are they to be
endured, then those Hellish Torments of wilful sinners that you have mentioned,
which besides their notorious disgracefulness are also for the most part
incurable?

But, Good Eupathus, if it be not afflictive to you that we should set you so
many tasks, and confine you to talk of such things which you never think of but
with grief, we shall desire you but once more to touch a string that sounds so
harsh. If you be not displeased with such entertainment, replied Eupathus, I
shall be willing to gratify your request, having little else to divert you in
this lonesome place. I shall acquaint you with the case of a Gentleman whom I
had the fortune to meet under the Wood side not long since, and he rode upon a
quick-pac'd Horse, and I perceived that he made him run at the utmost extent of
his speed. Having espied me he made such a stop that gave me notice he had a
mind to speak with me. As I came toward him, I might easily discern the Grief
which was in his Heart, if his Looks bore true witness to his Mind. But it
seems he did not desire to conceal his Grief, for complaining bitterly of his
Misfortunes, he asked me if I had not seen a young Gentleman, and a Gentlewoman
that seemed to reckon more years in her age, whom he had lost fight of but a
little before. Yes, said I, they lately gallopp'd by as fast as they could with
whip and spur, and are just now alighted, and entering into Hedonia's Barge,
which it seems attended to waft them over. Well assured it could be none but
those whom he had hitherto followed in vain; he continued his pursuit to the
Rivers side; and the Barge being not so far gone but that they were within
hearing, he called to his Wife to return: but she not only refused that, but
told him, she had abandoned him for ever. Whereupon he came back to me, and
began to tell me the particulars of his Condition, which I thought before to be
sufficiently unfortunate. That Gentlewoman, quoth he, which you saw is my Wife,
whom I married after the death of a former, and I have lived with her for a
long time so happily, that ever till now I thought it one of the most true
signs of an inexperienc'd mind to put a Single life in any competition with
Marriage; and I thought my self so well informed in the advantages of the state
which I did enjoy, that I could defend the cause of the Married against any
arguments. They seemed to me so weakly founded, that they could put no stresse
upon any strength of their own, but took confidence only from hopes of the
inequality of the Antagonist. I was wholly of his opinion, and thought it such
an evident truth, that it is placed utterly beyond the Jurisdictions of
Dispute: and though I perceived he had other things to say, yet I could not but
interrupt him with the defense of the position, what exceptions soever he was
going to make from a cross Experience; and so added, that Nature had made us
incomplete on purpose that we should consummate our Imperfection with the
Conjugal Union, and that no single person with all advantages ever arrives at a
perfection which is any way comparable to Two so made One. I did not think that
he had well considered that he was born that ever disapproved such an excellent
means of his being, or that he was worthy to be who did refuse in such a lawful
way to be a means of leaving others after him. How justly shall Posterity
forget him quite, or remember him with disgrace, who would have had it
impossible to have been remembered at all? This way a man becomes immortal in
his very Body, and has an opportunity to people the World with such
inhabitants as an affectionate love, which none but Parents are capable of,
will constrain all his life to make as good or better then himself. I esteemed
all my portion of Worldly happiness which I had in other instances doubled,
when I perceived they were enjoyed also by one whom I accounted a part of my
self; and I could bear but one half of any cross accident, because she would
bear the other. And though it is true, that since nothing is unmixedly pure in
this World, Marriage has its domestical cares; besides that they are more then
counterpoys'd with Comforts to alleviate them, which no other condition can
boast of, Nature has secured that state against the oppression of such
inconveniences, having appointed two at least to bear one light Burden.
Virtuous Husbands must needs be truly pleased with such a Companion as having
helped to prevent the dishonours of licentious Youth, does as willingly
afterward sustain a great part of the infirmities of Old Age. And although some
tender minds fancy it as an insupportable misery to die one before the other,
that is to say to be torn in pieces; yet that separation is capable of the same
and better arguments of Consolation then those with which wise men comfort
themselves against the parting of their Souls and Bodies, They shall meet
again: But the reason has more force here, because they meet sooner. And
because they have made account that such an indissoluble Union ties them
together, they endeavor as the main care of their life to make themselves such
as that they may not have reason to desire a Divorce.

At that word the Gentleman stopped me, saying, Good Sir, go no further; you
have made my wounds bleed afresh, and quickened the sense of my insupportable
misery by drawing a lively picture of that Happiness which I once thought my
self Master of: and this I believed with no small measure of Faith, for I had
such an experience of the greater part of your discourse, and such a firm
confidence in my Wifes Integrity, and such a deep sense of my own entire
affections, that I thought it was impossible for a true Lover to be Jealous:
and when I heard of any that troubled themselves with that foolish
impertinency, I could not but judge that they had either made a careless
choice, of which they now indiscreetly repented, or that through scrupulous
nicety they were willing to make instruments of their own affliction; but
withal I applauded my own Felicity, which seemed to me so void of any flaw,
that I never entertained the least surmize of the mutability of my present
condition.

But I perceive now that we are not to pass a final sentence upon any Worldly
state too soon, for my Sun is for ever set, which I thought impossible to have
been for the least while eclipsed. Having replied so far, the deep sighs with
which he accompanied these words interrupted the course of his speech; which
gave me opportunity to enquire into the particular Original of his Adversity. I
knew well that discontented Women find several occasions to ground their
dislikes upon against their Husbands. Sometimes he is not Rich enough, now they
think on it, or he is not the Wisest man in the world; and yet they themselves
will publish his follies: it may be he keeps a Servant, not for unworthy
regards, whom they cannot fancy, and for that they will make the House too hot
for him; or they want one for whom they have no use, only they will not be
without one no more then their neighbors: at other times they are sick for
such vain (...) of Clothes or Household Stuff which his estate cannot provide,
or which would be but unsuitable to his degree, and are such things as wise
Matrons do scorn; or being of a peevish humor they will be gone to their
Friends: and sometimes they have no content, though without all reason,
because, forsooth, they may not govern a little more; which is a humor contrary
to the first intention of a Wife, and by which they do ridiculously offer to
put their Head under their Feet. How matters stand between You two, I know not:
but however I think that these or any such like reasons are but pitiful grounds
for a Woman's departing from her Husband, to his extreme discomfort, the ruin
of her Family, and her own eternal Infamy. I think so too, said the Gentleman:
neither indeed were the forementioned instances the roots of this disaster. As
she wanted not any accommodation that my Fortune could allow, so besides all
other Comforts we had diverse pledges of Marriage Love, Children, in whom we saw
our selves multiplied and united; and our desire was seconded with mutual
endeavors to make them meet, not only to supply our places, but to deserve
better after our departure. But Devilish Lust has spoiled us all. Till of late
I did think her so free from that unreasonablenesse, that I never suspected
destruction from so great an unlikelyhood. But as a healthful Constitution by
the Contagion of diseased bodies does many times receive mortal sickness; so
did she contract a Vitiousnesse of Soul by the converse of an unlucky
Companion. There was a young Gentleman, whose Father being dead, had by an ill
governed life spent a great part of his means; and for the love which had been
for a long time intimate between his Father and my self, I gave him counsel to
leave such Courses as must necessarily, if he persisted in them, bring him to
all those Miseries which attend the contempt of an unpitied Beggary. At first
he took no heed to my Words; but in a while finding his estate so entangled
through the profuseness of his expenses, that he could not have the use of
that which was not yet wasted, he hearkened so far to my advice, as to sell
part to clear the debts which lay upon the whole, and made great promises of
future Frugality: and for a while dissembling the love of his former practices,
he was a frequent guest at my House, and would needs stay sometimes longer then
I desired; by which means under pretense of respects to me, as his Guardian and
Benefactor, he cloak'd the unworthy affections which he had to my Wife, and
made my Courtesy a mask for his ungrateful Treachery. I cannot but have so
much Charity as to think that she never imagined his first Visits designed so
unchastly, or that she was so prone to sin that it was needless for him to use
diverse tentations: but I perceive, to my unspeakable grief, that she was not
rivetted in such a deep love of Virtue as to preserve her Innocence. Though a
Castle have strong Walls, yet if those which keep it want store of Provision,
or neglect their Watch, when diligent enemies besiege it, they will either be
forced to yield, or be surpised through their own Carelessness. So I suppose
it fell out with her, who, I doubt not, calling to mind what she had been, was
much satisfied in the worthiness of Chastity, and being convinced of the
unchangeablenesse of Virtuous reasons, could not but believe that she ought to
persevere; and so held out a good while; but at last was betrayed, by keeping
an undue guard upon Importunity and Place too fit for his purposes: and those
which do not secure such advantages, are ever in danger of being delivered up
to their enemy by the traitorous dispositions which are in their own breasts;
which though they might lurk more undiscernedly before, will then be sure to
show what they are. He had not neglected several devices to ensnare her
affections; and she, foolish woman, not minding the pernicious Hook, was
caught with the splendid baits of Jewels and such toys, which to a woman
that esteems it infinite dishonor to be unvertuous, signify no more then
Fish-hookes made of crooked pins, with which little Children angle in puddles
to catch nothing. I having taken notice of more then was to my comfort, and
much distrusting what might follow, advised her to beware, and told her that
the Converse of this Gentleman boded more then civil Courtesies, and that his
frequenting my house was not only in regard to that friendship which had been
betwixt me and his Father; for I perceived in him toward my Wife more then
ordinary observance, amorous glances, and that he sung wanton Songs, which
carried such a sense as he could not so well insinuate in prose: and I knew he
would not have stayed so long where he had very little to do, or come so often
upon very slender Errands, but for some dishonorable respects. As my fears
increased, I often told her of such things as might have prevented mischief, if
she had minded them; as of the treacherous Violation of her Faith, which would
be as the sting of death in her Conscience; the discomfort of those few years
which were yet to come of my life; her own inavoidable Disgrace; besides the
cruel and unmotherly abandoning of her own Children by most unnatural
Falsehood: to all which I added those particular miseries which did attend her
when she should be deserted by that Villain, which she might well expect, since
base Lust does use to go out, when a little time has withdrawn the fuel of
its violent flames; and that she must think he would not stick to neglect her,
who had before abused both her and me. She dissembled her purpose till the
revealing of it would not hinder its Execution, sealing the vain protestations
of her false Faith with many Curses, which I am afraid she will meet too soon
in that place where no blessing will arrive.

And thus have I told you a Story of a poor man that took into his house a
Serpent out of the snow half dead with cold, which being revived with the
warmth of his fire, bit him and his Children to death. Here Eupathus broke off
his Discourses, and having entertained the Travailers with a short Supper, when
the time of the night required it, he disposed them in such Lodgings as his
small house afforded. The next day considering the place to which they were
going, he gave them notice of some things which he thought serviceable to their
Design. He begun after this manner; You have heard, Noble Travailers, and seen
enough of Piacenza, which has not verified its name with such pleasures as you
care for; and Vanasembla, through which you are to travail, will also make a
great show of many gaudy things of another sort, which when you examine them,
will be found to contain but a small matter of substance: And there are many
persons that will make you believe their Country is the Kingdom of Heaven,
which will not prove Angels if you look into their manners. As soon as you are
within the Borders, which you will easily perceive, for they love to have great
marks of division between themselves and their neighbors, I would have you
turn out of the Common rode upon the right hand; and then keeping straight
forward, you will come to a little House standing in an unsuspected place: it
makes no great show, but is situate in a very healthful air, wheredwells an
honest plain man called Apiston, who has retired thither for his safety. He is
humble, and thinks very meanly of himself; but having been often abused by such
as he believed, according to report of others far better then himself, he is of
late grown wary, and does not now think all those good, who, though they do not
affirm themselves to be so, yet give shrewd signs of ambitious desires to be
esteemed so; and whilst they think themselves singularly good, he examining the
grounds of their indulgencies toward themselves, finds them to be but such
things which are common to good and bad; and when he puts them to the trial
concerning any singular thing indeed, they are pitifully deficient. Having
taken notice that Religious pretenses are applicable to worldly Interest, and
having seen many so sordid as to use them accordingly, he does not at all
wonder at those actions which men zealously perform sometimes to the amazement
of simple beholders, who count him very Stoicall because he does not join in
such a common applause. He is not much taken with Zelots, because they have put
Uncharitableness into their Religion, and branded Divine Moderation with the
odious title of Lukewarmnesse. They often strike at the Holiness of Morality
with illiterate Invectives; but have so much more slighted those lovely virtues
of which it does consist in their Immoral practices, that they have made
themselves ridiculous to wise men, by the ostentation of those great pretenses
by which they privilege their exalted state from the necessity of such low
matters. But the truth is, their estate is not so raised as they would have men
believe; neither are the things which they depress of mean worth, for they are
too hard and too good to be performed by wordy Hypocrites.

He is one that does not swallow carelessly all Opinions which those which take
up every thing upon trust applaud for great Mysteries, having found many of
them upon examination to be contradictions to all true Religion. When he
perceives bold Notions thrown abroad, he carries some of them home, but never
lodges any of them in his heart till he has tried them, and found them right,
by two excellent Touchstones, which he has ever by him; I have heard him call
them Empsychon and Grapton: when they hold not good by this proof, he rejects
them for Dross. And because they are many times wrapped up in odd
embellishments of Fancy, and sometimes crusted over with a show of Antiquity,
he has an excellent File, called Exetazon, by which he does pare off the
outsides, and such things as are fastened to them to set them off, that so he
may the more ingenuously and nakedly take a view of them. He is always very
suspicious of such as he discovers to be stamped with some secret characters of
Worldly Interest; which though it makes them current with the Multitude, among
whom Error goes covered, yet they will not pass with him.

There are diverse select Factions amongst them, and they are all as confident
as if Infallibility were shared among them; and yet some of them must needs be
in an Error, for they all contradict one another. They solicited Apiston a
great while to adhere to their several parties; but he was unwilling to divide
himself from good men to serve any Humor, being well assured that when they
have made their petty enclosures, the Divine spirit will fly over all their
Hedges, and converse with good men whether they will or no. Apiston saw so much
of plain Truth among most of them, that he knew would serve them to their most
important concernments, but that they spoiled the usefulness of it with
Contention, Intricacies and doubtful Controversies. He was the likeliest to
have been beguiled with some that extremely reproved the want of Charity, and
exhorted men to Brotherly Love; but having opportunity put into their hands to
express it toward others which needed it sufficiently, they being also
entreated to do it, confessed that the Principle was excellent in it self, but
that their difference from them in judgment had made it hurtful for them. By
this he perceived that their Charity was but Self-love, and the extent of their
Kindness bounded with the circuits of their own Faction. This was a pitiful
disposition, and infinitely below the true height of his generous Temper: for
he is so clearly illuminated with the Divine Light, and has his Passions so
regulated and sweetened with true Love, that he has an excellent sympathy with
God and all Good men; and setting before him the universal Charity of the
Father of the World, he has a most affectionate Regard to the concernments of
All, and never thinks himself more honored then when he can procure their
good. But as he engaged himself in action to bring to pass the Intentions of
his Good will, he was so pushed with severe Falsehood, and so thrust with bitter
Envy, that he could not quietly pass the streets; and therefore to prevent
mischief he retired into a corner, there to expect better times.

He will be shie of you at your first Arrival: but you must be content with
that, for he is no trivial person, and will recompense these appearances of
Incivility with the advantages of a most desirable Friendship; and in
particular he will give you a full notice of Vanasembla.

When Eupathus had proceeded so far, he took a small Tablet out of his pocket,
whereupon was written in Greek characters, (...). (The meaning of the words was
a prohibition of rash belief, which Eupathus and Apiston counted a great sign
of folly.) And, quoth he, if you find my Friend make scruples of giving you
reception, present to him this Tablet.

Here was a rare Encounter of mutual Affection: for as Eupathus by their
Converse had discovered the Travailers to be Excellent persons, and was very
unwilling to lose their Company, yet by reason of the Love which he had for
them was careful to tell them whatsoever might make for their Happiness when
they were gone; so they received so much pleasure from his (...), that they
found themselves most willing to stay when they were going. But as the Design
which they had undertaken required their Departure, so it made Eupathus to
neglect the consideration of his own loss, and to dismiss them to accomplish
their intended Journey. It was not long before they came to the borders of
Vanasembla: but by reason of some intricate turnings they had gone a little out
of their way, which they soon perceived; for having once missed their
directions, they knevv not vvhither to go. As they vvandred up and down, they
stumbl'd upon the company of a great fellovv called Megabronchus, who was a
Vanasemblian, but had been taking his pleasure among his neighbors of
Piacenza. He was quite of a different temper from that of Apiston, for he
could swallow any thing that was svveetned with profitable considerations,
and expressed a great indignation upon their naming Apiston by way of enquiry
to know where he dwelled. No body can tell, quoth he, for he has forsaken us
in Vanasembla, and retired to a private life. He pretended a great offense
taken against our Customs and Opinions, which are so excellent that they are
grown the very Rule of Perfection, from which nothing can be taken, to which
nothing can be added. It Is true there are some different Sects amongst us, but
I mean that which I am of. Apiston is of a squemish stomach, he will believe
nothing unless he have reason for it. He does give all honor to the book
called Hierographon, but he will be his own Interpreter: and though fourscore
or a hundred of our Way resolve concerning the determination of a Controversy,
he does not think himself bound to believe our definition, because we have not
an Infallible Spirit. I confess he is of a peaceable Temper; I could never fall
out with him, because he would never give me leave: though I had a great mind
to have quarreled with him by way of Reproof. His Conversation is holy, as far
as I could discern; but some of my acquainrance have declared great suspicions
concerning him, but they would not tell me the particulars. It may be they had
received some informations against him, and at present do distrust the truth of
them, or are guilty of some Infirmities themselves, that make them a little
more sparing in their speech. However I do not like him, neither do I desire to
be seen in the company of any that frequent his house, for that may turn to my
prejudice.

Urania and Panaretus were willing to listen to Megabronchus his talk the
rather, because he gave them a taste of Vanasembla; and they were willing to
detain him a while longer in their Company, that they might take off his most
groundless disaffection to Apiston; not only having the engagement of good
information concerning his Worth, but perceiving the Allegations against him to
be pitifully insignificant. Panaretus therefore, as they went along between two
Banks, where he could not well part from them, told him that they were as
unwilling that he should receive damage in their presence, as that an absent
man should be wronged in his Good name whilst they were able to help it; and
that they hoped they might easily prevent, if he would but particularly bear
their talk, as long as they had willingly given ear to his discourse.
Megabronchus consented: whereupon Panaretus having minded upon what particulars
he had grounded his Accusation, and taking notice that he had unawares said
many things in his defense, made a short answer to what he had so highly
applauded in his own party, and accused in Apiston as bad, or lessened as good.
Its true, quoth Panaretus, that you think very well of your own Sect: I cannot
blame you; no doubt your Adversaries do so of theirs. But you have acknowledged
your selve fallible, and therefore you cannot give any infallible assurance of
your being in the Right in every thing: you are men, and so may give so much to
your Idiopathies that may biasse you out of the way of Truth: you cannot but
acknowledge this to be true, and if it be, you ought not to be angry that
Apiston does believe it. And since you are fallible, as you confess you are,
you ought not to be so much offended with a good man that thinks you are
deceived in something, where your selves do not deny but that you may. If he
dissent from your determinations, no doubt but he thinks all necessary Truths
are determined long ago both for you and him infallibly; and he is not so much
to blame for refusing assent to your fallible desinitions, as you are for
making new additions, being neither divinely warranted nor infallibly guided to
do it. You know you differ from many others in the world, that think themselves
highly wronged in the neglect: therefore, good Sir, for the future be persuaded
to suffer it patiently that others do not in all things agree with you.

That Apiston is very tolerable in other respects, appears from that Character
which you have given of the Temper of his spirit, and the Excellency of his
Conversation, by which it may be perceived he is one of Wisdom and Modesty in
his Carriage toward others, and unblameable in regard of his proper
Accomplishments: and though you may have received misreport concerning him, you
ought not much to value that, if you consider the general inclination which is
in men to disparage such as differ from them thinking that a worth will accrue
to their own Opinion from a creditable disrepute cast upon the persons of the
Dissenters: and you may commonly observe it, that they can easily wink at
gross Faults in themselves, though they are always quick-sighted as to the
least of others.

Whilst Panaretus was speaking these words they came to a place where two ways
met, and Megabronchus being weary of the discourse, especially because he could
not answer it, he told them his way was to the left hand; and having resolved
which way soever they went, he would go no further with them, he made a rude
haste from their Company. They took the right hand, as they were directed by
Eupathus, and came in a short space of time to Apiston's house. He was walking
up and down in a serious Meditation concerning some Discourses which he had
lately heard in Vanasembla, wherein he thought the Goodness of God to be
greatly misreported, and his Creatures taught to put very little confidence in
him, to wit, that he cared but for a few of his Creatures, but did eternally
hate the rest. As he was giving thanks to God for making him partaker of a
better knowledge of him, by which he was saved from blasphemous hatred and
Hellish despair; his Meditations were broke off by the arrival of Urania and
Panaretus. He accosted them so, as they might easily discern he had some doubts
concerning them by his Countenance; but that they might not impute his
strangeness to Incivility, he told them that he made no question but they knew
the times to be such, that they required a great wariness in those that would
not be abused. Though he had no particular causes of Suspicion, but that they
made their (...) with a Courteous Intention; yet he desired to know whence they
came. They answered, From Eupathus. He is my Friend indeed, replied (...), and
some that have understood of our intimate Acquaintance, have made use of his
name to deceive me in some things, wherein I had not been abused but for the
credit I gave to that pretended Recommendation; and therefore I must desire
some further assurance besides your bare words that you came from thence. Upon
that Urania pulled out of her bosom, where she had kept it all that day, the
Tablet which Eupathus gave them. Apiston having read the Symbol, immediately
saluted them in most friendly manner, brought them into his house, and gave
them such entertainment as men usually bestow upon those whom they love
unfeignedly.

Panaretus and Urania, abundantly satisfied concerning the reality of their
Welcome, desired him to give them some account of the reasons of that change
which they manifestly perceived in his Countenance and deportment to them after
the receiving of the Tablet. Apiston told them, that there were in that Country
and in diverse parts of the world a certain company of plain honest men that
desired nothing so much as to revive true Charity, and to maintain those few
sparks of it which are yet unquench'd by Covetousness, Malice, and Hypocrisy;
and that though they did abhor to divide themselves from mankind by a sort of
Conspiracy, combining against their friendship, yet they found it necessary to
have some private sign, by which they might be known in foreign parts to such
as having never seen their faces before, might by this token be assured that
they were their Friends, and so supply them with advise or money, or such
assistances as the businesses which they were employed in might require. The
reason of this necessity is, said he, because many that are incomparably good
are sometimes very poor, and being in strange Countries might be in danger of
perishing, by reason of that Uncharitableness which prevails in the world, and
has so hardened the hearts of the Rich, that they will not relieve even those
whom they believe to be in want, and might know to be such as do well deserve
supplies. Besides, some of our Friends are sometimes engaged in such
undertakings that require more assistance then one or two or twenty can
contribute, and we want convenience of transmitting such things into other
places as are of necessary use: but by this means these defects are made up,
none refusing either to give credit to him that carries it, or to bestow their
help in such ways as they find to be best to accomplish these Virtuous
designs, which are undertaken for the Universal good of Mankind.

Panaretus much pleased with the device, demanded of him who was the first
Author of it. Pythagoras, said Apiston; and in Imitation of the Virtuous
example of those excellent Philosophers, which by obedience to his Precepts
revived Charity to the Admiration and Envy of the World, we have amongst some
more of their laudable Customs embraced this. We have had some Experience,
quoth Urania, that it is not unuseful; but do you think, Apiston, that the
Pythagoreans did accomplish such effects as you mention by it? There is no
doubt of that, said Apiston: and, if you will have the patience to hear it, I
will relate you a Story out of an Authentic Author, which will give you
plentiful assurance of what I said.

There was a poor Pythagorean, who having travailed a great way on foot, by
reason of the heat of the weather and the length of his Journey fell into a
violent Fever. He lay at a public Inn where no body knew him, and having not
provided money sufficient for such Accidents, he began to be destitute of
Necessaries; which the Host understanding, supplied him out of mere Compassion
of his sad Case. When the Disease had gone so far that Death was now at hand,
the Sick man called for a Writing-Table, which means was only left to requite
so great love, though the effect of his desire would not come to pass till
after his death. Having written a certain Symbol, that is, One of those
Sentences which was part of the mystical Doctrine of Pythagoras, he sent the
Table to his (...), praying him to hang it up on that side of his house which
was next to the High way, and to observe if any that went by took notice of it;
assuring him that if any should chance to read it which understood the writing,
he would not only repay his cost, but also reward the great care which he had
taken of a Stranger. As soon as he had said these words, he died. The Host
buried him, and though he expected no return of his Expenses, yet omitted
nothing that belonged to a decent Funeral. He had so little trust in the
Table, that if he had not been moved with the last words of a dying man, he
would not have hung it forth. A good while after he had placed it according to
his directions, a Pythagorean travailing through that Town espied the Table
hanging upon the wall, and having espied one of their Symbols upon it, he went
into the House to know who had put it there: and having understood in what
manner the charitable Host had used his poor Guest, he requited him not only
with many thanks and great praises of his Virtue, but with much more money then
he had disburs'd; leaving not only the Host, but all the Neighborhood,
wondering at such a rare instance of extraordinary Friendship, and concluding
that it was an excellent doctrine which made the mutual love of those which
professed it to be so great.

Apiston having ended his Story, though he could perceive no visible sign of
weariness in Urania or Panaretus, which indeed was put off with that true
delight which they found in many pleasant Conferences, yet remembering their
Journey, and to declare his Civility, he persuaded them to retire to their
rest, which the night also being far spent made very seasonable and welcome to
them all.

THE THIRD BOOK, OR VANASEMBLA.
WHen the gray eyed Morn with her rosy fingers had drawn the Curtains of the
East, and the glimmering light began to peep upon the World, Urania and
Panaretus, now weary of their rest, left their beds, being loath to sleep away
a minute of that day by whose light they hoped to see the much-desired
Bentivolio. Had they known his present Condition, their sleep would have been
shorter and much more disturbed: but measuring the Truth of their Hopes by the
Extent of their Wishes, they supposed him well, with whom they knew it could
not be ill if Equity had the disposal of things in the place where he was. So
Lovers please themselves in sympathies with their own desires, and take no
small delight in prophesying all Happiness to such as they do entirely affect.

Apiston's thoughtful Soul had called him up a good while before; for being
used to the pleasant entertainment of wakeful Meditations, he was content with
a smaller portion of Sleep then those allot to themselves who have no better
use of dark time, and know no other Day but what is made by visible Light. To
begin the day with him who is the Beginning and End of all our lives, he took a
Theorbo, and sung this holy Song to it with a good Tenor Voice.

Good God! how dull a thing am I, to make
Nights of this tedious Length; when such awake
Who need more sleep then I, and rise by Night,
Whose work will scarce pay for their Candlelight?
Is Death so lovely grown, that I should court
His drowsy Image in this sleepy sort?
What pleasure is it, for half my time to be
In cloudy Mists lost to my self and Thee?
The cheerful Birds with early Notes begun
To sing their Mattens to the rising Sun.
And all the Flowers lift up their nodding heads,
And spread their leaves upon their fragrant beds;
And deck themselves with all their pride to give
Welcome to those bright Fires which make them live.
But I lie still, detained in sluggish Dreams,
Though thou art up, and with thy active Beams
Upbraid'st my Sloth: Nay, thou do never set,
But upon Sinners and such as forget
Why they have Eyes. Great Sun, thy out-spread Ray,
Chasing the Shades, does make a constant Day;
And with its Vigor all dark powers Controules,
And shines at Midnight upon watchful Souls.
Lord, since thy lustres by this Earthen Ball
Are intercepted, and (...) a wall
Of Mud shut up, and those gross Fumes that rise
From this foul Dungeon cloud my feeble Eyes;
Tear this thick Curtain and restore my sight;
Transport me to the Regions of Light,
Where nothing comes from whence a Cloud may grow,
Where Blessed Visions Light and Eyes bestow,
Where Holy Souls Eternal Watches keep,
Advanced above Earth, Sin, dark Night and Sleep.
Apiston had just finished his Song, when his servant knocked at his door to
acquaint him that Urania and Panaretus desired his company below. After he was
come down, and had given them the usual salutations of the Morning, they
declared to him their willingness to perfect their journey. He readily answered
their desires, both with the civility of a speedy dismission, and also
accompanied them on the way, till they came to a Hill from whence they had a
full View of Vanasembla.

The Sun having now attained that Height which makes Noon, the heat made them
willing to rest awhile under the covert of some Trees that grew near the foot
of the Hill, they being also pretty well wearied with their Travail through
barren Grounds, which for the most part were overrun with a shrubby sort of low
Briers, filled with such sharp and tenacious Prickles, that if they chanced at
any time to step out of the beaten Path, they could never get clear off them
without most hurtful scratches. As they took notice of the Prospect, Urania
spied on each side of them diverse Ruins, which by their greatness signified
the Magnitude of those Edifices which lay buried under them; and thereupon
demanded of Apiston what they were. They are the Remains, quoth he, of as
goodly Fabrics as ever the Earth supported: but their Usefulness far exceeded
their Magnificence, built by the incomparable Twins Theophilus and
Philanthropus; Two so loved by the people in former times, that they called
them the Sun and Moon, whom they resembled in glorious Splendor and benign
Influences. They having with no less Discretion then hearty Zeal devoted
themselves to God, and knowing no such way to improve their worldly estate as
by employing it to further such Designs as God does most delight in, they built
and endowed these Houses, partly to relieve the poor, judging themselves their
Stewards, and making account that by the receipt of Riches they were put to the
trial of their Charity and Humility; partly to entertain men of Excellent
minds, to this end that there they might have an opportunity to improve
Knowledge, the glory of Humanity, and to preserve it by a prudent Communication
to others, and so to keep out that barbarous Ignorance that invades Mankind,
and draws it down into the same level with Beasts: with this great aim also,
that men being made partakers of true acquaintance with the Divine Wisdom and
Goodness which are displayed in the Works of God, might be raised into wise
and just Adorations of the Creator, which they expressed frequently in Holy
Hymns; and being inamoured with the Goodness of God truly known, might express
a worthy imitation thereof, in relieving the imperfections of Youth by
Knowledge and Virtue, and extending the Benefits of the same Charity to all
others that stood in need of that better sort of Alms. But alas! not long
since they became a prey to destruction, which was brought to pass by the
Covetousness and Ambition of two wicked brothers, Timanthus and Pleonecton;
who envying the Charity of former times, which they could not imitate, and
grudging those which needed it the Comfort of Ancient Liberality, especially
having an eager thirst after their Revenues, dispossessed them by Violence, and
lest future Ages should repent of their Ancestors sins, and restore the true
owners to that which God and Man had made their Right, they pulled down the
Houses, and so made the mischief irreparable.

Apiston perceiving the time of parting from his Company to draw near, broke
off the discourses which were between them, and began to speak of the Country
which was now their prospect, after this manner; This Country of Vanasembla had
its name given to it by the Theoprepians, who thought it fitted them but too
well, because they made an Apish imitation of the Theoprepians. But the
Vanasemblians, who thought highly of themselves, did not like it by any means,
as judging it both inferior to their worth, and disgraceful in the
signification; and thereupon made an order to punish such as should repeat the
Name, though but in jest, with their sore displeasure.

The Country was formerly divided into two equal Parts, one called Polyglotta,
the other Microcheires: but because of the likeness of their Tempers and
affinity of Manners, they united themselves into One Jurisdiction; and to keep
the old Names, they called the Metropolis Polyglotta, and the Country
Microcheires. The Inhabitants of Polyglotta are all guided by one Rules yet for
distinction sake they parted themselves, according to their discretion, into
five little Divisions, which they called Pammelaena, Iconium, Pseudenthea,
Kenapistis and Agazelus. I will not trouble you with the reason of the Names,
because by and by when you come thither you will easily perceive, that though
they do many things extremely absurd, yet they kept decorum enough in giving to
themselves proper Titles.

There Apiston took his leave of the Noble Travailers, who keeping a quick pace
to redeem this stay, within a few hours arrived at Polyglotta. Where they
first endeavored to know what was become of Bentivolio: But this work was not
so soon dispatched as they thought, for after much enquiry they could by no
means find him. This was an extraordinary trouble to them all that Night, which
they were fain to bear in a Common Inn, resolving as soon as the light of the
Morning gave them leave, to renew their pursuit; which they performed
accordingly: For having learned of a Stranger, who lay in the same Inn, that
such a one as they described came to Town, (though he could not tell where he
was;) they made their first enquiry among such as attended the Higher Powers,
(now the Government was of such a sort as very few could tell what it was, only
it was formerly Monarchical:) but they soon understood, that he desired
entrance at Court, and had been admitted but that Flattery and Falsehood,
Jealousy and Faction kept him out. The next search they made among the
Gallants, which were scattered up and down the Metropolis; but most of them
protested that they never saw him: only one said, he had been with them
formerly, but had received such offense from Pride and Lust who kept them
Company, that he would stay no longer among them. They went next to certain
Houses built for Pleasure in fertile grounds not far from the City, where those
which might live where they pleased used to spend the Summer, and having
inquired of the Peasants for Bentivolio, they answered that none of that name
had come into their Landlords houses since they left off the old Charitable
Hospitality. Being so far disappointed, and doubting where to seek next, it is
likely, says Panaretus, that he has taken sanctuary in some of the Churches:
and having entered into one of the most famous for outward beauty, they had
great hopes of finding their lost Friend; for they heard his name often
mentioned. But after a short stay one informed them that he was not there, for
that a furious Debate, which was held there a few days before, had so inflamed
the parties with wrath against each other, that they did many strange things,
and amongst the rest, at the instigation of an Ignorant Zelot, he was ordered
to leave the place. This put them to so great a loss in their thoughts, that
they resolved to seek him any where, supposing they might meet him where it was
not very likely he should be, since they missed him where they had good reason
to expect his presence; and so they went toward the Merchants Walks: but when
they were come (...), one told them, that Covetousness had forbidden him their
Company. As they past by the Schools of Disputation, they thought to step in;
but hearing a tumultuous noise about impertinent Questions, they knew if he had
been there he would have come forth presently. It may be, said Urania,
according to his Custom he is gone to visit some Hospital: but when they came
thither, the Poor people told them sad news, that they had seen such a one in
former times, but of late he never came near them. They had yet some small hope
to meet him amongst the Common people as they walked up and down the streets:
but it soon vanished; for they knew he could not converse with such as had
resigned themselves to Murmuring, Sloth, Fraud and Hatred.

At last they met a good man called Philoxenus, who perceiving them to be
Strangers, was loath to pass them by, especially because he guessed by their
Countenances, that either through unacquaintednesse with the place, or some
other occasion, they were under a present dissatisfaction. Having demanded
whether his service might be of any use to them; Yes, says Urania, if you
could give us notice of a Friend, from whom we parted not long since, having
agreed to make this City the place of our meeting, where, though we have
hitherto sought him in vain, we know he must needs be, except some disaster
have befallen him. Withal she gave a description of his person: which
Philoxenus having well considered, he knew whom they sought, and prayed them to
go with him to his house, where they should have tidings of their Friend. They
went along with no small joy, hoping to find Bentivolio at his house. This they
quickly saw to be a mistake; for Philoxenus perceiving the error of their
Expectations, told them plainly that he was not there. Where is he then? quoth
Urania, with a quick reply! I am loath to tell you, says Philoxenus, because
he is where you little think, and where he does less deserve to be: He is in
Prison, under the Custody of a cruel fellow called Achrestus; and because I
know you long to understand how he came there, I will briefly acquaint you.
Your friend being present at a Religious Conference, it happened that some with
a great deal of blind Zeal did speak very unworthily of God: upon which he
prayed them to consider better of God, before they spoke of him after that
manner; for that in his apprehension the things spoken were very much to God's
dishonor. Hereupon ill words were returned, and one called him Heretic; and
in fine the Disputation ended, as most use to do, to little purpose. But the
next day an Accusation was preferred against your friend before the
Magistrates, who carried a very great respect to the Accusers, because they
were persons that made great show of Gravity and much Zeal for Truth. They
accused him at random, and laid so many horrid things to his charge, that an
Order was granted to commit him to Prison. I understand that Articles are
framed against him by one Orgilus, and that he and another called Dyscolus will
witness them, though Dyscolus never saw Bentivolio in all his life. The
Articles are the strangest things to quote against a man by way of accusation
that ever you heard, viz. That Bentivolio should say, That the Vanasemblians
made Religion a masque; That their Laws were fine Cobwebs; That he had been in
many Countries where he heard not so much talk of Goodness, but was never in
any where he saw less performed; That the people were holy Atheists; That they
set the Profession of Virtue and the Practice thereof in opposition to each
other; That little things were in high esteem with them, and greater matters
slighted; and such like. But the anger conceived against him was blown up by
the Malice of one of the Judges, who had a great spleen at Bentivolio, because
he had written a letter to reprove him for taking away by a most wicked fraud a
poor man's estate, whom two or three Sycophants had made obnoxious to a slight
Law.

Philoxenus knew well enough that this was but ill news to his Guests; and
therefore to correct the unacceptablenesse of his Story, he told them that he
made no doubt but that he could put them in a way to accomplish his speedy
deliverance: which is, quoth he, to make application to one of the chief
Judges, whose name I have forgotten, who is a most just Magistrate, a lover of
Right, not smutted with Covetousness nor biased with Partiality, and that
knows well enough, that Goodness does not consist in such Niceties as most
understand not, and few agree in. Urania greatly pleased with this Relation,
desired Philoxenus to bring her and Panaretus to the Judges House; which he
willingly performed: and having sent in a signification of their desires by one
Eumenes, a servant that always gave much respect to Philoxenus, and was
willing to assist any that came to his Master upon worthy errands, the Judge
sent them word that they should attend him in a fair room, which by reason of
the liberty of access and freedom of speech, which he allowed there to all
wronged persons, was called Parresia, where he accordingly met them, without
such delays as proud persons design to State, but prove the reproachful
significations of their vain minds. He being much taken with the graceful
presence and Virtuous Carriage of Urania and Panaretus, which were not only
correspondent to all perfect Rules, but seemed to be expressive of something
which is beyond the attainment of the most raised Hypocrisy, he civilly
demanded the cause of their Address; which when they had declared, he gave
order immediately to send for Bentivolio, assuring them that they should have
all fair reparation if it should appear that he was wrongfully imprisoned.
Before he was come, his accusers, who had timely notice of his being sent for,
appeared and made many general accusations against Bentivolio. Urania taking
the opportunity of their silence, to which at last they were forced, having
said all they could, not weighing the unjust reproaches of one whom she knew to
be innocent, prayed the Judge to examine the Witnesses apart concerning the
Articles, which by the first reading appeared to be framed with much
indiscretion, or else upon great malice. Her request was granted, and Orgilus
being brought forth, said, he received the Articles in a Letter from a friend
of his, whom he desired to be namelesse, and that he had preferred them, he
confessed, not without a grudge against the person of Bentivolio, because he
did not assent to him one day whilst he was asserting with no small vehemence,
That Moderation of Temper toward men of different Opinions was worse then
Atheism; and because he had heard him say, That it was one of the greatest
calamities that ever befell Christian Religion, that Christ's Disciples, so
called by themselves, were so unlike their Master; and that he thought the most
Ignorant were always the most fierce; which he took as a particular affront to
himself: and this was the Sum of his Testimony.

Dyscolus being called forth, affirmed, That Orgilus wrote the Articles, and
that he himself did not hear the words spoken, but that he signed the Charge,
because he had heard such words and worse related concerning him in several
places; and particularly that he affirmed, he was able to bear with Honest men
though they differed from his Apprehension of things, and thought that others
ought to do so with a mutual regard to each other; especially since he knew no
Church which was Infallible, and therefore ought not to force men of peaceable
spirits and Innocent lives to an acknowledgment of Divine Authority in their
private determinations when the Matters are dubious and of smaller Importance:
and the rather because they refuse to submit to the Impositions of others, and
have declared the Usurpation of one that has dignified himself with the Title
of Infallible Interpreter as a mark of Antichrist. He added some other words of
dislike of Bentivolio's Person, because his Temper was so contrary to his own,
protesting that he did not love lukewarm Concord; that he knew scarce any thing
indifferent; and that there was no distemper in heat, and that the Torrid Zone
is the middle Region where Virtue inhabits -- Peace, Peace, said the Judge,
your brain is too hot. If this be all the business, you are a couple of
Unworthy persons, and you shall have the reward of your Malice. He told
Bentivolio, that he was sorry that any person of Wisdom and Virtue, but much
more that Bentivolio, should suffer imprisonment in that City upon such
frivolous pretenses; that he might go whither he pleased, and that he should
improve his utmost endeavors to procure the free abode of himself and his
friends in those parts.

Having dismissed Bentivolio, he applied himself to some that had too
passionately abetted his Accusers, and perceiving that they were not very well
pleased with what he had done, he accosted them thus; Are not you ashamed to
appear in such a dishonorable business? Could you stoop to such lowness of
spirit, as upon such poor grounds so pitifully witnessed to disquiet such a
worthy Gentleman? Will you make this place disinhabitable to ingenuity? When
you judge concerning your duty, lay aside the hindrances of Interest, which
must needs prejudice your discerning Faculty. Enjoy your own thoughts, in God's
name, but do as you would be done unto; and what you would not have done unto
you, do not. Where sin manifestly cleaves to an Opinion, you may justly shun
the Assertor, because he has discovered his wicked Temper by owning falsehood:
but when any thing is so darkly revealed that we cannot assure our selves that
he which holds the part contrary to us is condemned of himself, I dare not give
the odious name of Heretic. You allow such as dissent from you to be Learned
and Good, when you speak out of passion; and because the Diffenters are so
considerable, you should not be too peremptory in your determinations. Why
should you conclude that for necessary, which your dissenting from many Wise
and Good men does prove to be doubtfully declared? What you pretend concerning
the necessity of your Consequences is less valuable, because you are not sure
you do deduce them right; and your Explications are not of themselves
Faith-worthy, since you do not pretend to be Infallible Interpreters: and if
you should challenge a Right to all men's Faith, you do little less then usurp
Divine Authority, since both Scripture and Reason desert you in the claim of
Infallibility. In stead of this odd zeal, for God's sake promote such things
as are unquestionably good; and there is no doubt but as that shall kindle the
flame of Divine love more perfectly, we shall clearly see the way toward our
present and Everlasting Rest. With such words he dismissed them, but very
little satisfied, because he did not declare himself for their Opinion;
contrary to which they could believe nothing true.

Urania and Panaretus having thus regained their dearest Bentivolio, they
retired altogether to the house of Philoxenus, who had no small share in their
joys; where when they had dispatched such Civilities as were due to great Love
and long Absence, they renewed their desires of seeing Polyglotta: and that
they might make a full discovery of it, they resolved to begin at one end, and
so proceed quite through it.

Their first stage was Pammelaena, which was placed in an obscure part of the
suburbs; for the Pammelaenians were of no great esteem in Polyglotta. They were
the less respected because of their black swarthy Complexion; which was not
caused by the heat of the Sun, for they were removed far enough from light, but
rather by some infernal smoke, which had tanned them. They were consigned to a
place which sitted them, for the ground was low, and continually sent forth a
steam, which did so darken the Air, that it was impossible to perceive any
thing distinctly among them. At a good distance they took the People for Trees
walking up and down; but when they came nearer to them, and heard them make a
brutish noise, they thought they had been Beasts: but the shape of their Bodies
refell'd that error, for they went upright, and so they concluded them to be
Men; though it is true that Apes and Monkies, with that posture in such dark
air, might have put tricks upon them. They were much troubled with a discase
called Hylotes: which though it permitted to them an indifferent good use of
their more Bodily powers, by which means they could eat and drink, taste and
feel; yet it did extremely dull their Wits, and sent such a thick rheum into
their Eyes, that they could scarce see that which lay just before them; and
made them so hard of hearing, that it was a difficult matter to make them
understand any thing that was said to them. It produced one eminent quality,
which was very observable in them all, which was called Dyspithea: by reason of
this, though they held many ridiculous Opinions, yet no Reasons whatsoever
could move them to an alteration of their mind. They were all troubled with a
great weakness of memory, which was perceived quickly; for Bentivolio and
Urania having at their desire told them their Names, they asked them again so
often, that they were ashamed to answer: and at first doubting whether it was
not an Abuse, they tried whether they had not forgotten their own; and when
they could not remember them, their Wonder fell into Pity.

No great matters were expected to be shown, where one could scarce see any
thing: but as the noble Travailers were upon their return, passing through a
dirty narrow street they stumbled unexpectedly upon an old Temple dedicated to
Agnoea; which was unspeakably dark, both because it had no windows, and by
reason of the natural fogg^nesse of the Air, which was so thick that it might
be felt. They not dreaming of a Church in such a dismal place, thought it was
the womb of Night, the Cave where Darkness sleeps, a Charnell-house for empty
Skuls, or indeed the very Region of Death. But mistakes are easy in such a
place; it was the Pammelaenians Chapel. It was built so capacious, that it
would hold all the inhabitants of Polyglotta; and there was a report that they
extended the building to that greatness by a general Contribution: neither was
their money laid out wholly in behalf of the Pammelaenians, for the richest
persons and men of great quality thoughout the whole City did often repair
thither to Worship; nay sometimes persons famed for knowledge were observed to
steal in among the rest.

It happened to be the hour of their Devotions, by which means the entrance was
more easy; though to say true it is difficult at no time, for the Doors are
very wide and are never locked. When they came in, they saw the ill-favored
Statue of Agnoea slovenly cast in Lead, on the one side supported with an old
Woman called Hypnotica, who leaned drowsily upon the wall, with her Eyes shut,
as if she had been dead. Upon the other side was the Statue of a man called
Tuphlotharson, which was carved in Wood, but with a brazen face, with staring
looks full of impudent Confidence; the Eyes were open, but did not resemble
such as have sight, for the Tunicles seemed to be all of Horn.

They expected no mystical ceremonies in the Chapel of Ignorance; however
upon the Wall above the Altar they saw something written in odd Characters,
which could hardly be read, because he which put them could hardly write; only
Bentivolio picked so much sense out of the ugly scrawles as to understand that
they had a mind to have inscribed this sentence, TO KNOW NOTHING IS THE
SWEETEST LIFE.


After a long stupid silence a purblind fellow, called Morosophus, began to
make a Speech: and what should it be, but a Declamation (forsooth) against
Knowledge, which he had stuffed with a great company of impertinent words in the
praise of Agnoea? He extolled her Beauty ridiculously, but that fool; know no
difference between Praise and Dispraise; and in commendation of her Color he
said, she was not unworthy to be called the Queen of darkness. He praised her
Blindness, because it was perfect; her Immoveablenesse, because it was such
as might vie with that of Rocks; and said, for Contentedness she excelled
the dead: with much more stuff of the same sort, which did not a little
please the Pammelaenians, who had hired this half-vvitted fellovv with good
store of Victuals and a small sum of Money, (which things he only aimed at)
to make a Speech now and then as a defyance against the rest of Polyglotta, who
had spoken something by way of scorn against Ignorance, and Morosophus had
reported it to the Pammelaenians in hopes to get the forementioned employment;
and it succeeded according to his expectation. For the Pammelaenians were so
mad that any body should offer to understand better then themselves, that they
entertained him on purpose to confute and reproach the pride of such vain
boasters. By this means he was engaged to use that little wit he had, to prate
foolishly against Knowledge. His words were Oracles among the Pammelaenians,
whom by several odd devices he had so enamored with Ignorance, that they
abhorred Wisdom as a kind of Devilish thing.

Having ended his lavish Praises of (...), he continued his Oration made in
Dispraise of Knowledge, after this manner: And what is Knowledge but the Opinion
of the Proud? what are Books but the shells of that Opinion? what are Tongues
but Nut crackers by which the kernel is taken out? what are the Sciences but
Ignorance called by a wrong name? what are the Arts but tricks invented by Wit
to ensnare the simple? what is Reason it self but a mere Trap to catch the
Ignorant? Memory is an unlucky Table, good for nothing but to record injuries
and such things as are better forgotten. Fancy is but a Spider's wheel made to
spin Cobwebs. Learning is the vain Jingle of (...); Academies the foolish
effects of mistaken Zeal; Scholars a lazy sort of (...) people; and the
Schools the Nurseries of their (...), where the spawn of cunning Knavery is
brought to maturity. What is Skill in any Mystery but an unprofitable device
got with much trouble and expense of time and money? Those which they call Wise
discourses are only a Rhapsody of affected Words put together to amuse and gull
the Vulgar. O thou most hateful Learning! thou art an Arch enemy of Levelling
and the all-desired Equality, which cannot be had whilst men of greater
Abilities will pretend greater Merits, and are chosen into higher places,
because they are fitter to manage them. But if men would believe it, able parts
are good for nothing but to disturb the rest of Mankind; Greater Understandings
plague the World with Division and Controversies; the use of Disputation is to
unravel the peace of mankind, and to root up the best settled Governments. Then
he fell into exclamations brutishly loud; But O profound Ignorance! the Nest of
Peace! Thou art the quiet sleep of the Soul, in which all harmful thoughts
cease. Thou art the Nurse of Self-love. Were it not for thee, Fools would
never admire themselves and others who are foolishly like them. Thou art the
wholesome Root of Obedience. Princes and States do justly extol thy worth, and
are unspeakably beholding to thy incomparable usefulness: neither do they more
advance thy Honor, then secure their own Good, when they banish Learned men
out of their dominions, or force men from Books by taking away the Estates of
Students. They are the Obedient Ignorant who, not understanding their own
Interests, are content only to think of small matters. They never raise any
blustering winds to mount themselves higher, because they judge nothing so safe
or easy as to ly upon the ground. These are content to see with other men's
eyes, because they have none of their own. Since they cannot contradict the
unreasonable appointments of their Governors with better things offered in
their room, their Blindness makes their Obedience cheerful: and though
sometimes a peevish fit happens to take them, yet it bodes no great hurt,
because they do but imperfectly understand the designs of their Superiors, nor
can easily find out any ways to oppose them, but such as the foresight of wise
Counselors has stopped beforehand.

Then he applauded the Pammelaenian Valor, that is the Boldness of the Blind;
and affirmed all Demosthenes's kindred to be Rhipsaspides (by which word the
people understood Conjurers.) Then he laughed at Plato for foolishly wishing
That all Kings were Philosophers. Then fetching his breath he renewed his mode
of Exclaiming; But O brave Turks, the proof of my observations, where Knowledge
is Treason, and Books Rebellion! O wise Rome, which know no support like
that of an Implicit Faith, and acknowledgest no Mother of Devotion so fruitful
as Ignorance, and have wisely put the sweet babe to Nurse to blind Obedience! O
the rare Mysteries of true Knowledge, whose methods are then most applauded,
when they introduce the most perfect Ignorance! O unspeakable Ignorance, who
do put so much beholdingness upon Knowledge! Justly have we made thee our
last End, when Wisdom does confess thee to be so great a Means, that she can
do nothing without thee.

There he stopped, being hindered from going further with a brutish Hum from the
Pammelaenians, which did so ravish the Ass, that Urania and Bentivolio could
not but think that if he should go a few steps further, he would pass from a
Fool into a Madman, and therefore becken'd to Panaretus to interrupt him;
which he did in these words: Peace, Peace, vain Talker, who know no use of
thy Tongue but to make a Beast speak. Thou have brayed a great while after such
a manner as would have put thy self and thy Clients to sufficient shame, but
that thou art guarded with Impudence, and they with Ignorance. Thou do not
know what thou do profane, nor do care whom thou do abuse. Are not these
Pammaelaenians blind enough, unless thou do make them such incurably? Do
thou insult over the (...) of Fools, and under pretense of Assistance plunge
them deeper into the pit of darkness? Vain Sophister! the clouds of (...)
cavills raised in thy foul brain are not able to eclipse the (...) of true
Wisdom; neither will thy counterfeit reasons go current for an excuse of
reproachful Ignorance. I will dispell the mist which (...) have cast before the
Eyes of these abused people. Do not thou know that Ignorance is the Blindness
of the Soul, which for want of Knowledge is but a Lanthorn without a Candle? Is
the want of Eye sight a thing to be applauded? nay, is not an Ignorant person
one buried alive? or at the best but a breathing Carkase? Is he not confined to
a Dunge on dark as Hell? and when he chances to appear abroad, does he not
affright people with the rusty chains of black darkness that rattle about
him? Is not he the common scoff of all beholders, because he wears openly the
disgraceful badge by which Beasts are known from Men? What is Youth if it miss
the help of right Education? Its Imperfection appears in the uselesnesse of all
after-life. It is an eminent piece of thy Folly, which I must needs take notice
of, that thou have quoted several things in dispraise of Knowledge, which are
its most proper Commendations. Amongst thy other fooleries thou would needs
use thy Tongue to speak against Languages, and fall out with Books because they
are but the Shells of Knowledge. Who ever said they were more? But is it a
dispraise to a golden Cabbinet that it is not the Jewel? What if they be but
Shells? do they not include a kernel which is the food of the most worthy part
of the World? Are not those Tongues against which thou speak, those
honorable Interpreters by which we enjoy the Experience and Friendship of
foreign Nations? Are not those Books which thou undervaluest the sacred
Repositories where the Riches of Wisdom are secured against Oblivion? I am
afraid it is but lost labor to mention to Thee the Pleasures of heavenly
Contemplation. Does not this lengthen the brevity of our short life with the
Knowledge of many Ages? Does not this help the Reader confined at home to
travail abroad, and enlarge his Mind with the view of other Countries? Is not
the huge Mass of Divine Knowledge divided into many Books, by that means
brought unto us from the many parts of the World in cloven Tongues? To this I
might add, That such as enjoy this Felicity are not more accomplished in their
own capacity, then made useful to an Universal good: so that all the Joys of
their private Meditation are not only allowable because they are most pure in
themselves, and most perfective of Humane Nature where they are possessed; but
because they terminate themselves in such products as are the best Welfare of
mankind, if they knew their own Concernments.

It is scarce worth the while to take notice of thy silly Politics. What is a
Commonwealth but an Union of men so framed as may most promote the good of all?
a prudent Association, by which they may more easily enjoy what is communicated
to each, and secure their happiness against such as, growing irregular in their
Principles, may offer disturbance from among themselves, or endeavor by a
Foreign power to shake their wel-founded Prosperity? But who shall lay the
Foundations upon which it is to be built? Shall Fools compose the Rules of
their Government? Shall madmen make Laws? or will you trust them with the
Execution of such as are made? Does not every one acknowledge that besides other
Incapacities, there is nothing more Injust then a Fool? Shall such as
understand not their own Interest appoint what is fit to be done as to the
concernments of many thousands? A Fool knows not how to behave himself toward
the variety of humors and mutability of tempers in those which are to be
governed; and he must needs be at an horrible loss by reason of extraordinary
accidents which happen frequently in humane Affairs. Alas! silly men are so
far from being Eligible themselves, that they are not capable of choosing others
for good Magistrates: for though some among them are not unfit by a Trust of
the Legislative power to perfect the Laws, or to execute such as are well
constituted; yet it is a wonder if the brutish Multitude find them out; or if
they do stumble upon them, yet it is a thousand to one but by reason of some
slight fancy they will neglect the most apt person for an inconsiderable
fellow.

God has taken such care of the World, that he has put it in the power of
Rational Nature to find out several Arts which do relieve it in many
necessities: but weak-headed men, though it may be they will allow some
Mechanical Arts as tolerable things, because after seven years Apprentiship,
with much ado, they have learned something of them, or find by Experience they
cannot be well without them; yet did they ever Invent any, or add any
considerable Improvement to that which was found out by others?

But since thou did greatly long to make an odious representation of Learned
men, it is strange thy dark Fancy did not fall upon some handsomer accusations
then Cowardice and Sedition, which thou have pinned upon! them with very slight
Arguments. True Valor refuses not to expose it self to hazards in the defense
of the common Welfare; and who will so boldly step between that Jewel and
Danger, when it presents it self, as the Wise, who know the incomparable Worth
of that for which they venture themselves, and have made it an especial Article
of their Creed, That they were born to live and die for the public Good? But
the world cannot be quiet for them. The Falsehood of this Crimination is evident
to those which will but consider that Ignorance is the true spring of all
Disorder. Dark minds filled with Error are like Clouds big with Thunder; and
when they are Masters of so much Power as to give vent to their fiery Passions,
they astonish the World with the Effects of Rage and Cruelty. The truth of this
might be instanced in many deplorable Actions of the mad Multitude. Ignorance
is so naturally harmful, that if such as are strangers to Wisdom should do any
good, it were only a great Chance; for they do with the same eager endeavors
overthrow Right with which they sometimes blindly oppose Wrong. They are
altogether unapt to acquiesce in the determination of the best Governors,
because they understand not their own Good when it is propounded, and do often
greedily catch at the worst Shadow for the best Substance, and with a
sufficient dotage believe things to be true which are most false, having not
ability to distinguish Truth from Falsehood, if it be but a little masked with
specious pretenses. How should they prove otherwise then unruly, fierce and
disobedient, whose Obstinacy is not lessened by force of Argument, which they
feel no more then a Stone? Shall they abstain from Irregular actions whom a low
Condition does continually prompt to rob others, where furious Self-will
raigns, and the many-headed Beast doubts not to Indemnifie it self for what it
does by a multitude of Swords? But prudent Subjects make no scruple of giving
Obedience, because they know the safety of the World is supported with the
defense of Laws, and that all particular good Interests are wrapped up in the
public weal, which cannot consist with Mutiny and Rebellion. Wise Princes, who
know that their own and the peoples Happiness stand upon the same Bottom, and
that they are preserved or destroyed together, seeing that the weak Multitude
is not able to guide it self, and that they are not able to extend their short
hands to the vast compass of Affairs; have necessarily sought assistance from
the abilities of prudent Ministers. And as they find their People improved in
their Understandings, (which is a principal perfection,) they rejoice both in
the Peoples Good and their own Glory, when they see that their Subjects are
men. He is rather a Herdsman then a Prince who desires to reign over Beasts.
Its true, when a King abandons the Royal Diadem of Righteousness, and puts on
the inglorious Crown of a Tyrant, because he means to do that which is
dishonorable to be known, he will endeavor to make his Subjects ignorant; of
which Imperfection he makes the same use that a Thief does of a Mist: and if
his designs take, the people bereaved of their Liberties and Rights, have the
same Consolation from their Ignorance that the Travailer has in the loss of
his Money, when he considers that he had not been so easily robbed but that it
was dark.

That fine Instance of the Turk is but too great a witness to this Truth,
mistaken by thee, Dull Soul, who can see no difference betwixt things
directly contrary, that is, the Confirmation of an absolute Monarchy in a
Tyrant, and the Establishing of the Peoples welfare under a Just Prince. O
blessed Turks! thrice and four times happy in such an Emperor! He has
delivered you from Knowledge, and bestowed upon you stupid Ignorance, bestial
Lust and perfect Slavery, and by your own help has made you utterly at a loss
as to the means of Deliverance, and so in a worse Condition then his Captives,
for these are capable of Redemption. And you, Heavenly Romans, have done well,
(have you not?) to build the Heights of Faith upon the ruins of Knowledge. O
shameful abuse of Truth, where men must piously believe they know not what, and
sometimes profess that which they know to be False! O stupid Obedience, which
know no reason but Slavery for that which thou do eagerly perform! Thou,
Holy Tyrant, who from thy high Throne look down so disdainfully upon all
petty Robbers, take to thy self the glorious Title of Supreme Usurper, since
thou have invaded and destroyed the Liberty of Souls.

Here Panaretus made a pause, having gone so far, not that what Morosophus had
said deserved so much answer, but to correspond with his own desires to
undeceive the Pammelaenians, who not only perished themselves for want of
knowledge, but were very forward to destroy such as had the imputation of it.
Morosophus gnawed with the guilt of his wicked undertaking, went to Panaretus,
and whispering in his ear, said, he confessed the truth of what Panaretus had
discoursed, and the wickedness of his own Speech which he made against his
Conscience, and desired Panaretus to appoint him any method of Repentance for
his Folly, except the disgraceful recanting of his words before the
Pammelaenians, whom he was sain to please, being compelled for want of bread to
speak absurdly: he begged leave also to pass from that forlorn place under the
guard of their Company. Panaretus having observed with what Hypocrisy his sin
was compounded, and being not yet assured of his change, rejected his motion
with this Reply; No; base Fellow, remain in Darkness since thou have hated the
Light: let thy portion be with such as love Falsehood, who could sell Truth
for a piece of bread. As Panaretus had ended his words, an Officer, that had
attended to what had past, arrested Morosophus, and carried him away to answer
several things laid to his charge by one called Autocatacritus, in the great
Court of Polyglotta. It was reported afterward that his Punishment was, that
he should never be trusted with the keeping of any Public Library, lest when
he wanted money, he should be bribed to burn the Books.

The noble Travailers not entreated so much as by way of Ceremony to stay any
longer, hastened toward Iconium: and they were no sooner entered within the
first borders of their Precinct, but they perceived a discontented fellow,
whose name was Catasarkus, to come forth of a dark Hole, which he had made his
Lodging in the Rubbish of an old Temple, formerly called Skiamelluses, which by
report in ancient times was the most magnificent Edifice in the World. His
Habit was something strange: he had a great piece of a broken Yoke about his
neck, which was glided, but extremely heavy; yet the old Fool did so dote upon
it, that he would often turn about his neck and kiss it as he went along. He
was clothed with a long Garment, and about the Borders of it he had fastened
great Fringes with blue Ribbands; upon his Forehead and the wrist of his left
Arm he had tied broad Scrolls of Parchment which were filled with Hebrew
Sentences: He intending a signification of no small Sanctity by these Mystical
Ornaments. He made a daily Lamentation for the destruction of Skiamelluses,
though it happened above a thousand years before he was born; but having heard
great Stories of it, among other things he was made to believe that it should
be restored again to its ancient Glory: and as he was going to pay one of his
ordinary Visits to the Seacoast, he was met by a Gentleman which seemed to be
made up of Gravity and Sweetness, his name was Euprepon, and he accosted
Catasarkus after this manner; Sir, I have observed trouble in your face, and
have often taken notice of those walks which you have made upon the Seashore
with such expectation as one may perceive in those who have friends abroad,
when they think that the time of their return approaches. It is so, said
Catasarkus, for I earnestly expect the coming of a great Prince, who, as I am
informed, will ere long land here to rebuild the now desolate Skiamelluses.

Alas, poor man! said Euprepon; you are fed with vain hopes: It seems you have
but few Correspondents abroad, or at least they furnish you with very imperfect
Intelligence. The Ship which you look for was cast away long since upon a Rock
which is in the borders of the East sea, called Staurus: but the Prince whom
you mentioned, a good while before that Accident happened, foretold (for he was
a Prophet too) that Skiamelluses should never be built again, and gave his
Friends the Model of another sort of Temple in some few things resembling that,
but contrived with far greater Skill; not so glistring outwardly, but much more
rich, a great deal larger, and of better and more lasting Materials, of which
this was but a Shadow; and charged them never to attempt the reparation of this
waste structure. At these words Catasarkus went away in a very great discontent
without replying the least word.

Urania, who with her Companions heard the discourse,' demanded of Euprepon
further information concerning Catasarkus, and in particular whether he was not
one of extraordinary Piety, since he had so much Devotion toward the
remembrance of a ruined Temple. No, said Euprepon; for though he seem wonderful
Religious by his garb which you have seen, and though he never looked up all
the while he talked with me, as you could not but take notice, and wears that
Mortar hat upon his head, pretending by that means to keep his eyes from being
polluted with the sight of this wicked World; yet I have inquired into him
among his neighbors, and do understand by them that he is no such holy person
as he would be esteemed; and that he does more dote upon that old Temple, then
love the God who once dwelt in it; and that he does more talk of ancient times,
then do any present service to his God, though he lives for ever. He loves none
of his Neighbors, though he is beholden to them all. He has lived a great
while in many places where he has no right; only the Natives of mere humanity
do not turn him out of the Country, because he has none of his own to retire
to: and yet the chiefest use which the ungrateful fellow makes of their
courtesy is to cheat them; which he can more easily do, being of a singular
Craft. He has in his Cell an Iron Chest full of Money, which he attends day
and night as watchfully as ever the Dragon did the Golden Fleece. They say his
Heart is as hard as the metal of which his Coffer is made; and that he ever
shows his cruelty, when he has any opportunity to make an advantage of it.

Euprepon being loath to trouble them with any longer discovery of such an
austere piece of Wickedness, left off his talk: and as they went along, they
came to the Ruins of another Temple, but less famous then the former; and
having Euprepon for an (...), Bentivolio asked him what it was. This Temple,
says Euprepon, called Pantheon, was formerly the (...) of an old foolish King
called Polytheus, who took upon him a strange power of making as many Gods as
he pleased, and such as he fancied most he worshipped, and consigned the rest
to his neighbors. Though this Temple, as I said, was not equal to the former;
yet it was of great note in times past for brave Images, (which some said were
absurd pictures of things that cannot be resembled) for splendid (...), crowned
Sacrifices, Bulls with guilt horns, and such like things. But the worship
being stupid Idolatry, and the Worshippers as very Beasts as those which they
offered, having stood too long to evil purposes, at last a Young Child appeared
from heaven, and struck it down with his hand. The ruined parts were suddenly
dissipated with a dreadful Thunder, which struck such amazement and horror
upon the beholders, that no body durst ever since attempt to put them together
again.

They made no long stay here; and as they passed on, a few steps brought them
in view of a pile of magnificent Buildings, whose chief Glory was a stately
Church called Exosemnon, raised high with lofty Towers, which glister'd with
that sort of Brass of which they make tinkling Cymbals: but it seemed to stand
totteringly upon a pitiful foundation, for it was built upon Sand, and
supported on each side with worm-eaten posts. It was adorned with fair
Windows; but when they were within, they perceived the Light was much
obstructed by a difficult passage through thick glass. This was much helped by
the constant flames of great Tapers, which were supposed to be lighted for that
end, or else to burn daylight, for the Sun had been up many hours, and shone
with that vigorous brightness that no Cloud had power to appear. The Walls
were clothed with rich Arras, wherein Gold and Silver, of small value
notwithstanding the worth of their Matter, were fain to strive with Silk for
the preeminence of curious Workmanship. The sides of the Church were so thick
set with Pictures, that it seemed to be made in imitation of Plato's Den, where
one could see nothing but shadows. But they were proper Ornaments in such a
place, where Religion consisted so much in paint, that many took the Church for
a handsome Tomb where Piety lay gloriously interred.

Their covetous neighbors of Kenapistis desired not to have Religion dressed,
because they would not be at the cost of Garments; only some who were loath to
let her go quite naked, had got some sluttish clothes, and put them on so
illfavouredly, that her friends were ashamed to see her appear publicly in
such an ugly disguise. As she stepped into this Temple one day to give them a
Visit, the Exosemnians bestowed a more becoming dress upon her, by which she
was known a good while after: but when some of her discreeter friends were
dead, others out of a foolish dislike of what was well appointed, would needs
undertake to adorn her after a new fashion; but they put on so many odd pieces
of gaudy attire, that the people after a little time began to think that she
was nothing but Clothes.

As they took notice of diverse Fancies, their Eyes were called off by the
stately entrance of a great Person, whose head was inveloped with three Crowns,
which were put on partly as Fnsigns of Power, partly of Ambition: Two Circles
of the Triple Ornament signified what he had gotten, and the Third what he
desired to add to the other two; for having no just Right to the
Ecclesiastical or Civil Powers which he had usurped, he was attempting a
newfound Authority over them both. His Officers had their names from the four
quarters of the World, where they were to execute the commands of his unlimited
Sovereignty. His Vestment was adorned with variety of rich Colors, and looked
as Gold does when it is mixed with Snow. His Gate was majestic; his Attendants
such as follow the triumphant Chariots of Conquerors. He was no sooner sat
down in a Princely Chair which was ready for him, but the people began to
murmur over some Prayers, which for ought they knew were made to him, for they
were in an unknown tongue. Afterward some shrill-throated fellows began to
sing; and though many of them blended their voices together, yet the matter was
so ordered, that if Religion had consisted in Sounds, this had been perfectly
acceptable, for it was impossible to find any fault with the noise, it was so
harmonious.

It was some trouble to Bentivolio and his friends that they could not
understand the meaning of their Devotions; however they comforted themselves,
because they guessed at it as near as the dull multitude of staring people, who
gaped as if they hearkened with their mouths, whilst a waggish fellow that went
up and down with a Sponge flung water into them.

After a while they began a Collation; and having given the people some Bread,
it was expected that they should have Drink too: and there was Wine good store,
but it seems the Officers drank it all up themselves. Sure, quoth Urania, they
are very uncivil to make a Feast, and give their Guests no drink. No, says
Euprepon, for half of this old Sacrament which they take from them they have
given them Five more new ones. As they were talking, a tall man which stood by
the Altar took up a great bundle of little papers, which the Ignorant called
Indulgences; and whilst they threw them among the people, it seemed to be just
like the employment of idle boys, who cut their paper into useless shreds,
and throw them out of their Windows that they may see them blown up and down
by the Wind. Urania seeing some words written upon them, took one of them up,
and read the Inscription, which was, LEAVE TO SIN. Good Lord, quoth Panaretus,
how small a Benison contents these people? They think themselves happy because
they have license to undo themselves. Whilst they performed their holy Rites,
they made an infinite number of humble cringes: and so they had need, who had
brought down the glory of Holiness, which consists in the Excellency of inward
Dispositions, to the contemptible lowness of a few ridiculous Gestures, and
changed their Masters noble Institutions into a company of beggarly Traditions
of their own creating.

As they were going away, being sufficiently tired with beholding so many
impertinent Follies, they saw a Woman kneeling very devoutly before an old
Shrine, and there making a prayer to one dead man for another. I wonder, quoth
Bentivolio, at the stupidity of her Faith: however she keeps some decorum in
her senseless address, in that she implores assistance from one that cannot
hear her, for another that is past help.

As they were come without the Church-dore, and had agreed to retire home, they
were invited to see some private Recesses which belonged to the Church, by
diverse Orders of Ghostly people, whose holiness consists in the name of their
Founder-Saint, and who excel one another in goodness by reason of a different
Habit, or in that it is tied about them with a Girdle of a more mortified
color. Their chief office is to licenciate Hypocrisy, and to make void the
danger of a sinful life: for they have agreed upon a way that permits none to
go to Hell but Poor sinners, or the covetous Rich who would sin for nothing;
the first must go because they cannot, and the other because they will not pay
others to suffer for them. The rest are out of danger; let their life be what
it will, they will insure their Salvation after they are dead, by burying them
in a Monks Habit, which without doubt is utterly incapable of Damnation. They
have concluded also, That those desire to be damned who will not be so easily
saved. These do never scruple their own Holiness, by which they save others
also that are wicked, because they are like the Apostles, whom they do
sufficiently resemble, though they be never so Ignorant and Wicked, because
they are Poor: and they are wonderfully poor and free from Covetousness too,
because they receive no money except it be privately.

They have hallowed the Lusts of the flesh; for by their lawful enjoyment of
(...), they have altered unholy Marriage into a sanctified sort of Fornication;
the very Stews having ceased to be profane, since his Holiness has
condescended to receive the wages of Uncleanness. They have invented a
comfortable sort of Fasting; it goes for Abstinence with them, to eat another
sort of meat then they do ordinarily, though that be as pleasant and more
nourishing. And when they are pinched with this new kind of Hunger, they say
their Prayers by dozens; and if they run over their Beads the second time, they
do so over-rate the foolery, that they make no doubt but they have merited
Heaven, not only for themselves, as Wicked as they are, but for others too
which are lazy, or which cannot be at so much leisure as to do any thing for
their own (...).

There were infinite heaps of sacred Relics; but after they had showed the
Box wherein Judas his Kiss was enclosed, and the Coffins of Ananias and
Sapphira, with some other disgraceful Remains, Urania would see no more.

They were no sooner come into the Churchyard, but they were accosted with a
most lamentable Spectacle; for they saw the fair Lady Eusebia with her trusty
servant Akeraea driven violently out of the Church. One might well perceive how
miserably they had been used, for their Hair was torn, and the blows which
they had received left sufficient marks upon their skin to witness the cruelty
of those which gave them. Alas! Madam, said Urania, how came this mishap? By
the malice of the Exosemnians, replied Eusebia, who have seized my house, and
made the holy Sanctuary a den of thieves. This beautiful Temple was once filled
with holy Prayers and thankful Hymns, which men free from guile sung
continually in praise of the Redeemer of the World. Then Religion flourished,
being rooted in sincerity and watered constantly with heavenly dewes of Divine
Benediction: and though Godliness wanted those splendid Accoutrements with
which these Hypocrites have now endeavored to adorn it, it was its own Glory,
and commanded the love of all beholders with the power of its native Lustres.
But now, alas! how wan does it look, notwithstanding they have used all sorts
of paint to supply its defects? It is defaced with Hypocrisy, which how hard a
matter it is to conceal, is but too apparent, when all the colors which they
have laid so thick upon it will not serve the turn. How many Fooleries and
Lies must be put together to supply the want of Plain-heartednesse, which when
all is done cannot effect it? What scorns does Truth suffer when she sees her
self basely represented upon a ridiculous stage by these Wicked Hypocrites? Ah
poor Simplicity! what Wounds have I received for thy sake? But I take them with
Joy, when I consider how often thou have saved my life: and I know my life does
so depend upon thy welfare, that I cannot outlive thy death for the space of a
Minute. Thou art the Joy of my life and the Comfort of my Sufferings; and
though I am distressed, yet I will ever rejoice, since I am not separate from
thy company, my dear Akeraea. Let them please themselves with the empty
Cabinets of Truth which they have robbed from me; I have enough in thee, my
Jewel Akeraea.

Madam, said Urania, your Affliction is so unjust, that methinks it is easy to
make those which have imposed it upon you sensible of the greatness of their
Sin. Will you accept of my Brothers assistance to plead your cause, who, though
he is not permitted to use his Sword in this place, may peradventure by worthy
Argument make them relent? Never hope for that, fair Urania, quoth Eusebia,
they are too much hardened; nothing can make them relent but Thunderbolts.
There is reason enough why they should repent; but they will but lose their
labor who shall attempt their Conversion. They have stopped up the way to
Righteousness with Worldly Interest, and have rendered a Reformation impossible
by making it a damnable sin but to talk of it. If they should pretend to admit
you to a liberty of discourse, you will find but small effect of your
disputation; for propound what Argument you will, they have an universal
Distinction, called Distoma Romphaea, much akin to that sharp tool with which
Alexander dissolved the Gordian Knot; and though they apply it barbarously, yet
it will spoil the best argument. And it is to as little purpose to answer any
Disputants of theirs, for the last Opponent is still a Butcher, who instead of
Syllogismes is armed with an Axe. It is not safe for you to stay here, where
Religion is propagated with Subtlety and Violence, because they have no
confidence of success from Truth or Charity. Since they saw some dislike in
your faces at your departure, it is probable they will inquire after you; and
if they once lay hold of you, they will force you to stay longer then you
desire in this wretched place. Upon this seasonable advice they made haste out
of Iconium, and Eusebia understanding what was their purpose in Pseudenthea,
went along with them: but Euprepon took his leave of them; for having been
there formerly, he had observed such unbeseeming carriages among them, that he
resolved never to come there again.

They were no sooner entered into Pseudenthea, but they saw all the inhabitants
flocking together, like a company of WildGeese, toward a broad place in the
middle of their Parish: and as they drew nearer, they perceived a Stage raised
pretty high, much after the manner of that which Mountebanks do use, and Three
Men walked upon it in such a sort as if they had designed a strife which of
them should most express to the life the postures of Madmen. They acted their
parts not unhandsomely, for besides staring eyes and mouths all foaming with
froth, they had all the Antic gestures of brainsick persons. Their names, as
the people said, were Mantimanes, Exorcista and Panstreblus. They were all
Mutes, till one Cacodaemon in the habit of an old Prophet commanded them to
speak.

The first that began to act was Mantimanes, who was much disturbed with an
extreme heat of his Brains, and he pulled out of his pocket an Almanac which
was scribled over with diverse Horoscopes and other Astrological figures; some
of them he pretended to be the Fates of Kingdoms, others were so particular
that by them he could make the people understand every thing that had or should
befall them from their Nativity to their Death: this they did confidently
believe, though they knew not why. After this he showed them diverse
Looking-glasses, in which he said they might see what was become of their
Friends in the most remote parts of the World; that young Women might plainly
discern the Complexion and stature of the Husbands which they were to have,
with many such things. Then calling suddenly to his man Planaster to open the
little Window of the Retiring room upon the back of the Stage, a little Dove
flew out, and sitting upon his shoulder put her Bill in his Ear, whilst he
pretended to listen to her with much Devotion. After the Dove returned,
Planaster opened the door and let out a white Do, which Mantimanes had kept
tame a good while privately in his house, and affirmed to the credulous vulgar
blinded with superstition, that it was a Messenger sent from God. He received a
Letter out of her mouth, which Planaster put in, and having dismis'd her, he
opened the Letter; and having read it to himself with all humble Reverence, he
acquainted the people that he had obtained the favor of God to know many
strange things, which were to be kept secret at present, but which he would
reveal in due time; and that in the mean while he was to prophecy destruction
to the World, unless they did speedily repent. Exorcista had now been awake a
pretty while, and suspecting by the Prologue which he had heard that a long
speech was to follow, which would both take up the time, and for ought he knew
either rob him of the Audience or indispose them to attend his pranks, to
prevent the worst, he began to quarrel with Mantimanes, and after some words
muttered again, Exorcista commanded him silence with such a thundering voice,
that he durst not but obey the force of his terrible Charm. Exorcista not
doubting but he should gain with the fickle Vulgar what reputation he could
make the other lose, accosted Mantimanes in very rough language, beginning
after this manner. Thou scorn of Inspiration, Thou worm-eaten Vizard of
Prophecy, Thou old rotten Tripos, Thou laughing stock of wanton Spirits, who
art more Fool then Prophet, but much more Knave then Fool. Thou base Jugler,
do thou pretend to tell others their Fortunes, having no other way left to
mend thy own? Thou Beggarly Cheater, who have not so much as the possession of
a Cottage on earth, do thou make these people believe that thou have the
privilege to know their concernments in the Fabulous houses of thy Astrological
Heavens, having no other design but to get a little money? Did not you
prophecy that the World should end five years agon, and made the frighted
people forsake their Houses, and climb up into Trees, to see how all things
would come to their fatal Period, just as the old World did, when the Deluge
threatened them after another manner? Was not it your Brother that a good while
since used to foretell the deaths of such great men as discovered his knavery
and obstructed his designs, and when they had almost outlived the prefixed
time, was fain to kill them himself, with the help of some Assassinates, to
make his word good? Did not you some years since to these very people which
hearken to your follies affirm that you could discern between the Elect and
Reprobate, as clearly as a Shepherd can know a black sheep from the white
ones? and that you saw invisible Characters of Predestination upon the heads of
the Elect, and the Reprobates encompassed with black marks of Damnation? Do you
not still condemn such as you do not like for Sinners, that so they may be
guilty of the miseries with which you threaten them? Rather then your
Prophesies should fail, who must be the Executioners of your Wrath but your
selves? Do not you make a wise improvement of doing Justice, to send those to
Hell whom you judge worthy to go thither, that you may quietly enjoy their
Rooms on earth when they are gone? Go down, lest the People having heard of
your madness send you to Bedlam. Hold your peace and be gone, lest I encompasse
you in a Circle of this Holy Wand, and conjure out of you that Enthusiastical
Spirit which makes you so prophetically mad.

Upon these words Mantimanes tore off his clothes, leapt off the Stage, and ran
stark naked through the affrighted multitude, preaching damnation to all, good
and bad, except such as would follow him: which two or three silly Women,
quaking for fear, were observed to do.

Mantimanes being hissed off the Stage, they raised their expectations of some
wonderful matters from Exorcista; though they had little reason, for he did
only counterfeit a Conjurer, and was something more gravely mad then
Mantimanes. He unwilling to lose such a fit opportunity, began his part thus;
It is no wonder, Good people, that yon Fellow carried himself so ridiculously;
I have seen many enraged after the same manner with a Prophetical worm crept
into their distempered Brains: and some have believed themselves to be Christ,
and some the Holy Ghost, and some the Man in the Moon, and some the Bush upon
his back, and that the Man in the Moon was going to set it on fire to burn the
Earth; of which some, no fools neither, were much afraid. But leaving these
idle Dreams, I will show you a Rarity, which you will say is a strange truth,
a Woman possessed with a Devil called Engastrimuthus; the Woman's name is
Hysterica. Now the truth is, the Woman had possessed her self, if one may say
so, and the Devil was only a Mormo, represented by a cunning queen, instructed
how to act both the Devils part and her own; and having that disease which
disturbs women by reason of strange suffocations, she made use of the mad noise
of Vapors and Wind in her body to persuade people to think that the Devil was
in her, and that she had very great Conflicts all the while the Fit lasted with
an Evil Spirit.

The disease with which she was troubled, called the Hystericall Passion, was
very applicable to his design, both as having Periodical Fits, and because the
noble parts being affected with the distemper, it was accompanied with
disastrous symptoms, dangerous to the sick person and frightful to the
Beholders: For the Heart being filled with too great a plenty of thin blood,
which it cannot discharge by oft-repeated pulses, and the Lungs overcharged
with flatulent Spirits, by which they are disabled as to their proper motion,
and thereby deprived of the benefit of fresh air; there must needs follow a
suffocation of the Vital Spirits, which will soon reveal it self in dreadful
effects throughout the whole body, as Difficulty of breathing, Palpitation of
the Heart, Intermission of the Pulse, Invasion of the Brain by turbulent
spirits, Elevation of the Hypochondries, which are forced to rise against the
Diaphragma, which by endeavoring to make way for the straightened Lungs does
uncivilly press upon its neighbors, and breeds an inward disturbance, attended
with a great noise of windy vapors in the bowels, wild appearances of the
whites of the eyes, deep groans, foaming at the mouth, and Convulsive fits
appearing dismally in several parts of the body by such distorted contractions
of the Fibers, that endangered Nature seems to solicit all her powers to
writhe her self out of her Oppressors hands.

Whilst these things happened to Hysterica, the Conjurer knowing what would
presently follow, said nothing, only seemed to be amazed at the Devils
Operations. The Ignorant people were amazed indeed, and concluding
Engastrimuthus to be a cruel Spirit, most of them, especially the Women, cursed
him in their hearts. But at last the flatulent spirits being diffipated by the
power of Natural heat, and the oppressive quantity of blood lessened by the
transpiration of the more subtle particles, the Woman returned to her self,
and began to act her part, which she had well learned, after this manner: I am,
said she, by Profession a Witch, and have at this time the Apocalyptical Beast
in my belly, and I perceive by his suggestions that he is an Heretical spirit,
for he says That the Pope is Antichrist; and that Antichrist was begot by an
Incubus, and that the synagogue of Witches was his Mother; and that any may
perceive him to be Antichrist by his great mouth, rough hair and crooked
tallons; and that he is an Enemy to Christian Religion and a blasphemer of
Christ, whom though he does profess in public, yet he adores Lucifer
privately; and that he does meet sometimes in their Conventicles, and worship
him in the form of a Goat, for which reason Beelzebub had lent him diverse of
his Imps to seduce the nations from true Piety, and to destroy Charity from
amongst men, intending by that means to pull up Christian Religion by the
Roots; and for this he was immediately assisted by the Spirit of Lucifer.
These things, quoth she, I know to be true, for I was often at that Conventicle
of Devils, and have the marks of the Beast in my hand and forehead and other
parts of my body. I my self by the help of Asmodeus made a Powder of the ashes
of burnt Goats, which would tempt the very Nuns to Lust; and inflict such a
melancholic impatience upon the Monks, that they would repent of their Vows,
and swear that they were ill made and worse kept. It had a faculty to make such
as smelt it to despair, and to confess their sins by halves, and (which is
worse) to doubt that their Confessor had not authority to absolve them. It
forced them also to believe themselves holy, though they committed all the sins
of the diabolical Synagogue; and made them dtspise the pleasures of Paradise
for a voluptuous life; and made them conceive Hell to be only such meetings as
she had been at, which did so content her, that she often wished her self
transported into a She-Devil. She said further, that to affront Antichrist,
they took his Triple Crown and the Exorcists Cowle, and put one upon the head
of Beelzebub, and the other upon Asmodeus, and said, You are worthy of this
Honor. She told them besides this, that in their frolicks Asmodeus feigned
himself sick, and Leviathan played the Physician, and made an ointment which
she administered, that they might make a sport of Extreme Unction. And one Night
I remember --

But when she was come so far, Exorcista began to be in a sacred rage, and
commanded her silence with such a shril voice that it frighted the Devil.
Having a Basin of water by him, he took out of his pocket a great paper of
Salt, made up in the form of a Cross, and baptized it three times in the
Water; which he affirmed to be thenceforth of that sovereign virtue, that it
was an Universal medicine for Soul and Body, and had this particular quality
that it would cast out any Devil (...) he was adjured by it, in regard that it
did cleanse the Soul so that the Devil could not abide the Body; and said it
was mortal Poison to any Apostate spirit. Having besprinkl'd her and the
Company so plentifully that they were all pretty well (...), he cried out with
an astonishing noise, Come out, thou barking Dog; cease this hellish noise: In
despite of Lucifer, Beelzebub, Astaroth, Leviathan, and all the combination of
Devils, I command thee to leave this holy Mansion, which is consecrated with
the Benediction of baptized Salt: (and then he crossed himself) come out (...),
leave grinning, thou false Cur; I conjure thee, O Dog of Hell to come out and
go to thy kennel; I command thee again and charge thee to leave her Body and
Soul for evermore.

This sign being given, with great Show of Unwillingness the Spirit went out
obediently, that is to say, the Woman ceased to act the Devils part any longer,
the Fit being ended which she was loath to begin again. But some knowing
persons which were present were almost split with laughing to see how gravely
Exorcista acted the Conjurer, and how pitifully the simple Vulgar resented the
Mormo's case.

Exorcista being gone, Panstreblus took his turn, and pretending to be awakened
out of his sleep with Frights, he began after a ranting manner to discourse of
strange Visions which were brought to him by the ministry of Heavenly Spirits,
and related the names of diverse Angels that talked with him in his sleep;
though his Visions were only sick Dreams which had deluded his Fancy. So
Children led by the strength of Imagination see the forms of all things in the
clouds, sometimes Men, sometimes Lions; and as the Vapors are differently
modified by several circumrotations of the Air, seem to see strange shapes of
things and wonderful actions. So madmen relate uncouth things, which had no
Original but the Dyscrasie of their own brains; and sick people in the heights
of distemper, not without great self-admiration, talk things which trouble
their sober attendants, and of which they are ashamed when they come to
themselves.

This Distemper was not such an unblameable Infirmity, nor accompanied with any
plainness; for he accommodated all the extravagancies of his Fancy to such
Principles as he had entertained in his foul breast, which was polluted with
the worst of Crimes, Pride and Lust.

The first thing of which he made mention was a Commission from God, in which
he was autoriz'd to be the Reformer of the degenerate world; (which really
stood in as much need of Reformation as there was little hope that such an
Instrument should ever effect it,) and that when it was made better according
to those excellent Laws which he had received to be the Pattern of its
amendment, he was to rule over it as Universal King, and promised great
felicities to those humble fools which should lend their help to place him in
his Throne.

After this he began to declare some parts of his Vision, which was wholly
framed in a subserviencie to his forementioned design. It was revealed to him,
as he said, that all old things must pass away, and amongst the rest the
Kingdom of an ancient Prince called Anaxanacton, which he confessed to have
been very glorious in all respects, except that it was Carnal; but that his own
should be Spiritual, and as far raised above the Light, Righteousness and Love
of that poor State, as the Sun excels the meanest Star. Then he cried down the
Prophets for old Fools, the Apostles for simple Fishermen. He exploded Reason
as a mere Carnality, and the Scriptures as a Dead Letter; and stuck not to
affirm, That the World for sixteen hundred years and more knew very little,
and before that, nothing. That he was designed to undeceive the Nations; for
which Work he was enabled by a Light through which he saw the Trinity, and
plainly discerned the Three Persons with his bodily eyes, and that they
appeared unto him like a great Triangular Glass in which he saw All things.
That now the world should be happy, for he would show them the deep Mystery of
those things whereof before they had but the bare History; and that by the
power of this all glorious Light they should be restored to a new Liberty of
Soul and Body.

Then he magnified Two principal Beams of his Seraphick light, which he
commanded them to behold with the eye of Superintellectual Faith. One was, That
the time was come when the difference of Good and Evil was to be abolished, and
that it was occasioned only by a foolish eating of Apples, and supported in the
World so long by ignorant Conceit; there being no Evil but in Opinion, and
every thing is good to such as think it so. It Is true, he said, that puny
understandings were not capable of the privilege of such sublime knowledge; and
that they must continue to make a scrupulous Conscience of Right and Wrong,
because the weakness of their minds permitted them to understand no better, but
that Morality is founded upon the bottom of Humane Nature, and that the Reasons
of Good and Evil are Eternal and Indispensable, interwoven with the Essential
Constitution of a Reasonable Soul, that they are derived from above, and that
God loves Righteousness and hates Iniquity, and that they, poor worms, are
in some measure like him by the participation of holy dispositions: but because
of this incapacity, he said, they must still be kept clogged with their yokes
about their necks; but that all which partake of his Spirit should presently be
raised into more sublime thoughts, which should immediately deliver them into
such a freedom that they might do what they pleased without sin, and bring down
the Divine will to a correspondence with their own even in the lowest
Appetites, in all those motions which Scrupulosity calls Irregular; it being,
as he said, a Foolery to think that they had received Appetites whose
satisfaction was a sin, let it be performed what way it can; and that the talk
of Higher and Lower Faculties, was a Rag of old Ignorance; and that it was a
jejune piece of Philosophy, to imagine that one Faculty is to regulate the other
in its satisfactions for the Measure, Manner or any other Limitations, or to
make preference of one sort of satisfaction above another, forasmuch as each
Faculty, the Soul and Body, and all things else were God in Various forms.

His other Principle was, That all things move by the Laws of invincible
Necessity; and that now they ought to understand the foolishness of the
doctrine of Choice, and wisely to give way to the all-commanding force of
Destiny, as to the irresistablenesse of a mighty stream which would carry them
along with it into the Ocean of Blessedness whether they would or no. He
talked also of invisible wires which draw men along in all the course of their
Actions and Passions: He reviled Exhortation as the greatest cheat in the
World, and said, that nothing was so fabulous as those Discourses which make
people believe that they have any Liberty of Will.

It seems Panstreblus could not see that this stupid Philosophy destroys the
liberty which is rooted in the essence of the Will, and would have us take it
for a special Excellency in the Soul that it is cheated into a false Belief of
innate freedom. But he cared not though he made the virtuous compliance of holy
Souls with the Divine will a mere Nullity, and cast an universal blur upon the
doctrine of Obedience. He rashly cut the nerves of Industry, by setting the
most generous endeavor but in the same Rank of Desert with the most sluggish
Idleness; and by his sordid Principles blocked up the way to all brave
attempts, allowing such as perform the most honorable Achievement to be no
more prayse-worthy then if they had committed a foul Sin. He made the promises
of due Rewards of no more force then as if one should sing well in hope to
please a Stone; and called the most discreet administration of Punishment,
Mistake and Cruelty. In short, he made the whole World but a St. Bartholmewes
Fair, and men and women mere Puppets drawn through all their actions with
Homerical Wires, and in fine Denied God power to make any other sort of
Creatures besides (...). He talked his pleasure of Religion, and said it was an
useful yoke made by Politicians, who had hewed it into a fit shape with the
Mystical devise of Promises and Threatenings, to hamper the Credulity of the
ignorant Multitude; and that the Conditions upon which the Divine Grace was
pretended to be obliged, that is Obedience or Disobedience to Holy Precepts,
were only Tricks invented for the better security of their designs upon the
tame World, which they might lead any whither, having the Hopes and Fears of
silly people in a string. But now, said he, by order of the Adamantine Fates
this rusty chain is to be broken, you must entertain a new Spirit, and renounce
all former Notions as the pretenses of deceived Hypocrites; knowing that though
you seemingly obeyed that Politic Religion by which the Grandees ruled the
World, yet you had your private designs intermixed with your Obedience, which
kept you true to the General Rule, which you also magnified no further then
Hypocrisy and Self-interest permitted.

To wash off all these stains, and to initiate them into his Discipline, he
commanded them to be baptized in his Name; upon which he promised that so many
as would become his Disciples, should immediately feel themselves possessed of
the forementioned Glory.

When he had proceeded so far, he went down from the Stage, which was not a
place so fit to act the following Parts, and becken'd the people to follow him
to the Lake called Borborus, where he would make them partakers of his dirty
Baptism. Such as were too much inclined by a wicked Temper to embrace fleshly
doctrines, soon followed this Dreamer, though with as little discretion as the
Rats of Halberstade danced after the Pyed Piper into the River where they were
all drowned.

Bentivolio desired Urania that they might go a little further, to see what end
the Beast would make to such scurvy beginnings: but when they came near the
Lake, it did so smell of Brimston that they thought it might be Asphaltites.
Panaretus guessed it rather to be the Bottomless pit, not only because of a
dark cloud of ill-sented Smoke which ascended continually from it; but because,
as he had heard before, those which went into it never came out again.

The Noble Travailers made great haste from this place, where their abodegave
them so small content; and their arrival in Kenapistis, which bordered upon
Pseudenthea, promised them little more satisfaction. Upon their entrance they
were surpised with an unexpected entertainment; for they perceived an
extraordinary Silence to have seized upon the Inhabitants, and the great
discontent of their Souls revealed it self in the perplexity of their dejected
Looks. It was a sight much unlooked for among the Kenapistians, who were
reported for a jolly sort of people, and full of talk.

Whilst they walked up and down musing what might be the cause of so great an
alteration, they met a man of sober countenance, but such cheerful deportment,
that he seemed either to be unconcerned in the general disaster, or else to
have overcome such passions as rise from worldly accidents by a brave temper of
Spirit: He was called Ontagathus. It seems he had not put Civility out of his
Religion, for he had no sooner discerned Bentivolio and his Companions to be
Strangers, but he accosted them in courteous manner, and demanded if in that
place, with which, as he thought, they were not much, acquainted, his
assistance might in any respect be acceptable unto them. Our design, said
Bentivolio, was only to have seen this place, and to receive some information
concerning the manners of the Kenapistians; and since you have encouraged us by
the civility of your offer to make use of your help, you will do us a great
courtesy if you let us understand the reason of that universal grief which
has manifestly invaded this place. That I shall willingly perform, said
Ontagathus.

It is occasioned by an accident which happened the last night, which was the
death of Tuphlecon the late Governor of Kenapistis; one much beloved of the
people, and in whom they had blindly reposed such strong confidence, that they
wholly depended upon his conduct, and ruled all their persuasions by such
reasons as he suggested. He never failed of making his Proposals acceptable,
for he had a through insight into the Temper of the people, and made his
Dictates correspond with their Humor.

As to himself he was thought to be of an incredible Faith, by which he was
able to believe any thing, though some, which knew him very well, affirmed that
he did indeed believe nothing. He pretended one particular excellency in his
Faith, which was an ability to believe against all Sense and Reason; and he
esteemed a power to give credit to such things as contained the most apparent
contradictions, to be the most acceptable resignation of his Understanding to
God. And though some told him that this was a kind of Brutish belief, and that
our Mind is then Divine, and can no other way be made like unto God, but by
submitting it self to all Truth and rejecting of all Falsehood, which in its
nature is a contradiction to Heavenly Verity; yet he persisted in his opinion,
and was very confident that such a Sacrifice of fools was the most Reasonable
service of humane Souls.

His main business was to make a fair show of great Sanctity; and this he did
by a punctual observation of all outward Rites. He never went abroad till he
was well instructed concerning his carriage by one Euprosopon, who was his
intimate friend and domestic Counselor: but many quick sighted persons were
able to look through the exactness of his dress, and saw that the utmost
extent of his design was but to seem good: which served his turn well enough in
reference to his main intention, which was to get and keep Authority among men,
for he had waved the sincere care of being acceptable to God. Though Hypocrisy
was much more damnable in him, because he was not of such a weak Understanding
but that he might easily have known That God does not regard superstitious
devices, nor was ever so cheaply pleased as to be content with a Vain Faith or
the show of Holiness.

The chief Humor manifestly predominant in the Kenapistians was Love of Ease;
which did so far command them, that though they desired to seem Religious, yet
they would have all difficulty removed from what they should be ordered to
perform, though it were never so Necessary or Excellent.

Tuphlecon had taken notice of this Temper, and fitted it with such conformable
Laws, that it was no hard matter to procure obedience to his Government; for
he never commanded any thing but what he was sure they were willing to do: they
were unwilling to do nothing at all, perfect Idleness did not agree with their
Fancy; but they would have the instances of their Obedience easy, and the
Materials of which they made their Oblations such as should not cost them much.

Tuphlecon by a sordid correspondence had utterly perverted the state of their
Spirits; for by appointing them mean things, far below the excellency of true
Perfective duties, he debased their Souls: and they took as much Joy in these
worthless strawes, as if they had been the services of just Spirits made
perfect; and they judged themselves worthy of no less acceptance then (...),
and took all those for Fools which ventured to reprove the vanity of their
minds, or endeavored to show them that they were governed by false measures of
Religion, and that they had indiscreetly left out of their Obedience such Rules
as were most necessary to secure the Interest of their Souls, either by
improving them in that Goodness of which this present state is capable, or by
ascertaining their Eternal Welfare. But whatsoever was said was of no value
with those who had determind'd it to be enough for them that their Instructions
pleased them, whether they would save them or no.

The Kenapistians having thus reposed their hopes of Security upon false
Principles, contented themselves with a Form of Religion, and neglected the
Indispensablenesse of a Holy life. The Severities of Godliness were ridiculous
among them, and the practice of Charity arbitrary: they reckoned the Examples
of the Primitive times inimitable, and concluded the Desire of Goodness
sufficient to Salvation. In Theoprepia they love what these do but profess, and
do what these only say. Flesh is allowed its Dominion over the Spirit; Envy and
Hatred have banished Love; and they have devised a new way to go to Heaven
without peace of Conscience, which they endeavor to quiet by neglect of
Examination. Or if by chance they find they are not conformable in Disposition
or Practiseto Holy Rules, yet they excuse the business by alleging That Sin is
inconquerable in this mortal body; That Obedience is impossible; That the Best
things which we do are Splendid Sins, and the Worst are but Sins. They repent
as often as they please; nay they believe, if they do but repent at the hour of
death, it serves the turn for the sins of their whole life, and notwithstanding
the greatest causes of Despair, they may believe and be safe for ever.

By these Principles the Kenapistians grew extreme low in their Conversation;
and if they had lived among such as make a just estimation of things, they
would have forced them to think either that Religion is a pitiful business in
it self, or else that these were Hypocrites and did profess it only for a show.
However the Kenapistians enjoyed a great deal of ease, and freed themselves
from scrupulous enquiries, and the strict performance of indispensable duties,
having made such things unnecessary by false Rules. They kept their
Covetousness untouched, because the public orders made no great matter of
Charity, and because they took not good Works for the only way to Heaven. They
made sufficient amends for the Wrongs they did, if they were sorry for them,
because Restitution was no Fundamental Article of their Creed; and how bad
soever they were, they thought themselves excused, if they did accuse
themselves stoutly; and it was abundance of Mortification with them, to
complain sometimes of their unruly Appetites, and to revile their Passions,
because they would not be bridled.

The Example of Tuphlecon, who framed his Life according to the same Rules,
made them love him infinitely; for under his peaceable government they were
obliged only to talk of their Duties, and enjoy their Liberty. But this fair
day began to be clouded by Tuphlecon's sickness, which I must confess I
expected a great while before: for though he put the best side outward; yet I
observed him to be very weak, and that he went constantly with a very slow
pace, which he used not so much for State as to hide his Infirmity, which grew
at last to that height that he could dissemble it no longer. His disease was
very sharp, some call it Brygmodonton; it is much of the same nature with that
pain which is known by the name of Remorse of Conscience. Those that are
troubled with it, seem to feel a Worm in their Heart. When he had been gnawed
thus a while, his Countenance grew wan: those which knew not what he ailed,
would have guessed that he was haunted every night with an Evil Spirit. His
Voice being grown so low, that one could scarce discern what he said, he was
supposed to be very near the grave.

Whilst he lay in this miserable condition, an old friend of his, called Colax,
whom he entirely loved, having heard of his Case, brought him some Medicines,
which he composed according to such odd Receipts as he had transcribed out of
two or three foolish Books which he borrowed of Tuphlecon. The Effect showed
their Invalidity, for he received not the least Benefit by them. You may guess
the Worth of the Compositions by the Nature of the Ingredients of which they
consisted, Ananke, Peirasmus, Pathos, Hylotes, Adunaton and Moira. And as he
administered his Cordials, he told Tuphlecon, to comfort him, that he ought not
to break his Heart for invincible Infirmities, (and such he esteemed all his
Sins.) That God was obliged to excuse our disobedience, because of the
naturalnesse of Sin; and that he needed not to doubt of pardon for such faults
as he was forced to commit by the irresistible power of Tentation. That God
does not exact Perfection of us, because it is Impossible. That he needed not
trouble himself that he was so bad, since God had predestined him to be no
better: and in short, that he might make one Answer to all Objections, even of
Hypocrisy it self, That Christ had been obedient for him. Yes, said Tuphlecon,
with a quick and passionate reply, And I fear that he will be saved for me too.
Away, Colax, this is no time for Flatteries; my eyes are too open, I see the
uselesness of Lies, and I find now that which has been said long ago to be too
true, That about the time of Death the sense of God begins to awaken in men. I
have put too much confidence in thy false friendship: I have talked often of
that word Faith, and pleased my self with the Name, but am destitute of the
Virtue, which indeed I never knew in the right notion; that small pretense
which I can make to it is only a faint resemblance of the word misunderstood.
To night I have examined the false Jewel upon which I doated, and I perceived
it was counterfeit. I understand the meaning of God's declarations now, and see
that he never meant to compromise with Hypocrifie, and to patronize the bare
show of Goodness: I see that none can be made partakers of eternal Bliss
without a holy life, which is the proper express and only proof of inward
goodness. If God had not made it necessary by his declarations, yet the nature
of the State it self makes it impossible to be otherwise; and I find this
verified in my self: for being void of such Dispositions as are the just
preparations of that Incorporeal state, I feel my self unfit to live happily
out of this Earthly Body. I have built upon Quicksands, Colax, and now the
Wind arises and the Land-flouds (...) me, my house begins to fall. I imagined
my self to be one of God's Elect, and thought that to be a sufficient ground of
Hope, because diverse told me, who had seen the Eternal Rolls, that his choice
is Absolute: But I doubt now my name was never in the Book of life; and if it
be, I am sure I cannot find it. But my misery is the greater, because that
which has deluded me all this while is the only Refuge unto which I can betake
my self, and that is, Vain Faith: and as I talked formerly of believing
Contradictions, or any thing; I see now that I must do so still, if I will
attempt to comfort my self, for I have all the reason in the world to despair.

Colax was much astonished at this talk, and perceiving that his company
afforded no consolation to his dying friend, he went home: but they say that
the sad condition of Tuphlecon made such a deep impression upon his Soul, that
he took his bed immediately.

Colax had no sooner left the Room, but a dismal company of ghastly attendants,
who had waited all the while at the door, camein; the chief of them were
Phrictus, Odax, Thanatus, Krimatophobus and (...). Tuphlecon had no sooner
espied them, but he fell into a swoon; his spirits returning after a while, he
cried out for his old friends, Tharraleus, Philopseudes, Hyperoncus and many
others. But when he perceived that none answered his call, a deadly sighing
seized upon him; and, after many deep groans mixed with horrid Exclamations, he
dyed much after the manner of those disconsolate people which break their
Hearts with Grief.

As soon as the news of Tuphlecon's death was bruited abroad, and it was known
in what a forlorn sort he left this world, the Kenapistians began to suspect
That Vain Faith will not serve the turn in the other; and That such a
Confidence as does not subdue Sin, will not suppress Fear; and That such as
live wickedly, will be forced to think themselves miserable at their death. The
Storm approaching, they saw that their constitution was only made to endure
Fair weather, and that they were destitute of a Defense against Afflictions and
Death. Now they wonder at the folly of their Credulity, who believed
unreasonably That they should be excused for sinning against their Conscience,
because they felt its remorses when it was abused; and they find that what they
counted Repentance, was worse sin; and what they thought an alleviation, is a
great aggravation of their burden, both by a greater vileness of the Sin and a
proportionable Guilt. And now they are all appalled with a great doubt
concerning their Faith, and are afraid that a careless life will bring them
into such a condition that they shall have much ado to believe themselves well,
against the force of such Reasons as are the demonstrations of an unhappy state.

Here Ontagathus ended his Story, and craving pardon for the tediousness of his
Relation, because they had laid their commands upon him to make the Report, he
added, If you desire to go further, to inform your selves more fully concerning
the Kenapistians, I will attend you. No, no, said they all, we have heard
enough already, and the time of the day requires us to return to our Lodging at
Philoxenus his house; and if your occasions give you leave to go along with us,
we shall be glad of your company. I will go along with all my heart, replied
Ontagathus, he is my very near neighbor; and to morrow I have purposed to
spend my time in Agazelus, which, as I understand, you intend to visit before
your return.

It were too long to give an account here of the several discourses which
passed between Philoxenus and his Guests, (who were much more welcome because
they brought Ontagathus with them) whilst they made a review of their
Travailes, to collect something from the consideration of men's various Tempers
and the Events of diverse actions, to improve their Understandings, as also to
commit to Memory the more remarkable passages, and to entertain themselves by
way of recreation with talking of what they had seen; therefore I will pass
them over, and relate what happened in Agazelus.

Ontagathus rising more early in the morning then his usual time, because he
was loath that those whom he desired to attend should stay for his company,
came to them a little after they had made themselves ready; and though they
were pretty well wearied with going up and down, and more then sufficiently
glutted with Vanasembla, yet they were unwilling to go away before they had
seen Agazelus, which was talked of as the Glory of Polyglotta. Ontagathus to
make the way less tedious, and to prepare them for a sight of Agazelus, by a
previous description of the place, gave them, as they went along, a brief
account of the most remarkable things which he had occasion to observe when he
was amongst them. He began thus.

Through the midst of the chief Street runs a swift Brook called Picrudor: the
Water is often troubled, and always bitter. It has drowned many; for when a
man chances to fall into the Stream, it carries him away with such violent
force, which it has by reason of its coming from steep Rocks, that his
recovery is impossible.

Upon the banks of this Rivolet is built a large House much after the fashion
of a Labyrinth, and some call it so, because of the resemblance; but the true
name is Mataeoponus. The keeper of it is known by the name of Lerocritus. He
has two Servants, Antilegon, who looks to the doors, and to keep out such as
he suspects to be no well-willers to Agazelus; and Amphisbeton, who shows the
Rooms. It is much frequented by Disputants, and I pretending to be one got in.
As I passed through a narrow Court, which had been paved with a rough sort of
Pebbles, but was then overgrown with sharp Thistles and stinging Nettles, I
came to a wide Room, called Logomachia: an open space in the middle led to the
upper end, where stood Lerocritus his Chair, many seats being placed upon both
sides of the Room. It was very large, for as the times go, they are no
Christians which cannot dispute; and indeed since the practice of Goodness was
left among them, it is the chief instance of their Religion. Upon a broad Table
which was before the Chair they had placed abundance of Books, which were
filled with Definitions, Divisions, Restrictions, Corollaries,
Irrefragabilities, Quiddityes, Entityes and Non-entityes, with many more
strange words. I asked Amphisbeton what they did contain. He said, most learned
Expositions of Hierographon; and that he had heard men say, that those which
made them had gathered all the hard words out of it to expound the easy, and
put in some of their own more hard then any that they found there; whereupon
they were grown at last so obscure, that he verily believed if those which
wrote that book should rise from the dead, they would not be able to understand
them. I asked him what they were good for. He protested he could not tell: but
as far as he could guess, they were good for nothing but to make differences
amongst honest men, to puzzle Truth, and to enable men in the opinion of the
wise to talk extraordinary nonsense, and to present words so subtiliz'd that
they are past the understanding of their Auditors; and that he had observed one
strange quality in them, which was, that they did usually reflect such an
amusement upon those that spoke them, that they did not understand their own
talk. Sure then, replied I, it was great pity that the Egyptians of old wanted
these Books, they would have saved them the labor of inventing Hieroglyphics;
for these uncouth forms of Speech would have sufficiently preserved their
Mysteries from the contempt of Vulgar Understandings.

I asked him the use of those diverse rows of (...). He said, since that was
the Room where the chief business of the House was managed, they were appointed
to receive the Citizens of Agazelus, without whose grave deliberation nothing
was determined: though he had observed that after many days busily employed in
serious debates, and sometimes in hot contests, for the most part their work
was as far from a conclusion as at the beginning; and that after a years
Consultation, matters were so ineffectually tossed from one side to the other,
that they seemed to weave Penelope's web; and that from this fruitless issue
of much toil, the House was called Mataeoponus.

Sure, said Urania, interrupting his discourse, you make me think of a Mine in
Amphilogia which is haunted with a company of busy Spirits, which seem to
resort thither with desire of employment, and work with such diligence as if
they had been hired for daily laborers. The poor Miners at first were glad of
such help: for when they looked upon them, they seemed to dig up their Ore, to
separate it from the Earth, to melt it into usual form; but when they were
gone, they found nothing done for all the great stir and show of Labor. You
could not have found a fitter Comparison, said Ontagathus, to have represented
the busy Vanity of these idle attempts.

I remember that I stood once not far from the Door, and a sudden knock made me
turn about to know who it was that demanded entrance. Sundry people of stern
gravity came in; and when two Ladies that were in the rear were about to enter,
Antilegon forbad them. They were modest, and would not intrude, but quietly
retired. I whispered Antilegon in the ear to know their names; and he told me
one was called Alethea, the other Charinda. An ingenuous person of good note
having taken notice of Antilegon's refusal to let them in, made a complaint of
the Incivility, and said, that disinterested people could not but suspect that
some unworthy actions were to be performed amongst those who admitted many that
would without doubt have been deservedly stopped, both upon a scrutiny of
Knowledge and Goodness, and yet excluded two Ladies of known Wisdom and
Exemplary Charity. An angry man of the company replied, that Alethea might come
in, if she would; he knew no body that desired her to be kept out; and moved
that she might be sent for. The rest consenting to the motion, Amphisbeton went
for her. She was utterly unwilling to go in without her sister Charinda, and
asked if she might not take her in. I have no order for that, said Amphisbeton;
but she may stay here a while, and see if you can procure her leave. Go,
sister, said Charinda, I will expect your return, which I am afraid will be
too speedy. When she was entered, they were in a hot dispute, and though they
had sent for her, never took any notice of her coming: so she stayed in the
crovvd without any observance, each Disputant eying his Opposite more then
her, though she was in the middle betvveen them; and as the parties grevv
vvarmer, they jostled her from one side to the other, after such a rude manner,
that her being there was little to her content. And at length being troubled
with their quarrelsomenesse and vvearied with noise, she quitted the Room,
nobody so much as desiring her to stay. By which I perceived that though they
had sent for her in a Complement, and pretended to desire nothing so much as
her company, yet that her room was as acceptable, and that they were as much
pleased with a disputation concerning her as the enjoyment of her presence.
She and Charinda vvalk'd together into the cool grove of Hesychia, which
borders upon Theoprepia.

After she was gone, they continued the noise, rubbing their ears and talking
with such eager loudness that it was hardly sufferable: they were not
ashamed to speak all at once; though that Custom is so barbarous that it is
despised by the vvild Indians: yet having a good mind to see the end, I held
out, supposing that such Violence would not last long.

As I looked about I savv many little doors in the Wall of the Room, much like
to Sally-ports. For what serve these, said I, good Antilegon? You must know,
said he, that these Doors are of great use for the more quiet departure of the
Assembly; for many times those who come in all together at that great Gate, do
so fall out before they have done talking, that they will not go forth with
such as came in with them, and each having a private key to those little doors,
one goes this way, and another that.

Amongst other things I perceived also that each party (for the Agazelians were
divided into many Factions) had a Desk by themselves, and a Scribe which
attended diligently with pen and paper: I guessed it was because they did so
highly value the discourses which were made, that they would not permit any
syllable of a word to be lost. No, said Antilegon, each side makes use of these
to note all the suspicious words of their opposite party, and every saying that
is capable of misconstruction, that by these, when they have put them together
in a Satirical Pasquil, they may render the party odious against whose opinions
they have entertained dislike. For each side does write, as well as speak,
against another, and this at such a rate, that when they have once differed,
they make it impossible to agree again. When they cannot bring their
Antagonists to their Opinion, they count it Religion to disgrace their party;
and if they know any evil of their Persons, they refer it wholly to their
Principles, though their own Sect has the same and other faults: and if any
evil thing follow from their Opinion, though at the distance of seven
Consequences well stretched upon the rack of Censure, they fasten it upon the
Conscience of their Opponent, though he understand no coherence between his
Opinion and their Deductions, and does so really abhor such Conclusions as they
make, that if he could think they did follow from what he holds, he would
renounce his Assertions.

When the Disputation was ended, each Chieftain had his distinct herd standing
as near the door as they could get; and when they appeared, they all applauded
their own Champions, whom they supposed Conquerors; and so triumphed before
they were sure of a Victory, with as much discretion and no less noise then
if the multitude had consisted of adverse flocks of angered Geese.

When Ontagathus had gone thus far, they were come near to Mataeoponus, which
upon their approach began a Verification of his Story; for they were accosted
with a prodigious noise, infinite numbers of Agazelians thronging together to
be made partakers of the din. The press was so great that Bentivolio and his
Companions could not get into the newbuilt Logomachia; only whilst they stood
in the Court they perceived an older house where there was more free access,
and thither they went, thinking to repose themselves a while after their long
walk. It was not so much frequented, because at that time the Agazelians ears
did itch more after new Controversies. But when they were entered, they
perceived that no place is void of disputation in Agazelus; for four Grave
persons, called Bellarmo, Therulus, Lucanius and Erotidius, had been a good
while in a sharp contest about diverse matters wherein they differed; and as
they came in, Bellarmo was telling a strange story of Anaxanacton, a great
King, and he particularly extolled his magnificence for a Royal feast which he
made for his Subjects; and making a relation of the variety of Dishes, amongst
other things he said he gave them his own Flesh for Meat, and in stead of Wine
poured forth his Blood into golden Bowls. Then he praised the inimitablenesse
of his Love, that would feed the bodies of his Subjects with his own.
Perceiving that his Companions did scarce believe him, That you may know, quoth
he, how he did such a wonderful thing, I will acquaint you with a rare mystery.
By an unspeakable way which he had, when the Bread and Wine were put upon the
Table, he would convert them into the substance of his own Body and Blood, and
yet they could not perceive but the Bread and Wine retained their former
nature, for they had the same Taste, Color and Shape, and yet there was no
such thing upon the Board; for what remained was only the Accidents of Bread
and Wine, preserved still in being by an Omnipotent power without their
Subjects, and had the same color to see to, and the same power to nourish such
as did eat and drink, as if they had still been joined to their proper
substance, though that was conveyed away invisi^ly. So that though it be a
strange thing, yet I may tell you it for a Truth, That the King sat at the
Table in his Chair, at the same time when he was in the mouths of some and the
hands of others that feasted with him. And I have heard that though his
Subjects are scattered through large dominions, yet he can after the
forementioned manner feast them all at once, and be present with them all,
though they be separated from one another by the distance of many thousand
miles, whilst they all eat him at the same moment of time.

At these words Therulus, who sat not far from him, replied, You are something
out in your story, Bellarmo, for the King you talk of did not convey away the
meat and drink of his Guests, as you say, and by way of Transubstantiation
convert them into his own Flesh and Blood, but united himself with their Bread
and Wine: And while he was so corporally mixed with their meat and drink, they
did eat and drink the King and his meat both together. This I know, for I have
been feasted at his Table a hundred times; and such as cannot see how this
should be, were either never at his house, or else are as blind as a stone.

Upon this Lucanius grew a little angry, and said, For my part I cannot see it,
yet I have been there many times, and I believe as often as any in this Company;
and I thank God I am not so blind, but I can read a Book, which I have heard
you both acknowledge for a true Record of that Story; and by what I find there
I am forced to deny credit to your report. For it says, That Anaxanacton went
to Heaven long ago, and at his Ascension declared that he would not return till
the Restoration of all things, which is not only not past, but, as I fear, a
great way off. Were you at Supper in Heaven, Bellarmo, or you Therulus? Did
either of you see his Subjects cut that Glorified Body in bits? But that it
cannot possibly be true, that the Bread and Wine are changed into the Body and
Blood of the King by any Corporal Metamorphosis, is manifest in that the
hallowed Bread and Wine, of which you affirm such incredible things, will grow
moldy and sour; which are things impossible to be attributed to Anaxanacton's
condition, who since his reception into Heaven, is according to the most
perfect sense in a state of Incorruptibility.

Bellarmo and Therulus were so offended with these words, that they rose up in
a great passion, and would needs be gone: But Erotidius prayed them to have
patience till he also declared his opinion; unto which with much ado they
consented, and sat down again: whereupon (...) began after this manner;
Bellarmo, you and Therulus have related strange things, which amazed me to
hear, and I understand that you have told these stories formerly in diverse
Companies; but I fear much to the dishonor of Anaxanacton. For whilst you
report such impossible things, you tempt people to doubt whether ever there was
any such King, or whether he made any Feast at all; because they are sure he
could make no such as you mentioned, the thing being in its nature impossible.
Some body has extremely abused you, to make you esteem it for an Excellency in
his Religion to be filled with Opinions which are contrary to common sense; and
to introduce a suitable Faith, which commends its worth from a power of
believing such Doctrines as contradict the Principles of Natural Reason which
God has planted in our Souls; unless God should be thought to design the
Extirpation of the Roots which he has set. If you put such monstrous
Assertions into Religion, men will be apt to take it for an old-wivestale, or a
fabulous Superstition invented by brain sick men; and those that are initiated
into your mysteries being taught to believe any thing, will as easily believe
nothing; and by being religious after this fashion, will be effectually
disposed to Atheism: for when they examine their Faith, they will find that in
truth they only believe for fear, or profess that they do for worldly regards,
but that they have no reason for what they hold. Ingenuous men are governed by
the Divine light which shines in their Souls, by which they know that God
cannot do that which implies a Contradiction; and upon the same ground they
assure themselves that there was never any such Feast. You affirm unreasonably
that the Body of your King, which is but One, may be in diverse places at once;
that it may be a thousand miles removed from me, and yet but the distance of a
hand-bredth at the same time; and so you make the same distance greater and
less then it self. For if he be corporally present with me at his Feast, and
after the same manner with another at a thousand miles distance from me, the
same Longitude will be shorter then it self. You deny not but his Body is in
Heaven, and you affirm it to be in a Chapel upon Earth at the same time: so
that if you draw a line from the same point of my Hand to the same point of the
King's Body, which is the same line, because it is a straight line between the
same terms, the distance will be but a yard long, and yet reach many hundreds
of miles: which is a plain Contradiction. Your Monster has another head also
no less deformed then this; for your Transubstantiation does suppose one Body
may penetrate another, whenas all the world have confessed it to be the nature
of Bodily substance to be Impenetrable; and ever since that Propriety was
stamped upon its Essence by the Creator, each Material Substance does stoutly
and irresistibly keep it self from being penetrated by another. So that whilst
you report that the Viands were transubstantiated into the Flesh and Blood of
your King, you would make people believe that either he had no true Body when
he made that Feast, or at least that he has not now. You say, to make the
wonder the greater, That the whole mass of your King's Blood is in each drop
of Wine, and that every Crum of Bread is converted into the whole Body; not one
Crum into the head, and another into the feet; and so the Whole is thrust into
every Part: which does necessarily infer a Penetration of Matter; which can no
more reasonably be affirmed then Contradictions can possibly be reconciled.

This Contradiction is swelled with another; for whilst you allow the
Convertiblenesse of one Body into another, without the destruction or
augmentation of each other, you grant leave for an absurd Inference, which is,
That Body may be without Space or, which is all one, Extension, for Space is
Extension. Since therefore the Essential property of a Body is Extension into
Longitude, Latitude and Profundity, your Transubstantiation and
Consubstantiation are confounded with this absurdity, That a Body may be
without Space, and that Extension may be not extended. Therefore, Gentlemen,
since our Master's Body is in Heaven, and that he has told us he will not
return to Earth till he come to restore this miserable world, and has
appointed us to commemorate the love of his death by the renewall of his holy
Feast, where each dish is a Symbol of better things then any fleshly eye can
see, let us receive the benefits of his Divine presence by an humble Faith,
without this quarrelsome dispute for the bold determination of the manner of
his being there. So shall we, who are now divided by that which was appointed
to unite us, become again a holy Synaxis, and in stead of offering a ridiculous
sacrifice, we shall celebrate an acceptable Eucharist.

When Erotidius had sat down, Lucanius rose up with an intention to speak
further concerning Erotidius his Arguments; but Therulus netled with the former
discourse prevented him, saying, Hold thy tongue, Vain Man, thou will consent
to his silly talk: do thou not see him so ignorant of the Nature of Faith
that he will not believe Contradictions? After those words he went out of the
Room, saying, I will talk no more with such Asses.

Bellarmo took the opportunity to wave an answer with pretense of great wrath,
and went away to the chief Governor of Exosemnon, to give him an account of
what had passed. How he reported the discourse I know not, but in recompense of
his ill-bestow'd Zeal in such a pitiful cause he received a Red Hat.

As soon as they were gone, Erotidius guessing Lucanius to be inwardly vexed,
as far as outward Looks are significations of the Mind, asked him the reason of
those immorall passions which had been entertained that day by such as boast
themselves to be Christians, and look down from the high battlements of
Spirituality, as they call it, upon the Holiness of Morality, as a poor low
thing; pretending in their own more raised spirit transcendently to contain
whatsoever is good in it, as the Reasonable Soul does the Sensitive Faculties:
adding withal, that such irregular expressions would not be kept secret, but
be improved to the greatest disgrace, whilst they were divulged by such
adversaries as they had, who were not so heedlesse as not to make use of such
fair pretenses of accusation. To this Lucanius answered, not without a fretful
peevishness, that he understood no great reason for such carriage, only he
knew that by a just though most dismal Judgment they were predestined to
these distempers: so rising up with that choleric haste that he overturned his
Chair, he went away. Erotidius sitting still in a posture of extreme grief,
pulled his hat over his eyes and wept heartily, whilst the tears ran down both
his cheeks so fast as if each tear had been pursued by his fellow, and that one
eye vied drops with the other.

Urania taking notice of his passion, came near and demanded the reason of his
sorrow. Alas, Madam, said Erotidius, I would gladly with these waters quench
the unchristian heates which you saw just now kindled, and to these tears I
would willingly add my Blood, if by that I could wash away the guilt of these
foul distempers. Come Erotidius, said Urania, grieve no more, you have done
your best; be patient till they repent of their follies. Come along with me,
and I will carry you where you shall hear other matters discoursed after
another manner. Now she intended to conduct him with her Company to Theoprepia,
into the sweet vales of Sophrosyne, where diverse Virtuoso's did daily meet, and
with most excellent Understanding discourse upon the most profitable things
knowable.

As they were leaving the Room, a company of illiterate fellows, but more
fierce then the former, would needs renew the Disputation; and one that thought
himself the wisest among them, earnestly desired that the Argument of their
discourse might be Kiskildrivium. They brutishly agreed, being much taken with
the wonderful sound of the word. It cost them much time to know from what
Language it was derived, but at last they concluded it to be of Roman pedigree;
and when they had been as long in enquiry after the signification of it, one of
them recollecting his memory, told them it was Transubstantiation. I do not
believe that, said another, for notwithstanding our talk all this while, I am
confident that Kiskildrivium is an insignificant Term. So it is, quoth the
other, but no more then Transubstantiation, for they both signify nothing.
Upon this they resolved to dispute no more upon that subject, having heard it
exploded but a little before.

After this they quarreled a good while one with another about the choice of
some Question to dispute of: but coming to no agreement, they resolved to
dispute of nothing, and so went away all together to Logomachia.

This meeting being thus dissolved, Urania and her Company withdrew also; and
as they went by the door which leads into Logomachia, they found that entrance
was now very easy, for a great part of the company being wearied with an
Expectation, of whose effect they at last despaired, were gone away; only the
Grandees which were Leaders in several points of Controversy remained, and
such little parties as had resigned themselves to the sovereignty of their
Dictates. Toward the upper end of the Room in three select Chaires more high
then the rest sat Aganacton, Polymachus and Dysarestus, for they had no small
Authority in Agazelus. Antinomus and Hypernephelus sat by the Table: over
against them sat a proud Fellow with a Sadducees Coat on; as they were musing
who it should be, one pointing to him said to his companion, That Atheist is
Agerochus. A little below him sat a frantic Enthusiast, called Magicus, and
Melancholicus leaned upon the back of his Chair. Toward the lower end stood an
empty Chair; and as Alazon and Deisidaemon were scuffling for it, a bold fellow
of a simple visage with his eyes sunk under a great forehead, called Ignaro,
possessed himself of it to their great discontent. As they were discoursing, a
humorous fellow, called Heautus, made a great disturbance to their affairs;
his manner was to walk up and down amongst the company, to hug himself, to talk
of himself and to himself. A sober man displeased with his impertinencies,
demanded of him what he sought there. He said, Himself. He asked the reason of
his troublesomenesse to the meeting. He said, Himself. Whilst some that minded
not the Mystery of his folly fell a laughing, he moved the company that the
arrogant fool might be put out of the Room; alleging that there was but small
hopes of doing any thing whilst he stayed, and that when they were freed from
the hindrance of his clamorous noise, they might the better hear one another,
and more quietly bring their businesses to some good conclusion. It was
wonderful with what loud eagerness the company answered, No, no, let him
alone, he shall not be turned out, we can bear with his follies well enough, we
have been used to them. Whereupon he being much pleased that the company had
voted his stay, began to be more quiet.

Upon one side of the Room, where was a crowd of busy Talkers, they saw one in
the form of a Shepherd, clad in a white Mantle, put on so handsomely, that many
were much delighted with looking upon him: but he was another kind of thing
then that of which he made show; his name was Lucifer. Urania jogged Bentivolio
to take notice of his carriage; for though he demeaned himself with a great
deal of wary cunning, yet sometimes he could not choose but discover himself:
for when Magicus was talking of some great Prophet lately sent from Heaven,
that was, as he said, above Christ Jesus, and who was the only Comforter; or
when any of Kenapistis magnified a Vain Faith, and reproached Morality as a
poor Heathenish Vanity, he would encourage them. When Agerochus provoked the
company to anger with bitter words, and undertook afterward to prove that
it was impossible that there should ever be agreement in the Church, they
perceived him to laugh. But when any Virtuous man who loved peace advised the
rigid to Moderation, shovv'd the inconveniences of an uncharitable spirit, or
desired them to lay aside conceitednesse, and to order Heautus to withdraw,
he expressed an extreme Discontent in his looks.

Things were managed in such a confused manner, that any body ventured in
amongst them, many which had nothing to do, and some who went only to do
hurt, and (which was strange) Miasmasarka and Pneumatodes were espied there,
but they shrovvded themselves under the Patronage of Antinomus and Agerochus.

Before I go any further to tell what happened at this meeting, it will not
be amisseto set down a short story which Ontagathus told to Urania the night
before at the house of Philoxenus concerning Aganacton, Polymachus and
Dysarestus. They are, said Ontagathus, persons of no mean esteem for Religion,
and have expressed such a zeal for their particular Opinions, that they have
not refused to fight for them, each of them striving with their greatest force
to bring the other two into obedience to their Sentiments; and as they had the
advantage of the upper ground, they threw those which would not submit to their
Constitutions into great affliction: but they defended themselves from the
imputation of Cruelty for so doing, by saying that the chastisements which they
appointed were only godly persecutions and wholesome corrections, very needful
to reduce disobedient people to their duty; and that they did not punish after
that fashion which the wicked use, when they kill one another, because they had
a charitable intention in their severest castigations. But as far as any
by-stander could perceive, whatever the Intents were, the Actions were
mischievous, and utterly unbecoming the very pretense of true Religion, which
as it contains a most excellent love of God, so it never leaves out a great
Charity to all our neighbors.

Aganacton was first deputed the chief Governor of Agazelus; but he executed
his Office with such Rigor, that he ruined poor men for a word, and made people
offenders for such trifles as were not to be regarded by a prudent Governor.
Though many of his wiser Friends advised him to the contrary, knowing that a
good Governor should neither multiply unnecessary Laws, nor inflict such sore
punishments for small Faults that the severity bears no proportion with the
guilt. A poor man was once required to come before him, who was unwilling to
go, not that he thought himself guilty of any Fault, but because he could ill
spare the time from his labor, upon which he and his family subsisted: but
being compelled to make his appearance, he desired to know his Charge. They
answered, he was sent for because he had profanely dug his ground and sowed
it upon Assumption-day. When he asked what Assumption, they told him that of
our Lady; and when the ignorant man demanded, what Lady? they angrily replied,
The blessed Virgin. I cry you mercy, said the poor man, for my Ignorance of
that Assumption, and I hope it is very pardonable, for I could never meet with
that Story in a holy Book which I have at home, where they say all good things
are recorded: but I honor the Virgin Mother, whom all Generations do justly
call Blessed, and I know that she is so full of Grace and gentle Goodness,
that she does not desire a poor man to worship her with a Sacrifice made of his
Childrens bread, or that any body should die of hunger for her sake. Thereupon
he prayed them to dismiss him, for that he had at home a sick Wife and five
small Children, and if he should do no work that day, they could eat nothing at
night. Notwithstanding this fair plea, after many reproachful words, they told
him he should pay ten shillings for his offense, or else go to prison. Then I
must go to prison, quoth the poor man, for I am not able to pay half often
shillings. According to their word they committed him, that by his Example
others might understand what they were to Expect if they offended in like
manner.

Amongst others Polymachus and Dysarestus were punished, because they did not
comply with Aganacton's Rules, and also by their Example and Arguments (...)
many Agazelians from their Obedience. But Aganacton at length growing very weak
by reason of a violent sickness which seized upon him, Polymachus was put into
his Room; which was brought to pass by the importunate Intercessions of the
people: For Polymachus had so frequently declaimed against Aganacton's
fierceness, that they made no doubt but he would express extraordinary
meekness; and they seeing Aganacton low and feeble, made use of the
opportunity to advance Polymachus to the Government; which he had not managed
very long, but they plainly perceived how strong a Tentation great Power is to
mortal men, how hard it is for such as rule to do right in all things, how
unanswerable men are unto their promises when they are changed from an adverse
condition to one more prosperous, and how apt they are to disturb others when
they think themselves secure, and to slight the Comforts of such as were the
Instruments of their advancement, if they do not humor them afterward with all
possible submissions. Polymachus began to bestir himself, and consigned his
friends to all preferments: he was hard to Aganacton's Officers, and
dispossessed most of them, to bring his own Relations into their places. He put
also no small affronts upon Dysarestus, and at last signed an order for his
banishment. But as Dysarestus was upon his journey toward the Sea shore, he
met a Troop of the Agazelian Horse, and made known his case to the Captain, by
a full relation of his sufferings under Polymachus: whereupon the Captain,
Centaurus by name, commanded his men to lay hold upon Polymachus his Officers,
and taking Dysarestus back with him to Polymachus, he upbraided him with many
disgraceful instances of his ill management of affairs, and particularly
reproved him for his cruel carriage toward Dysarestus and his friends; and
told him that for the time to come he must deport himself more gently, and for
a security of doing no future harm he should take Dysarestus into the
partnership of his Government. Unto this Polymachus was forced to give an
unwilling consent, for as matters stood then he could not help it. The power
being thus divided between Polymachus and Dysarestus, they ordered things so,
that either party thought themselves well appayed, for they enjoyed quietness
and preferment, but they both slighted Aganacton, scarce ever visited him in
his sickness, and longed for his death. It is a hard matter for such as have
governed others to learn Obedience themselves. Aganacton's sickness continued
upon him, and his friends also by a passionate sympathy with his distresses
were brought very low: but they suffered not alone, for diverse things happened
which occasioned Polymachus and Dysarestus to disagree, and their parties,
being much divided according to the Interest of their Leaders, did much
mischief to each other.

Thus much of Ontagathus his story I thought good to insert, because it makes
known some of those reasons which occasioned the distractions of Agazelus,
which were now grown to that height, that their once-flourishing Society
withered into little Factions, and instead of the happiness of mutual love,
they had now an Union only in common Afflictions and the dissatisfactions of an
unsettled condition.

A wise man who had observed the Rise and Progress of their Troubles to depend
in a great part upon a spirit of Uncharitableness, prayed them that they would
so far resent the misery of their present condition as to enquire into the
possibilities of Recovery; and since they saw the Dangers of their
disagreement, to think speedily of terms of Accommodation.

Though they were unwilling to hear of Accommodation, every one being much
indisposed to bate any thing of his Selfwill and Idiopathies; yet being galled
with many ill Effects of their Dissentions, they were persuaded by the Reasons
and Authority of one generally esteemed a very Wise man, to try if they could
come toward each other in nearer distances. And this occasioned the meeting of
which I have made mention already: but what small hopes of success were at
this time produced was too apparent by the unfriendly manner of their converse.

Among several things, too many to be here inserted, one was very observable,
that though they had all one common pretense of Appeal to an Authentic Record
called Jus divinum, for putting an end to their Controversies, which was
therefore placed in the midst over the Table; yet it was upon the top of such a
high Pole, that none of them could easily reach it: whereupon each party did
very rudely throw their Bibles at it to bring it down to their own side; by
which violence they did often give unhandsome blows to their Opposites, which
usually occasioned so much anger, that after they had (...) together a long
while, they parted with much more hatred then they met. It being impossible to
bring good affairs to any success when they are managed without Prudence and
Charity.

When they had jangled a good while according to the forementioned disorders,
and were all going to rise in a great fume, Bentivolio desired some of the
chief Disputants, that they would have the Goodness to receive a few words
from one who was sorry for their divisions, and did hope that he might show
them a way to make up their uncomfortable breaches. The motion was acceptable,
because they were now even wearied out with discord: and having demanded his
Name, when they understood it was Bentivolio, they were extremely pleased,
having heard of him often, but never seen him before. They received in a good
part a confirmation of what wares ported concerning him, from the Grace of his
Speech and the Loveliness of his Countenance, and earnestly desired him to
make them happy with his seasonable Advice, if he had any Remedy for such a
deplorable condition. Bentivolio answered, that however it should succeed, he
would show the reality of his Good will: but he judged it necessary before he
went further, to have some private Conference with Aganacton, Polymachus and
Dysarestus, and that the multitude should be dismissed for the present, and
receive Intelligence of their discourses at the next meeting. The Company tired
out with fruitless attendance, consented to the proposal, especially since
they were to understand things another time.

As they began to withdraw, Bentivolio snatched Lucifer's staff out of his
hand, and drove him out of the Room; and as he went forth he took Magicus along
with him.

Miasmasarka and Pneumatodes fearing the same Fate, ran away with such a
frightful haste that every one took notice of them, which made their Patrons
blush; for one of them holding Antinomus by the right hand, and the other
Agerochus by the left, they hurried them along for company.

Then he desired that Heautus might be given in charge to one Autaparnes to be
kept in safe custody till the next meeting; at which they should hear such a
bill read against him as would procure him shame and punishment.

He bade them send Hypernephelus home with a guide, and appoint Ananephon with
a sharp rasor to shave off the wild hairs that grew round about his Crown,
and to apply some Remedy which settles the Brains, and frees the Fancy from
arrogant Conceits, and makes ordinary men unapt to dream that they are the
Saviors of Mankind, or to desire to be worshipped with Hosanna's, or to think
that they are the Judges of the world, come to pronounce the last Sentence. He
ordered that Melancholicus should take a lusty dose of Hellebore to purge
discontented humors. Upon this Hypernephelus and Melancholicus wept bitterly,
and prayed him for pity sake not to take notice what Madmen say in their Fits,
nor to impute the faults of their distempered Heads to the choice of a wicked
Will. To which Bentivolio answered, that they should do well to follow the
forementioned directions, and perfect their Repentance.

When one had pulled Ignaro out of his Chair, he bade them throw him out of the
Room; but first advised him to go to school with little boys of his own size
of Understanding, and charged him, as he would not suffer such punishment and
worse, that he should not venture into that Company any more. When Alazon and
Acephalus heard these words, they sneaked away.

Bentivolio was not willing to take any notice of Agerochus, for he scorned all
advice, though he extremely wanted it; but because of his intolerable Arrogance
he thought it requisite to give him a few reproofs. Agerochus, quoth
Bentivolio, you might do well to learn so much Ingenuity as to think that
others may possibly understand sense as well as your self. Leave off your
design to make the world believe Contradictions or nothing, for you will lose
your labor. Be content that some things are in their own natures Right and
others Wrong without your appointment. Repent that you have endeavored to
chase Faith out of the Societies of men, and to banish Honesty out of the
world, by making your Books base pleas for Hypocrisy and Villainy. Let Almighty
God be a Spirit, because he has told us that he is so; and except him from the
foolery of your determination, That whatsoever is not a Body is nothing. Put
not the Sovereign Lord of the world to so much unworthy trouble, as to ask
leave of his Subjects that the Commands which he has given them may be
obligatory. Take heed lest for those rude affronts you have put upon Religion,
the people do not justly call you the Northern Antichrist. Read the four
Evangelists sometimes, and having set a Deaths-head before you meditate upon
the Reasonableness of the Last Judgment. Take down the swollen sails of your
Windmil; and when you are grown sober, you shall have leave to write one Book
more, but with this Condition, that you do recant all the rest. Agerochus was
so mad that any body durst offer to teach him, that he went away with such
expressions of scorn, that he sufficiently signified that he judged none in
that Company worthy to learn of him.

The Room being freed from the tumultuous multitude, Bentivolio desiring his
fellow-travailers to sit down, accosted Aganacton, Polymachus and Dysarestus
with his wonted civility; and having craved leave to ask them a Question or
two, he first demanded, If any of them had ever been sick. They all answered,
Yes. I got a fall said Aganacton, with running too fast: I scarce ever went
abroad since, only by the help of a Horselitter I came to this meeting in hope
to find some cure, of which I should be sorry to be disappointed. I could wish
with all my heart, said Polymachus, that you had used a softer pace; for when
you ran so fast I was weak, and could not get out of your way, but you trod so
hard upon my breast, that you struck almost all the breath out of my body, and
made me labor under a difficulty of speaking for a great while after. I, said
Dysarestus, was Sea-sick once. Bentivolio asked them further, If they had not
some thoughts of their Sins in their Sickness, and if they did not entertain
some purposes of amending their Errrors, if they should obtain their former
health. They all said, Yes.

Bentivolio giving them thanks for the freedom of their Converse, told them,
Gentlemen, you are upon a fair way of recovery, and two of you seem to have
regained more health then Aganacton. When you come to your perfect strength,
make good the promises of your sickness. Take heed of relapsing into a disease
which is Epidemical to your Country, and does so infeeble men's minds, that they
know not when they are well, and does sometimes so inrage them, that they do
not think themselves well unless they see others ill; which is a hellish kind
of distemper. I have heard that you, Polymachus, was much offended when
Aganacton was sick of this disease, and would not quietly enjoy his own Liberty
until he had deprived you of yours; and yet you and Dysarestus having gotten
power into your hands, would not let him enjoy his. You pronounced your self in
the right, and esteemed that a sufficient warrant for your peace, when
Aganacton condemned you for Error; and now you will not give him that leave to
judge for himself, which you took before. He thinks he is in the right, and you
say, you know you are not in the wrong: you may be mistaken; you see the
Confidence of the Person is no sure proof of the truth of the Opinion. Each of
you is as confident as the other, and if one believe any one of you, two of you
are deceived. But suppose you be not mistaken, will you prosecute another for
not knowing so much as you do? And if you say he may know if he will, or he
does know, but he is obstinate; If that be a good plea, could not Aganacton
have justly made use of it against you when you were the sufferers, and
complained of your usage as injust? You ought to have so much Charity, as to be
willing to grant that to others which in times of necessity you asked for your
selves. Take heed of Violence, Friends, and prefer the safety of all before a
hazardous venture of what you have, and may comfortably keep, for the
unrighteous acquist of more then is your due. Those are mad people who when
they are fallen out, will rather kill one another then be parted.

Concerning Forms of words be not too troublesome. You have a Book at home
which is half Hebrew, half Greek; make that the Confession of your Faith. Be
not Imperious in imposing your Interpretations of doubtful Expressions upon
such as understand them not. When you have a mind to be zealous, express your
Heat in those famous and undoubted Instances of Goodness, True Piety, Charity,
Righteousness and sober Prudence, which are written in your Book with great
Letters. I had almost forgotten Heautus, who stands committed prisoner to
Autaparnes; it is fit that he should never be released. To manifest the Justice
of such a sharp Censure, he gave them a List of such horrid Accusations, that
they were very unwilling to read them.

Here Bentivolio ended his Discourse, entreating them to receive favorably
what he had propounded with a sincere regard to their Happiness. They gave him
thanks for his Good will, and promised to take his Advice into their serious
consideration. The day being far spent, Bentivolio took his leave of them, and
accompanied Urania and Panaretus unto the House of the most courteous
Philoxenus.

THE FOURTH BOOK, OR THEOPREPIA.
AS a Travailer, after he has sojourned a good while in a foreign Country,
does naturally desire to return to his Native soil; and when he finds parts
abroad far inferior to the reports which made him travail, the Air being
unhealthful, or the Manners of the people unsuitable to his Disposition, and
that the diversions of the place do make no considerable Compensation for his
patience, he grows weary of his stay, heightens the value of his Home by every
inconvenience of his absence, and quickens his desires of departure
proportionably: So it was with Bentivolio and his Companions; for though they
never esteemed the Countries through which they passed as good as Theoprepia,
yet they had now found them so much worse then their Expectation, that their
longer continuance in them grew tedious, and they fancied nothing but a safe
return as the Price and Consolation of their wearisome Pilgrimage.

Philoxenus and Ontagathus had so ordered their affairs, that they were ready
to go along with them; of which their guests were not a little glad, for they
had found such Truth of Love and Reality of Goodness in them both, that they
thought it impossible to have better Company.

Ontagathus was their Guide through that part of Vanasembla where they were to
go; for he knew the Country, and conducted them by a direct Path, which leaving
the muddy Lake called Borborus upon one hand, and the high Rocks of Hypsocardes
upon the other, leads strait forward into Theoprepia. After they had travailed
some hours with such a pace as is proper for a Journey, they came to the Top
of a rising ground, from whence they had a fair Prospect into a pleasant Dale
called The Valley of Agon; and there they were accosted with such a sight as
struck them with great admiration. It was an encounter between a sprightly
youth called Nicomachus, and one Peirastes, whose looks were more courteous
then his intentions, as appeared by the effects of his converse.

Nicomachus had designed a journey into Theoprepia the Higher, where the
beautiful Arete dwelt, upon whom he had bestowed his affections so entirely,
that it was truly reported of him that he loved nothing but her. Peirastes
having understood his purpose, resolved to do his utmost to hinder the
execution of it. He had three Kinswomen, which though they were so inferior to
the Incomparable Arete, that all their Beauties put together would not make so
much as a fit resemblance of her Excellencies, yet he would needs think them
all worthy of Nicomachus his affections: and he was so indifferent in his
desires as to any one of the Three, that he had commanded them all to do their
best to procure his Love, imagining to himself abundance of Pleasure if any of
them could prevail. Their Names were Narke, Nynhapanta and Orexis. Peirastes
was more willing to hinder this Journey, because he was afraid that if
Nicomachus had once seen Theoprepia, he should never be able to persuade him
back to Vanasembla. He endeavored to deter him from his undertaking by many
misrepresentations of the Country, which he made the most unlovely part of the
world: and finding that course unsuccessful, (for Nicomachus was not foolishly
credulous,) and knowing that he could not force him to go back with him by a
compulsive power, (for Nicomachus was so strong, that none might constrain him
to any thing against his will,) therefore he procured these three Girls to
assist him with their devices. They had provided themselves with many Charms,
and were willing to do any thing for Peirastes, both because their hopes did
much depend upon him, and because he gave them good rewards for their service;
and he was as willing to employ them, because they had often served him with
good success: and indeed they were so skilful in their Art, that if the person
whom they assaulted did not very well know his way, and had not set a firm
resolution to keep it, they would inveigle him back again. They gave such proof
of their power upon Nicomachus, which showed they were no Punies; though being
overmatch'd with an unequal Combatant, it proved ineffectual. If one have a
watchful Mind, a true Faith and an upright Heart, free from Hypocrisy, they
can do nothing.

Narke had a box of Sweet Powder, which being cast into the air produced such
an intoxicating perfume, that such as took in the sent thereof were apt
presently to fall asleep. There is no Antidote against it but an excellent fort
of sneezing-powder called Melita, which does utterly frustrate its force. She
had also diverse Gall-traps in her hand, which she used to throw in narrow
passages of the way. They were Balls set round with such sharp pricks, that
those which were destitute of just preparations for their journey, and were not
guarded with a resolved Patience, were not able to go over them. She did use
also to meet passengers upon the Rode, and tell them strange stories of Lions
and Bears, which she affirmed to be in the way, and of desperate Hills which
could not be climbed without peril of breaking ones neck, and of impassable
Boggs in several places which seemed to be firm ground; by which means she did
often so enfeeble the minds of simple people, that they would return with her,
who made them a prey to Peirastes, in whose Castle they were kept prisoners.
For her fair pretenses were so inwardly malicious, that though she could
conquer none but such as foolishly yielded themselves up to her allurements,
she always undid the self-taken Captives.

When she perceived that these and such like Charms would not prevail upon
Nicomachus, who had armed himself for greater Assaults, she called to her
Companion Nynhapanta for assistance; who came forth with a splendid Coronet
upon her head, a golden Hook in her Hand, and a basket of Atalanta's Apples
upon her arm, and attempted Nicomachus with much entreaty to accept of a
Civility which many that passed that way did not refuse, which was only to
divert himself a while at her house, which was in sight upon the Edge of a Hill
joining to the Valley of Agon. Nicomachus with many thanks waved her offer,
alleging that he had not travailed so far as to need a Bait, and that he had so
far to go, that he could not stay to accept of it; and therefore desired her
that in stead of offering a Courtesy she would not do him a Hindrance. Alas,
Sir, quoth she, you need not make such haste: peradventure the place whither
you are going will not give you such welcome as I shall. It is not fit, replied
Nicomachus, to undervalue the favor which I cannot accept, by comparing it
with others: The Country whither I am going shall content me with the meanest
welcome: If I can but arrive safe to it, I seek no more. It seems then you have
heard great matters concerning it, quoth Nynhapanta. I have, said Nicomachus.
To which Nynhapanta answered, I see a small evidence of Truth will content a
man of an easy Faith. Reports concerning that Theoprepia are so different, and
the Excellencies of it are so weakly assured by any that I have heard talk of
it, that for my own part I wonder any wise man should ever move a step out of
this pleasant place upon such uncertain informations. I perceive you are a
pretender to Virtue, and a rival Lover of the Lady Arete, which makes you so
squeamish to receive the entertainments which I offer; and according to the
guise of your partners, you think your selves obliged for her sake to abandon
this present world, and then presume that you have done such a great matter,
that you shall not fail to be rewarded for it in Theoprepia.

Some of your Faction are so high-minded, that they applaud their Felicity in
the Love of Arete with arrogant words, and dote so much upon her Person, that
they will make lavish protestations that they care for no Portion. This they
may the better say, because she has but little. But if she were accompanied
with a great Dowry, they pretend it would not make her more lovely to them; and
therefore slighting such common Motives, as they call them, they avow that he
is no true lover of Arete who needs such poor Incentives of his affection, and
that Love which does desire any Addition with her is not so generous as to
become her Suitors. For my own part I wonder at their stupidity, that they
should talk of not loving that which makes their Mistress more desirable, and
that they should not understand the folly of their affectionate Temper: for
though, like fire, it may shine bright for a while, yet it must needs go out,
since they reject the fuel which should supply it with new Vigor. But others
which have seen this youthful heat evaporate, being made more wary by their
Experience, say, that though Arete's person is as amiable as any Creature can
be, yet she was never so despised by her father as to be denied a Portion, and
that it is such as only Arete is worthy of it. But when those which do not
understand that she has any at alldemand what it is, they say it is most in
Reversion: and when they are asked where it lies, they reply, in Theoprepia;
not in this world, though that is all they ever saw, but in another, of which
they give such an imperfect account, that I think this sort of Wooers is almost
as silly as those which would make us believe that they love Arete without a
Portion, since they know not what it is, nor understand that she has any at
all, but by hearsay.

As she was going to say more, Anger begun to sparkle in the eyes of the good
Nicomachus, hearing Theoprepia blasphemed and the Noble Arete dishonourably
represented; and he stopped her with this smart Reply. Hold thy tongue, profane
Nymph: thou have said nothing but what I can disprove, neither have thou
offered any thing but what I know to be a Vanity. I have had experience of the
falsehood of all Sensible things: they make a great Show indeed, and promise
largely; but they have still made such untrue performances, that I will never
trust them any more. And though you censure it as an Absurdity in those that
pretend to love Arete for her person, and think you have found a gross
Solecisme in their Affections; alas! you do but show your own Ignorance: For,
is not Beauty lovely in it self? Are not all fair things, by the nature of
their Being, amiable? You may as well use other words, and say that Loveliness
is not amiable. That Virtue which you disparage is the Beauty of the Soul, and
has an Essential Pulchritude in its Constitution, without any reference to any
thing but it self; as the natural unloveliness of Bodily deformity is
acknowledged not to depend upon external appurtenances. But you would teach
Nature some new Lessons, and have it work upon new Principles, and make us
believe that a Person of incomparable Beauty does not rationally move any
affection in the beholders, till they have inquired whether her Handsomeness be
accompanied with an equal Fortune. Away with your gross Ignorance. If one
happily fall into the converses of a Wise and Virtuous man, who concealing his
name, does by prudent Discourses and good Actions show the Excellency of his
Accomplishments; you would not have us set any value upon his worth in this
simple Consideration, till we be assured that he is one of the richest men in
the Country where he dwells. I wonder you had not made some scruple also about
the Parentage of the Divine Arete. But as it is a known Truth that she is nobly
descended; so if it were doubted, the unparalled graces which shine in her
Composition would give a clear Evidence of her Original. She is of such an
Excellent Understanding, noble Disposition, and always conversant in such
honorable Actions, that she is admired by all but such as never knew her. But
because she should not be disesteem'd in the world for want of such an
Appendage as a Portion, her Father has endowed her above any other of his
Children: for they have but an Annuity out of his Estate for life, or some
small Pension determinable upon the expiration of a few years; but here is is an
Immortal Inheritance, exceeding the rest both in Value and Duration; which he
bestowed so liberally upon her, because he perceived she was most worthy of it,
and would improve it to the best uses. This estate you depress under the
disgraceful term of an uncertain Reversion, not knowing that her great Fortunes
are proportioned to the vast measures of her Fathers riches, and the extent of
his singular Affection toward her.

The Uncertainty which you objected, I suppose you refer either to the Value of
her Estate, or the truth of her Title. As to the Title, he which never did nor
ever could deceive, promised it to her by word of mouth, and before he died set
it down in his Will, which he sealed before many honorable Witnesses with his
own Blood. As concerning the Value of the Estate, he declared thus much to her,
that it was so great, that if it should be reported to her, she had not a
sufficient understanding til she should come to her full age to comprehend it.
Which Infiniteness of Worth not drawn into a particular relation must needs
transcend any little inheritance circumscribed with narrow instances, and
bounded with the small dimensions of our short apprehensions. It is fit it
should be Eternal, because Arete is Immortal. What should one that is made to
live for ever do with a perishable Estate? She has enough in present
possession to keep her whilst she is in her Nonage, sutably to her Birth and
Quality: for her allowance is so vast that no Prince's upon Earth equals it.
How shall I reckon the particulars that constitute her present Felicity? Peace
of Soul, Harmony with Nature, Improvement of Mind, Beautiful Health, true
Honor, solid Joys, Freedom from Error, Converse with her Father in the other
world by Letters, frequent Tokens sent by Angelical Messengers, Liberty of
Spirit, Contempt of Mortality, and such like.

Though her Father would not give a perfect Inventory of her Future Estate,
there was great reason for that, though you do not understand it; for by this
means he has prudently consulted for his Daughters Honor. If he had fully
revealed the riches of her Fortune, every base-spirited person would have made
love to her, and she should have wanted a Trial of her Suitors Ingenuity. Such
would then have pretended that they could love none but her, who now can love
any that has wealth and worldly Quality: nay peradventure some would have
courted her that are so cheaply constituted, that they would think themselves
highly honored by a smile from thee, Nynhapanta, who have nothing but an Estate
for life, and that of so small value, that I think a man of a very ordinary
Judgment may easily find reasons enough to despise it. It was fit that such as
woo Arete should bring noble Affections, and those they do something discover
by making love to a Virgin of a concealed Dowry: which was never hid to cheat
any true Lover, but to keep off false Dissemblers. He who shall be so happy as
to enjoy her, will find himself so well contented with the Experiment of what
was promised, that the Expectation of her future Revenues will not be
troublesome; and it will please him also to see himself made more acceptable to
Arete and her Father by the proof which they have received of his ingenuous
Affections.

Upon this Reply Nynhapanta blushed and retired; and Peirastes, in a great fear
lest his project should utterly fail, came forth of a Thicket of Myrtles,
where he lay in Ambush to see how things would go, and if need were, to succor
the weakness of his Accomplices. He accosted Nicomachus with a Speech framed to
express a mixture of Love and Anger: he began thus; In sooth, Young man, your
presence would make one think you more civil then your actions do allow you to
be. You seem to be careful of Virtue, and yet you understand the nature of it
so little, that you make no scruple of doing Wrong. Though you would make us
believe that you are one of the Sons of Wisdom, yet I see you have need still
to unlearn your Folly. You abandon your own Good, and cannot but be
unreasonable in what you design, since you have not the use of that most famous
Principle of Nature, Self-love. What Right will you perform to others, who have
no Charity for your self? You pretend that you ought to love those which hate
you, and yet hate those that love you. But though you take a pride in loving
your Enemies, and count it the Top of your Perfections, yet what need you
multiply your Enemies by expressing Incivility? You have enough already: or
since you boast of loving those which do not love you, do you make that a
dispensation for your slighting of those that do? What? have you abandoned your
faithful servant Orexis? She was, as you know, committed to your care by her
Parents, who believing the truth of that great respect which you often
expressed for her, durst have trusted her very life in the pleasure of your
Will. You said she should be as dear to you as you are to your self. You did
sometimes manifest a great regard of your promise, and seemed to employ much
care for her Welfare: and because her Estate was often troubled with litigious
Controversies, when any of her concernments were under question, you would get
leave to be Arbitrator of the difference, by promises of an impartial sentence;
but for the most part give the Verdict for her, whatever Reason said to the
contrary. What has changed your mind? Has she offended you? or is the Offense
so great that it may not be pardoned? If you would not forgive it, could you
not have ordered a more moderate punishment then to banish her from your
company? which you must needs acknowledge to be Cruelty, since you know that she
will die if she be cast out of your Favor. I met her the other day in a most
miserable plight, and she did not stick to complain of you; which she would not
have done, but that you had pitifully neglected her, and that she has no hope
of redress but from the same hand that inflicted the harm. See what an unjust
love you bestow upon that Arete, which makes you thus unmerciful to every body
else!

By that time he had said this, Orexis, who understood her time, appeared, but
to the great grief of Nicomachus; for Peirastes his talk and the presence of
Orexis did work upon him so powerfully, as if they had been within his heart,
and turned his affections about with as much ease, as if they had got into
their hand that Helm of the Soul by which Nature steers what course she
pleases. Having hearkened a little longer to their discourses, which were made
up of entreaties to stay presented by Orexis, and reasons to dissuade his going
forward urged by Peirastes, pulled by Nynhapanta, clogged by Narke, and hindered
by them all, he stood afflicted with such contrary motions, as we see expressed
upon the balance of a pair of Scales when by a violent blow it is made to waver
this way and that. Diversity of cunning Stories began to work upon his
Credulity; false representations of things dazell'd his eyes, and intricate
questions made him doubt the reasonableness of his Resolutions; plain things
involved with perplexed Circumstances enfeebl'd his choice; and in short, he
was brought to that pass, that he began to dispute with himself whether he
should go forward or backward: and thus he stood a while, taking time to pause
upon his thoughts, but sore distressed with the difficulties of contrary
persuasions.

Peirastes seeing his charms begin to work, thought it great Imprudence to
neglect so happy an Opportunity to perfect what he had begun, and said,
Nicomachus, you see how you are afflicted with the change of your Affections:
what can you expect but a worse conclusion of these disastrous beginnings? Your
affection to Arete is too excessive; Virtue consists in the Mean between two
Extremes: Your Immoderation is irregular, your Violence unnatural. You blow the
coals of your love so fiercely, that though you make the flame more scorching
for a while, yet it will make it go sooner out. Love less, and you will love
better and longer. You love Arete unvertuously. But it may be you are willing
enough to return, but for the shame of Apostasy. That fear is needless: who
shall reproach you for coming back, but such as peradventure have not gone so
far themselves? Say that Orexis and I compelled you to return. All men will
pardon a Fault which they see to be so natural, that it is in a manner
necessary. Prove to all that censure this action, that it was impossible to go
forward over so many hindrances as lay in the way; and then they will confess
it was no Sin to come back.

Here I must needs take notice of an Accident which was very wonderful.
Bentivolio and those which were with him observed that all the while Nicomachus
kept on his pace toward Theoprepia, he seemed to be clothed with a garment of
Light, and his words seemed to be pointed with sharp rays, as he spoke to
Narke and Nynhapanta in the beginning of the Conflict; but that now one side of
him was grown dark, and that he made such a kind of show as the Moon does when
one half is eclipsed. Upon which sight Urania, guessing the true reason of this
change, expressed the Compassions which she had for one whose case she judged
very pitiful, in these words; Yon young man seems to be agitated with the
Vicissitudes of Rational and Sensitive Appetites: and I am afraid that the
choice of Virtue is dulled in his Soul by the force of Tentation, and that he
inclines too much toward the solicitation of his worse part. God grant that he
do not believe the false Tempter, and that he, which now stands still, do not
go back with those Traitors, but return speedily to himself and Theoprepia.

She had scarce finished the words of her short Prayer for Nicomachus, which
the rest of the Travailers accompanied with their Hearts, but they saw the
Light environ him round about again; of which they were very glad, not doubting
but God had heard their Prayer, and saved the Tempted Passenger. Then he began
to talk again, having recovered his courage, after this manner, (which I will
set down; and if I forget some of his words, yet I am sure I do not injure the
sense of his Reply.) Peirastes, are you so vexed with the Imprudence of your
Fault and the misery into which your Sin has thrown you, that you envy all
that stand in the Happiness of that Grace which God has bestowed upon them?
Are you so evil, that you are offended because God is good? Will the multitude
of Companions, whom you draw into your Pit, alleviate the Torments which you
suffer there? Are you so maliciously devilish as to make sport with the
Infelicities of others, which are in a great measure due to your Faults? But
though you are so ill-minded, you shall not make a prey of me. Does not humane
nature miscarry too easily of it self through Ignorance or Incogitancy, and
does it not go astray fast enough through false Opinions, unless you hurry it
on by your provocations? But how noble you are in your Proffers! Would you
consign me for a Companion of that sleepy Hagge, Narke? or since she will not
give content, must Nynhapanta be her Second? No, Nynhapanta, I have received a
glass from Theoprepia, by which I can see beyond the presentness of this world.
And for this Orexis which you talk of so passionately, did I ever take her
otherwise then as she was commended for a faithful servant? or did I deprive
her of that Office in my house, till she quarreled with the Loves which I had
entertained for Arete, and declared that she highly scorned her for a Mistress?
It Is true, I often took her part, defended her concernments, and made my
judgment give way to her Desires; but I will do so no more: a former Mistake
is no prescription for future Errors. She has revealed her infidelity by many
abuses; and I have no reason to trust one that has often deceived me. I
endeavor to love my Enemies; but not in such instances as to make me Enemy and
Traitor to my self. I could never be quiet for her unreasonable demands: She is
not to be satisfied with granting, but denying her immodest cravings. I will
never receive her again, but upon her promise to recant her Arrogance, and to
submit her self in all duty to Arete, whom upon her knees she shall ask
forgiveness before she be pardoned.

But what do I talk thus long with such as you are? Away Peirastes; do not
think that I am ignorant who you are. Retire and hide thy shame in the
darkness of thy Infernal Grott. Crooked Serpent, do thou think by subtle
arguments to wind me out of my way to Blessedness? Thy Persuasions are not
forcible: Thy Fraud is very easily discovered. Do thou teach me the way to
hate by remitting my present affection? and endeavorest to put me into a
suspicion of loving one too much whom I am sure that I can never love enough? I
need not fear excess in Affection, when the Object makes it impossible; except
I choose false instances, or use due expressions indiscreetly: for then I shall
love my Happiness with all my Heart, but not with all my Mind; and so in stead
of the whole, by dividing my self fondly I shall give but half, and so offer to
the God of Love an Unreasonable Sacrifice. But I must be moderate in my
Affections, lest I exceed (forsooth) that Mediocrity in which the nature of
Virtue is founded. You are very Philosophical, Peirastes; and I grant that
Virtue is sometimes beset with enemies on both sides, and that it is a fault if
the Soul restrain not the ardencies of affection, because many times the Object
upon which they are bestowed is not worthy of them. But it is a false Rule, if
it be universally applied; for it holds not in respect of God, who is the
Principal Object of Love: and how much he abhors a Lukewarm Temper you have
heard before now. It is Virtue it self to exalt our love to the highest degree
when God is Object; and it is most prudent to affect him with excess of
passion, because that Intension is but proportionable to his unmeasurable
Goodness. Shall I think those contracted affections worthy of my Best Good,
which I may bestow lawfully upon every token that I receive from him? Are some
lame Velleities a virtuous pursuit of the Chief Good? or is it enough to have
begun to love him whom we are to love eternally? will the treading a few steps
countervail for perseverance in our journey to our last and best Home? Thou
would have me so sottish as to think I had finished my journey, because I
have gone part of my way. What else can it mean that I should seek comfort in a
vain return, because I have gone farther then others? Should I remit my
affection, that I might take breath and deliberate foolishly about so great a
necessity as my Salvation, which is the Best Good of which I am capable? As
wisely might one ask advice whether it be Prudence to endeavor to be Happy.
And since the Goodness of my Creator has made Felicity attainable, shall I
bestow no other exercise of my Will upon it, then upon some Good which is
impossible? For that also I may desire with the imperfect action of a weak
Velleity. No, Peirastes, Theoprepia is my Happiness; and since it is designed
for me, I will not rest till I come to it.

Since thou did talk something to little purpose concerning the shame of
returning, I will take a slight notice of those words. What? do thou conceive
that I would most willingly be miserable, but for the disgrace of Apostasy?
and would thou have me take off that, by pleading the Compulsion of external
Force? No, Peirastes, that will not do it. Why should thou endeavor to make
me give credit to that which thou do not believe thy self? I am of that
Constitution which my Maker has placed above the jurisdiction of Compulsion,
and thou do know it: I desire not to be miserable, though my unhappiness
should not be joined with my fault; but since I am free from Constraint, I
cannot be undone but by my own Will. Shall I call that by the false name of
Compulsion, when I consent to the design, and make my bodily powers contribute
to its execution? My action in the Return would not be involuntary, unless thou
did carry me away upon thy back; nor then neither, if I were willing to be so
carried.

The Difficulties of Tentation, which thou did also mention, leaving no stone
unturned where thou have any hope to find a means of my harm, are of no such
efficacy with me; for though they grow much stronger by their Sympathies with
my Fleshly Appetite, yet they are not of that force either to excuse Vice or
make Virtue unattainable, but are appointed for another more excellent End.
What? does Tentation take a man from himself? Or does that which heightens the
price of Virtue, and assures and increases the Reward, disannul our Duty? What
is Virtue good for but to raise our lower inclinations, and to overcome the
evil spirit which domineers over this wicked world? What serves our
Understanding for but to discover the fallacy of worse satisfactions, and to
make them uneligible, when by comparing them with others it does show that they
are manifestly prejudicial? Is not our Will a (...) given us to preponderate
our powers to such actions as Reason pronounces good? And though some slight
inconvenience may accompany the Good which Reason propounds, and some Benefit
may be joined with the Ill which the Appetite desires; yet is not the less ill
of the two a great good in respect of the other? and shall I not form my choice
accordingly? I know it is natural to gratify the Body, for which thou have
made so many Orations; and I do it when its (...) are reasonable, and when I do
not see great reason for the contrary: but it must never be done to the
prejudice of the Soul. Whose Will shall be performed? that of the Master or the
Servant? Why do thou, by the help of Orexis, endeavor to impresse upon my
Mind such a fair representation of fleshly Objects, and to obscure the
beautiful Image of Virtue? My fixed Will shall pursue its love, and excite my
Mind to reassume the Contemplation of true Goodness; and to further my better
sort of affection with a clearer sight of that which I cannot forget and be
happy. I do not only foresee the Excellent End of my designed journey, which
moves my Will to undertake it; but I perceive also the meliority of my choice
above all thy Contra-proposals: and I will use the same Understanding to direct
me how I may obtain my End, by which I am convinced it is necessary that I
should persevere in the use of Means.

By this which I have said thou see of what inconsiderable opposition those
rubs are which thou have put in my way to make the paths of Virtue unpassable,
and Return to Vice excusable. No, they make the choice of our Duty more
commendable, Obedience more noble, and the Reward proportionable. All Excellent
things have difficulty annexed to them. It Is a sign of Strength, when a man is
not overcome by such things as of their own Nature are apt to vanquish our
resistances. Do not think by the difficulty of some Means to make me slight
that which could never be easily attained. The Excellency of that End which I
have propounded to my self is so transcendent, that it sweetens the most harsh
Means, and makes any thing that does further my design acceptable. I am not one
of those (...) Cowards, who when they are tempted think they are placed between
a bare necessity of doing well and unconquerable allurements to do ill, and
then cry out feebly, If (...) be sweet, and not to (...) necessary, why is
Nature so imperfect as to disobey the Law, or the Law so severe as to hurt
Nature? Away with this witty (...). Shall a man esteem his Duty impossible,
because it is easy to sin? Or can any think themselves good, whilst Virtue is
unpleasant? He is never necessitated to sin who is always assisted by a Divine
Spirit; and a good man's temper is so formed, that nothing is so sweet as
Obedience, to which Trial is no Contradiction, but Evidence. The fire refines
true Gold; but the metal which is discovered to be Brass by the Furnace, was
so before. It may be such counterfeit reasons as you have alleged will pass
currently with such as are depraved with habitual Sin, and have enslaved
themselves to irregular Passions; but to rectified Souls, which have always
the most serene apprehension, it is in vain to offer Appearances for Truth: For
they will examine whether that which is called Good be True; and will try
whether that which is commended for the Best, be so indeed; and will not judge
of things as they are represented by the false light which Passion holds, or as
they are colored by Tentation. Be gone Juggler, or else I will break all your
false glasses: you shall not inslave the Liberty of my Will to brutish
Appetite: I will not for the vain jollity of soon-fading Pleasures, lose the
sprightly Temper of a Holy Soul, nor be deprived of the true Joy of one that
has refused to sin when it was pleasant.

When Nicomachus had done speaking, Peirastes vanished, Nynhapanta turned away
with great indignation, Narke fell down in a swoon: and as Nicomachus went
away, Orexis followed him at some small distance with a dejected countenance,
intending, as she afterward declared, to submit her self to the Lady Arete.

Bentivolio and his fellow-travailers having patiently awaited the conclusion
of the Combat, and much rejoicing at so happy an issue of a doubtful Trial,
made haste after Nicomachus; and when they had overtaken him, congratulated the
happy Victory which he had lately obtained; which they did the more
passionately, because they had been spectators of the Fight. He returned thanks
to them after such a manner as showed that his Triumph was only in God, to
whose Grace he ascribed his Conquest. They understanding his purpose for
Theoprepia, gladly increased their number with one more, whom they had good
reason to admit for a fellow-Travailer. In a few hours they passed the Valley
of (...), and entered into the borders of Theoprepia.

When they had gone but a little way into the Country, they perceived such a
change of the Soil and Air, that they seemed to be come into another world.
Though the ground was not high (for that part of the Country was called The
humble Valley of Tapinophrosyne) yet it was not clouded with such thick Foggs
as infested Pammelaena, and made it both dark and unhealthful. It was blessed
with a serene Air, ever free from Storms; neither was it troubled with the
stifling heates of Agazelus, but was sweetened with fresh Breezes which came
from those healthful Hills which lay round about it. Though it was low, it was
firm, and had no Boggs. The Earth was wonderful fertile, being watered with
many streams which descended from a great common Spring, which by and by I
shall have occasion to describe. As they sat upon the green banks of a little
Rivolet, and had refreshed themselves with crystal liquor, Nicomachus, having
first demanded leave, expressed the joy of his late success in a short Song,
whilst the silver Brook did courteously accompany his voice with a purling
noise, and supplied the want of a Through-Base with a kind of Hydraula.

I think it will not be amiss to give a Character of the Inhabitants of
Tapinophrosyne; for by that the Reader will see that Pride is not in that
esteem every where which it has unjustly gotten among us.

These people were of a Modest Temper and discreet Carriage; they had a sedate
Calmnesse in their Spirits, and a solid Joy painted it self with true colors
in the lively cheerfulness of their faces. They were so courteous to all, that
one would think it to have been a Law of their Country to prefer all others to
themselves; for when others were such as they could not give them Preeminence
in the estimations of severe Judgment, yet they would do it in Expresses of
Affection and all offices of Love. The greatest amongst them were the most
civil, not in word, but in deed; for it was a received Opinion with them, that
The more any Person is raised above others, the more he ought to stoop to do
them good. They would perform the meanest services for one another without
grudging, nay, with that prompt affection, that one would have thought that of
a Servant a chief Office among them. Though they do much undervalue such
Complements and respects as are made up only of words, yet they express their
heartiness with all civility of language and proportionable deportment. When
they were demanded any thing concerning their Country, they gave such answers
as sufficiently proved that they did not overvalue themselves; and when others
praised them for any thing, they would blush and utterly refuse to speak any
more of that matter, and say that they could not receive that as their due
which others gave them in courtesy. They never vainly boast of their
Excellencies, or make a show of them, as if they were going to sell them, as
some (...) spirits do. As it is criminal with them in the highest degree, to
pretend to what they have not; so it is next to that, to praise themselves for
what they have. They wonder at the folly of those who please themselves with
those childish plumes and straw-hats with which ordinary Pride does adorn it
self; because the instances have no worth in them: and they do also condemn the
Pride of those that are endowed with truly-noble Gifts, because Humility is a
part of that Thank fullness which we owe for what we have received. They admire
the (...) of the Stoics, who give no thanks but to themselves for their (...),
and ascribe their Felicity to themselves alone. They (...), that since God has
made things worthy to be chosen, though a man does freely select them from
others which are not so good; that a creature has nothing to pride it self in
for that, but that God is more adorable, who could make such an Excellent
Creature: and since that acts not neither according to its nature but as it is
under the assistance of his almighty (...), the mistaken reason of others
Arrogance becomes to them a rare instrument of Humility. Though they persorm
(...) things that are worthy in themselves, and make for the (...) of him that
deserves all praise; they make no (...) at it, then that the Streams do run
into the Sea from (...) they came. They count it but Justice to serve him who
(...) them something by his mere pleasure. And when they have furthered any of
his designs, they are glad, because they could have done nothing so good; but
they count it Poverty of Soul to expect thanks of him, to whom we owe more then
we can perform. This Temper makes them resent their own Worth no more then if
they had none; and they (...) it so much the greater a favor from God and
worth in them, if, when they have done well, they attribute nothing to
themselves.

Their external Garb was significative of an inward (...): neither men, no nor
women nor young men dressed themselves as if they desired to be valued for
their apparel; for they clothed an inward worth with true Humility.

If any of them spied a Fault in another, he would be (...) to cover it till he
could show it to him (...) private, and then (...) would do it with so much
sweetness, that the (...) could scarce tell whether he was reproved or courted,
and would receive the reproof with the same spirit of content, with which those
that cannot endure to hear of their Errors receive Flatteries.

In all these practices they keep such an exact (...) to (...) their Rules,
that they carefully shun a base pusillanimity and all sor did submissions of
themselves. Their chief Enemy is one Philautus, who dwells not far off from
them in a high rock in the Hills of Hypsocardes, and he steals down sometimes
unawares: his design is to take prisoners and carry them to his Den, of which
he will tell strange Stories, and magnify his lofty Cell in which he overlooks
their dirty Hutts, as he disdainfully calls their lower houses, and will make
many praises of himself which are most of them Lies. If he prevail upon any of
them, he commonly throws them over some precipice; but when they reject his
persuasions, and leave him to himself, he goes back afflicted with the greatest
shame imaginable.

These courteous people conducted the Travailers to the House of their chief
Governor, whom they called Gnothisauton: His seat and garb was such as became
the Prince of Humility.

He was at that time discoursing with two Young men, who travailing toward
Theoprepia, had lost their way; one of them aiming at the higher part of the
Country, had made more haste then good speed, and the other neglecting his
directions miscarried foully. Both of them having wandered a good while, for fear
of perpetual erring, were come to be better informed by Gnothisauton.

One was called Megalophron, who, as he came from Vanasembla, finding the way
dirty which led toward Borborus, inclined so much to the other hand that he
went up to the Top of Hypsocardes, never making question but that the noble
Theoprepia lay beyond the raised Height of those lofty Hills: and as he
followed the several turnings which winded about diverse ways upon the
Mountains, he was so bewildred at last, that he knew not where he was, till he
was come back to that part of Polyglotta which is called Kenapistis; where
being much amazed at his mistake, (for he had such great thoughts of himself,
that he presumed he could never have erred,) he took the wisest course to
recover his loss, which was to mend his pace back again; and observing well
where he lost his way, he took better heed to escape a second error, and so by
good hap, though he was well tired, he came to Gnothisauton. He could not but
smile to see what a wild maze the young man had trod; and after a short pause,
he asked him what thoughts possessed his mind upon the Tops of Hypsocardes. O,
quoth Megalophron, I looked down from that height with great scorn upon all the
world, and did easily imagine that it was made for me: I thought that all men
which I savv were but as Grash oppers in respect of my Greatness, and I
believed it was not amiss if they did adore it: I imagined my self far above
the lovver sort of Stars, and kicked the Clouds out of my way. But I confess
as I vvander'd here and there, I was almost stifled with the rank sent of a
venomous Herb called Authades, and I had like to have broke my neck diverse
times over abrupt precipices.

Gnothisauton desired him to say no more, for by that which he had declared,
he knevv well enough what had seduced him; and taking him into an inner room,
he set before him a large Glass, which shovv'd him the entire proportion of
his Body from head to foot, with a most true representation of each part. Upon
which Megalophron fell a weeping. What aile you? quoth Gnothisauton. Alas!
quoth Megalophron, enough to make me vveep, I see the face of my Nativity. I
thought so, said Gnothisauton, my Glass does present such as look upon it
with such a reflection of their natural Image as will take down a higher
Crest then yours. Have you seen your self indeed, and begin to know the frame
of your constitution? Do you perceive that the Beauty which you so extremely
admired was a borrowed thing? that you owe to another for your Being, and
depend upon his pleasure whether you shall be any thing or no the next moment?
Do you mind that you were not the other day, and that you did lurk in the
beggarly shades of Nothing amongst the rest of increated things, which durst
not shovv their heads by reason of poverty and want of Being? You will not
boast, if you believe that you receive what you are from the great Father of
all things; nor aspire to such heights of Self-conceit, if you reflect upon the
lowness of your Original. You know now by your own Experience, Megalophron,
that such as mount Hypsocardes with an arrogant Spirit, do but climb downward;
and when they think that they have made a fair progress in Excellency, my
Glass will convince them that they have only encreasd their Imperfections.

But did you see nothing else in my Glass? quoth Gnothisauton. Yes that I did,
said Megalophron, and much more then I desired. I saw my life pictured, and all
the most remarkable passages of it so accurately portrayed, that the
imperfections of all my actions seemed to stare in my face. I thought as much,
quoth Gnothisauton; for this Glass does not only serve the Eye, but the Memory:
such things as proud men, who will know nothing but good of themselves, cast
into the pit of Oblivion, it awakens their memories and recals, and makes them
take more notice of their unworthy acts then when they first committed them.
You see now that what you foolishly boasted of is not your own, and what you
are forced to own against your will proves your shame. And it is good reason
that you should blush in both respects, Megalophron; for you arrogated to your
self what was another, and would neither see your own faults, nor the Wrong
which you offered to him who endowed you, by employing his Gifts contrary to
his will. But since you are returned to ingenuity, you are welcome to me, I
will put you in your way again, and give you such directions as shall serve you
throughout your whole journey. I am not sorry for your tears, since such clouds
do often rise from the Salt sea which afterward fall down in sweet showers. An
excellent wariness may grow from this Error, and true Prudence be more
diligently (...) by you from the dissatisfaction which you have experimented in
this mistake.

As Gnothisauton was about to perfect his advises, he was forced to break off
his talk in mere pity to Borborites, for that was the other wanderers name; and
seeing him dropping wet with water and mud, he asked him how he came in that
sad case. I was travailing, quoth Borborites, toward Theoprepia, and kept my
way till I met a Serpent, called Hyla, in the Road; and I was so taken with the
beauty of her Skin, the comeliness of her Shape, and those various forms into
which she would wind her self, that I went very near unto her; though I had
good reason to have taken better heed, since I saw that she did eat dust, and
went upon her belly. She taking the advantage of my heedlesness, twined her
self about one of my legs, and then hissed and pointed with her head which way
she would have me go, and for my life, I thought, I could go no other. In a
while I was come to the borders of the muddy Lake; and though I saw my danger,
I could not but step into the edges of it. But when I found my self ready to
sink into the foul mire, I began to think that it was very probable, if I
should go a little further, I should never come back; and thereupon I resolved
to return: but finding my self disabled so long as the Serpent inclasp'd my
leg, I laid hold of my sword; and the wily Snake suspecting to what end I would
draw it, (...) her self, and crept away with as much haste as I could desire. I
rejoiced at the flight of my enemy, but pursued her no further, not knowing but
the false guide might yet serve me some treacherous trick, and repeated my way
back with a speedy pace; which having continued some hours, I arrived here,
though in such an unhandsome manner, that I am heartily ashamed of my self.

Young man, quoth Gnothisauton, who had well minded his discourse, I would I
had been acquainted with you sooner, for I perceive you have been a great
Stranger to your self; I would have endeavored to have made you better known
to one who is most concerned not to be ignorant of you. It is no wonder that
you were seduced by Hyla, and that you are so besmeared with noisome filth. It
has been your opinion a good while, that a man is only a living thing made of
Blood and Earth kned together; you minded not that the Soul is not only capable
of higher things then this world affords, but is utterly unsatisfied with the
most honest of fleshly delights, and therefore must needs be afflicted with
those impure entertainments in which you had like to have immersed your self:
and but that your Soul was confined by its Maker to a longer abode in that
house of clay which you have made so loathsome, to attend and further your
emendation, it would have left that flesh, which you so unworthily indulged,
buried in the depths of Borborus. There is a Poole in my Garden, where I advise
you to wash your self; for your Pollutions are so offensive, that till then I
cannot endure to converse with you. The name of the Poole was Metanoea, which,
as they said, was filled with the tears of Penitents and Lovers. One called
(...) having suffered shipwreck upon the sands of Microcheires, with the help
of a broken board getting ashore upon the South-West Coast of Theoprepia,
happened to come to Gnothisauton's house, and hung a Votive Picture, containing
the Description of his Danger and Deliverance, over the door of this Poole; and
seeing in the wall hard by it a fair Table made of two smooth Stones joined
together in a handsome square, he engraved upon them a Copy of Verses, which
expressed the thoughts which he had upon his plank: one of the Stones being
brittle, the weather had worn away a part of them. I cannot tell where to
procure the entire Copy; however since they are not impertinent to my story, I
will transcribe those few that are left. They begin abruptly, thus; And been
undone had I not been undone.
This Storm has calmed my Mind, and fond Desire
Does with its Fuel in these Waves expire.
Those Stones which I so prized had I brought home,
Could only build my Prison or my Tomb.
Thus whilst my Soul endangered with my Bark
Began to sink, my Shipwreck proved an Ark.
So Virtue takes a Benefit from Shame,
And makes bad Blots to serve an After-game.
So Broken Bones grow firmer when they are set.
What we have paid for, we shall scarce forget.
Our Wisdom's made of Second-thoughts. To stray
Once, makes us for the future mind our way.
When stubborn Souls, softened with grief, are bowed
To God, the Rainbow's painted on a cloud;
And when by Love it melis in showers of Tears,
Where Sin first entered, Sorrow first appears.


When those which bathed themselves in this place came forth of the water, one
Ametameletus, who looked to the Bath, would whisper such words in their care,
that they never desired to return again to Borborus. Though they wept bitterly,
it moved not him, for he would tell them, that it was but just that they did
lament the madness of their wicked life; and he would always say, that those
tears should do them no good, if they repeated their sins. With some such
language Borborites being dismissed came into the house: whereupon (...) bad
him and Megalophron to take the nearest way to Sophrosyne, in which place they
were to stay some time, from whence they would receive further directions. As
they were ready to take their leave, he counseled them as they passed through
the Vale of Humility, where now they were, to observe the manners of the
people, that they might be able to express them in some competent
resemblances, assuring them that except they did, they would not be admitted in
Sophrosyne or any other part of Theoprepia.

As Gnothisauton had finished his discourse, Bentivolio and his friends came
in. He quickly perceiving that they were persons of another sort then his
former guests, (for Gnothisauton had a rare apprehension) gave them
entertainment accordingly. He bad them welcome into Tapinophrosyne, and
congratulated the happy success of Nicomachus, of which they gave him notice.
Bentivolio perceiving by all his discourses that he was endued with singular
Wisdom, asked him many questions; and amongst others, he demanded of him the
reason why he had chosen that low Valley for his habitation. I shall soon tell
you that, quoth Gnothisauton: for though it is low, it is both healthful and
fruitful, and is placed at the bottom of one of the Highest Hills in all
Theoprepia, called Theorus, whose top is blessed with the holy fountain
Agathorryton, which waters all Theoprepia, and it is very bountiful to us,
for you could not but often cross those many streams which run thoughout our
Valley, and to these we owe our fertility. That Spring sends forth two Streams,
which are called Taano and Takato: the qualities of one are something different
from the other; for Takato is lushious and more thick, Taano is clear and
Crystalline, and besides the incomparable taste, which makes those which drink
of it to confess that they never tasted the like in any other part of the
world, it has a rare virtue for clearing and strengthening the eyesight, and
is used with good success as a general medicine for most infirmities. The
Theoprepians, who have an exact palate, do perceive a more earthly Relish in
that of Takato, and say that sometimes it tastes as if it came through minerals
of Silver, Brass and Iron. It is so necessary to make the ground fruitful,
that the Theoprepians could not well be without the use of it; but they only
drink and bath themselves in the streams of Taano.

From the top of this Mountain you may discern the whole Compass of Theoprepia,
which is laid about the Hill in such a posture of Situation, that it does
manifest a necessity of its beholdingness to the Spring Agathorryton. You will
wonder perhaps that the Countries are laid so together, that they seem to be
checkered one within another. But this conjunction is a Type of their more
strict union in Heart; for they have no Monopolies of Love, or such particular
Privileges, but that all have a common interest in them.

Whilst you stand upon the Hill and look Eastward, you will descry straight
before you a small Lordship which belongs to Eupistis. Upon the right hand
joining to that is the flourishing Eusebia, and beyond that Eastward the lovely
Philadelphia. In the Confines of each where these three meet, stands the
well-governed City Phronesia, whose present Governesse is a wise Lady called by
the same name. Her Husbands name was Phronimus: He left a Son called Theosebes,
whom the Eusebians honor exceedingly; and they have good cause so to do, as
you will see when you come thither. He had a Daughter also called Agape, famous
for her Charity, and very much loved by the Philadelpbians for the likeness of
her Temper. Not far from Phronesia toward the North you will behold the
healthful Country of Sophrosyne. It Is a middle sort of ground between high and
low, and of no very great Compass. Throughout the middle of Theoprepia lies a
great straight Rode, which is called Biocalon, and it leads at the further end
into the pleasant Valley of Elpicale; from whence there is a way into the
Higher Theoprepia; which does well deserve to be called by that name: for
though when you see this Country which I have described, you will judge it to
be the highest of all you have known, and so it is; yet it is not comparable to
the Upper Theoprepia.

You will wonder, Noble Travailers, that I should comprise the Description of
Theoprepia in these few words, which perhaps you have heard represented for so
large a Country that it needs many Books to map it out, and sometimes requires
diverse Volumes to describe a little part of it. But it is a compact Country,
and more to be admired for Worth then quantity of ground, and is often
misrepresented by such as were never there. As you travail you will find my
words true, and having the Country it self still in your eye, you will need no
more directions. God be your good guide.

The Travailers, so courteously dismissed, took their leave gladly; for it was
but a small satisfaction to hear of such a Spring as Agathorryton, unless they
saw it and tasted of it. They soon climbed the Hill, though it was high; but
when they came at the Top, they received the reward of their Labor. For though
Gnothisauton had bestovved no mean praises upon Agathorryton, yet their
Experience proved it to be many times more excellent then his talk; and the
waters, especially of Taano, are of such a Nature, that some of their
qualities are not discernable by Report, nor understandable but by Taste.
Having well refreshed themselves by drinking of that most delicious stream,
and pleased themselves with the fair prospect of Theoprepia, they went down
from Theorus to see each place at a nearer distance, and kept the beaten road
which led toward Eupistis.

As they travailed, they discovered a great mistake in the relation which they
had heard in Vanasembla concerning the path through which they were to go to
Eupistis his house: for that disparaged it as a very perplexed Road; but their
experience undeceived them. And whereas, it was told them that Eupistis lived
in an obscure place, very hard to be found out, which much troubled them,
because they could not go to Phronesia but by it; they found that
discouragement also groundless, for it was situate upon a conspicuous Hill,
and might be seen a great way off.

They had not gone very far through the grounds which belonged to Eupistis,
but they met him busied in a very worthy Employment. He was in the field
encouraging his servants, whom he engaged to diligent Labor for the good of
others; for the proceed of their daily work was the Relief of his poor
Neighborhood. His Hopes were placed higher then the possibilities of this
present world; and therefore having a competent Provision for himself, his
Family and Friends, he was so far from endeavoring to undo others, that he
did not care to improve his own Estate.

He had two Sons, Pistalethes and Alethalogus; and they follovving the
excellent pattern which their good Father set them, bestovv'd a great part of
their afternoone-time in Charitable offices: sometimes they did instruct their
neighbors in the main points of their duty, and propound such motives as made
them do their work cheerfully, and ansvver'd all the objections of
Disobedience. If any were feeble and apt to faint, he had a Daughter which
was very like her Father, called Elpis; and though she did not come much in
sight, yet upon such occasions she would appear, and very courteously direct
those which needed them, to such Cordial Herbs as grew plentifully in their
Garden, which would give them present Relief.

Eupistis invited the Travailers into his House: and when they found their
entertainment in all expressions suitable to the good character which a friend
had given them of Eupistis, it put them into a considence of talking more
freely with him; and after much pleasant intercourse they demanded of him the
reason why he was called by so many Names, as they had heard in Vanasembla. I
know no just cause for it, said Eupistis, only they in Polyglotta have so much
tongue, that they love to make many words; and according to that lavish humor
they have bestowed so many Names upon me, that when plain Travailers ask my
neighbors where I dwell, they use such odd significations of their mind in
their enquiry, that the poor people, which know me well enough if I were called
by my proper Name, cannot give them any answer; nay, sometimes they are apt to
be angry because, as they think, I am miscalled. And when they come to me, they
will scarce believe who I am, unless when I tell them, I name my self by the
same word which was used by those that sent them. Pretending to do me honor,
they have made the world believe that there are so many Mysteries in my Nature,
that one word is not able to express them, and that I am above any common
Name. They say that in Agazelus they have long disputes which of my Names does
fit me best, and sometimes contend which of them does express me more
learnedly; one is for Assent, another for Consent, a third likes Persuasion
better, a fourth says Recumbency is fitter then all the three, and a fifth
thinks that none of them are comparable to Assurance. Some divide between me
and my self, making my Christen name to signify one, and my Surname another:
by which means some, having conversed with me a good while, have at length
ignorantly asked me where they might speak with me.

But the truth is, these things do not much trouble me; only I am offended with
the Kenapistians, for I hear that they have drawn my picture, though I do not
love to be painted, and as they think to the Life, though it was done only by
the memory of one who pretended to have seen me once: but sure he forgot
himself and me, or was not Master of his Art, for the Picture is made with
pitiful colors, so scurvily laid on, that it does ill-favouredly represent one
that is Dead, or at least make an unhandsome Image of a liveless unactive
person; for those which have seen it do say, that they have disgraced me with
the pale visage of one that is ready to give up the Ghost. I suppose it is
rather the Picture of some old bedridden Kenapistian: as for me, you perceive
that I can speak cheerfully and walk ftoutly, that I have a good Color in my
face, and, though I say it, I thank God I have a good Courage in my heart, and,
if you had come a little sooner, you should have seen me use both my hands; for
I was setting some medicinable Herbs, and ingrafting the Cions of such Trees as
usually bring forth as much and as good fruits as any in the world. But I pity
their Ignorance, and can easily forgive them, since I am not killed by their
mistake, nor dead, though their Picture is a kind of Epitaph made upon me
beforehand. I pardon also the folly of the Agazelians, who have made the notice
of my person so obscure with a numerous company of uncertain names. I am a
plain man, and did never change my Name. I was young, and now am old; but I am
the same Eupistis still, and have always dwelt in this place: And I am of a
plain Nature, neither did I ever attempt to alter my natural Temper by Art. My
known property is, To give credit to what my Creator is pleased to say to me;
and I do depend upon him, according to those declarations by which he is
pleased to reveal his good will to me, and my care is to compose my self
wholly according to his Commands. I wonder sometimes that the Vanasemblians are
so dull as not to know what it is to believe, since they can tell well enough
what they mean when they say, they give credit to one another in any thing,
whether it be in matters of bare Report, or such Contracts as have mutual
Conditions annexed to them.

By this description of your self, quoth Bentivolio, you seem to be near akin
to one, that is called Faith, in our Country. It may be so, said Eupistis. But
do you know what is understood by Justifying Faith? quoth Bentivolio. Yes very
well, said Eupistis, and so may you too; for I have told you already what it
is. Why, quoth Bentivolio, was none ever justified but by that Faith which you
have described? No, replied Eupistis, nor ever will be. Pray what do you make
the chief ground of your Belief? quoth Urania. The Nature of God, said
Eupistis, which is so Gracious, that I cannot but expect good from him; so
Powerful, that he can easily do more for me then I need; and so True, that he
will not fail to perform what he has promised. But you may be deceived, quoth
Panaretus, in your Opinion concerning the extent of his good will toward you;
because Self-love its apt to multiply needless wants, and great desire may
make you believe that which you will not find true: we easily give credit to
that which we passionately wish. It Is true, said Eupistis; but to prevent that
danger, I have a book, called Hierographon, which was written with God's
finger, and in that he has declared his mind, and given me so many and so
great Promises, that I cannot exceed in the measure of my Faith, and they are
so plainly expressed that I cannot easily mistake his meaning. They say God
wrote this Book with the blood of his Son, which was a great love in them both;
and I am apt to believe it, because the Son of God seeing me to be a sinful
Creature, and that I was afraid to go alone to my offended Maker, of his own
accord does mediate for me, and gives me access through his Intercession, and
in very deed is such a friend to me in all respects, that I may truly say, That
God's Son is my Father.

Since you are so intimately acquainted with Faith, give me leave I pray you,
quoth Nicomachus, to propound two or three Questions to you for my better
information in that point. With all my heart, replied the gentle Eupistis. I
would first know, quoth Nicomachus, why Faith is made the first thing in
Religion. Because, quoth Eupistis, God will have nothing to do with such as do
not give credit to him. But why do they say, quoth Nicomachus, that without
Faith it is impossible to please him? Because, quoth Eupistis he which does not
believe him to be a God who has commanded, or does not expect a full reward
for his work, will never do his duty. Why, quoth Nicomachus, is Faith called
the Evidence of things not seen? Because, replied Eupistis, though the things
promised are not seen, Faith does as much assure the Truth of them to all good
men, as if they saw them with their Eyes, or were convinced of them by
Demonstration. I perceive, quoth Nicomachus, that you are very careful about
Good works, why will not a naked Faith content you? Because, quoth Eupistis, it
is impossible for a negligent person to live by Faith. How comes it to pass,
quoth Nicomachus, that Obedience is sometimes included in the signification of
Faith? There is good reason for that, said Eupistis; for since Obedience is the
Natural Child of true Faith, it may well be called by the name of its Parent.
But they say, quoth Nicomachus, That well-grown Obedience does wonderfully
strengthen Faith: How comes that? It is no wonder, quoth Eupistis; for why
should not the Child, when it is come to age, nourish the Parent, who would die
if it did not attend him with an obedient regard? Do you think, quoth
Nicomachus, that a firm belief of God's Truth and a Confidence in his Good will
are separated from Good works or from each other? No indeed, quoth Eupistis:
for he which considers God's Promises filled with such things as he does most
want, must needs desire them; and believing God to be True and Powerful, he
will consequently expect them at his hands; and seeing God has declared the
Effects of his Promises attainable only in ways of Obedience, if he neglect
that Means, it is manifest that he does not desire the End. He which expects
any thing of God, supposes him Faithful, or else why does he trust him? And
because he believes God's Truth, he knows he will no more give his Blessings to
such as he has declared against, then he will deny them to such as are
qualified according to his prescriptions. And therefore he which does really
believe God, cannot but put his confidence in him, and must in all reason
charge himself with his Duty toward him.

Nicomachus, having received satisfaction to his demands, gave thanks to
Eupistis for making so many patient Answers to a Stranger. Urania perceiving
that Nicomachus had ended his discourse, desired him to have the goodness to
bear with their troublesome company a little further, and to give her a little
satisfaction as to a Report which she had heard concerning his Deportment
toward his Sons, by which she was informed that he constrained them to perform
daily very hard Tasks. Have you heard that? quoth Eupistis. I confess my sons
do God's work every day; but the Rewards, which he has promised to give them,
are so vastly bigger then all the proportions of their Diligence, that they
make all their labor in attaining of them not only easy, but pleasant. My
Children call no Task hard, but when they are sick or very weak. I shall only
trouble you, quoth Urania, with one story more; which I do not believe, for I
have great reason to the contrary from my own knowledge of your Wisdom; but I
desire to satisfy others with your own words: which is, that you require such
as you instruct to believe impossible things; and that when many of your
discreet Auditors are offended at the harshnesse of your Impositions, your two
Sons, Alethalogus and Pistalethus, have diverse times fallen out about it before
your face. Have you heard that too? quoth Eupistis: You have conversed much
with my enemies; for I assure you it is a mere scandal cast upon my Family, and
especially upon my son Alethalogus: for I never gave any such absurd occasion
of their quarrel as you have mentioned, and they are and have always been so
loving, that they did never fall out in all their life, which can be truly
affirmed but of few Brethren; and by reason of this inviolable Affection, what
one consents to, the other likes, and what one is not pleased with, the other
never approves. Sometimes, I confess, they are disturbed in their most
intimate Converse by the malicious interposition of two Bastards, which use to
come a begging to my house; they are not improperly called Pithopseudes and
Pseudognosis: their chief Endeavor is to do mischief to my Sons with false
Reports; they watch opportunities to find them alone, for they dare not tell
them their lies when they are together. But however their design is
ineffectual, for neither of them will believe any thing against the other: each
of them does acquaint his Brother with what is said, and then they examine it
strictly. I thank God they are both prudent, and are not apt to believe
everything. They commonly find their Tales, either some absurd Flatteries of
Pistalethes, or malicious Slanders raised against Alethalogus. These Liars,
being often discovered, have not dared of late to come near my house.

But that you may receive full satisfaction in this particular, I will call my
Sons; and, if you please, you shall discourse with them, and understand their
mind from their own words. When they were come in, Eupistis, turning toward
Pistalethes, said, My Son, I hear that you have lately reported your self to be
a despiser of Humane Learning, (as they call it, though it is Divine, for it is
the gift of God) and that without my knowledge you have burnt all the
Philosophical Authors which I gave you: and these Noble Travailers have been
persuaded by some to think this true. Sir, quoth Pistalethes, my Study is but
small, and I have not many Books: but if these Worthy persons will take the
pains to see it, they will find that I have not so madly abandoned those
Excellent Authors, which, I suppose, you meant, Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle,
Plotinus, Epictetus, etc. and my Brother can bear me witness that I do often
read them, for we study together, as you know. But do you think it worth your
labor? said Bentivolio. Yes indeed do I, quoth Pistalethes; for I perceive by
their writings that they had participated of an excellent Spirit, and some of
them do discourse well concerning many things which our Holy book has declared
no less then necessary to Salvation. As for example, That there is a God; That
he is the First and Best of all Beings; That he is the Creator of all things;
That he Governs all things with a most wise and just Providence; That he ought
to be worshipped by his Creatures with the best (...) of Adoration. They have
in a good measure discovered the beauty of Virtue, displayed the truth of
Goodness, and proved that Honesty is far exalted above all Profit and
Pleasure. They have discoursed well concerning the everlasting bounds of Right
and Wrong, and represented the different offices of Virtue in their
Definitions, and illustrated their Rules with some fit Examples. Many of the
Poets have put wise Sentences into Verses, and made them more delectable in the
reading, and easier to be remembered. But, Pistalethes, quoth Bentivolio, does
not your brother Alethalogus quarrel with you for what you believe, and affirm
that somethings written in your Holy book are contrary to Reason? No, never,
said Pistalethes, he is better informed: for though some will hardly believe
me, yet I can truly affirm, that when I told him of Salvation by the Mediation
of God's Son, of the Resurrection and Immortality, of the great duties of
Forgiveness, neglecting Revenge, and loving our Enemies, and such like; he
said they were rare Doctines, and had such an admirable Connection with all true
Reason, that he was so far from objecting against them, that he was ravished
with the glory of Truth that shined in them: and that though he was so
weak-sighted as not to have been able to have found them all out, yet he was
not so proud as not to approve of them when they were discovered to him. But
does he not sometimes say, quoth Bentivolio, that it is a foolish thing to
believe without Reason? Yes that he does, said Pistalethes, and so do I. We do
not worship God with a brutish Faith: we think we have all the Reason in the
world to believe what God says; and our Book contains nothing else. When we
read this Book, we find many things which we did not know before; but when we
have examined them, we find them so far from offering Contradictions to Reason,
that we cannot but judge them Fools that count any Point which is asserted
there to be Unreasonable. Some weak people will needs think that my Brothers
Conversation is a hindrance to my Faith; though I am assured by my Experience
that he does help me to give a more firm credit to Divine Revelation. I am not
of that facile Faith which makes men believe that for which they have no
rational ground; and to every thing which can show that, my Brother never
denies Faith-We do both of us fear that such as cavil at any Divine Revelation
are either dull in their Understandings, or vitiated by some perverse habit of
Affection; and we can name many who have been counted Philosophers, who
scrupling at these things, have given credit, or at least pretended to do so,
to others far more unlikely.

Is all this true? quoth Bentivolio to Alethalogus, who ftood by. Yes, Sir,
quoth Alethalogus. For though I pretend to Reason; yet since I grew acquainted
with Revelation, I find no cause to complain, but much reason to rejoice; for
it does clearly direct and strongly assist my Faculties in the attainment of
that which my Nature does most rationally desire. It does present such noble
Truths, that I cannot entertain or improve my self better then by devoting my
mind to the Contemplation of them.

I perceive then, quoth Bentivolio, that you are not so in love with your
Philosophical Authors, but that you have reserved good affections for the Book
called Hierographon. Alas, Sir, quoth Alethalogus, it is not the first time
that this Question has been put to me, by such as have received false
information concerning my temper of Mind and course of Studies. Those Heathen
Books, which I esteem at a higher rate then those who undervalue them, because
they never read them, or have heard others speak against them, do fall short of
these Divine Writings, both in that most of them give but a doubtful notice of
Felicity, and all of them discover a great imperfection in the directions which
they give for the attainment of it. So that what was desirable before to my
Nature, and probable by such Arguments as I could frame, is now fully credited
by me for the sake of Divine Testimony. What was granted as possible before, is
now revealed to be: What I did but wish formerly, I do now believe; the
doubtfulness of my guesses being taken away by the certainty of God's positive
declaration. By this help I can determine my Belief; which unassisted Nature
could not do, because it did not know the mind of him that made Nature: besides
this, I can perform that which I could not before, because I had not such
instruction or encouragement.

That you may not retain any doubt of me in this point, I will be more
particular in my discourse. The Philosophers were very uncertain in their
Opinions concerning the Reward of Virtue. Some of them assigned none to it: In
which they were sufficiently to blame: for will any man undertake a long
Journey in which he must suffer many Inconveniences, having propounded to
himself no valuable Recompense of his pains? Is any person in the world so
foolish as to set no other end of his Travail but that he may be wearied?

Others indeed assigned a Reward to Virtue, but with such uncertainty of being
attained, that it would not answer the Objections, nor support the industry of
such as should endeavor for it. For when a man should have taken all possible
pains to become Virtuous, they could not assure him that he should be Happy:
making Felicity to depend upon worldly Prosperity, and openly asserting, that
if that failed, the most Virtuous man would become Miserable; and therefore
durst not pronounce him Happy before his death, not knowing but that he might
become unhappy before that time. It Is true, some of them knowing the
Uncertainties of this world, did more wisely place their Felicity in the
securities of an Immortal state in the other, and took the pains to write
Books to persuade men to believe the truth of their Opinion. But besides the
weakness of many of their Arguments, which were far enough from Demonstrations,
and capable of Objections hardly to be answered by them, they themselves did
speak so doubtfully sometimes of their own Faith, that it must needs make the
belief of others to stagger. It was an Opinion which they wished to be true,
but many of them were not assured but that it might be false. As any body can
see a vast difference between beautiful Speculations and a firm Faith; so their
desires which produced in them some raw hopes of Immortality, were so chilled
for want of certain Revelation, that it was very difficult to ripen them to any
vigorous Expectation. The Great Tully, who talked of a foresight of
Immortality, doubted whether the acceptablenesse of the Opinion had not made
him believe an Error; and in stead of proving it to be a Truth, he was fain to
say only this, That the pleasingnesse of this Faith made him not only willingly
to believe, but also firmly to resolve, that if it was an Error which did so
delight him, he would not be convinced of it while he lived. I know not what
made the excellent Socrates say at his death, That he hoped to go to good men,
but durst not affirm it too confidently. But peradventure it was only his
Humility, and knowing that there were two contrary states in the other world,
he doubted whether he was worthy to enjoy the best.

It cannot be denied but that some were very confident of the truth of this
good news, and that not only single persons, as Cato and Cleombrotus, but some
whole Countries, as the (...), instructed in this point by Zamolxis, are
reported to have slighted this life in hopes of a better. And others, as the
Pythagoreans and the Platonists, were so well assured that an Immortal
enjoyment of God was their Happiness, that they esteemed their life below not
worth the having, but as it referred to a better by way of preparation. But how
few were they in comparison of the vast multitude of incredulous Philosophers,
of whose vicious lives I cannot but think their unassurednesse in this matter
to have been a great cause? Being no better ascertained concerning their
Reward, they must needs want sufficient Motives to Obedience; and being
destitute of a steady expectation of Immortality, they could pursue Virtue but
a little way: For when the sweetness of Allurements made a strong Tentation to
return to Vice by a gust of offered Sensuality, how should they but fail as to
a power of abandoning present Joys, though they were besmeared with sin, who
did not much expect any future Compensation of their Self-denial? When
Aristotle said that Young men were not to be admitted to his Moral Lectures,
did he not tacitly confess that he had not persuasions strong enough to
subdue their vicious Passions?

I might also add here the Diversity of Opinions concerning Felicity found
amongst those which could not but think that there was some such thing. Whilst
one said one thing, and another another, the Bystanders would be apt to think
that there was no such thing as Happiness, since those which pretended to be
the wisest men in the world could not determine what it should be. It is easy
to judge how infirm those persuasions must needs be that are bottomed upon such
weak foundations. How should ignorant people reconcile themselves to their
duties, when their Teachers differed so much about their Reward, that they
could not tell them certainly what it was?

But to contract my Discourse, they seemed not only to be uncertain of the
Journeys end, but to give insufficient directions concerning the Way; that is,
made not only doubtful promises of Happiness, but discoursed imperfectly of
Virtue. I do not mean here that broken account of men's Duties, which is to be
seen in the Laws of several Nations, which were either imposed by Princes as
the collection of some of their Favorites, or made by the consent of the
Multitude, that is, by some few more able men among them which outwitted the
rest to vote for their Opinion: but this Imperfection discovers it self in the
Books of not a few Philosophers.

They also are blun'd with horrid Contradictions to Nature, with which they
were acquainted; and to Morality, which they professed. To omit many things
which I could name, they failed grossly not only in giving a short account of
the Divine Providence, but asserting such unworthy things concerning it, as did
teach those which believed them to neglect all dependence upon God. I need not
prove this by recounting the swinish Doctrines of Epicurus, or those of
Aristotle, not much unlike the other, by which he circumscribes God's
Government in such narrow bounds, that he does not allow him leave to extend it
beyond the Confines of the Moon, nor to take any care of Sublunary affairs. I
do not wonder that the Stoics, a Sect of great name, raised the Structure of
Virtue no higher, since they failed in laying the right Foundation, which is
Humility, and ascribed their Goodness to themselves. Though I cannot put this
upon other Philosophers, for some of them called this an Atheistical Virtue;
and indeed it must have been but a proud Humility, if they could have been
Humble, which does not acknowledge God for the Author of it. For want of this
humble dependence upon God, the Father of Lights, and an honest improvement of
those good Gifts which they had received from him, and for stifling their
Natural light with a wicked life, the Divine Justice let them fall into self
chosen darkness: and then it was no wonder that they came short of prescribing
to others their Duties, who had disenabled themselves in point of Knowledge, by
neglecting to do what they knew to be their own. By this means true Goodness
and Wisdom was so hard to be found among them, that Anacharsis having
diligently searched the most famous places in Greece, not with a capricious
Lanthorn, but a sober intention to gain knowledge, which consisted not in great
Words, but such as he measured by soundness of Mind, short and significant
Speech, and accurate correspondencies of Life, having met with many
disappointments, at last he found it only in an obscure Village dwelling with
the humble Myson.

But the Institutions of Hierographon are perfect in both respects: It has
both plainly revealed our Felicity, and given us such clear Directions for the
attainment of it, that we are at no loss at all in our thoughts concerning it.
That Immortality which lay hid in the dark guesses of Humanity, is here brought
to light, and all doubts concerning the Portion of Good men are resolved. Since
he who has all power in his hands promised Eternal Life, what say his
Servants? We know whom we have trusted. For my own part, I see plainly that God
in this Book has written as much as was fit to give satisfaction to my
Thoughts and Desires; and my care is that I may equal the fullness of his wise
Directions with an Excellent Practice, and express such a Virtue as has some
correspondence with so great a Reward. I know now what I am to wish; for he
has shown me what is best. I am not ignorant what I ought to do; for he has
told me. The Reward which he has promised is of that infinite value, that it
is not only a sufficient Incentive to a cheerful Obedience, but a potent
defense against all Tentations to Disobedience. For being assured of so great a
gain as an Immortal Inheritance amounts to, I care not to hazard, no nor to
lose some small matters to attain it. And, to end my too-tedious Discourse,
lest I should at any time have impotent thoughts of being Happy some other way
then he has prescribed, and so grow sluggish and careless; he has threatened
me in such a manner, that I am sure to be more miserable for despising the
possibilities which he has offered. Thus far Alethalogus.

Bentivolio and his Companions glad that the Misreports which were made of such
Excellent persons had occasioned them the benefit of hearing so ingenious a
Defense, begged Pardon of Eupistis for his Trouble, which had been a means of
their Advantage: which was no sooner asked, but it was given. Having upon the
invitation of Eupistis diverted themselves for some days with him and his
Virtuous Sons, Urania taking no small content in the cheerful company of his
most hopeful Daughter Elpis, they performed the Thanks which such freedoms and
Civilities required, and took their leave; and in a short time accomplished
their Journey toward Phronesia. When they were come to the City, they soon
found the way to Phronesia's house; for a loving Theoprepian, Philanthropus by
name, who met them happily in the street, directed them thither.

They having declared to Phronesia who they were, where they had been, and what
was their design, she was extremely joyful at their Arrival, and promised all
manner of Welcome which that place would afford; heartily wishing that they
might find some Pleasure to recompense their abode with her, that so she might
be the longer happy in their company. After a few Ceremonies which are needful
to make expression of inward Courtesies, and some short discourses, Phronesia
led them into a fair Room, and entertained them with a noble Dinner. The
Preparation and Attendance were so discreetly ordered, that they quickly
perceived that Phronesia's house was governed by no ordinary Prudence. After
Dinner they went into the Garden; and sitting down in the cool shade of a green
Arbor, which they used as an Umbrella to keep off the hot Sunbeams, Urania,
understanding by some words which were spoken at the Table, that Phronesia had
not lived always in that Country, desired her to let them know how and upon
what design she came thither.

Phronesia was very willing to answer her demand, and began thus: My Husband
Phronimus was first seated in Argentora, (it may be you have heard of that
Country:) but by the Injury of the Times, which grew troublesome through the
violence of the covetous Inhabitants, we were (...) to dispose of the Estate we
had there as well as we could, and necessitated to seek a more peaceful
habitation in some other place. For we thought it was a part of Prudence to
endeavor to escape the inconveniences of this present life by honest means,
and to pass as quietly as we could through this wicked world. Our desire was
to sit down where we should find such a People as would best suit with our main
Design, which we thought to be the principal End of Humane Life: and of this I
will give you a brief account.

My Husband observed by frequent consideration, that the All-wise Creator had
bestowed different sorts of Being upon his Creatures, and that as the Nature of
any thing was more Noble, it was designed to more excellent purposes; and
amongst the several ranks of Created Being, with which we converse, he found
none equal to Mankind; the Reasonable Soul being the greatest Name of Honor in
this lower world.

By this he could not but understand that the Felicity of humane Nature must
needs exceed that which is allotted to other Creatures; and after many thoughts
concerning it, he perceived that it was this, To live conformably to the
dignity of a Rational Soul, and to serve the noblest End of which such a Being
is capable. He learned the End of every thing by tracking the proper Actions of
each distinct Nature; for having considered these narrowly, he saw what Mark
they aimed at. This Rule served him to discover his own highest End; whilst he
viewed every thing that he was good for, he supposed that the best Actions of
which he was capable would point unto it: and when he had demanded of all his
Powers, what were the best things which they could do, they answered with an
unanimous voice To Know and Love.

Hereupon with a strict scrutiny he inquired into the Objects of those
Faculties, that he might discover about what these Actions should be
conversant; and that, if there was better and worse, he might employ his Mind
upon the Contemplation of the most excellent Truth, and fix his Love upon the
best Good.

After he was gone abroad, he met with different entertainment: for some things
bore great respect to bodily Nature, and gratified that part to which they were
nearer allied; but gave so little satisfaction to his other half, that he found
it still complaining. Searching into the reason of this difference, he found
himself to be of a double constitution, a kind of middle thing between the
Spiritual and Visible world; and that there was good cause that those things
which had affinity with his Worsepart might very well content it, and that it
could not reasonably dislike that which was as good as it self, that is,
Fleshly and Mortal. But for the same reason his Better part was dissatisfied,
for that, being acquainted with the Meliority of its constitution, and having a
clear foresight of the Immortality of its Duration, formed Appetites
proportionable to its more refined Temper, and was not content to glut it self
with material and perishing things.

Upon this he resolved to try if there was not some Better thing then what lay
in open view, which was reserved for worthy Souls which would take the pains
to find it out: and he had no sooner drawn the vail of Fleshly Being with a
quick hand, but he espied behind it the lovely Image of Spiritual Truth and
Goodness. Then he went up and down the world hoping to meet something which
would tell him the name of that Spiritual Being.

He had not gone very far, but many rare contrivances of Wisdom, great effects
of a mighty Power and infinite testimonies of an unspeakable Goodness informed
him, that the beautiful Picture which he had in his fancy did represent the
First Essence which had created all the rest, and that his Name was, GOD. They
pointed also to him so directly, that he could not but see him; and whilst he
looked upon him, the Divine Perfections displayed themselves so gloriously in
his countenance, that he could not take off his eyes from his face: and when
his Mind began to be satisfied with Light, and his Will with Love, he concluded
that he had now found out the true North, because the quick point of his Soul,
which did so scornfully disdain all other Rest, had fixed it self here.
Whereupon he resolved to bestow the Remainder of his life in the Contemplation
and Love of the Increated Goodness, and to consecrate all his Powers to the
service of his and the worlds Creator, and to make him, who was the Beginning
of all things, the Last End of his life; especially since he saw that
whatsoever contributed to the happiness of it, depended entirely upon the
First Good, and was wholly due to his Benignity.

But I remember, and I think I shall never forget it, he told me, that when the
joy of these thoughts began to grow (...), he seemed to hear a soft whisper,
which delivered words to this sense, If you dwell always upon the top of this
Hill, what will become of those Friends whom you have left below? If it be so
good to be here, go down and endeavor to bring them up with you. Whilst he
mused upon the meaning of this advice, he took notice that he was so
constituted by his Maker, that he was obliged by natural ties to many more
besides God and himself; and that as Knowledge does lead to Action, so the Beams
of Heavenly Light which shined in his Soul, were by a good part of that Action
to reflect themselves upon others; and that there were several ways by which
he might enjoy God and himself amongst them, to whom he should both make God
known, whilst they learned of him, and more fully serve the Glory of his great
Master, by procuring the help of so many more Hands to work with him to such
Ends as pleased him best, and by consequence refer the Gifts which he had
received with much more advantage to the praise of his Benefactor.

Then looking further into humane Nature, he saw all men so framed, as to have
in their Souls a good foundation of mutual Love, which is also increased by the
reciprocal necessities which they have one of another; and that they have
particular Gifts bestowed upon each, by which they may help the whole. By this
he discerned that it was not God's will that he should live alone, but rather
take such a course of life which would correspond with that Universal Sympathy
with all the world, which was proportionable to his relation to it; which he
was to express in those Acts which would further all others in the pursuit of
their great End, which is Happiness, in the Knowledge, Love and Praises of
God, the First and Greatest Good, a true accomplishment of their better
capacities with Wisdom and Virtue, and a right enjoyment of those worldly
portions in which God has condescended to gratify our lower Faculties.

With these Meditations he came down the Hill: but when he was at the bottom,
and began to consider the forlorn state of the degenerate world, and took
notice how most Nations upon the Earth, by the prevalent customs of a vicious
life, were naturalized to Folly and Wickedness, he was sore grieved for the
misery of his fellow creatures, and was ready to despair of doing any great
good with his best Charity. He saw every where the Laws of Nature perverted,
the Dignity of the Soul violated, the order of our Faculties disturbed, and
that men had changed the true values of things by false Opinion, enslaved the
sublimity of the Mind to Sense, and dethroning Reason had set up the basest
Affections. By this means the Beauty of Holiness which shone in Virtuous
Habits and Actions was obliterated, the consent of the Will and Appetites with
the Understanding disannulled, and Humane Nature so far from being raised to
those heights of which it is capable in another world, that it is depressed and
hindered from what it might enjoy in this; Men choosing to act only such unworthy
parts, that it is a shame they act them so well, because it is too clear a
Testimony that they have mis-bestowed their time through deplorable Ignorance
of their own worth and God's good intentions: One personating a Rich Fool,
another an Honorable Slave, a third a Voluptuous Beast, a fourth some malicious
Fiend. And when they have for a long time carefully endeavored to act them to
the life, the Passions which they have represented, by Custom become so natural
to them, that they are good for nothing else. Thus Humanity tumbles down from
its Happiness, and loses even congruity with such things as were designed for
its Perfection, the glory of Divine Wisdom, the Tranquillity of pure Souls, and
the Praise of worthy Actions. Men keep no decorum in their Counsels, Affections
or Manners, measuring themselves by no Rule; they let all run at random. So
that they have in a great measure banished Prudence and Piety, Honesty and
Charity out of the world; and having abolished the harmony of Truth and
Practice, they live at such rates as if they had listed themselves to wage
daily war against Reasonable Nature, and had conspired either to bring Humanity
into subjection to Beasts, or else, in compliance with the Devil, had agreed to
do what mischief they could to disturb the quietness of the world.

Upon this sad consideration he looked into History, to see if he could find
that happy place, if there was any such, where he might discover upon the tops
of some Hills any few that had escaped this unfortunate Deluge. Seeking there
for Examples of a better state, he happened to meet with those which were cried
up for infallible Patterns fit for an universal Imitation: but upon perusal he
found such eminent flawes and Errors in some, and others so contracted and
narrow, that they left out the greatest instances of Perfection. But that which
troubled him most was the absurd practice of the world, which did for the
greatest part choose such things for their Last End, which he judged so unworthy
of that Dignity, that he did not esteem them necessary Means for the
accomplishment of his Designs. Alas! he sought not the Garlands of Olympus, the
Triumphs of Rome, or the Pleasures of Asia; he took no thought who should dig
down the walls of Babylon; he wanted no Ships to transport him to the shores of
Barbary; he desired not to travail through the Sands of AEthiopia, to discover
or win either of the Indies: he knew well enough that men often go to such
places as these to seek the Happiness which they have left behind them.

When I have asked him sometimes the reason of his Tears which were often
mingled with his Meditations, he would answer, That he could not but weep, when
he took notice that the chief aim of most ranks of men in all Nations was so
poor a thing as Riches; and he would profess that he was ashamed of the
Baseness of men, who made themselves Servants to Money, thinking by that to
become Masters of every thing else. Sometimes he would say that he was at once
seized upon with Wonder and Pity, both because in general he saw they were
much tormented with a confounded hope of some great good, but knew not what it
was; and in particular, because they did not perceive that the End could not be
Noble which was to be attained with such Contemptible Means; and because they
were not awakened to a sense of their Folly by all the Sin, Trouble and
Uncertainties which they endured in the wearisome pursuit of so mean a prize.
But they were desperately resolved upon their business, and would go through
the way which led to their Journeys End, though it was never so bad. For this
he saw some Princes stuff their Crowns with Thorns: For this Subjects
dethroned those whom God had set up, hoping to rise to riches by the Fall of
such, whom they could rob when they were down. This made the Grandees take part
with either side, as they best hoped to improve and secure what they had
already acquired. The Citizens toiled infinitely, because they thought there
was no reason for which men should be judged worthy of Great Titles, but that
they had been so wife as to become richer then their Neighbors. For this the
Plowman strives to out drudge his beasts, that he may grow a wealthy Yeoman:
upon this account the Merchant ventures all, and his Wife and Children are
content that he should hazard himself too, in hopes of going to the Seaside
when he returns, and of receiving him enriched with the gains of his
Adventures; though it may be he and his Jewels are cast away upon some
malicious Rock in sight of the Shore. This fills all sorts of Laborers with
daily cares, the Highwaies and Prisons with Thieves, and the Courts of Law with
endless Suits: For this the Land is oppressed with Soldiers, and the Sea
covered with Fleets, and infested with Pirates, Princes Houses infected with
Flatterers and Hypocrites, and the City thronged with Cheaters: For this Women
despise their Chastity, and Men their Honor. In short, This makes the Miner dig
into the entrails of the Earth, and the Mariner dive into the bowels of the
Sea, to fetch up more noble Chains to inthral his Soul.

Upon this he perceived plainly that Riches were the one General End that all
aimed at, though they took diverse ways to come at it; and before they could
arrive at it, plunged themselves in unspeakable miseries, which it is
impossible that they should escape, since being destitute of inward Worth they
sought to make it up with such an unworthy Compensation, and whilst they
pretended to admire Happiness, slighted the true means to obtain it: nay
though they see their Labor lost, and their Liberty enslaved, and find their
Minds galled with the falsehood of Flatterers, their Hopes unsecure in the
uncertainty of Riches, and that they are tired with beastly Pleasures, and
killed with rotten Luxuries, to which their great heaps of Money administer
sewel; though they see that they have taken their way through Precipices, and
fallen into bottomless Pits, and are judged mad by the Wise, (for they do it
knowingly and willingly) they are not displeased that they have taken so much
pains to make their condition so calamitous, only they are vexed because it
proves no better.

So that the world seems to be like a company of tumultuous people, who being
made falsely to believe that a Jewel of invaluable price is lost in a certain
place filled with ordinary Pebbles, for fear of being prevented by one or other
in the Morning, they make haste thither in the Night, and when they are met,
scuffle in the Dark to seek what is impossible to be found there; but if any
chance to take up some ordinary Stone, which they all trod upon with contempt
the day before, then tormented with a groundless suspicion, they pull, fight,
strike and cry, and some laugh at the ridiculousness of their own and others
Folly.

You see, Noble Guests, quoth Phronesia, reflecting upon the length of her
discourse, I am so tedious in giving you an answer, that I am afraid you do
repent of having asked me the question: but I will contract my Story. After our
arrival in sundry places where my Husbands fears were verified and his despair
increased, being much affrighted with this sad face of things which appeared
every where, he prayed earnestly to God to show us some place where we might
find better Company. Heaven heard his prayer, and brought us acquainted with a
Gentleman, who gave us notice of the Virtuous temper of the Theoprepians, and
in particular of the good Nature of the Philadelphians, who not only maintained
a great Charity among themselves, but for all that desired to converse with
them. By the guidance of this happy Star we light upon this Country: of which
time I can never think without tears of Joy; for here we found Wisdom and Love
in league with Truth and Goodness, Religion and Righteousness embracing
Temperance and Prudence; here we found those quiet Habitations where Charity,
Tranquillity and the Freedom of all plain Converse had reposed themselves,
where every thing that belongs to the Sorenity of Rational Life flourishes;
and to conclude, here we saw what we had heard of in other places, wished in
all, but hoped to find in none.

So I have told you, quoth Phronesia, how and upon what Design we came hither;
and I believe by the prolixity of my Narration have made you often wish that I
had either not begun, or else ended it sooner. No, assure your self, said
Urania; if your journey from Argentora had been no more troublesome to you then
the Relation of it has been tedious to us, we should not have compassionated
your Travailes. But since you have given us such pleasure from your
Afflictions, pray let us also taste the joy of your Prosperity. I make no doubt
but we, who have pitied you in our thoughts for what you suffered before, shall
much more easily rejoice with you when we shall more fully understand the
happiness of your present condition.

In obedience to your Commands, whose company is a great part of our
Happiness, I will proceed, quoth Phronesia, to a further Relation of the state
of Theoprepia. This City with the Consent of the people was built by my
Husband, and, upon their motion, called after my name, and has Eupistis upon
the West, Eusebia South, Philadelphia East, and upon the North Sophrosyne, as I
suppose you may have heard in Eupistis. This City is the Metropolis to them
all. Here they have erected a magnificent Temple, by the advice of the
Eusebians, in which they celebrate the praises of the Great and Good God, whom
they all worship with most hearty Devotion.

The City is seated, as you see, upon a pleasant Hill, raised to a moderate
proportion of height above the adjacent Country. This small piece of rising
ground is so situated, as if it had been marked out by Nature for the destined
foundation of a Metropolis. It is plentifully watered with both the streams of
Agathorryton, which descending from the raised Top of the Hill Theorus, do
easily run up the highest places of the City. We have not encompassed it with
any Wall, because it is placed in the middle of the Country, and guarded with
the Strength of all the Inhabitants which dwell in the Circumference. We know
that the united Courage of honest-minded people is the only safeguard of a City
or Country; and have observed that walled Towns not defended by the Valor of
those which dwelt in them, are but vain significations of Safety. The
Theoprepians are so inoffensive, that they will not provoke others; and they
are so united, that others dare not offend them.

I would not have you, Noble Friends, to understand this relation so, as to
think that the several parts of Theoprepia, which I have mentioned under
distinct names, have different ways of life, each being confined to the strict
sense of its Title, or that the City Phronesia is governed by other rules then
the Country. No, they all live according to the same Institutions; only each
Country has taken its name from excellent Persons, who were Eminent in those
particular Perfections to which their Names carry reference: and having learned
from them the worth of those Virtues, they not only conformed their practice to
them, but as a grateful remembrance of such worthy Leaders they were willing to
bear their Names in the Title of their Country.

Eusebius taught his people the Worship of God; Philadelphus gave the true
Rules of Charity; Eupistis discovered the Grounds of Faith; Sophron made them
understand the Laws of Temperance; and Phronimus showed them how they might
join all these directions together; and so both made this City a glorious
Metropolis, and brought the Country by the observance of the forementioned
Laws to such a good Temper, that they are not undeservedly honored with the
Name of Theoprepia.

But I shall give you a view of their Constitution in the several pieces, of
which the whole frame is made up, and show you after what Method he put them
together. He saw that Man was made with a natural desire to have Neighbors,
and was so utterly discontented without them, that he was apt to be weary of
himself in Solitude, and esteemed lonesomeness a close Imprisonment; God has
fitted him with Speech and Reason, as rare instruments of Converse, and has so
equally distributed his Gifts, that each of us must be beholden to another for
something, or else want that Happiness which we might enjoy in Society. So one
Nation loses its part of the good things with which another is blessed, if there
be not a friendly Commerce between them. Besides this, every Single man was
aware that the Felicity which he did enjoy was in danger of being disturbed by
others, unless he could make some Companions of his Fortune, and give part to
secure the whole, both against such ill-dispos'd Foreigners which through Envy
might assault them from without, or such ill-principl'd Neighbors which might
work them mischief from among themselves. As the State of any people grows more
Happy, they ever expect more Envy; and the harm which that will threaten cannot
be avoided but by their firm Union. This Union can never be established but by
such Principles and Rules as will make all that are concerned in it to
understand that their Interest was so really cared for in the whole, that the
Union is a Common Benefit to all, and not an oblique Design to advance any
particular interest, colored over with the specious pretense of Public Good.

This Phronimus had in his eye, for he well knew that the whole could not be
happy if any part were miserable. He had often considered the unspeakable
miseries which many Nations suffer, where a few neglecting, what they most
pretend, the Good of all, take in only the Interests of the Great and Rich.
Phronimus could find no way to prevent this, but by laying the bottoms of their
Concord in firm Principles of mutual Regard, that by a great Righteousness and
true Love, taking a prudent and just care of all men's Concerns, he might stop
the main Spring from whence all Calamities do flow, which is, Covetous
Ambition: for though guilty men blame other things, yet they themselves know
that this only is in fault.

To effect this he acquainted the Theoprepians that he had observed the Wisdom
of Philadelphus in ordering the affairs of that Country to have been so great,
that it could not be exceeded by any Mortal man: and that the fruits of it were
not more visible to the Sense in the flourishing peace of the Philadelphians,
then the Roots upon which their Happiness grew were manifest to Reason; for
that he had laid the foundation of their Unity in Love, which is the Bond of
all Humane Society: This Love he comprehended in a few Precepts, which were so
plain, that every body understood the words; so good, that the sense was
apparently just; and so full, that they included all Duties. They were these:
To love others as themselves, To do what they did expect to be done to
themselves, and Not to offer that which they would not as willingly receive
from others.

The Prudence and Justice of these Rules was so acceptable, that they embraced
them with an unanimous consent, and immediately settled upon such a firm bottom,
that, before they were aware, they found themselves so strictly united, that
they were become Members one of another. As they did by the natural intimacy of
Self-love know what it was to wish well to themselves, they did sufficiently
understand the Rule by which they were to act toward others; and acknowledged
it for just and good, because they desired the same measure from others; and
they saw it must needs be an even direction, because it had a proportionable
Regard to all. By this, blind Self-will was curbed, foolish Self-estimation
instructed, and a rare Good will kindled amongst them; for they received what
they could justly desire, and feared not to suffer the Wrong which they did not
do, and knew that they were in no danger from such who loved them as
themselves.

Thus in stead of a multitude of voluminous Law Books, and Pandects of
intricate Statutes, which are by unjust men so much the more valued, as they
are unfit for the true end of all Laws, and which they desire to be made
obscure, that they might expound them as they list, he appointed only the
forementioned Rules, and so prevented the miseries which Ambition and
Covetousness always bring with them. For having received by these full notice
of their own and others Rights, they knew they could not be Ambitious, and seek
to enslave others to their Wills, or Covetous, and snatch more then their own
share of those good things which God has plentifully distributed among them
all, but they must needs transgress the most just Laws, and be challenged for
their fault by an inward sense of the Unreasonablenesse of their Sin. Having
possessed their Souls with these Reasons of Charity, and lodged in their Hearts
a true affection to the Good of others, they are so far from endeavoring to
thrust others below them that their own height may be more apparent, or getting
unduly from others that they may swel their private Heap, that they abhor not
only the Action, lest the Law should take notice, but the Thought, lest they
should be forced to condemn themselves when they call themselves to account for
thinking so unworthily; and they further the good of others, because they
perceive, if they were miserable in any respect, they should bear a part of
their Affliction by the just Sympathy of mutual Love. As these Principles have
fixed upon every man's heart a full contentment with his particular portion, so
they have abundantly pleased the whole in the possession of what God has
assigned to them as their General Lot; by which means they are neither troubled
at Home with those Contentions and Complaints which are the effects of the
Rapine and Pride of Unjust Neighbors, neither do they seek to enlarge their
borders by invading any foreign Prince or State.

Having agreed upon their Laws, and made the Office of chief Magistrate
hereditary to our Family, in which they have bestowed an Honor upon us which I
must ever acknowledge, and prudently consulted against those mischiefs which
from emulous Competitors are still incident to those Kingdoms where it is
Elective; by the advice of Phronimus they chose such Ministers of Law, whose
Tempers were most suitable to the Laws, and of this they made a judgment only
by the Conformity of their Conversations. The experience of a regular life in a
private capacity administers hopes of an excellent Governor. But Phronimus was
more careful in this point, because the people look at the Magistrates Example
both as a warrantable Pattern, and a kind of Law to defend what they do in
imitation of it. And he knew that the Composition of one who is entrusted with
the Rights of many is of that important Goodness, that many things are
requisite to make it up, as Prudence in the management of affairs,
Perspicacity of Understanding, impartial Honesty in the distribution of
Justice, Meekness of Disposition that he may be willing to serve in Love, a
Modesty not apt to be discomposed with Honor, Temperance that will not be
disgraced with Luxury, a Generous mind that scorns to be corrupted with Money,
a Gravity correspondent to his Authority, and such a Courage that dares do a
Just thing though it displease.

As the Ministers of Justice come not to their places by those unworthy ways
which are used in other Countries, so neither are they hindered in the discharge
of their Trust by the obstinate Manners which elsewhere are some discouragement
to the best Officers. They honor their Governors as petty Gods. As those who
are by God above others, ought to love those for whose good they were raised;
so the people ought to yield free Obedience, since for the Happiness of the
Whole it is necessary that they should be governed by others, who for that
reason must be above them. Here they like their duties, and take their
obligation from an habitual love of Virtue. The Fear of Punishment prevails
not here: for though Punishment be an appurrenance of Law, and necessary in
regard of some unjust persons, who must by it be compelled to do their duty, or
suffer to make Reparation and Example of violated obedience, (and they have
such here as are fitly appointed according to the nature of each fault;) yet it
is less needful here, because the people count no punishment equal to the
deserving of it. So that the chief work of their Judges is to decide some
doubtful Cases with an impartial Judgment, and to make their definitive
Sentence end all further Controversy with the power of their just Authority.

Here Phronesia making a little pause, said, Noble friends, you will it may be
expect, that since I have affirmed Theoprepia to be built upon so brave a
Foundation, I should be able to show you some correspondent Superstructure; and
that I will do immediately. For those Holy Rules, being inviolably kept by
them, have produced all the desirable Effects of good Government, and made all
orders of people among them as happy as the condition of this world will bear;
both by improving and securing all their Enjoyments, and relieving the
Infirmities which are common to them with all mankind, as far as the comfort of
Society with the best of Neighbors can give succor.

If I should speak of all Particulars, I should weary you and my self: but I
will recount some few, that by them you may judge of the rest. Every man is
sufficiently secured against Wrong among those which rejoice to do good, and
esteem it but a small piece of Righteousness to do no hurt, and who judge it
unjust not to help others in every thing which does not harm themselves. The
concernments of Soul and Body, which divide our whole Man between them, are
carefully preserved by all. Why should they wrong others in Body, detract from
their Name, despoile them of their Goods by Force or Fraud, when their own
desires not to be so used would make their Actions odious to themselves, as
well as afflictive to others? They will very hardly do Wrong, who have
accustomed themselves to part with their Right, which they can spare, when they
are through mistake wronged by others; and though the case require some, yet
then content themselves with moderate Satisfaction.

They have a principal care of Souls, to teach them Knowledge, and improve them
in Virtue by good Example. They esteem this duty but a Gratitude in themselves,
because they have received the same Favor from those which are gone before
them, that they might be enabled and obliged to show it to such as come after
them. Their sorrow for others Miseries engages them to further the Happiness
which they desire, by directing them in the way to it, and by showing them how
to escape the calamities of Ignorance, Vice, Youth, Age, Sickness and Poverty.

Because things of Immortal concernment are greatest, they acquaint the
Ignorant with the Nature and Duration of Souls, and teach them so to order this
short life, as to attain the peace of a good Conscience by an early Virtue and
constant perseverance in well-doing, and so prepare them for a true hope of a
happy life after a cheerful departure from this world. If any err, they show
him his way; when they see him sluggish, they provoke him to his duty with
strong Incentives; if he offend, they admonish him; and if he be dejected, they
administer Consolation according to the nature of his Grief.

Because Children are born Impotent and Imperfect, they endeavor to prevent
such mischiefs as may be separated from their Nativity; and because an
excellent complexion of Nature is a great advantage to Virtue, they are
careful of fit Marriages and good Nurses: the Mother is always Nurse too, if
she be able to perform that office. When their Understanding begins to come in
use, they are curious of their Education; for want of which many that are ill
born are worse bred: and as they grow in years and come into the Confines of
Childhood and Manhood, and are liable to the Vices of both states, they use all
possible means of their preservation, and amongst the rest the vigilant eyes of
wise and Virtuous Tutors; who in Theoprepia are persons of good esteem, and
want no due encouragements. They have a sufficient number of Schools at
convenient distances, by which the attainment of Knowledge and Goodness is
unspeakably facilitated: For they are taught to know worthy things as soon as
they know any thing; and their inclinations are engaged to Virtue before they
are seized upon and ruined by habitual Sin. Which is, in my opinion, a great
piece of Prudence: for from this practice they find a benign influence to flow
upon the whole Country; whilst those which have learned, do afterward teach
others, and give as good an Example as they have received. The Theoprepians are
great lovers of true Learning and all Ingenuous Arts, and have better Methods
of Study then most other places, and so arrive at that height of skill in a few
Months, which others after the expense of many years scarce attain at last, by
reason of the Preposterousness of their Industry. Their custom is, when they
perceive in any a particular inclination to some Art, taking it as a probable
Augury of special aptitude, to consign them to that Study, in which they
usually prove excellent.

But as things are valuable according to their Uses, and Means are rated by the
Ends which they serve; so the Theoprepians bestow their pains chiefly to
improve their best Faculties, that having accomplished them with the Knowledge
of Tongues and the more Noble Arts, they may be more able to advance the good
of Mankind.

Their chief design is to make their Youth perfect in Ethics, that so they may
be Prudent, Religious and Good. They inform them carefully in the Principles of
true Logic, and help Natural Reason with Artificial. They industriously pursue
the Knowledge of Nature, that they may understand the Works of God, and by them
Him. They are well versed in Mathematics; which Profession is honorable to the
Student, because it makes him serviceable to his Country. They neglect not
Agriculture, because the Earth brings forth all things. Knowing the several
benefits of Converse with foreign parts, they are expert in Navigation. In
short, they encourage the knowledge and advancement of every useful Trade.

They make their Recreations of such things as have Art in them, and pay the
Rational part something for the Intermission of its more Spiritual Exercises:
and though they are afraid of Corporal pleasures, yet they do allow honest and
healthful Exercises of the Body to strong and active Constitutions. In stead of
those foolish plays of Dice and Cards, by which Youth in other places makes a
vain Consumption of their time, (by the Permission of their Uncharitable
Parents, who through unspeakable Imprudence do often besides their Time waste
also their Estates in that most hurtful sort of Idleness) they please
themselves with expressing the Rules of Rhetoric in Masculine Orations; and
sometimes (...) themselves with Music; and when they use their Voice, they set
good Notes to Moral and Historical Ditties, and so practice Music and Poetry
both at once.

They neglect no Art that has any Worth in it; but they care not for Science
falsely so called, by what Title soever it be magnified: of such Arts as make
only for Pomp and serve Vanity they are not curious. They esteem none learned
for knowing a few odd words, but such as are enriched with useful Notions.
They let alone the trifling niceties of Questionists, because they have not yet
learned what they are good for. They condemn some mischievons Arts which are
allowed in other careless Nations, as Divination by the Stars: A Judicial
Astrologer would be punished for a Cheater among them, and they esteem his
profession but a black Art.

Here Phronesia being almost tired, and fearing lest her Auditors should be as
weary of hearing as she was with speaking, said, I have so often excused my
tediousness, that I have increased my fault with Apologies: but I must entreat
your patience, because you have set me a task which I could not finish sooner.

As they bestow a great care upon Youth that it may be fit to serve; so they
neglect not old Age, because it has done its work: and therefore, as part of
their Reward, they dispose their old people in a convenient house built with
plenty of Rooms, where they have company and all necessaries provided to
alleviate the burden of their decrepit time, and to prepare them for a better
world. In the same House they lodge their Sick, where they have Diet, Physic
and Attendance proportioned to their Distempers.

The Poor, which are but few in Theoprepia, because Rapine does not dwell
there, are accommodated after such a sort, that their Poverty does not grieve
them; though they have nothing of their own, they are so supplied by the
Public Charity discreetly managed, that they are neither forced to steal, nor
die for hunger, as they do in other Countries. These offices of Love toward
the Necessitous are performed with a great willingness, because it is made a
part of their Religion to comfort the Fatherless and relieve Wido was in their
affliction, and to sympathize with those which are bound, as if they were tied
with them in the same cords of Adversity: they count it also a base thing to
afford only good Wishes to such as need those further assistances which they
are able to allow.

As they are thus passionately affected with the Sufferings of Humanity, not
knowing how soon they may need some or all the Courtesies which they bestow; so
they are most punctual observers of those sacred Obligations which God has
laid upon men in Natural and Civil Relations. This sort of Righteousness must
needs be secure, because that which is elsewhere performed by the necessity of
Consanguinity is here the choice of Love. Those Silver cords by which other
Societies are tied together, are here changed for golden chains, and
multiplied to an inviolable strength. The particular Virtues of every distinct
Relation are so displayed in the Theoprepians practice, that you would think
their Conversation a Mirror, made only for their lively representation. It
were too long to name them. The Prudence and Fidelity of Vigilant Magistrates,
the cheerful Submissions of Loyal Subjects, the wise Deportment of Loving
Husbands, the modest Observance of Obedient Wives, the indulgent Affections of
Careful Parents, the ingenuous Gratitude of Dutiful Children, the discreet
Commands of Gentle Masters, and the ready Performances of Willing Servants.

Such as are not related to each other in the forementioned Respects, are yet
so much made one by their common Union, that you would esteem their carriage
not an expression of ordinary behavior, but rather a School, where those
Virtues which concern the general condition of Mankind were formed by industry
and design, to give notice to learners to what height they may come.

Courtesy is natural, and Kindness habitual. They are abundantly Civil, though
regardless of those Ceremonies which are necessary complements to hide the
Defects of true Love among other people: Men having not so far put awav the
remembrance of themselves, but that in most places they keep on the Form of
Humanity. What is but a show otherwhere, is Substance here; declared in fewer
words, but more good deeds. Simplicity is at the bottom of all their converse:
why should they hide their Hearts from such as love them? or how can they make
a show of what is not in their Hearts to such as they themselves love?
Friendship is at a high pitch. Never was there a more noble Communion of Souls
upon Earth. Their Joys must needs be doubled by the Good of others whose
Calamities they reckon their own. Love must needs be firm in its Nature and
raised in its Worth, where it is not soldred with Lust or base Interests.

Humility is in great Honor. Why should such express Arrogance in word or
deed, who remember how unacceptable it is to themselves to be affronted, and
think none so worthy of honor as those which most willingly give it?
Covetousness is easily avoided, where Want is not feared, where Worth is not
measured by the largeness or number of great Chests, and where those which gain
unduly, make account that the more they oppress or circumvent into want, the
more they must relieve. This Spirit, like an allsoveraign Balsam, frees them
from those noisome Plagues which do ordinarily infest the Societies of men,
Hatred, Envy, bitter Zeal, Malice, Suspicion, Cruelty, Morosity, Strife and
Revenge. How can they hate others who count all men their Brethren, and have
charged themselves with such a noble exposition of Love, that they esteem it
Hatred not to love them? Envy has no room with them, for they see if it
should, it would be misplaced upon such as either they themselves should have
endeavored to make happy, or by whose happiness they see their own Good
promoted. Bitter Zeal is contrary to their Temper, for when it is most warm, it
is still sweet; never stirred but with just Motives, and ever accompanied with
great Charity. They hate Malice, both because they will not be afflicted with
such a scurvy Passion, and because their endearment of their Neighbors welfare
does not permit them to think how to afflict him. They are far removed from all
Cruelty, for they have forbidden themselves rash Anger. They abandon all
Morosity, being so candid and affable, that they have a peevish Sowreness in
the same disgrace with sordid Flattery. They are free from Suspicion, ever
believing that their Neighbor is good, or hoping that he will be so; and
whilst they endeavor to make him better, they know this is one means, to cover
and bear with his Infirmities. They easily avoid Offense in their language and
deportment, having banished the spirit of Contention from among them. They have
nothing to do with any sort of Revenge but Forgiveness, both because it is a
Fundamental Law of their Kingdom to requite evil with good, and because they do
not desire to entaile quarrels upon their Posterity; neither do they allow
that Unchristian notion of Honor, that passes so currantly with such as can
dispense with their duty, when they must suffer in their reputation amongst the
Ignorant for doing of it.

Thus the Theoprepians lead a happy life upon Earth: Justice and Charity, which
are banished from other Nations, have taken Sanctuary here; Tranquillity, which
could not procure room to set her foot in other parts of the tumultuous world,
has here erected her Throne; Plenty, which does not satisfy other places with
her largest Measures, does here take away the very name of Want with such
proportions as they despise and abuse: and they see plainly by their own
Experience, that it is not from Gods Unbountifulness, but men's Folly and
Wickedness, that they do not live happily in this world, whilst some
imprudently manage, and others wickedly mis-spend his Gifts.

When Phronesia had gone so far, her chief Gentleman, called Anchinous, brought
word that Supper was ready, and desired to know if she would have it set upon
the Table. Yes with all my heart, said Phronesia; and took that fit opportunity
to end her Discourse, begging pardon of Urania and her noble Companions, who in
stead of that returned her most humble thanks, and but that they were still to
enjoy her presence, would not have gone out of the Arbor for all the Suppers
in the world; for they valued her converse above all other possible
Entertainments.

After Supper, as one that was present reported, they pleased themselves with
putting diverse ingenious Questions concerning the argument of Phronesia's
Speech, which I do not at present remember; and because they would be too long
to be here inserted, I am the less offended at the weakness of my memory. But
after they had talked away a good part of the Night, they were conducted to
their Chambers to sleep out the rest.

In the Morning they received a Message from Theosebes to invite them to dine
with him that day, and also to favor him with their good company in the Temple
that morning, where some solemn Devotions were to be performed. They accepted
his courteous offer, and returned a thankful answer, being very willing to
partake in those Prayers which such Holy persons offered, and to receive Love
from those who were most worthy to be loved.

When they were come down into the Hall, they were civilly accosted by
Phronesia, who also excused her self to them, that for an hour or two she
should be deprived of their most desired company, praying them to impute this
her involuntary Absence to the irresistible urgency of most important Business.
She acquainted them that she would leave with them Amerimnus, who was an
intimate friend of Theosebes, to whose piety and prudence he did commit his
chief affairs, and that (...) should attend them either in the Gardens or
wheresoever they would please to divert themselves. They received her Civility
with all thankful correspondence, and dismissed her, much pleased that she had
brought them acquainted with Amerimnus, by whom they hoped to understand
something of the Disposition and Manners of Theosebes. That they might not lose
such a fair opportunity, they walked into the Garden, and taking the advantage
of handsome Seats in a place where they might have a full view of Eusebia,
Bentivolio (...) Amerimnus to oblige him and the Company with some such reports
as he should think fit to give to strangers of the holy life of Theosebes. I
should most willingly obey your command, quoth Amerimnus, but that I am not
able to draw to the life the Image of such an Excellent person, or to express
any just Resemblances of his Virtues. Alas! his Worth is above the highest
praises that I can reach; and yet some peradventure, who have been only
acquainted with ordinary perfections, would think that I extol him upon design,
more then his Merit. But as I know that you have the fairest degrees of high
seize in your own Experience, and so cannot but judge that possible of
which you are Instances; I will give you a short description of his
Excellencies; and the rather, because it will not be long before you will
converse with him, and then you may easily correct the wrongs which I shall do
him.

The chief thing which he aims at is to be a true Lover of God, to whose
service he has entirely devoted himself: he thinks all noble Affections due
unto him, and judges Love misplaced if it be bestowed upon any thing else,
except in very low degrees. As he finds the Excellency of things different, he
appoints them distinct allowances of that Affection, which yet are but several
sorts of small measures: But as God is out of all measure excessive in
Amiableness, so he has set no bounds to the Love which he has for him. I have
often heard him say, That he is not worthy of the name of a heavenly Lover,
that does not Love God with his whole Soul: In which I must confess I cannot
but think him in the right, for the Greatest Good does justly challenge the
best Love. His affection is so really fixed here, that he seeks nothing but
Union with God; and doubting that he is not yet come to the utmost intimacy
which is possible to an holy Soul, he does endeavor continually to make nearer
Approaches. He told me one day, that he seemed to see the mouth of Hell open,
when he did but think of such a state wherein men are removed from loving and
being beloved of the infinitely Good God.

He has consecrated himself for a holy Temple to God, and has made his Soul
that spiritual Image wherein the Divine likeness does shine; and being kindled
with the vigorous heat of celestial Love, he offers up his Heart for a daily
Sacrifice; the flames which ascend are all perfumed with the breathings of
Seraphick Joy, mixed with anhelations of fervent Desires. Whilst he is
conversant in acts of Devotion, I cannot say that his Body is lifted up from
the ground, as they report that Pythagoras was when he prayed; but I am sure
his more noble part is carried into Heaven, which is never far from such a
Divine Spirit.

It is not possible for any other man to describe the Passions which he feels;
for none knows how much one loves but the Lover himself: but he is so
constantly attended with all outward demonstrations of inward affections, and
they are so notoriously known to all that converse with him, that it is as hard
not to think him a Lover, as it is impossible to believe that such are who can
give no proof but a bare pretense to that Honorable Title. We cannot choose but
know that he is always in the thoughts of God, for he is ever speaking of him,
and still busied in doing every thing which he understands to be acceptable to
him, and esteems nothing too hard to suffer for him if he think it be a trial
of Love. He receives every thing which looks like a signification of Anger with
extreme sorrow, and yet with all thankful submission to his loved God, whom he
will heartily bless that thus he puts him in mind of his failing; for before
he was apt to fear that he did not love enough. If any thing in which he
delighted be taken from him, he immediately restores to God the Love which that
enjoyed in his right. Though he rejoices infinitely when God smiles upon his
Soul; yet he is afraid that he does receive many expresses of Divine Favor in
vain, because, as he says, he is able to love God but a little. When he takes
notice that God's Perfections are so great that he can add nothing to his
Glory, no not so much as by wishing him any good thing; he rejoices in the
happiness of God, and would not have it otherwise, lest he should foolishly
desire God to be Less, in hope with his silly Love to make him Greater: but he
is therefore more careful of the duties which he owes, since he plainly sees
that he serves one who can value nothing but the Good will of his poor Servants.

By bestowing his Mind totally upon the Contemplation of God, he blasts the
fairest flowers of Vanity, either wholly neglecting to consider what they are;
or if he glance upon them, he sees them so Inferior to that Good with which he
is in love, that he pleases himself to take that occasion to slight them the
more, and to immerse himself deeper in the remembrance of such things as it is
a death to forget.

I never heard him magnify any Created thing. His Sister indeed has told me
that he does highly esteem Three Jewels, which he keeps very private, (they say
such as have them do not love to show them) and makes no less account of them
then of his Life. She called them, as I remember, Ommelion, Terpsithea and
Galenepsyches. There is great reason why he looks to them so carefully, for
besides their inestimable value, by means whereof none that has them can ever
be poor, they have other rare Virtues; for such as keep them, find themselves
ravished with a secret delight in God, and a strange alacrity in his service,
they are never destitute of a placid calm of Soul and a serene peace of
Conscience, their minds also are filled with raised Meditations and abundance
of heavenly thoughts. They say also that these Incomparable Jewels cast such
bright rays, that they show the Beauty of Holiness, the Reasonableness of
Religion, and the Excellency of Virtue, and make them as visible to good men as
any bodily thing is to our common Eyes. Besides, they say that he which is
possessed of them is so happy and content with his portion, that he depiseth
the best Jewels of this world as contemptible Bits of ordinary Glass.

But if these Jewels, quoth Urania, be of such incomparable worth and rare
effects, methinks Theosebes should never trust them in any Cabinet but his own
Bosom. I am of your mind, replied Amerimnus; and though they talk of a Closet
in the house, which is so secret that none knows where it is, which is the
Repository of these Jewels, yet I have often thought that he wears them ever in
his Breast.

The whole Neighborhood is convinced that his private entertainment is the
Love of God, because in public he does express an unparalled Love to men,
and chooses such Instances as will best make those which partake of them to
become Lovers of God: for his Love imployes it self chiefly in the care of
those greater necessities of their Souls, having less need to busy himself in
the Relief of their Bodily infirmities, because his Sister Agape does of her
own accord discharge that part so excellently, that she proves her self not
unworthy to be Sister to such a Brother.

His affable temper has made him so accessible to all, that his neighbors
come freely to him, knowing that they shall be more welcome if he can do them
any good; and when he visits them, (which he does often perform to such as are
capable of that Civility,) he ever sets before them a most eminent Example,
which is the best of Books.

In the Temple, where he is Chief Priest, (according to the Custom of ancient
times, for then the Prince had also that Honor,) he celebrates the Divine
Perfections with due Praises: And that others may do it the better for his
assistance, he sometimes helps them with a clear Explication of the Divine
Attributes, as Goodness, Wisdom and Power; and sometimes makes them to
understand some of God's most famous works, as the stupendous Creation of the
well-fram'd world, that admirable Providence by which he takes care for all
things which he has made, and the most Mysterious Redemption by which Wisdom
and Love, in a sacred Conjunction, have brought the greatest good out of the
greatest evil. Whilst he performs these things with an incomparable Clarity of
Divine instruction, the people think they see the Invisible God, and cannot
refrain from that sort of Adoration which is made of most raised thoughts and
equal affections. Though they do not omit that sort of Worship which consists
in Corporal prostrations, but bow their Bodies in humble reverence of the
Divine Majesty; both because we are to glorify God with our Body as well as
with our Soul, as also that the outward submission is some signification of the
inward: yet because the External is less, and sometimes destitute of the
Internal, and then worth nothing, he has taught them especially to adore the
Supreme King with humble demission of Soul, and the unfeigned subjection of
their Self-will.

We have not many Ceremonies, because we know that God does principally delight
in Spiritual services, and because Men are apt to be content with outward
Rites, if they be so multiplied that they may have some pretense that they will
dispense for in ward truth. But as that fancy is foolish in it self, though
they were never so many, so here it is warily prevented: for we have but two
great Rites of External Worship; A Sacred Font of pure Water, in which we
consecrate our Children to the Redeemer of the World, who was incarnate for our
sakes; and A Holy Table, at which we frequently commemorate the Love of our
Savior who died for us.

I may not forget one particular Charity which Theosebes does frequently
perform, and that is Pious Orations; in which he does so plainly reveal to the
People the Nature of Virtue, that they seem to see her come down from Heaven
and stand in the midst of them when he speaks; and they cannot but fall in love
with her, whilst he makes exhortations to them to resign themselves to her love
and service, being infinitely taken with the person and arguments of the
spokesman that wooes for her.

Sometimes he numbers to them the chief Precepts of Wisdom, that they may leave
none out of their memories, and find them there more readily for practice.
Otherwhiles he demonstrates to them how vastly the Reward does exceed all the
duties of Obedience, that they may more plainly see how good a Master they
serve, and so both work more cheerfully, and fear to offend one whom they have
so much reason to please. Sometimes he shows them how the Rules of Truth have
been verified in rare Examples of true Saints, and those of the same rank and
state of life with themselves, that they may not think Holiness impracticable
except in a few, nor a heavenly life such a high thing as ordinary people
should not aspire unto; and then they will blush and weep to see how imperfect
they are in comparison of others. At other times he takes occasion to discover
the folly of such, as envying themselves the happiness which God has
propounded, deprive themselves of the glory of a good life by Sloth,
Hypocrisy, and the love of sensual Pleasures. By these convictions they find
vain joys to begin to dye in their hearts, and they presently excite
themselves to a vigorous pursuit of Goodness, and strive after a portion in a
happy Immortality. When he mentions the Divine Threatenings, or reproves
sinners, which he never does publicly but for most weighty causes, they think
it thunders; though the terror which seizes upon them does not proceed from
loudness and noise, but the smart penetration of Reason and Love, which shine
so clearly in his Corrections, that the Offender cannot but grieve for himself,
when he sees such a worthy person sorry for him first.

Our daily Incense is Fervent Prayer; our Oblations are Holy Hymns; the Altar
upon which we offer is the Love of God. Our Prayers are such as no good man
will refuse to say; for we do with all possible prudence express this sort of
dependence upon our Heavenly Father, begging of him both such things as our own
Necessities do mind us of, and those which an universal Charity does require us
to ask for all the World.

Our Hymns are composed to minister unto Thanksgiving: for as we think our
selves, and that truly, happy that God is our Patron; so we hold our selves
perpetually obliged to acknowledge the Benignity of our Benefactor, to whose
Good will we owe whatsoever we have. Our Songs are usually designed to
celebrate the Praises of the great Creator and most merciful Redeemer of the
World: but Theosebes does so prudently order the Ditties, that if we do not
forget them we shall have a particular remembrance of the Divine Benefits; by
which means he has both prevented the vileness of Ingratitude, and kept in
our minds every thing for which we are to give thanks, as the pious Love of our
Parents, the Supplies by which he made their Death less afflictive, all means
of good Education which concurred to the happy instruction of our Youth,
Sufficiency of external accommodations, a good accomplishment of our
Businesses, and success in our Undertakings, deliverance from great Dangers at
Land or Sea, recoveries from Sin, Virtuous Friends, by whose Counsels and
Examples we have been encouraged to bear up against the spirit of the wicked
world, the Assistances of the Holy Ghost, the knowledge of true Religion, the
enjoyment of the Scriptures, and such like.

Amerimnus having given them this account of Theosebes, was now going to make
an Apology for the length of his Speech, when Phronesia returned and saved him
that labor, by acquainting the Company that Theosebes did expect them at the
Temple. When they were come thither, they perceived by the manner after which
it was built, that the people did not esteem all Cost thrown away which is
spent any where but in their own houses; for it was a most delectable place,
and so adorned with lightsome Windows and convenient Seats for all sorts of
Worshippers, that as all were well pleased with the House of Prayer, so the
poor thought themselves highly honored there; for though their Homes were far
meaner then many enjoyed whom they saw there, yet here they equaled them:
which stirred up their hearts to think of the Kingdom of Heaven; for they
thought the nearer they came to that State, the less difference they should
find in their Mansions.

Theosebes received them with that welcome which one of his Princely Temper
must needs bestow upon those concerning whom he had framed extraordinary
thoughts: but he was more especially glad of their Company, because he thought
his Prayers and Worship would be more acceptable when they helped the
performance, and that God would be more willing to bestow his Blessings among
them when so many of his friends were present.

Having finished their usual Devotions, he conducted them unto his House, where
he gave them that entertainment which he thought would most answer their
desires, and was himself the greatest part of it; for he administered rare
content to them all by his pious Discourses. When Dinner was ended, Panaretus
giving him hearty thanks for the delight which by his means he received at the
Temple, and particularly from the holy Song which was sung and accompanied with
a soft Organ, which he praised for the rare connection of proper Notes and
excellent Words; but wondering that the people expressed it with such an exact
harmony of well-agreeing Voices; he asked Theosebes how he had brought them to
that perfection of artificial Singing: and further demanded of him, whether
some were not offended at that sort of Music, as too carnal a thing, and unfit
to be used in the worship of God; both because men's Minds are apt to be more
attentive to the artifice of the Composure, and the pleasure of Sense, then to
the praise of God which is designed to be raised by it; and also because I have
heard, quoth he, that in some places such are employed in playing upon the
Organ and other Instruments, or in accompanying them with their Voices, which
are so far from being acceptable to the God of Heaven, that by their profane
lives they are grievous to good men upon Earth.

I am much pleased, quoth Theosebes, with your freedom of talk, and I am
heartily glad that you will by any argument occasion the continuance of our
Conferences; and as to the particulars of your demand, I shall endeavor to give
you satisfaction. That Music is advantageous to good men in the service of
God, seems to me a thing easy to be put out of question. It is well known that
it has a great Influence upon the Spirits, and a rare power to work upon the
Affections: it is confessed also that Affectionateness is the Life of our
Devotions: That assistance therefore must needs be commendable which does
cherish that essential quality of Religious addresses, without which they would
be rejected. If my Experience were a thing to be quoted, I could truly say,
that by the Exaltation of raised Affections I have found the good agreement
which Music has with Divine Service. When we give thanks, we should do it
with Joy, and that is exceedingly promoted by fit Songs both by reason of the
sweetness of Poesy, and the melody of good Notes: for which respects I
suppose Music was used of old in the famous Temple of Skiamelluses; and we
find Psalms and Hymns continued in the Institutions and practice of
Anaxanacton, though he made a great change in the Worship of those days. By
which we understand that artificial assistances of Devotion are not so carnal
as to merit rejection; and that regard to order of words and sounds which makes
Verses ryme, and agreement of select Notes which makes the Tune, do not
necessarily withdraw the Mind from attending upon God, who is in that way
praised. But left the people should receive harm in this point, because our
Songs are accorded to an Instrument; I have often told them, That in Divine
service there is no Harmony, without the Heart do accompany every part of the
performance; and if that Instrument be not used or out of tune, they sing to
themselves, not to God. I do also exhort them frequently to mind the sense of
every Song more then the sound of the Words, and not lose their spiritual Joys
in the allurements of audible pleasure, which is abused when it does not serve
to lift up the Soul more affectionately to God. Our Ditties are both so holy,
that any good man will be content to bear a part in them when they are sung,
and so plain, that they consort with mean understandings, and are for the most
part set to such familiar Notes, that Vulgar auditors easily learn the Air.
The Composer is still charged to avoid many fractions; and when any new Tune is
appointed, they are willing to observe it carefully till they have got it in
their memories. If they have not the words which are sung by heart, they have
Copies of them given to them, which they will make their own; for they do not
grudge time or pains to further their service of God. Thus they accommodate
their Voices without any disturbance to their Minds, and the intention of their
affections is both more engaged and furthered.

As for the other part of your discourse, I am wholly of your opinion, that the
Unworthiness of Wicked Artists does not only make the Music unacceptable to
God, because they live out of tune to their holy Songs, but also justly
offensive to good men, who think it so odious a jar to sing one part and
practice another, that they can scarce endure to hear it. But I have always
had a great care lest our Music should be spoiled with such untunable
Instruments; and I am sure that Amiantus, who is Master of the Quire, will
admit none but such whose Conversation does very well accord with their
Profession.

I give you thanks, Theosebes, quoth Panaretus, not only for resolving my
question, but because you have vindicated so good a thing from great abuse, and
made it fit for the praise of the best God.

Then Theosebes broke off their Conferences by desiring them to retire to a
Grotte which he had upon a clear River which ran through his Garden, where they
might both avoid the heat of the weather and enjoy the pleasure of further
Intercourse.

When they were come thither, some of his chief Musicians, placed in a Room
which he had built for such purposes, began to perform such select Music as he
had appointed for their entertainment. Amongst many other excellent Songs one
was composed in defense of Church-Musick. There Harmony revealed the utmost
power of its sweetness, not so much to please, as to produce those Effects
which would witness its Usefulness in such applications. Some speak against
it which never heard it, and so are ignorant of its Nature; for it only can
express its profitable delight, which when it does, the action has some
resemblance of that of a handsome Limner when he draws his own Picture.

I have a Manuscript written by Amerimnus, and as I turned it over one day I
chanced happily to find the forementioned Ditty: the Notes were there too, but
they were pricked in a Character which has been out of use in these latter
years. The words were these:

I.
We sing to Him whose Wisdom formed the Ear;
Our Songs let Him who gave us Voices hear:
We joy in God who is the Spring of Mirth,
Whose Love's the Harmony of Heaven and Earth.
Our humble Sonnetts shall that Praise rehearse
Which is the Music of the Universe.
CHORUS.
And whilst we sing we consecrate our Art,
And offer up with every Tongue a Heart.
II.
Thus whilst our Thoughts grow Audible in Words,
And the Body with the ravished Soul accords,
We hallow Pleasure, and redeem the Voice
From vulgar Uses to serve noble Joys.
Whilst hollow wood and well-tuned Strings do give
Praises, the Dumb and Dead both speak and live.
CHORUS.
Thus whilst we sing we consecrate our Art,
And offer up with every Tongue a Heart.
III.
Through cheerful Air with quicker wings we fly,
And make our Labor sweet with Melody.
Thus we do imitate the Heavenly Quires,
And with High Notes lift up more Raised Desires.
And that Above we may be sure to know
Our Parts, we practice often here Below.
CHORUS.
And whilst we sing we consecrate our Art,
And offer up with every Tongue a Heart.
When they had ended this Song, Theosebes commanded them at Urania's request to
sing the Hymn which they heard in the Temple in the morning: and when they had
done, Urania talked softly to Phronesia, who sat next to her, and asked her
who made the words of that Hymn. I know not, quoth Phronesia; but as you may
guess by the sense of the words, they seem to be sung in Heaven by good Angels
and Men, when they design to express the worthy Praises of the Creator and
Redeemer. And to acquaint you with what I have heard, my Sons good Genius
knowing that he used to sing such Ditties, threw the Copy one day into the
window of his Study; and they are so taken with the design of the Song, that
they sing it frequently. I desire, quoth Urania, to have a Copy of it. You
shall command it, quoth Phronesia; and withal took out one which by chance she
had in her Pocket. And that my Readers may know what kind of Hymns they sing in
Theoprepia, I will set it down. I cannot say that it is a perfect Copy, but I
received it from one of Urania's friends, who with her good leave transcribed
it, and sent it to me. It was as follows;

Angels We praise thee, God; Thy works do make us know
Both who is the Author, and what Praise we owe.
When Thou did leave the Regions of that Light,
Which is so great it blinds Created sight,
Thou wrapp'dst Thy self in darker light, that we
Might the Creator through thick Crystal see.
Thy Power and Wisdom, equally above
Our reach, are thus brought down by higher Love.
Heaven is thy Throne, thy Footstool Earth, the Sea
Some drops from thy great Spring: The cheerful Day
Glances from thy bright Eyes: the Starry Night
Takes from the Spangles of thy Vest its Light.
All Orders of Created Being say
With different tongues thy praises, as they may.
Whatever is, or grows, or uses Sense,
Reason embodied, pure Intelligence;
Whatever swimms, or creeps, or goes, or flies,
Does, when we bless Thee, echo to the skies. (us be,
Thy Works will praise Thee: whilst Thou makst
At once we find our selves, Great God, and Thee.

Men And we poor Men, through whose great fault the World,
Vnhing'd by sin, was into Ruins hurled,
Cursed because sinners, have more cause then you,
Blessed Angels, as we can, this work to do.
The Son of God, made Man for us forlorn,
That we might live, disdained not to be born:
And when our Stains required a Holy flood,
He saw our need, and washed us in His Blood.
Heaven is new opened, He has made a Door
For all that do repent, and sin no more.
He by his Love ended the dismal strife;
Hell's hope is frustrate; Death's the way to Life,
Which grows Immortal from the hallowed Grave:
How can we choose but sing, when God will save?
For since He designs the ruined World to raise,
It is but just it should fall down in Praise.

Angels All Heavenly Powers do in Thy Praises meet;
Archangels throw their Crowns before Thy feet.

Men Old Patriarchs and Prophets bow before Thee;
Apostles and the Holy Church adore Thee.

Angels We offer praise because we kept our Place.

Men Because we are Restored we thank thy Grace.

Angels It Is One great Sun whose Glory shines so bright
In Heaven;

Men. And fills this lower world with

Both By Thy blessed Influence, O Holy Dove, (Light.

Men Men are inspired;

Ang. And Angels taught to love.

CHORUS. We bless Thee, God, the Father of us all,
And celebrate the Worlds Original.
The Heavens and Earth, made and restored by Thee,
Join Praises in a grateful Harmony.
Accept our thankful Hymn, though such poor lays
Fall infinitely short of worthy Praise.
And since, Great sourse of Being, we can never
Praise Thee enough, we will sing and praise Thee ever.

After the Song was ended they spent the rest of the Afternoon in the spacious
walks of a fair Garden, and by various discourse made Theosebes bring forth
those rich Treasuries of Divine Knowledge which he had laid into his Soul by
frequent Meditations in the same place. When the Evening began to spread her
duskish wings, they hastened to Phronesia's house, and took Theosebes along
with them.

When Supper was ended, Nicomachus desired leave that he might propound two or
three Questions to Theosebes; which being cheerfully granted, he begun thus: I
have been told, quoth he, in Vanasembla, that if one do but desire and
entertain a purpose to go into your Country, that he shall be carried thither
immediately without any more ado. No, quoth Theosebes, all Foreigners must
take the pains to travail, or else their Wishes and Resolutions will never
bring them hither. If I be not misinformed, your Experience will witness what I
have said to be true; you found not the passage free from all difficulty. But
the Borderers, especially one called Hemicalus, who though he dwells near unto
us would never come among us, has raised many ridiculous and false tales
concerning Theoprepia. Others, quoth Nicomachus, say that you live a very
Melancholic life in Eusebia. They were never there which told you that, quoth
Theosebes; you have seen the contrary. They are unreasonable people who condemn
such as they do not know. We do not live discontentedly, for then we should be
miserable; neither do we abandon Joy, for so we should become Stones: if we
would live without the sense of humane things, we should be forced to pull our
Hearts out of our Bodies. But we know that there is a sort of Masculine
Pleasure, which does recreate and ennoble the Soul: and we dare not sink our
selves in the Voluptuousness of Sense, lest we should stick fast in Mire, as
we have understood that they all do who will know no reasons or Delight, but
such as are derived from brutish Rellishes and dull correspondencies with the
Worse part.

You take great pains for Knowledge, quoth Nicomachus. Is Wisdom so difficult?
or must you needs know every thing? why do you do it? Because we believe, quoth
Theosebes, that God will not accept of Ignorance for a good Plea. But they say,
quoth Nicomachus, that your labor is never at an end. There is good reason for
that, quoth Theosebes, for our state consists in habitual Goodness, and that
is not to be attained without many Acts; and besides this we seek a noble prize
of our diligence, Eternal Blessedness. Is that then, quoth Nicomachus, the
great End of all your Industry? Yes, quoth Theosebes. But methinks we need not
doubt, said Nicomachus, but God will give us that, although we should not
strive so much for it, because he knows that we are weak: No, said Theosebes,
we have no hope to make Imbecility the refuge of Idleness, since we find God
is ready to help us to do all things that he requires of us. But what need you
be so careful every day? said Nicomachus. Because, quoth Theosebes, we shall be
judged for every day. But what need you do this more then others? said
Nicomachus: Many do not trouble themselves so much. Because we see, said
Theosebes, that many are stupid and mind not their concernments, and we have no
such esteem of those whom we pity for their Errors, as to make them exemplary
to our selves. Why, quoth Nicomachus, do you often vilify the Interests of
this world, as they say you do? Because, quoth Theosebes, we see them desert
those who have courted them with most servile affections. Since you have
attained a great Perfection, quoth Nicomachus, why do you trouble your self any
further? Some think you are more burdensome to your self then you need to be.
To this Theosebes replied, They which do but imperfectly understand their own
condition, cannot so well pronounce concerning others; but I am assured that if
I should slack my endeavors; to grow better, I should wax worse, and so fall
into a doubtful hope of Happiness, and after that into a certain fear of
Misery. Those which resolve to sit down upon the Hill side, will never reach
the Top; and if they fall asleep there, peradventure they may tumble down
again. I despair of obtaining my End, which I have told you, but by
Perseverance; and I have no hope of that, but by vigilant Care and constant
Progressions.

There Nicomachus broke off his discourse, praying pardon of the Company that
he had continued it so long, and by his speech occasioned their silence: and
since it begun to be late, Phronesia acquainted the Company, that if they
pleased she would wait upon them the next morning to the healthful Plains of
Sophrosyne, and desired Theosebes to make them one more with his company. The
Noble Travailers signifying a thankful consent to a motion which contained so
much Civility, they ended the Conferences of that Night.

In the Morning Phronesia rising something earlier then ordinary, though she
was never late in bed, having prepared all things necessary for their Journey,
conducted her friends toward Sophrosyne with such a convenient Equipage, that
they easily perceived that true (...) extends it self to all things. They came
in a little time to the borders, which were adorned with plenty of ancient
Trees; and having travailed a little way through the (...) Woods, they came to
old Sophron's Seat. His house was built with the plain stone of the Country,
not adorned with Pillars of foreign Marble, or rich Columns of Corinthian
Brass, nor furnished with the overworn Statues of such as had nothing else by
which they could be remembered; neither were the Rooms furnished with stately
beds of Ivory, or golden Goblets: in stead of the trouble of such dangerous
household-stuffe they had plain Utensils, and were served in Earthen Vessels,
were content with a little, and formed their desires according to the
proportions of true Necessity. One of Sophron's Sons (for old Sophron was dead)
that had in nothing degenerated from his Father, met them in one of his Walks,
and conducted them into his House; where they found all things appointed with
respect to a decent Soberness, and saw that they were as far from Sordidness as
from a luxurious Delicacy.

After usual salutations, and civil entertainment performed after the manner of
Sophrosyne, Bentivolio according to his custom entered upon discourses suitable
unto his design, and acquainted Sophron that, as amongst the many singular
Courtesies done to them by Phronesia, they esteemed it a great honor to be
accompanied by her to his house, so he desired Sophron to favor him and his
Friends with the knowledge of their Manners and the reasons of their Discipline,
which they had heard to be the most conformable to Humane Nature of any in the
World.

I have nothing to say, replied the Modest Sophron, in praise of our Customs in
comparison of others; but what they are you shall soon know. Since the Roots of
Immortality withered in Paradise, Life has not been purchasable in Fee-simple;
and therefore our Ancestors took thought how they might improve their Time
during their Lease; and perceiving that they were to enjoy it in joynt-Tenancy
with the Body, they took what care they could to make it least cumbersome to
the Soul, that the Spirit might be more content to dwell with it, and more able
to accomplish its actions without disturbance from such a dull Companion. The
chief thing which they found advantageous to these purposes was an universal
Temperance: and this they esteemed necessary to their Design, both because some
in a very short time forfeit their Lease of life by the neglect of Moderation,
and though a longer space was allowed to them, they foolishly shorten it, and
scarce out live the time of a Gourd; and others so disenable themselves by the
Effects of Intemperance, that they live to as small purpose as if they had
never been born, and in the close die as unwillingly as a Beast caught in a
snare.

Health is our Pleasure; and our Riches, Content with competent Portions. We
emulate nothing but the Simplicity of our Ancestors: we think that we then
enjoy our Body as we should, when we keep it subservient to a thoughtful Soul.
We look upon it as an Inn where we are to sojourne a few days, and provide
such accommodations as are proportionable to the stay which we are to make: but
our principal Employment is to prepare our selves for the estate which awaites
us at Home, and to do such things here as will prove beneficial to us when we
come thither. All that we desire by the way is a healthful Chearfullnesse and a
serviceable Temper; and these we obtain and secure by denying satisfaction to
all unreasonable Appetites, which, as we have observed, wheresoever they are
indulged, destroy those who are so foolish as to be in love with them.

If the Instances be lawful in which men please themselves, we wonder why they
transgress their Bounds; for then they displease: and since God has commanded
us not to pass the limits which he has set, we esteem it most unworthy to
offend, because he never forbids till the Excess hurt us. When men choose
unlawful instances, we are astonished at their brutishness, because the allowed
are better; besides that they leave no gall in the Conscience.

If men pretend a joy in such freedoms as they fancy and then rifle to
themselves, we think they are sufficiently punished for their boldness by the
sad dyscrasies of their wronged bodies, as the Surfets of Gluttony, the Vomits
of unmeasured Drinking, the Crudities of indigested Varieties, which are the
Roots of afflictive Diseases, unclean effects of bestial Lust, dishonorable
Sickness, sleepless nights, disturbed Dreams, and untimely Death; besides what
is to be expected in another World.

Whilst we see such things to be the necessary consequences of a dissolute
life, we please our selves in a sober preservation of our bodily Comforts; and
what we have we enjoy without the checks of a discontented Soul: ours must
needs be far from reproching the Pleasures which it helped us to procure: we
preserve and recover the Body by the Soul; a discreet observation of our
Constitutions is our chief Physic. Whilst a Holy Soul dwells in a healthful
Body, it has an Antepast of their future and better Conjunction. The Sensitive
part is apt to be mistaken, and frequently makes the Soul suffer for its
Errors; and therefore we keep a strict watch upon its Tentations, lest it
exceed due Proportions in the Quantity of Meats and Drinks, or be too curious
as to the Qualities of either. As we avoid Excess, so we are careful to use
things which administer proper Nourishment; and of those we think our selves
well provided, if we have such as secure our End: the End of Eating and
Drinking is Health, and the End of Health the employment of Soul and Body in
worthy actions.

We are not troubled with the incivility of offering great measures of drink by
way of Complement; we esteem it no great Courtesy in any man to invite us to
drown our selves either in Water or Wine: It is a great abuse of good nature to
please another with our own hurt, and no less folly to pretend a regard to
some friends Health, and at the same time to despise our own.

We care not for delicate Odours, sweet Herbs are enough; and in stead of
curious Meats and Drinks, we choose those which have a less troublesome
preparation, and give more natural satisfaction. Yet we are not ignorant that
there are different Tempers of Body and Uses of Life; and therefore we can tell
how to allow that to others which we take not to our selves: but we are wary
also to distinguish between the true Infirmity of a weak Stomach, and the
Curiosities of a fantastical Palate.

Hunger and Thrist are our best Sauces; and we are not so lavish in the expense
of them, but that we still keep some to relish our next meal; and therefore
though we have dined or supped, we rise not without some Appetite. To what
purpose should a man for so poor a gain as a sick dullness, endeavor to eat
as much as he can?

Sometimes we have moderate Feasts, but they are always proportioned to the
just considerations of the Number and Quality of our Company: and those who are
entertained, do then more especially mind their Rules, knowing that their
Virtue is under a Trial: and though we allow a greater measure of time for
Converse, and Cheerfulness is not prohibited; yet we so order the matter, that
we may not indispose our selves for what we have to do, by sitting too long;
and do both deceive our palate with the best Discourse which we are able to
furnish at the Table, and cause the Cloth to be taken away when we perceive the
Company have eaten and drunk enough.

I must confess that we are more strict in these Observations, because by this
means we endeavor to way lay an inconvenience which others accelerate by
Excess in meats and drinks: for by that, one sort of Intemperance ministers to
another; and of the latter we are more afraid then the former, because it is
more dishonorable: but if they were equal, we would be loath that any thing
should make our Body so disobedient to the Government of our Soul, that it
should be provoked by its own negligence to lustful Sympathies, and be
destroyed by the Beast which it could have mastered, if it had not fed it too
high. The Pleasures of Abstinence have a rare gust, being sweetn'd with
subservience to Chastity, by which we preserve the Honor and Strength of our
Bodies. And since the best of Spirits, who is the Love of all Noble Souls, does
ever refuse the Mansion which is disgraced with bodily Uncleanness, and does
most of all abhor to be lodged with (...); therefore we do so far abandon the
use of alldishonest Pleasures, that we keep the very thoughts of them from
desiling our Minds, and esteem those which are with just limitations allowed to
be then strictly forbidden, when they are not joined with abundance of
Temperance, and hallowed with a great deal of Modesty.

We are more easily defended from the danger of these Pollutions when we come
to riper years, because our Wise Parents took great care that the Modesty of
our young Natures might not be ravished with evil Examples, light (...),
obscene Books, or wanton Pictures, and that the unspottedness of our
Virgin-life might not be stained with bad Company, lascivious Dances, or the
mischiefs which constantly attend upon an Idle life. Idleness is esteemed with
us no better then it deserves, that is, an Ignoble thing; and those who know
not, nor will practice some good Art, are accounted useless members of the
Creation.

For other particulars wherein we have no set Rules, we guide our selves by the
best Examples, and incline to that part which is most severe to the Flesh,
keeping in all things a decorum with the Prudence of universal Moderation. But
that I am afraid to be troublesome to your patience, I would tell you also that
we do more heedfully observe the Orders of our Ancestors, because we have
heard, and know it to be true, that the Divine spark which is placed in the
constitution of our Souls, can scarce be discerned where it is, when it is
(...) with an Atmosphere of bodily Fumes; and that it is always unfitted for
its highest operations, when it is clogged with turbulent Passions. Converse
with God is the top of our Joy; and we cannot ascend to him but in a serene
Calm of Soul, no more then we can see the Sun when it is (...) up in thick
Clouds.

We do not desire to be buried alive: which misery we should think to befall
us, if the Eye of our Soul were darkened to the sight of our best Good, the
gust of our present and future Happiness dulled, and the hopes and desires of
Immortality choked in us, and the power of the Soul, by which it lifts it self
up to the attainment of celestial life, depressed or extinguished. And since we
find that an immoderate resentment of fleshly Pleasures does perversely aim at
such dishonorable Ends, we abandon it, being so far in love with the Dignity
of Humane Nature, that we scorn to degenerate into Brutes through such mean
persuasions; but we subjugate our Fleshly part to advance the honor and
liberty of our Minds, having observed that men of the best-govern'd Affections
have ever attained the greatest excellencies of Judgment.

Whilst we content our selves with a Frugal way of life, we provide fevvel
for charity, and redeem something to bestovv upon such as want, from lavish
entertainments, superfluous variety of gay Clothes, and multitudes of needless
Houses. In short, To the prudent Institutions of our good Father we owe an
excellent Health, an agile Body, unhurt Senses, quiet Sleeps, a peaceful Soul,
serene Contemplations, a symmetry of Passions, freedom from shameful Lust and
violent Anger, preparations for Heaven, and a happy Death after a contented
Life; from which we part with little trouble of Body, but whose remembrance
is so acceptable to our Mind, that if we were to live it over again, we should
repeat it according to the same Rules.

When Sophron had finished his Discourse, he desired them to walk into a little
Grove which joined to his Garden, and there by an ocular demonstration he
showed them what pleasure may be found in a Little, and by what way Wise men
make the half more then the whole: for with Herbs, Roots, Fruits, Milk, Honey,
Bread, and the native Wine, which he called by another Name, he made a Feast,
which was a Practice upon his former Rules.

But this first part of the Entertainment was far exceeded by that which
followed; which was a rare Discourse managed by two young Ladies, of which I
shall give an account by and by.

It may be some Reader will wonder why I do so much magnify this sort of
Entertainment: and because I have mentioned it diverse times, I will now give
the reason of that Theoprepian Custom. You must know that although the
Theoprepians did frequently retire themselves to Contemplation and Piety, and
had appointed select Places removed out of the Noise of the Tumultuous world as
fittest for Education; yet they were not ignorant of those Advantages which may
be had in Converse with others: and it was received as a common Opinion amongst
them, That Ingenious Conference is one of the most pleasant sorts of
Recreation, and a most profitable, as well as delectable, exercise of our
Natures; since by this means every one does teach and learn, and by a free.
Communication of Souls in a lively and vigorous way of Knowledge, enjoy a
delight as far above that which is attainable in lonesome life, as an excellent
Song of many Parts is above the pleasure of a single Voice, or at least as the
performance of a good Composition with fit Voices and Instruments passes the
mute joy which one can take by looking upon a Song pricked in a Book. The
Theoprepians being used to this way, and having confirmed their love to it by
the experience of the Benefit which they reaped from it, slighted those mean
Sports which ravell out the time of other people, and leave them discontented
when they see to what little purpose they have spent it. Lest their Conference
should be tedious if they managed it always after the same fashion, they have
learned to vary the Mode of their Discourses with much pleasing Change.
Sometimes they put Questions, that they may enjoy the Learning and Knowledge of
each other in their Answers. Sometimes they make it their task to recite
Examples of Noble Precepts, by which the possibility of the highest Virtues is
demonstrated. At other times, by observing the happy Successes of Good men,
they encourage themselves in the pursuit of that Holiness which they
practiced. Sometimes they recount the sad Catastrophes of Splendid Tyrants, and
take a view of the true Miserableness of Fortunate Wickedness. And otherwhiles
they make little Orations, in which they declare and commend the Excellency of
some particular Virtue. That day Euergesia and Philothea were appointed to a
loving contest for the Priority of the Graces which they bore in their Names;
and Phronesia having acquainted (...) with the design the Night before,
prevailed with her to do them the Honor to accept of the Moderator's Chair,
and with a short speech to determine the Controversy according to her own most
excellent judgment. Taking her by the hand she led her to her Place, and
having set the two Ladies Euergesia and Philothea in the midst upon two green
Seats, all the Company being disposed round about in a convenient Circle,
Urania becken'd to Euergesia to begin: Which command she obeyed after this
Manner;

Illustrious Auditors,

It is hard for me to say whether I be more encouraged or disheartened in the
performance of my Task by this Noble Company: For as it would be my singular
Joy, if I could present you with any worthy enterainment; so it does extremely
afflict me to think how much I shall abuse your Patience against my will, and
that my Power does in a time or so great necessity desert my Wishes. As the
Nobleness of my Argument does inspire me with Desire, so the Imparity of my
Abilities does spoil my hope or making good my Undertaking, which I think so
far above my Endowments, that I have much to do with my self not to find more
fault with my Province because it is too good for me, then many others do with
theirs because they judge it inferior to their Worth, Since my skill is too
weak to display the divine Beauty of Charity, I must be sain to draw a Veil
instead of a Face: only I have this comfort, that as I know this bright Sun
needs not borrow my small finger to point to it; so I make as little doubt but
that it will show the All-conquering Vigor of its native Lustres the more,
whilst it breaks through the cloudy Representations of my dark Dscourse.

That I may be clearly understood in what I intend, I shall say what kind of
thing I mean by Charity, and then give an Argument or two for my Opinion
concerning it. By Charity I understand a Good will so comprehensive that it
includes an Universal Regard to the Necessities of all Mankind, and a hearty
endeavor for (...) Relief. Of this I am to speak by way of Commendation, and
my praise extends so far as to call it the most glorious thing that is sound
amongst men: which I think will easily appear by the exact Conformity which it
bears to the Archetypali pattern of all Worth. To be most like the Divine
Goodness is to be next best to it. This place Charity does of right claim,
since it is an (...) Benevolence putting obligations upon all the World by good
affection, and making all sorts of infirmities to wear its Livery, in the
effects which it produces by Beneficence. And therefore mankind with a common
Love does, as it were, adore those persons which are crowned with this Glory,
as Visible Gods. Confirmed in my belief by these Reasons, I am more bold to
affert, being not only satisfied in the grounds of my private thoughts, but
well assured that if I err in what I think, I shall be justified by the
General Vote of the World.

That God is the Original Pattern of all Excellency is a thing out of all
Dispute; and it is as clear a Truth, That the brighest Notion which our poor
Minds can form of Divinity, is Goodness, and that this is the Splendour of the
increated Majesty. He does verify the Adorablenesse of his Godhead by this
Attribute, which is so full of God, that it does Deifie the rest. By his Wisdom
he would be acknowledged able to out-wit his Creatures, and by his Power to
tyrannize over them; but that he will do neither, we are affured only by his
Goodness. Whilst his Creatures find in what vast extents it dwells in his
Nature by the incomparable Effects which they experiment in themselves, they
fall down before it in submiss Adorations, and pronounce them infinitely due to
the Universal Benefactor and Patron of all things. And they cannot choose but do
it, whilst they perceive that he is not only the Eternal Fountain out of which
all things are derived, but, as they also take notice, that he does incompasse
the World with his out-stretch'd Arms, and reaches Perseverance to the
happiness of his Creation; in which nothing is depriy'd of the benefit of his
Love, but what, by choosing Hatred, makes it self incapable of Love. So that he
is in every point of this great Circumference, and like an Omnipresent Sun is
every where ready by a free Communication of his beams to fill the whole
Creation with heavenly Light.

But though God has so made up his work, that he has left nothing unfinished
by which any doubt may justly arise concerning his Almighty Skill or infinite
Goodness; yet one may discern some shadows of seeming Imperfections to remain
in its Constitution, as if he had left something undone which he would not
perfect till afterward. One Visible flaw which I seemed to find was the Poverty
of many of his distressed Creatures: at which I was troubled; yet not so much
for their Affliction, as for the Dishonor which rebounded upon their Maker
from their unrelieved Condition. But seeking further for satisfaction to this
scruple, which I knew might be had if I sought it right, I happily met divine
Charity, and she told me, when I entreated her name, that she was the
Counterpart to the Defects of the Creation, and deputed by God to make them up,
and withal carried me to her house, which was not far off, and showed me a
Storehouse, which she called The Treasury of God, which was able to supply
more necessities then humane Nature was ever troubled with. I went away fully
resolved in my Mind, because I saw it was no disparagement to God to make the
world after the forementioned manner; since though he had not given them all
things immediately or at once, yet he had put all necessary additions so far
within their reach, that the want of more perfect Happiness should not be laid
upon him; and that he had most justly resolved the Condition of men should be
Imperfect if they were Slothful or Malicious. I perceived also that Want was
requisite to make us understand the Benignity of his Supplies, and that without
complaining; since he had provided them in abundance, and created the courteous
hands of Charity to bestow them where they were needful. I understood (...)
that God had by this means cast a great honor upon us, that he would not so
complete every thing which belonged to the excellency of his work, but that he
did leave something undone, that we might be co-workers with him toward the
perfecting of the Universal good, and so have a more honorable share in it.
Whilst by this means I saw a Divine luster reflected upon the condition of Men,
yet I could not but take notice that Charity was the great Globe of light where
all those beams were fixed; and that whilst it did glorify Virtuous persons by
shining in them, that of all the Virtues it self was most glorified.

Who can consider the Nature of Charity, and not see that God has singled it
out of all the rest of his creatures, and made it his Vicegerent in the Royal
Office of Love, and as trusting it above others, has made it the sole
Treasurer of those Mercies which he intended mediately to bestow?

How can I but extol that Virtue which God has magnified, and which is of
such important use, that it seems necessary to support the defense of the
Supreme Goodness? For though that has prepared all Blessings in plentiful
measures, not only with sufficiency to correspond with Want, but also with
superabundant fullness to administer to Delight; yet without this key, which
unlocks those Repositories where they are laid up, the Poor, which most need
them, would never be able to come at them.

The truth of this is manifest, if we look into those parts of the world where
Charity is not entertained: for in those places Ignorance, Poverty, Sickness,
Complaint, Disorder, War and all manner of defects ruin the Happiness of
Mankind. But where she is received, there Knowledge, Plenty, Health, Amity,
Peace and all good things abound: for she carries her Treasures with her, and
does most freely impart her Stores, because she counts not her self a jot the
richer for them till they are distributed. She plains all the unevennesses of
Fortune with a merciful hand, and smooths all the Wrinkles which seem to be in
the inequality of worldly (...), and so answers those Objections which
otherwise would be made against Divine Providence, whilst one man has more
then another; and makes the Poor content that the Rich should be their
Stewards, and the Rich much more Rich, whilst they make themselves poorer by
giving away a considerable part of what they have.

Upon Hunger and Thirst she bestows her Corn and Wine: She would esteem her
Wool good for nothing, if the naked did not want Clothes: She frustrates the
dreadful threatenings of Beggary with her Money, and makes the Iron fetters of
Captives to fall off with the force of Gold and Silver. The Sick want no
Visits, whilst she can go her self; nor Medicines or Attendance, as long as she
is able to procure them. Strangers have not leave to ly in the Streets, for she
takes them into her House, or a convenient Hospital provided for them with all
necessary Accommodations. The cold Winter prevails not against such as have no
Fuel, because she has lard up enough for them in warm weather. Desperate
Debtors are hindered from cursing God and their Creditors in Prisons, for she
either persuades those to whom they owe to forgive them, or pays their Debts
She bestows Knowledge upon the Ignorant with meekness; forms the rude and
composes the disordered with prudent instructions. She passes by Offenses
committed against her self, and hides with candid Hope such faults as she
cannot presently mend; and where any Good is begun, she helps it forward toward
perfection. She reconciles the differences of Mankind with discreet
interpositions: and having done what good she can to particular persons, she
seeks out ways to advance the Public Good. And by a divine Fullness would,
like an inexhaustible Spring, send forth Streams continually to replenish all
the Wants of men, but that they obstruct their passage with unworthy Damms; and
yet she makes a shift to get over them, conquering all Evil with Good. The
World shall sooner want empty Pitchers, then Charity will want Liquor or
Affection to fill them up; all times being her Opportunity, all occasions an
Invitation, and whosoever pleases, her Guests.

Charity makes her self a great high Priestesse, offering up prayers
continually for all the World, for whose Good she is not unwilling to become
also a Sacrifice; and having made all that dwell in the same Nature her
Children, she would gladly, like a true Pelican, feed them with her blood. And
as she lives to no other, as her main, End, but to do good, (for she esteems it
all Glory to be an instrument in Gods hand to further the good of others:) so
she counts it but congruous to her Nature to be willing to die, not only as
Pylades for his friend (...), but rather as Damon for the more useful Pythias,
taking it for a sufficient price of death, to lose her own, to save their lives
which will be more beneficial to the world.

This makes all the World in love with a Charitable person; when they see him,
they behold the true Volto divino drawn upon his face, and think that God is
come down to them in the shape of Men. This puts an awe upon his presence, and
makes his Example reverenced. They cannot think upon him without love and
admiration: they know he is worth ten thousand Vulgar Souls, and strive for him
as their common possession; expecting as great a darkness to seize upon them by
his loss, as the Earth would suffer if God should extinguish the Sun; and is so
endeared to the Neighborhood, that if any place should endeavor to woo him
from them, they would esteem it as great a wrong as to divert a common River.
This Grace tuned the Harp of Orpheus, and was the life of the Pythagorick
Music, which made the dull Stones dance into order, and sweetn'd the very
Beasts out of their roughness. There was nothing in those days which durst be
so ill as to disobey the precepts of one that was so good. Finally, Being
sensible that this was the highest obligation of which humane kind is capable,
though they are naturally afraid of Death as the worst enemy; yet being
desirous to perform a due requital, for such a one they are willing to die.

But I will conclude my Discourse, lest by multiplying words, I should be
thought to suspect the Evidence of the Truth which I defend, for such a dark
business that it cannot be easily demonstrated, and through tediousness of
Speech concerning Charity forget my Argument, and uncivilly abuse the courteous
Patience of those Noble Auditors who have to me more then sufficiently
discovered the power of Love, in that they could so long bear with my
Infirmities.

Euergesia having finished her Discourse with a general approbation, which
revealed it self in all their Countenances, Urania desired Philothea to succeed
her: which she did with a modest Smile, after this manner;

If I were able to form raised notions in my mind, most Excellent Auditors, and
to clothe them with the beauty of Rhetorical Language, I should think my self
happy in this present opportunity, having received a Subject which no low
thoughts can reach, and honored with Company which deserve the best of
Discourses. The discouragements which rise from my Imperfections do chiefly
amaze me, knowing that I can speak nothing that will (...) the silence of your
Attention. I should undoubtedly hold my peace, but that I know that those who
are most able to do excellently themselves, are most ready to pardon the
failings of others, and that they make not their Deserts the measures of their
Acceptances; and that I am assured by the experience of a happy acquaintance
with your Virtues, that you will take in good part what is offered with
Humility, though it fall extremely short of what you might have justly
expected. My Argument does afford me some Comfort, because it will be its own
praise, and does contein so many refulgent perfections, that to recite them is
Eloquence: and though I am not able to perform that in a manner answerable unto
their worth, yet I make bold to hope that I shall be excused in that defect,
because even Praise is not ashamed to confess its self poor of Encomiums for so
rich a Subject.

Divine Love is the Exaltation of Humane Nature to the Top of all possible
Perfection; the Soul raised to the possession of its utmost Felicity. By
Celestial Love we receive the fruition of our chief Good. Whilst the Soul is
enamored with God, it exercises its most noble Faculty upon the best Object.
What I have asserted concerning the Object, is without the jurisdiction of
doubtful disputation; all other things being in comparison of God both as
little in Quantity as a Drop to the Sea, and as inferior in true Worth as
painted Fire is in respect of the real Sun. All other good things are but
little Pictures made to represent some small parts of this Universal Goodness;
Momentany persuasions of ill-bestowed Affections, of which they are soon
deserted, having not roots sufficient to uphold their own Loveliness, which is
soon withered by the Sun that produced it, like the Flowers in Summer.

Concerning the Priority of the Faculty some Question is made; though I know
none that pretends Rivalry with Love but Knowledge: but how unjustly it does so,
I shall soon demonstrate. There are but Two things which I can guess by which
our Faculties exalt their Worth, the Excellency of their Operations, or the
Nobleness of the Object.

As to the Dignity of the Object, no allegation can be made to put a difference
between them, because God is the same to both: the First Truth is the First
Good; God is the most Knowable and most Lovely thing in the world; excess of
Knowablenesse following the Greatness of his Essence, as Infinite Amiablenesse
does shine in the Goodness of his Nature. Here Knowledge and Love are
reconciled, both conspiring in a strict Union jointly to Adore so Worthy an
Object.

We must give judgment then concerning the Meliority of these Powers, by the
Operations which they produce; and they must stand or fall in the reputation of
their Excellency, as they rise higher in their Applications toward the most
Supreme Object. And here I think the difference is so visible that there is no
Comparison between them; for Love is admitted to a nearer approach to God then
Knowledge, and by the liberty of that access is demonstrated to be a more Sacred
thing. Knowledge is but a look upon God at a distance, which is allowed to such
as are far enough removed from all Glory; but Love is an Union with him. Love
takes it for its Definition, to be the Union of the Lover with the Object
loved. Holy Love ties up the life of the Soul in God with the perfect bond of
celestial Amity, and it knows no death or destruction but Separation from its
beloved God, nor can endure to be absent from him. And as he always loves
again, (for his Love is a great part of his Goodness) or rather continues his
Love, by which this Affection was first produced in the Soul; they cleave
together by the close inhesions of Reciprocal Affection. So that they are no
Hyperboles which an intimate Friend of the Prince of Lovers used, when he said,
He that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and he in him, by a mutual inhabitation:
and his reason is strictly conclusive, For God is Love. Holy Lovers by this
affection have such a Complacency in God, that they live in him more then in
themselves, and are so naturalized to his Conversation, that they can be no
where without him, and do passionately reject all things as hindrances of their
Happiness which do offer to keep him out of their Hearts.

But how far short does Knowledge come of such a Bliss? Where Knowledge ends,
Love begins, perceiving it has gone but a little way. What is it barely to
discover that there is such a thing as God? or Philosophically to contemplate
his natural Persections? What am I the richer for understanding that there are
Silver Mines in the Indies? what the Mind understands only by Knowledge, the
Soul enjoys by Love, and so is made happy. How little Excellency does arise
from lonesome Apprehensions is manifest in that Forlorn Spirits remain Devils
still, though they know God, because they do not love him too. Its true, Love
makes use of Knowledge in the accomplishment of this sacred Union, because it is
naturally impossible to love that which we do not know, or to place a strong
Affection upon that whereof we are but uncertainly informed. But what
preferment does Knowledge receive by this more then the Honor of an Instrument?
I deny not Knowledge to be the handmaid of Love, for so she is, and therefore
receives respect, because of the Relation which she bears to such a Noble
Mistress: in her Illustrious company she is always honored, as all are that
serve where she does; but when she has dismissed her self from that attendance
and is met alone, she is like a Cipher without Figures, is of small regard, and
is many times corrupted with very dishonorable practices.

Of what small value Knowledge is in respect of Love, we may perceive also by
the Divine permissions, which have given us leave to bestow it upon the meanest
Creatures; but Love is a hallowed Faculty, which he has consecrated by
reserving it for himself, and is ever jealous lest any Idolatrous corrival
should share with him in that facred Affection. We have leave to know and use
other things, but not to love them; except in such minute degrees, that they
may well think that we would rather make them believe that we do counterfeit an
affection, then love indeed. Wherein God does not only secure his own right,
but also expresses a great care of us; because Love containing the Virtue of
Union, if we should bestow it upon Creatures, we should debase our selves by a
conjunction with many things worse then our selves, and so make our selves
unmeet to be exalted into Union with God. We have profaned the Affection which
was due to God, by uniting it with every contemptible Object.

As by that which I said before concerning the Subserviency which Knowledge
performs to Affection, Love appeared to be the Exaltation of Knowledge, from
which if it were separated, it would be discarded by Mankind as a thing of no
use or else mischievously applicable: so lest any should think that Love is
beholden to Knowledge for this service, I will prevent that mistake; for she is
not only well rewarded for her labor, but it does so redound to the increase
of her own Interest, that in the very way wherein she serves she is requited.
Its true, a bare Knowledge does give some small directions to the Love of God;
but the Divine Beauty of the Godhead is not clearly visible till Love have
kindled a fire in the inamor'd heart. The Light which shines from the flames of
Love is like the noonday beams, Bright and Hot. This heavenly Fire does shine
with Vital light, and with a potent heat does dry up those fumes of Lust which
would cast a cloud upon the eyes of the Soul. Whosoever sees by any other
light, has only some cold reflection of wan Moon-beams upon glistring Snow:
Though he may brag of Knowledge, he sees only with Owls eyes; and if he talk,
must needs speak at random of that which he never saw but in the twilight. He
may make some Fancies proportionable to what he has heard others say, but is
so devoid of the grounds of certain Knowledge, for want of Experience, that he
does but guess at Heavenly things, as blind men do at Colors.

By this Argument it is manifest that the Soul through Love ascends not higher
into the ineffable Joys of Heaven, then into the Serenities of the Beatifick
Vision; and is as far from being in debt to Knowledge here below, as he which
pays his Creditor with Gold for Silver, and that in greater weight then he
received.

But why do I weary your Patience, whilst I balance Love with this Rival, who
is but its Harbinger, and so though it goes before to the same place, is but
sent to provide Entertainment for another? The Glory of this Virtue is better
revealed, if we consider the Nobleness of its Descent, accompanied with a
correspondent Deportment. Love is the Natural Child of Celestial Goodness, and
to produce it the God of Love vouchsafes to condescend to appear in the world,
not only clothed with the Essential Lustres of his Natural Beauty, but also to
superadd those adventitious Attractives of Bounty and Mercy, proportioned to
the Wants and Miseries of our Condition.

The Divine Goodness, designing our promotion, chose this as the best Means to
make us Happy and Good both at once. For as God's Love brings his Goodness into
view to produce our Love: so when our Love is brought forth, it becoms our
Goodness. As we must of necessity have continued miserable if God had not loved
us; so he permits us not to be happy but in loving him. That God will be loved
by such as we are, is his great Condescension: but that we love the Divine
Goodness, is the highest Exaltation of our Affections. So that Heavenly Love
being the Flower of the Reasonable Soul full blown, and confirmed in holy
vigor by the same Goodness that produced it; we may well think it the chief
Faculty for which we should please our selves that we have received Souls. Love
is the Correspondent of Goodness, for which God is pleased with himself.
Whilst the Best Good is the Parent and Object of our Love, our Affections are
made Divine, and we led to Blessedness by a most pleasant way, since in the
Constitution of our Happiness Love is so great an Ingredient. Thus Love is
become that holy Ladder by which the Spirits of good men go and come between
Heaven and Earth with reciprocal Motions. Nothing comes from above that will
rest long below. The participations of this Spirit are like waters of Life
derived through invisible Channels from the great Sea, filling the Hearts of
men, as so many little Springs, but never forgetting the way home, nor
unmindful whence they came: the overflowing Stream makes little Rivolets, which
never rest till they return into the bosom of the beloved Ocean.

I have often admired the noble Spirit of Love, whilst I have seen how all that
are possessed with it it make way to God with an irresistible Vigor through
all hindrances, both carefully performing all services which are acceptable to
him, and for his Love despising all the glistring allurements of the flattering
World; and making use of a rare advantage which it has in its own Nature, (for
in Love all the Passions are seated as in their common Root) it does with it
self offer up all the Affections of the Soul to God. Taking constant Motives
from the Generousness of its own Temper, it does that which none but Lovers can
perform: Where languid Souls enfeebled by the want of this assistance find
impossibilities, complain of impotency, and make a stop; it goes on, and
conquers with an invincible power.

It so passionately desires to please whom it loves, that it does not only such
things as are required by Explicit Commands, but never staying till it be
bidden by words, complies with the most secret notices of the Beloved's
pleasure, and does whatsoever it thinks may please when it is performed,
whether it was commanded or no: and having done all that it can, counts nothing
too hard to suffer; and yet has so poor an estimation of its own Merits, that
it does not rate all that it has done or can suffer at the value of one Smile
from God.

As a Holy Lover sees that nothing can be added to the Greatness of the Divine
Goodness, which needs not what he can wish, because it has that already and
infinitely more; he is much pleased with the contemplation of such Perfections,
and makes proportionable Adorations, and is conformably thankful, since that
Supreme Goodness would love or be loved by Him. And whilst the Lover perceives
that the Divine Goodness is only worthy of that which it needs not, he sets
Love for a Sentinel at its own door, to keep out all things which offend the
Beloved or seek to invade his Portion: And in the discharge of this office is
vigilant and curious. How disdainfully has it repulsed other Loves, when they
have been so bold as to make unworthy offers? How have I seen it make other
sorts of Lovers to blush as they passed by, upbraiding them with the indignity
of those inferior Objects to which they had devoted their affections, with an
injurious neglect of God, who is so inexpressibly worthy of Love in himself,
and to whom all the World is infinitely obliged? How disconsolately have I seen
poor Tentations sneak away after Love had mortified their vain hopes with smart
denyals? How clearly has Love convinced many of her erring friends of their
great Folly in giving away the Affections due to their Maker, to those things
which are not able to requite them; and of Insolence too, whilst to his
disparagement they court every trifling Vanity before his face? By which I
understood that the safety of the Divine Honor was much reposed in the trusty
Valor of this noble Champion.

But I will go no further; for whilst I look upon this Sacred Virtue as
descending from Heaven, glorifying the Understanding, uniting the whole Soul
with God, either clasping about the Best Good, or kneeling before the Throne of
Mercy, or serving his pleasure to whom all things bow; I am so far from
retracting what I have said in the praise of Divine Love, that, if I knew how,
I would increase it with more Eulogies. As there is no Goodness comparable to
God's aboves so below there is no Affection equal to Love, nor indeed any
Goodness or Affection but Divine Love.

It may be, (...) you had some expectation that I should have spoken with some
Reflection upon your Discourse made in the praise of Charity. But I shall excuse
my self for neglecting all Comparisons, because I think that such as heartily
magnify the Love of God, can never speak against Charity. I find it in such
strict Union with the Love of God, that I judge it an Inseparable Effect of
that as an Excellent Cause, a Peculiar Instance of its incomparable Power, a
rare Counterpart of its Amiableness, an honorable Companion by which its Worth
is made known, and a plain Verification of its undeniable Truth.

Since Loveliness is the firstborn Property of Goodness, it may be next best
to Imitate, but it is best of all to Love. Whatsoever is first discerned to be
worthy of Love, is afterward for that reason judged fit for Imitation. Some
have fancied that these two Graces are, what Nature has made you and me,
Twin-Sisters: and (...) they be, let them always go together, as you and I do,
hand in hand.

When Philothea had made an End Urania with no less grace, then if all the
Virtues had bestowed their Ornaments upon her, began after this manner.

It is a thing too apparent to receive the least shadow of doubt, That it is a
very difficult Task to determine a Cause which two such Advocates have pleaded.
Each of them being endued with rare abilities of Learning and Wit, and
furnished with Subjects that justify the Hyperboles of Praise, must needs make
what they say very hard to be answered. Whilst I was rapt into admiration of
their most excellent Speeches, methought I saw the Virtues themselves glad to
be so nobly patronized; and though they wondered how they came to be at such
ods, as to be opposed in the distances of Comparison, yet they were not
displeased that by the transcendent skill of their tutelar Professors they
were both made Incomparable.

I am beholden to my good Genius for sending me a Dream last night, which
whilst I call to mind methinks I see it was his Good will by that to prepare me
for the discharge of this honorable undertaking, unto which I confess my self
inferior, and to make that Task easy, which otherwise I should have judged
impossible.

I dreamed that I did contemplate the face of the Heavens, and seemed to see
Two Suns encircl'd with mighty lustres: and as the wondering Spectators were
making guesses and laying wagers which was the Parelion (and that was hard to
say, their Glories were so equal;) any body would have thought that God had
made another Sun just like the first, or else cut it into two pieces with the
unequal sides toward us. But after they had well satisfied the Curiosity of the
beholders with so strange a Novelty, they made the wagerers part stakes, for
the Two Suns accosting each other in nearer distances, at last United
themselves into One body, and doubled their Splendours in the single Globe of
Light which they both made and glorified by their Conjunction.

Whilst I meditate upon the Two divine Subjects of this days Discourses, I see
two Intellectual Suns at once display their beauties before me: when I view
each of them apart, I think them both without Compare; and when I look upon
them both together, they do so dazzle my eyes with their vigorous Rays, that I
know not which to prefer. But if you will have a little patience, I hope they
will unite their beams, and take the praises, which I must give to each, in a
joint Encomium.

Virtue is not a thing to be pulled in pieces, no not in Thought: being not one
single Member of a Body, and so valuable according to the handsomeness of its
particular Form, or Convenience of its distinct use; but an entire Body
constituted of many well-proportion'd Parts, by which, when all are fitly
joined, the Whole is made up: and the Nature of Virtue does so essentially
consist in the Integrity of all the Parts, that if any of them be wanting, the
Body is so maimed in its Composition, and so lamed to action, that it is
esteemed no other then a deformed Monster. The Whole were not the Whole, but
for all the Parts; and the Glory which the Parts ascribe to themselves is, that
they contribute to make up the Whole.

So in the Composition of a delightful Harmony, the Thirds and Fifths have no
lonesome consideration for which their Sweetness is admired by the ravished
hearers, but they receive their praise as they are blended together with other
Notes, in reference to which they become Thirds or Fifths, and by whose tunable
concurrences they are enabled to grace the Song. The Soul accomplished with
many regulable Faculties is the Subject of Virtue, which is content that it
should be honored with her Name and Relation, if none of them be Irregular; but
she allows not any person the Denomination of Virtuous, unless he Understand,
Affect, and Act according to her respective directions. Her Dominion is
Universal, and her Sovereign Empire consists in this, that no Subject disobey
any of her Commands: neither is that a Tyrannical Power, for there is nothing
Unjust in the Government of Virtue, nor any Precept so mean, that it is worthy
to be trampled upon by Disobedience.

Its true that Virtue does display her Greatness in many Instances; but she is
not so superfluously made up that she can spare any particular as a trifling
Ornament. How fit it is that every thing should be in the place where she has
put it, is soon manifest by the ill favouredness of the Defect which it leaves
when it is taken out. As the multitude of Excellencies shows the perfection of
her Constitution; so the ugliness which presently appears when one is
separated from the rest, does demonstrate the necessity of their essential
Connection. So the variety of Strings that are fastened upon the Body of a large
Instrument do make it capable of higher Music, which has a liberty to express
it self in a greater Compass by reason of the multitude of bigger and smaller
Chords; but if two or three of them be out of tune, they will disorder the
Music of the Whole: For though some Sounds may come off pleasantly from one
part of the Instrument; yet as soon as the Hand touches upon the untuned
Strings, they will jar unpleasantly, and the Discord will be so much the more
observable and odious as the other Strings are more exactly tuned; and so the
Music will become ungrateful to all judicious Ears.

When I have sometimes thought of the Golden Chain, which is said to be tied
above to God's Throne and from thence let down to the Earth to draw us up
thither, I imagined that the first Inventors of the Notion represented by it
the firm Concatenation of all Heavenly Virtues: and I am afraid that if a few
Links of that courteous Chain should by any dire mischance be broken off, we
low Mortals should not be able to catch hold of it. Whosoever wickedly undoes
this holy Combination, makes the Happiness which God has designed for him
unattainable.

When the Tree of Life was first planted in Paradise, I make no doubt but it
received singular beauty from its many wellspread Branches, and gave
extraordinary delight by a great variety of Fruits: but since our Apostasy we
value it most for its Medicinal qualities; that it is sweet to the Taste, and
pleasant to the Eyes, are smaller praises. The Infirmities of Mankind are
numerous; and as they are respectively curable by the several sorts of healing
Fruits which grow upon this Vivifical Tree, and the Medicinableness of every
one is so affixed to its own Branch that it is not communicated to another, if
you lop off any Arm, some Disease of Humane Nature will be left incurable.

As we have great reason to rejoice in this virtuous Conspiracy of all the
Graces, and to think those infinitely malicious who should endeavor to hinder
so many friends jointly aiming at our Good; so their attempt who should be so
unworthy would soon discover its Polly as well as Malice: For the Virtues will
not be separated, the Graces will not be courted alone; none of them will be
loved, except their Fellows share in the affection. What Favors they bestow,
are never single; they always send down Complex Influences: that Heavenly
Light which irradiates the Soul with a serene Knowledge, does at the same time
awaken the powers of the affectionate part into Love; true acquaintance with
the highest Goodness will be accompanied with the best Affections; and whom it
makes to love, it insensibly transforms into the Image of the beloved Goodness.
The Heart being made partaker of God's Love, must needs be inamored with the
Goodness which is the Root of that Love: and as it is ravished with the
Sweetness of Divine Good will, the Undeservedness of his Grace, and the
Clemencies of his Pardon, a Heavenly Spirit steals into the Soul, and it loves
and becomes like unto God so both at once, that it finds it self like a wedge
of Steel all set on fire, at the same time possessed with Light and Heat. So
Divine Love and Charity are Twin-daughters of the same Mother, born both at
once, who preserving the Union with which they embraced each other in their
Original, do never after permit any thing to violate their most intimate Amity.

It can be no disparagement to Virtue to be praised after this fashion; neither
can any take a just occasion to think that she is poor in her self, that must
be made up of so many pieces: no, she is one entire Excellency in her own
Nature, and those many Rays of Glory which shine from her, do but display, not
divide, Her; she sends them forth and gives them luster, but keeps them all so
fast locked to the Unity of her Essence, that they can no more be plucked off
from her, then you can clip off the Sunbeams with a pair of Scissors.

Virtue is one in her self; much like the Center of a Circle, which though many
Lines are drawn from it round about, and it is looked upon sometimes as the
term of this Line, and then of that; yet it is one term to them all, and is it
self undivided. So is Virtue but one Perfection, though it seem to be
diversified in regard of many Affections which it moderates, and several
Actions which it does produce: her Unity is thereby no more disparaged, then
the Monarchy of a Prince is impaired by the multitude of his Subjects, or large
extent of his Dominion. Though the Precepts and Actions of Virtue are many,
they are all ordinated to one End, in which they are united, as well as in the
Principle from which they proceed.

This Variety is her Glory; for by this means she sits in her Royal Throne
guarded with a Princely attendance: Prudence it self manageth her affairs,
Justice decides her Causes, Charity keeps her Subjects in Union, and Obedience
makes them universally observant of her excellent Laws: and she receives a
complete Glory from them all, which would be considerably lessened if any of
them should be wanting to themselves or her. Thus Virtue is beautified by the
reflection of many Splendors upon her, which were at first derived from her
self. Thus have I sometimes beheld an illustrious blaze of mingled Lights
placed orderly in distinct Sockets upon a Candlestick of burnished Gold,
receiving their first Illumination from the midst of the Ball; but after they
had mixed their United Rays, how dazeling was the Glory of the Room where they
shone? Which they could not have effected, but that giving and taking light
from each other, they made a general Contribution for one Great Splendour. So
does the generous Vine declare the Plenty of its vigorous juice by thrusting it
forth, not in single Grapes, but Clusters.

But this great Truth, if I had said nothing, would have been sufficiently
verified in that Noble Combination of excellent Spirits, in whose converse I
and my fellow-Travailers have been unspeakably happy since our coming to
Theoprepia. The Pleasures which we have received from each are so many times
doubled, whilst we enjoy you all, that they are not to be expressed in words,
much less equaled with Thanks. We should have thought our selves blessed in no
mean degree, if we might have enjoyed, as our portion, any of those single
Friendships which you have bestowed upon us united in your most desirable
Company. And I must needs profess that we think our selves no less honored,
then if all the Muses had not only given us leave to visit them in their
distinct Cells, but had also appointed a Rendezvous upon Parnassus for our
sakes, there to bestow upon us the pleasures of their Music, which must needs
be an unparalled Consort, because it is made up of such Voices, which if they
were alone could not be equaled.

I have taken this opportunity in my own and my Friends names to give you
thanks, not knowing when I should have a fitter season to pay that which has
been a long while highly due. Ever may your Society flourish; let nothing make
your chaste Pleasures wither. But I might have spared this Wish; for it is no
more possible that your Delights can fade, then that those Eternal Roots upon
which they grow can die. The truth is, I can make no Wishes that signify any
thing as to your Happiness, except Duration: For if that which you enjoy be
continued, you can have no more. At last may the foolish world grow wise and
become happy in imitation of Theoprepia.

As to you, Philothea and Euergesia, an unparalled Pair of Virtuous Sisters,
in what words shall I present my particular Thanks? You have made the Love of
God and Man so amiable in your Discourses, that I cannot choose but love you
both. As the Virtues which you have elegantly commended are inseparable, so I
give you the Praises, which you equally deserve, in a joint acknowledgment: and
I should think my undertaking highly applauded, if I were as confident that I
should be pardoned, as I am sure that you are admired.

This Conference being ended, Phronesia made a return of thanks to Urania with
such affectionate expresses, that every one present thought Words to have been
the least ingredient in their Composition; and after a short time bestowed in
such pleasure as leaves no grief when it is past, Sophron desired them all to
retire into his house, where he entertained them with a Supper after the Mode
of Sophrosyne, and with such Diversions as neither wasted the time, nor gave
them any occasion to be weary of it. But having observed that the silent Night,
whilst they were talking, had stolen away more then they thought of those
hours which are allotted to Rest, he desired them to retire to their Chambers
to save what was left.

Phronesia and Theosebes having staid a few days with no small content in
Sophrosyne, they returned to the City, taking along with them their noble
Guests, whose company was as much pleasant to them, as the loss of it
administered occasion of grief to the good Sophron, who would have been much
troubled, but that he had learned among other Rules of Wisdom, to part
contentedly with the best things which God will permit us to keep no longer.

The Travailers had now spent a considerable time in Theoprepia; for which
though they were sufficiently paid with the pleasure of excellent Company, and
the knowledge of a most Happy People, yet the necessity which lay upon them to
finish their Design made them think of returning home: which when Phronesia,
Theosebes and the good Agape understood, they began to be affected with the
same resentements of their Condition, which men feel when a former Happiness
does aggravate a present Suffering; and thought that the Joys which they had
gained by the presence of most desirable Friends, were now all lost by their
departure; and they were willing to have judged it not only an Uncharitable
thing to deprive them of the Happiness which they had lately bestowed, but also
an Injustice to leave them in a worse condition then they found them. For they
seemed not only to carry their own Persons away, but also whilst they prepared
to be gone, they robbed the Theoprepians of their Hearts, and destroyed the
Contentment which they took in themselves before they came. But then reflecting
upon the Innocence and Necessity of their Friends, and harkening to Prudence
which admonished them concerning their own duty, they began to think it
requisite to take heed lest they committed the faults for which they were ready
to blame others. They had no reason to complain, since the Travailers were
afflicted with the same instances of Grief; and it had been cruelty to punish
such as suffered with them, and were most of all troubled that they could not
suffer entirely that Sorrow of which they perceived themselves to be, though a
guiltless, yet a sad Occasion.

Whoever had been present at this parting would have melted into Pity; for of
all the sharp Trials which in this Region of Changes exercise our tender
Spirits with a deprivation of our better Enjoyments, there is none that does
more afflict us then the Loss of those Companions who, whilst they staid with
us, made us a little Heaven with their presence. And though it does please us
that they are gone to Bliss, (for we cannot envy those whom we love,) yet the
remembrance of what we did enjoy, but of which we are now bereaved, does make
us more discontented that we have not leave to go with them, and renders our
lonesome abode below more doleful.

After many Embraces and diverse expressions of mutual Love, Phronesia and her
Friends having accompanied the Travailers a good way on the Road of Biocalon,
they took such a Leave of them, as was a lively Resemblance of that natural
affection which the Soul feels when it is forced from its intimate Associate,
the Body.

The Travailers had not gone much further before they came to the Valley of
Elpicale, which lies at the East end of Biocalon. Upon their arrival there they
found themselves immediately possessed with that sort of Joy, which Mariners
sailing toward the East Indies do experiment when they have weathered the Cape
of Good hope. It is a pleasant Dale: the Ground always green, and embellished
with diverse kinds of painted flowers and fragrant herbs, yielded not only a
rare Aspect to the Eye, but also a delicious Smell as they passed along; a
little Rill which watered the Valley, did glide along by them with a murmuring
noise for fear of being lest behind them. Both the sides of the Valley were
encompassed with straight Rows of fair Plants which, from their constant
vigor and perpetual flourishing, are called Amaranth. When they had measured
the better half of the Dale with a steady pace, they were accosted by a
beautiful Nymph, called Irene, which came out of a neighboring Grove, and
brought with her a great number of little Chappelets made of the purple flowers
of Amaranth, and put a little Coronet upon each of their Heads. When Urania
demanded the reason of that Action, she answered that the Owner of that Grove
appointed those Garlands as a Civility to all Travailers which came that way.
Urania and the rest receiving her Courtesy, dismissed her with many thanks put
into few words, because they had now a vehement desire to see the End of their
Journey.

Having quickly passed the valley of Elpicale, they came to the famous River
Lampromelan, so called, because though the waters were of a duskish color, yet
from the banks there is a fair view of the lofty Hills of Theoprepia the
Higher: whose Inhabitants they saw shining with Glory, as if they had been
clothed with the Sun, and so exalted above the state of this Low world, that as
they walked, they seemed to have the Moon under their feet.

A Ferriman, called Euthanatus, by order of the Prince of Theoprepia, gives
constant attendance here to transport such as come through Biocalon to his
Country. The man was of a grim look, and very apt to affright such as did not
know him: but they having heard that he was faithful in the discharge of his
Office, willingly committed themselves to his Conduct. He had no sooner placed
them in his Boat, but they fell into a gentle flumber, which after a long
journey refreshed their weary Limbs with an acceptable repose. Whilst
Euthanatus wafted them over, he diverted himself with a Song, which was framed
to express his compassionate (...) of the unpleasant Task of that Boatman
which wafts Evil Souls to Infernal shades, and pleased himself with his own
more noble Employment, in that he was the Ferriman of Theoprepia. His Ditty was
as follows.

Unhappy Charon! how I pity thee
Condemned to toil in Hellish drudgery?
What do thou daily suffer, tossed upon
The dismal billows of black Acheron?
I guess thy thoughts and passions, whilst I think
How often thy rotten Boat is like to sink,
Ore-fraught with sinful Souls; and thou dismayed
With their wan looks, whom Devils make afraid:
Who pay their freight with grudging, telling thee,
That thou have brought them where they would not be.
I thank my Master, I have no such task;
My Passengers give me more then I ask:
And I should count my self, though I Am but poor,
Well paid, though I for nothing waft them ore.
For they re Good Souls, and so refined from Sin
And heavy Flesh, that though I take them in
Many at once, I row with greatest ease,
And pass so quick, that I do ever please.
This I observe, They Are cheerful when they come,
And much more glad when I have brought them home.
By which I see, That those which no hurt do
Where they have been, are welcome where they go.
To keep presumptuous Ghosts out is my Charge:
Should they rush in, they would overwhelme my Barge:
And if Despair steal in, I know it would break
My Cordage, or else make my Vessel leake.
Unwilling Souls who by constraint have died,
To earthly life by strong affections tied,
Shall not come in; for they will but pass in pain,
And I be forced to bring them back again.
Should doubtful Folk, which trust not God, come near,
My wavering Bark would toss (...) Hope and Fear.
Who God (...), or weaker men beguile,
And their own Souls with wilful guilts defile,
The wind would turn, should such to pass essay;
Or if it were fair, they would prove a Remora.
Their dirty Wherry in foul Styx does floate:
Those which are meet for Heaven do fit my Boat.
And as they pass, no blustering wind dare blow,
Nor one rough VVave set frowns upon the brow
Of Lampromelan, whilst a constant gale
Of cold, but useful, Air does fill my sail.
Here I will sing, and work, nor grudge my stay
To waft my Masters Friends which come this way:
And when he says, he does expect no more,
I Will put my Boat adrift, and go ashore.
By that time he had ended his Song, he was come to the other side of the
River: and he had no sooner put his Passengers upon the Bank, but they awakened
and started into an unexpressible gladness for their happy arrival in their
Native Country. Some of their old Acquaintance walking at that time near the
River, conducted them courteously to the Palace of Abinoam which was hard by.

I should now proceed to relate the joyful welcome which the good old Father
bestowed upon his Children, and to discourse concerning the Marriage of
Nicomachus and Arete, and to declare how Abinoam, to honor their Nuptials,
brought forth not only all sorts of rich Bliss, but certain unspeakable degrees
of Joy, which he had kept secret a great while in the hidden recesses of his
vast Treasury. I should also say how affectionately Bentivolio's Brethren did
congratulate his Return, and made an agreement never to part more: and then
describe the manner of their Life, and Entertainment in the Court of Abinoam.
But being sufficiently wearied with coming hither, I will make bold to sit down
and rest before I go any further.

FINIS.
BENTIVOLIO AND URANIA, The Second Part, IN TWO BOOKS: By NATH. INGELO, D.D.

LONDON, Printed by J. Grismond for RICHARD MARRIOTT, and are to be sold at his
shop in Saint Dunstan's Churchyard in Fleetstreet. 1664.

To the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of LAUDER DAILL, Secretary of State to His
Majesty for the Kingdom of Scotland, Gentleman of His Majesty's Bedchamber,
and one of His most Honorable Privy Council in both Kingdoms.
MY LORD,
THe Obligations which your Lordship has laid upon me are so great, that I
disputed a good while with my self whether it were not better to continue an
unthankful Negligence, then to attempt a Gratitude in this poor Expression.
When I perused the Number of your Lordship's Civilities, I felt something of
those troublesome Passions which surprise a Merchant when by the Foot of his
Accounts he perceives that his Debts have overgrown his Ability to make
Payment. But remembering how unworthy a thing it is ingratefully to conceal
another's Right, I thought it was necessary to acknowledge what I owe, though I
am not able to discharge it: and when besides this I considered that your
Lordship's Goodness can as easily take a small Acknowledgment in good part as
bestow Courtesies without the Expectation of any, I grew a little confident,
and thought that the Forbearance of a due Address would be as unjust a Modesty
in me, as it is in any Tenant who is ashamed to carry his Rent because his
charitable Landlord requires only a Pepper-corn.

This Motive, yes, my Lord, this Motive is the Root upon which my Boldness
grows. A mean Sacrifice is not incapable of Acceptance with God, nor a little
Present with such as are like him, if they be offered with a sincere Mind. With
my own Intentions I am indifferently well acquainted, and I have received such
Assurance of your Lordship's generous Disposition, that I think I may lawfully
say that in your Lordship's behalf which Pindar did long since for Thereon the
Prince of Agrigentum; (...)
(...)
(...) Olymp. Od. 2.

(...)
(...)


But lest I should offend your Lordship's Modesty with a Recital of your just
Praises, or press too rudely upon your Patience with a long Epistle, I will
only crave leave to tell you a short story, (which is also a Cast of my present
Office) and then kiss your Lordship's Hands.

As I went one day since your Lordship's Departure from hence to that part of
the Neighboring Hill which rises with a lofty Grace upon the South Side of
the pleasant Valley Aquedon, where I had the Happiness first to know your
Lordship, I chanced to arrive at that hollow part of the Rock where your
Lordship was sometime imprisoned, just as Apollo accompanied with his Virtuosi
was making a Visit to the Muses who inhabit there. They to our great trouble
were at that time weeping. We having asked the Reason of their Tears, they
answered, that it was not possible to be so stupid as not to resent the Absence
of one of their best Lovers, and that they had not been able to sing as they
used to do when they thought of the Loss which they suffered by his Removal.
We were going to ask the Name of that so worthy Friend; but when by chance we
saw the Door of your Lordship's Cell thrown open, we knew well enough whom they
meant, and replied thus; Most gentle Muses, It is ingenuous not to forget one
to whom you are obliged; but you must take heed lest under the Pretense of
Grief you enviously resent your Friend's Happiness. Would you confine him to
your petty Conversation who is designed to the Service of one of the greatest
Princes in the World? You do too fondly love your private Concerns, if you are
displeased because such a Gallant Soul is taken from you, and you do not
consider that it is to promote a General Good, and to undertake a part in those
useful Cares to which the Muses themselves owe their Tranquillity. If great
Minds should resolve to decline the troublesome Affairs of Courts, the most
flourishing Kingdoms would soon find the same miserable change of their happy
Condition which the Athenians brought upon their once famous City, after they
had deprived themselves of their best Statesmen by a brutish Ostracism: with
which Fate the Syracusans also were justly punished, for making an Apish
imitation of that pernicious Custom by a foolish Petalism. The first of these
States might with as good reason have built their Acropolis without
Foundations, and the other have sent their Fleets to Sea without Ballast and
Pilots. The Truth is, if Virtuous Persons would not be drawn out of their quiet
Privacies to attend Public Business, Devils and the worst of Men would only
be left after their wild fashion to govern, that is, to destroy, the World.

Civility made the Muses silent till we had done speaking, and then they wept
again. Whereupon one of our Company demanding what it was that could trouble
them still; one of them (as I remember, it was Urania) replied thus, We are not
capable of envying one whom for many Reasons we are obliged to honor with our
best Love; neither are we so poorly-spirited as to repine at the public
Benefit which many may reap from our Lover's Employment: our Tears do only
signify our Desires of our Friend's Security, and express the Fears which we
must have for One encompassed with those Dangers which commonly attend the
Flourishing Seasons of Humane Life. We have been told that a Royal Poet used to
call great Prosperities ((...)) Flattering Lubricities; and that Atossa the
Mother of Xerxes expressed the same sense in words not much different; (...)
AEschyl, in Perf.

(...)
(...)
To which our great Lyrick speaking upon the same Argument has added, (...)
(...) Olymp Od.x.

(...)
(...)


Here Apollo smiled and said, I see that all true Lovers are a little Jealous.
I cannot but pardon that carefulness which springs from tender Affection; but
withal let me advise you to comfort your selves, and to lay aside those
Apprehensions which you might not (...) entertain for low Spirits; they are
impertinent here. I suppose you have had so much Experience of your Friend's
Virtue, long tried by many Assaults of Adverse Fortune, that you cannot wish
his Return to the old Dungeon in Portland for your fuller satisfaction in that
Point; and therefore it is unreasonable to distrust him now when he is brought
upon the Theater to show the same Virtue in a new Scene of Life, to perfect his
Courage in the Probations of a bright Prosperity, and to receive that Honor
which is due to Fortitude when it has proved it self Invincible by blunting
both the Horns of Tentation. Leave weeping, Dear Muses, and pray that your
Friend may do honor to God proportionable to the Advantages of his Condition,
that he may happily serve and be always loved by his Royal Master, that he may
increase the Glory of his Noble Family, and after many peaceful days in this
World be admitted into the Beatifick Presence of the Eternal King.

Here the obedient Muses dried their Eyes, kneeled down and prayed heartily (as
true Lovers use to do) for your Lordship's Happiness; which Performance is
also the daily Task of,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's most Obliged and very Affectionate Servant,

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Must begin this Address with an Excuse, and crave pardon for a Mistake in
the close of the Fourth Book of this History; which was occasioned by a Report
that Bentivolio and Urania, with the rest of their Companions, after their
Departure from Phronesium, went immediately to the Higher Theoprepia: but I am
informed since by an intimate Friend who dwelt some time in that Country that
they made a stay at Theander's House in the Borders of the Lower Theoprepia,
being engaged to it by the Charming Conversation of the two Virtuous Sisters,
Theonoe and Irene. Whilst they stayed there, Bentivolio and his Brother
understanding by two Gentlemen who came upon a Visit to Theander's Daughters,
that the brutish Theriagene had barbarously deprived Alethion of his Kingdom;
they found themselves very unwilling to return home till they had endeavored
the Restoration of that Excellent Prince. As the Design was worthy of their
Generous Souls, so they thought it feasible by the Assistance which they hoped
to obtain from the King of Theoprepia.

After I had received this Intelligence, I thought it was necessary to correct
the forementioned Error; I looked upon my History as imperfect without this
Addition, and (...) that it might be no unpleasing Diversion to some Readers to
understand the Life of Alethion, to know the Accidents which happened to the
Noble Travelers before their return to their own Country, and to read those
Discourses which passed between Bentivolio and other very worthy Persons
concerning Arguments which I think to be of as great Import as any in which
Humane Wit employs it self. In some places I have brought them in defining the
Nature of true Happiness, in some asserting the Existence of a Deity, in others
attempting the Vindication of Divine Providence. Sometimes they undertake to
show the Vanity of this present Life, and the true Use of that short Time by
which our Continuance in this World is limited. Sometimes you will hear them
exploding vain (...) to Revelations in Matters of Religion, and at other times
demonstrating the Eternal Nature of Virtue; and in some Leaves you will read
what they said when they endeavored to prove the Immortality of Humane Souls:
besides some other Subjects very considerable to all serious Persons, which I
have endeavored to put into handsome Dresses, both knowing that they are
worthy to be (...) with the most industrious Art, and also hoping that they
would add grace to my Book whilst I treated concerning them.

I thought also it would not be unacceptable to insert a short Story of the
Life, and to give a brief Synopsis of the Sacred Doctrine, of our dearest
Savior: To which I have added also a Vindication of his Incomparable Gospel,
to discharge it from the Impudent Cavils of those who undervalue the Holy
Scripture, not because they have much Wit, but because they are Ignorant of
those Perfections for which it is not only Justifiable, but Admirable; as they
have been told not long since by a Gentleman deservedly honored for Wit,
Virtue and Learning.

In asserting the forementioned Verities I found reason to be more prolix, and
shorter in the Historical Narrations; which though they are in most parts
Parabolical, and so not unuseful to those who will understand them, yet they
being not the Principal parts of my Discourse, I thought less care was
requisite to compose them.

If any Curious Reader ask, But why all this? Really I can only say that it was
partly to give an account of my Time to Almighty God, to do honor to the
Gospel of our Lord and Savior, to serve the Lovers of Truth and Goodness; and
partly to entertain my own Mind. If Tully pretended this as a Reason of his
writing Books, Nos autem qui non tantum roboris habemus ut Cogitatione tacita a
solitudine abstrahamur, ad hanc scribendi operam omne studium curamque
convertimus; I hope I may use the same Excuse, especially since I am very much
satisfied that I could not employ those quiet Hours which I gain from the
troublesome Affairs of Humane Life to better purposes then those which I have
mentioned. What good man can dissent from him who, amongst some Extravagancies,
has recorded this noble Speech, Il ne faut pas douter Mount. Book 2. chap. 12.
p. 243.
que ce ne soit (...) usage le plus honorable que nous leurs scaurions donner;
and qu' il n' est occupation ny dessein plus digne d' un homme Chrestien, que
deviser par toutes ses estudes and pen semens a embellir, estendre and
amplifier la verite de sa creance? i. e. There is not an Employment more
honorable for a Man or more worthy of a Christian, then those studious
Endeavors by which we embellish Religion, and advantageously recommend the
Truth of it to the World. I cannot but think that what Ion said of his
Attendance at Delphi, may be much more (...) applied here; (...)
(...), (...) in Ion.

(...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
or what the Priestess called her services, (...). In Bacch.

Which in English speaks thus, My Task is noble, Phoebus me commands
To wait where the Oraculous Tripos stands.
I serve no Mortal, but that God whom all
The World does justly their great Patron call.
This Holy Office is Ambition's Height;
To serve is Honor, and to work Delight.


What can be more congruous to our Nature, if we know our selves, then this
(...), to devote our Time to the service of God, and (which he values as one of
the chief Sacrifices which we can offer to him) to direct our Actions to the
Melioration of Mankind? I look upon the World as a great Temple whose Doors are
open day and night, in which some do continually sing Hymns in the Praise of
the Eternal King who is the Creator of it: It becomes all Excellent Spirits
both to bear a part in that Divine Song themselves, and to use their best Art
to bring others into that Holy Chorus. How far these Papers may conduce to so
good a Purpose, I cannot tell; but I have made them as persuasive as I could.
That for which I have Eurip. Pind.
been chiefly sollicitious is that they may please (...), such as are fit to
determine concerning Wisdom, and who have heartily concerned themselves for the
Interests of Virtue: and if this Expectation be not frustrated, I shall think
my self (...), to have performed the greater part of my Task; and for other
matters I think my self able to pass unconcerned through little Censures.

In this short Prologue I think it will not be impertinent to make a particular
Address to Atheists, Epicureans and Scepticks. I have many Reasons to fear that
I shall not convert Atheists: I know that such as dispute with that sort of men
do (...), contend with the Arrogant and argue with such as are hard to be
convinced: but since their Infidelity is conquerable, I have done my endeavor;
and if the Application prove not effectual, yet I hope they will find no just
cause to be offended at my Charity, if any such shall happen to read this
Book. If I have used any sharp Expressions in the Reproof of their Unbelief, or
endeavored to cast Disparagement upon their Principles; they will not have
Reason to be angry if they consider the Greatness of that Interest which I
defend, and remember that the Ancient Philosophers spoke at a far higher Rate;
the boldness of whose Philosophic Zele I have followed at a very remote
distance.

Plotin the chief of the Platonists pronounces rooundly, that the Denial of an
All-wise Creator is (...), Enn. 3. lib. 2.
so Irrational that it can be approved by none but those who have neither
Understanding nor Sense. Arrianus, in a great Indignation against such as could
not discern God by Lib. 1. cap. 16.
his Providence, breaks out into these passionate words, (...). O God, one of
thy Creatures is enough to discover thy Providence to a modest and thankful
Person; those who have considered many of them, and yet do not acknowledge a
Creator, are guilty of a stupid Impudence, and ( as he says in another place)
are (...) of a (...), Lib. 1. c. 6.
they have lost their Discerning Faculty, and so cannot perceive; or are
infected with Ingratitude, and will not acknowledge a God. Cicero having made
use of the Admirable Courses of the Orbs as an Argument to evince a Deity,
says, (...) Lib. 2 de
qui vacare mente putat, is ipse expers mentis habendus est, Not. (...).
etc. He which is not sensible of a Divine Mind so fairly represented, is so
devoid of Understanding himself that he knows nothing.

Many others whom it is needless to cite have used Expressions of the same
nature; who, though they were not so enraged with the baseness of Atheists as
Moxus was, who drowned the Crambians because they did not worship any God, yet
being inflamed with a sober Zele they made use of words which were justly
reprochful, and condemned them as most unworthy Persons for attempting to
extinguish the noblest sense of our Souls, and to eradicate (...), Plut. Dion.
Prof.
the Ancient Faith of Mankind, that Natural Belief which is planted in all
Reasonable Souls, and to overthrow the strong and everlasting Foundation of
Virtue. Who can justly blame their Heat, when they did only oppose such as do
(...), insolently affront the common Faith? For my own part, I must say that
whilst the whole World exhibites Arguments in the behalf of God, and all the
Creatures proclaim a Deity echoing to one another with loud Acknowledgments; I
cannot but wonder that the morose (...) should not be pleased with this
Intellectual Harmony: whilst he stops his Ears, and with a surly voice denies
the Truth which is so generally affirmed, he makes me think of the
dull-sounding Drone in a Bag-pipe, for when the higher Notes delight the Ear
with various Harmonies, being pleasantly referred to one another, this
discomposeth all with one Base, untuned Note. I would not have troubled my self
with this sort of People, but that I judged it necessary to show the Falsehood
of their Principles, and so to prevent the Contagion of those Errors which
have a most pernicious Influence upon Humane Life; for they tend directly to
the Overthrow of Religion, the Destruction of Virtue, and to the Introduction
of all bold Wickedness into the World.

The voluptuous Epicureans will be content that I make my Address to them very
short, lest they should be too much disturbed in their soft Repose. I confess I
think it is to little purpose to say much to them of Divine Matters, whom
Sensual Pleasure has made (...), such dull-sighted judges of Truth, that they
affirm there ought not to be any Knowledge of Good and Evil, that so they may
eat Forbidden Fruit more securely. Lest they should be discomposed with that
which I have written in disgrace of the Life, as well as Book. 5.
the Philosophy, of their great Patron, Epicurus; I think it is fit in this
place to give an Account of the Reasons which I had for it. His Opinion
concerning Pleasure was declared in the time of his Life by his most intimate
Companions to be this; That our Happiness does consist in brutish
Voluptuousness. That this is the genuine Sense of his Expressions, his chief
Admirers could not but acknowledge many years after his Death. Lucian
confesses plainly, that when he compared Epicurus with Democritus and
Aristippus ((...), that famous Master of Luxury) he had nothing to say but
this, That he was (...), more impious then they, but for other things he was a
good Companion and a Lover of his Palate. He was reproch'd for his beastly
Philosophy by Heathen as well as Christian Writers, as is manifest to such as
know Books. Among others the Noble Epictetus, as Arrianus testifies, used to
call his Opinions (...), Lib. 3. cap. 7.
Wicked Assertions, destructive to Cities, pernicious to Families. Though
Diogenes Laertius endeavor to put a better Gloss upon his Doctrine, yet what
is the Testimony of a single Author against so many who are unexceptionable?
That one gallant man, Cicero, whom I have opposed to him as a Counterwitness,
is so considerable, that the learned Casaubon does esteem him worthy of a
higher Encomium then I have bestowed upon him, and uses these words in his
Praise, M. Tullius, Author gravissimus, In Not. ad Laert.
quique esse debeat (...), M. Tully, a most grave Author, and one who alone is
worth ten thousand Diogenesses. I might add to these the disgraceful Character
which is put upon this Sect in Holy Writ.

That the Gardens of Epicurus were not free from that sort of Women which I
have mentioned in my fifth Book, needs no greater Proof then what I have
offered. Besides one whom I have named, Laertius and Tully have recorded many
others, the chief of which were Marmorium, Erotium, Hedia and Nicidium. The
Epistle which Leontium, one of that Number, wrote to Lamia, in which she
complains of the Venereous Temper of Epicurus, and disparageth him as an old
Adonis, is recorded in the second Book of Alciphron, and begins thus; (...),
i.e. Nothing, as I think, is harder to be pleased then an old man when he grows
youthful again, this Epicurus does so persecute me. He finds fault with all
things, suspects every thing, and writes endless Letters to me, which keep me
from his Garden. By Venus, if Adonis were now fourscore years old, lousie,
always sick, and wrapped his head in a Fleece of Wool in stead of a Cap, I
could not endure him.

But I will disturb these delicate People no longer.

The Scepticks can expect no satisfaction from me; for they teach their
Scholars to laugh at Geometrical Demonstrations, and have given them this as
the Sum of their Philosophy, That they ought not to believe any thing. It
must be granted that Truth is not very easily found out; but they have highly
(...) it by confounding it as much as they can with Falsehood, and discourage
all Industry by reproching our Endeavors for the obtaining of it, as Enquixies
after we know not what. What else did Boccace mean by his three Rings, Sextus
Empiricus by his Purging Potion, his Ladder and Fire? To what other End did he
direct the great pains which he took to prove that we have no Faculties to
employ in the search, and that Truth has no distinct Character from Falsehood,
that we have no Connate Directions or External Helps to bring us to the
knowledge of any thing; in short, that we are as much assured that Salt Water
is mad because the Sea ebbs and flows, as that a Man is Rational because he
apprehends and discourses? This stupid Unbelief was much promoted in the World
by Lucian; and how much he pleased himself in his Attempt may be perceived by
his Hermotimus, the Cup supposed to be lost in the Temple of AEsculapius, and
that sly Jeer which we find in his Piscator: (...).

I can easily foresee also that a small Effect of this Discourse is to be
expected from the Rhodomonts of this present Age, who having resigned
themselves to the slavery of Vice, do publicly declare themselves free from
all pretenses to Virtue, and with no small scorn pronounce (as some of their
Predecessors did long ago) (...), Plot. Enn. 1. Lib. 6.
That Temperance is but Folly, and Righteousness a generous Ignorance; and
boldly protest that Bonum is Umbra qum nescimus, quod Honestum splendido magis
quam solido nomine dicitur; Goodness is a shadow of we know not what, which by
a splendid Title, without any solid Reason, is called Honesty.

And because they would not be condemned by the Virtuous Lives of good men,
they would have the World believe that such as endeavor the Reformation of
Mankind, and give Rules of Excellent Discipline in hope to make Men better, do
only (...), S. Emp.
speak great words which are above the Power of Nature; and rather declare what
they wish then what is possible; and that when they persuade others to put
their Doctrines into Practice, they do not tune disorderly Nature, but put it
upon the Rack.

I know very well that whosoever considers the Degeneracy of Humane Nature,
will be compelled to say with Seneca, Rem difficilem De Constant. Cap. 4.
optamus humano generi, Innocentiam, We desire a very difficult thing for
Mankind, Innocence; and after many Endeavors, still perceiving the potent
resistance which Vice makes, will be apt to use the Reflection which Hippocrates
made in the like Case, (...), These are but wishes. Yet we are assured In
Epist. ad Cratevam.
also that those who wish well to others are not to be blamed, and that thanks
have been given to such as refused to despair in hard Attempts. It is a base
Cowardice to yield to an Adversary who may be conquered, though with some
difficulty; especially where Courage can ascertain a Victory in part: And
therefore wise men have as rationally continued their Endeavors in this case,
as Mariners do their Industry at the Pump of a Leaking Ship; which Seneca has
gallantly expressed in these words; Aliam excludit aquam, aliam De Ira (...).
2. cap. 10.
egerit, manifesta foramina praecludit, latentibus and ex occulto sentinam
ducentibus labor continuo resistit; nec ideo intermittit quia quantum
exhaustum est subnascitur. Lento adjutorio opus est contra mala continua and
foecunda, non ut desinant, sed ne vincant, i. e. They keep out the Water as
well as they can, they force out that which gets in, they stop the Leaks which
are visible, and resist the danger which threatens them by such holes as they
cannot discover, with a continued Labor; neither do they intermit their Pains,
though the Vessel takes in water as fast as they exhaust it. We must use a
gentle Industry against those Mischiefs which spring up continually, not hoping
to destroy, but to subdue them. For this Reason I have broke through the
Discouragements which arise from the Power of bold Vice, and ventured to
describe Noble Examples in which Holy Rules appear practicable, that I might
both engage and assist Imitation in all capable Souls: And I made choice of
this way, knowing that we ought, In (...).
as Plato has told us, (...), to act looking upon beautiful and divine Images
set before us. Some possibly will learn to despise a vicious course of Life,
though it be followed by the degenerate part of the World, when they see how
contemptible it is in comparison of better Examples; and rather endeavor to
contribute something to the Exaltation of Humane Manners by their Virtue, then
hope to excuse their own Imperfections by citing such mean Precedents. It is
but a slight Justification of our Actions which is only taken from Vulgar
Practice; (...), For no M Tyr. Dissert. 20.
place can create Virtue by common suffrages: but it is the glory of men to
conform their Lives to the Eternal Reasons of Goodness, whose Indispensable
Principles are Connate with our Souls.

It will be strange to no wise man that I interpret the Divine Precepts as
requiring Duties far above any thing which we see practiced in most Nations of
the World. An Excellent Person has told us long since, Equidem si omittenda
sunt omnia tanquam Mori Vtop.
insolentia atque absurda, quaecunque perversi hominum mores fecerunt ut videri
possint aliena, dissimulemus oportet apud Christianos pleraque omnia quae
Christus docuit; If we must omit all those things as impertinent and absurd
which the perverse manners of men have made to seem strange, we shall be forced
to conceal among Christians most of those things which Christ taught.

I hope none will take an occasion to find fault with me by making this
uncharitable Supposition, that I have taken the boldness to give Precepts of
Virtue, desiring by that means to be esteemed better then others. No, no;
(...). ^.
I have no contention with any in that point, but with my self always; for I
endeavor by the Assistance which I administer to others to grow better then my
self. I desire also that none would be offended at those Objections which for
the insolent boldness with which they contradict Truth might be supposed worthy
to be concealed; I judged it in some part necessary, lest the Adversaries of
Truth should say, if I had quoted only some more ordinary Exceptions, (...),
Lucian. in Hermot.
That we set up Puppets of Twigs, and having shot them down boast that we have
conquered armed Men: I thought also that being answered they would become
harmless.

I suppose I need make no Excuse for inserting amongst my Discourses some
Arguments known only by Divine Revelation; for I designed this Book principally
for the service of Christians; and all men do esteem it a most absurd thing not
to be willing to hear Truth or receive good News because it is not brought by
an ordinary Carrier.

Now, Courteous Reader, I commit my Papers to your perusal. 1 dismiss them more
cheerfully, because of that Good Fortune which, as I make bold to hope, does
await them; being assured that if any thing be written as it ought to be, it
will please Good men; and that whatsoever is defective, will equally please
those who take most delight in that which is worst, having indeed no other way
to keep themselves in their own favor but by finding (...) in others. And as I
must always esteem it a high Reward of my Endeavors, if they be accepted by
the Virtuous; so I do think my self worthy of much blame if I should envy that
small content which any shall please to take in that which, because it
corresponds not with their Humor, they vote Imperfect; especially since I have
placed the Satisfaction of my Mind concerning this Book, not in Expectation of
Praise, but in Assurance that what I have written is a service to Virtue and
Truth.

THE FIFTH BOOK: OR, THE RIAGENE.
THe beautiful Irene conducting the Noble Travelers along the Grove, where the
cheerful Birds welcomed their Arrival with pleasant Notes, in a short time they
entered into a Walk more spacious then the rest, where fair Lyme-trees and
flourishing Sycamores stretching their long arms from one side to the other
made a most hospitable shade, which with the help of thick branches covered
with broad leaves kept out the offensive heat. This Walk brought them to a
Garden which joined to the House, which was beautified with many fair Plats
encompassed with little Myrtle-hedges, and being adorned with excellent Flowers
and fragrant Herbs did recreate the Senses and Minds of such as came near them
with sweet odours and lovely colors. It was graced with variety of broad
Allies bordered with Cypress-trees. At the four corners of the Garden were
Sommer-Pavilions of structure sufficiently handsome. Upon the other side of the
House was a fair Orchard planted with the best sorts of Fruit Trees and many
rare and useful Plants. The passage to it was through a little Wilderness,
which by many windings representing a Labyrinth in a Wood of Laurel, Holly and
Juniper, led to a delightsom Aviary peopled with the best-voic'd Birds. The
middle of it was embellished with an artificial Rock, out of which crystal
streams continually ascended through little Pipes, and falling down the sides
of the stone filled a small Sea in which the Rock stood with water. Here the
Birds took an infinite delight to drink and bathe themselves: Neither did they
think themselves Prisoners; for the Cage being large, handsomely turfed, and
having many Trees planted round about the sides of it, gave them so much room
to build their Nests and fly up and down, that they seemed to enjoy a Wood in a
Palace. When they came to the outermost Walks upon the North-side of the
Orchard, they saw large Fish Ponds, some of which bred so plentifully that they
stored all the rest; and those which were not Mothers proved good Nurses, and
did so well feed the young Fry, that they supplied the house upon all
occasions with delicate and well-grown Fishes. They had no sooner entered into
the Garden but they were in full view of the House, which though it was not so
curiously framed as to make signification that he which built it hoped to live
in it for ever, yet neither was it so meanly contrived or furnished, but that
it was fit to entertain most worthy persons. At this time the Owners looked
upon it more pleasingly then ever, judging it now the happy Receptacle of such
Company as Angels would be glad to receive into their Celestial Mansions.

Here the Virtuous Theonoe received the Noble Travelers, and accosted them
with such a Grace, that it struck them into no small Admiration of her
presence. She did fully answer and somewhat exceed those fair Proportions by
which they had drawn her Image in their minds, not so much in regard of those
fading Lustres which are visible in the Body, and do usually produce a slight
Love in amorous Hearts, (though she had Beauty enough to make her Body a
lodging most agreeable to the Excellent Qualities of her Heavenly Soul, and it
became her as properly as a handsome Cabinet does a most rich Jewel) but she
was chiefly wondered at for those better Virtues which raise and fix the
greatest Estimations in the Breasts of the most knowing Persons. But that some
which have heard of her incomparable Perfections, would think them profaned if
any of no greater abilities then mine are should offer to picture them, I would
venture at her Description: However I suppose I may lawfully do it, or at
least it is but a Sin that she her self would pardon, that upon so just an
occasion I make bold to relate what I can remember of her singular Virtues. The
shape of her Body was so full of Symmetry, that the most curious Limner could
find no fault in it. Her Eyes were beautified with a sparkling Modesty. Her
Countenance was a lively Pourtraiture of Grave sweetness. Her Dress was such
as showed that she neither wanted Art to put it on decently, nor was troubled
with any fantastical delight in Apparel. Her Father neglected nothing which
might signify his affectionate care of her Happiness, but being sensible that
he had received from God a Daughter of an Excellent Nature, he was diligent to
give her Education suitable (...) Capacity and Birth. In this point Theonoe had
the best assistance in the World, that is, the daily Example of her most
prudent Mother Sosandra. Her great Knowledge testified that she had improved
all advantages to the utmost, and was a clear proof that the Capacity of the
Female Sex is not so inferior to ours as some Men do ignorantly believe. Her
Fancy was quick, her Memory faithful, her Judgment solid. She understood many
Languages, and could speak some very exactly. Her Discourse was composed of
discreet Wit, and raised Admiration in all that conversed with her: for she
delivered well-fitted words and excellent sense with such tunable Accents, that
those which heard her thought she spoke like Memnon's Statue when it was struck
with the Sunbeams. Her Conversation was Ingenious, and always expressed such
a modest Confidence as accompanies Innocence when it is lodged in a generous
Soul. Her Temper was something reserved, but void of all Morosity. Her
Deportment prudent, and wanted nothing which is requisite to make up a graceful
Carriage. She used no Affectedness in her Speeches, Looks or Actions. Humility
pleased it self to dwell in such a Noble Spirit, which set off its worth with
all possible Advantage. She had so much Discretion and Fidelity, that the most
Excellent Persons in the World desired her Friendship. She did so truly love
Charity, and expressed her regard of those which needed it with such an
universal care, that there were none of her poor Neighbors which prayed more
heartily for themselves then for her. She was known to be such a passionate
Votary to Chastity, that none durst speak rudely in her presence. She was a
true Lover of God, and devoted her best Affections to him and to his service,
ever esteeming it as a great folly to pretend Love to amiable Persons or worthy
Things, and to slight God, the greatest Good and First Fair, by whom all other
things were made lovely. Her Religion was not made of Talk or framed of a few
external addresses, by which many make their Devotionary part, like the rest of
their Life, a Complement; (...) it consisted in a great Knowledge and much Love
of the Divine Nature, and in a constant Resignation of her Will and Actions to
all holy Commands as indisputable Laws. Having spent a good part of her Life
according to this infallible Method, at last she grew accomplished with all
those Virtuous Habits, and was blessed with those serene Tranquillities which
fix themselves in those Ingenuous Souls where true Knowledge is sincerely
obeyed.

This is a rude draught of Theonoe's Perfections: and though I have not been
able to paint her to the life, yet it does so far resemble her, that by it you
may know the Qualities of Irene; for they were not more Sisters in Nature, then
they were alike in all virtuous Accomplishments. Indeed they were two lively
Reflections of one Divine Beauty parted between them, and shined with no more
different. Rays then the Sun would send down if it were cut into two pieces.

Some possibly which may chance to read this Story will be apt to think that I
have said too much in their Commendation: but there is none which ever saw them
and was in their company, but will either be angry or sorry for the imbecility
of my Wit, finding the Encomiums which I have bestowed upon them to fall so
exceedingly short of their transcendent Worth. I have the rather committed this
short Delineation to writing, because I suppose that other sorts of Painting
are only able to express but one half of Beauty, and that the far worse part;
and because I think the two Sisters in this representation are so far beyond
ordinary Exemplars, that many Ladies would think themselves very handsome if
they were like them; and of this I am sure, that in all places it is not easy
to meet with such as are equally made up. I know it is no hard matter to find
many which are graced with an elegant form of Body, pleasing features of the
Face, an amiable sweetness of quick Eyes, Heads covered with fair Hair, smooth
Hands parted into delicate Fingers ending in a round littleness; and in short,
adorned with proportions of Bodily parts so exactly measured, and lively
colors so well placed, that they might sit to Painters as Original Copies of
rare Pieces of Humane Form: and yet many of these Beauties are so deformed with
evil Dispositions and dishonorable Actions, that the excellency of their
bodily Composition is spoiled by an ill-agreeing connection with a vicious Soul:
for which they have been not unfitly compared to the Ancient Temples of Egypt,
which are fair outwardly, being large Structures built with choice Stones; but
if you looked inward, instead of a God you should only see an Ape, a Crocodile,
or a Serpent. And yet how fondly do some dote upon these empty shows,
esteeming a well-colour'd Skin or handsome Gestures above Excellency of
Manners, Modesty and Chastity, and those other Virtues which constitute a great
Soul? I call it Dotage, for the folly is no less ridiculous then if they should
be enamored with their fine clothes, or prefer the fashion of their new
Apparel before the comely shape of their Bodies. But I must return to my Story.

Amongst those many Diversions which the Travelers enjoyed in the conversation
of these Noble Sisters, I must not forget one which they esteemed above all the
rest: It was a Summer House which Theander had built near the Head of a
pleasant Spring, which running under it made the lower Rooms cool Grotta's, and
was adorned by a neighboring Grove which grew hard by it. As soon as they were
told that Theander made this the Receptacle of his retired Life; they were
affected with a singular pleasure: for we are apt to be moved, I know not how,
with the very places where we find particular remembrances of those brave Souls
whose Virtues we have admired, and seem to see those great men, when the Houses
where they dwelt, the Rooms in which they discoursed, and the Tables where they
sat are before our eyes. Here Theander was constantly to be found, not
sleeping away his Time, or wasting it idly with vain pleasures, as the soft
Gallants of Rome trifled away their Lives in the Gardens of Tarquin: no,
Theander, and many Virtuoso's which daily frequented his House, conversed in
these Privacies, as the Great Tully did with Atticus, Cotta and Balbus, and the
rest of his learned Companions, when they walked under the Marian Oak at
Arpinum, or sat in cool shades upon the Banks of Fibrenus. Having here
sequestered themselves from the Tumults of the lower World and the avocations of
vulgar Conversation, they enjoyed a freedom from the troubles of impertinent
Company, rejoiced in a calm fruition of noble Studies, and recreated themselves
with a most profitable Diversion from such laborious employments as some men by
reason of their condition of Life are necessitated to undergo. Hither they
retired to modest Pleasures, and sweetened Labor with Ingenuous Recreation.
Here Theander, when he was alone, improved his Mind in the Knowledge of things
by deep Meditation; not only reading such Books as were worthy to have been
written, but sometimes writing such as were not unworthy to be read; designing
his endeavors not only to his own entertainment, but to accomplish his Soul
with such abilities as might make him more serviceable to the common good of
Mankind. When his Friends came to him, he made them contribute their
Assistances, whilst they employed themselves jointly, sometimes in the
Contemplation of the Heavens, to observe the several motions of the Planets,
and by the help of Telescopes to take notice of their various Appearances; and
sometimes in the examination of Minerals, for which purpose they had a Room
well appointed with Furnaces and Distillatories; otherwhiles they inquired into
the Mysteries of sensitive Nature, the Reasons of Growth, and the Engines of
Automatous motion, which may be understood by Anatomy. Some select places of
the Garden were furnished with large Bee-hives made of Glass; and through those
Windows they peeped into the exquisite methods of those busy Artists, which
contain such great Skill in a little Compass.

In the Grove Theander had built a Chapel, which in my mind was a Design full
of prudence; He, without doubt, having found in himself upon his Arrival in
this solemn place a great alteration of Temper, that is, a more raised
disposition for devout thoughts, took the advantage of his Experience, and
dedicated the place to holy Services, hoping charitably that those good people
which came to it through those shady Walks would be encountered with those
heavenly affections which he had felt in himself. Who has not observed that
the soft murmurs of a Fountain, the sight of that green Moss which naturally
adorns the Banks, the gentle blasts of cool Air which are whispered through the
Trees, and the native horror of a thick Grove, do compose the Mind to more
then ordinary thoughts, and raise great passions in the Soul? Upon our first
entrance into an ancient Temple, arched with a lofty Roof, whose awful
solemnity is heightened with an holy Silence; or when we descend into a
spacious Cave, whose hollowness not wrought by Art seems to be a natural Vault
overspread with the Canopy of an hanging Mountain; do we not feel our selves
struck with a sacred dread, and made apt to entertain more soft affections; as
if the Walls we see, or the Ground on which we tread, were animated with some
particular Genius which bestowed upon us this change of Disposition, either as
an assurance of Welcome, or else as a notice of its own great Presence? For this
reason we must needs suppose that the knowing Poets frequented the heads of
Fountains, and meditated in silent Woods, not only as Recesses from noise, but
as those delightful Mansions where they were sure to find the Muses always at
home, and never fail to receive their wonted Inspirations. The Heathenish
Idolaters had so much prudence in the course which they took for the supporting
of Erroneous Worship, as to join a Grove to every Temple; for whilst the
People, apt to admire whatsoever is strange, thought some invisible Power must
needs inhabit such Solemn Places, their Devotion received a natural nourishment
from their Eyes: Of these effects their Idolatrous Guides could easily make
application to what Object they pleased, the Worshippers being extremely
ignorant. But Theander, who knew how to make use of every thing, had virtuously
improved these natural advantages both for himself and his Neighbors, who were
willing to be relieved from the oppressive load of Secular life; and knowing
that they must needs lose God where they cannot find themselves, would
earnestly long to retire frequently to this pious Solitude, where they were
restored to the use of their own better Powers; and tasting there the fresh
delights of the Divine Presence, would be unwilling to descend from this holy
Mount into those lower Grounds where earthly Vapors always rise, and usually
stifle and choke the delicate sense of the Soul. When I think of Theander, (and
I often think of him) I cannot but wish to be in some such place.

The Noble Travelers visited this Chapel every day, and spent a great part of
their time here, in the Grove and the Garden-house; which, beside the other
Conveniences forementioned, was accommodated with a flat Roof, which being
covered with Lead and encompassed with Ballisters gave 'em leave to walk where
they enjoyed the Pleasure of two fair Prospects. Upon one side they had a view
of the Higher Theoprepia, showing at a good distance like a pleasant Landscape.
In the way to it they beheld the whole valley of Elpicale, and at the further
end of the Dale the fair Haven Kallolimen, and the famous River Lampromela,
which parts the two Theoprepia's. At Kallolimen an old Ferriman called
Euthanatus, by order of the Prince of Theoprepia, gives constant attendance to
transport all Passengers which come through Biocalon over the River Lampromela.
I have not yet received a perfect notice of the particulars which make up this
Excellent Landscape, and therefore I must crave your Pardon, good Reader, that I
pass it by with such a short Narrative.

From the other side of this Roof they looked into that part of Theriagene
where stood the great City Plutocopia. This was removed from Theander's seat to
such a distance, that it was not discernible without the help of a
Prospective-glass. Bentivolio perceiving it to be very large, desired Theonoe
to give them a Description of it, and to inform them concerning the Customs of
the People. I shall the more willingly obey your Command, answered Theonoe,
having received Intelligence concerning it from a kinsman of mine who came to
visit us not long since, being just then returned from Plutocopia, whither he
had traveled to acquaint himself with their manner of Life. It was called
Plutocopia by Taraxion, the Son of Mataeogenes, who built it. It is not far
distant from the Proud City Hyperenor, whose insolent Example the Plutocopians
do but too much imitate. It is (...) upon an Isthmus or narrow Bridge of Earth
lying between two vast Seas, which do continually beat upon it, and every day
wash away some part of the Land with their impetuous waves. There is nothing
very remarkable in this City but an unspeakable Industry which they bestow only
to get Riches. Their Coin has no Image upon it, but is only inscribed with two
words, Chrysus being stamped upon one side of it, and Tapanta upon the other.
The Device is not improper, because it does significantly express the vast
apprehensions which they have of Wealth. They understand no other Happiness but
that which they can measure, as Hannibal did the Romans Rings, by the Bushel.
They bestow upon themselves for Recreation some of the most feculent sort of
Pleasures, for they vouchsafe to be drunk sometimes at a gluttonous Feast. A
virtuous Person is reckoned among them by the number of Servants which he
keeps, the Acres of Land which he possesses, or the Ships which belong to him.
Charity is esteemed a capital Foolery, Humility and Modesty are confined to the
houses of the Poor. The Inhabitants are all either unjust themselves, or
Oppressors Heirs. Ingenuous Arts have no place amongst them. They think
themselves incomparably learned, if they understand the Tongues of Trade, and
have some little skill in Courtship. They never tasted any Liberty of Soul, and
are at last so extremely in love with their habitual Slavery, that they will
neither open their eyes to look upon Truth, nor hearken to those which offer to
show them their Errors. They take it as the greatest incivility in the world
for any to attempt the change of their Opinions. The truth is, having bottomed
the Designs of their Life and their expectations of Felicity upon Erroneous
thoughts, wise Counsel would but disturb their Peace. Some which have
calculated their Latitude, report that they are situate in a Climate which lies
many degrees without the Tropic of Virtue. The Youth being never acquainted
with any other methods of Education, but to learn how to get and keep Money, do
usually so improve themselves in that Art, that they are able to cheat their
Fathers: and in a short time they do so exceed the bounds of Covetous desires
which were set to them, that they will frequently complain that their
overgrown Parents do not die soon enough. In point of Marriage they are
contrary to the Genius of other Lovers, for in Plutocopia no young Virgin has
so many Suitors as a rich old Woman with three Teeth. Those which are
beautified with a good Fortune, especially if they be not likely to live long,
though they be really very ill-favored, are there esteemed more handsome then
an Exquisite piece done by Titian or Van-Dyke. They are very uncivil to
Strangers, hoping by this means that they shall be freed from the chargeable
trouble of entertaining such as come from other places. They are infinitely
suspicious of their Neighbors, and upon small occasions, magnified by
Jealousy and false Reports, will fall upon one another, after such a cruel
manner, that one would think a Civil War had happened amongst a swarm of Wasps.
They are perpetually Litigious, and drag those to the Law whom they have
injured. It is no wonder, for it is their Principle to believe that they ought
to hate another for ever, after they have once done him a Discourtesie. They
are so exceedingly ungrateful, that those few (and they are but few) which do
good to others, are so far from hoping for a thankful requital, that they fear
a mischief from none more then those whom they have relieved. They are always
gnawed with Envy, repining at that which they call the Happiness of others;
which is Great Houses, Beneficial Offices, Much Plate, Brave Furniture, Rich
Coaches, High Diet, Gallant Clothes and Large Gardens. They commonly make so
much haste to be Rich, that by a tooeager Prosecution of their cross Designs
they hinder not only others, but themselves; like people in a Throng, who
thrusting each other forward with an indiscreet haste to get out at some Door,
do wedge up the passage. They count it a great Ability to cheat one another;
and this Art is practiced among them so generally, that some have resembled
Plutocopia to a field in the time of a great Plague, where you can see nothing
but Crows and Carkases. They have so corrupted the Offices of Friendship, that
the Stagyrite would be forced to burn out two or three of Diogenes his Candles
before he should find any there which would fit his Definition. They love their
Friends as they do their Lands, and despise all Friendship but that which they
can put to use. They are so far from practicing any generous notions of Love,
that they account them ridiculous persons which speak of 'em. Yet they are so
vexed with the effects of Unworthiness and Falsehood when they feel them, that
in a great discontent they will wish there were some infallible Mark set upon
Hypocrites, or that a Window were made into men's Bosoms; not minding what sport
they themselves would make if their wishes were accomplished.

If it were not too tedious to relate the Story, I would acquaint you with a
Trick which was lately put upon them by one Alopex. He and two of his
Companions arriving in an Inn, stayed there two or three days, where they
made an agreement that they should salute Alopex as their Lord in all
companies, and having put him into Mourning Apparel, pretend that the cause of
his coming to Plutocopia was the Death of a most hopeful Son, his only Child,
whom he had lately buried in Polistherion, which was the chief City of
Theriagene, which was far distant, being parted by a great Sea from Plutocopia;
and that therefore the most disconsolate Gentleman had left his City, left the
company of his Son's Friends or the sight of his Grave should keep his sorrows
alive; and that as an addition to his Grief he had suffered shipwreck, by which
he lost Ten thousand pounds, which he brought with him to buy some convenient
seat, and to discharge the Expenses of his abode, till he could dispose of his
Estate, which was very great both in Lands and Goods, in his own Country; and
that he had resolved to spend the rest of his Life in Plutocopia, where his
Loss did not so much trouble him, as that being destitute of his Attendants he
should not be acknowledged according to his Dignity. He Cough'd frequently as
being in a Consumption, and drank often of a little Glass, which he called for
with such a low voice as if he were ready to faint for want of Spirits; he
talked always of his Lands, Houses and Money; made his Will every day, in
which he employed the most noted Scrivener in the City, upon whom he bestowed
great Legacies. His name was Klerotheron, a man famous for great skill in his
Profession. He used to lend money to young Heirs, and having got a Mortgage for
the Principal, did not long after purchase the Fee with the Interest. It was
his manner when he was entertained in a Suit, to promise his Client lustily;
but being compelled sometimes to take a Bribe from the adverse party, he
frequently found himself so equally poised, that he stood like Buridan's Ass,
hungry between two sorts of meat which pleased him alike, and knew not which
cause to prosecute first. This man Alopex thought a very fit instrument to
promote his design. The first use which he made of him was to hire him a brave
House near the River, which he did; and in a short time by his means he
inveigled many covetous Citizens into his Acquaintance, who, in hopes to be
made his Heirs, feasted him magnificently, furnished him with Moneys, sent him
rich Presents, and so carefully performed whatsoever they thought acceptable to
him, that Alopex began to think his lies true, and was willing to forget the
reality of his Condition; till one of his mock-servants having bethought
himself of the insecurity of Falsehood, and knowing what they should be forced
to suffer if they were discovered, asked Alopex after he had returned half
drunk from a Feast, What would become of us, if Klerotheron, who pretends so
much kindness to us, should send a spy to Polistherion to know the certainty
of our Reports? Then, replied Alopex, like a man awakened out of a pleasant
Dream with a loud Thunderclap, we should be forced to pay for our good cheer.
I think it is high time, said his other Companion, to free our selves from the
danger of Dissimulation by a real Escape; for having sinned so egregiously, we
shall always expect the Punishment which we have deserved. But what course
shall we take? I think I can resolve you, replied his Fellowservant. I
understood yesterday that there is a Bark in the Port, which though it bears
other colors, belongs to Amphibius, which is an Island not belonging to the
Jurisdiction of Theriagene: The Master's name is Pirates. I will engage him
with a good sum of Money to take us in. The Wind being fair, they will be
ready to set sail, for they have disposed of their Praight. Tomorrow, said he,
turning to his Master, you shall feign your self to be very sick, and send for
Klerotheron, and let him know that you desire to remove your self to his
Country House, which lies near the Sea about three Leagues from the City, being
willing to die there privately, that you may not be troubled with Sollicitors:
withal give Klerotheron your last Will, which you may make to night, and
appoint him the sole Heir of your Estate; entreat him to go along with you
without giving any notice of your Design, and when we have him aboard, leave
the rest to me. They approved this Plot, and put it in Execution the next
Morning whilst it was dark. When they were gone off a little from Land, Alopex
would needs be very sick, and desired Klerotheron to keep him company in his
Cabin, pretending that he doubted very much that he should never live to see
his House. Klerotheron comforted him, and endeavored to make him believe
otherwise. Alopex entertaining Klerotheron sometimes with pretenses of
inclination to Vomit, sometimes inveighing against the unmercifulness of the
Sea, sometimes feigning a sleep, and when he awaked giving order concerning the
manner of his Burial, amused him with various diversions till they were above
four Leagues at Sea. Klerotheron, supposing that they might very well have come
to his house in less time, called to the Pilot, for Alopex would not let him
stir out of his Cabin, and told him he was afraid that they steered a wrong
course. The Pilot pretending to be very angry, replied, that he was too old to
be directed by him. Klerotheron being so snib'd, was compelled to a little more
Patience: but at last suspecting some misfortune, rushed out and went upon the
Decks; and perceiving that they were almost arrived at the Island Moronesus,
cried out very discontentedly, Sirs, what do you mean? To land you at your
house there, answered Alopex his servants. That is not my house, said
Klerotheron; you have over-slipt it a League. They replied, Whether this be
your house or no, we know not, but we are sure that you must land here. Whilst
they were talking, Alopex appeared, not making any great show of sickness now:
at which Klerotheron wondered; but much more when Alopex began to advise him
with a grave voice not to disobey the young men, (...) they should throw him
overboard. Klerotheron not knowing whether that was any great mischief,
considering his present condition, stood musing what to say, till Alopex having
assured him that all his Lands and Estate (except what he had borrowed in
Plutocopia) were in Moronesus, his men, to prevent all further Disputation, let
down Klerotheron by a rope into a boat which they had called from the Shore,
making what sail they could, as Alopex thought, for Amphibius: but Pirates
being the more cunning Fox of the two, and loath to lose his Prey after he had
got it into possession, having divested Alopex and his servants of all the
spoils which they had gotten in Plutocopia, and following the example which he
had but just then seen, bestowed upon them a little old Biscuit and moldy
Cheese, and left them upon a Desert Island called Lestocharis.

Here Theonoe made a pause, and begging pardon for the length of her jocular
story, they granted it, with laughing at the just Fate of Klerotheron, and the
retaliation of his sufferings upon Alopex. After they had pleased themselves
awhile and were now silent, Irene told them that, if their patience would bear
it, she would acquaint them with another Accident which happened after the
former, in the same place, as she understood from the same Gentleman, who for a
diversion related it to them one night after supper, and at her Request gave it
to her in writing. It began thus:

The Plutocopians worship a God called Holochrysus, whom they have honored
with the solemn Celebration of a public Feast twice every year, and with a
Golden Statue set in a most conspicuous place in the midst of their City. It
was made by Eudaemon, esteemed by them as the best Artist in the World. At the
desire of the Plutocopians he had shown his utmost Skill in the contriving of a
Noble Design to do honor to their God. It was framed, as far as I can
remember, after this manner. Eudaemon erected a Magnificent Arch; in the middle
of the South-Front toward the top he put the Image of Holochrysus sitting in a
Throne made of Silver, which stood upon a high Rock, and seemed to be divided
from the lower ground by Precipices, naturally abrupt, but made of more
difficult Ascent with stupendous extuberancies of Ice and Snow, insomuch that
it was almost inaccessible, especially toward the top. Notwithstanding that one
Ponus did encourage such as climbed, and helped them with his hand over some
difficult places; yet the Passages were so dangerously slippery, that those
which ascended with the most bold Confidence, did usually fall down and break
their Necks. Those which escaped the danger of this rough way, came to a small
Plot of plainer ground, where they seemed to stand astonished, their eyes being
dazzled with the Glory of the Illustrious Image. A beautiful Virgin in a
glistring Habit called Pseudelpis was placed on the right side of Holochrysus,
and becken'd to them to come nearer the God, where several Worshippers upon
their knees before the Throne received from the Hands of Holochrysus chains of
Gold and Jewels. They say that Eudaemon upon the North-part of the Arch had
drawn the Figure of Apateon, who taking the Advantage of a Precipice as they
returned upon the backside of the Rock, (for they were not permitted to go
down the same way which they came, because of the Multitudes which were still
climbing up,) robbed most of the Votaries of those rich Gifts which they had
received, and afterward threw them headlong from the Rock: and if any chanced
to escape this Death, they were met and jeered by a scornful Virgin called
Hybris. Most of them were so vexed at their disappointment, that when they came
at the bottom of the Hill, they were represented as entreating an old Woman
called Angerona to strangle them. But these Figures are not now to be seen,
because Chrematophilus, a Citizen of great Note in Plutocopia, had procured
them to be obliterated, as being a dishonorable Appendage to that Divine
Image. Before this Arch upon a rising ground stood an Altar at which Pleonectes
the High Priest gave attendance; and, according to their Custom, after some
Sacrifices, he recited a Panegyric made in the praise of Holochrysus, whom he
extolled as the Patron of their City, the Protector of their Happiness, the
Founder of their Dignities, the Fountain of their Joys, and in short,
acknowledged him to be the Beginning and End of all their Designs. The
Plutocopians applauded his Oration with an Universal Hum, some having heard
what he said, and others imitating their Neighbors. After this they
entertained themselves with Music, Dances, and other sports correspondent to
their Festival solemnity.

Whilst they were in the midst of their Jollity, Skeletion, a grave
Philosopher, his Habit resembling those which of old were called Cynicks, of a
slow pace and looks somewhat cast down, being newly arrived in the City, went
to see the manner of this great Assembly. He took the first convenient place
which he could find, sat down, and fell aweeping. The more inconsiderate of
those which were next him took his impertinent Tears as an affront to their
common Joys. Others, which pretended to a little skill in History, thought
that Heraclitus having taken upon him the Form of Diogenes was risen from the
Dead. Whilst he continued weeping they began to leave off their Mirth, the
Multitude flocking about him, as boys use to do about a Stranger. Their
Curiosity was the greater, because they saw a great Glass in his hand which
had such a strange Power, that it made most of those which looked upon it to
shed tears. He called his Glass Iconecron. It was made in a round Figure by
one Cranion, his Brother, who had formed a Deaths-head so artificially upon it,
that those which saw it, discerning nothing but a rotten Skull without Hair or
Skin, a few Teeth all uncovered, instead of Eyes empty holes, and no Nose, were
amazed, being ready to think that since their Image was thus transformed, they
had been dead a great while; or if they were at present alive, yet they fell a
crying to perceive what within a little space of time they must of necessity
be. Skeletion said nothing, only wept with them; and being unwilling to be too
troublesome at this time, he retired to his Inn. This Accident was (...) a
shower of Rain to Country People at a Fair, and forced so many of the Company to
withdraw, that it both put an unacceptable Period to the pleasure of their
Feast, and made 'em forget what they had enjoyed; for when they were gone home,
they talked of nothing now but Skeletion and his Glass.

A few days after this the Plutocopians had a Great Mart, which they kept
every Month upon a large Key adjoining to a muddy River called Glycypicron,
which ran through their City; where whilst they were infinitely busy in
selling and buying of Trifles, Euphranor the Son of Morogelon, a Jolly Fellow,
never out of Humor, moderately fat and of a lively complexion, famous for his
merry Temper, for he used to laugh at all the World, having heard of the
incomparable Vanity of the Plutocopians, came to the Town in hope to make
himself some sport. He was not deceived of his Expectation, for he had no
sooner got upon a high place whence he observed the People and their Actions,
but he had like to have killed himself with laughing. The Plutocopians staring
upon him, not without some Indignation, asked him what he laughed at. At you,
replied Euphranor, who make such a silly Question: when every thing which I see
is ridiculous, do you demand what I laugh at? He continued his Mirth so long,
and laughed so heartily and loud, that they began to be afraid of him, and
suspected that he was Mad. For several days he made it his Recreation to walk
up and down the streets, and to deride the Follies of the Plutocopians, which
he saw expressed in a thousand ridiculous Varieties; whilst the pensive
Skeletion, whose eyes were Fountains of pity, deplored, as he thought it his
charitable duty, their Unhappiness. The Plutocopians sufficiently disturbed
before by Skeletion, were yet more vexed upon the Arrival of Euphranor, upon
whom they could look no more pleasingly, then as upon a second Messenger which
comes to confirm bad News. They thought Plutocopia stood before these men of
such contrary Tempers, like those Pictures which being looked upon diverse ways
represent different Figures; showing a Baboon to one Spectatour, and at the
same time a Beggar to another. After a little time the Plutocopians began to be
extreme angry, seeing themselves both pitied by one as miserable Wretches, and
laughed at by another as Fools; and complained of the injuries which they
suffered to their chief Magistrate, by name Bathypogon. He having consulted
with some of the graver Senators, determined that they were both out of their
Wits, and made an Order that Archibius and Thurepanoecta, the two principal
Physicians of the City, should visit 'em and endeavor their Cure. Not that
Bathypogon was much moved with any charitable resentment of their condition,
but to free the Citizens from trouble. The two Strangers lay both in one Inn,
where when the Physicians were come, they desired the Master of the House to
acquaint Skeletion and Euphranor who they were, and to let them know, they
having heard those two Gentlemen to be strangers in Plutocopia, had presumed so
far as to give them the trouble of a Visit. By good chance they were both
together, for Euphranor had gone that morning to Skeletion's chamber on purpose
to laugh at the Weeper; for among other things which made him sport, he thought
Skeletion very worthy to be laughed at, who seeing the world miserable by
reason of their affected Folly, would needs cry for that which could not be
altered, and afflict himself because many were in misery, whenas by that means
he added one unhappy Fool to their wretched number. Euphranor went forth, and
seeing the Physicians in the next Room, accosted them cheerfully, thanked them
for their Civility, desired them to come into Skeletion's Chamber and sit down.
Skeletion took no notice of them, but signified much grief of Mind by Silence
and a dejected Countenance. Archibius and his companion having saluted their
Patients; after a little discourse Archibius desired to know the reason of
Skeletion's sorrow. I weep, said Skeletion, to think how many Men and Women you
have killed. At this Euphranor was taken with a new fit of Laughter.
Thurepanoecta asking him the Reason of his Mirth, Euphranor told him, he could
not choose but laugh to consider how willingly people paid great Fees for that
Death which was bestowed upon them, and to think how little you cared for what
Skeletion said, it being all one to you whether you kill or cure, so you be
pai'd for it. Thurepanoecta being of a proud temper, was very much troubled to
be so abused where he went without expectation of a Reward. Archibius was not
moved, knowing it is an Indecorum for a Physician to be angry at his Patients,
especially when their disease is in their Brains; and continuing his Discourse
with Skeletion, attempted by diverse Questions to find out the cause of
Skeletion's Malady. But Skeletion took him off, saying, that though the World
were not in other respects barren of occasions of Sorrow, yet he should not
cease Weeping whilst he saw it abused by so many bold Medicuccio's, who being
strangers to the Principles of true Philosophy, utterly ignorant of the
Mysterious constitution of Humane Bodies, unskilful in Anatomy except what they
had seen practiced at some great Dinner, careless of Study and unfurnished with
Experience, yet pretend to be Restorers of Health and Saviors to Mankind,
though they are more afflictive to the sick then their Diseases themselves if
they would let them alone. He accused them of Disingenuity, because they did
not acquaint their Patients with the shortest way to Health, and both neglected
to exhort them to Temperance, and to reach them to measure it according to the
Nature of their various Constitutions. He esteemed it cruelty, that such as by
the Mis-government of themselves had fallen into sickness, must also be
tormented with the tedious courses of Physic, and be forced to continue sick
till their Physician was content to gain no more by their want of Health, and
the possibility of their Recovery made very doubtful, being exposed to the
uncertain Operation of diverse Medicines jumbled together in a long Composition,
the pompous number of costly Ingredients only serving to make a greater show of
a learned Prescription, to keep sick men poor too, and to enrich covetous
Apothecaries. In short, he told them that he was sorry so many of them had not
read their great Master's Oath, and that fewer observed it; advising them never
to pretend to the honorable Name of Hippocrates his Disciples, or attempt to
cure others, whilst they found themselves sick of the Diseases which he had
forementioned. These words put Thurepanoecta into such a sharp Paroxysm of his
angry Distemper, that he was not able to bear the Abuse any longer, but flung
out of the Room. This sight did so tickle Euphranor's Spleen, that (...) fell a
laughing. Archibius himself could not choose but smile. Skeletion reproving
Euphranor; How can I forbear laughing at you, replied he, when I hear you talk
so sillily to one that is resolved never to mind what you say; and at him for
being angry at that which he knows to be true?

Archibius perceived that these men were not mad, and judged that Thurepanoecta
had not just cause to be so highly offended, knowing that many counterfeit
Physicians deserve those Reproofs which Skeletion had given them, and that what
he had said was so far from bringing any prejudice upon those Gallant Persons
that are really accomplished with that useful Skill which they profess, that
the detection of false pretenders would only remove a few blocks out of their
way, restore due Honor to that Divine faculty, and advance the Health and
Happiness of Mankind. He would willingly have stayed longer to enjoy converse
with Euphranor, for Skeletion was not pleasant Company; but considering what
effects the wrath of Thurepanoecta, which was inccns'd, might possibly produce,
he took his leave, and went to Bathypogon's House, where he found Thurepanoecta
engaged in deep invectives against Skeletion and Euphranor, saying that they
were not only mad men but Villains, and that Bathypogon ought to take the same
or more severe notice of them, then if they had brought the Plague to the Town;
they being sick of two sorts of Madness, and both so infective, that they would
endanger the putting of many people out of their Wits. Archibius was sorry that
Thurepanoecta had proceeded so far in his Defamation; but when he had made an
end, Bathypogon asking his opinion also, he spoke in their Defense, and told
him and his Assistants that the two Strangers were troubled with some
Distempers, but those easily curable; that he did not apprehend them to be mad,
much less that they were guilty of any unworthy Intentions, or designed any
mischief against the City. As a more plausible way to persuade them to believe
what he said, (for he knew it was a hard Task to speak to any purpose in the
behalf of persons against whom those which heard him were already prejudiced;)
he was going to have told them the story of Democritus and the Citizens of
Abdera: But Thurepanoecta interrupted him, saying, Bathypogon, and you
Gentlemen which sit by him, may well suspect that to be true which I have
reported concerning the contagious nature of these men's Madness, for you see it
has infected a Physician. Archibius being so much in his wits as not to
trouble himself with making a vain show of Wisdom among Fools, went away: when
he was gone, Bathypogon and his Companions asked Thurepanoecta what they should
do with Skeletion and Euphranor. He advised them to call a Court, and having
there accused them of Sedition, to condemn them to be sold for slaves, and
transported to gather Hellebore in the Island Anticyra; adding, that they
needed not to make any doubt of finding Merchants to buy them: but if it should
happen so, he told them as a Reserve, that they might banish them, and command
them upon pain of Death never to come within the Gates of the City again. They
took his advice, and resolved the day following to put it in Execution. They
performed it accordingly; for about ten of the clock the next Morning their
Sergeants seized upon Skeletion and Euphranor, and brought them to the
Townhouse. The forementioned Bathypogon, famous for Wealth and a great Beard,
was appointed to be their Judge: they desired Chrysalides and Pluterastus to
plead against them, having agreed upon the Sentence which Thurepanoecta had
dictated.

The Court sitting, and a multitude of Spectatours being assembled to see the
event of this Great Action, Bathypogon nodded to Pluterastus to accuse
Skeletion, who with no small zele began thus: We have great Reason, most Grave
Bathypogon, to bring this man before the Judgment Seat, he being a Blasphemer
of our God, and a despiser of that Felicity which we have received from him.
That he is guilty of these Crimes is too manifest in this, that some days
since he openly profaned our Religious Rites, and put a public affront upon
our Festival Joys. I accuse him as a hater of Mankind, whom he does
perpetually torment with his direful Lamentations. I lay to his charge also,
that he being a Factour for Achthedon, and a Correspondent of our utter enemy
Anelpistus, is come into the City to spy out our weakness, that he may the
more easily betray us to our Adversaries. He has seditiously sown the seeds of
Discontent in the peoples Minds, and has endeavored to undermine the bottom
of our Hopes, that so he may ruin the Pleasures which are built upon them. In
short, I demand Justice against him in the name of all the Plutocopians,
because he maintains Intelligence with the forlorn people of Hades, which are
our mortal enemies; and has received from them a Magical Glass, which does so
bewitch the Eyes of all that look into it, that afterward they can do nothing
but weep.

When Pluterastus had done, Chrysalides was commanded to charge Euphranor;
which he did after this manner: I accuse thee, O Euphranor, as a Reviler of our
Ancient Customs, and a Reprocher of our most Excellent Constitutions, and as
one that has traitorously endeavored to expose our Government to scorn, by
persuading the people to believe that our most serious Affairs are but
ridiculous Trifles. Thou art worthy to be punished, because thou do
continually upbraid men with the Imperfections of their Nature, and insult over
the Necessities of their Condition with a disdainful Laughter. Is it not most
meet that he should feel the severity of our Laws, who has disparaged the
values of our richest Commodities before those Foreiners which converse with
us; and by this means has put a great stop to our Trade, which is the life of
Plutocopia? The truth of these accusations being manifest, I make no doubt,
most just Judge, but you will appoint him such a Punishment as shall both free
us from his dangerous practices at present, and put such an Awe upon others of
his Ludicrous Temper for the future, that they will not venture to employ their
abusive wits to the disturbance of the Plutocopians.

Now Skeletion left weeping, lest the foolish Plutocopians should think that he
bemoaned his own estate; and Euphranor laughed twice as loud as he used to do,
to let them see how much he slighted their Menaces. Hereupon Bathypogon stood
up, and having strok'd his long Beard once or twice, would have pronounced the
sentence against them, but that a great noise which he heard among the People
gave him an Interruption. It was occasioned by their thrusting one another to
make way for Orthocrinon, a Gentleman that lived in a Village called Euesto,
not far distant from the City, and who was of a Venerable esteem among the
Plutocopians for his extraordinary Wisdom, and especially for many singular
Courtesies which they had received from him. Orthocrinon, as I am informed, is
an Excellent Philosopher, though he arrogates no such Title, nor makes any
pompous ostentation of his Knowledge in great words, but approves his real
worth by prudent Actions, which do so completely adorn all the parts of his
exact Life, that the best Philosophers may take him for an Example. He is
descended from a good Family, and owner of fair Possessions; but he despises
worldly Dignity in comparison of Virtue, and makes no reckoning of Wealth in
regard of Philosophy. He has given away a great part of his Estate to promote
such in the course of Study as having great aptitudes for noble Undertakings,
are hindered only by the want of such things as are necessary to support our
common Life; and has now only left a reasonable Competency for himself and his
Family. He seemed not to be so much incited to Philosophy by former Examples,
or persuaded to it by the Exhortations of his Parents and Tutors; but was
rather inflamed by an innate Love of Wisdom, which with a mighty force derived
from the inclinations of his own soul thrust him forward, when he was young, to
all excellent endeavors. He does not profess himself a sworn Disciple to any
one Sect of Philosophers, but embraces Truth wheresoever he finds it. His
manner of Conversation does something resemble that of Socrates. If Anacharsis
had found him at Chaenae, he would have taken him for Myson, and been no less
pleased with him. He did so imitate both in the prudence of a frugal
Temperance, that no disease durst meddle with him, left it should be starved
with Hunger and Cold. His Life was an impartial Correction of all Vicious
Manners; yet though he was a most rigid observer of Virtuous Rules, he did not
allow himself to imitate the severity of the Cynicks, because he thought that
they did many times rather bite then reprove. He was not apt to take notice of
those Faults which he saw in others; only he did constantly despise those whom
he observed to be very curious of words, and as negligent of their Actions.
These he usually called Chelidones, because their Custom is to make a great
noise with select words, to boast of round Periods, soft Compositions, rare
Inventions, and brave Sentences, to seek the glory of voluble Speech, and
desirous to be cried up as great Orators; or else jingling with Syllogisms,
producing large Inventories of Questions, and clattering wheresoever they come
with loud Disputations, and affrighting their Auditors with endless
contradictions, claim it as their due to be admired for deep Philosophers:
whenas God knows, under these fine shows made more plausible with a contracted
Brow, a severe Countenance, an affected Gate, and a distinct Habit, they do
often hide Unspeakable Ignorance, Foolish Opinions, Contentious Pride,
Vainglory, and an innumerable company of Trifles. He did not despise these
great Pretenders because he himself was ignorant of the Art of Speaking; for by
reading the best Authors, and exercising himself to speak and write, he had
attained to the top of that excellency: or that he did undervalue Philosophy;
but he was grieved to see it exposed to scorn in the world; that small matter
which these great Boasters profess being no more like true Philosophy, then an
old Woman in a Tragedy looking sadly is Hecuba. He thinks no method of teaching
comparable to Example; and though he says nothing of himself, yet it is
manifest to all that understand Virtue, that he is a most lively Representation
of it. In sum, he is that bright Mirror in which all may see incomparable
Wisdom, sincere love of Truth, perfect Humility, exact Justice, the true
measures of Temperance, Tranquillity of Spirit, Freedom of Soul, and such a
Sweetness of Deportment; that all who have had the happiness to converse with
him, become Lovers of his divine Perfections, and think that they have found
that happy Guide, who not only understands Truth himself, but restores Liberty
and Joy to all such as know him. Though it is impossible but such Perfections
must needs gain him Estimation, yet he has one particular Excellency which
commands an Universal Love: For he has such a rare dexterity in performing all
Offices of Friendship, that he has no Acquaintance which has not found the
benefit of it in such respects as are suitable to his condition. He had much
obliged the Plutocopians, not only by composing private quarrels which usually
happen amongst Neighbors, whom he restored to Amity; but (...) in appeasing of
more public Commotions, in which he showed no less Prudence then Charity; for
he persuaded the Seditious to lay down their destructive Idiopathies, and yield
quiet obedience to the common Laws. The effects of his powerful presence were
so generally Beneficial, that there was no ordinary person which did not obey
him as a Father, and those which were in Power honored him as a Friend. It
happened that not long since Orthocrinon having observed some which managed the
public Affairs of the City, to abuse their Trust to their own undue
Advantages, he reproved them so smartly, that his freedom of Speech and
impartial Honesty procured him so much hatred, that for a good while he had not
been in Plutocopia. But hearing that two Philosophers lately come to the City
were apprehended and brought to a public Trial for Misdemeanors by them
committed, well knowing what Sentence would be passed upon them where they were
to be judged, he went hastily to understand the matter, and meant if they were
innocent to intercede for them; but perceiving in part by those which stood
near the Door, that things were managed unhandsomly, for he heard some say,
Aha! these are new Sins; I never knew any body that was hanged for weeping: we
must cry no more. I care not for that, said another, but it vexes me to think
that we shall not be allowed to laugh. Our Court is very severe to day, but
will it be so always? and shall we be condemned too before we have spoke for
our selves? By this talk Orthocrinon understanding both the faults for which
they were accused, and that the Judge intended to condemn them without giving
them leave to make their Defense; hereupon he made haste toward the Tribunal.
Whilst Bathypogon and his Assessours wondered at his Appearance in such a time,
Orthocrinon resolved their doubt by speaking to them after this manner: It is
now a good while, Bathypogon, and you the rest of my Friends of Plutocopia,
since I gave you a Visit; and I am sorry that I come now so unhappily, for I
see you are ready to do that which, if I be not misinformed by the
Bystanders, is extremely to your dishonor. You are going to condemn two
Strangers before you have heard them speak for themselves. Your Presence would
be acceptable, said Bathypogon, if you did not hinder our proceedings; but we
cannot bid you welcome if you endeavor to represent us as unjust. We did not
intend to condemn them till two Lawyers had accused them of great Crimes; and
we can not want Evidence for the truth of their Charge, for they are such
notorious Offenders, and have so generally disturbed the peace of our City,
that there is scarce any present who has not been molested by them. However,
worthy Judge, replied Orthocrinon, you must observe your Laws, and then
especially when you are about to pronounce Sentence upon others for the Breach
of them: and since your Law does not permit any man to be condemned unheard, I
pray you let these Strangers have leave to make their Apology, and then you may
do as you see cause. Bathypogon grumblod a little at the Interruption, but
being persuaded by Chrysalides and Pluterastus, who whispering in his Ear, told
him that he might permit them to speak, but withal bade him be sure to condemn
them as soon as they had done, gave his consent; and desiring Orthocrinon to
sit upon the Bench by him, he (...) to Skeletion to speak, if he had any thing
to say for himself.

Skeletion forbearing his sighs for a while, that they might not hinder his
Speech, began thus: I should wonder at it, O most unhappy Plutocopians, but
that I have often seen the same unreasonableness in other places, that you
should think a man accusable for expressing a Sympathy with the general estate
of Mankind, that you esteem it a fault in me to cry with so many that weep,
that is, toweep when I see many miserable. I might in some happy place, if I
could have found it, have dried up my Tears, and I should have embraced this as
no small good Fortune, since it is no great pleasure to weep; and I came hither
to seek it. But I am not only disappointed, as I have been in other places, but
am so far fallen from my hope, that I seem to be overwhelmed in the Infernal
Lake of Sorrow, where I rather deserve your pity then anger. If poor Prometheus
fastened to a cold Rock was an Object of Compassion whilst the merciless Eagle
fed upon his Heart; I have reason to expect that you should condole with me
who, at least in my own apprehension, am sunk down to that Center, where all
the Calamities which do afflict the whole Circumference of Humane Life do meet:
yet here am I accused for weeping.

It were a sufficient Plea for my Lamentation, to say that I do but bear a part
in that sad Dirge which is sung by all the World: It is begun by Infants, who
when they first live, that is, begin to be sick of an incurable Disease, come
crying into the World; indeed presaging those Tragical Misfortunes which they
are to suffer, they prelude to them with Tears. This is a common Destiny, and
so to be met with in all places. But here I have seen the newborn wretches,
wet with Tears and Blood, exposed so unmercifully, that it would soften a Rock,
if it were able to see their Calamity, and make it dissolve it self into Tears:
But I must not weep. You throw the Poor to Hunger and Cold, nay their Parents
do it, because they have no money to buy them food and cloths: and if by some
strange chance they outlive this Death, yet they are forced to learn to speak
with crying, and to beg as soon as they can speak. I cannot but weep for
company, especially perceiving the (...) destitute of Humanity, that they see
it, and yet refuse to relieve them. I do not wonder so much at it, but I am
grieved nevertheless to see them use their Own not much better. It Is true, they
give them Meat and Drink, and use means enough to keep them from dying; but
when they are grown to the use of Understanding and Choice, they prostitute
their Youth to Ignorance and Vice: For neglecting to bestow upon them that
benefit of which they are now capable, to assure their Infelicity they
carelessly abandon them to two foolish Guides, Apeirus and Cacotypus. Apeirus is
an Obstinate man, you are all well acquainted with him, and by reason of his
extreme Ignorance and high conceit of his Knowledge, is scarce capable of being
taught himself. Cacotypus is utterly devoid of Virtue. So that one of them
being unexperienced in the true Method of Education, makes them Fools; and the
other corrupting them also with bad Example, renders them Vicious. You might as
well put them to suck a He Goat, or make a Wolf their Nurse. The consideration
of this does often make me say within my self, Lord! what small hope is there
that Goodness should ever grow to any Perfection in this world, where it is
thus nipt in the Bud! And my grief is continued, whilst I foresee those sad
consequences which must needs proceed from such miserable Beginnings. For they
no sooner arrive at those years which are esteemed the confines of Childishness
and Manhood, but they are captivated with the follies of both States. It Is
true, I have observed in your City a low narrow Gate called Metanoea, which
opens toward Orthodus, which is the rode that leads to Sophiarete, the Region
where Wisdom and Virtue are said to dwell; and I have taken notice of some
Young men, which being awakened by some courteous Genius, who (as I suppose)
had fore-warned them of that which would happen to them in their older Life, if
they continued that course which they had begun, have hereupon rushed out at
that difficult passage, and made toward Orthodus: but the Ascent being steep,
and the way rugged in that part which lies nearest to your City, they made no
great haste, and being clogged with a Cachexy or Habit of sin contracted by
long Custom which they are unwilling to shake off, and being enfeebled with
tempting Remembrances of their former Voluptuousness, advanced no considerable
way till their Companions in sin, which hastened after them, overtook them, and
having seduced them back do so confirm them in their Errors, that they are
good for nothing but to propagate new Instances of wicked Life, and to hinder
Vice from decreasing for want of bold examples. I confess it grieves me not so
much for what these suffer in their single capacities, but because the
concatenation of like Successions does perpetuate Folly, and seems to make the
end of sinning almost unexpectable. You their unwise Parents are the chief
cause of this mischief; for you never minding that the Excellency and Service
of our after-life depends upon our early preparations, leave your Children an
undisciplined prey to Uselesnesse and Contempt. By which means you not only
bestow, but entail a Curse upon Mankind; whilst you neither cease to be bad
your selves, nor permit your Children to begin to be good. Hence it comes to
pass that when they are grown Men, and make no doubt but that now it is fit
that they should be their own Governors, they not knowing of themselves what
is best, and much more unwilling to be told by others, by reason of an
irregulated heat, they venture upon such rash Actions, and do so grossly mistake
in the management of their Life, that when by the change of their Complexions
they understand that they are arrived upon the borders of old Age, they desire
to go back again, and fall into this passionate wish, Alas! why is it not
lawful for us to grow young twice, that what has been done amiss in our first
Life might be corrected by our after-thoughts? that is, having lived foolishly,
they are vexed that they must die when they begin to be wise.

But before it comes to this I cannot but pity you, seeing how you are
tormented with the effects of your precedent Errors: for that feeble Body,
made of a little Blood and Earth kneaded together, in which the Soul is cag'd,
is not only of it self frail Flesh and weak Bones, apt to be cut with every
sharp thing, and crushed with every weight, but so filled with accidental
distempers by your Imprudences, that, like the shell of a Granado, it is in
continual danger of flying in pieces, being ready to be torn asunder by what
it contains within it, distempered Humors, Crudities, Wind, Obstructions,
Inflammations. These and many such like things do so distress your Health,
that you doubt whether you live or no; and when you endeavor to believe that
you do, your hopes are frighted with those Deaths which hang over your Heads by
small threads, threatening every moment a sad Period to an uncertain Life by a
hot Fever, a watrish Dropsy, a pining Hectic, the painful Stone, intolerable
Gout, or a stupifying Apoplexy; some of you being tossed for a long time
together between the Grave and Hopes of Recovery, by that known scorner of
Physicians, a sly malicious Quartan. But this would not afflict me so much, nor
you neither, if that Better part of you were not a more lamentable Spectacle. I
cannot suppress my tears when I see those Misfortunes which are fallen upon
the Heaven-born Soul. How is it clouded with Mists of Ignorance, deluded with
false Opinions and wild Fancies, befooled with Self-love, swelled with vain
Arrogance, apt to be set on fire with mad Anger, and burnt up with hellish
Wrath, to be exalted with bold Presumptions, and sometimes as low depressed
with deep Despairs, abused with inordinate Appetites, sick with disquietnesse
of Mind, tormented with anguish of Conscience, and overwhelmed with weariness
of Life? A Truce being made with one Passion, a War is begun by another, and
the poor Spirit racked upon the Vicissitudes of its own restless Affections,
as upon so many afflictive wheels. Can I choose but weep when I behold such
Miseries, especially since I look at them as incurable?

This were enough to be quoted as a Defense of those Tears for which you accuse
me, and I need not strengthen it by making a Catalogue of those innumerable
Aggravations which swell your Misery up to an unspeakable Mass, and torment
all conditions of Humane Life, in the City, in the Country, at Land, and at
Sea. The Husbandman is condemned to pull up Weeds which will never cease to
grow in his barren ground. He mingleth his Bread with Sweat, and his Sweat with
Tears; and when he has taken the greatest pains, has only drawn water in a
sieve, and labored to make himself more work. Your Mariners are distressed at
Sea, and after a thousand Dangers with much difficulty make their Port; that
is, they are tossed home that they may rebound to some new Storm. Your
Craftsmen are chained to endless toil, like Galley-slaves to their Oars. Your
Citizens of all ranks pretend great discontent for want of loving Neighbors:
and Friends of all sorts complain that they have no Touchstone to try such as
say that they love them, but that which commonly shows they do not, Adversity.
Parents are vexed with the Disobedience of their Children, and they think
themselves undone by the Unkindnesse or death of their Parents. Masters and
Servants frequently accuse each other. It is ordinary to hear some bemoan
themselves because they are not married, and others judge themselves more
unhappy because they are. Some Husbands cry because their Wives are dead, and
some because they are alive.

These are some of those Tragical parts which you act upon this miserable
Stage, and the last Scenes are worse then those, which remain to be represented
by Ancient people, who when they are already wearied with a miserable Life, are
still disturbed by one Geron, a Grim-look'd Fellow, who being a rigid Factour
for Death, comes to make you pay dear for those small Contents which you
enjoyed before, and that but for a little while, and which were then not so
greatly desirable, every good thing having two Evils joined with it. When you
are scarce able to pay any thing, it will go hard but he will have something,
and he usually takes the best of what is left, an Ear from one, a Hand from a
second, a Leg from a third, or what he can lay hold on. How did it tear my
Heart some few days since, to see how Chronus, the Father of this Geron,
seized with a remorsless Violence upon a wretched Company of ancient Men and
Women, dragged some by the Arms, some by the Feet, some by the Neck, struck out
their Teeth, pulled out their Eyes, lamed them, killed them, and threw them
into Ditches? I think it was a courtesy to some of them, for their Bodies were
ill used by his Son, and grown such troublesome Lodgings to their Souls, that
they could scarce endure to dwell in them. And yet the miserable wretches were
forced to stay in these straight Cottages, unthatch'd above, full of Smoke and
Rain within, and there to swallow the Dregs of Life till some welcome Mischief
choked them.

Here Skeletion made a pause, for his sighs forced him to leave Speaking; and
when he began again, Euphranor laughed so loud that the Plutocopians could not
hear him, and having taken no great pleasure in what he had spoken already,
they were unwilling he should say any more: So Euphranor was commanded to
succeed him, which he did in such words as these. I have traveled over the
greatest part of Histrionia, most gentle Bathypogon; but I never came into any
place where such as kept a Theater were unwilling to admit Spectatours, much
less where the Players were angry at such as were present for laughing at
their Mimical sport. The whole world is a kind of Tragick-Comedy, in which I
never saw any act their parts more ridiculously then the Plutocopians; and yet
they accuse such as laugh at them: which I cannot but esteem one cast beyond
all which I have seen already. I suppose you have no such conceit of your own
Actions, and are ready to demand at what I laugh in particular. I will save you
that labor; I smile at every thing which I see or hear, I laugh at all which
you do or say, and chiefly at you your selves, because in this Play you like
no part but the Fool's. I perceive by the silly Government of your Actions,
that you have cashiered Wisdom out of your Thoughts; and, which is the height
of your Folly, you think your selves Wise. I can except no order of Men from
the reason of my Mirth. I have not maintained correspondence with any that wish
your disgrace, and have therefore revealed your Infirmities; for they are every
where manifest. I suppose you cannot look upon it as a Contumely that I take
notice of what you discover, nor take it as an affront that I am so pleasant in
your presence, since you compel me to be merry. How can I choose but laugh to
see so many Bladders empty of all true worth, swelled with false Opinion, and
then tossed up and down the streets with vulgar breath, not much unlike those
Bubbles made of Soap and Water which idle Boys blow off from Nut-shells? When
I meet so many hundreds of conceited people, who think they are Wise because
they are Rich, Virtuous because Politic, Learned because they have a few
Books, Happy because they have many Titles, and suppose themselves full of
Worth because they are big with Arrogance, and Good because they are so
esteemed by the Ignorant, and adored as Gods by such as know not what belongs
to Men; I cannot but stand still and laugh to think what a brave Mart this
would be for Prometheus his Oxen, and I easily fancy with what wonder you
Plutocopians would gaze upon a Drove of large Skins well stuffed with empty
Bones. I was almost killed the other day, my Spleen was so stretched with
laughing at a young Gallant who stood in a low Balcony, having nothing else to
do but to observe whether such as passed by did make their Obeisance
proportionably submissive to the Greatness of his Peruke, and did sufficiently
admire the new fashion of his French Breeches; especially when turning back, I
saw how dejected he looked because I went by him without stirring my Hat, which
I did on purpose, thinking I might as well neglect to worship a man made up of
cloths, as refuse to bow down to a gilded Post.

I confess also I can never think of your Old men but I laugh at their foolish
Covetousness, whilst they tell their Money all day, and rise in the night to
hide their Gold in some safer place then that in which they put it when they
went to bed, and grow lean with cares to make their Heap bigger, which is so
bulky already that it is troublesome to keep, and does exceed their Necessities
with such vast disproportions, that they know not well what to do with it. I
cannot but please my self to think how eagerly the Poor whom they have
defrauded will fall upon them when they appear in the other World, and what a
sad scuffle there will be when they clap their bare Skulls with their bony
hands. Yet such is the Madness of this sort of Men, that they bequeath the
Moneys which they should restore, to erect stately Monuments to dwell in when
they are dead; imagining that they shall be happier if they lie under great
Marbles, and hoping that some may possibly spend their time in viewing those
brave Structures which cover their dust, and read with no small content those
Epitaphs which before they died they made themselves. But it is so ridiculous,
that methinks the Poor should laugh at it, when they see how much these Rich
Fools think themselves worthier and better then their Neighbors, because they
have greater Houses and more Money, and will not remember that in Hell they
will not be known from them by any other Mark but greater Torments. But since
the Poor do so peevishly slight what should make them patient, I must laugh at
them whilst they whine so sillily at their poverty, and will not know that in a
short time they shall be equal to the richest men in the World, and who are at
present in many respects more miserable then themselves. It is a cast beyond
Laughter to see these foolish Poor how proud they grow upon a little taste of
Good Fortune: they are as much ashamed of their very Parents as Fathers usually
are of their Bastard-Children; it may be they allow them, as Mercury did Pan,
to come to them sometimes, but never to call them Father before Company. Now
they no more know those friends which relieved them in their Adversity, then a
Great man's Porter can remember that he saw one that was at his Master's house
but the day before, till he have hired him to recall his name, and helped the
weakness of his Memory with a piece of Silver.

It is some sport to me to see those curious Women, who have nothing to do but
to be fine, and to think beforehand how wan their painted faces will look when
Death, which does not much value Beauty, comes rudely to undress them. Methinks
I hear how they will cry when he breaks their Glass, throws their Hair one way,
their Powder another, and leaves them no Ornament but a white Sheet; and how
they will vex when he tells them that in the other World there are no Marks set
upon Skulls by which a Lady may be known from her meanest Servant. I am not a
little beholden for my Mirth to those proud People which have accustomed
themselves to talk of their Pedigrees at such a high Rate, as if they would
have us think that Mankind had sprung from diverse Originals, or at least that
they have nothing in them of the first clay; and are so elevated above this
lower World with the wild belief which they have entertained, that they will
scarce bestow a humble word upon such as come near them. They make me think how
dejectedly they will look and shrink out of sight, when I and my Companions
shall meet them and laugh at them in the Deserts of Negrogaea. I envy not those
fat Epicureans which float at present in muddy pleasures; I shall find them
ashore ere long, for I know at what Port they must all Land. I cannot but laugh
to think how they will cry when I and one or two of my Friends shall sit down
by them and upbraid them with their former Voluptuousness, and how they will
fret to hear poor Cynicks sing.

You think perhaps, Bathypogon, that it is a strange kind of Mirth to laugh at
the unhappy: and so it were, if those which are in misery acted their part with
any Decorum; but they complain ridiculously, and are very angry at those
mischiefs which they inflict upon themselves. They are vexed because they are
sick, and when they were well did what they could to destroy their Health. They
eat and drink beyond all Natural Appetites, and then inveigh bitterly against
surfeits. They despise the Happiness of Tranquillity, undervalue the Riches
which wise men never missed in a Competency; they reject the Pleasures of a
Retired life; they will climb up into the Region of Winds, and when they are
there rage at every Storm, complain of the burdensome Cares which attend
Honorable Employments, are galled with the envious looks which are cast upon
great Preferments, are infested with the Counter workings of Corrivals; and
when they fall, as they often do, being now sensible that their Hurt is equal
to the Height of their Exaltation, they curse and express a seeble impatience,
although they are only orush'd with their own weight. Then they will needs
revile Greatness, and foolishly praise the Poverty which before they only
hated, and confess that Golden fetters are as uneasy as those of Iron; and yet
are so discomposed with the impertinent remembrance of what they have been,
that they cannot contentedly be what they are: and shall not I laugh at them?
If they were not mad, they would consider that they have only lost what none
can keep, and suffer that which commonly happens to very many. Why do they not
make account that those Servants will run away from them whom they knew to be
perfidious, or at least very fickle, having changed many Masters before they
came to them? These uneasy Souls pretend to be much troubled with the
greatness of their misfortunes in comparison of that which others suffer, and
yet will not put theirs into a common Lump with their Neighbors, that the
whole may be divided into equal Shares; but fearing that their present Lot will
be increased, carry it away as it is, and yet go home grumbling. And must I
pity them? I am sorry that no Play is yet invented where both sides might win
always. These Delicate people should do well to transport themselves into
some newfound Land, where there is no use of Patience; for none are permitted
to dwell in this world which will not be content to endure some Hardship. If I
should make conjectures of their Affections by other pieces of their Carriage,
I should think that they love unhappiness; for not being satisfied with what
they feel at present, they torment themselves with the fear of that which is to
come, and so antedate their miseries, and sometimes crucify themselves with
the troublesome Expectation of that which will never happen. Nay, they dote so
upon Affliction, though it displeases them, that not being content with their
own Misfortunes, they will needs take part in those of others; that is, visit
their suffering Neighbors, talk whiningly and look scurvily, but not relieve
them. And this they call Pity.

But since Grief is not heavy enough with all these allowances, they increase
it with Envy; that is, they unworthily despise the Joy of those many Good
things of their own, which God has given them to fill up the Defects and
alleviate the Sorrows of Humane Life, by repining at other men's better
Conditions, which yet, for any thing which they know, (for they judge by very
slight rules) is much worse then their own. Sometimes they are displeased with
the Excellent parts of others by which they are benefitted; like those
ill-natured beggars which murmr at his wealth from whom they receive daily
Alms. Being troubled that others outshine them, they endeavor to eclipse
their Light by Defamation, hoping vainly that themselves shall be thought good,
if they can make others seem to be bad. But this color is so base that it
appears by any Light; for as they are truly empty of that Love which would hide
the failings of others, they discover plainly that they are full of Impotent
Malice. But I must not offend these Virtuoso's with laughing at them. Yes I
will, and I can never laugh enough to hear them talk sometimes of Felicity and
pretend desires to be Happy, and yet scorn the way which leads to it: for
though they have been told a hundred times that no great Happiness is to be
hoped for in this world, and that the chiefest parts of that which is
attainable are, rightly to know our Selves, to dis-esteem Mortal Life, to be
content with our Portion, not to expect what cannot be had, and such like
things; they will needs seek Happiness where none ever found it, being
incurably miserable by reason of a wilful Ignorance of the Nature of Things, a
false love of Fleshly Life, ungoverned Longings after those Things which if
they could enjoy would no more assuage their Thirst then water will cure a
Dropsy. They are just like to those discontented persons which endeavor to
lose themselves by wandering in diverse places, but they meet themselves every
where, and will always be sure to find vexation whilst they are in their own
Company; yet they accuse all things but themselves. So the Impotent Sick
complain of their Bed because they lie uneasily, and beat their Pillow because
their Head aches.

It may be I should not laugh so much at the follies of you Plutocopians, but
that you do so ridiculously date your Resolutions to grow Wise; for thus you
say, After we have got so many thousand pounds more, after we have built so
many Houses, or purchased so many Lordships, we will be content. And why not
now? Are you not Rich enough already? What need you so greedily to gnaw that
Crust of the Poor, Hope? So the Clown sits down by the River's side till all
the water pass away: But he may sit long enough. Go over, Fool, the Stream is
fordable now. But it is better sport to see how subtle Time is revenged upon
those which slight his present offers. One not altogether unsensible that he
has over-charg'd his Vocation with burdensome Cares, says he will shake off
his Load at the return of his next Ship: Another expects but one good Harvest
more, or two dear years at the most, to make his Riches answerable to his
Desires: A third resolves to be charitable (as Hypocrites sometimes talk of
leaving their Sins) at the next great Feast. And whilst they are vainly
contriving how to delay that which is necessary to be done at present, Time
beckens to Death, and he comes and makes it impossible for the future.

And now I talk of Death, which is the End of this Ludicrous Play, I cannot but
laugh at the Epilogue, which is usually acted by an Old man, who having nothing
to prove that he has lived long but that he has bought many Almanacks, does
pride himself in his Age; and being blind, deaf and lame, will yet venture upon
the Stage; and when he is there, forgetting what he is to do, cries out
unseasonably, I would live still, and repeats his mistake so often with a
feeble voice, that the Poet is forced to send one to pull him into the
Tiring-Room. And there it is a new sport to see how all the Actours quarrel
with the Master of the Revels for telling them that the Play is done: they
would act still, and cry because they are commanded to put off their Habits,
and think themselves robbed when they restore their Vizards, which were only
lent them for a while to fit their persons to their Part.

Though Bathypogon understood not much, yet he perceived that Euphranor jeered
the Plutocopians; and fearing that he would never end of himself, commanded him
silence; and taking Orthocrinon for a very wise man, as the rest of the
Plutocopians did, (for men sometimes approve Virtue which they will not
imitate,) he desired him to give his opinion of the two Philosophers, and to
advise him what to determine concerning them. Orthocrinon, perceiving that what
the Philosophers had said was capable of some Correction, and considering with
himself that it was a fit opportunity to bestow some charitable advice upon the
Plutocopians, began thus: I have always thought, Bathypogon, that the
Calamities which attend the condition of Mankind are not inconsiderable, but I
never saw them resented so compassionately as by Skeletion, neither did I ever
know any so pleasantly unconcerned in them as Euphranor seems to be. I know
that Glycypicron with unaccustomed Tides flowed lately twice in twelve Hours:
but who would have thought that it did portend that in a short time you should
become the Objects of the deepest Sorrow and highest Mirth? Poor Plutocopians!
your Misery is so great, that one of them thinks he needs an ever-running
Spring of Tears to bewail it; and the other esteems your Folly so ridiculous,
that he cannot contain himself from perpetual Laughter. However, Skeletion, I
do something wonder at you; for if there be so many unhappy people in the world
as you seem to believe, what need you make your self of the number by your
calamitous Sorrow? If those mischiefs which inevitably await us are too great
already, why do you make an addition of this voluntary Torment? If you think
men over-match'd with Adversity, or at least very hard put to it, why do you so
uncharitably endeavor to lessen their Power by Despair, or soolishly deplore
what you judge incurable? Do you mean to open Pandora's Box again? It was
almost quite emptied before, nothing but a little quantity of Hope being left
in the Bottom; and will you let that out too? How should they look upon Humane
Life otherwise then as a desperate Case, seeing it plunged in a gulf of endless
Sorrow? It is an impertinent Humanity to make others more disconsolate by
weeping for them. If the flood be not passable, why do you swell it higher with
your Tears? If it be, why do you discourage them from attempting to go over,
whilst you sit weeping upon the Bank? But let me tell you, Skeletion, the state
of our Life is not so deplorable as you would make it. A Man is neither a
Contemptible thing in his Constitution, for he is adorned with Reason, by which
he is capable of the knowledge of all things, and is priviledg'd with Speech,
by which he is fitted for Conversation with such as are of the same Nature with
himself; neither are the Pleasures which are allotted for our portion so
inconsiderable, that it is undesirable to be a Man. For since he has many
Faculties, and those furnished with proportionable Objects, he is a rare
instrument of Pleasure to himself. He has no Sense but it is abundantly
provided for; he need not to glut himself with any one Recreation, diverse
present themselves. And though the world be full of people, God has provided
Room enough for them all without streightning any, if they could be content
with just Shares. And though some things occur which are Inconveniences, yet
every one has its Remedy annexed; as there is no Poison which has not an
Antidote. The Winter is warmed with Fire, the Summer is cooled with Shadows.
There is no Affliction so heavy but it is accompanied with an Alleviation, and
wise men can easily find it. Courteous Time does always apply one Consolation,
whether we seek it or no; for by the familiarity of long converse it makes any
condition tolerable. It Is true, some things are trouble some for a while, and
Fools complain more then they need; but wise men bear them handsomely, and put
the best side outward. What need we take things by the wrong handle, or quarrel
with God or his Providence? We ought to think that there may be good Reason,
though we understand it not, that things should be as they are, when we wish
them otherwise; and that Mortal condition must be appointed after this manner;
and that we ought by no means to wonder at our own grievances, when we see that
all our Neighbors have either the same or others. Nay, though Death awaits us,
and so we seem to be in danger of losing All, yet we have no reason to
complain, because it is mere Courtesy that we have lived so long, and indeed
that we came into Being at all: and if we knew our Happiness, or would learn to
call things by their right Names, we should not be so shie of Death, for it is
the only passage to Immortal Life.

As for you, Euphranor, though I think a Man shows some Gnerousness of Mind
that laughs at all adverse Accidents, and that he does deserve better of Men
then one that weeps at all things which he sees; since by being in the Company
of one that is so merry, they begin to think that the face of Humanity is not
so terrible as they were apt to imagine when they were alone: yet if I may
freely speak my mind, I must tell you that as it is an insupportable torment to
lodge the Miseries of others in our own Hearts, so it is but an inhumane sport
to be delighted with them. Or if you intend your Mirth more charitably, hoping
by this means to make Fools ashamed of themselves, yet I am afraid you will
never reduce them to Wisdom by laughing at their Follies. Humane Nature is
sometimes willing to be instructed, is never content that any should insult
over its Imperfections; always esteeming such Tutors Enemies, not Reprovers of
Sinners. Sick men would not be jeered, but cured: and really, Skeletion, your
Method is as unreasonable, for Physicians do neither laugh nor cry at their
Patients. If you attempt a Cure this way, one of you does but milk a Bull,
whilst the other holds under a Sieve: or if you both think, as you seem to do,
that they are past Recovery, go away and let them die quietly. If you judge
them out of their Wits, does either of you think to appear Wise among so many
Madmen? or will you be mad for Company? Have you considered the Nature of
things, and do not remember that no Age brings forth many Wise men? Take heed
lest you both fall out with Nature, and it may be mistake it too. What? would
you have no fools in the world? you would have a Picture drawn without any
Shadows. Should nothing be greater, nothing less in the Creation? Is it to be
esteemed an Indecorum that Beasts are not Men, nor Trees Beasts? Is it any
greater Indecency that some Men are more Wise then others, then to see
excellent Fruits grow upon some Trees, upon others such as are not so
desirable, and upon some none? Will any Wise man cry because it is not always
day, or laugh to see people Feverish? Is not Folly one of those diseases which
Humane Nature is sick of? As he which made Men is not to be blamed for their
want of Health, because they are voluntarily sick; so neither is he to be
thought wanting as to their Recovery, since he has given them sufficient means
to obtain it, and they perish irrecoverably because they will not use them. But
what is that to you, Euphranor? Let them alone. Your Discourse, though never so
wise, is but lost upon such as are past sense. Exhortation is odious to such as
are otherwise resolved. You praise Liberty to abject Souls that can bear any
yoke so it be lined with Gold; which love to be slaves, and are worthy of
Fetters. You talk to those of a dangerous Hook who have determined to swallow
the Bait, and will never believe that there is any Hook till it stick in their
Throats. You advise such to forsake a foolish course of Life, which are so
utterly unacquainted with Wisdom and Virtue, that if they should take your
Counsel, would not know what to do. Therefore let me desire you, Euphranor,
not to provoke men to be worse then they are already; that is, of Fools to make
them mad by laughing at them: and you, Skeletion, not to make them think their
condition more unhappy then it is, because you continually cry for them.

I entreat you also, my Neighbors of Plutocopia, not to be too angry at the
Deportment of these Strangers, considering that it is a Courtesy to be
awakened out of a hurtful Dream, though by a loud Noise. Be not displeased that
you are put in mind of your Mortality. An Emperor could bear such words from
one that stood behind him in his Triumphant Chariot. Your Possessions are like
your selves, of Uncertain Continuance. Mine and Thine are Words that signify
only a just present Use. The most Rightful owners are but Usufructuaries. You
can never make a Prescription by possessing that which is only borrowed for a
time, and held merely at the Will of him that lent it. If you accustom your
selves to think you are Mortal, you will live more prudently, you will spend
the little time you have more frugally, use well what you cannot carry with
you; and knowing that you do but sojourn in this World, you will be less
troubled when you are called Home. If you make that use which you may of
Euphranor's Laughter, you will forgive him his Mirth; if you weigh the reasons
of his pleasant Humor, you will wish to be of his Mind. If you made some
Glasses in imitation of that of Skeletion, they would show you such a true
Image of this mutable World, that you would learn to proportion your affections
to the frail Nature of Things. You would not then fret at those necessary
Vicissitudes which are the Roots of your disappointments; knowing that the
brightest Prosperity shines but like a Winter's Sun, faintly at best, and is
often clouded; that Men stand in Worldly Rank like Arithmeticians Counters upon
a Table, sometimes for Shillings, sometimes for Pounds, and sometimes for
Pence; or like Chesse-men, are sometimes Knights, sometimes Pawns, and at the
end of the Play are shuffled into a Bag altogether. You would then see no more
reason to be angry, because others flourish, then to envy the Gayeties of a
short-lived Butter-flie, or to repine at the Feasts and Music of a Grasshopper,
which for a month or two hops from Herb to Herb, quaffs up the Dew and sings.
You would not be puffed with Pride, though your own sails be swelled with
prosperous blasts of good Fortune, remembering that it is not long before proud
people, that which makes them Arrogant, and their Pride sink altogether; Humane
Glory being but like the vain Glistering of a Rainbow, which is made of a few
Sunbeams scattered upon a waterish cloud. If it were not unseasonable, I
should also advise you that you would venture your uncertain Riches not only at
Sea, but upon Charity; for I fear many of you will be undone ere long for want
of those gainful Returns which Merciful men are sure to meet in the Eternal
World. If you bestow upon your selves such a moderate Portion as will maintain
a Temperate cheerfulness, and impart what you can spare to the relief of such
as are in Necessity, you will improve what you have to the utmost advantage;
for you prudently use things as changeable as the Wind and Tide to bring you to
a Happy Port, and make those which sail with you glad by the way. Those which
enjoy a flourishing estate and understand not this Art, lose, to their
unspeakable damage, a rare opportunity to be merciful to such as possibly in
future time may be able to repay what they may then need. But Prosperity is
always ill-bestowed upon Fools, for they presently grow insolent, falsely
supposing that they can never be unhappy.

I have nothing more to say, Bathypogon, but only to entreat your favorable
Sentence for the two Strangers. It were a most unmerciful thing to condemn
Skeletion, who has only grieved you with too much pity; and as unjust to
punish Euphranor for doing that which he is forced to, for he only laughs at
things which are ridiculous. I think the Plutocopians might do well to reform
their Errors, and then they will be so happy that their State will no longer
be a proper Object for Skeletion's Compassion; or, if you think it not yet time
to grow Wise, make a Law that for the future none shall presume to laugh at
your follies, and then it is likely that Euphranor will obediently depart out
of your City.

Thus the gentle Orthochrinon ended his Advice. But Bathypogon and his
Fellow-Citizens Ears were so hard stopped with the Hopes of a Feast which they
intended to make with the Money which they should receive for the Philosophers,
that Mercurie's Augre would not have been able to boar a hole in them.
Bathypogon, taking no notice of what Orthocrinon had said, pronounced the
Sentence, and commanded the Crier to proclaim, That if any man would buy the
Philosophers, he should have them both for twenty pounds. No body offering to
buy them, Bathypogon bade the Crier give a years time for the payment of the
Money. The Merchants were so afraid of their troublesome Qualities, that they
were not Vendible so: Whereupon Bathypogon, by the Advice of his Assistants,
ordered that they should be gone out of the City, and commanded them at their
utmost Peril not to remain within the Gates that Night.

Orthocrinon having seen the fruitless event of his Intercession, went away,
but expressed so much Courtesy toward the Philosophers as to desire them to
go with him to Euesto. They accepted of his Invitation; and when they came to
his House, (which being a pleasant Solitude, was no improper seat for a
Philosopher) they could not but like it. But they were much more taken with the
prudent Cheerfulness of his Wife Euthymia, the sober Deportment and excellent
Knowledge of his Ingenuous Children: in short, they beheld such a discreet
Order in the appointment of his whole Affairs, that they were forced to think
that Orthocrinon was so wise and happy, that Euphranor could not laugh at him,
except he esteemed it Ridiculous that he was a Man; nor Skeletion weep, unless
it offended him that he was not a God.

Here Irene ended her story, for which she received many thanks from Urania and
her Companions. The time of the day requiring it, Theonoe desired them to walk
in to Dinner. They were no sooner come into the Parlour which opened into the
Garden, but they were surpised with an unexpected Joy, occasioned by the
fortunate Arrival of two Gentlemen near akin to Theonoe and Irene, called
Amyntor and Sympathus, who came to perform a Visit. This made a great accession
to the Contentments of the whole Company; and they which brought it, quickly
perceived that they themselves had encountered a greater Happiness then they
expected: The pleasures which are enjoyed in Company being of that nature, that
whosoever contribute to their production ever carry away their Principal with
an extraordinary Interest. The Fathers of these two Gentlemen and the Ladies
maintained mutually such an intimate Friendship, that they were commonly called
Pylades and Orestes; and their Love was transmitted by a kind of Hereditary
Traduction to their Children, and they preserved it so inviolably, that their
Families after their Death retained the Glory of their Ancestors Affection.
Amyntor and Sympathus were persons of great Wits, advanced by Study and Travel,
of good Discourse and agreeable Humor. Theonoe perceiving whilst they were at
Dinner, that her Cosens were not altogether so cheerful as they used to be,
asked them, when the Cloth was taken away, what was the Reason of their unusual
sadness. Amyntor confessed that they had in their hearts some Compassion,
though at this time they would willingly have concealed it, for the Death of
the good King Anaxagathus, and the poor Prince Alethion, whose Misfortunes were
the ruin of that once-flourishing Family. This news was very unwelcome to
Theonoe and Irene: however, since it is some satisfaction to know the state of
our friends, they desired leave of Bentivolio, Urania, and the rest of the good
Company, that Amyntor might be entreated to acquaint them with that which he
had heard concerning the disastrous Fate of the best of Kings, and his Son a
most Illustrious Prince. Bentivolio and his friends readily accepted the
Motion, for they intended to have made the same request, not doubting but such
a story must needs be full of great Accidents. Amyntor was willing to obey
their Command, and the rather, because it breaths an inward grief to relate it
to such as sympathize with our passions. Theonoe led the Company into a fair
Gallery, where when they had disposed themselves in convenient Seats, he began
after this manner:

The Kingdom of Theriagene (now well worthy of its Name) was formerly governed
by Anaxagathus, who derived his Empire by Hereditary Right from many Royal
Ancestors, that is, received Sovereign Power with all imaginary Advantages. The
Ancient Root of a Princely Family is a great support to that Veneration which
is due from Subjects to their Kings; for they cannot but have a Natural
Reverence for one whom God, Nature and Time have set and confirmed in Royal
Height. This most excellent way of Succession freed him from those
disaffections which are many times fastened upon Elective Princes by the Envy of
Ambitious Competitours, and the Hatred of such as factiously oppose their
Choice. Anaxagathus was neither engaged to gratify any Party of the People for
their Votes, nor owed any Reward to his Soldiers for the help of their Swords;
but being born a Prince, was equally acknowledged by all in his undoubted
Right, and was free to oblige such as he should think fit with unprejudiced
Favors. Upon this Foundation of his Sovereignty the Welfare of his Subjects
also was strongly secured, both as the Interests of the People are most safe
under Monarchy (which is evident; For since the greatest part of the Laws of a
Nation do always respect such matters as are the continual Occasions of
Controversy between Men; every part of the People being biased with divided
Interests, none can be so fitly qualified for Legislatours as is the Prince,
who having no particular concernment aims equally at the Common Good,) and as
the Right of Succession was entailed upon his Posterity, he had no Interest of
his Family divided from the public: a mischief which can hardly be avoided in
Elective Principalities, which being forced to take a great care of their
Relatives, since they are not sure of Succession, do often exceed the bounds of
just Moderation in what they design for themselves; and as they frequently
stoop to the use of ignoble contrivances to obtain what they desire, so they
make no scruple to repeat their Methods for the maintaining and increasing of
what they have gotten. As Anaxagathus was placed far above the Nenessity of
such unworthy Arts by an indubitable Title, so by a Princely Temper of Soul
received from his Progenitors he was naturally inclined to an affectionate
Regard to his Subjects, being born their Father.

As he was thus placed in his Throne by a Divine Power, so he was accomplished
with all those Princely Virtues which made him most worthy to sit there. For he
acknowledging his Authority derived from Heaven, principally endeavored to
deport himself as God's Vicegerent, and was not so careful of any thing as his
Honor from whose Hand he received his Crown; being not only Religious in show,
to gain Estimation with the People, but really affecting Piety, in hope of the
Blessing of true Obedience which Princes need both for themselves and their
Subjects. The Truth of this Disposition he made manifest both in that he showed
no Countenance to those which were openly impious, and ever declared an utter
abhorrence of Atheists, and preferred to the most Honorable places of his
service such as he thought to be the truest Lovers of God.

As the peaceable entry into the possession of his Kingdom freed him from those
troubles which have often amused the Prudence of Great Emperors; so his deep
Insight into the Principles of Government enabled him to avoid two dangerous
Rocks, upon which many Kingdoms have been (...), viz. the Ambition of the
Potent Gentry, and the Insolent Disposition of the Vulgar. He had great Natural
parts, and so improved them by Reading, Consideration and Experience, that he
was able to frame a quick and solid Judgment of any Matter belonging to his
Government. He knew that the business of a Prince is to advance the Prosperity
of his Subjects, and to secure their Peace against the Invasion of Foreiners;
and therefore acquainted himself with all things which are necessary to be
known as Means conducing to those Ends, particularly with the Nature of his
Prerogative, the Rights of his People, the Laws of Nations, the Strength of
other Kingdoms, the Commodities of his Own, the Inclinations of his Subjects,
and the Designs which his Neighbors may probably have against him.

He gave a great Demonstration of the Perspicacity of his Judgment, both in the
Election of his Councillors, (for knowing that Kings must see with other men's
Eyes, and trust a considerable part of their Affairs to the Fidelity of their
Ministers, he made choice of such as were not only persons of Honor, but men
of singular Prudence and unquestionable Integrity,) and in the Examination of
their Advice: for since all men are fallible, and may some time or other give
Counsel with too great a reflection upon particular Ends of their own, he would
never receive any but that which he did clearly perceive to aim directly at his
and the Common Interest. If after public Debates he did yet doubt concerning
that Opinion to which he inclined, he would privately conjure some of those who
differed from him, to tell him freely the Reasons of their Advice; which they
would most willingly do, knowing that Anaxagathus never esteemed those his
Friends, who out of fear of contradicting his Inclination would conceal what
they knew concerning his Good. By this means he secured himself against
Flatterers, and made the utmost Improvement of his Friends Abilities. To his
Wariness in Deliberation he added Stedfastness in his Resolves, and Diligence
in the Execution of his Purposes.

In his Carriage he expressed a Majestic Gravity, never condescending to such
Actions as import lowness of Soul, diminish the Veneration of Royalty, or
expose his Person to any Contempt: yet he always manifested so much Serenity
and Sweetness, that he incurred no Hatred by the most severe Exercise of his
Regal Power. Knowing that it is easier to prevent Hatred then to regain Love,
and that Malice cannot be slighted without some Hazard, he declined avoidable
Offenses. He ever matched Clemency with Greatness of mind, knowing that Mercy
shown by one that has great Power does unspeakably oblige; and that it was
never any Advantage to a Prince to be hated, which is always the Effect of
Cruelty. When any Favor was bestowed, he ever let the People see that it
proceeded freely from his own Goodness; and when Rigor was exercised, which
was but seldom, they saw it was a necessary Punishment of Sins which ought not
to be pardoned.

There is no Reason of just Infamy, for which Princes do sometimes receive a
dishonorable Character in the Book of Fame, which he did not well observe and
carefully avoid. He was very curious of his Conversation, lest it wanted the
just Ornaments of every Moral Virtue; because he knew that Princes cannot hide
their Actions, and that it was no assurance that he had done well, because none
durst reprove him. He was unwilling also to make an Example against the Law,
and let his Subjects see that it was possible for sin to be unpunishable. He
would make no use of an Arbitrary Power, though his People knew it was their
duty not to resist him; neither did he think he lost any thing of his Power by
not doing every thing which he might. Whilst the King strictly observed the
established Laws, the People learned Obedience from his Government. His great
Care of his Subjects safety made them perform their Duties with an unspeakable
willingness: they esteemed the King's Riches their Public Treasury, and when
they paid their Taxes, acknowledged that they gave but a Little to secure All.

Anaxagathus lived always according to the Degree of a Prince: yet managed his
Expenses so frugally, that they did never exhaust his Revenue. For this there
was great Reason: for though Money was not the Sinews of his Wars, but rather
the Love and Courage of his native Soldiers; yet he knew they must be paid
when they are employed, and that with Silver a King may hire men as well as buy
Iron with Gold. The truth is, he had little cause to think of entertaining any
foreign Auxiliaries, for he was so entirely beloved at home, that he could not
but be much feared abroad. His Subjects endeared his Happiness to themselves,
and made their Loyal Affections so manifest upon all Occasions, that
Conspiratours had as much reason to expect Punishment, though they should
accomplish mischief against his Person, as they are always fearful when they
design it against other Princes. It was a singular testimony of the Prudence of
Anaxagathus, that he had obtained whatever could belong to a Prince's Security,
when to the Majesty of his Person, the Defense of the Laws, the Assistance of
his Friends, and the Strength of his Guards, he had added the Universal
Good Will of his People. Being assured of this, he slighted the vain Strength
of chargeable Forts, maintaining only One in a weak place of his Frontiers, and
that rather for Pomp then any Defense that he expected from it.

Thus did the Good King Anaxagathus live in Glory, contemning that poor Honor
which some weakly endeavor to perpetuate by Statues of frail Stone; for the
Everlasting Image of his Virtues was framed in the Souls of those which could
not think upon him without Admiration. His whole Kingdom was his Theater, and
all his People Spectatours, applauding his wise and just Actions. There was no
City in his Dominions which did not preserve his Trophies made of Conquered
Hearts. This was Anaxagathus his Happiness; and indeed what greater Felicity is
there then to be able to impart Prosperity to many others? His discreet
Subjects thought themselves happy too, for they saw that they enjoyed what
Freedom Mortal men are capable of, and they desired not that extravagant
Liberty which the Ignorant Multitude often talk of, sometimes rebel for, but
never enjoy; exchanging Obedience and Peace for Sin, War, and then just Slavery
under such as for their own ambitious Ends made them in love with Treason.

Thus the Kingdom flourished under Anaxagathus, and they had no small grounds
of Hope that it would never wither; for as they could not enjoy a better King,
so neither did the King or the People desire a more Hopeful Successor then the
most Excellent Prince Alethion, who was the only Son of Anaxagathus. I pray
you, Cousin, said Theonoe, with the leave of this good Company, since you are so
good at Descriptions, will you give us a short Character of his Perfections? by
this means we shall not only enjoy the pleasure of your Wit, but you will also
detain us by a beneficial Delay from the hearing of that at which we are
assured beforehand that we shall be grieved. Though I have reason to blush,
replied, Amyntor, at one half of the reason which you give for your Command,
yet I will be obedient in the best manner that my poor ability will allow.
Alethion was a Prince of a lively Complexion, sprightly Eyes, black Hair,
curling naturally in handsome Rings, of a serene Aspect, of a tall Stature,
goodly Shape, and Princely Carriage, of an obliging Conversation mixed with
Majesty. He had a quick Wit equaled with a solid Judgment. He spoke with
facility, and delivered extraordinary Conceptions in most clear Expressions.
Those Connate Notions of Truth, which God has bestowed as a Natural Glory upon
Rational Souls, did shine in his bright Intellect like fixed Stars, unclouded
with those ill-sented fumes of Lust which darken wicked Minds. To this Light he
added whatsoever may be gained from Experience enlarged with much Conference
and great Reading. He had a constant Propension of strong Desires to all
Excellent Seize, a most piercing Wit for the finding out of such means as
would help to accomplish his End, and was unweariedly diligent in the use of
them. That he omitted nothing which might make him Master of his Noble
Designs, was manifest in this, that neither the Avocations of the Court, nor
those multitudes of Tentations which allure Princes to Pleasure, but do usually
betray them to Ignorance, were able to hinder him from an exact knowledge of
the best Arts and Sciences, which made him able to give a true Judgment upon
any piece of Learning.

It was one of his principal Recreations to discourse with Philosophers, that
is, such as he perceived really to have advanced the knowledge of God and his
Works, and were also perfected with that Wisdom which consists in a sincere
Belief of what God has made known by Revelation: for he accounted it a strange
kind of Vanity to pretend an eager desire to find out Truth our Selves, and yet
to slight that which God of his Grace has revealed to us for our Direction and
Encouragement; that is, to pretend an Esteem for Books, and undervalue the
Sacred Bible. The great pleasure which he found by understanding the Mysteries
of Natural Philosophy, made him very Curious in the Contrivance and Use of
those Instruments which do further us in that Inquiry, as Telescopes, Tubes,
and all other Mechanical Engines. He was very Liberal in allowances which are
requisite to make those Experiments upon which true Principles are founded, and
by which they are proved; but which Princes only are able to bestow. Generous
Nature in requital of these Services discovered to him all her Secrets, except
some few which she yet resolves to conceal from Mortal eyes, and intended that
in a short time he should be acknowledged by all the world as the Prince of
Philosophers.

He made a firm League with all the Virtues, and was true to his engagement,
never betraying any of them to scorn in the whole Course of his Actions. He
would often express a pity for the Superstitious, and always declared a
zealous abhorrence of Hypocrisy. He was the more to be admired in his
Religion, because as he was a devout worshipper of the Supreme King of Heaven
and Earth, so the Sincerity of his Virtuous Disposition did not grow upon any
Erroneous Principle; for his Regard of God did not spring from Ignorance or
panick Fear, those contemptible Foundations upon which Ungrateful Atheists
bottom Religion, but from a clear Knowledge and true Love of that which is
best. He was the Paragon of Temperance, and Chaste to an Example. He had such a
Generous Soul, that he could not only forgive an injury, but forget that he was
wronged; esteeming them very ordinary Chirurgions which cannot heal a wound
without a Scar. By his practice he made others learn this true and noble sort
of Revenge. He had an unfeigned Love of Truth, and would rather endure any
Inconvenience then break his Word, and lose any Design which he could not gain
but with the blemish of his Honor. He had an incomparable Fortitude, whereof
he gave infinite proofs, and did usually forget himself to be a Prince when his
Friends stood in need of his Courage. He had a Prudence which taught him to
make use of every thing that was an Advantage to any important Business, and
this he attained by much Exercise. At Home in times of Peace, when the most
excellent Soldiers have little to do, he would walk into the Field with them,
and discourse concerning Military Affairs, make them train their men, represent
serious War in jocular Skirmishes; and having viewed diverse sorts of Ground,
ask Questions proportionable to their diversity of Situation; such as these: If
an enemy (would he say) had not minded the Advantage of that Hill, how might we
gain it? Or if he possessed it, and we were placed in this lower Ground, how
should we assault him? If he worsted us, by what means might we be able to
retreat in order? If we had the better of him, how might we make the best
improvement of the Victory in a pursuit? From such Instances going on to other
Chances which happen in War, he made Demands, received their Answers, and
replied. By this means he attained such a clear foresight into Martial
Affairs, that no case could easily fall out for which he had not a Remedy
provided. I have heard some, which have had the happiness to know him
familiarly, say, that of his own Country he had drawn such an exact Map in his
Mind, that he could talk distinctly of all Inland places of Strength, and knew
his several Ports, convenient Rodes, dangerous Shelves, and useful Fastnesses
upon the Seacoasts, as well as if he had dwelt in every place.

He had one happiness which Persons of his Quality do not frequently enjoy; For
Traveling Incognito, he saw the Courts and Camps of many Princes, where he had
the opportunity to observe the best Actions, and also to perform some which
made his Worth shine through his Disguise. This made him admired in most places
where he sojourned, and he returned home enriched with variety of Experiments
from them all.

Before the Necessity of any actual Adventure, he formed his Resolutions
according to such Rules as wise Persons had composed for all cases in
Speculation; and coming to encounter disasters at Sea and Land, he gave such
Proofs of his Constancy, that it was visible to all which knew him, that Chance
had no power over his Virtue; and that the fixed Temper of his great Soul did
not rise and fall according to the weather-glass of external Accidents. He had
such an undaunted Presentness of a prepared Mind, that when he was affronted
with any sudden alteration of Fortune, without any Consultation how he might
make an escape, he would immediately stand upon his Defense. When he engaged in
any Enterprise which concerned the King's service against his Enemies, they
made but a small account of the Advantage, if in any thing they had the better
of him, for they knew he would soon repair it at their Cost; and when they were
put to a Loss, though they knew he always pursued his Victory, yet they were
not much dejected, for they were sure that no success did ever make him
Insolent.

The King his Father having perceived by a short Experience that his Son was
made up of all those Accomplishments that he had put into his Prayers for him,
taking notice that it was a hard task to determine whether his Body or Soul had
the Advantage in those Gifts which were distinctly proper to them; and having
observed that he was able to give as good Advice and manage what was determined
with as much Prudence as any of his Senators, he made him one of his intimate
Council; and seeing that his Soldiers received not only Discipline but Example
from his Matchless Valor, he made him General of his Armies.

The People were enamored with his Perfections, and never looked upon him but
as the Glorious Mirror of all Princely Graces. Their Happiness being full to
the top in Anaxagathus, they thought it must needs run over in Alethion. They
could not look at the Father as a setting Sun, whilst they seemed to see him
rise and shine more gloriously in such an Heir. Their honest Hopes were not
ill-grounded, though the Princes Excellencies had not the same effects in the
King's Mind which they had in the People's. Yet those were not their Natural
Products, but oblique Resentments caused by sinister Representations made by a
Cousin of Alethion, whose name was Antitheus. He envying the Prince because he
was so justly Great, brought the King into suspicion that he aimed by indirect
Means to be unjustly Greater. The Excess of Virtue in Alethion upbraided him
with his own Defects, and the Imbecility of his Malicious Wit could devise no
other way to be revenged, but by endeavoring to make the King believe that his
Son valued those Excellencies which were taken notice of in him only as things
which made his Father Less. Antitheus had a Nature unspeakably Ambitious, and
that made him discontented with his condition in the Court, though it was much
too good for so unworthy a Person. He fancied that there was no Happiness in
the World but to see swarms of officious People press about him, and await his
pleasure with uncovered heads. He despised the best Estate of Subjects as a
gilded Slavery, and esteemed it Poverty of Spirit to be willing to be governed;
and had entertained such false Principles to accommodate his proud Humor, that
he made no question but it was his Right not to obey any longer then till he
could get power to Command, and concluded that no Method was unlawful by which
he could make himself Supreme. This Temper carried along with it a Malicious
Envy against his Equals, and possessed him with an habitual Malignity against
his Superiors. He made account that he had but two considerable Impediments in
his way; (for other matters he thought he should easily dissipate with a puff
of his Breath) and those were the King, because he was in the present
Possession of Royalty, and the Prince: and this latter troubled him most, both
because he had a strong Antipathy against his Heroical Soul; and because he
knew that though the King were dead, yet he would survive in the Prince: so
that he could never look at the flourishing state of Alethion, but as that
dismal Coffin in which he himself was buried alive.

In those Intervalls of Reflection which force themselves into the thoughts of
great Sinners, he would sometimes say to his friends, But what is this which I
attempt? How can I forget my Uncle? why should I injure my Cousin? I must
trample upon Fealty, abandon Gratitude, despise nearness of Blood, banish all
respects of Piety out of my Mind, and suppress the pains which my Conscience
makes me feel. These troublesome Considerations, and the various Difficulties
which he was to encounter, gave mighty checks to his Hopes: yet he had such
unsatiable desires to go forward, that he resolved to try all Possibilities,
and either to accomplish his Design, or perish more contentedly in the attempt:
Hoping withal that if he could not rise to the Height at which he aimed, yet
he should make the Prince fall with him; and imagined foolishly that if Success
did answer his Expectations, he should be able to hide his Sins under the
Prosperity which he should then enjoy, and obtain pardon for his bold
Wickedness by a Title which whilst he possessed none durst deny to be good. He
had diverse Friends which not only knew his Temper, but having peculiar
Discontents of their own were disaffected toward the present State of Affairs,
which they wished altered, in hopes to rise proportionably to the Advancement
of their Patron; and they promised themselves a more probable Success, because
Antitheus was the next Heir but one to the Crown.

Antitheus found no means so fit for his purpose as to implant a deep suspicion
in the King's thoughts against the Prince. Anaxagathus having a fearful Nature,
his Mind was a soil too fit for Jealousy, and Antitheus doubted not but he
should be able to make it grow, whilst he and his Accomplices nourished it with
much Artifice, and that in time it would bring forth the fruit which he
desired. The more he considered, the more difficult he found his task: for the
Prince managed his Command with such prudent Innocence, that Antitheus had
nothing but misconstrued Virtue to form into an Accusation; and the King having
great Affections for the Prince, it was not easy to make a Father cease to
love such a Son, who by his Excellencies attracted the Love of all men. This
forced Antitheus to use his Wits to prepare matter for the Prince's Ruin, and
his patience to await some lucky season when he might throw a spark into it to
blow it up, and yet so undiscernedly, that none should be able to say from what
hand it came: Knowing that bold Falsehood cannot only impose upon shallow
Judgments or weaker Courage, but upon Wise men too, if the opportunity be
watched wherein they also will be weak. That his Intentions might not be known,
he hid them under a deportment full of civilities toward the Prince, and took
all occasions to give him humble respect, especially in the King's presence;
but by his Agents he secretly undermined the King's Affections to his Son, and
mis-reporting his Designs with many false surmises, he endeavored with these,
like sharp Darts winged with Fame, mortally to wound his Reputation. He set a
false Gloss upon all Alethion's Actions, some of which could not but be capable
of different Constructions: It being a hard matter for a Person of his Quality
and Employment so to deport himself in the concurrence of various
Circumstances, that one which observes him with a malicious Eye shall not be
able to make a sinister Interpretation of a most sincere Intention.

Theosebes the King of Theoprepia, being invaded by the Theromachians, had sent
to Anaxagathus to desire his Assistance; Anaxagathus resented his Condition,
and sent the young Prince Alethion to his relief, who performed many admirable
Actions, and in particular rescued the Person of Theosebes when he was enclosed
in a Troop of Theromachians, and so encouraged his Soldiers by his Example,
that the Theromachians were all killed or taken. He stayed a while in
Theoprepia; and though he returned Victorious, it was muttered against him,
that whilst he was absent with the Army, he caressed the Soldiers with
extraordinary Favors, expressed more then usual civility in his words and
carriage; and that they not only obliged with his Bounty, but infinitely taken
with the prudent Courage of which he had given most signal proofs in the
Conduct of the Fight, cried him up with such words as are only fit to be given
to Emperors. This was suggested to make the King believe that his Son was
infinitely Ambitious, to make him suspect his Loyalty, and look upon him as one
that thirsted after the Government. The Disturbance which Anaxagathus received
from these Reports was much increased by the Peoples Acclamations, which he
fancied as Echoes to the voice of the Army: For they Extolling the Person and
Actions of Alethion, bestowed upon him the greatest Praises and significations
of highest Admiration as he passed along the Streets; and as they came near to
the Palace, the King took notice of all that was done from a Balcony.

Then was Anaxagathus indisposed with too much Prosperity; He thought himself
miserable when he was only too Happy, like those who are blinded with overmuch
Light; whilst Alethion was in danger of an Eclipse, because he shined too
bright: So the Athenians bestowed Ostracisms upon those which were too
Virtuous. The King had but a few Holidayes after this sight, for the
entertained a tormenting passion which continually gnawed his Heart, and turned
every the most innocent Accident into a most corrosive nourishment for it self.
In a short time the Venomous Affection showed its power in very malignant
Effects: for the King, without any Cause known to the Prince, would express
himself in such rough Language, and accompany it with such unpleasing Looks,
that Alethion could not but perceive that his Father was abused with untrue
surmises. This did afflict the Prince; yet he having a great Soul, and that
fortified with a spotless Virtue, dissembled his Grief, and entertained
Patience, till God and Time should cure his Father's mistakes. Anaxagathus to
discharge the trouble of his Doubts, unhappily revealed his mind to Antitheus,
who being too well versed in the Art of Dissimulation, pretended a great belief
of the Prince's Loyalty; and though he confessed that he had heard things which
were most extremely dishonorable, if they were true, yet he advised the King
to repute them, as he himself did, false; adding that a short time would
probably give a clear Resolution of that which was at present doubtful. The
King left it so at that time, and Antitheus went no further in his Discourse,
because though he saw a strong Jealousy kindled in the King's Breast, yet he
was unwilling to blow it up into an open Flame, fearing that for want of
sufficient Fuel it would be extinguished without doing that mischief which he
intended to the Prince. Whereupon having entered into consultation with
Dogmapornes his Friend, and one that loved not the Prince, they resolved upon a
new Device; and that was, to write a Letter in Alethion's Name, and direct it
to Theosebes the Prince of Theoprepia, whose matter should be formed to advance
the suspicion of Anaxagathus, and put him upon some such Action which they
might use for a fair Introduction to their main Design.

Alethion had not only made a common Amity with Theosebes, but contracted such
an intimate Friendship with him, that they were no less dear to each other
then to themselves; and both to testify and preserve their Affection, kept a
constant Correspondence. It happened also that Alethion, during his stay at
Phronesium, had entertained a great Affection for the Princess Agape, the
Sister of Theosebes. The knowledge of these Accidents was but too subservient
to Dogmapornes, for he had a faculty of forming any Characters which he had
seen before. In confidence of this Art he undertook to imitate the Prince's
hand so exactly, that he should not be able to know it from his own. He had an
Acquaintance with one called Panurgus, who was well known to Siopelus,
Alethion's Secretary. Him they ordered to visit Siopelus, and to watch an
opportunity, when he found the Secretary engaged in earnest business, to fix
the Prince's Seal to the Letter, and then pretend that he found the Letter by
chance, and give it to Dogmapornes when he should see him with the King, unto
whom Dogmapornes was to present it. The words carried this sense.

Most Illustrious Prince Theosebes;
The Love which unites our hearts, has made it impossible that I should not be
always Yours. The Truth upon which our Friendship is founded will not permit
any Condition to make a diminution of our Affections. If it were not a
Reservedness unbecoming our Relation, I would not give you the trouble of
knowing my present State. I am afflicted by my Father to gratify his Enemies,
who have wickedly brought him into an unjust suspicion of my Loyalty. It does
something astonish me to find my self a Grief to him whose Joys I would redeem
with the loss of whatsoever is dear unto me. Although I am more apprehensive
for his disturbance, then for any mischief which it may possibly work to me;
yet I am not so out of Charity with my Innocence, as to abandon it carelessly to
undeserved Ruin. I hope I have discovered the Ground upon which my danger is
built; and when I shall have sprung a Mine which I have laid under it, I doubt
not but that which now threatens me will be torn up by the Roots. At present I
need nothing but your Prayers, as occasion serves you shall hear further from

Your most affectionate and faithful Lover, ALETHION.


The next day the King took Antitheus into the Garden to talk with him
concerning the former business, which was never out of his thoughts, and asked
him if he had yet received any further notice of Alethion's Designs. No,
replied Antitheus, only they say the Prince was much out of Humor yesternight,
refused to eat, and entertained some of his Associates in private discourse;
and as he dismissed them, which was very late, one overheard him say, I will,
I will, for it is intolerable for a Prince to be so used; I will rather die
then be despised. The King turning hastily about, advanced but a few steps in
the walk which led toward the House, before he saw Dogmapornes with two more
of his Confederates coming toward him. Dogmapornes perceiving by the King's
Countenance that he was exceedingly incensed, craved his Majesty's pardon,
alleging that he should not have presumed to have invaded his Privacy, but that
his servant having found a Letter in the Street directed to Theosebes the
Prince of Theoprepia, he thought it was his duty to bring it to the King.
Anaxagathus observing it was sealed with the Prince's Arms, was much troubled,
especially when having opened it he found it written with his hand, as he
thought, and saw his Name subscribed to it. When he had read it, supposing he
understood what it meant by the Comments which he had received beforehand, he
seemed to be rapt into an astonishment, and after a while broke through his
silence with Expressions which signified an infinite Anguish. His words were
such as these: O Lord! how feeble a thing is Humane Felicity? That flattering
Glass in which we pleasingly view the beautiful Image of Happiness may be made
bright, but there is no Power which can secure it from breaking. Our Heights
are but Precipices, we cannot stand upon their Tops without Fear, and the
higher they are raised, the more irrecoverable is our Fall. How vain is the
Trust which is reposed in Mortal men, when the best Assurances of Humane Faith
are only fairer Masks of Perfidiousness? O the foolish Boasts of proud Artists!
How mean and useless are those Inventions for which they pretend to have
merited Immortal thanks and Glory from Mankind, unto which they have,
notwithstanding their Brags, done so little good, that they have left us
unprovided of Supplies for our greatest Necessities? They can try Gold and
Silver, and discover Counterfeit Jewels, and make a Judgment upon such like
Trifles, but they are ignorant in that which should resolve our more concerning
Doubts. Which of them has found out a Touchstone for Fidelity? It is a poor
Art which can neither make men good, nor teach us to know those which are bad.
For want of this Skill (and he spoke true, though with a wrong Application) we
are apt to give Credit to those which endeavor to betray us, and many times
doubt when we have the greatest reason, did we but know it, to be assured.

I do not now begin to be acquainted with that Mutability which domineers in
this lower World; but it astonisheth my soul to experiment new mischief from
such an unexpected Instrument. Sure my Son does think that God to be dead who
made the Laws which enjoin Obedience to Children and Loyalty to Subjects, and
imagines vainly that some Devil Reigns in his stead, who regards not such
things. But how can I believe Alethion to be so impious? He has acknowledged a
Divine Authority by his long Obedience. It may be, for all that, some violent
Storm of evil Imaginations has overcome his Virtue. Who could have dreamed
that any thoughts so wickedly potent could find Harbor in the Minds of the
now-Apostate Angels, as to make them fall at once from their Allegiance and
Heaven? As I am grieved for thy (...), so I pity thy folly, Alethion. Do thou
impotently long for a Crown? Ah! thou do not know how often my Head has been
wearied with it. Do thou think it such a glorious Pleasure to govern others?
Alas! Thou art Ignorant that the greatest Prince is but a Royal Slave, and does
perpetually serve those whom be commands, and is constantly rewarded with Fears
and Jealousies so great, that no private person is capable of them. O poor
Princes! Happy indeed if they estimate their estate by the opinion of others;
but when they judge by what they feel, they cannot find it so. Crowns and
Sceptres, Purple Robes and all the other pompous Circumstances of Majesty are
ever so much greater then the Substance, that Kings find themselves Men still,
and that notwithstanding all those bright Glories which make their Outside
shine to the dazeling of the Beholders Eyes, it does often lour and rain
within. Ignorant people would soon see that they have little cause to grudge
their Obedience, if they did but know what it is to endure the troublesome Care
of Princes.

Here Anaxagathus changing his Tone, delivered words with a more passionate
Air, and added, But all this I could bear, being but a common Lot incident to
all Princely Fortunes: but that my Son, but that Alethion should endeavor to
ascend the Throne by my Fall, it is intolerable! If wickedness grow according
to this proportion, it will be impossible that the world should subsist. God
must provide some other Earth, and transport good men thither; for this will be
so overspread with Violence, that they will not be able to find any quiet
Habitation in it.

When Antitheus perceived that the King had made a Pause, knowing that it was
his time to strike whilst the Iron was so hot, he prayed the King to retire to
his own Prudence, and rather wisely to think what he ought to do himself for
the defense of his Interest, then to complain so passionately of what was
designed against it by others, and seasonably to stop that which was ill begun
from taking any further Effect. What then should I do? said Anaxagathus. You
may (replied Antitheus) immediately secure Alethion in one of your Castles
remote from the City, by which means you will discourage his Accomplices, and
gain time without danger to search to the bottom of his Design. The King
appoved his Advice, and gave charge to Dogmapornes to carry Alethion to the
Castle which was under his Command. Dogmapornes not a little glad that their
Plot had taken so far, made haste, and with a select Guard of his friends
marched presently to the Prince's Palace, and having secured the Avenues of the
House, went in to deliver his Message, with a countenance which did more become
some friend who resented the Prince's Condition, then him that was the
principal cause of his Affliction. When he had told the Prince that it was the
King's pleasure that he should prepare himself to go to that Castle whereof he
called himself at that time the unhappy Governor; the Prince being of a
Magnanimous Temper, and taught by Prudence to receive without Amazement the
most unexpected Events, asked Dogmapornes what time was allowed for
preparation. You must be gone presently, answered Dogmapornes. But may I not
see my Father first? said the Prince. No, replied Dogmapornes, the King is much
(...), and charged me upon my Life to see his Command answered with present
Obedience. I will perform it by God's help, said the Prince; for how much
soever he is mistaken in the Cause of his Anger, I will embrace the Effects of
it with Patience; adding, But, Dogmapornes, do you not guess the occasion of
this sudden Order? No, said Dogmapornes; for being hastily sent upon this
unacceptable Errand, I only heard some of those which stood by talk of a
Letter, which being intercepted revealed something of a Design against the
King, in which I suppose that they imagined that you are interess'd. Though the
Prince could not divine what they meant by the Letter, yet he saw plainly that
some had abused the King, and did endeavor to ruin himself; whereupon his
thoughts concerning this Affair gave themselves breath in these words: Proud
Error! Will no other lodging serve thee but the Breasts of Kings? Is it not
Victory enough to abuse all the Inferior World with mistakes, unless thou do
also show the malicious power of Triumphant Lies in the Ruin of Innocent
Princes? How hard is it for Kings not to be deceived, who are forced to see
with other men's Eyes, or to use such colored Spectacles as they are pleased to
provide for them, who never meant that they should have a true sight of things?
Modest Truth, which is always Generous, and had rather be banished then
intrude where she is sure not to be welcome, does so rarely appear in Courts,
that Princes are fain to disguise themselves sometimes to get into her Company.
Flatterers are so unhappily cunning, that they can make Falsehood pass currently
for Truth, and represent Truth so disadvantageously that it is disbeliev'd, and
make honest men disfavoured as the Prince's Enemies. It were happy for my
Father, if those which attend his Person loved his Interest: but I am afraid be
is environed with Sycophants, and that those which wish him well dare not save
him from the prejudice of Misinformation, lest they lose themselves in the
plausibility of Falsehood.

I have great reason to be sorry for my Father's Misfortunes: Though my own
Affliction be great, I should easily slight it, if I did not foresee that my
Ruin is made a Prelude to his Destruction. O subtle Malice! Do thou take
away the Son as a Traitor, who is the only Bulwark which my Father has left
against treasonable Attempts? Is it possible my Father should think me so
foolishly wicked as to endeavor to steal that which would be my own after a
short time; and which I had rather want for ever, then blast the Glory of a
lawful Possession by using the least indirect means to attain it? Is
Anaxagathus grown so strangely credulous, that a Counterfeit Letter is a better
Testimony then so many years Experience? Did not Phaedra write an Epistle
against Hippolytus, and then hang her self? but did that make him guilty of any
sin against his Father Theseus?

But it is to no purpose to make Apologies, when the Judge will give no
Audience. I could heartily wish that my Father may in some reasonable time be
so far disabus'd, as not to love Virtue less for my sake, nor me for false
Reports. But I am afraid lest this black cloud, which appears now over my Head,
will ere long discharge a storm upon our Family. It is too plain a symptom that
a Kingdom is not far from Destruction, when the Methods of its safety are
confounded with perverse Counsels. This fatal Imprudence does too commonly
attend those who are destined to Ruin; when adverse Fortune has begun to
afflict them, they use contrary Medicines, or delay to apply fit Remedies to
their Distempers till they be grown incurable.

The Prince having finished this short Reflection, told Dogmapornes that he was
ready to go along with him. Dogmapornes conducted him a private way through the
Grove which adjoined to the Prince's Palace, for fear of tumults. However he
could not carry the matter so privately, but that the City and Army had notice
of it. Most of them retaining their former Goodwill to the Prince, were ready
to make an Insurrection for his Deliverance, saying as they went up and down
that the Prince was betrayed. Those which were of Antitheus his party opposed
them, and asked them if they would rebel: adding, that nothing was done to
Alethion but by the King's order. Hereupon Misopseudes, a prudent Senator; and
one of the Prince's friends, fearing that the Mutiny of the Army would turn to
Alethion's prejudice, told them, that as there was no doubt of the Prince's
Innocence, so he made no question but that he would be speedily freed from his
Imprisonment; and, to quiet this Humor, he added, that nothing could more
confirm the suspicion which was already entertained concerning the Prince's
guilt, then in a Rebellious way to attempt his Vindication. Having thus
appeased the violence of the storm, he returned to the King to intercede for
the Prince. When he was come to the Court, he found them all surpised with an
uncouth Accident: for an old Servant of the King's, who had ever a most
passionate affection for the Prince, having for a long time kept his bed by
reason of a dead Palsy, being told by the boy that attended him that Alethion
was sent to Prison, the old man amazed into a kind of recovery started up, and
by the help of his boy having got out of his bed, and put on a Nightgown, and
supporting his feeble Body with a pair of Crutches, went out of his Chamber,
crying, Oh my dear Master! my dear Master! When he came to the King's Presence,
he cried out, O my Lord, do not believe any Reports against the Prince. If
there were never so many Letters and Hands and Seals, Alethion is Innocent: and
the Tears running down his cheeks, he added, Sir, you are abused, you are
abused. The King, vexed with this unexpected Accident, commanded his servants
to take away the Impertinent Fellow. There is no need of that, said the
Paralytick, I will be gone of my own accord: grant me your pardon for this
offense, for I will never trouble you more: but let me tell you that you will
repent of the Prince's Imprisonment. When he had said this, he returned to his
bed, and died immediately. The King said nothing: but those which stood by
perceived that he was extremely troubled, and, as they guessed, looked upon
this Interposition as an ill Omen; for it was known that the old man for many
months was not able to stir in his bed but as he was moved by others.

Misopseudes, Philalethes, and some other of the Prince's Friends, took an
occasion from this Accident to speak in Alethion's behalf, and desired him not
to make any peremptory conclusion in his mind concerning the Prince's
Disloyalty: adding, that though Letters were found, yet possibly the Prince
might not write them; mentioning also the great Grief which the King's Subjects
had conceived for the Prince's Restraint; and ended with entreaties which they
made to the King to give his Son leave to come to him, that so he might have an
opportunity to clear himself from his Accusations. What? replied the King, do
not I know my Son's Hand and Seal? Shall I not believe my own Eyes? Shall I not
trust my own Judgment, when I see so much cause to doubt the fidelity of such
as have the least reason in the world to be unfaithful? Do you tell me of the
peoples Affections? then it seems my Son has engaged them against me; but I
will take care that he shall not head their Rebellion. Anaxagathus was so far
from accepting their Mediation, that suspecting they were (...) of some Design,
he commanded them to be arrested and committed prisoners to their lodgings in
the City; but by the advice of Antitheus, who feared they might cause some
disturbance, he sent them into the Country, and confined them to their Houses,
charging them not to return to Court without leave upon pain of Death.

Within four days Dogmapornes came back, having secured the Prince under the
Custody of Apronoeus his Lieutenant. The next morning after his Return one of
his Soldiers brought news that the Prince, impatient of his Prison, had
dismissed himself from that and his Life both at once, by throwing himself from
the top of a high Tower into the River which ran by the Castle. This Report was
brought according to an agreement made between Antitheus and Dogmapornes, for
they durst not immediately murder the Prince, fearing the King's mind might
change. Though the news was false, they looked upon it as serviceable to their
Purpose, which was, as soon as they could to destroy the King; and having done
that, to use this report as a fair color for that which they meant to do
next. For they resolved then privately to do that themselves which they now
affirmed the Prince to have done, and so make one Sin a Disguise for another.

When this news came to the King's Ears it is easy to imagine what grief it
conveyed to his already-distressed Heart; but the (...) was infinitely
increased by an Accident which happened an hour or two before the Messenger
came: For Sagax the Captain of the Prince's Guard, deeply resenting his
Master's Condition, neglected no diligence in endeavoring of his Deliverance;
and knowing that the Letter alleged as his Crime was a Forgery, he thought he
could not take a better course then to employ his pains in the discovery of him
that contrived this Engine. Whilst he was advising with his thoughts how he
might accomplish this, one that was an under-Clerk to the Prince's Secretary
came to him, and expressing the same affection which Sagax had for their common
Master, he told him that he believed one Panurgus had a hand in the framing of
this Letter, and that he saw him one day, when the Secretary was in earnest
discourse with some Gentlemen which came to him from the King, put the Prince's
Seal to a Letter; and when he asked Panurgus what he did, he replied, that he
only sealed a Commission, which the Secretary had desired him to do, because
it required haste. The Captain of the Guard having heard this story, asked him
if he would depose what he had said before the King. Yes, said he, with all my
heart. When the King heard this, he sent for Panurgus, and caused him to be
examined before him; and being asked what the Commission was which he sealed at
the Secretarie's desire, he denied that ever he sealed any: The Secretarie's
Clerk attested that he did, and offered his Oath to confirm the truth of what
he said. The King's Anger beginning to relent toward Alethion, he commanded
Panurgus to be racked. When he had felt some sharp Torments, he confessed the
Truth. Being asked who employed him in that wicked enterprise, he answered, he
undertook it for such Reasons as pleased him: adding, that since he had
acknowledged his own fault, they might give him what punishment they thought
good; but that he was resolved to suffer without endangering others. The King
having notice of his words, promised him Pardon if he would discover those
which had encouraged him to this wickedness. He answered desperately, that he
desired not to be pardoned for that which he had done, and was so far from
repenting of it, that if it were needful he would endeavor to do it again.
Whilst they increased the pains of the Rack, it happened that an Impostume
broke in his stomach and choked him.

The King understanding by this means that the Prince was abused, though he
knew not particularly his chief enemies, was so confounded with the miserable
effect which his Credulity had produced, that he took all the blame to himself,
accused himself of Folly and Injustice, abandoned himself to disconsolateness,
and not being able to contain the intolerable anguish of his Mind, gave breath
to his Passions in these words: It is now time for me to die, since I have
slain my Son, that I may hide the shame of my unjust Wrath in the dark Grave. I
have destroyed my Son, my Self, my Family. I have killed Alethion, because he
was accused. O accursed Jealousy! O unreasonable Suspicion! He was Charged
with sin, but did that make him Guilty? The Letter seemed to be his hand, but I
was not sure it was the same. Did I think (O weakness of my thoughts!) that
this was the first Seal which was Counterfeited? Alas! alas! Could I not have
seen him? ought I not to have heard him? If I had convinced him of wickedness,
would not his Repentance have given me Satisfaction? If he had assured me of
his Innocence, would it not have saved us both? Had I not read the History of
Hippolytus? Did I not pity the misfortune of Hermenegildus, and deplore the
unhappy death of Mustapha? Did I not observe how their overcredulous Fathers
cruelly destroyed their innocent Children, and with them cut off the Succession
of their Families? I had reason to have suspected the Advice by which I am now
undone; it was too viclent for the Matter, the Person which gave it was young,
and might possibly lay the Foundation of his own wicked Hopes in my Son's
Ruin. Had I not heard how Falsehood among her other Tricks had stolen the
Mantle of Truth, and ever since performed all her mischievous Stratagems
disguised in that Habit? Does not Cunning crook it self to insinuate pleasing
harms? The Counsel which our Enemies know we will like is only framed to
promote their Ends which made it acceptable. But we can remember nothing to
direct us when we are in Passion! O my dear Alethion! My folly is the Precipice
from whence thou art thrown; My Jealousy is the River in which thou art
drowned. Then the Tears trickled down his cheeks, and his Sighs stopped his
speech: after a while he proceeded thus; Forgive me, spotless soul. But why do
I ask forgiveness who have made my sin unpardonable by destroying him that
should have forgiven me? It is all one, for I should never cease to torment my
self till my Death, if he which would forgive me were yet alive.

With many more such Expressions did the miserable Anaxagathus lament his Loss,
and having retired from all Company, took his bed, and with it a Fever, which
being increased with his extreme Grief and neglect of all Remedies, brought him
to that Death, which he now passionately desired, the next day; whereupon the
wicked Antitheus sent Dogmapornes to his Castle, to verify their false news in
the death which before was but fictitiously suffered by Alethion.

Thus, said Amyntor, have I given you a short Relation of the sad state of
Theriagene. I cannot inform you further, having not received any Intelligence
from my friend concerning that which has happened since. The Company thanked
Amyntor for the diversion which they received by his story, all pitying the
unfortunate condition of Anaxagathus and Alethion. But (...) found a generous
desire to arise in his Soul, and longed passionately to see Theriagene, not
only out of Curiosity to know what strange Event attended such dreadful
Beginnings, but, if it were possible, to relieve the Prince's friends,
Misopseudes and Philalethes, whom he understood to be Prisoners, and rationally
guessed that some worse Sentence did await them, whose execution he hoped to
prevent. He acquainted the Company with his desire, promising to return in a
short time. Amyntor declared that he had entertained the same Resolution,
especially because he thought himself obliged to visit his friend Misopseudes,
from whom he had received many kindnesses, and whose virtues had fixed such a
deep Estimation of him in his heart, that neither any length of time nor the
most adverse Accidents of life were able to wear it out; and therefore asked
Bentivolio's leave to attend him. The Ladies were unwilling to deprive
themselves of such Friends by giving them leave to depart out of their Company;
yet considering the nobleness of the Design and the shortness of the Journey,
they gave a mixed kind of Assent; only Urania would not dismiss Panaretus, and
the two Sisters prevailed with Sympathus to stay with them. They were both the
more contented, because Bentivolio assured them that if occasion offered it
self, they should hear from him, and if any thing happened which was worthy of
their presence or needed their Assistance, he would send for them. He took
Nicomachus also with him, to the end that if he could not return so soon as he
expected, he might make use of him, to let Panaretus and Urania understand the
state of his Affairs. The night after they took their leave, they came into the
Borders of Theriagene. The next morning, having traveled so long that the Sun
had almost finished half his days work, they withdrew from the Road into a
Wood, intending to repose themselves a while in the cool shade; and following a
path which led into the Thicket, whilst they sought a place fit for their
Retirement, a broad open Field discovered it self, and presented a sight which
they expected not in that place. They saw two men lying dead upon the ground,
and a Gentleman endeavoring to catch his Horse. What this meant they could not
divine, but perceived the Gentleman something startled at their approach. Not
knowing their faces, and doubting that they came not to his Relief in a place
where he had found mischief designed against him, he stood upon his Guard,
supposing that they attended to perfect what was unsuccessfully begun.
Bentivolio and his Companions knowing that it was Prudence not to determine
concerning any thing till they well understood it, much less to think of
inflicting Punishment when they were not sure any Wrong was done, and
remembering that it is a duty never unseasonable to be (...), they caught the
Horse, and delivered him to the (...); who though he perceived a Doubtfulness
in their Countenances, yet finding their Actions civil, and judging by their
Garb that they were Strangers, he began to hope that some other business
brought them to that place, and that they had not any purpose to assist his
(...); and thereupon with more confidence he began to speak to them, allowing
them the Liberty of Silence, which at that time was a Courtesy, for they knew
not very well what to say. Gentlemen, said he, I know nothing of you but that I
am beholden to you: and though possibly I may have given you some occasion to
think dishonourably of me, since you find me encompassed with such dubious
Circumstances; yet if you have heard of the Tragical state of Theriagene, you
will the less wonder at this encounter: and if you will have the goodness to
understand this little Scene which was just now acted, you will be so far from
loading my Misfortunes, which are already heavy enough, with your severe
Censure, that you will rather support me, who am forced to bear them, with your
charitable (...). Bentivolio replied, It becomes us to think well of all men,
till we know we have cause not to do so: we are Strangers in this Country, but
we have heard so much of your perplexed estate, that it has raised a great
Compassion in our souls. That which has been told us is so extraordinary, that
we have taken a Journey both to assure our selves concerning the verity of the
Report, and to understand what has happened since our first Intelligence.
Particularly we have with a sincere Good will designed the Rescue of two Noble
persons, Philalethes and Misopseudes; of which we make no great doubt, if God
be propitious to our endeavors.

The unknown Gentleman observing eminent Marks of Virtue in Bentivolio's
Countenance, and being greatly taken with the Nobleness which he had expressed,
pulled off his Helmet, and said, Generous Strangers, I am Philalethes the
Brother of Misopseudes whom you have so civilly mentioned; I am confined to my
House, which is not far off, by the Usurper Antitheus: I hope you will honor
me so much as to go home with me, though when you come there, I shall be forced
to crave your pardon if my present Condition will not allow you that Welcome in
this Country which persons of your Worth do deserve every where. Whilst he
said, these words, he took notice of such Airs in Amyntor's face as he had
formerly well known, and added, If my eyes and Memory do not fail of their
duty, you are Amyntor. Which he acknowledging, Philalethes embraced him with a
passionate kindness, and mingling his salutation with tears, said Amyntor, we
did not use to meet after this manner at my Brother's house, but since you have
heard of our Afflictions, you cannot wonder at what you see. No, no,
Philalethes, replied Amyntor, I am not ignorant of your Affairs, and though I
did not expect this strange encounter, yet I esteem my self happy to have met
so soon my friend's Brother, whom I shall never cease to love in despite of
the greatest Misfortunes which often befall, but never lessen, the Best men.
But that you may know, dear Philalethes, how happy we are in our Misery, (I say
ours, for my friend's is my own) know that we have in our Company Bentivolio,
whom I can commend unto you by no better words then by saying it is He.

Philalethes struck with a glad horror, expressed the sense of his Mind with
all symptoms of a pleasant Ecstasy, in these words: Good God! How short are
those measures by which we limit thy Power and Goodness? we represent nothing
so lively to our selves as Afflictions; and when we have some small occasion to
doubt, make it a reason of Despair, forgetting that extreme Misery is the only
thing which makes thy help seasonable. O Lord, for whom shall I give thanks to
thee first? for the poor Prince Alethion, or my self? I will do it for both.
For my self, because thou have given me leave to see a Person whose Virtues all
the world does justly admire; but chiefly for the Prince, because now I make no
doubt of his Restoration, since God has sent such a worthy Person to
undertake it. Bentivolio astonished to hear Philalethes talk of the Prince's
Restoration, said, turning to Amyntor, Sure this Gentleman thinks that I am
able to raise him from the dead. No, Bentivolio, replied Philalethes, there is
no need of that; for, God be thanked, the Prince is yet alive: I meant what I
said, only of his Kingdom. Sure then, said Amyntor, God has sent us hither to
amuse us: but since we are only entangled in the Labyrinths of Divine
Providence, I doubt not but he which has brought us in will lead us out by
some happy clue. In the mean while, Philalethes, pray give us leave to rest our
selves under this Oak, for we are weary with Travel, and you will do us a
great favor if you let us know what made you come hither, who those are whom
we suppose you have killed, and what is become of the Prince Alethion. You
shall quickly understand these things, answered Philalethes, who having saluted
Nicomachus, sat down by Bentivolio. Those fellows were Brothers to a Villain
named Panurgus, who pretended to have taken up a forged Letter, for which the
Prince was imprisoned; and either to revenge their Brother's death, for he died
upon the Rack, to gratify Antitheus, or out of hatred to my person as a Lover
of Alethion, they came hither in hope to have murdered me. They laid their
design thus. One of my Brother's Servants (for what cause I cannot tell)
remained in the City, and those Assasinates taking notice of it corrupted him,
I suppose, with Money, to come to my house yesternight, to tell me that two of
my Brother's friends would be in this place to day about the time when I first
saw you, to impart some Secrets to me which did highly concern us both, and
therefore did earnestly desire me to give them a meeting. I knowing that the
Messenger was my Brother's servant, and that those whom he named were his most
true friends, supposing that he brought no Letters because it was not safe to
write, believed him, and came, but not without Arms, of which I soon found the
Necessity. As I alighted from my Horse, they made toward me with Swords, which
they had hid under their Coats, and gave me a wound for a Salutation. Turning
upon them for my defense, I had the good fortune to kill one of them and wound
the other; which when I perceived, I desired him to desist, and let me know for
what Injury which they had received from me, they sought reparation by this
highest sort of Revenge. But his Malice had made him so greedy of my Death,
that by silence and continuing to fight, I saw that if he could not kill me, he
would live no longer. Nay then, said I, you shall be pleased; and as you came,
so you shall go together. With a very few blows I sent him after his
fellow-Murtherer. But as these Villains have suffered more punishment for their
wicked attempt then I desired to have inflicted upon them, if it had pleased
God otherwise to have delivered me from their Malice; so I think my self well
appay'd for the hazard I have run, and nothing disappointed of my Expectation,
since the Message is verified in a sense which they never intended by this
fortunate Encounter. Now let me entreat you to go along with me, and when we
come to my House I will tell you the story of the Prince, and desire your
advice concerning the course which we are to take; for it is a perplexed
season. Bentivolio, whose Prudence was always awake, stopping Philalethes,
said, Sir, we are strangers, and do not know what Constructions may be made
upon any Accident happening at our Arrival in such a Juncture of time:
therefore if you please, our servants shall throw those wretched Carkases into
that old Cole-pit, lest some Foresters finding the dead Bodies, give notice to
the Country, which will make a general Alarm, and it may be trouble us all with
an impertinent Hue-and-Cry. Philalethes approved the Counsel, and as soon as
they had put it in Execution, they betook themselves to their Horses. When they
came to his house, Bentivolio told Philalethes, that the first expression of
his Regard to them should be to search his own wounds. Upon the first
inspection he found them not dangerous, and having quickly dressed them, his
Lady entertained her unexpected Guests with a short Collation; yet they thought
it long, because it was some hinderance to the accomplishment of Philalethes
his promise to tell them what was become of the Prince: which when the cloth
was taken away he fulfilled after this manner. I understand by the discourse
which we had in the Wood, that you have heard of the death of Anaxagathus, who
broke his heart with the Grief which seized upon him when he heard the news of
his Son's Death, of which he would never be convinced but that himself was the
principal Author. The day after Anaxagathus was dead, Antitheus, the Venomous
Root upon which our Calamity grows, sent Dogmapornes, one of his Confederates,
to the Castle where the Prince was imprisoned, with order to kill him
privately, and throw him over the Rock, that so his Body being afterward taken
out of the River, might make good the Report which they had spread abroad
before concerning the manner of his Death, which by that means they foretold
much after the Custom of Evil Spirits, which give Intelligence beforehand to
Witches and other their Correspondents of such mischiefs as they resolve to do.

When Dogmapornes was gone, Antitheus and the rest of his Accomplices began to
deliberate what was next to be done for the settling of the Kingdom. They
determined presently to proclaim Antitheus King, as being apparently the next
Heir to the Crown, and commanded upon pain of Death, that none but the
Soldiers of his own Guard should appear in Arms, nor that the Citizens should
meet in any Assembly upon pain of Treason, and secured such as they knew to be
Alethion's friends. This I learned from one of my servants, who escaped out of
the City by night. Dogmapornes made all possible haste to his Castle, to
Execute the wicked Commandment of Antitheus, and killed some horses by the way;
but when he came there he found himself utterly disappointed, for the Prince
was gone the day before. How it came to pass I will acquaint you, for my
Brother not being able to conceal from me such happy news longer then the time
which the Messenger required for his Journey to bring it, sent one of his
friends to me who was able to inform me perfectly, for he waited upon the
Prince during all the time of his Imprisonment, heard his Discourses, and knew
the manner of his Escape. You must understand that the Prince was chiefly
entrusted to the Custody of two Persons, Apronaeus, who was Lieutenant of the
Castle, and Diaporon, who commanded a Troop of Horse under Dogmapornes.
Diaporon attended continually upon the Prince, Apronaeus came only sometimes to
see that he was in safety. Diaporon was of a nature very averse to Malice, and
though he had not the greatest parts, nor could make a perfect judgment of
things by his own Ability; yet his temper was not impregnably fortified against
good Reason. As he had at the first no disaffected resentments of the Prince's
Person, for he had never disobliged him; so in a short time he fell into a
great Admiration of his Virtues: and perceiving him not to be afflicted with
what he suffered, he concluded in himself that the Prince had no Demerits upon
which Punishment could take hold. He saw a smooth Serenity in his Looks, a
great Contentedness in his Speeches, an undisturbed Equality in all his
Conversation. He heard him often assert his own Innocence, but without any
other Expressions except of pity for his abused Father. The affection which
this Deportment produced in Diaporon's breast, possibly augmented with some
surmises of unworthy Contrivances against the Prince, in a short time grew so
strong, that it made him heartily with that he might be so happy as to work his
Deliverance.

As he was musing one day how he might accomplish such a hard Attempt, he
thought it was best to communicate his Mind to Apronaeus, for that he thought
it necessary to the Prince's Escape that Apronaeus should assist him, or at
least connive at the Design. Though he was something imbolden'd to reveal this
secret to Apronaeus, by that intimate Friendship which a long Acquaintance had
contracted between them, yet he found the matter of that Importance, that he
could not resolve presently what to do; both being doubtful how Apronaeus
would resent such a high proposal, and also being well assured that if he did
disgust it, he should not only ruin himself, but utterly undo all further
hopes of the Prince's Deliverance: and thereupon resolved to do what was
possible in his single endeavor, and chose rather to take any course for the
Prince's rescue, then to leave him to that danger which was unavoidable in the
place where he was. Whilst he was floating upon these Deliberations, Apronaeus
came to visit him, and perceiving in his Countenance symptoms of discomposed
Thoughts, (for he came upon him so suddenly, that he could not wipe out the
picture of his Mind which his Passion had drawn upon his Face,) he demanded the
cause of his Melancholy. Nothing troubles me, replied Diaporon, only I
represented to my self the various Accidents of humane Life: and as I was
attentive upon my Imagination, the unhappy state of our young Prince appeared
before me with strange mixtures; and I could not but wish that either a Person
of such a brave Spirit had not stained his Innocence with any unhandsome
Designs, or that so great a Virtue were not unworthily clouded: And I began to
wonder how Vice of late was grown so strong that it could endure to be
punished, or why Virtue should be so weak that it is not able to shine through
the plausibility of false Accusation. Away, Diaporon, said Apronaeus, with
these Philosophical follies. Thou art always troubling thy head with Religious
Dreams. To what purpose do thou believe that vain Distinction of Virtue and
Vice, and meditate upon those useless notions of Reward and Punishment? Do
thou not see how these Doctrines are confuted by the Practice of all the world?
Men seek Happiness by other Methods, and neglect these Rules both as uncertain
and unpracticable. We have often heard our Governor say that there is no God,
or, if there be, that he does not trouble himself with the Affairs of this
lower World: whether he does or no, I do not much care; but I think it is true
enough, because I see into what a miserable estate this Prince is brought, who
was a known pretender to the Love of God, and a great Patron of his devout
Worshippers. Here Diaporon interrupting his friend, replied, God forgive you
this irreverent discourse, Apronaeus; will you never leave this Impious humor?
I know you suppose that you have sufficient Reason for your belief; I think you
have not. You are now going to visit the Prince; when we are with him, I will
by some means or other give you occasion to discourse these Opinions, for he
does not only abhor them as prejudicial to the state of Mankind in their fatal
Consequences, but laughs at them as pieces of irrational wickedness in their
monstrous Constitution. I am no great Lover of Disputation, said Apronaeus,
neither do I esteem that which you call Truth worth much Inquiry; yet I will go
with you to see our joint Charge, and since we have not much to do, this
Discourse may possibly allow us some Recreation.

When they came to Alethion's Chamber, they found him reading a little Book,
whose Title was, Good men are ever happy. Having given them his usual salutes,
he spoke something in Commendation of the Author, who had shown much prudence
in choosing a subject that he was well able to demonstrate, and had expressed
the sense of his mind so artificially, that his Readers were sure to find
excellent thoughts clothed with suitable words. After that he applauded the
fortunate state of Virtuous Souls, and admired the Goodness and Wisdom of
Almighty Providence, which had so secured the Interest of all those who had
faithfully consigned themselves to his care, that nothing could make them
miserable. At these words Apronaeus smiled. The Prince perceived it, and asked
him the Reason of his Mirth. I laugh, said Apronaeus, that you, whom I have
always esteemed very Religious, should notwithstanding you see your self
abandoned to Affliction, talk still of Providence. Sure, Apronaeus, answered
the Prince, you have something else in your thoughts which made you smile at
what I said, or you have some other Reasons which make you speak so
disrespectfully of the Divine Providence. I have several things, replied
Apronaeus, but I think that what I have said is most proper to you; for you
reason against Sense, and dispute against Experience, saying, as others of your
Opinion do, that a God created the World; it may be so: but if he did, it was
to small purpose in my mind, since he does not take care to keep it in better
Order. Possibly he is weak and cannot help it; perhaps he is otherwise
employed, or else so idle that he will not trouble himself about it; or it may
be it is below him to mind such Trifles. I know not which of these excuses you
like, but I am sure it is a piece of unjust carelessness, if he can hinder it,
that he does not relieve his friends, but suffer them to be trampled upon by
those which bid defiance to his Authority, and quote their own Prosperity,
whilst they do so, for an Argument against his Providence. I verily believe
that ere long men will take it for granted that there is no God; and that those
which think there is, will blaspheme him because he takes no care of them. For
my own part, I make no doubt but that Fortune governs the world, if it be
governed at all: and I think that she is blind, in that she bestows great Gifts
upon many that do not deserve them; and I dare swear she is poor too, because
she has not enough for those which do.

The Prince permitting him to go no further, with a calm serenity replied,
Apronaeus, though your words carry a very bad signification, and must needs be
offensive to all Rational Beings, which gratefully acknowledging the Fountain
from whom they have received their Essence, cannot be contented to hear the
common Father of the world dishonourably represented; yet I do not wonder to
hear you speak at this Ignorant rate, since I know it is easy for Ingenious
Atheists to abuse men of weaker parts, and venting their thoughts where they
dare, (for, God be thanked, Wickedness has not taken such an universal
possession of Humane Nature, neither are all so degenerated from Knowledge or
apostatized from Truth, that they have the Confidence to do it every where,
but) in some Company which they presume inferior to themselves in Wit, or it
may be admirers of their Excellencies, they endeavor to support the Reputation
of their more then ordinary Abilities, by making Proselytes, and impose upon
unexperienced Wits with great Boasts of new Philosophy: though their (...)
Discoveries are usually but two or three of the worst opinions of some old
Philosophers, which they have taken out of their Graves, and endeavored to
revive with such Arguments as have been often answered and hissed out of the
world by the best of Men.

I am glad, replied Apronaeus, that your Princely Mind is so little sensible of
those thorny Objections, though you feel how sharp they are by Experience,
which do very much trouble others when they only think of them: But go on
Generous Prince, and let us see if you can pull 'em out of my Understanding, at
least so blunt their points, that they gall not this (...) Diaporon. That which
you spoke just now, replied the Prince, as it respects me I take but for a
Complement; but to the rest, which concerns the Interest of all Good men, I
will give an Answer. It is a common thing for people, when they suffer great
Afflictions, to talk Atheistically. They speak as if they did not think that
there is any God, because they fancy themselves to be little beholden to him;
and sometimes they wish there were none, and yet think that they are justified
in their Impiety, because he uses them, as they say, very hardly. Therefore,
Apronaeus, I would not have you put your Objection of Suffering, so carelessly
as to hope to infer a denial of Providence from Good men's Afflictions: for let
men be what they will, they think themselves too good to be punished; and let
their Castigations be never so justly moderated, they judge them too great for
them. If a young man die which possibly has sinned away his Life, he cries
out, O cruel Fate! why do thou destroy me before my time? If a mother lose a
Child, which perhaps her own indiscretion killed, then you shall hear, O unjust
Stars! why do you rob me? For Stars or any thing else is God or the Devil, when
they think themselves hurt. So that you may perceive, Apronaeus, that the
common Original of these Complaints is a foolish Passion joined with an
Imperious Prides and that most Plaintiffs in this case labor not only under a
defect of just Patience, but are troubled also with a shortness of Discourse.
What? must God be bound to please men always, lest they in a Fit of angry
Grief deny his Government by way of Revenge; or, which is as bad, accuse it of
injust Severity? Is he so inconsiderable, that he is obliged to attend us with
an officious care; and are we so great, that he must be afraid lest he do not
please us enough? When men are pleased, there is, yes, there is a God: why
then, simple Mortals, and not when you are displeased too? You find so much
fault in your Calamities, that you conclude they could not have happened to you
but that there is no God, or else that he Governs not the world as he ought:
whereas, if you examine the matter thoroughly, you will find so much more (...)
your selves, that you will be forced to acknowledge your sufferings Arguments
of his Justice whom you foolishly accuse, and bear them as deserved
Punishments. But when you are in a Passion, you will neither confess that you
have merited anything, nor be content that God is not of your mind; no, you
will die, and rather then live any longer, you will kill your selves, and in a
scorn be gone out of his Territories, because, as you say, he bestows so little
regard upon you. But it is very unlikely that you should escape so; neither is
it a thing to be imagined, much less believed, that God has no Reserve for
Rebels, and that he should fail to punish in another world those which have
done their utmost to deserve it in this; and it is a (...) madness to think
that they shall be pardoned for breaking Prison.

I have said this, Apronaeus, to let you understand that such as have a mind to
complain, do not punctually examine whether it be with just cause or no. But
whereas you say it is many times, unjust because Virtuous persons are made
miserable, and so urge your Plea against the Divine Providence; By this I see
that you are ignorant of the Nature of Happiness and Misery, and therefore I
wonder not that you determine so weakly in this Controversy. You do not only
mistake the true notion of Happiness, but suppose it to consist in such things
as a good man would think himself unhappy if he could not despise them. The
Felicity which you fancy, is to be Lord of the Country where you dwell, to live
in stately Palaces, to lie upon soft Beds, to drink excellent Wines, to eat
nothing but what is Delicate, never to know Labor, to sleep with Music, not
to be controlled in your Designs, and such like. But, good Apronaeus, will you
consider how childish your Attempt is, whilst you go about to gather up so many
things to put a fair Gloss upon Misery, and crust it over with a show of
Happiness? What? must Happiness be patched up with so many and such mean
Shreds? I thought our Felicity had been comprised in one chief Good, and that
the satisfaction of the Masterwish of our Souls was attainable in that single
Fruition, and not to be begged from a confused Multitude of (...), which are so
poor that they are not able to defend themselves from a Wise man's Contempt.
The Heaven-born Soul advances it self by Rational passions toward God the
first Good, whom it knows to be the Spring of Being, the Root of Life, the
Father of Wisdom, the Fountain of true Pleasure, and the Haven of Desire. It
hastens from all things to him, longing to be illuminated with his Divine
Rays, to partake of his most lovely Disposition, who is the Archetypal pattern
of all Goodness, infinitely pleased with the Contemplation of his Attributes,
which are the Notifications of his Nature as far as it is knowable, and
ravished with the Consideration of his excellent Works, which are
Entertainments worthy of the best and most raised Minds. Happiness must be
placed in the Soul, that there it may perfect our Faculties, satisfy all our
greater Capacities, and secure us against the uncertainty of all external
Dependences. Those Divine Illapses which put us into a Sensation of God by an
Intellectual Contact, and give us a lively Sympathy with him in whom we live,
make us feel our selves happy, and give us a serene knowledge of him to whom we
owe our Being, and fill our Souls with Joy mixed with Gratitude and Love, unite
our Hearts with his Sacred Will by Resignation, make us lodge all our Concerns
in his Providence, unto whose Conduct it is then easy to commit whatsoever is
dear to us: Then we consecrate all our Actions to his Glory who gave us our
Powers, and serve his Designs, both because they are his, and also the best in
the World; so that our whole Life becomes one continued endeavor to perpetuate
and accomplish this Happiness, we having now but one main Design, which is to
begin and end all our Actions in God. The vigorous Motions which these strong
passions raise must needs be terminated in a progress of endeavor as boundless
as our necessity of being eternally Happy is cogent, and the Good which must
make us happy is Infinite in sweetness. And though a good man in this world
possesses this Happiness but in part; yet it is an unspeakable Comfort to him
to perceive that the power of the Divine Presence with which he converses has
taken off some of the ruder disconformities of his rough Nature, and
superinduced some beautiful delineations of the Divine Image upon his Soul,
which now adorn it with Greatness of Mind, Contempt of the World, true Liberty,
pure Temperance, an amiable Meekness, great Humility, vast Charity, venerable
Chastity, the dearest Love of God, and most raised Thoughts. Whilst it
expatiates in the latitude of its own Compass, it despises all little things,
taking an unspeakable pleasure, not only in viewing the fair Proportions of
these Foundations, but in the hopes of equal Superstructures which in time will
be built upon them.

It is the top of true Philosophy, Apronaeus, to show us our chief Good; for
that being rightly constituted, the Directions of our whole Life are (...), and
our Affections settled. And though possibly we should mistake in some little
matters by Ignorance; and omit some by Forgetfulness, and meet others which are
not manageable by reason of the innate stubbornness of humane Affairs; yet the
consequence is but slight; for we can receive no greater Damage then the
Nature of those things which we have not known, or neglected, or cannot rule,
does necessarily infer. Those which have attained to this Felicity are elevated
above common Fears and usual Disappointments: the misapprehension which pinned
their affections to such small matters being now chased away, they are informed
by Experience that they do as little need those low supports to uphold their
Felicity, as they knew long before by Discourse their inability to relieve them
if they wanted their help. For what man is there that has considered the
Nature of things, who does not know that all Earthly conditions are empty of
that true satisfaction which Humane Nature always wants, sometimes looks for,
but never finds in the good things of the material World? Men feed themselves
with a vain Hope, which has its Root only in their own deluded Imaginations,
and give glorious Names to Trifles that they may more plausibly deceive
themselves; and when they find themselves disappointed, they accuse the World
of falsehood, though it only breaks the Promises which they themselves made; and
then they confess, that though they could well paint the colors of the Flower,
yet they could not give it the Vital sent. This has been told us often by such
as have gone before us, but we will not believe them, supposing that such as
make the Report either envy us, or have not taken a right course; and thereupon
resolve to make a Trial our selves, and then we are forced to confirm (...)
Relation with our own Experience. Wisemen have other seasons to determine them
to seek Happiness in God, or else to bid adieu to all Hope: for they see that
as the Contentment which is sought otherwhere is but small, so that which they
find is uncertain; the most assured course of Humane Life being carried about
into various changes by perpetual (...); the Earth upon which we dwell being
the Stage of Mutation, the proper Region of Vicissitudes. The uncertain Method
of these Alterations was formerly called Fortune, and represented by a Woman
sitting upon a (...), not improperly. It Is true, some of the fonder sort of
Mortals promise themselves stability in their floating Stations, being content
to be ignorant as long as they can: but they might as well hope that the Boughs
of which their Pavilions are made will never wither, because they continue
Green for a day or two.

But besides this, Apronaeus, I am the more convinced of the cheapness of these
things which you do so magnify as to make the want of them Misery, when I see
them thrown away upon the worst of men. It is but a Scorn put upon the admired
Vanities of this World, when God scatters them with a careless hand, and
permits them to the enjoyment of the most despicable Persons. It satisfies me
as to the unequal Division of Riches and Power, and I cannot but conclude they
are of no great value, since God concerns himself no more in their
Distribution. Shall he be so regardful of Trifles, as to weigh them out by
scruples in Gold scales? Shall he partake in the Errors of vulgar Opinions,
and trouble himself with the care of making every Good man Rich or Potent? What
he slights, why should I esteem?

Here Apronaeus craving leave of the Prince, replied thus; Certainly, Sir, if
we receive this Doctrine, we shall be forced to believe that this World was
made to no purpose. If it be not our Portion, to what end was it created? The
Prince answered, Be not apt to think that this World was made in vain,
Apronaeus, although it is not our Happiness; though we may not make a God of
it, yet it serves to excellent uses: It is a temporary Manifestation of
Almighty Goodness and Wisdom in Material things. The Corporeal world is an
Image of God, and shows what he could do in Matter. According to the several
Possibilities of Reception God has made his Omnipotence to reach all Degrees
of Being; so this Fabric does, as all excellent Machines do, discover the
Worth and Ability of their Maker. I think God is so visibly revealed in the
Creation, that I may safely pronounce that an Atheist is not only Ungrateful,
but a Fool. However God did never intend that we should adore his work instead
of Him; and what greater Adoration then to court it as our Happiness?

By this Discourse, said Apronaeus, you seem to have an indifferent sense of
those conditions of Life which we think very contrary, and possibly you have
arrived at the Stoicall Apathy. No, Apronaeus, replied the Prince; Virtue does
not stupifie Good men, and so make them insensible of the Differences of
objects. Though many things are extremely Ridiculous, and the Accidents of
Humane Life in very many Instances contemptible; yet considering our
Constitution, I grant that some states of Life are so framed that they are a
Trial of Resolved men, and it is all the praise which we can give to great
Adversity, that it is the exercise of Virtue and the proof of strong Spirits.
Man is an Amphibion, part Soul, and part Body; and as by this means he has
different Capacities, which have diverse Objects fitted to them, he is put upon
his Trial both by prosperous and adverse entertainments. We are placed between
sensual Amors and the muddy Delights of the Flesh, on one hand; and the pure
Spring of Increated Goodness, and those Crystal streams of Knowledge and Virtue
which flow from him, on the other; and we are under the probation of our Wisdom
and Ingenuity: and we come off with honor if we hold out in the Combat of
Flesh and Spirit, overcome Body with Soul, and subdue Passion with Reason;
which we then only do, if we love the God which has made all things above his
best Creatures. Those who have devoted themselves to sensual Pleasures, have
only glutted themselves with forbidden Fruit, and are so far from being happy,
that they are manifestly overcome with the Spirit of the Sensible World, which
in time will Triumph over them, and having reproch'd them for their Folly and
Cowardly submissions, at last throw them headlong from the Banks of Time into
the vast Horrors of Eternity, where it is not possible for them to hope for a
good Reception with God, whom all their life they have slighted for every vain
Toy.

Good men are not insensible of what is beneficial to Nature in those things
which are miscalled Happiness, but they know that their chief Advantage lies in
a right use of them, which consists in Moderate, Charitable and Thankful
Applications. They look upon all created Goodnesses as God's Messengers, and
are led by them to God; whilst others mistake'em for God that sent them, with
as gross an Ignorance as if a rude Peasant newly come to the Court should take
the first man which he meets there in brave Cloths for the King. By this you
may perceive, Apronaeus, that whilst virtuous men are provided of this true
Notion of Prosperity, they cannot be ignorant of the Nature of Adversity, or
ever be so sensible of any thing which it can do, as to think that they are
made Unhappy by it, unless they should fall into such a want of Discourse, as
to esteem themselves made miserable by the Absence of those things which did
not make them happy being present with them. It Is true, Adversity changes the
Scene and gives them other Parts to Act, that is, requires them to exercise
some other sorts of Virtue then they did before; but the Actors are the same. A
good man in Affliction is no more impaired in point of Felicity, then a strong
man is weakened upon a Theater where he only shows his Strength. If his
Sufferings grow extraordinary, he knows that great Trials are necessary to make
great Examples; and as he reflects Honor upon the Cause of his suffering from
Innocence, so he derives Consolation into the manner of it from Patience. I
have read the Stories of such as have despised no small Afflictions with a
Generous (...). Archimedes was not so distracted with the extreme dangers of
Syracuse, as to make him leave his Figures. Did not Aristides write his own
name in one of the Shells of Proscription, and would have done it in another?
Did not Cicero rejoice that he was banished from Rome? Shall I admire these and
many other Noble Examples, and not imitate them? I am what I was before,
Apronaeus; neither can a Prison exclude my Comfort, more then false Accusation
has destroyed my Integrity. I do not think my self deprived of Liberty, for I
am not hindered from performing those Actions which I chiefly delighted in
before, the Contemplation and Love of God: other Duties are not required,
because I have no opportunity to discharge them; but I have the power and will
to do them too when time shall serve. As to the trouble of Adversity, I think
it is worthy of me, who have often endeavored to comfort others, which is an
easy work, now to forbid my self to grieve.

It seems then, said Apronaeus, any Condition is alike to you in point of
choice. No, replied the Prince, there is some Difference, though not much: I do
so far prefer my former State, that I would not have chosen this; and yet I am
not so out of Charity with this, but that I can bid it welcome. The knowledge
which I had of the others Uncertainty made me provide for this long ago. I
should think my self very Imprudent if I were now to seek for Patience, since I
had observed that every man in the World has great use of it one time or
other. So I had seen Mariners carry utensils which were proper only for Storms,
though they went to Sea in Fair weather. The Peace of my Soul shines clear
within, and is no more clouded with this Disaster, then a Light which is
guarded with a thick Lantern upon the stern of a Ship is in danger of being put
out with those blustering winds which make a noise about it. You do well, Great
Prince, said Apronaeus, to draw such a fair picture of Misfortune, but you
wilfully take no notice of that deep Impression which Affliction makes upon all
the rest of the World. I know, replied the Prince, that many look upon it with
no other Passion then as if it were the head of some Gorgon. But what then? So
I have heard Children cry for Trifles, and have seen a Fool held with a straw,
and thought it as impossible to free his foot out of the snare, as if he had
been tied with bands of Adamant. Those words signify little which express
nothing but the Imbecility of vulgar Opinion, i.e. unprofitable Error. We are
not to pass a Judgment upon Truth according to the Suffrages of Fools, nor
govern our Affections or Actions by the trivial Sentiments of those whose
Ignorance we do commonly despise. I confess that if the Rules by which the
Vulgar make Estimations were the Standards of Truth, I should allow it for a
great Indecorum, that many times in the Ship in which we sail through this
troublesome Sea, Good men are thrust down into the dark Hold, or put to toil at
the Pump, whilst base Persons walk at their pleasure upon the Decks, and
sometimes sit at the Stern; and I should be tempted to be angry, if I thought
the Welcome which they find at the Port to which they are bound were
proportioned according to their usage on shipboard. If our worth were to be
judged when we come ashore by an outward show, it may be I should be no more
pleased with my present condition, then Neptune was when Mercury, ranking the
Images of the Gods, put his below that of Anubis, and told him he must not take
it ill that the Egyptian Deity with a Dog's Mouth was preferred before him,
because he had a large Golden Nose. Wise men must not be angry to see others
advanced above them. Either they are better then our selves, or not. If they
be, what cause is there of Anger? They deserve it. If they be not, we are equal
to them. If they be worse, let us hold our peace and be thankful, we are
preferred before them.

I might also tell you, Apronaeus, that as Good men are not made unhappy by
Adversity, so many of those whom you see afflicted are not Good men, though
they seem to be such. They may be bad enough which are so cunning as to conceal
it. But no Mask can blind the Divine Eye. If it be unjust to punish Good men,
which God does not; it is unreasonable for bad men to complain, though he do.
We ought of no case to make a Judgment against the Justice of God's
proceedings; for though he makes Punishment sufficiently discernable in some
Examples, yet he many times does not acquaint us with the Cause why it is
inflicted.

I am afraid, Good Prince, said Apronaeus, that I shall weary you with my
trifling Objections: if you will pardon my importunity, I will only trouble you
with demanding an answer to something which I propounded in the beginning of
this Discourse. It may be Good men are happy, as you say; but methinks it were
fit that wicked men, if there be any, should be punished. For whilst they are
in Prosperity, as I told you before, it is hard to believe that there is any
God that cares how things go here. Do you think then that they are not
punished? replied the Prince. Do you think they are so highly privileged in
their prosperity? Beside what I have said already to prove that the Material
World is unable to satisfy the greater Appetites of the Soul, and to show how
uncertain that small pleasure is which men sometimes seem to take in their vain
Dreams, there are other Reasons which demonstrate to me that wicked men cannot
be happy. God has interwoven Vexation with their most prosperous Conditions;
Inseparable Imperfections do constantly molest them, and they are frequently
assaulted with unexpected Accidents; by which means they are never secure,
never at case. I think this but a small matter and common to all which partake
of the same estates with them. But because they are Wicked, they are for that
very Reason Unhappy: Wickedness is its own greatest Punishment, neither can
Punishment be so properly demonstrated as by the Nature of Sin. Reason and
Virtue are the Glory of Humane Nature; and as it has a rare content in the
Discourses of Wisdom, so in the performance of Actions suitable to Virtue it
finds an Acquiescence like unto that which things have in their (...) place.
But he which breaks these Laws, offers violence to the Noblest Principles of
his Soul; and they are so interwoven with the Essence of it, that he which
affronts them, endeavors to degrade himself. Those Repeated Actions which
induce Habits of sin, deprave the Soul, and sink it into a base State of Being,
sometimes making it to wallow in Mud with brute Beasts, and sometimes throwing
it into that fiery Pit where Proud and Wrathful Spirits are tormented. The
Shame that is fastened to all wicked Actions shows that they are naturally
base. Let a man sin never so privately, as ravish a Virgin, or rob a Traveller
in a Wilderness; though there be no witness to make him blush, yet when he
thinks what he has done, he is sensible of the Nature of Honesty which he has
wronged; and the Prevarication is odious, because the Law which he has
transgressed is the transcript of eternal Righteousness written in the Heart of
Man by God when he made Humane Nature; and he can have no pleasure to remember
that he has done an Action so disagreeable to Nature. That Sin is its own
punishment, is so generally true, that a man can neglect the Rules of Virtue in
nothing, but he is weakened and debased in Soul, or Body, or both.

But left bold Men should slight this Turpitude, and think to make a
Compensation for some dislike of themselves by the pleasant diversions which
Sin allows, God has made it impossible to be undisturbed in Wickedness, by
reason of the sharp Remorses of an evil Conscience. If they will sin, this will
bear witness, and, if none else do, accuse, and has Authority to condemn too,
and it always sees its Sentence put in Execution. Those which are punished by
it, are burnt-with a sullen flame, which torments the Soul as a feverish heat
does the Body. The Sparks of this fire may be hid in Embers, but it cannot be
put out. It has been formerly represented by Furies with burning Torches, and
sometimes by the Thespesian Vipers; for a Sinner is ever gnawed by his
Conscience upon the remembrance of an ill-govern'd Life. They are very Ignorant
which think there are no pains but such as are Bodily, for the Mind is capable
of greater Torments. That which afflicts the Flesh is only some present Pain;
but the Soul is vexed with that which is past, with what it feels at present,
and with the Fears of that which is to come. It Is true, Jolly Sinners do what
they can to make the World believe that they feel no such thing; but how is
that possible? We know that Essential Principles are the same in all Men: Wise
men of all Religions have acknowledged a Conscience to be rooted in the Nature
of the Soul, that is, a Power which animadverts upon our Actions, and condemns
us for what we do amiss. This severe Reprover, by blows which Sinners only
feel, destroys that Joy which they promise to themselves in prosperous
Wickedness. This makes Murderers take but little content in those Possessions
which they have purchased with the Innocent blood of those whom they have
killed with the Violation of all Sacred Rights. If Sinners be well, what makes
them use so many Arts to palliate their sickness? what makes them so
burdensome to themselves when they are alone? what makes them seek so many
diversions, but the hope so to drive away this evil spirit which haunts them?
Have not Tyrants killed or banished all Wise and Good men they could reach,
left they should have witnesses of their Actions, because their Consciences
told them that they were unjustifiable? Have not some Vicious Persons sought
Refuge from thinking in perpetual Drunkenness? and others thrown away their
lives, not being able to endure themselves? I thank God, I abhor desires of
Revenge, and I think it is too Cruel to think of those who have wronged me
without great Pity; but I am assured, though neither God nor Man punish them in
this World, they will never be able to pardon themselves.

But I must add to this which I have named, the Torment which awaits them in
the other World; the fear of that must needs be a great Vexation, as it is an
incomparable Pleasure to a good man that he hopes to be happy there. This
expectation blasts the Delights of sinners, and makes them but like those
Recreations which condemned men enjoy in Prisons, who though they play at Cards
or Tables, yet the Ropes about their necks spoil their sport, whilst they
continually put them in mind of being hanged. I grant that Atheists endeavor
to blunt the edge of this Argument by a flat denial of Immortality, and would
willingly think that they are all dead in the other World, because none ever
came to them to give them notice of the contrary: but those faith-worthy
stories which report the Appearances of Spirits, and have told us of some that
have risen from the Dead, put them many times into such agonies, that they
would be glad to be assured of their Annihilation after this Life. When they
venture to think seriously (which they dare but seldom do) they have such an
unacceptable remembrance of what they have been, and so much assurance, that if
there be any happiness afterward, they shall have no share in it, that to
comfort themselves they vote That there is nothing after this Life. These
suffrages signify indeed their strong desires, but are no Arguments of a true
Opinion concerning the Future state; but that uneasy Temper of Soul which
makes them wish so proves what I assert, That they are not happy at present.

It may be this is true, replied Apronaeus, and if it be, I confess that those
whom you call Wicked are very unhappy; yet it seems still a kind of slur to
that Government you speak of, that if they deserve that Punishment, they have
it not sooner. It is something which you say of the former sorts of Tormeut
which you have mentioned, but they are invisible, and so little notice is taken
of them by others; but if they were hurried to Execution as soon as they sin,
it would strike a Terror upon Bystanders: but since Vengeance is so long in
coming, they are encouraged to sin by delay. Good men's Hopes are weakened, and
they are ready to say, If God neglect his servants, why should they worship
him? Justice is blasphemed, and the Force of Law enervated. If some happen to
be struck sooner, it is but as Thunderbolts fall, by chance: And who can
imagine but they do? for they often cleave a gallant Oak, and sometimes tear an
useful Sail, or kill a harmless Traveller; when those which sin boldly arrive
at gray Hairs without any considerable Misfortune, and in appearance die
peaceably. Poor Apronaeus, said the Prince smiling, what slight devices art
thou constrained to use to support a false plea? Must there be no Providence
unless those which sin be presently Condemned and immediately Executed? Those
which sin are always Condemned, and God is so merciful, that he thinks it
punishment enough that for a while they carry their heavy crosses, to which you
would have them presently nailed. He is (...) Gracious, that he does usually
respite their irreversible Doom in expectation of Amendment, and so both saves
sinners, and teaches those which look on to imitate his merciful Example.
Those which have deserved the blow, fear that he will strike too soon; and
shall any be weary of the Divine Patience which comforts others, because they
love to see sinners fall? I must also tell you, Apronaeus, that he is not so
gentle as to neglect Justice. God does make Examples enough in every Age to let
all the World see their danger: and though some be spared that deserve present
Punishment, it is both a Glory to his Forgiveness, that some of those which
escape Repent; and if he let many go in (...) of their Emendation, may he not
as well and much better do it, then a General decimate his Regiments for a
Mutiny of which they are all guilty? God is not endamag'd by delay, those which
continue their Rebellion can never get out of his reach; he is not willing to
dispeople the Earth by sudden Executions. But because men are apt by long
Impunity to imagine that either they are not obnoxious, or that none regards
what they do; God many times is forced to confute their Imaginations by Great
Plagues, Pining Famine, Cruel Wars, to unburthen the Earth of its wicked Load,
and takes away such as had too long oppressed Virtue and supported Wickedness
with the most vile Examples: by which means he shows both how unreasonable
Sinners are whom no forbearance will reclaim, and how just he is when he uses
severity, because those which suffer it sinned so long against one that was
loath to punish, and by his Punishments asserts his Providence. By some words
which you have delivered, you seem to be willing to think, Apronaeus, that God
does not manage his Justice with Prudence, because he does not inflict all
Mulcts upon the persons of sinners. But must this piece of his Goodness also be
made an Argument against his Providence? and shall we think he does punish by
chance, because he is mercifully Just? Was it not esteemed a Favor to the
Persians, when their Emperor commanded only their Turbans to be beaten? Did
the World use to grumble at the Charge of their Sacrifices, when God required
only a Beast for a Man? But I spare to urge this any further, because those
which are ready to sink must be permitted to catch at Reeds.

Here Apronaeus made such a pause as signified that he had no mind to proceed
any further: but Diaporon, craving leave to continue the Discourse, added, I
have so great satisfaction, most Excellent Prince, in your Answers to the
Objections which Apronaeus has made, that I have nothing to renew a Reply; yet
other things which he has not quoted disturb my belief in this Point. For if
God be Almightily Good, and Rule this World by an unerring Prudence, how came
this Unlucky thing Sin, which (...) so much trouble, into it? You say it is
Evil, and assert that nothing but Good comes from God; whence is it then? What?
did some envious Anti-God put this flaw upon his Work? There is no Question,
replied the Prince, but Sin is Evil, for nothing else does properly deserve
that name; and it is as indubitable that the most good God is not the Author of
it: and yet to defend his Honor we need not run to that old Fable of Oromasdes
and Arimanius, whom the Ancients, not knowing how otherwise to answer the
Question concerning the Original of Evil, set up as two Gods, and made one the
Author of Good, and the other of Evil; for this matter is determinable by
ascribing Evil to its proper Cause, which will clear the doubt, and reflect no
disparagement upon the All-Good God: Men brought in Evil by the foolish abuse
of that Free Will which God had given them. It is the Glory of the Creator,
that he could make such a Noble Automaton as Man, who moves spontaneously, and
according to an innate Liberty of Election determines himself to his Actions.
He put this Liberty into the hands of an Intelligent Creature, whom he both
made able to know that which is Good, and fitted his Nature to the Love of it.
He made it so much his Interest to be Obedient, that he promised him great
Rewards for doing small Duties; unto the performance of which he gave him
sufficient Assistance. He told him wherein Evil consisted, forewarned him of
its mischievous Nature, forbad him to introduce it, and by a most rightful
Authority threatened him severely if he transgressed the Orders which he had
received. But Man, by a perverse abuse of his Freedom, chooses that which is
worse, will not take pains to distinguish that which is truly Good from that
which is so in Appearance only, and so sins.

I thought, replied Diaporon, that as all things received their Being from God,
so they operate only as they are acted by his Power; and that therefore though
some things which they do are not Good, yet since nothing can work without his
Assistance, it may be supposed that he let Sinners into the World; and though
they affront his Authority, it is not a matter of any great consequence, since
they are permitted only as a Dramatist sometimes brings a (...) upon the Stage,
who abuses the Poet himself. If this be a true account of Sin, then it is not a
Fault, but rather an Ornament of the Creation. God is a most excellent
Dramatist, said the Prince, to keep your own Metaphor, and has made the World
a Noble Representation of his Divine Art; and when he brings Actors upon the
Stage, he assigns every one according to his Ability a convenient Part, and
commands them to observe the Order which he has appointed: and if they
pronounce the Words which he has set, and act their Parts according to the
Rules which he has prescribed, they do honor to God, and receive Praise from
wise Spectatours, and Rewards from the Author. But when Man which has a
Poetical Fancy dislikes his Part, and changes that which is given to him by
the Variations of his own Wit, or acts that which belongs not to him, he
disturbs the Design, and is like one that sings out of Tune in a Musical
performance. The Dramatist sees what is done, and, though he stay till the
Company are dismissed, will be sure to call him to account in the
withdrawing-Room; nay, the Spectatours themselves which know the Poet are much
displeased that the Fool should put in such disagreeable Parts, knowing they
are not of the Author's Composing, and do often hiss him off the Stage, when he
thought to have made good Sport, and sometimes in dislike of the Impertinency
go away. Sin in the World is like an ill Lesson played upon an Instrument out
of Tune. Humane Nature was well strung and exactly tuned by him that made it:
but when men break the strings or play scurvily, it is most absurd to complain
of God, the Fountain of Intellectual and Sensible Harmony.

But, Excellent Prince, replied Diaporon, since God could have hindered this
Error, why did he not? If he had not permitted Man to himself, he had not
failed. What, Disporon, said the Prince, shall not God have leave to make a
man, except he be obliged also to tie him hand and foot as soon as he has
done? If man have a power to sin and not to sin, shall the unthankful Fool sin,
and then rather accuse him who gave him power not to sin, then himself who had
not sinned but that he abused it? Sin is a Voluntary Loss of an excellent
Privilege, and is not Originally in the Nature, but in the Action: Nature
signifies the same thing, that is Courtesy and Obligation, whether men use it
well or ill. But since God could have prevented it, said Diaporon, and did not,
it seems to be better that there should be Sinners then not; and if it be so,
what need we take any care what we do? Certainly, Diaporon, replied the
Prince, you are little versed in the Nature of Virtue, which cannot consist
with Compulsion: For what Virtue is it to do that which we cannot resist? If
Liberty had not been given, there could have been no Virtue; but it was a thing
worthy of God to bring Virtue into the World, although at the same time Sin was
not made impossible. It Is true, God could have made man like a Sempiternal
Clock, and hung the heavy weights of Necessity upon all his Faculties, and
forced all his Motions and Actions; but as our Nature had suffered a great
prejudice to have been so meanly constituted, so it had been a great
Disparagement to the Creator that he was not able to make a free Agent, and he
had left himself but a little room for his Providence: for what great matter of
Government is it to keep things in order which are bound up in Chains of
Invincible Necessity? The Glory which God would then have had in Ordering the
affairs of the Intelligent World would have been but like to that of a Good
Clock-keeper.

But by your Argument, Diaporon, if you mind it, we must believe that it were
better God had bestowed no excellent Gifts upon us, if they be capable of any
misapplications: and therefore we ought to be sorry that ever we received the
blessing of Reason; for it is well known that many abuse it to very unworthy
Designs. And so you infer that it is better men had never been Created. See
what foolish Consequences you make when you understand not or contradict an
Infinite Wisdom. I hope that this makes it manifest that it is far more
Rational that a power of being Virtuous should be bestowed upon men, then that
they should have been wholly deprived of that Excellency, though it be not
immutably assured from possibility of sin, (and for this Reason we ought,
contrary to what you said, to take care that we sin not) both in respect of our
selves, it being unreasonable because ungrateful, when we have through our own
neglect made our selves bad, to accuse God for making us Good; since if it had
not been our own fault, we might both have continued so, and have grown better:
and in respect of God, to whom it is no prejudice, since his Orders are never
so neglected but he can make himself an Amends for the contempt; and it is no
small testimony of Providence, to make a good use of things which fall out
unhandsomely. As he himself is the Author only of Good, so he permits no Evil
to be done by others of which he cannot make a profitable improvement. That
self-conceited Player 9to use your former Comparison a little longer) which
made a disturbance by his own impertinent and foolish Additions, is but a Foil
to the excellent Wit of the Poet; for the Spectatours have a Copy of the Play
by them, and know that the Author put no such things into his Design: and when
he acts that which is prescribed, but not as he ought, it makes only to the
Disparagement of the Imprudent Actor, for all discerning Auditors infinitely
excuse the Dramatist from any fault, and blame the Player so much the more,
because the part which he acted ill-favouredly was excellent. This is all the
Applause which he gains, when by transgressing his Rules he thought to have
made an unexpected Sport. Thus God out-wits arrogant Fools: for though he has
granted to Man a free principle by which he is Master of his own Actions; yet
if he do foolishly when he pleases himself, it is not to be imagined that he
has leave to wander out of the bounds of Providence. It is an honor to us
that God has taken us aboard his Great Vessel, and more, that being there he
has not confined us to our Cabin, but given us leave to walk upon the Decks
or below at pleasure: but it were a simple thing to imagine that he would not
steer to his Port, or that our inconsiderable Motions should hinder the Course
of his Ship, or that he would not punish us ashore or reward us according to
our Deportment a-shipboard.

But since Virtue is Good, replied Diaporon, and God loves it, and Goodness is
the Happiness of Men, and God, as you say, does not envy us to be Happy; I
think he ought to have found out some way to have made all men Good. You
dispute boldly, said the Prince with a smart Accent; and if you made these
Pleas in your own Name, I should think you very proud. Good Butter-flie,
venture not too near the flame, lest you burn your Wings. Sober men have
always acknowledged that Modesty is no where more necessary then in divine
Inquiries, and that these Speculations have such bounds set, that none can
attempt to pass them with more discretion then venture over Precipices, because
God's Understanding is as far beyond ours as his Power transcends all that we
can do. However this I say to your Objection, God has appointed a way to make
men Good, but you do not like it. You would have had a Man made something else
then that which he now is. Humane Nature is Good, and therefore God cannot be
blamed that made it. But it might have been better, you say. You may do well
to be angry that men are not Gods. But you will do better to say, since men
are Good by God's Gift, and may be better by their own Industry through his
assistance, which he is always willing to give; if they be bad, let them not
blame God, but themselves. We must not demand what we please of him that ows us
nothing; and it is extreme folly, when we have enough, to be discontented
because we have not more. What though God could have granted such a privilege
to Man that he should not have been capable of being deceived? yet you cannot
justly quarrel with him for not doing it, but are bound to return thanks to him
for that sufficient knowledge of Truth which he has bestowed, since God was
neither bound to make us or give us any thing. But you, Diaporon, would have
some Method of Melioration which should make men Good whether they will or no,
if I may speak so absurdly; and I suppose you have a mind to ask, if you would
speak plain, why God does not show himself so visibly to men as to make it
impossible for them to question his Being, and why he does not work Miracles
every year to convince Atheists. You care not for Converse with God, unless you
may determine the Manner of it. But you should remember that it is a high
favor that we have leave to approach to Almighty God in any way that he will
appoint. The Divine Wisdom has made choice of an Ingenuous Faith as the
Foundation of all intercourse with Eternal Truth; and that Principle does then
declare its Nature and Power where sufficient Causes of Belief are given,
though they are not such as do compel our Assent, or leave no room for Doubt,
if men will pertinaciously endeavor to cavil against the Truth. Religion ought
to have a Prudential Bottom, because it is a Rational Worship of God, and
cannot consist except it be supported with Reason; but it has no such Motives
as to force obedience from the most Wicked. If God should appear in his Glory,
it would amaze men into belief by sight; and if he should so extort submission
from his Creatures, they would have nothing left whereof they could make a
free-offering to him.

Let me desire you, Diaporon, to consider what an Indecorum it were to change
the Method of Virtue which God has put. God has promised Happiness to mankind
upon fair Terms, for he has made Virtue the common Rode to it, which is smooth
and agreeable to our Nature: Is it not then unreasonable, that they should come
to the Journey's end which decline the way? Is it unjust that those who have
indisposed themselves for a happy state, should afterward meet with such things
as suit their Disposition? How can they hope to receive a Crown, which never
did any thing worthy of it? It is more patience then they deserve that God
bears with them till they Trifle away (...) whole Life, especially having
frequently persuaded them to the contrary. Since God pleases himself with the
Ingenuous converse of some few which love him of choice, he is not to be blamed
by such as do not devote their Souls to him; because as he does an infinite
Courtesy to Holy Souls whilst he takes pleasure in them, so he has highly
deserved of those which are undone, because they have misplaced their
Affections upon mean Objects.

Here Diaporon replied, But since, Dear Prince, it is our Interest to be Good,
and God is most Gracious in his Nature, and knows that we are very weak; it
seems congruous to those Considerations, that he should have made the Method of
our Happiness easier, by taking out of our way those Tentations which sometimes
make us sit down, and sometimes lead us aside. Sure, Diaporon, said the Prince,
you have a great love to Idleness, or else your Temper is more Cowardly then I
imagined. Would you have thought it better if God had made us without
Faculties? or, since they are bestowed upon us, do you think it fit they should
be useless? You find fault with this World, because it is not a Stadium where
men receive the Prize which never run for it. If you had not fond Passions, you
would not desire that men should be rewarded for doing nothing. Is it a thing
worthy of God to bestow Felicity upon such as will do what they please, and
slight the Observation of such Directions as he has declared to be the only
Means allowed for the obtaining that excellent End? You would have God govern
the World by such Rules as suppose Men to be scarce anything. How came you to
be thus soft? Diaporon. Will you not keep your way when you travel, if another
Rode cross it? Will you leave off your thoughts of going Home, because you see
handsome Inns by the way? Has God commanded us any thing but that which is
Good? Has he forbidden us any thing but that which does us hurt? We may enjoy
what pleases us so long as it is profitable: he has made our Bound only where
it is not to our benefit to go further; and shall we be so unthankful and
stupid as to call it a Tentation that we have not leave to do our selves a
mischief? If in any thing you take pains, does not the pleasure of a Virtuous
Industry and the great Reward which is promised infinitely exceed your small
Labor? What are you afraid of? Alas! the Rose-bush has prickles upon it; you
are sorry that God has made any thing that does bite. Coward, if some things
have Teeth, you have Hands and Eyes, can you not look to your self? What would
you never go alone, Child? You are troubled that you have not a perpetual
Keeper assigned to you. This is a foolish objection: God has made Day in vain
for such as are offended with the Light of the Sun, and laid Rewards to small
purpose before such as hate Action; and we must needs think that all those do
whom every trifling Accident tempts to be Idle.

When the Prince had said these words, he left his Chair, and walked up and
down the Room: but perceiving a melancholy in Diaporon's Countenance, he asked
him if he was troubled with any thing which was spoken. No, Excellent Prince,
replied Diaporon, but I have some scruples yet, from which, if it were not
uncivil, I should be glad to be delivered by your gentle hands. Propound them
then, said the Prince, and we will discourse walking. Then Diaporon proceeded
thus: I should acquiesce in the Reasons which you have alleged concerning the
state of Virtue and Vice, but that I am told there is no such Liberty as you
have mentioned; in that all things are moved by the Laws of an Invincible
Necessity, and that all Causes are chained to their Effects by such a Fatal
Connection, that no Election, Wit or Power can break the least Link: which if it
be true, your fair Discourse concerning Choice is but a pleasant Imposture.
Particularly they say, That we are made in our Natures what we are, and
determined in our Actions to what we do by the Influences of the Stars, from
which also by an inevitable Order we are to expect our Condition of Life for
all the time that we are in Being. The Prince replied, To resolve the first
part of your Objection, Diaporon, I would have you to consider whether it be
likely that Men are no more Authors of their Actions then those Automata which
are moved with springs of Steel; or whether we do no more deserve blame for
Irregular Actions then a Watch ought to be beaten when it goes wrong. When men
live Virtuously, are they no more to be praised then the Tools of an Artist
which have been employed in making an excellent Machine? Did the Hellespont
deserve as much to be whipped for breaking the Ships of Xerxes, as a Parricide to
suffer Death for Murdering his Father? Or was it as rational in that proud
Persian to write Letters to Mount Athos, as for Atossa to have reproved her Son
for that Folly? What difference can there be between any of the forementioned
Instances, if all things be tied by the Laws of invincible Destiny, and are
extrinsecally determined to all their Actions? Those who can swallow such
Absurdities need make no scruple of throwing Virtue and Vice out of the World:
and indeed by entertaining the foresaid Opinions they are obliged to do it.
But God forbid, Diaporon, that you should engage in such monstrous wickedness.

Let me tell you also, added the Prince, that what you said concerning the
Stars is most extravagant. If you can imagine such Fancies to be Credible, you
are prepared to believe all those Ridiculous Fables which idle Dreamers have
reported concerning the Stars. These pretenders to new Principles of knowledge,
which scorn the old because they did not invent them, and it may be because
their necessary Consequences are altogether unacceptable to their debauched
Humor, would have us think that by the Motions of the Heavens and various
Circumrotations of the Stars a Matter was generated at first, which being spread
and sown in the Earth gave a Being to Men. A story of the same Credibility with
Lucian's Dendritae, and may pass in the same Rank with the Fable of Deucalion
and Pyrrha. If by these omnipotent Influences men became Rational Creatures, I
suppose some piercing Effluxes which proceeded from the Bull's Horns boar'd
their heads with two holes before and one of each side, that they might hear
and peep through them; and that their Masculine irradiations make Boys, as the
Feminine do Girls. To what other Cause should we ascribe the Difference of
Sexes? I guess also that from some extraordinary Illapses their Rival
Fortune Tellers, the Gypsies, took their Original.

But which will they say, Diaporon, that these potent Stars produce these
admirable effects, Ignorantly or Knowingly? If they do it Ignorantly, we must
suppose that they run round like blind Horses tied to a Mill-wheel. But for
Honor sake I suppose they will say that they do it Knowingly, and so every
Star is an understanding person: and it is no great boldness to affirm that,
for some old doting Nations made them Gods, and bestowed, as it was fit, divine
Worship upon them, as they did also upon every Earthly Being which was
beneficial to them, committing not only stupid Idolatry, but ungrateful
Sacrilege; for they robbed the Master of his Honor to give it to his Vassals.
We may now easily imagine what other rare feats these knowing Stars do perform:
Certainly the Sun and Moon, no mean persons, have excellent Discourses when
they talk together in their Conjunctions. The Turks (those grand Masters of
Learning) have informed us that they lie together in the Eclipses, and beget
Stars. A fair solution of the Phenomenon of new Stars which are sometimes
observed by Astronomers. The Sun is Hot, and therefore every Night goes to bed
in the cool waters of the Atlantic Ocean, and makes oblique Motions toward the
Tropicks to refresh himself at the Fountains of Cold, the Poles; and by his
nearer approches visits one of them in Summer, and the other in Winter, left
they should take his too-long absence unkindly, for they are very sensible,
especially of Civilities. It is very likely that the Moon is the Sun's Wife,
and that with his leave she does sometimes officiously supply his absence in
the Night, left the darkened Hemisphere should fall out with her Husband. It
would trouble us to guess what these living Creatures do feed upon, for they
must needs be hungry and thirsty; but that we may remember that the Earth and
Sea, not unthankful for the daily Courtefies which they receive from them, do
continually exhale Tributary Vapors to keep their Benefactours alive.

These are the Great Princes which domineer over this lower World, who by the
Sidereal Influences, which are sent down from their high and mighty Powers, do
raise Humane Spirits and Affairs as easily as the full Moon swells a Cat's
Eyes. These Potentates dwell in those magnificent Houses which Judicial
Astrologers have built for them, founded not much unlike to Castles in the Air.
Without question they have an excellent Polity among them, and the Greater
Powers give order to those which are Inferior, who dare not be disobedient to
them whatsoever it costs them. It is manifest, in that poor Diana lost her
Temple which was burnt at Ephesus that night when Alexander was born, because
she was sent by order of some higher Intelligence to be Olympia's Midwife.
These sensible Stars may well be those Wheels upon which the Fates of the World
are spun, and accordingly the Circumvolutions of the Heavens must be the
Turning of those wheels. I suppose that the Puny Stars may be the Parcae's
Spindles, of which they make use when they draw the contemptible Threads of mean
Fortunes of short Lives.

It may be, said the Prince, continuing his Discourse, you think me too
pleasant in resolving this scruple; but how can I, Diaporon, give any other
then Jocular answers to such a Frivolous Doubt? I wonder, if you will have me
more serious, how Humane Nature came to be guilty of such a gross Paralogism,
as to believe that because the Sun has a known Influence of Heat, that
therefore it has as many more as men please to assign to it, (some of which
are littles less then Contradictory to each other; for they say it both heats
and moistens;) or because the Sun has some constant operations which are
Regular and deprehensible by Reason, therefore we may attribute other (...)
Effects to it which have no foundation in Observation. Who knows not that the
Sun, the eldest Son of Nature and Father of the Day, the Fountain of our Light,
and that General Fire which warms all the World, does accomplish rare things
upon our Terrestrial Globe? that it makes the four different Seasons of the
Year, in which earthly Bodies are observed to suffer very considerable
Mutations? In Spring it makes the Herbs to grow, the Plants to Bud, the Trees
to Flourish; in Summer it ripens Fruits, and adorns the Earth with Flowers; and
in Autumn, having finished his Anniversary task with us, having the same work
to do in another place, begins to withdraw, that then also the exhausted
Ground may repair its self all Winter with cold and moisture against the next
Spring. These are known effects, and we perceive that they flow from the
Access, Abode, and Recess of that assured Influence, Heat: but what is that to
those strange Products which have no dependence upon any known Virtue in the
Sun, but are as fictitious as those Consequences which Deluders do variously
feign? They have no foundation in Reason, except this be sufficient, that
because the Sun is an excellent Instrument, it is a Principal Agent; or rather
because it can do something, it can do all things, which is to say, because
it is a brave Creature, it is a God. I cannot imagine upon what other ground
they should assert that the Sun does create Prophets as well as make the Grass
to grow, and bestow rare Abilities upon Lawgivers, and adorn some great
Ministers of Religion with the power of Miracles, as easily as it can melt a
Ball of Snow.

It were not difficult to give you, Diaporon, a particular notice of the
manifest falsehood of those inconsistent Principles with which those pretenders
to Astrological knowledge endeavor to support their Errors with which they
would abuse you; but it would be too long at present, and since we shall meet
often, I will do it when you please. I believe by this time you are willing to
retire, said the Prince, continuing his Speech to Apronaeus and Diaporon, for
we have talked a good while; I will only stay you so long as to give you a
little Advice, for I perceive you have been conversant with Atheists, who
though they dare not speak directly, yet if you examine what they say, you will
find that those Arguments which are used to traduce the Providence of God,
serve no less to impugn his Being. I presume the rather to give you a friendly
notice of your Danger, because Atheism is not only stained with Ingratitude,
but is commonly rooted in a love of Sin, and nourished with a desire to live
with an unregulated Will. When men have persuaded themselves that there is no
Divine Power, to whose Laws they owe an Obedient Regard, they think they may
indulge themselves in a Voluptuous Life without control. They deny the Being
of God, lest they should be put to the trouble of giving him holy Worship; and
when they seem to allow a Deity, they confine him to the superaerial Regions,
lest being placed too near them he should take notice of what they do here
below, and so for fear of being called to an account for their enormous
practices, they deny his Providence.

Your Civility, said Diaporon to the Prince, is infinitely obliging; but I hope
my Error, if I be mistaken, is not so dangerous as you pretend. That great
Philosopher whom we honor as the Master of our Sect does not, I confess,
acknowledge a Providence; but I suppose it is not only for those Reasons which
I have mentioned, but as thinking it is below a God to mind such small things,
or that it would be troublesome to his Happiness. It is well known that he
confessed an Eternal and most blessed Being, and affirmed that he ought to be
worshipped for the Excellency of his Divine Nature: and as your Reason will not
permit you to think that he did not believe a Deity, because he reproch'd the
Gods of his Country, against whom he had but too much to say; so I hope your
Charity will not let you call him Atheist, although he thought that Divine
Being did take no care of this lower World.

I know well, said the Prince, that your Sect does magnify Epicurus as the
Inventor of Truth and the Architect of Happiness, who having only been honored
to see what is True, had redeemed the World from Error, and declared the
Methods of a blessed Life, which before were unknown: but I know no Reason for
any such Encomium, both because a great part of his Philosophy was not his own,
and that which he added to what he borrowed (to say no worse) is altogether
Contemptible to Wise men, for he asserted the lowest sorts of bodily pleasure
to be the supreme Happiness of Men. This Imputation is not fastened upon him by
Ignorance in History, as some of his Admirers would make the World believe; for
by those Relations which we find there, we have as much reason to doubt whether
he himself were a Temperate Person, as to be assured that his Followers were
not. Though Laertius has spoken in his behalf, and, to vindicate his
Reputation, says that his Scholars did either Ignorantly or Wilfully mistake
him; yet his professed Disciple and great Admirer Lucian, (who preferred him
before all other Philosophers, and extolled him with the highest words which
can be bestowed upon a Man) comparing him with Aristippus and Democritus his
Masters, says, that he exceeded them both in Impiety and Luxury. And we know
that Cicero, an Author more Faith-worthy then Laertius, objected to one of
Epicurus his friends his unworthy Definition of Happiness, quoting it in his
own words, and reproching the sense of it, asserts that Epicurus did
acknowledge no Happiness distinct from soft and obscene Pleasures, of which he
used to discourse by Name without blushing. He reports also concerning
Metrodorus, who was Epicurus his most intimate Companion, that he did
scornfully disdain his brother Timocrates, because he made a doubt whether all
things which belong to a happy Life are to be measured by the Belly, and
offered to show Velleius his books if he questioned the Allegation. His Garden
was not shut against Whores; Leortium was the chief, famous for her bold
writing against Theophrastus, and who cast a sufficient disparagement of
impotent Lust upon Epicurus, even when he was grown old, in a Letter which she
wrote to Lamia, yet extant.

But this is not a matter which I care to contend for, whether Epicurus was so
Voluptuous as these report him to have been, or to show that his Followers were
egregiously dissolute, which is not disputed; but to prove that his Principles
did so dispose men to Vice, that he said most truly who long ago asserted, Let
those which would be Excessively Intemperate, prepare themselves to enjoy their
desire by embracing the Epicurean Philosophy.

It is strange to me that Epicurus should be so magnified for his Philosophy,
since (as I said before) the greatest part of it is not his: He took the best
Flowers in his Garden from Democritus, without asking his leave, neither did he
give him thanks for them afterward. It is a blur upon him upon Record, that he
did also ingratefully throw mud and stones into that Well from whence he
watered his Garden. But I chiefly blame him for those Doctrines which are by
his own Sect assigned to him as his proper Opinions, some of which you have
repeated; for by them all he depraved the Philosophy of Democritus, exposed
Humane Nature as a Prey to Licentiousness, expressly denied God's Providence,
and only Ironically acknowledged a Deity, and so undermined Religion.

That he debased Humane Nature, is proved already; for what can be more
unworthy of a Man, then to use his Reason to make him more perfectly a Beast?
That the Extirpation of all Religious Observance of God was his Design, is
manifest both by the acknowledgment of his greatest Disciples, and by the
nature of his Discourse. Velleius, extolled by his Contemporaries as equal to
any of Epicurus his Scholars that were Greeks, and preferred before all the
Romans, embraced his Principles being afraid of that Omniscient God which other
Sects put as a perpetual Observer of Humane Actions, to whose Judgment he was
not willing to be obnoxious for what he said or did. He did rationally hope for
exemption from these fears in the School of Epicurus; for Lucretius, who took
the pains to put his Philosophy into Verses, has recorded it as his Immortal
Glory, that he was the first that ventured to set his Face against Heaven,
durst disclaim Religion, and brought Arguments against it into the Field of
Disputation, which made Devotion tremble and fly out of the Souls of Men, and
trampled under his Victorious feet that which durst resist him, and then
triumphed over it. Some, I know, do excuse this attempt with a smooth
Interpretation, that he did not engage against Religion, but that gross
Superstition which was practiced by the Sottish part of the Heathen World. If
that were all, we should have no reason to find fault, neither would Lucretius
have any great cause to boast of his Master's Valor: For the Superstition
which he vanquished was but a Cowardly thing; and the Gods who were honored by
it were so Contemptible, that they could not defend themselves nor their
worship from the just scorn of Wise men. It was a most miserable Picture of
Divinity which was made up of all the Passions and Vices of the worst of men;
and their Religion was proportionable, for it principally consisted of such
Rites and Performances as were Oblations only fit for Devils. But true
Religion, which is a Masculine Principle, Rational in its Original, being
founded in Knowledge and Justice, and noble in its Products, is affronted by
his Arguments. For he not only denies God's Regard of us, for which chiefly we
are obliged to acknowledge him with Religious Adoration; but has given such
unworthy Characters of his Eternal Being, which he pretends to own, that he
does rather expose him to Contempt then promote his Worship. Having left his
most beautiful Attributes out of his Description, he has drawn only a wan
Image with a few inconsiderable Delineations, such as are to be seen in the
first Draughts of a Picture; for which cause, if there had been no other
Reason, it was just that his God was anciently derided by the name of
Monogrammus. What strange kind of God must that needs be which does nothing?
If he have an Almighty Power, his Omnipotence is bestowed upon him to no
purpose; if he have not, he is Contemptible for his Weakness. He says his
Eternal Being is to be worshipped for his Excellent Nature: but how can we
believe that he has an Excellent Nature, who is devoid of the greatest
perfection of Being, Goodness? It is the Glory of all brave Natures to be Good,
and it is the Luster of the Divine Majesty that it is the (...): But what
Goodness is it in that Nature which (as he confesses) does delight it self in
its own pleasures, and neither did, does, nor will do any thing else? It is
likely that Men will acknowledge an Idle thing sitting in Heaven with folded
Hands, for a God? Is that a proper signification of his Blessedness, that he
has nothing to do? Is he worthily praised who is reported to be like those
delicate people, who esteem Idleness so great a Felicity, that they would judge
themselves unhappy if they had any Employment to attend? Does he rationally
persuade us to worship God who tells us that we were never beholden to him, and
that he is resolved never to take any care of us, nor does more regard our
Adorations then if we did blaspheme him? Will the vulgar honor him for a God,
whose excellent Nature a Philosopher reprocheth with such base Representations?
Shall not discerning persons conclude that he is an Atheist really, who
asserting a Godhead in words, speaks so unworthily of him as to hinder those
which heard him from believing what he said? That this was the sense of some of
the best of Ancient Philosophers concerning Epicurus his Theology, is evident
to such as know Books.

He did prudently to talk of God, for fear of drinking in Socrates his Cup: but
he was infinitely below the generous Simplicity of that brave man; for he
delivered his Opinion plainly, but this declared his mind in such slight words,
that he discovered he had formed no nobler Conceptions of the Immortal Godhead
then of the Vulgar Idols, nor equal to those estimations which his Neighbors
had of Statues of Stone; but it was sufficient to his purposes, if they served
him for an Antidote against the Athenian Poison. I must confess I do not wonder
so much at his prevarication, when I see some of his Followers, who pretend to
do honor to God by bestowing Glorious Attributes upon him, slur it by saying
they gave him those Titles only as Poets write flatteries in a Song.

I have observed how variously this sort of men use their Wit to excogitate
devices by which they may cast dis-respect upon God, whilst some deny his
Being, and others disallow his Providence; some say that God is a Benefactour
to us in that possibly he governs the World, though he did not make it, only
orders things which had an eternal Existence from themselves. Those which have
read the story of Vaninus, know how little Atheists desire to be believed when
they speak any thing in favor of God. This new Notion is no great favor, I
confess; but it is the less, because it is incredible. How shall God obtain
such a Dominion over that which he did not make? It was either given to him, or
lent, or else he took it by force, or bought it, or it was pawned to him; He
came to it by Succession or Right of Occupancy, or possibly was hired to govern
it for some other. But these are such Impious Vanities, Diaporon, that we
cannot imagine they were designed to any other purpose, but to deprive God of
all Title to Creation or Government.

But Epicurus, knowing it was a slur upon the Divine Prudence, if God being
acknowledged to have made the World, should have left it without Government,
bestowed the honor of Creation upon Democritus his Atoms, by which he has
sufficiently discovered what he esteemed to be the Cause of all things; and
though, it was Glory enough to his Mock-God to confess jocularly the
Excellency of his Divine Being, and looked upon it as no small Courtesy that
he exempted his Delicacy from the care of any thing but Pleasure, pretending,
as you say, that the Government of the World is a thing below the Divine
Majesty, or too troublesome to his Happiness. These two Allegations might
signify something more then they do, Diaporon, if we did not know that
Ingenious persons want not various pretenses to dismiss that Company with which
they are not pleased. Why should it be below a God to Govern the World? Is it
not worthy of a Creator to overlook those things which he has made? The
Creation was not unworthy of God, and it is no less becoming him to preserve
then to make. You may as well say that it is below God to be Good, as to say
that he is above a Charitable Regard to his Creatures. The most Benign Father
of the Creation does not abandon the Orphan World to the careless disposal of
blind Chance, or to be commanded by the savage Passions and turbulent Humors
of exorbitant men, who would soon make it unhabitable to those who are most
worthy to live in it; nor does he despise their Concernments in it, but does
find reasons for his continued Care in his own innate Goodness. The Corporeal
World is not contemptible, for it is a visible Image of the Divine Perfections;
and whilst God does order all affairs in it by his Almighty Wisdom, he does
illustrate that Glass from which his Glories are reflected. That goodly
Machine, the Universe, the regular Motions of the Heavens, the Vicissitudes of
Seasons, the alternate Mutation of Bodies, the safety of the whole System
notwithstanding the rude Clashings of turbulent Matter, and the Symmetry of all
the parts preserved entire notwithstanding the frequent concurses of contrary
Principles, show not only the power and presence of a Great Mind, but assure us
that God pleases himself to take care of his Works. Because Goodness is
essential to God, he is not wearied with Ingratitude, he makes his Sun to shine
upon Atheists. That which was Courtesy at first to the Ignorant, continues
till it grow Mercy to the Unthankful. Selfish Spirits are unacquainted with
this Divine perfection, and think all labor lost which is bestowed upon the
Good of others; and, being indigent Souls, stand in need of all that they can
do for themselves. But God is inexhaustible in his Sufficiency and infinite in
his Good will, and can supply the Necessities of all his Creatures, expecting
no return but what is their Benefit which give it. Why should men fancy this
employment below God? For as none is so stupid as not to acknowledge many of
his Greater Works to be Excellent, that is, Products of great Skill and vast
Power; so those which are but small in bulk testify as much Art, and are
valued proportionably by such as have judgment in things, and they are
convinced that it was more then a little Skill that made them, since their
Composition is so Mysterious that it requires a great knowledge to understand
it. That many things which seem but mean have no excellent Uses, because the
Ignorant know not what they are, is no more just a Consequence, then that a
Lute is only fit to carry Ashes, because a poor Woman does so mis-employ that
rare Utensil sometimes for want of a Dust-barrel. Those Imperfect pieces of the
Creation, that is, which are so esteemed by undiscerning persons, could no more
have been spared then little pins can be rejected which hold together the Frame
of a curious Watch. It may be we think some things little, because we have
conceived our selves to be greater then we are. All things are but small if we
compare them with God's Being: but to say that any thing is too little for his
Care, is to reproach him for labor ill bestowed in the making of it.

But whereas you say it is Civil to exempt the Divine Majesty from an
Employment so troublesome to his Happiness: It is an Officiousness so far from
Civility, that it is the greatest Dishonor imaginable, and shows with what
mean Conceptions they have bounded the Divine Power which speak such poor words
concerning it. God is an omnipresent Goodness, piercing through all things with
his powerful Wisdom with more facility then the Sun can dart Light and Heat
through the Air, Water and Earth. A Man, which is no great thing, can govern a
Ship amongst raging waves, can guide a Chariot drawn by fierce Horses, can rule
an Army consisting of vast Multitudes of valiant Soldiers, and, by the
assistance of a little borrowed prudence, can manage the Affairs of many
Kingdoms, and wrap up their principal Concernments in a few thoughts: And shall
not he which made Man do much with Ease as well as he can do a little with
Trouble? Cannot he accomplish his Designs without any disturbance, when his
Creature only fails for want of Skill or Power to force the Spirits of those
whom he does govern into Obedience? God needs not to send Scouts into foreign
Parts for Intelligence, he wants to help to obstruct the Machinations of his
Enemies, he can make them destroy one another. He is not distracted with cares,
he never suffered any Disappointment. He dwells in the midst of a serene Light,
and sees all things at one view, and with a powerful Hand keeps an indisturb'd
Order in his Affairs. This is the Reason of that perfect Consort which is
between the Parts of the Creation; and his Government is no more interrupted by
some Accidents which seem to Jarre with it, then an Harmonical Composition is
disordered with Half-Notes well placed. Those Instances of Government wherein
the Methods of Prudence or Justice seem to be contradicted, and with which we
find fault because we know not how they agree with all parts of his Design, are
not more justly blameable then Knee-Timber, without which Ships cannot be
built, is to be slighted because it is crooked. So that all the Favor which
this Argument made up of a pretense of Civility does bestow upon God, is to
represent him Ignorant, Impotent, or Envious: It must be Weakness or want of
Skill, that he cannot govern all things, or want of Goodness, that he will not
take any care of his works; and he is a Blessed Being in a very unhappy sense,
being supposed a God, who is defective in any of these Respects.

Here the Prince, resolving to make an end of the present Discourses, concluded
thus: As I would not have been willing to upbraid Epicurus with this Gross
Ignorance, since he had not the happiness to look upon things by the light of
Divine Revelation, which not many years after his time shined upon the deluded
World; so I should not have troubled my self nor you, Gentlemen, with so large
a Confutation of this Error, but that the Method of our Conversation and the
Danger of so great a Mistake required it. I doubt not but you esteem it an
extreme folly to retain an Error which God has made known, and know that the
plea of Antiquity is vainly applied to Falsehood, since Truth is more ancient;
and that it is an unworthy rudeness not to accept of the notice of Truth,
because formerly you have been acquainted with her Enemy.

Thus ended the amicable Dispute between the Prince and his Keepers: but his
Arguments so captivated their minds, and his Sweetness had so prevailed upon
their Affections, that they wished it might consist with their Duty to set him
at Liberty, and manifested the humble Respects which they had for him in
several Expressions of Sympathy. The Prince, with an Air which signified the
serenity of his Generous Soul, replied; My friends, I am not unsensible of
Ingenuity wheresoever I find it; but I desire that you would not express your
Love to me in any pedantical notion of Pity. The Miserable may be
compassionated; but I hope I have given you no (...) occasion to reckon me as
one of that number. I have many times taken a serious notice of the Afflictions
of my friends; but I never used such a pity as made me take a share of their
grief without lessening their part. I account that Compassion only worthy of a
Man, which is so expressed that it delivers him that suffers from his Calamity:
All else is despicable, because there is no reason that two should be afflicted
for one. If you be not, as possibly you are not able to express this sort of
Pity, do not trouble me or your selves with vain Affections. I know that the
Rode which leads to the other World has so many Varieties of Good and Bad,
that when I meet with the worst I do not think my self out of the Way. I have
no power to make it all plain, neither have I bargained with God to smooth it
for me. My mind is fixed upon the thoughts of my Journey's End, and if I may
arrive in God's presence at last, I am much unconcerned in any thing which may
happen till that time. Undeserved Disgrace, a Father's Suspicion, a close
Prison, an immature Death, and that hastened by Malice and Falsehood, are all
Welcome. A Storm does no hurt which brings a Mariner sooner to his Port, though
his Bark sink there, if he save his Lading, where he must have left the Hull
however. I speak not these words out of Despair of Restoration, for that is
possible enough in it self, and I have no cause to make it improbable, who have
Innocence for a Bottom of Hope: I do not think there is any difficulty in the
Divine Methods, because I understand them not, nor do appoint God a time to
bestow those Courtesies which I do not absolutely pray that I may receive.
Dramatists do usually so lay their Plot, that it is nearest to take effect when
it seems to be a lost business. For my own part, I protest I do not desire God
should alter the course of his Providence to accommodate my present Condition;
neither will I think that any thing falls out amiss, though he permits that
which I unjustly suffer from my adversaries not to be rectified in this Life,
since I know it will be set in order in another World to my infinite Advantage.
Though I might be troubled at the Mystery of my Affliction, because I am not
yet acquainted with the Cause of it, yet I am satisfied in the Wisdom and
Justice of the Divine pleasure; and I hope that God, who is the lover of Truth
and patron of Innocence, if he allow no means of my Rescue, will however
vindicate my Reputation, by which means my Name will rise again, and live when
I am dead. If I knew the Instruments of my Adversity, I should no more
attribute my suffering to them as having any Concern in the principal Design of
it, then if I were assured that two Angels did play at Chesse invisibly, I
would think that the Knights and Pawns did put themselves from one place to
another, because I could not discern the power that moved them. So far as I
think Grief becomes me, I am sorry for those who, having, as I am afraid, no
principles of Action but Ambition and Covertousness, have done me wrong, and
engaged you in an unworthy undertaking.

Here Apronaeus and Diaporon making Excuses for so long a Visit, (but which
they would not have liked so well if it had been shorter) took a humble leave
of the Prince. Diaporon being very passionate in his desires to deliver one
whom he judged most unworthy to be a Prisoner, went with Apronaeus to his
Lodgings, and beginning to discourse, asked him how he liked the Prince's
Philosophy, and what he thought of his Deportment. I cannot tell, said
Apronaeus, whether I should admire more his Wit or his Patience; but as I
plainly perceive that a Prison is no restraint to his generous Soul, so I am
made to believe that Virtue is the Foundation of his Courage, and that there is
more Providence in the World then Dogmapornes does acknowledge. If Virtue be so
happy when it is afflicted, I think a Sinner is not safe though he be
unpunished for a time. However it be, I will endeavor to understand whether it
be a Reality or no, since it makes her Lovers so content with all sorts of
Fortune. For my part, answered Diaporon, setting aside the Dignity of a Prince
which God has bestowed upon Alethion, I should be glad to be in a worse
Condition then he now suffers, so I might but have the experience of that
Goodness which possesses his Soul. Since Wisdom enters not into Malicious
minds, I make no doubt but his Soul is the Temple of Innocence. Whilst Diaporon
pronounced these words, one knocked at the Door, and when he was come in, told
them that he was lately come from Polistherion, where the King was much
disturbed with the news of Aletbion's Death, and that one of Dogmapornes his
acquaintance was accused for forging Letters in the Prince's Name, that the
King was fallen sick with Grief, and that the Army and City muttered some
discontented words against (...) and Dogmapornes, as the Contrivers of the
Prince's Imprisonment. This Relation startled them both; and having desired the
Messenger to withdraw, they consulted each other what was fit to be done. I
think, said Diaporon, that this is the most intricate Scene of Affairs that
ever I beheld in my life. I thought it impossible that Alethion could be
suspected, but much more that any should dare to accuse him, and most of all
that the King would believe any thing suggested against him. I know no reason
why any should report him to be dead, unless they meant to kill him; and I
cannot but conclude that if the King be so disturbed at the false news of his
Death, that it has made him sick, he will be so much more pleased with the
true Report of his Life, that it will recover his Health. I think it is not
only our duty to our Sovereign, to whom we owe all services, but our prudence,
not to neglect such a fair opportunity to show our Loyalty by preserving his
only Son. The worst Interpretation that can be made of our Action is, that we
endeavored to put into a Harbor which was not assigned us, to avoid the
danger of a violent Storm; and if any thing happen contrary to our Expectation,
we can suffer nothing dishonorable, having desired to perform our Duty, though
we saw it full of Hazard. I am much amazed, answered Apronaeus, at this
strange Accident; since the Prince is reported to be dead who was in my
Custody, I may be assured that his friends will look upon me as his Murderer,
especially since one of my Colonels acquaintance is accused for writing the
Letter for which the Prince is imprisoned. Since the Army and City, by whom the
Prince was always infinitely beloved, do concern themselves in his sufferings,
I am afraid of the Issue of this dark Affair, and wish with all my Heart that I
had not received such a troublesome part as I know not how to act. However,
Diaporon, I think it is best to follow your advice, by which we shall gain
time, and save our selves from sudden Attempts. But to what Port shall we steer
our Course? What we are to do in this matter, if we can do any thing,
requires speed. You say true, replied Diaporon, we must resolve quickly, lest
long Deliberation take from us our power to act. Let us convey the Prince into
Theoprepia, which we may effect thus. There is a private Door which leads by a
subterranean Passage from the Governor's Lodgings to the River's side: let one
of your servants about four a clock this afternoon bring our Horses thither, as
if he intended to water them, there we will take Horse, and conduct the Prince
first to the Castle of Misopseudes, who is his known friend, where we are sure
of safe Repose to night, and from thence we shall easily reach the Borders of
Theoprepia. Apronaeus liked the Contrivance; whereupon they presently returned
to the Prince, and acquainted him with the Intelligence which they had but then
received; and with many protestations of their sincere Intentions revealed
their desires of his Safety, and told him of the way which they had agreed upon
to secure his Person, if he pleased to accept of their service. The Prince
knowing it was better to run any hazard then to stay where he was, after a
short discourse accepted their offer, and went away in a Disguise.

When they had traveled about two miles, they met a Horseman riding toward
them with a very great speed, who knowing Apronaeus, stopped his Horse, and told
him that he was sent before by Trisanor, who was not much behind with a Convoy,
and brought Misopseudes Prisoner to his Castle. Whence do they now come? said
Apronaeus. From his House, replied the Messenger, where we surpised him this
morning about break of day. By whose Order, said Apronaeus, have you performed
this service? By a warrant signed by Antitheus, said the Messenger. When they
heard that, Diaporon at the Prince's Command took hold of his bridle, and then
dismounted him. Whilst they were deliberating what to do with him, (for it was
not fit that he should go to the Castle and give notice which way they were
gone, and his Company was but of uncertain use to them if he went back)
Apronaeus desired leave of the Prince to kill: him but he falling upon his
knees and begging his Life, the Prince had but just granted his Petition when
the Party which conducted Misopseudes came up. Trisanor rode in a little
Chariot, which was attended with two Horsemen upon each side, and gave leave
to Misopseudes to sit with him. Apronaeus rode boldly up and killed him which
drove the Chariot; upon which Trisanor flung himself out of the Coach, and
mounting his Horse which was led by one of the Soldiers, gave Misopseudes who
was disarmed in charge to one of his Soldiers, and then a sharp fight began
between the Parties. Trisanor and his men resembled the Deportment of a stout
Tigre, which whets valor with rage when she is in danger of being robbed of
her Whelps. The Prince's friends animated their Courage with the worth of the
Person who had honored them to be his Protectours, and whom they knew to be
very able to defend both himself and his Guard; and concluding that it must
needs be a grateful service in the beginning of their Trial, if they could also
rescue one whom the Prince entirely loved, they threw themselves between the
Prince and his Enemies. Diaporon made such a sharp pass upon Trisanor, that if
he had not avoided it by turning aside, he had been slain at the first
encounter: however he lost not his labor, for he killed one of the Soldiers
who came in to the relief of his Captain, and afterward continued his combat
with Trisanor, who being ashamed that he had given ground, redoubled his Vigor
in the next Charge. The Prince attacqued him which guarded Misopseudes, and
with a Princely boldness said, Traitor, deliver up that Loyal subject to his
Prince; and accompanying his Commands with a blow or two, made them to be
obeyed: for the Soldier fell down dead, and the Prince gave his horse to
Misopseudes, who was come forth of the Coach, not so much glad of his Liberty
as amazed to see him that procured it. Diaporon had given and received some
wounds from Trisanor, who fought desperately, not so much desiring to save his
life, as to sell it at a considerable Rate, and discharged a blow upon
Diaporon's head which was so far effectual as to astonish him for a while, but
withal broke his sword; and as Diaporon recovering himself was aiming a thrust
which would have ended the controversy if it had been prosecuted, the Prince
hoping by Trisanor to understand the Affairs of Polistherion, commanded him to
hold his hand, whereupon Diaporon riding close up to him (...) him out of his
saddle, which being perceived by the rest, who were four, they fled, taking the
way which leads to Misopseudes house.

This Storm being thus blown over, the Prince gave the Chariot to be driven by
the Messenger whose Life he had spared, who had seized upon the Horses, which,
perceiving themselves destitute of a Guide, began to run wildly up and down the
Field. They had advanced but a little way in their intended Journey, but they
were forced to return again to their postures of Defense, and put themselves in
order for a new encounter, perceiving six armed Horsemen to make all possible
haste toward them, whom they supposed to come to secure the Captivity of
Misopseudes. They were only some of Misopseudes his kinsmen, whom his Lady had
procured to endeavor the Redemption of her Husband; and as they were going to
Charge each other, both found themselves happily mistaken. Misopseudes led the
Party, and though they were his friends, they also supposed that they saw him,
but being much distracted between Wonder and Joy, could neither tell what to
say or do, till Misopseudes imagining what doubts possessed their Minds,
resolved them by crying aloud, Alight, alight, my true friends, your love to me
is infinitely (...); you do not receive me, but our Prince. These words were
such an Addition to the former unexpected Happiness, that they began to think
that they were asleep, and therefore put these strange things together in a
Dream which could never be enjoyed waking. However having the use of their
Eyes, and the Prince doing them the Favor to pull off his Vizard, they threw
themselves from their Horses and ran to perform their Homage. The Prince gave
them his hand to kiss, but not without Tears; for he could not conceal the
sentiments which he found in his Soul of those Affections which his Friends had
for him in his extreme Adversity.

Amongst all these clashes of various occurrences, one thing fell out happily,
for Misopseudes his friends killed all Trisanor's Soldiers that fled, except
one whom they took prisoner, by which means the Prince had a more safe
opportunity to escape out of the Power of their Enemies. The Prince having now
a little more leisure, was willing as he rode along to acquaint Misopseudes and
his Companions with the manner of his escape from the Castle of Dogmapornes,
and was going to express to them the Obligations which he had from Apronaeus
and Diaporon; but the deep Impressions of dutiful Love which were fixed in his
Soul for the King his Father made him first call for Trisanor, by whom he hoped
to be informed concerning the state of his Father, the Court and Kingdom.
Trisanor was now grown so near unto Death with loss of Blood by reason of many
wounds, that he could scarce speak, and only said with a low voice, Anaxagathus
is dead, and Antitheus is proclaimed King.

This News as an unexpected Allay took off the lushious Relish of their late
good Fortune. Though they did not fully believe what Trisanor reported, yet
they had but too many reasons to cause them to believe the truth of that which
he said, besides this, that Bad news is seldom false. The Prince's Faith was
stronger in this point then that of his Companions, and his passion prevailed
so proportionally, that he was forced to give it leave to exhale it self in
this exclamation: How unserene are all the Joys which we possess upon Earth!
Certainly mortal men are incapable of pure pleasures. How is every grain of
Contentment which we are allowed in this World blended with a much greater
quantity of Sorrow? There is no time so proper for us to expect Affliction as
that wherein we think our selves most secured against it. We have no confirmed
Peace, but only a short Truce made with Adversity, and that never well kept;
for our escape from one mischief is but a short delay that another makes which
is designed to overtake us. But to what purpose do I speak after this manner?
we must not refuse what God presents; and since we are yet uncertain what his
pleasure is, let us placidly await it.

Misopseudes perceiving that the Prince had ended his Discourse, continued a
Reflection upon their present estate after this manner: The afflictive sense
which I have of the Condition of Theriagene cannot equal Yours, most Excellent
Prince; my presumption is not so bold as to come near such a great Comparison;
but it gives precedence to none else: for as my Obligations urge it as the
highest Duty which is now possible; so that knowledge which I have of the
effects which must needs ensue upon this strange conjunction of unlucky
Accidents does awaken whatsoever I possess of pious Affection. But as I am
fortified against what may happen with that magnanimity by which your self most
concerned in these Dangers makes your Courage exemplary; so I find all reason
to hope, when I consider the strength of those Principles upon which your
Felicity was always founded. Who has not observed that in Extraordinary Cases
the Design of Providence is laid so intricately, that we may have just occasion
to wonder, but none to doubt? It is to me a sufficient Argument that an
Almighty Knowledge attends the Concernments of Good men, because though they
are frequently permitted to come near those Pits which their Adversaries have
prepared for them, yet they seldom fall into them. There are two States in the
World, Good and Bad; and when that which is worse has cunningly contrived the
destruction of Virtuous persons, whose multiplication is the Welfare of the
World, and is assisted in this most unworthy Attempt by vast numbers of those
who are sworn Vassals to Wickedness, it is a great Testimony of the overruling
Power of Supreme Goodness, that it is able to make their Designs abortive, when
the distance is but small between the Contrivance and the Execution.

We thought, most Dear Prince, that your Life and your Friends Interest in
Theriagene must needs be blown up, when a Train was so privately laid against
it, and so many hands ready to give Fire to it: but by our mistake we gain this
Assurance, That when good men are not successful, it is not because God is
defective in his Care, or wants Ability to assist them; or when the Designs
which are made against them take effect in part, it is not because he could not
have frustrated them totally, but because he gives ground for a time, as
prudent Commanders make their men retreat with a seeming Flight, that they may
make way for the employment of their Ambush, and then by a more complete
overthrow destroy the vain hopes of such as thought themselves Conquerours only
because they were deceived. We ought not to be so curious as to the Mode of our
Preservation, as to deny God leave to show his Wisdom when he does us a
Courtesy.

This is all the sense which I have of our Condition; and since we cannot of a
sudden put our selves upon Action, it will be requisite that we think of some
place where we may deliberate with safety. Whether should we betake our selves?
replied the Prince. To Theoprepia, said Misopseudes. I have resolved upon it,
said the Prince, with Apronaeus and Diaporon, whom I must now and always
commend to your Affections as Friends to whom under God I owe my deliverance;
we have agreed to retire to Theoprepia, where I am sure to be welcome to my
good friend Theosebes, whose Kingdom was ever an open Sanctuary to wronged
Innocence.

Here Philalethes made a pause, and craved pardon of Bentivolio and Amyntor for
so tedious a Report, adding this excuse, That it is not easy to make a short
story of that which pleases him that tells it. You shall not need to ask
forgiveness, said Bentivolio, of those which owe you infinite thanks for
performing an office which has taken up much of your Time, and highly obliged
us both by making us to understand those incomparable Virtues with which your
Prince Alethion is accomplished, and because you have so fully assured us of
the safety of his Person, which we esteem as a divine presage of his and
Theriagene's Restoration. Noble Travelers, you have expressed a Generous
Charity, said Philalethes, in the Compassion which you have entertained for a
miserable Kingdom; and how rationally your Pity is bestowed you will more fully
understand, if you can endure to hear any more of our present Condition: but
because the Relation is long, I will not begin it till to morrow; and if you
please, we will bestow the rest of this Evening in the Gardens and Park which
adjoyn to my House; for as I am sure you have traveled enough to day, so I am
afraid I have talked too much.

The next day Philalethes conducted his Guests into a Turret which was upon the
top of his House, where in a pleasant privacy he continued the Discourse which
he had begun concerning Theriagene to this sense: After Dogmapornes arrived at
his Castle, and was told that the Prince was gone, he was infinitely
confounded; not being so much astonished that the Accident was contrary to his
Design, as vexed that a thing should be possible which he had made so difficult.
At first he endeavored to give no credit to those which told him the news,
being very unwilling to think that could be true which he most passionately
desired to be false: But when he was convinced by the testimony of many
witnesses and the fruitlesness of a diligent search which he made himself, and
was informed concerning the Manner of the Prince's escape, he was utterly
bereaved of that vain Hope with which for a while he smothered his Passions,
and then the Fire pent up in his wrathful mind broke forth in flames of wild
Rage, whilst he talked after this manner: Though I did not think that there is
a God, yet now I see there is a Devil, and that he has made this Castle his
Hell in which he does torment me; but I will not burn alone. Then he wounded
and killed some of his Soldiers. Many were not present; for the greater part
considering the Cruelty of his Temper, and knowing that the Vexation of
Disappointment would make him excessively revengeful, without taking any notice
whether he punished Offenders or Innocents, had withdrawn themselves as soon as
they heard of his approach.

Dogmapornes made no long stay here, for knowing that this Accident required
new Counsels, and being disenabled to perform the task for which he was sent,
he saw that it was necessary to return speedily, and give notice to Antitheus
of that which had happened. Antitheus was much pleased when his servants told
him that Dogmapornes was come back, hoping that he had delivered him from the
fear of his most considerable Adversary: but when he was come into his
presence, perceiving that his Countenance gave no intimation of such news as he
expected, What, said he, Dogmapornes, with an angry doubtfulness, is not all
well? No, Sir, answered Dogmapornes, I am the unhappy Messenger which must let
you know that Alethion made an escape from the Castle a day before I came
thither. How, said Antitheus, with a great Consternation in his looks, is
Alethion got out of our hands? what Mad Fate does overruled our Affairs? Had
ill Fortune no other time but this assigned to act her part? It is to no
purpose to be angry, but I cannot help it; for the same Chain of perverse
Destiny that has drawn down this Misfortune upon me, does also pull me along
with it into a Confusion of thoughts. However I may hope that as this Accident
was unlikely to have happened if we consider those things which went before it,
so possibly that which is to come after it is as different from this. That
invincible Necessity which forces me to think so, whether it be true or not,
makes me also speak after this manner, whether it be wisely or not. But let us
go on, Dogmapornes, and make what we can of this unlucky business; I mean, let
uncontrollable Fate tumble us further down the Hill, or roll us up again. That
which has happened could not have been otherwise, and what is come is not in
our power to prevent. Since we have no Freedom to choose our Actions, it is some
comfort that we are not accomptable for what we do. If that which we aim at be
destined for us, we shall arrive at it whether we will or no; if it be not, we
do but trouble our selves in vain. Since we hope not, why should we despair?

You are startled, Noble friends, added Philalethes, at this Mode of Discourse,
but it is not unsuitable to his Principles; and you will wonder more at the
absurdity of his Actions. I will give you a brief account of those Rules by
which he pretends to govern his Life, and also tell you the effects which they
have produced in this poor Kingdom since he put them in Practice. But before I
rehearse his Opinions, which are the most hurtful Extravagancies into which
Humane Nature can fall, I will let you know how he became capable of such
extraordinary Delusion. He has a good Natural Wit, but that so over-match'd
with Pride, that he is like a little Vessel with a vast Sail and no Ballast;
for he looks upon himself as one born to govern all the World, and boasts that
his Stars whom he acknowledges for his Creatours have accomplished his Body
(for a Soul he does not believe to be in the Nature of things) with such
transcendent Virtues, that he is not unfit to be the Illuminatour of Mankind,
and declares frequently that the Universal World is not only obliged to hear
him, but to sit at his (...) with the lowest Reverence, and receive his
Doctrines as the indisputable Commands of a Catholic Dictator in Knowledge,
and yield Obedience to his Precepts as proceeding from the great Father of all
Art. He wonders that the Ignorant Nations do not flock to him, being the
Infallible Oracle by whom Nature is at last pleased to speak; and does often
say, That though the present rebellious Age does not perform their duty, yet he
makes no doubt but aftertimes will understand themselves better, and deploring
their long Ignorance expunge out of their Souls those Erroneous Principles by
which before they misguided their Actions, and keep an anniversary Festival as
a solemn Commemoration of him the Redeemer of Knowledge. He esteems all Books,
Ancient and Modern, except two or three of his own, but Rhapsodies of such
insignificant words as Mountebanks deliver upon their Stages; and compares
those which read them to the dull Multitude which is abused with their
impertinent Medicines. He is much displeased that the Ancients were born before
him and by way of revenge will sometimes say that Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle,
Hippocrates, Plotin, Simplicius, and the rest of that Rank, are but the Names
of doting Fools whom the World has sillily admired; and that Epicurus, and it
may be one more, lived till they began to know something, but not much, which
also by the Malice of Time and the Ignorance of latter Ages is almost lost: but
that He has taken the Ashes of buried Knowledge out of their Urns, and to the
joy and wonder of men has made it live again. It is a great part of his
ordinary Discourse to reproach the Neotericks; and then he makes use of such a
scornful Carriage as if he were switching one of his Lacquaies with a
Riding-rod, and will protest that those who do not confess that they have
learned whatsoever they know from him, are proud and ungrateful Dunces; yet
sometimes in a better humor he will express a pity for such as do not believe
his Opinions, because none can understand his Books but himself. He esteems
Schools the Nests of purblind Owls, where nothing is learned but Ignorance, and
says that the Universities cure the Imperfections of their Disciples after no
other manner but as Tinkers mend pots.

It may be you will laugh if I should tell you what he said not long since to
one of his Confidents: Nature has made me her privy-Councellour, and done me
the Honor to see her undressed; a favor bestowed upon none but my self: She
has led me through all her Territories, and, being not a little proud of my
Company, talked with me all the way, and resolved me all Questions in Natural
Philosophy, Divinity, the Doctrine of Manners, and Rules of Civil Government;
has entrusted me with the Key of her Secrets. She has shown me the Pillars
upon which Truth is founded, and exposed to my view the essential Connexions of
all things. She has conducted me with a dark Lantern through the Subterranean
Labyrinths of this Earthen Globe, and let me see those hidden Floud-gates by
which the Sea steals into the underground Rivers, as also the backstairs by
which they climb up to the tops of Hills where they make Springs. She has led
me into the entrails of the deepest Mines, and shown me the great Caldrons
where Earth is refined by Subterranean Fires. She has walked with me through
the greatest Seas, and acquainted me with the whole Nation of Fishes, and
leading me round the outward part of the Earth, has discovered to me the
nature of all things which appear upon the surface of that Globe; has shown me
the various contextures of different Atoms into several forms of Being, and let
me see those strange figures by which the little particles hang together, which
other men have not as yet heard named. She has told me why it was impossible
for some things to grow, and how some came to have Sense, and why others are
honored with Reason, the highest of all Bodily Faculties. After this she
carried me through the Air, and acquainted me with all its various
Modifications, taught me the doctrine of Vapors by Experiments, let me stand
by whilst she gave fire to Thunder, dissolved congealed Clouds, and squeezed
thick moisture into Rain. Here we sat down upon a Rainbow, and she resolved
all difficulties that arise from the Nature of Matter; told me what Light is,
and how Colors are produced, and answered all Questions that concern Motion.
Then she transported me into the Ethereal Regions, and showed me the Motion of
every Orb without those Artificial Spheres which ordinary Mortals are fain to
use, and that to small purpose. She gave me the proper names of the Stars in a
Book, and a Catalogue of their distinct Qualities, by which means I can tell
the true nature of every particular Influence. At last she let me see the
utmost Wall by which the World is enclosed.

Here Bentivolio making an interruption to the Discourse said smiling; I
thought, Philalethes, that you would have told us among other things that
Antitheus was Complemented by all the Signs in the Zodiac as he rode through
the Heavens upon the back of the stately Ass Alborach; and that as he was
passing by the Lunar Orb, the Moon, overjoyed to see this new Endymion, crept
into his sleeves to embrace him, and went out in two pieces at his Neck; and
that he, by the great Skill which Nature had then taught him, souldred it
together again in requital of so great a Civility. But to be more serious;
Pray, good Philalethes, acquaint us with some of those deep Mysteries which he
pretends to have learned by such a miraculous Method. I know not yet what he
has performed, replied Philalethes; but he brags that the Civil World was not
known till he discovered it, having descended from the Mountains of Light, and
that the Principles of true Policy are no older then his Books; that he has
rectified the Notion of Religion to the unspeakable Benefit of the World; that
there is nothing worth Observation in the Mathematics which is not entirely
due to him; that he has reformed the whole System of Natural Philosophy, and
so perfectly discovered the Impostures of Ethics, that he has proved the
Doctrine of Virtue and Vice to be a mere Fiction, by a new way of Reasoning
which he has invented; in short, that he has so advanced Mechanical Skill,
that the best Artists esteem it their happiness to become his Apprentices. I
beseech you, Philalethes, said Bentivolio, what has he revealed concerning
Divinity?

I can more easily give you an account of his words, replied Philalethes, then
tell you what he would have us believe to be his meaning; for at different
times he does express himself in such contrary Language, that it is difficult
to suppose that he has any resolved thoughts concerning God. This Great
Phoebus looks at all his Dictates as Oracles, but they are useless to manking
till some other Apollo rise up to unriddle them: However we see Reason enough
to imagine that he did not intend men should increase their Faith of a Deity by
reading his Books, because he has written so ambiguously concerning his
Nature. One while he says there are no Beings but Bodies, and that Incorporeall
Substance is a term of Contradiction; which would make us think that he
believes no God but the Visible World, and that the Sun, Moon and Stars, Men,
Beasts and Trees are the Limbs of his great Body; but that at other times he
has been heard to say that God neither is nor can be a Body: for when they
consider that these Expressions jarre so horridly that they are incapable of
Reconciliation, they are forced rather to conclude that he is in jest when he
mentions God, and uses the name Deity by way of scorn, or for fear of the Fate
of Vaninus. For when he wrote his Books, he knew well enough that the Religious
acknowledgment of a Supreme Power is so deep impressed in the Minds of men,
that if he had talked plainly against Almighty God, some of his more Loyal
Creatures would have chastis'd the boldness of his Blasphemy after some such
Fashion.

Sometimes he says there may possibly be a God, but we are utterly ignorant
what he is: that is, that there is something in the World which none can tell
what it is, which is God; and that we ought to adore him, that is, do honor
to we know not what. When some much displeased with such a dull Assertion have
answered, That his Attributes are known significations of his Divine Nature,
that is, Essential Properties which are manifest by his Works; and urged that
we have as true a knowledge of God as of any thing else, and behold the Wisdom,
Power and Goodness of his Eternal Being revealed long since in the Creation of
the World, and which do still present themselves to the eyes of men in the
Preservation and prudent Government of all Created things: He replies, that the
forementioned Attributes may be given to God, but they do not truly express
what he is more then the Amorous Sonnets of Extravagant Lovers do give a true
Character of their Mistresses Persons, and that the Praises which they import
do not more properly belong to God then the Flatteries of Amoroso's do to their
Idols, whom they extol for Perfections which were never in them. Since some
would be apt to call this Atheistical Impiety, he has endeavored to hide it
under the plausible Notion of God's Incomprehensibility; that is, he would have
men such Fools as to believe, that because they cannot comprehend the Immense
extent of the Divine Nature, therefore they do not apprehend any thing
concerning it: as if it were not more easy to find the great Sea then a small
River; or as if we could not discern the wide-spread Ocean at all, because we
cannot drink it all up with our Eyes.

You will easily suppose, Bentivolio, said Philalethes continuing his
Discourse, that he has represented Religion as springing from base Grounds,
who has given such a miserable account of the Deity which is to be
acknowledged by it. If he had not been disaffected toward the Divine Nature,
he might easily have found many good Reasons to support his Honor in the
World. The chief of those which he has assigned are these, Ignorance in the
Generality of Mankind, the Impotent Fear of Superstitious Fools, the Cunning
and Hypocrisy of Princes and Priests, and the Influences of some Stars. Thus
he pleases himself to imagine that the Ignorance which forces Mankind to
frame strange conjectures for want of acquaintance with Ordinary causes, made
them suppose that some Invisible Power created the World; and that seeing the
Condition of Mortal men is often oppressed with Poverty, Disgrace, Sickness and
Captivity, through an impotent fear of such Misfortunes, though they happen by
chance, yet either by reason of their own Ignorance, or because they have been
told so by others no wiser then themselves, they esteem them Punishments
inflicted by an Invisible Power whom they have offended, and to whom out of a
slavish pusillanimity they are apt to do Homage, and appease with Prayers and
Sacrifice, that so they may escape Torment. Some have observed that in his
lucid Intervalls the inbred Notion of a Deity has forced him almost to
confess, that there is something in God for which by the Right of his Nature he
is to be adored; yet he will by no means allow it to be Beneficence, which does
naturally infer Gratitude; but, if there be anything, it is Power, by which he
is enabled to do us a Mischief. Thus he would have men to acknowledge God only
for such Reasons as the Devils, because they can do hurt, are adored by the
Indians in a dreadful Image armed with sharp Teeth and crooked Claws. By this
Iron yoke the Heathen world was of old kept in subjection to those Cruel
Spirits whom the Hebrews properly named Asmodei, and the Greeks Apollyons, and
we, from the Evil which they do, Devils, the power of their mischievous nature
commanding fear by hurtful actions.

Men being naturally under the power of the forementioned Principles, he says
that cunning Princes, who with the Assistance of covetous Priests both contrive
and alter Religion as it best serves their Designs to awe their People into
Obedience, endeavor to make them believe that they received their Laws from
God; telling them that when contagious Sicknesses, cruel Famine, dreadful
Earthquakes, or any other extraordinary Misfortunes happen, it is because God
is angry for the neglect of his Rites; teaching them to appease his wrath with
expiatory Sacrifices: and when they took notice of obstinate Offenders whom
they could not conveniently punish because of their Multitudes; they threatened
them with Punishments to be endured in the World to come, by which means
Melancholic people are affrighted into their Duty.

Besides these Reasons, by which Piety is rather undermined then supported, he
says that Mankind is piously affected by certain Stars, and that Religion is
diversified according to the Variety of Influences which are sent down upon the
Earth. He pretends also to know the Complexion of every Star so exactly, that
he can declare by what Planet or Conjunction of Stars every distinct Religion
is produced, and affirms boldly that the Jewish Discipline is from Saturn, the
Christians Gospel from Jupiter and Mercury, the Mahumetan Superstition from the
Sun and Mars, the Idolatry of the Pagans from the Moon and Mars. It is strange
that he derived not Heathenism from Jupiter, since his name was so famous among
them; and that Mahumetanism should not have taken its Pedigree from the Moon,
which would have symboliz'd with the Turkish Arms, the three Crescents; and
that neither of them should have been made to hold of Venus, since both are so
full of abominable Lusts. However, borrowing a little more canting Ignorance of
the Astrologers, he says that all these Constitutions have been and shall
again be afflicted according as there happen any great Conjunctions in those
Opposite Trigons which have dominion over their Laws (as for example, Aries,
Leo and Sagittarius have over Christianity, Gemini, Libra and Aquarius over
Judaism;) and that as one Planet overcomes another with Reason, Craft, Piety,
Cruelty or Lasciviousness, Religions alter and succeed one another, as they
have done eternally. These are the unworthy Bases upon which he would place
Religion, slighting those noble Pillars upon which it was at first erected,
God's Right and our Duty. Any man that believes the Being of God, and
confesses him to be the Creator of the World, will easily grant that we are
obliged in Justice to worship him, and Ingenuity will constrain him thankfully
to acknowledge and humbly to adore his Patron and Benefactour. But as Antitheus
has stifled the Connate sense of a Deity, which all Nations do confess to be
interwoven with the nature of their Souls; so esteeming himself not beholden to
God, he suppresseth those great Reasons which make other men Religious, left he
should be judged Ungrateful.

It may be you desire, proceeded Philalethes, to know by what brave Standard he
measures Religion, which he has disgraced with such a mean Original. Antitheus
taking no notice of the Law of Nature, or the Gospel of our Savior, assigns no
Rule but the Arbitrary Commands of the Civil Magistrate, and esteems that true
Religion in every Country which the Governor thereof prescribes, and approves
all for true, though one contradict another, and judges him Religious who,
because he is commanded, worships the Devil; and says it is no sin for men to
prosess Atheism, if they be required to do it, or to renounce their Savior,
nay, though it be against their Conscience; and teaches them to excuse the
denial which they make in words by thinking otherwise, and gives them liberty
to do it in their interior Cogitations too, if they will, upon this ground,
because, as he says, Men's thoughts are not subject to the Commands of God. Thus
he has represented the Savior of the World as a Rebel for preaching a Gospel
which was not authorized by the Roman Emperor; and has disparaged the
Apostles as seditious Heretics, because they persuaded the World not to
worship Idols. If any thing can be added to that which I have already related,
he has further demonstrated that small measure of Good will which he has to
Religion by endeavoring to invalidate those Arguments which assure good men
that it proceeded from God, the chief of which are (...) and Prophecy. Miracles
are Divine Works transcending all ordinary Power of Nature, by which God has
given Testimony to the Doctrine of his Messengers. These he calls only unusual
Accidents of Nature, which Ignorant people wonder at; but which Wise men look
upon as no great Matters, because they understand their Causes, and because
Impostors do such things by a dexterous application of Natural Causes, or make
weak people believe so by (...) casts of Legerdemain. He says also that if some
things be so strange that they seem to transcend all Power of Nature and all
Art of Magioians, yet he which performs these rare Operations is not to be
credited unless the Civil Magistrate declare that the Works are Miracles, and
that the Person is come from God. By which Argument the World was not obliged
to believe in our Savior, though they saw him clothed with Divine Power,
commanding the Winds, making raging Seas obedient to his Word, subduing Devils,
healing all sorts of Diseases without any natural Medicines, triumphing over
Death, both by raising some to life out of their Graves, and rising himself
after he had been buried three days, in a word, exercising an absolute
Authority upon universal Nature; because Tiberius and his (...) did not make
his Miracles authentic with their Civil Sanction.

He is so willing to vilify these great Operations, as Tricks invented by
Covetous Artists to get Riches and Honor, that he will affirm those strange
Prodigies which appear sometimes in the Air, to be either Visions only reported
by Princes to have been seen, to amuse their People, or else that they are
represented in the Air by Glasses. He says that the Armies which seem to
skirmish in the Air are only Images of Soldiers at Land or Sea reflected from
one cloud to another, and multiplied as shadows are ordinarily by diverse
Looking-glasses; and when no Armies are near the places where these Apparitions
are seen, he says they are brought from remote parts by strong Winds. Sometimes
he fancies that men form these Shapes upon thick Vapors which swim in the Air
by the power of Imagination, as women make marks upon the Embryo's in their
Womb; or else that the Celestial Intelligences which move the Orbs imprint
those shapes in their own Bodies, which are extended much like to Skins of
Parchment, and in these men seem to foresee future Events by painted Schemes.
Thus he makes Miracles things of no greater wonder then an Ignis Fatuus, and
Ignorant Superstition the only Reason of that Faith which is produced by them.

Prophecy in his Opinion is no better Assurance: for he esteems Prophetic
Visions only as Dreams of phrenetick men, that thought they conversed with
Angels when they talked only with their own Shadows; and says, that God's
speaking to them in Dreams is no more but that they dreamed that God spoke to
them. Because sometimes things seem to be foretold, he ascribes the power of
Prediction to prophetic Vapors which some parts of the earth exhale in some
certain seasons, and that those Inspirations enabled the Ministers of Apollo to
give Oracles at Delphos, and forced the Pythian Girls to sing ecstatick Verses.

These being the chief Reasons which we have to believe what God has said, and
to do what he has commanded; you may easily suppose that he esteems the
Primitive Martyrs Egregious Fools, and their Noble Deaths only effects of
potent Imagination, which they suffered either through a great desire of
Honor, or were forced to it by the strength of Hypochondriack Humors, and
that except the Applause of their Sect they perished as trivially as a wild
Indian, who will die rather then not Worship his Pagod. Thus that Passive
Obedience, which for many Ages was performed with so much humble submission,
that it was manifest to all beholders to be no obstinate Humor, and by such
vast multitudes, that it proved it self to be no Rebellious Design when they
could not comply with unlawful Commands, which was the ancient Glory of
Christianity, and made it flourish under the most sharp persecutions, is by him
disparaged as at the best but an Honest Foolery.

You will not wonder at all, if after all this he expound any great point of
Faith into a Trifle. The Resurrection he esteems only a Recovery from some
Apoplectical Distemper; to raise a man from the Dead is only to awaken him out
of a Lethargical sleep, or to cure one that is sick of an Epilepsie. The
Apparitions of men that have been buried, as he says, are only some Vapors
extracted out of their Graves by the Stars, which represent the shapes which
they had when they were alive: The potent Stars collecting it seems Vapors out
of their cloths too, for they appear many times in the same Habit which they
used to wear. But it is easy for him to swallow such small matters, who
esteems Angels in general but Phantasms or wild Imaginations of sick Brains,
and by Good Angels would have us to understand nothing but our Friends, such as
are of our Opinion, observe our Humor, or applaud what we say: So an Archangel
is a Parasite, or a Carrier which brings good news in a Letter. Departed Souls
he interprets Shadows, that is, such as fall from our Bodies when we walk in
the Sun; and says that the Anguish which is called Remorse of Conscience is
inflicted by those, and that they are the most proper Ministers of that
punishment, because they must needs be conscious to all our Mis-doings, having
accompanied us in all places. Devils he reputes either Fictions of terrified
Souls, which hurt only such as make them by their own Fears; or else Wicked
men, that is, such as are not of our Mind; and sometimes any thing which hurts
us, as Diseases. Sometime he says he could be more content to believe that
there are Angels in the received sense, but that the Assertours of that
Doctrine do not allow Angellesses. He does not value Eternal Blessedness,
esteeming the Beatifick Vision an unintelligible Notion; and instead of a
clearer knowledge of God, and all things accompanied with an incomparable Joy,
he says the Kingdom of Heaven signifies only a state of Civil Government, like
to that which the Jews had before they made Saul their King. He tells us that
the Souls of Good men do not ascend into Heaven or enjoy any knowledge, but die
with the Body, but that they shall rise again, and then be as Adam was before
he sinned. He under stands by the pains of Hell, that Wicked men shall die as
others do, and lie without any sense in the Grave till the day of Judgment, and
when they rise again shall be tormented by seeing themselves more unhappy then
others, that is, they shall be forced to eat, drink, marry and beget Children,
as they did before, and then die again.

Here (...) made a pause, and begged pardon for the Length of his Narration in
these words: I am afraid, Bentivolio and Amyntor, that I have wearied you both
with a prolix Story of Antitheus his Theology; but as I hope that Obedience to
your Commands will serve for an Excuse of my offense, so I make no doubt but
that though the matter of my Discourse has been displeasing, because it gives
notice of a Wicked (...); yet it is the less considerable, because that which
is designed is impossible. For though the Engine which I have described be
framed with an Intention to throw Religion off the Hinges; yet it is no more
able to do it, then to pull Humane Nature up by the Roots.

You might have spared this excuse, Philalethes, said Bentivolio, but that you
can omit nothing in your Conversation which you judge Civil; but if your own
Weariness be not the true meaning of your Complement, we desire to be
acquainted with some few of those Principles by which (...) pretends to have
glorified Natural Philosophy. It is but a small labor, answered Philalethes,
and if it were greater I should willingly undertake it at your Command.
Antitheus, to make the forementioned Engine more strong, has fortified it with
some assistances which he pretends to have received from Natural Philosophy,
though indeed they are only a few false Opinions which he had bestowed upon it
in hope to borrow them as he should have occasion to use them; that is, to
(...) Philosophy to serve his Design against Theology: turning the sound
Principles of sober Discourses into bold Paradoxes, and fitting extravagant
Fancies, which are apt to take with vain Souls, not only to oppose true
Notions, but to lay Foundations of Atheism in his Disciples minds; at once
endeavoring to supplant true Reason in those whom he teaches to misunderstand
Nature, and to disserve God's Interest with such as know not the difference
between Jargon and Philosophy. One of his Fundamental Notions is, That the
World was made by a fortuitous concourse of straggling Atoms, or, in plainer
Terms, that it is Eternal, and was always such as it is now, or not much
unlike to it; the common Principles of all things which did eternally exist of
themselves, being often (...) into feveral Forms by a continued succession of
various Motions. By which Artifice all Dependence upon a Deity is rejected, and
the World instructed to acknowledge no first Cause. For he was afraid that if
he should confess that the World was not Eternal, he would also be forced to
acknowledge that the Supreme Deity determined it to begin at his pleasure. The
World thus constituted he calls Nature, and sometimes dignifies it with the
Name of God; not meaning that Omnipotent Wisdom, which being distinguished from
all created Beings derives from himself to them what they are in their
particular kinds; but the Nature of things connex'd by several Links of Essence
which make the World to be what it is: which is but a more dull Expression of
the Doctrine of Atoms, and depends upon the Ignorance of this Truth, that
Nature is God's Work, that is, the Method of Divine Art placed in the Essences
of things, by which they are led orderly to their particular Ends, and so is
only the effect of his All powerful Goodness, or the proper Nature which he
has bestowed upon everything.

He looks upon Incorporeal substances (as I told you before) as things to be
hissed out of the consideration of Philosophers; and in correspondence with
that brave supposition asserts, That the Soul is nothing distinct from the
Body, but only a few Atoms put together by chance in a certain Order; and that
Death is a dissolution of that Contexture, and a Resolution of the Soul into
small particles of fine Dust. But because of some who have diligently
considered those rare Operations in which Humane Nature does manifest it self
to be some better thing, he says that all those Acts are capable of explication
by Corporeal Motion. He affirms Sense to be nothing but the local Motion of
certain parts in the Body, and that Motion, and Sensation which is the
Perception of Motion, are both one; that is, a Bell hears it self sound. He
defines Reason to be only a Motion of the exterior Organs of the Body caused
by an Impression of the Object, and propagated by a succession of Agitations to
the inward parts; that is, the Inside of a Base-viol is made to understand
Music by him that draws a Bow over the strings which are fastened upon the
Outside, and is a Living creature all the while it is played upon: poor
Musicians never dreaming that they have such a power bestowed upon them, that
their Instruments understand Music as well as they; and not believing that the
Trees or Stones did ever dance after any Harper, though some Poets have said
so. Thus as he would have the Constitution of the World understood without a
God, so he would have all the Phenomenon of Humane Nature explained without a
Soul, that so Men may be free, if they please, to live like brute Beasts, to
whom by his Argument they are not Superior. The best notion which he can
bestow upon the Soul is but a Vivacious Habit of Body, or the local Motion of
some particles, and the Beasts have that; and Life possibly is an Harmonical
Wind, such as is conveyed by Bellows through the Pipes of Organs, whom we may
suppose to live as long as they breathe. Discourse is nothing with him but
Motion with Reaction, of which a Lute-string is equally capable with any Man.
He obliterates all Connate Idea's of God by which Excellent persons think
themselves enabled to converse with the Divine Nature, as the Eye being
replenished with a Crystalline Humor is made capable of seeing the Sun. Thus
Men are represented as no more fitted for Religion then Beasts. But as his
Doctrine raises Wood and Stones to the same pitch of Sense with Humane Nature,
it is but a small matter for him to depress it to the same Level with Beasts,
either in Excellency of Knowledge or Capacity of Religion. It is consequent to
this That the Soul is Mortal: How should it be otherwise, being but Motion.
when that cease, it dies. And considering that many believe otherwise, he
adds, that the Immortality of separate Souls is only a Window opened into the
dark Region of Eternal Torments by such as have been fooled with the Demonology
of the Greeks.

I perceive you are cloyed with his Natural Philosophy, and therefore I will
set no more of it before you, but give you a taste of his Ethics. But does he
acknowledge any such thing as Virtue? said Bentivolio. You may well make a
Question of that, replied Philalethes, by what I have reported; but I will tell
you what he says, and then you may judge. He asserts that in the Natural state
of Humanity all things are indifferent, that nothing is absolutely Good or
Evil, and that no common Rule of Good and Evil can be taken from the nature of
the Objects themselves; but all things are to be measured by men's Appetites,
which have the only Power to make whatsoever pleases them Good. He supposes
men in the state of Nature to be a company of Licentious People straggling up
and down the surface of the Earth without any Law, obnoxious to no Authority,
incapable of Sin, both because there are no Eternal Rules of Good and Evil, of
which the best Philosophers have believed the Law of Nature written upon our
Hearts to be a Transcript, and because no positive Commands were given to them;
for from whom should they receive them who were their own Lords? He says that
the World had never been troubled with those useless Notions of Virtue and
Vice, but that some proud Ignoramus introduced them upon an arrogant
Supposition that men have Liberty of Will, that is, a free Principle of Action;
whenas by his words all the Freedom that they have is, that they do not see
that they have none; men's Wills being, like other things, extrinsecally
determined: Hence he infers that either there is no Sin, or that God is the
Author of it, who does not only help us to Act, but force us to Will; teaching
the vilest Persons to excuse their worst Actions by accusing those causes which
with irresistible sorce necessitate them to operate as they do. Thus
Deliberation is rendered as a great Foolery, and a Horse made as capable of
Honesty as a Man, and a Stone as either of them. Conscience, which the Good,
men of all Ages have ever revered as an in-dwelling God, is despised by him as
an Idol made by false Imagination. Blame is reckoned but a signification of
Displeasure, not the Imputation of a Fault. His new Gospel has abolisht
ingenuous Shame, and says that those whom we call our first Parents had no
troublesome resentment of their Eating the Forbidden Fruit as a Crime, but
expressed a little Anger against God for not making them with their Cloths on:
as if they had been blind, and did not see their skins before they broke their
Creator's Orders; or had no reason to blush when through an ungrateful
Carelessness they divested themselves of the Innocence with which he indu'd
them, by doing what he had prohibited. Thus he has exterminated Sorrow for
unworthy Actions, which in sinners begins the Practice of Repentance; and made
humble Prayers, by which all the World does express a Dependence upon God, as
impertinent as if we should make an Oration to the Sun to day to persuade it to
rise to morrow. It Is true, sometimes he makes bold with his own Doctrines, and
frets at cross Accidents, and says that by reason of great Prudence one man is
fitter to give Advice then another, and admits of the Distinction which is made
between Counsels and Commands, with many other such like pronuntiations; which
being mingled with his assertion of the extrinsecal Pre-determination of all
Actions and Events, are Arguments against the Liberty of the Will, composed
much after the manner of those Horns which Mahomet saw upon the heads of some
of his Monster-Angels, which, as he says, were made of Snow and Fire.

Men's particular Natures being thus represented, you will expect that he should
appoint strange Rules to govern them when they are joined in Society. They
would be excellent, if they were proportionable to that great Conceit which he
has of his own Ability in this, kind: for before his time, he says, the
Doctrine of Civil Government was unknown; and that his Prescriptions are far
above any Comparison with what has been delivered by the best Legislatours in
the World, in that the better sorts of Beasts have a more prudent Polity then
Men, and could promulgate better Laws if they would please to speak in such a
language as we understand. But some which have considered his new Model affirm
it to be only a fictitious supposal of a state of Humanity that never was or
will be, and that his several Dictates are useless Consequences drawn from
false Principles, and perversely applied to the Condition of Mankind, which does
not only reject them as impertinent, but abhor them as mischievous to the
Nature and Happiness of Men. Some of his Orders suppose men to be Autochthones,
Intelligent Mushromes, or else Pre-Adamites born before the Moon upon some
Arcadian Hill; others are fitted well enough for the Serpentine Brood of
Cadmus, or for a barbarous (...) of Men degenerated into Beasts: but they agree
not with the nobler state of Mankind, which by the prudent appointment of our
great Creator is derived from our Common Parents Adam and Eve, whose state was
never Anarchical, for their Creator was their King; neither were they at any
time without Law, for they came not into the World till God had fixed the
Principles of Reason and the Roots of Love in their Natures, and obliged them
by bringing them into Being to observe the Laws which he had written upon their
Hearts. Their Liberty was not unlimited, for these Laws bounded it; neither
could their condition be a state of War, unless they should fight against
themselves: for by an universal Law well known to them all they were obliged to
love their Neighbors as themselves. They have deserved all Commendations who,
writing upon this Subject, have not only reduced the Civil state of men to
right Principles, but represented a better to men's consideration then was yet
ever seen but in Books; that so the World might meliorate it self by the just
imitation of a noble Example: But Antitheus has so far encouraged the World to
Degenerate, that he has made the Nature of Men worse in his picture then ever
it was in it self. For he has presented the first state of Rational Beings as
a War of all men against all men; that is, a Commonwealth wherein every man is
his Neighbor's Enemy, and in which every one may justly do what he will;
where the use of Force and Fraud is lawful; where every man having a Right to
every thing may get Possession of it as he can, by enslaving or destroying not
only what does hurt him, but also that which he imagines able to annoy him;
every man's Appetite being the Rule of what he may desire, and his own
Apprehension the sole Judge of the best Means to attain his Ends. He affirms
sometimes, and it is correspondent to the forementioned Principles, that Cain
did no wrong to Abel, since he only took out of the way one that was offensive
to him; and as it was no Injustice to kill his Brother, so it was but Wisdom to
tempt him into the Field that he might have an opportunity fit for his purpose.
Antitheus thinks it was no just Reason to move him not to do it to his Brother
because he would not have had his Brother done it to him; and that Cain was
punished by God unjustly, since he had done nothing but what he could justify
by the Law of his Nature, being to give no account of his Brother, no not to
God, since he was not his Keeper. He slights the Foundation of Happiness which
God had laid in Civil Society, pretending that Reason and Love will not hinder
men from doing harm to others. But then he should have put some better
Principles then what we have yet seen, for Fear and Hatred will not do it; and
if he thinks that they are the only means of Self-preservation, it is a weak
thought: For though Reason and Love did require men to do only good to others,
yet they did not forbid them to defend themselves against such as should
transgress the just bounds of Common Good. But his own Reasons are good enough
for him, who supposes neither Abel to have been Cain's Brother, nor Adam, to
have been their Common Father; and so excuses Cain from any Obligation to
Fraternal Love, and makes him unaccomptable to Adam, though he deprived him of
a Son without his leave. By this you may perceive that his Doctrine is not
agreeable with the first state of Nature, but only a false Imagination of his
own, and useful nowhere except the barbarous Regions of Cyclopia.

Antitheus having bountifully allowed this strange Liberty to Men in the state
of Nature, has taken what care he can to assure it to them in all states, and
let them know that it is incapable of receiving prejudice from any thing, not
excluding those limitations which they themselves shall set to it by voluntary
Promises; declaring to them that they are not bound to keep any Covenants made
in the state of Nature: and has added, that no Promises are at any time to be
thought inviolable for any Reasons taken from the nature of Honesty, which make
them sacred Bonds, since Words are but Wind; but that men ought to perform what
they have said for fear of Evil Consequences which may happen upon the breach
of their Promises. Men in his Opinion either not being under the force of a
Divine Law; or that continuing no longer in force to oblige men to their Duty,
then till they have opportunity to neglect it without Danger from their
Neighbors.

These are his Sentiments concerning those mutual Duties which Men owe to one
another in general: what his Opinions are concerning them as they are under
Government, you shall soon know whilst I tell you what Power he assigns to the
Magistrate, how he determines the People's Right, and how he takes from them
both what he had formerly allowed to them by cross Grants. He has gratified
the Supreme Magistrate with a Power of Creating Good and Evil, and pronounced
that his Absolute Will is Divine and Humane Law, and would have his People to
believe every thing to be Just which he Commands, and that whatsoever he
forbids is for that Reason Evil, and that no Laws made by him can be unjust:
That Subjects have no Propriety in whatsoever they possess, and hold their
Lives merely at the Will of their Prince, who without doing any injustice may
take away the Life or confiscate the Estate of his most innocent Subject; and
that all things are his in such an unlimited sense, that if he please he may
justly give away or sell the Sovereign Power. Having considered that the
Vulgar, which are almost all the World, are easily taken with specious
Pretenses, he exhorts Princes to learn the Art of Dissimulation, and to esteem
it a most necessary part of Royal Accomplishment to be able to Counterfeit all
plausible Virtues, especially Piety; that is, prostitute the sacred Notion of a
Deity to Worldly Interest: and remembering that so long as men continue Bad, as
they do yet, to be truly Good will sometimes prove dangerous; he says they
ought to know also how to make a profitable Use of being not Good, though they
seem so at all other times: and because it is accounted a Point of Honor in a
Prince to verify his Word, he advises him, when it is his Interest to break
his Promises, to color the Action with pretenses of Urgent Reasons, that the
Common people may think he was necessitated to violate his Faith.

At other times reflecting upon that boundless Power which he had bestowed upon
Princes, and fearing that the People would think him guilty of Adulation, and
say that he had misinformed Princes in point of their Right to gratify their
Ambition, he has made a Compensation for his Error by granting unreasonable
Allowances to Subjects: For, to make the Possession of Royal Power insecure in
Princes hands, he has given the People leave when they can to take it from
them; and when they are put to suffer Wounds or Death, though never so justly,
he has authorized them to resist: and lest they should doubt that they are
obliged to the contrary, he has told them that Pacts made in the condition of
Nature do not bind; that is, Subjects when they can may absolve themselves from
those Oaths by which they have sworn Fealty to the Sovereign Power; and that in
all Cases the longest Sword is the true Measure of Right, and the strongest Arm
the only Infallible Judge of Wrong.

But I will trouble you no longer, added Philalethes, with the repetition of
such Doctrines by which the state of Reasonable Nature is misrepresented and
Men unhappily directed, and which would quickly destroy all that Felicity which
depends upon Civil Policy, if they were entertained in the World. Here
Philalethes ended his Discourse; and as Bentivolio was about to make an Apology
for having put him to so much trouble, and to give him thanks that for his and
Amyntor's Satisfaction he was willing to spend so much time in the Report of
such unacceptable Matters, one of Philalethes his servants whom he had sent to
Polistherion was returned, and came into the Room to give him notice how things
went there. Ha! Kalodulus, said Philalethes, I have expected you these two
days; but it seems your entertainment was so good in Polistherion, that you
could not get away suddenly. Polistherion is at this time such an undesirable
place, replied his Servant, that if it had not been in Obedience to your
Commands, I would not have stayed there one day. I gave thanks to God a hundred
times as I was upon my way home, that you were banished from such a forlorn
City, which I can compare to nothing but Hell. You dwell in Heaven here, Dear
Master, and do singly enjoy that Happiness which for any thing that I could
discern is not to be found in all Polistherion. I met nothing but Discontent
wheresoever I came: the Streets are filled with Cries, the Houses echo
Complaints; the Exchange is spoiled with Fraud, the Courts are become a prey to
Injustice. All Relations have abandoned those Virtues upon which their mutual
Happiness was founded. Fathers have given up all Studies but their Pleasures,
and their Children imitate them. What Errors the Women commit I dare not say,
but they defend them by the Examples which they receive from Men. Friends
undermine each others Interests, and yet complain against one another. Fidelity
is grown so rare, that Masters are insecure as to their Domestic Servants, and
men have as many Adversaries as Neighbors. In short, they live after such a
fashion as if Wickedness were licensed amongst them; but I believe that they
will soon grow weary of this false Liberty, and be glad to return to their
former state. For Unhappiness seems to have made a perfect Conquest of
Polistherion, and having broken those Holy Links of Justice and Love by which
Prosperity is (...) to Humane Society, does make them drag one another with
chains of Oppression to suffer the torments of Disorder which they mutually
inflict upon those whom they should love and serve.

I will only trouble you further with the hearing of one or two strange
Accidents which happened whilst I was in Polistherion. I came one Evening (for
I durst not be seen in the Daytime, being known to belong to you) where a
multitude of People were gathered together; and staying to enquire the Cause, I
perceived that a Child was unmercifully exposed in the Street, and that the
Dogs had killed it and eaten half of it. The Mother being discovered to be the
Author of this Cruelty, the Father, not a little displeased with what was done,
was going to have killed her, but was interrupted by the coming of a Judge who
was returning from the Castle of Antitheus to his own House. He complained to
this Judge of the barbarous Fact committed by his Wife, and demanded Justice
against her. The Judge asked if his Wife was the Child's Mother; and the Father
answering, Yes, Then, said the Judge, she has only killed her own: but that
you have any reason to complain as a Father is uncertain, and you do only
believe it because formerly she told you so; but this is plain, that by the
Right of Nature the Dominion over the Infant did belong first to her, because
she had it first in her Power: and as to the Child he determined, that it was
mere Courtesy that she did not kill it sooner, and so went away.

My other story is of a Servant who killed his Master, called Streblodespotes,
who had possessed his mind with large opinions concerning the extent of his own
Authority, and would often say that a Master could do no Wrong to his
Servants, because they are supposed by the Nature of their Condition to have
subjected their Wills to their Masters Commands without Reserve. The frequent
Repetition of such Speeches induced one of his Servants, who presumed to
understand his Master's Power better then he himself did, to dispute with one
of his fellow servants concerning the Unlimitedness of Magisterial Authority,
and to urge against it that no Master could justly claim such an absolute
Command; but that if he required of his Servant any thing which was
inconsistent with his Obedience to God or Allegiance to his Prince, he might
think himself greatly wronged, and ought not to do what was commanded, and yet
have a sufficient Warrant for his Disobedience. Streblodespotes being
acquainted with this Discourse resolved to kill his Servant; but he
understanding his Master's purpose by one whom he had spoken to for his
assistance in the Execution of it, ran away to prevent his Danger. One
Cacodulus, another of his Men, who had as extravagant Principles for a Servant
as Streblodespotes had for a Master, did not only justify the Prudence of his
Fellow Servants that was gone, but protested, if it had been his Case, he would
have stayed and taken another course. How do you prove that to be lawful? said
one of Streblodespotes his slaves which stood by. Thus, answered Cacodulus; We
were taken Captives, and because our Master might have killed us if he had
pleased, we promised to serve him whilst we lived if he would not put us to
death: But since he has entertained us he both makes us perform very hard
service, and sometimes puts us in Chains; and therefore I suppose we are free
from any Obligation to our Promise. I think so too, said the other slave; and
since we have no hopes of Freedom till our Master be dead, let us redeem our
selves with his Life. Both agreeing in this Resolution, they watched a fit
Opportunity, and killed him. Some, which saw what was done, endeavored to
apprehend them; they did what they could to defend themselves. Whilst the
Contest lasted, a Captain of a Galley happened to come by who was a friend to
Streblodespotes, and having demanded of the slaves a Reason of their Action,
one of them replied, Our Master was infinitely severe in his Commands, and said
he could do us no wrong what tasks soever he set us, or what Punishments
soever he inflicted, because his Dominion over us was gained after the same
manner by which Men subdue Beasts; and we thought we might, as soon as we
could, re-gain our Liberty, Right according to his own Law depending merely
upon greater Strength. It may be so, said the Captain; and since I have more
Power then you, I will take punishment of you for the Death of my friend; and
immediately commanded his Servants to kill them.

Here Philalethes interrupting his Servant, and turning to Bentivolio and
Amyntor, said, I did easily foresee that such as these or worse Mischiefs would
soon happen under the forlorn Government of Antitheus; and asked his Servant if
he did not see Antitheus. Only once as he passed by in a Coach I saw him
through the Glass of my Chamber-Window, replied his Servant; for he does seldom
go abroad, and never without a very strong Guard, always fearing lest some of
Alethion's friends should stab him. Philalethes asked him how he was reported
to spend his time. He answered, Much after that manner which Sardanapalus used
in (...). Who are his usual Companions? said Philalethes. As I was informed I
will acquaint you, replied his Servant, for I durst not venture into the
Castle. He has made Pasenantius and Antholkes his Principal Secretaries,
Dogmapornes is his Favorite, Panthnetus is the Steward of his House, Philedones
his Treasurer, Asynetus his Chief Justice, Autautus is the Captain of his
Guard, and his Brother Proselenus is his Lieutenant: Psychopannyx, Saprobius,
and Udemellon are of his Bedchamber: Medenarete is his Minion, Astromantis
with his inseparable Companion Thaumaturgus are his Physicians; Scepticus,
Hypsagoras and Antigraphus are general Buffoons to them all. I hear also that
one Hieromimus lately come to town hopes, by the Intercession of Hypsagoras, to
be entertained by Antitheus, and that Anopheles does much favor him.
Gastrimargus, Cantharus and Aphrodisius are all preferred by Philedones. This
is all that I could learn in Polistherion. Philalethes said nothing, only
shak'd his head, and bade his servant withdraw. When he was gone, Bentivolio
desired Philalethes that besides his pardon for their former troublesomeness,
he would please to oblige himself and Amyntor with a short Character of the
forementioned Persons, adding, that upon the hearing of their odd Names he
could not but imagine that they were observable for some singular Qualities.

I shall willingly do it, said Philalethes. Pasenantius is a man of a most
perverse Disposition, and so is Antholkes: they both take a great delight in
contradicting what others assert, and think nothing well said or done but by
Antitheus and themselves: they are very agreeable to his Humor, because they
have a rare faculty in minting new Words and Phrases, of which Antitheus makes
no small use; for by expunging all known Terms, he hopes to extinguish all
received Opinions, and to introduce his new Philosophy into the World. But his
Expectations have a very weak Foundation; for it is observed that after he has
taken much pains to divulge some hidden Mystery in strange Sentences, he has
been found only to have wrapped up a Falsehood in unusual Terms, or to have
obscured some common Notion which every Novice understood as soon as he had
entered the first confines of Study, and could have expressed in better Words.
Shall I give you a taste of his Variations by which he has advanced a
Philosophical Ignorance? For God, he has put Nature; for Providence, Chance;
for Creation, Eternal Vicissitude; for Prescience, Fate; for Liberty,
Omnipotence; for Contingency, Necessity; for Possible, Future; for History,
Mystery; for Cruelty, Justice; for Discourse, Contradiction; for Philosopher,
Dictator; for Hypocrisy, Wisdom; for Religion, Mockery; for Theology, Atheism.

Of Dogmapornes you have heard something already, and of his Unworthy Opinions
concerning the Divine Providence, in the story of Apronaeus: he has many more
of the same nature, for which, as being very fit to be entertained in
Brothel-Houses, but worthy to be banished from all Civil Societies, because
they send down a mischievous influence upon Humane Life, he was called
Dogmapornes. I have often fansied that his Countenance does very much resemble
the Air of the rebellious Giants, and that he is much of that Disposition which
did so corrupt the Manners of the old World, that Almighty God was provoked to
(...) them with a Deluge. If ever Apostate Angels begot Children upon
Lascivious Women, he may well be thought to have come of that Race.

Autautus would have us believe that the World made it, self, or at least did
of it self Eternally exist in loose Atoms, and that after many wild encounters
the jumbled particles, as if they were playing at the ancient sport of
Oscillation, did at last luckily throw themselves into that infinite number of
rare figures of which this World consists. Proselenus is of the same opinion,
and is usually very troublesome to the Company where he happens to be, with
strange stories of Men whom he affirms to have been fifty thousand years older
then the Moon; and has framed many fabulous Tales of Eve's Great Grandmother,
whose Father, as he says, was called Praeadamita. He affirms also, almost in
the same words with the Atheist of Florence, that we should have certainly
known the Customs and Accidents of the former World, but that a great Deluge
happened in Adam's time, by which all the Records of the foregoing Ages were
destroyed, and no Persons preserved but Adam and his Wife, two Mountainous
Shepherds; and that Adam, to gain the Glory of being reputed the first Father
of a new World (a strange Ambition to seize upon the thoughts of a poor
Shepherd) agreed with his Wife to conceal the knowledge of that which was
destroyed from their Children: by which means it came to pass, as he guesses,
that we have only the notice of about five or six thousand years time; but
supposes that Adam's Posterity did find some Remembrances of another State,
yet, to support the Honor of their Family, reckoned them but Fabulous Devices
made by some of their Predecessors.

Philedones is one wholly devoted to a Voluptuous Life, of which he has made
choice as his only Happiness, as he says, merely in Imitation of the Exemplary
Virtues of the Epicurean Gods, who rejecting the troublesome Cares of this
lower World, do nothing but feast themselves in Heaven. He was inclined to
Sensuality by his Natural Complexion; but when he doubted a Man was made for
more noble purposes then those of which a Swine is capable, he was confirmed in
his way by two of his Companions, Panthnetus and Udemellon, who made him
believe that Men have no Souls, but that as they are born and grow like Beasts,
so they wax old and die as they do, and are not accomptable in another World
for what they do in this. When he put this scruple to them, But what if the
Soul should be Immortal? You need not fear that, said they; for if Souls,
supposing that there are such things, did not perish with their Bodies, they
would be so thick crowded together in the other World, that some of them would
have been glad of the Errand to come and tell Atheists of their Error, and
reprove them for speaking against their Existence. With such foolish Arguments
they have persuaded poor Philedones to believe that all Felicity is in
Pleasure, and that only to be measured by the Belly; and with the help of
Gastrimargus, Cantharus and Aphrodisius, whom he has made Purveyours for his
inordinate Appetites, he is so improved in Luxury, that he will not eat without
a Deaths-Head hung over the Table, nor drink but in a Priapus, and will have
none to present his Ambrosia but a Ganymede. He repents of nothing but the Time
which when he was young he lost in serious Studies; and to signify to the
World that he is a real Convert, he has declared that he will have no
Remembrance after Death, but a Monument made after the fashion of that Statue
which Sardanapalus had at Anchiala, and this Epitaph upon his Tomb, HERE LIES
ALL PHILEDONES.

Psychopannyx creates his Companions some disturbance, for he contends that the
Soul is a substance distinct from the Body, and shall awake again, though it
sleep a while in the state of Separation, being not able to live out of the
Body: but because he was in some doubt whether the Soul, having snor'd many
hundreds or thousands of years without so much as any Dream of Life or Sense,
will not afterward be unable to know it self again, they were content to take
him into their Company as an Honest Heretic: but of late Udemellon has made
him much more acceptable, for, as the only way to make him hope to escape the
Punishment of a Wicked Life, he has persuaded him to be of his Opinion, That
there is no Judgment to come, and that the Resurrection is a mere Fable.

Asynetus is one whose part in this Infernal Tragedy is, with a scurrilous
boldness to traduce the notion of Conscience; and he has acted it so to the
Life, that those which have seen him have imagined that he has often stabbed
that tender part of his Soul: But some that know his Constitution say, that
such a callous Matter is grown round about his heart, that no Dagger will
pierce it. He does teach Men to take off the sense of Sin by committing it
often; that is, to contract an Habitual Impenitency by a frequent Repetition of
Wicked Actions, and to rifle the Native Modesty of their Souls, by adding
greater Crimes to smaller Sins: herein following the damned Example of those
Traitors who make it their Excuse for committing the highest Villainies, that
they have already done such as can be defended by no other Means. He has
utterly spoiled a young Gentleman called Saprobius, whom he has made a
miserable Spectacle of a Vicious Life; Sin has done its utmost upon him,
having now left him nothing but a despairing Soul in a putrid Body. I look at
him as irrecoverably lost, because he is mortified to all sense of Ingenuous
Principles; by which means he has broken off from himself those Handles by
which God does take hold of us, and seems to have murdered those friendly
Guardians which God has appointed to reduce such as think to free themselves
from their Obedience by a rebellious Flight.

Medenarete is a She-Philosopher, and so in many respects acceptable to
Antitheus. Her Opinions are very conformable to Saprobius his Practices: She
esteems Virtue nothing but Words, Laws the Opinions of Men in Power; She denies
that there are any Eternal Rules of Righteousness, which took their Original
only from God, or that there are any Indispensable Principles of Good and Evil,
or that God has written any Laws upon Humane Nature in any other sense, but
that Virtue and Vice are determinable by the Customs of diverse Countries, and
Holy Rules variable according to different Fancies of several Ages or Persons:
That Religious Constitutions are only founded in the Wills of Princes, and
Piety supported by the Credulity of the Ignorant Vulgar, and the Obedience of
such as are forced to do what they are commanded. She does boldly affirm that
it is only a Rustic Bashfulness, or else a Cowardly Fear, that hinders Men and
Women from saying or doing any thing when they are out of the reach of the Law;
and that what is abhorred by all the World as most Evil, would become Good if
it pleased those who have Authority to determine so; and that what is generally
embraced as naturally Good because it agrees with the Common Principles of all
Mankind, would become Evil, and ought to be rejected as Wicked, if the Laws of
Men did appoint so. This is that brave Medenarete with whom Antitheus is
infinitely enamored.

What Astromant is is you may partly guess by those wild Notions of
Fantastical Astrology, of which you have heard something in the Prince's
Discourse with Diaporon. His Custom is to tell strange Stories, and to pretend
an extraordinary Ability to do great Matters by reason of his peculiar
acquaintance with the Stars; which he esteems the principal Ability of a
Physician, and absolutely necessary to one that hopes to be successful.
Thaumaturgus is a Jack-pudding to the Mountebank, and goes along in his Company
muchwhat with the same Grace that the Monkey does with the Bears. I will not
trouble you with any longer Description of him, you will quickly hear of him in
Polistherion. Anopheles is an intimate friend of Astromantis: he is wholly
taken up with making of Talismans, i.e. useless Images imboss'd or engraven in
Stone, Wood or Metal, under certain Constellations, made to represent some
Celestial Planet or Conjunction of Stars; that is, bearing the Figure of those
living Creatures which are described in the Heavens, and especially in the
Zodiac, which has its name from them. These being thus composed, as he says,
receive a Power from above; for the Stars being much taken with the Resemblance
of their Figures, send down potent Influences upon those small pieces of Stone,
Wood or Metal, which they not only retain themselves, but are also able to
impart to other Matters of the same Figure, as to a piece of Clay or Wax taking
an Impression from them. His Talismans thus made do, as he would make us to
believe, in a natural and constant way strange Wonders: as for Example, They
drive away Serpents and Rats from Cities, cure those which are bitten by mad
Dogs or stung by Scorpions, chase away hurtful Insects out of Fields, as
Locusts and Caterpillars, and deliver people from the Pestilence and all
Contagions of the Air; nothing of all this depending upon any Conversation with
Spirits, which he esteems Fancies.

Thus, as he says, he has revived the old Art by which the Jews made
Teraphims, and the Arabians and Egyptians framed Statues according to the Rules
of Astrology and Natural Magic, and having fetched down the Spirits of the
Stars, imprisoned them in these Shrines much after the same manner that Demons
are said to be included in Humane Bodies, by which means their Talismans of
Brass and Stone do move and speak, and resolve those Questions which are
propounded to them: I suppose Roger Bacon's Brazen head was some such thing. By
this Art the Brachmans, whom we must not think to have been Magicians, made
Boys of Brass, which served in their Meat, and filled Wine to the Table when
they entertained Apollonius. It may be that by a Resemblance of this rare
Philosophy the Laplanders make Iron Frogs, which hop upon a little Drum whose
Head is filled with many barbarous Characters drawn with blood, and as they
rest upon different Figures enable those which look upon them to divine
concerning Wind and Weather, and direct them concerning Fishing and Hunting.
Why may not the Laplanders fansy some of the Figures in (...) Zodiac to be
Frogs, as easily as others can see Fishes there? Who knows but the Piper of
Halberstade was of this Profession, and had some Talismans in his Pocket when
he drove the Rats into the River and the Boys into the Hill? Thus Nectanabo, a
glorious Instance of this Heavenly Skill, made Ships of Wax, no doubt under the
Influences of Argo, and then drowned them, by which means he sunk those of his
Enemies; as Witches make Images of wax under some Malignant Aspect, and then
prick them with Pins or melt them, when they would afflict or destroy those
persons which are represented by them.

As Experience does manifest the Truth of these Effects, so he says the Reason
is evident from the Nature of Resemblance, which draws the Power of the Stars
to Bodies which are imprinted with like Figures to themselves; imagining vainly
that, because some Inanimate things do bear the Images of others that have
Life, that the Figure does both form the Matter, because Toads are sometimes
found in the midst of a firm stone, and give it Operation, because Plants are
sometimes Medicinal to that Member of Humane Bodies which they resemble: not
considering that those small particles of Matter which have a Vegetative Power
are also endued with a plastic Virtue, by which they form themselves into
those Figures which are suitable to their Natures. So the Seminal Atoms which
are preserved in the Ashes of a Rose in a Glass, are raised through the
assistance of Fire into the color and figure which the Flower had before it
was reduced to Powder. He does not mind also that many things which are marked
have no Operation upon those living Creatures to which they are like; and that
where they have, it is God's care of our Good, who by these external Signatures
has given us notice of the Virtue which he has put into the Nature of things:
as by the red Drops which are visible in the Stone called Heliotropium, he has
showed us with what we may stop blood, and without which Natural power the
Figure which he talks of would do no more good, then soft Butter will stab a
man being made up in the Figure of a Dagger. But that which he says concerning
their deriving a power from above by the similitude which they have of some
Celestial Figure, is most ridiculous; for who knows not, that has ever looked
upon the face of the Heavens, that the Scorpion in the Zodiac is no more like
the Scorpion in the Earth then a Cat; and that the sign called Aries resembles
a Bull as much as a Ram? And what thing is so different from another, but they
will be able to reconcile it in their great Fancy, who imagine the Seven Stars
to be a good picture of a Bear? So a Jewish Astrologer pretending to read the
Destinies of Kingdoms in the position of the Stars, formed each Star into such
a Character as fitted the Notions which he would have expressed by the word
which was to be made up of them; and another possessed with a different
Imagination makes other Figures of them, and so spells the same Stars into
other Syllables, and at last reads them into a quite contrary sense to the
former.

But Anopheles supplying the Defect of Real similitude with Imaginary, is so
abused with this idle Fancy, that he thinks those men to have but a weak Faith
and small Learning, that do not believe that all such as are born under the
sign of the Ram will be meek like Sheep, and those which had the Lion for their
sign will be valiant. So all that had the ill luck to be born under the Dart of
Sagittarius must be killed; and all those suffer Shipwreck whose Nativity was
so disposed by the Bucket of Aquarius. He tells the World that all and only
such as receive influence from Virgo in their Birth, shall have disshevel'd
Hair, be Beautiful and Modest, and have no Children; giving us leave to infer
that no Ethiopian, no Mother, no Whore ever had the Virgin in their Horoscope.

I should have wondered that any man could found a Belief of such strange
things upon so weak Principles, but that I remember how this vain Resemblance
fansied against all sober Reason has abused conceited people in other Cases.
So Ananias Jerancurius thought he could explain the Prophecies of Daniel and
St. John by the Figures of two Fishes which were taken up not very long since,
one upon the Coast of Norway, the other of Pomerania; which he might undertaken
as rationally, as another could persuade himself that we are to reckon just so
many years from the Death of our Savior to the World's End, as there are
Verses in David's Psalter. Thus some have pretended under a pleasant Influence
from some jocund Constellation, to frame a piece of Iron which should make a
Woman that passed over it to laugh and sing; and have boasted that from a sad
Planet, I suppose it must be Saturn, they will draw such a Melancholic
influence into a Lodestone, that being laid under the bed of a Woman that is
not Chaste, it will make her talk in her sleep and confess her sins, or fall
out of her bed, especially if she put off her left shoe before her right.

I am glad, said Philalethes continuing his Discourse, that these Fancies make
you merry; (for Bentivolio and Amyntor could not forbear laughing) I was afraid
you would have been wearied, for I made my story the longer because Anopheles
will not converse freely with such as you are, and takes a great pride in
concealing the Mysteries of his Admirable Art, and will by no means profane
them or expose them to Contempt by Communication: for the supposes they are
Curiosities unheardof before his time, and which none knows but himself. But
since your Patience holds out so well, I will also give you an account of
Scepticus. He is one of the Buffoons general to this wild Company, and has
accustomed himself so long to believe or dis-believe any thing, that he is now
not much unlike those people who, having lost their Palate by the Malignity of
some Disease, are not able to distinguish the various Relishes of good or bad
Meat. His chief Employment is to make a strange kind of Balance according to
some Rules which he has received from one Pyrrho, and his hopes are, that when
it is finished he shall by this rare Instrument be able to bring Truth and
Falsehood to an AEquilibrium. He is assisted in this Design by Hypsagoras and
Antigraphus. He has lately opened a new Academy, in which he reads weekly
Lectures out of three Books which he has written (called Labyrinths)
concerning the Art of Dis-believing all things. In the First he asserts, That
there is Nothing: In the Second, That though there be something, yet it is not
Comprehensible by men: In the Third, That though we do understand some things,
yet we cannot explain them to others. He has two Orders of Scholars: those
which are of a lower Rank he calls Degrues, which are such weak Wits that they
doubt concerning most things which others assent to. Upon the other which are
of a higher Form he has bestowed the Title of Forts Esprits, whom by his
Artifices he has brought to that Perfection, that they believe Nothing. They
are so valiant, that they will talk in Defiance of their own Faculties, and are
able to swallow the greatest Contradiction as easily as a Hector can drink a
Frog in a Glass of Wine. They make no question but a Part may be as big as the
Whole, and that, for any thing we know, Men may be and not be at once; or,
which is all one to them, they may be dead when they think themselves alive.
Hypsagoras is one of his chief Proselytes, and speaks infinitely in the praise
of his Master, preferring him before all the Philosophers that ever were in the
World except Pyrrho: despises those which say they find in their Souls connate
Notions of Truth and Falsehood, and a natural sense of Good and Evil; and
rejects the most approved and general Sentiments of Mankind: says, that all
Discourse is but the Sentences of Blind men concerning Colors, and Industry is
but men's Inquiry after they know not what; and that it is as certain that men
have no Criterion to discern by, as it is a great doubt whether there be any
Men or no. He will swear often (for he accounts Oaths as necessary Ornaments of
Gentile Speech) that we cannot distinguish the brightest Day from the darkest
Night, and that no man can tell when he is awake. He affirms, that if men do
but speak boldly and make a noise with great words, that Nonsense is as good as
Sense, and that The gentle Whale whose Feet so fell
Fly over the Mountains Tops,
is as good a Poem as any Ode in Horace; that Ovid's Metamorphoses is as true
as Polybius his History, and that Tom Thumb is a Book altogether as useful as
Plutarch or Seneca. He supposes Stones do understand as much as Men, and that
pieces of Wood can speak, but they are sullen and will not. In short, he
asserts that we ought to believe Nothing, and that he does not believe himself.

Scepticus has seduced many young Wits into his Academy, and has gratified
the Licentiousness to which their Age is but too prone with such pleasing
Principles, that he has made himself an absolute Master of their Souls, and
they have sworn unreserv'd Obedience to his Orders.

I remember, a Gentleman riding with him upon the Rode, and hearing him often
say that we are sure of Nothing, told him that his words did include a
Contradiction; for if we know that we know nothing, we are sure that we are
Ignorant. This Argument does not prove what you desire, replied Hypsagoras, for
it is but like a Purging Potion, which expelling many Humors does withal
carry away it self. I rather think, said the Gentleman, that it is a
Counter-poison, which freeing the Soul from the dangerous Infection of an
irrational Incredulity, restores the Mind as it works to so much health, that
it is able to conclude that it knows at least its own Ignorance, and so makes
an Antidote of Venom: The Argument proving it self by this means of as good
Effect to the Soul as our Bodies find of Physic, which when it is purged away
leaves us in a more healthful condition. But there are better Arguments against
brutish Unbelief, and I should wonder what hinders their operation in you, said
the Gentleman continuing his Discourse; but that I know your Sect is extremely
distempered with a strong Connection of Ignorance and Pride, which is manifest,
besides diverse other things, in this, that you would have us believe you that
we ought to believe none.

Discreet Persons have left off to dispute with Scepticus and his Disciples,
knowing that it is to no purpose to talk to such as obstinately deny the most
evident things in the World. Some years since we wondered at a strange story
which was told us of a Village in Africa, whose Inhabitants were all said to be
petrefied; but now I think it is no such great matter, since I have seen men in
our own Country transformed so far into a degenerous Nature, that they are
mortified to Common sense. I will tell you a Trick which was lately put upon
Isosthenes, one of Scepticus his Admirers, at a Gentleman's House whose name is
Antisthenes, by a witty Youth who waited at the Table where he was at Dinner.
The Youth had heard him talk as he thought very absurdly, That our Knowledge is
so imperfect, that we are not assured of any thing; and resolving to venture a
beating by making a waggish trial whether Isosthenes did believe what he said,
or spoke only in a way of proud contradiction to the sense of all the World, he
procured two of his Fellow Servants to assist him in his Design. His Device was
this; When Isosthenes called for Wine, he gave him a Glass of Vinegar; which
when Isosthenes had tasted, What (says he) do thou abuse me, Boy? I asked
for Wine. And I gave you Wine, said the Youth. No, replied Isosthenes, this is
Vinegar. Do not believe that, Sir, said the Youth, it is Wine. It is so, said
his Associates, for we saw him fill it. Ha! said Isosthenes with a passionate
Air, shall I not believe my self? The smell is not that of Wine, the color is
very different, and the taste quite contrary. Sir, replied the Youth, our
Senses deceive us; for any thing that I know, Vinegar and Wine are the same, I
have no faculty by which I can distinguish one from the other. I beseech you be
not displeased with me, for it is my unhappiness that I do not know any sign by
which I may be assured what Liquor is Wine, what is not, or whether there be
any Wine or other Liquor in the World. Isosthenes was not a little angry, for
he saw himself abused, and was the more vexed because the Company laughed at
him; for whilst the Youth defended himself by disputing against him with his
own Arguments, they were much pleased to see how cunningly he had ensnared him,
and made him endure the practice of his own Rules. But Antisthenes, to appease
the wrath of Isosthenes, prudently told him that it was below him to be angry
at a saucy Boy, and ordered the Youth to be carried forth and beaten for his
Presumption; though in his Mind he approved his fault, knowing that besides
these which his Servant had used, there are no other means to reduce such
obstinate Dissemblers to their Right Mind, except burning Coals or good
Cudgels. This Isosthenes, amongst his other Fooleries, used to dispute against
Motion, and pleased himself with this trifling Sophism to make good his
Opinion; If any thing be in Motion, it must be moved either in the place where
it is, or where it is not. It is not moved in the place where it is, for there
it rests: And it cannot move in the place where it is not, for how can any
thing act in the place where it is not? It happened as he rode one day out of
the City he fell from his Horse, and having put his Shoulder out of joint, he
was forced to betake himself to Sotericus, a noble Surgeon, and to desire
his help. Sotericus having heard of his Humor, resolved to make himself some
sport with Isosthenes, and told him that his Shoulder was in the right place,
and that it was impossible for his or any other man's to be dislocated; alleging
that no bone could be put out of joint but by moving out of the place in which
it was, or in which it was not; neither of which are possible. Isosthenes
seeing himself jeered, prayed Sotericus to use no Arguments in that Point with
one that was necessitated to dis-believe them by the great Pain which he felt,
and also a disability to use his Arm. Very well, replied Sotericus; since you
are convinced of your Folly in arguing against Motion by the dislocation of a
Bone, I will confirm you in your right Mind by putting it into its place again.

I have now, proceeded Philalethes, given you the Characters of all Antitheus
his Companions, except Antigraphus, and I must not omit him; for as he joins
with Scepticus and Hypsagor as in decrying the Conduct of Natural Reason, so he
has a particular delight in vilifying the Assurances of Divine Revelation. His
common Sport is to jeer at Religion, and he thinks they have but a foolish Wit
who scruple to make a Jest of any thing. He says that Protagor as was but a
Cowardly Fellow, because he did not write more positively, and reviles the
Athenians for burning his Books; only he says they did something expiate their
Crime by giving Hemlock to that troublesome Moralist Socrates. He is deputed by
Antitheus to quarrel with all Books which contradict the Opinions and Practices
of his Sect, especially to disparage the Authority of the Holy Gospel: which he
endeavors sometimes by taking occasion, where none is given, to blame the
Matter, sometimes he dislikes the Style; sometimes he falls foul upon the
Author, sometimes reviles his Scribes; sometimes he pretends an incongruity in
the Historical Narrations, at other times he vilifies the Rational sense: Being
unable to distinguish between seeming Differences and real Contradictions, or
to explain things which are obscurely expressed, he puts the dishonor of his
own Imperfections upon others, and accuses the Holy Writers sometimes of
Falsehood, always of Ignorance. Sometimes he quotes the personal Infirmities of
some Writers which they have confessed, and makes what he had never known but
that they told him, Objections against their Books; expressing Malice where
they have only shown Ingenuity: for it was not Imprudence but Humility in them
to acknowledge their own Weaknesses, whose Design was not to do Honor to
themselves, but to serve their Great Master; and made it impossible for
generous persons to think that they would lie in his behalf, when they spoke
true against their own Interest.

Sometimes he abuses that Holy Book by taking single Words and pieces of
Sentences out of several places, and putting them together, as if he were
making a Cento Biblicus: by this means forcing them to express a Ridiculous
sense, which those Divine Leaves abhor, and endeavoring to make others think
that they favor absurd things, though whosoever turns them over knows that if
they mention them in one place, they condemn them in twenty. But such
Unworthiness does become one that has taken some of the Fragments of Celsus,
the worst leaves in Lucian, and having bound them together with some of the
most putrid pieces of Vaninus, Aretine and Rablais, has made them his Bible.

In the height of his Impudence he forgeth blasphemous Cavils against the
Unspotted Innocence, the Perfect Goodness and Unparalled Prudence of the
Great Prince Anaxanacton, and asperseth his Discipline as a thing founded in
Ignorance, and which exposes those which entertain it to scorn and injury;
wilfully neglecting to see that which is visible to all that can read, That as
Anaxanacton was the Mirror of absolute Perfection in his own Example, so his
Gospel is full of wise Counsels and prudent Rules; that it is adorned with the
noblest Explications of Virtue, and does so much tend to the Melioration of the
World, that no Method was before discovered which in any respect could be
equaled with it; and has so fully spoken to all important Cases, that nothing
can be added to make it more complete or useful; and has its Credibility so
strongly supported, that no other Book can come into Competition, nor any
Caviller be successefully Malicious: Its Divine Authority being first signified
by Prophecy and Miracles, and the Truth of what is said in Honor of it
confirmed by Universal Tradition.

One thing I should wonder at, but that I can admire nothing which Antigraphus
says, since I know what he is; which is, that he should prevail with himself
to affirm, as he does in one of his scurrilous Books, That the Founders of
Christian Religion had never established their Doctrines, but that among other
Devices they burnt the Books of the Heathen Poets and Historians, and destroyed
the Memorials of the Gentile Theology. Here the Atheist was so unlearned that
he had never read, or so malicious that he would not remember, that the ancient
Patrons of Christianity were Persons accomplished with all Humane Literature,
and both made use of the Heathen Books as very fit Instruments to overthrow
their Idolatrous Opinions and Worship, and resented it as a great Oppression
when the Doors of those Schools where such Books were taught were shut against
their Children; and were so far from endeavoring to destroy any Registers of
Antiquity, that one of the most Learned of all the Heathen Emperors used all
possible means to be made Master of the Library of a Christian Bishop after his
death, knowing it was well furnished with such as he esteemed Excellent
Authors: and that those Fathers of the Christian Church recorded nothing false
in their own Histories, is manifest, in that they appealed from them in their
Apologies to the Annals of their Enemies.

But this Impostor not much caring what he said, having falsely accused the
Christians of unhandsome Practices, would alleviate it by saying, that the
Heathens deserved to be so used, because the Professors of Gentilism had
practiced the same Arts against the Sect which went before it. Perversely
imagining (for he never had any Evidence for his bold Assertion, but good
Records of the contrary,) That it could not be otherwise, since, as he
supposed, the Sects must needs change often in long Periods of time; and those
he fansied as long as he pleased; and thought he had abundantly proved what he
said by a quotation of a later Date, i. e. That Christianism has destroyed
Judaism, and the Religion of the Turks has overthrown Christianity. Which
Argument is only a story guilty of manifest Falsehood: for Christianity did only
reform Judaism, which confessed it self to be but a Temporary Mode of Worship,
and by reason of many Imperfections capable of being improved; and that Turcism
has vanquished Christianity is no more true, then that the Turk is Master of
all Christendom.

Here, said Philalethes, I have good reason to make an end of speaking, for I
have troubled you with too prolix Descriptions of Unworthy Persons. Bentivolio
and Amyntor, sensible of their engagement to Philalethes, gave him thanks, and
being much amazed at his Report, thought that this Country, if any in the
World, deserved to be called Theriagene; but by the Prudence and Civility which
they saw in Philalethes, they perceived that the Apostasy was not General, and
upon his invitation stayed at his House a few days, both to relieve the
Solitude of such an Excellent Person with their Conversation, and to enjoy that
Felicity in his Company which they expected not in any other part of
Theriagene. But the Sympathy which they had with the afflicted state of the
most Princely Alethion, and the Misery which the better part of his Kingdom
suffered with him, made Bentivolio resolve to depart toward Polistherion, both
to satisfy himself as to the extents of a strange Calamity, and to inform
himself whether there were yet any Possibilities of Deliverance. He thought he
might undertake this with less suspicion, since he traveled through the
Country as a mere Stranger: and lest he should make himself a more unfit
Instrument to put his purposes in Execution, he took a more speedy leave of
Philalethes, and with his faithful Companion Amyntor begun his Journey toward
Polistherion, desiring to know the Persons whom he had already seen in Picture,
and to view the Country it self of which Philalethes had given him such an
exact Landscape.

The End of the Fifth Book.
THE SIXTH BOOK: OR, ELENCHUS.
THe second day after King Alethion and his Companions departed from
Misopseudes his House, they arrived upon the Borders of Theoprepia. They were
forced to lodge one Night in a Desert peopled only with wild Beasts, and to
guard themselves against their harmful Approches by encompassing themselves
with Fires. This Wilderness was made horrid upon one side with the dark shades
of old Trees, and on the other with vast Precipices, and the Noise of a Roaring
Sea which does perpetually beat upon the Rocks with mighty Waves. Here they
relieved themselves with Meat and Wine which they carried with them. The next
day about Noon they came to the famous Cave Phylace, situate not far from the
Seaside. Alethion having heard strange things related concerning it, did much
desire to see if the Truth was answerable to the Report. The Mouth of this Den
opened into a passage so full of Horror and Darkners, that they durst not
resolve presently to make an entrance into it. Whilst they remained in Doubt,
an Old man, who got a small living by guiding Strangers through the Meanders of
that Vault, came toward them with a Dark Lantern and some Torches, offering
them his Assistance; and having lighted his Tapers, and distributed them
according to the Number of those who were to go in, he led them the way: They
followed, being encouraged by the boldness of their Guide; and he was not
afraid, having made the Danger familiar by Custom. The Passages were rough, and
much like to those broken Stairs which are usually seen in the ruinous Walls of
an old Castle. When they had gone about a hundred paces, sometimes climbing
upward, sometimes creeping downward, and often winding about; they came to a
place which had the Resemblance of a large Hall, and seemed to be hollowed out
of the Rock, whose Roof was supported with Natural Arches and Pillars. Through
this they came to another Room which had the fashion of an old Chapel: upon
the sides of it they saw many Images of Living Creatures rudely embossed, and
in the middle some hung down being fastened to the Roof; which whether they were
of moist Earth petrefied or Water congealed to Stone, they were an Ornament not
unsuitable to the Place. The Horror of this dark Solitude was much increased by
the murmuring Noise of a River, whose Stream passing under many hollow Caverns
through straight places where it was (...) up by too narrow a Chanel, made a
sound not altogether unlike to groans: The water, as far as they could discern
by their Torch-light, was of the same color with Iron. Alethion and his
friends were struck with no small Admiration at this strange sight; and whilst
every one was conjecturing at the Design of this Disconsolate Mansion, I think,
said Alethion, that it has been an underground Temple consecrated to
Melancholy, or some Hermitage where Despair has used to dwell, or else a dark
Prison where guilty Souls have been shut up and made to endure a kind of Hell.
You would more confidently pronounce what you say, replied the Old man who was
their Guide, if you knew what I have seen in a remote corner of this Vault.
What have you observed? said Alethion. Things so extraordinary, said the Guide,
that I am afraid you will hardly give credit to the report when I tell you.
Possibly, answered the King, you may bring us to the place, and then our Eyes
will take away our Unbelief. No, replied the Old man; if I could, I durst not:
for I was soundly beaten for my boldness, and charged no more to disturb the
privacy of the Mysteries which were performed in that Place: but as one who not
long since would needs venture the same way told me, a great part of a Rock is
fallen down, and has stopped the Passage which led to that Dungeon, by which
means for some years none have been able to see or hear any thing. Then let us
understand what we may by your Relation, said the King. I shall obey your
Command in that, said the Old man, and proceeded after this manner. As I often
came into this Place to conduct those who desired to see it, so I went
sometimes alone into the innermost Hollowness of the Vault, to satisfy my own
Curiosity: and coming one day by a troublesome Descent to a low Grate, I saw by
the light of a small Lamp a Spectacle so miserable, that I can never think upon
it without Dread: and as your Eyes tell you that I am but too lively an Image
of one that has been affrighted, so by my discourse you will understand the
reason of my wan looks. Through Iron Bars which denied all other entrance but
of mine Eyes, I beheld such Objects as I never desire to see again, Men and
Women whose Flesh was so wasted and their Skin so discolored, that their
Bodies seemed to be only dry Bones enclosed in black Sackcloth. Their Eyes were
sunk into their Heads, and stared wildly; their Faces were pale like those
which are macerated with want of Meat; some with their Teeth tore from their
Arms those small parcels of Flesh which were yet remaining upon them: and they
performed this after such a desperate manner, that it was manifest they
endeavored rather to express a Rage then to satisfy Hunger. Some lay upon the
Dirty ground tied back to back, others were chained to Posts with heavy
Fetters; some were stretched upon painful Racks, and others laid upon hot
Gridirons: Some made me Weep to hear their Sighs; All forced me to Sigh to see
their Tears. I turned my Eye no where but I saw fresh occasions to excite an
unspeakable Compassion. Some ran up and down distracted, and talked of Honor;
Some struck their Heads against the sides of the Rock, and cursed their Riches;
Some had Books of Accounts recited and delivered to them, which they threw away
with a thousand Expressions of Despair and Wrath. Some sat upon the ground
with their Arms across, and seemed to be infinitely amazed when they were told
what pains they had taken to bring themselves to this Misery; and others, who
were near them, tore wider the Wounds which bled already, by reproching them as
Causes of their Unhappiness too. In other places I saw some hang down their
Heads and Curse their mad Obstinacy, and after a howling manner say, What?
could nothing but Hell make us believe that there is a God? Are these
intolerable pains the price of our Sins? Lord! at how dear a rate have we
bought a little pleasure? Did those who yet see the Light of the Sun but know
to what a filthy Dungeon we are confined, they would no longer live in a
Voluptuous carelessness, trifling away their Time, as we did; nor think any
thing too great to do, or too hard to suffer, to secure themselves from
falling into this Infernal Pit, where old Mother Night, Original Darkness,
Darkness that may be felt, dwells. Sure it was out of this Magazine of cursed
Shades that the Afflicting Angel borrowed that Pitchy Mist which blinded and
(...) the Egyptians, and here in this Storehouse of Plagues he reposed it
again to our Unspeakable Torment. Is there no Hope for the Damned? Did those
who dispute so eagerly concerning the Duration of our Miseries feel what we
suffer, they would think every Day a Year, a Year an Age, an Age Eternity. O
Annihilation! how desirable art thou to such as are oppressed with a Being
unsufferably tormented? We have heard some say, That they had rather be any
thing then Nothing: A short stay in this place would make them change their
Opinion. Would to God we had never been, or could yet cease to be. But we wish
Impossibilities, being condemned to live an Immortal Death.

I will trouble you no further, said the good Old man, with a Repetition of
calamitous Words, only before you return I will show you the outermost Passage
which led toward that Mournful place. It is barred up, as I told you, upon the
Inside with the Ruins of a Rock. Whilst they were viewing the outside of it,
Alethion spied an Inscription over the Door, and causing his Attendants to
advance their Lights, he read these following Verses.

This is the Prison of Apostate Souls.
Within this Iron Grate Vengeance controuls
The Pride of Rebels, fettered in such Chains
As Justice makes by linking Sins to Pains.
Accounts are justed Here: Bold Debtours Now
Are forced to pay, and say, It Is what they owe.
Here God's at last acknowledged, and Men see
That Sin is something, Hell a Verity.
Here late Repentance dwells. Here Hopeless Spirits
Hate their own Being laden with their Merits.
Where a tormenting Darkness clearly shows
What God will do when Patience Fury grows.
Alethion and his Companions having entertained themselves awhile with the
Contemplation of this strange House built by Nature under ground, returned to
the Lightsome Air, and designing nothing now but to see Theoprepia, he made
such a good progress in his Journey, that about the time when the Sun went down
he came to Xenodochium, the chief City of Philadelphia. The Governor having
understood that some were come to Town who by their garb and deportment
appeared to be no ordinary Persons, sent two Gentlemen according to their
Custom to offer what Accommodation could be had in Xenodochium. Alethion's
present condition forced him to stand in need of their Courtesy, and the
Nobleness of his Soul taught him to accept it with such an excellent Grace,
that they found themselves requited where they endeavored to oblige. They
brought him and his Company to the (...) House, who, though he had been used to
Conversation with generous Persons, was something surpised with the Presence
of these Guests, especially of Alethion; but having quickly settled himself, he
made the Reasons of his Wonder Motives to a more exact observation of such
Rules as the present Accident made necessary to be practiced. He brought the
Prince into Lodgings which were nobly furnished, and presented all supplies
after so handsome a fashion, that Alethion could not but judge the
Philadelphians the most civil people in the World. And when he perceived, by
the excellent discourse of those Gentlemen who attended him, from how great a
knowledge their Courtesy did proceed, he had no way to relieve his admiration,
but by supposing that the Philadelphians were privileged with an extraordinary
temper of Soul, and by calling to mind, that they were governed according to
most excellent Rules by the best of Princes. Which made him think to what a
raised height of Goodness brave Kings may elevate their Subjects by making
themselves great Examples: And how severe a Sentence they may justly expect
from God, when he shall call them to account for teaching their people to
degenerate into a low nature by their own ignoble Actions. And he was apt to
determine in his thoughts, That the chief hope of the emendation of humane
nature, which all good men pray for, does much depend upon God's bestowing vast
measures of a divine spirit upon Princes.

Though Alethion had given order to his Servants to conceal his name, and to
allow no other notice of his quality or companions, but that they were
strangers, who traveling to see the World desired before their return home to
visit Theoprepia; yet his attempt to conceal himself proved ineffectual: For
the glory of great Souls, not capable of being hid behind the thin veil of this
flesh, breaks through their bodies with illustrious Rays, and commands Honor
suitable to their Worth. Thus the Philadelphians were assured that they had the
happiness to entertain one of the bravest persons in the World, though they
knew not that he (...) called Alethion. The Governor was but young, and had
either not been in the Wars of Theromachia, where Alethion did nobly assist
Theosebius; or else had forgotten the features of his face, and other
Characters of his person. But the Prince, thinking it a necessary piece of just
Civility to let him know whom he had obliged, told him his Name. Alethion
resolving to stay here one day, both to see the City, and to return his
acknowledgments to the Philadelphians, sent one of his Gentlemen to Theosebius,
to give notice of his arrival in Theoprepia; and to (...), that he would wait
upon him at his Court, when He should please to give him leave. This Messenger
carried news so unexpectedly good, that it was above the faith of those who
heard it. The King would have punished him as an Impostor, if he had not
produced a Letter written by Alethion, whose hand he very well knew. Theosebius
immediately communicated this news to Phronesia and Agape, who were at that
time together lamenting the unfortunate Death of Alethion, of which they had
heard two days before. This contrary report brought so sudden an alteration
upon their Passions, that had not Incredulity stopped the working of their
spirits for a while, and made this cross motion more gentle, it had wrought
some such dangerous effect upon their health, especially in Agape, as frozen
people find when they are hastily removed out of cold snow to an hot fire. But
when they were not only assured that Alethion was alive, by reading his Letter,
but understood also at how small a distance he was absent from them, they could
not but permit themselves to a pleasing Transport of Affection, and antedated
the joys of his Presence with the contentment which they took in the knowledge
of his Safety, and revenged themselves upon their Grief by increasing the
sweetness of their present satisfaction with the remembrance of their former
tears.

Theosebius sent presently for Lysander, the General of his Army, and having
acquainted him that the Prince of Theriagene was arrived at Philadelphia, he
commanded him to go thither immediately; and taking his Coach and Lifeguard to
conduct him with all care and honor to Phronesia. Alethion having received
this noble invitation by Lysander, rose up early the next morning, and before
it was twelve of the clock came to Kepanactus, one of the King's Houses, which
was within a League of Phronesia, where Theosebius intended to dine with the
Prince of Theriagene. When Alethion was now about a quarter of a mile from
Kepanactus, Lysander's Lieutenant retiring from the head of his Troop, came to
the Coach side, and acquainted his General, that Theosebius at a very small
distance was upon his march toward them. Alethion, impatient of any further
delay, stepped out of the Coach, and went speedily to the first rank of the
Guard; where Theosebius seeing him attended by Lysander and his own Servants,
alighted from his horse, hastening to embrace one who had already opened his
arms for him, and as soon as he could obtain a power to speak from the vehemence
of his passions, saluted him in these Words. Most Dear Prince, the joys which
the sight of you produce in my Soul are so great, that I am not able to let you
know them, they are too big for words. That delightful original from whence
they are derived is such an unexpected Felicity, that I can scarce think you
here, though I see you. Most Excellent Prince, replied Alethion, I always made
my self believe that I had lodged you in the best place of my Soul; and I have
now received an infallible proof that I was not mistaken, since in your own
name you have expressed the thoughts which I formed there. Although I know I can
never equal your noble Love with worthy Affection, yet I am sure my joy exceeds
all that was ever produced by the encounter of any other friends. But is it
you, Alethion? said Theosebius interrupting him: My Dearest Brother, is it you?
And are you come from the grave to revive those who were ready to die of grief
for your Death? You might very truly think that I was not alive, replied
Alethion; for I esteemed it a cruel death to be so long separated from you, my
Dearest Theosebius: And now I am restored to life, now I live, whilst I see my
self so near to the King of Theoprepia. We can never be too near, said
Theosebius, and then renewed his embraces; which Alethion received, and made
reciprocal with such passionate endearments, that all the Company fixed in a
delightful amazement were forced to shed tears in sympathy with such a moving
sight.

While the Princes were thus locked in each others arms, the Queen's Coach came
up, and Phronesia with the young Princess, perceiving that Theosebius had made
a stop, alighted to come toward them; which put Alethion into new raptures of
joy: For Theosebius took him by the left hand, and presenting him to the Queen
and Agape, said, Dear Mother and Sister, receive the best of Princes, and our
Dearest friend, Alethion. It is possible to imagine something of those Passions
which were raised by this second encounter: But all that I am able to relate
would be so far short of that which was then experimented, that I think I can
do them right only by Silence. Who can express the Ecstatical joys which
possessed the mind of Phronesia, when she now received a Prince from death, who
saved her Son's life? How could she love him too much, who thought he did never
love Theosebius enough? Agape could not but be transported more then the rest,
because she seemed to her self to have the greatest share in this happiness.
How welcome this confirmation of Alethion's life was to that fair Princess,
none but she her self can tell, who had lamented his supposed death with so
many tears, that never was any real death deplored with more. Though her
modesty would not give leave that she should make the deep sense of her Soul
public, yet she forced her self to make those significations of affection
which Alethion took for more then ordinary good will: And as he was best able
to make a judgment of such indications, so she the more confidently allowed her
self to give them, because she was assured of their approbation to whom she was
accountable for her carriage.

The true Friends of both the Princes could not but take their parts in this
solemn Joy, which flowed from the happiness of those who were dearer to them
then themselves: And the felicity which attended this accident was so general,
that no by-stander thought himself unconcerned in it. As many little rivulets
filled with a land-floud, and meeting in some wider chanel, swell the waters
which they find there into so great a River, that they overflow their usual
bounds, and uniting those little rills with themselves, carry them all along in
one mighty stream: So the particular joys which seized upon all that beheld
this glorious sight, joined themselves into one vast body of unspeakable
Contentment, in which every one found his private satisfactions doubled by
union with those of others. The Princes would have continued longer in this
pleasing intercourse, but that Phronesia, considering how far Alethion had
traveled, desired Theosebius to break it off till they came into the house;
where having performed the Civility which was due to the Prince, they might
afterward reassume their delightful conversation. When they had dined, they
diverted themselves in the Gardens which belonged to that pleasant house for an
hour or two. Theosebius desiring to return into the City before it was dark,
placed Alethion with the Queen and the Princess in his own Coach, which being
open on all sides did not withhold their sight from the greedy eyes of the
People, through whose cheerful Acclamations, echoing to the louder noise of
great Guns, they passed all the way till they came to the Royal Palace.

In the mean while Bentivolio and his Fellow-Travellers arrived at
Polistherion. Having stayed there one day he inquired of his Host concerning
the way to Sigalium, a place not far from the City, where Eugenius, a friend to
Philalethes, and one who was worthy of the best Friendship, had a pleasant
Retirement, and where by Silence and a seeming Unconcernedness in the present
Affairs, he obtained a Protection from the Observation of his Enemies.
Bentivolio and Amyntor made a Visit to him, both that they might know that good
Gentleman, and by his means inform themselves more fully concerning those
things which were requisite to their present condition. They told him, that as
Strangers traveling through the Country, they could not but desire to see the
most considerable Places, and to enjoy Converse with worthy Persons; but that
they came to him upon the friendly recommendation of Philalethes, who, amongst
those many Civilities which they had received from him, had given them, as one
of the greatest of them, such a notice of Eugenius as had made 'em bold to put
him to this trouble. Eugenius, whose Temper was to be civil to all, but very
obliging where he saw great reasons of endearment, soon perceiving that they
were no ordinary Persons, gave them a most affectionate Welcome, and desired
them to make his House their own whilst they should have occasion to stay in
those parts of the Country. Bentivolio refused that offer, alleging that he
could not accept this great Favor without a prejudice to them both; it being
impossible that Antitheus should be long ignorant of their arrival in his
Country, or that he should not suspect some Design in his enter course with
Eugenius, if he did not first make known to him such reasons of his coming to
Polistherion as might prevent those Jealous Apprehensions which are naturally
apt to possess the Minds of Usurpers: and therefore he requested Eugenius at
present only to assist him with his advice, and to direct him how he might
seasonably appear in Polistherion, and discover himself to Antitheus with some
fair Advantage. Sir, said Eugenius, to morrow Antitheus makes a great Feast for
his Courtiers, and in the Afternoon, to divert the Polistherians from the
Contemplation of the late unpleasing Accidents, he has appointed some young
Gentlemen upon Horseback to run at a Ring, and has given leave that whosoever
pleases may be admitted Competitors; and has declared that he who first
carries the Ring three times, shall receive for a Prize liberty to ask what he
will of Antitheus. If you have a mind to engage in this Exercise, I will go to
Court, being invited yesterday, and as opportunity requires will do you any
service which shall be in my power. Bentivolio, who very well knew the Rites of
this Undertaking, was glad of such a happy occasion to (...) his Acquaintance
with Antitheus, and taking his leave of Eugenius with all due Acknowledgments,
he returned to his Lodging in Polistherion.

When the time was come which was appointed for the Celebration of this Sport,
Antitheus appeared upon a Scaffold attended with his chief Courtiers, and
accompanied with many Ladies enriched with greatness of Beauty and embellished
with fair Jewels. Ten young Gentlemen showing themselves upon stately Horses
ready to perform the designed Action, Bentivolio advanced toward them: His
Horse was black all over, except one little Star in his forehead, which being
vigorous and of a proud carriage added Grace to his Rider; and he managing his
activity with a dextrous skill gave life to that Grace. The Rivals entertained
him civilly, not being able to disdain a Gentleman of such a goodly Presence.
Orders being given for the first Course, they finished it to the great
contentment of the Spectatours; but the praise of the Action fell only to
Bentivolio and two more, Proselenes, and Alcinous the Son of Eugenius; for the
rest missed the Ring. The next Course was performed much after the same manner,
only Proselenes missed the Ring, which Bentivolio and Alcinous carried the
second time. In the third Bentivolio and Alcinous succeeded as formerly, also
Autautus the Brother of Proselenes had the good luck to carry the Ring upon his
Lance; the rest, either by the unmanageableness of their Horses, or want of
Experience in that Exercise, missing it. The three Courses being finished,
Victory, which had denied all her other Votaries, hovered at an equal distance
between Bentivolio and Alcinous. As soon as Alcinous saw the Event of the third
Course, moved not only with those singular respects which he had entertained
for Bentivolio, whom he had opportunity to know at his Father's House, but much
pleased with his own Good Fortune to be matched with such a Competitor, that it
must needs be to his Honor which way soever Victory should at last dispose the
Prize, rode up close to Bentivolio, and accosting him with a serene
cheerfulness, said, Sir, I am very glad that my contest happens to be with such
a gallant Adversary. Though I should miss the (...), I shall not be pitied,
having been worsted by one whom none can overcome; but since our Fortune is yet
doubtful, if you please let us decide it with the repetition of three Courses
more. Bentivolio being willing to avoid the Envy which might accrue to him from
the Victory, and do him some disservice in the time of his abode amongst such
as could not be well contented to be overcome by a Stranger, turning himself
toward Alcinous, told him that it was not fit for him to dispute the Prize
further with one whom he could not but judge to have wone it already; alleging
that though he himself had carried the Ring thrice, yet he expected no
advantage from that performance, since Alcinous had done it before him. No,
replied Alcinous, you must not be Judged not to have done it first, because we
could not both run at once; my order in the Courses was a thing of Chance, and
can give me no pretense to Victory, since I was equaled by you as soon as your
Turn came: although I am not unsensible of your Civility, yet I had rather lose
any Prize then receive it dishonourably. After some other words Bentivolio was
forced to condescend to his Proposal, and both agreed that the next Miss upon
whomsoever it should happen should end the Controversy. For two Courses they
were equal; at the third Alcinous having the Ill luck to strike the Ring upon
the ground, Bentivolio putting spurs to his Horse quickly took off the other
which was placed in the room of it, and took up also that which Alcinous had
let fall upon the point of his Lance. Whilst all the Spectatours, struck with
the Admiration of Bentivolio's Action, accompanied his Victory with a general
Shout, Antitheus, though he was of a proud Temper, and utterly indisposed to
like any thing which was Excellent in another, could not but enquire who he
was; and being told by Eugenius that he was a Gentleman who came lately to
Polistherton, having a desire to see the Country, he sent for him. When he was
come, the Beauty of his Person, the Gracefulness of his Deportment, and the
Power of Universal Applause made Antitheus condescend to personate Civility,
and accost him thus: Generous Stranger, said he, whoever you are, and whatever
your Design be, you are Welcome; if you had not merited it by your late
Performance, yet I esteem it but a due Civility to your Person to grant you
whatsoever you can ask in Theriagene. Bentivolio received this great favor
with much Modesty, and making that Obeisance which is due to a Crowned Head,
only desired that himself and two Gentlemen who traveled in his Company might
with his good leave stay awhile in his Country, and that he might have liberty
to divert himself sometimes at Sigalium with Eugenius, to whom he was obliged
for the notice of this Opportunity, by which he had the happy advantage of
coming so soon into the King's Presence. Antitheus, surpised with this
incomparable Modesty, by which Bentivolio both showed the Generosity of his
Temper and warily avoided the Envy of the Courtiers, replied, that instead of
granting this as Bentivolio's Request, he would make it his own, and entreat
him to stay in Theriagene; adding, that he should look upon it as a great
Accession to his Prosperity, if in Sigalium, Polistherion, or any other place
in his Kingdom he could find any thing to make his stay not unpleasant.
Bentivolio having made Answer to his obliging Discourse with many thankful
Acknowledgments, Alcinous, Proselenes, Autautus and their Companions passed
many Complements upon him, and professed that they esteemed it as a great
Prize, that by their Foiles they had gained the knowledge of a Person that was
so worthy to overcome. Whilst Bentivolio was making many Civil Returns,
Antitheus took him away, and entertained him and his Companions with a Noble
Collation and various Discourses, and offered him Lodgings in his own Palace;
which Bentivolio thankfully refused, and after Supper retired with Eugenius and
his friends to Sigalium. Whilst Bentivolio stayed at Sigalium, Pasenantius,
Antholkes, Autautus, and many others of the Court, sometimes by order of
Antitheus, and sometimes for their own pleasure, visited him. From these he
gained a full Intelligence concerning the Affairs of Theriagene, and by many
Discourses understood plainly by what false Principles they governed their
Lives, and offered at a Rectification of their Errors: which though he could
accomplish but in a few, the Dominion which Passion usurps over Reason being
almost invincible when it is confirmed by Custom, yet it was some satisfaction
to his mind to have done that Duty which Charity enjoined; though it was some
grief to him to see the Account which he had received from Philalethes so fully
verified. Sometimes he and Eugenius went to Polistherion to visit Antitheus,
where he had no content but to see how lovely Virtue is by comparing it with
the ugliness of Vice, which was there represented to the Life. At other times
he and his friends, under the Conduct of Eugenius, traveled into the Country
to see the most remarkable places in that Kingdom.

After Antitheus by many Converses understood that Bentivolio's Principles were
contrary to his, and the manner of his Life quite different from that of his
Court, he began to suspect that his coming to Theriagene was upon some ill
Design; which to prevent, he caressed him more then he had done formerly, and
offered him very honorable Commands: which Bentivolio could not accept, being
very much wearied with the Unpleasing conversation of the Antitheans, and
hating those Actions which had made the Usurper able to offer entertainment to
Persons of Quality. But to make his Refusal plausible, and to hinder Antitheus
from discovering the Truth of his Purposes, he said (which was most true) that
he had strong desires to return home, and also pretended himself necessitated
by very great Obligations to serve a Friend of his, whose condition, as he
lately understood, did much require his Assistance. Indeed his purpose was to
go into Theoprepia, where he heard that Alethion, the lawful Prince of
Theriagene, did at present sojourn, to whose Restoration he thought he should
be able to contribute something from what he had observed in Theriagene. He was
the more encouraged in these Hopes, because the time of the Year began to be
seasonable for Armies to take the Field; and he made no doubt that Theosebius
would supply him with store of men, or that Heaven would second them with good
success. Before he took his leave, he acquainted Eugenius with his Intentions,
whom he perceived to be no great friend to Antitheus, and who promised him, if
ever occasion served, to further what he designed, and entreated him in the
mean while to assure Alethion of his Loyalty.

Antitheus his Jealousies being increased with the Intelligence that he
received from one of his Spies, who knew Sympathus, That Bentivolio and Amyntor
had correspondence with Philalethes, and were entertained at his house, he
designed to murder them both. But one of Philalethes his Kinsmen having notice
of his purpose, discovered it to Eugenius, by which means Bentivolio and
Amyntor went away privately to Misopseudes his house, and sent a Messenger to
Philalethes to meet them there; from whence they went away all together to
Theoprepia. Only Bentivolio, according to his promise, sent Nicomachus to his
Brother Panaretus, to acquaint him and his Sister with what had happened already,
and to desire him and Sympathus to meet him at the Court of the Prince of
Theoprepia, where they should understand what was designed further.

Theonoe, Urania, and all the Company which were left at Theander's house,
rejoiced exceedingly at the sight of Nicomachus, hoping also that Bentivolio
was not far off: And though they found themselves deceived, they were not much
displeased. For Nicomachus told them he was well, and that he and Amyntor were
gone to Phronesium, and did entreat Panaretus and Sympathus to meet them there,
whither he also himself was to accompany them. They guessed at the design, and
could not but approve it: Only they entreated their friends to stay with them a
day or two, that so before their departure they might understand the State of
Theriagene by Nicomachus. Their desire was granted, and having pleased
themselves with the news of Alethion's escape, though it was but a repetition
of what they heard before from one that came from Theosebius his Court, they
conjured Nicomachus to inform them concerning Bentivolio's entertainment in
Theriagene. Nicomachus obeyed their command, and when they had disposed
themselves to hearken to his relation, he acquainted them with what had happened
in the way to Philalethes his house, and his entertainment there; and made them
know the manner of the Prince's escape. Then he told them of their journey to
Polistherion, and of their retiring to Eugenius his house, and let them
understand how Bentivolio made himself known to Antitheus, and with what
Complements he was received by his Courtiers. Urania knowing that Bentivolio
did not use to spend his time only in Eating and Drinking, making and receiving
Visits, asked Nicomachus as soon as they had supped, if they did not sometimes
meet with such persons as gave an occasion for more then ordinary discourse.
Yes, said Nicomachus; and their Principles being very contrary to those of
Bentivolio, caused various disputes between him and those with whom he happened
to converse. I beseech you, replied Urania, if you and this good Company give
me leave to make such a request, let us know of what they talked. With all my
heart, answered Nicomachus, if you will grant me pardon for the wrong which I
shall do to Bentivolio by forgetting many Excellent parts of his Discourse,
and for the offense which I must needs give you by the imperfect recital of
what I can remember. You need not make so many excuses, said Theonoe, to those
who will confess themselves obliged to you for a great favor; and Bentivolio's
honor must needs be secured, since if your memory should fail, of which we
have no fear, you are furnished with a ready supply from your own judicious
wit. If I could receive this Complement without blushing, replied Nicomachus,
and might lawfully err of choice, I would sin again by making some new
pretense of silence, that I might be once more so obligingly reproved for not
speaking. Pray, good Nicomachus, said the sweet Irene, put us not upon any
further loss of an opportunity, which we have destined to know Bentivolio's and
your last Adventure. I will be obedient, answered Nicomachus, and began thus.

The chief of our Visitants was Pasenantius, who commonly brought with him an
obstinate Gentleman called (...). When they came first, Bentivolio and Eugenius
were engaged in a Discourse concerning the rational belief of a Deity: And
Bentivolio affirming, that he could not but be astonished that any man should
so far degenerate from Reason, or apostatize from Ingenuity; as not to
acknowledge so great a Benefactour, or forget so known a Friend; their entrance
into the room made him break off his speech. Which Pasenantius perceiving,
after he and (...) had performed those Salutes which are usual at the meeting
of friends, he craved pardon for the interruption of their Conference. To which
Eugenius answered, Let us not leave off our talk, Bentivolio, for these
Gentlemen are Philosophers, and friends of mine. Yes, said Autautus, and will
not only think that we have wronged you, but that we our selves are deprived of
a great benefit, if you judge us unworthy of your Conversation. We will go on
then, said Bentivolio; and since we are engaged in an important discourse, we
shall be glad of your assistance to help us, as the difficulty of the matter
shall require; and turning to Eugenius, proceeded thus. You demanded last, as I
remember, the Reasons which made me so confidently (...) the Being of a Supreme
God.

My first Argument is the inbred Notion of a God; which as it shines in my
particular Mind with bright Rays of truth, so I find that in all Ages it has
been universally acknowledged by Mankind. This receives strength from the
contemplation of the Nature of things: for I am forced to confess a first Cause
by the very Existence of the World; much more when I consider both the
Beautiful Order of the Systeme, and infinite Variety of Excellent Beings which
makes up this noble Frame. I am convinced further of the truth of this
persuasion, when I behold the vast number of those horrid Absurdities which
flow from Atheism; and consider how easily all those Objections may be confuted
which are opposed to the assertion of a Deity.

I like the method which you propound for your Discourse, said Eugenius; and if
you will do us the favor to declare in order what you have to say for the
confirmation of the aforementioned Reasons, I will desire Pasenantius (for he
is versed in this Controversy) after each Argument to put those Objections
which are properly opposite. Since you judge them all easily answerable, you
will be put to no great trouble for their confutation; and we shall be more
methodically resolved in our Doubts. I shall take what course you please, said
Bentivolio, either by a continued speech, or else by making frequent pauses to
allow a liberty for alternate Answers. For since our Design is only to
apprehend that lurking Error which troubles those Crystal streams wherein
Truth is represented; it is all one to me, either by insisting upon particular
Arguments to fish with a single Line, or else by putting them all together to
make useof a Net: But since you like the first way better, I do so too. When I
say the Notion of God, I mean that Conception which we form of him in our minds
when we think of him; as, That he is the First Cause, the Maker of the World,
the Governor of all things; That he is an All-wise, most Good, All-powerful,
and absolutely Perfect Being, and so necessarily and eternally Existing; and
consequently to be Worshipped, not only for the Excellency of his Nature, but
as the benign Parent of all things, and great Benefactour of Mankind.

This Notion is natural, that is, impressed upon our Souls by that God whose Idea
it is; men having not learned it by Custom, or been forced to the belief of it
by any Law. It is a Truth professed by all Nations, who, notwithstanding the
difference of their Customs, the variety of their Laws, diversity of
Dispositions, and hostility of their Practices, have universally agreed in
this, as a thing that naturally results from the use of Reason; and which even
by such as have not spoken very honorably of God, has been acknowledged as a
common Prolepsis, that is, a connate Information. Of this I think my self the
more assured, because no beginning of time can be assigned when the World
entertained this belief; but that the common Parent of Mankind, who was made
with it, and to whom it was confirmed by conversation with God, taught it his
Children; who easily received it, because when they were arrived to that age in
which they were capable of being taught by others, they plainly perceived that
it did naturally spring from the free exercise of their own understandings. If
this were not true, I can give no rational account how it came to be generally
received by the World; it being impossible that by Force or Fraud any contract
should have been made to necessitate such a common Faith. For what Prince had
ever power to enact such a constitution? or what Ecumenical Sanhedrim ever met
to consult about such a business? It is also manifest, That this is an
everlasting. Truth deeply engraved in humane Souls, since no successions of
time have been able to wear it out. Though Falsehood steal the Mantle of Truth,
yet it cannot so conceal it self long; for Time will pull it off, and discover
the Cheat. If it had been unnatural, men would long before this time have
rejected it; and, being always impatient of yokes, they would not so long have
born this, which does oblige them to the strictness of Religious observances.
But they have been so far from abandoning this Truth, that they have not
subjected it to be dishonored with Disputes, and so have declared, That this
is that great Article of their Common Faith in which they all agree. If this
which I have said be not enough to justify the Reality of this Truth, and to
free it from all suspicion of Fictitiousness, we must confess that,
notwithstanding our best Faculties, which are appointed for our guides, we are
capable of being at a loss, when we have good reason to think our selves most
sure of our way: and being bestowed upon us to such mean purposes, we may
justly cast this (...) slur upon Nature, (to speak in the language of Atheists)
that she has made one of her best works in vain, having given men Rational
Faculties without any possibility of being assured what is Truth by the use of
them; and so has exposed them to a necessity of being deceived,
notwithstanding the pretense of a rare Criterion; and so has not only made a
snare of the best of Notions, but also having put us into a strong propensity
toward the Divine Nature, and made us think our selves happy in that noble
Love, has abused us with a vain affection which has no real object, and
rendered us Fools by making us Religious. Which is so absurd to imagine, that it
is not more incredible to say, That wise men build great Ships only to lie at
hull, and drive up and down with every wind. Since then the evidence of Reason
is so great, that it has led all men to an ingenuous Acknowledgment of God, I
cannot think that it is only a wildness of fancy, but a perverse disposition
in men who have used themselves to resist known Truths, that enables them to
deny him: But that it is unreasonable to suppose it true of any, I should think
them the only persons in whom Nature has implanted Error.

When Bentivolio had thus declared the sense of his first Argument, Pasenantius
was about to frame an answer; but Eugenius desiring his patience for awhile,
entreated Bentivolio to explain himself more fully: For by that which you have
affirmed, said he, you seem to believe, that the Minds of newborn Infants are
possessed with a Notion of God, and that such as scarce know any thing have an
actual sense of the Divine Being. I would not have you understand me after any
such manner, replied Bentivolio: For when I say, That the Notion of God is
inbred, I mean, That the Soul is principled with a natural sagacity, by which
she is apt upon the first occasions which are administered to her after she is
out of her Nonage, and admitted to the free exercise of her Rational powers, to
make a clear acknowledgment of a Deity. The Energy of Nature being excited by
outward Objects, there is formed in our minds an Image of the Supreme God; this
Effect notwithstanding being due to the innate virtue of our Soul as the
principal Cause, and which does owe to the Impulse of the forementioned Objects
only for the assistance of an Extrinsecal occasion. The Seed which is sown
under ground awaits the warmth of the Spring to make it bud; but the blossoms
and fruits which it sends forth are chiefly to be attributed to the Plastic
power of the seed, not to the heat of the outward air. Humane Souls have many
natural Ideas impressed upon them, for which they were never indebted to Matter;
of which that of the Cause and Effect is one: which being awakened in the
Understanding by the Consideration of such a noble Being as the World is, has
present recourse to some excellent Nature as the Cause of so great an Effect.
This rational capacity is placed in our Souls as an Antecedent Principle of
(...) Knowledge, and it improves and ripens it self into an actual apprehension
of God by time and (...) I understand now what you mean, said Eugenius to
Bentivolio and if you please (added he, turning toward Pasenantius) you may
let us see, if you can disprove what he has said.

You have put a fair color of verisimilitude upon this Notion, said
Pasenantius to Bentivolio, by the greatness of your Eloquence; but the truth of
what you affert lies so open to the mercy of powerful Objections, that it is no
hard matter (as I think) to dispute probably against it, and to allege various
reasons which disturb the belief of what you have said. That this universal
acknowledgment signifies not so much as you would make us believe, seems to be
evident from this, That you all confess the God of whom you speak so
confidently to be Incomprehensible; that is, neither perceiveable by our
Senses, because he is Spiritual, nor to be comprehended by our Mind, because he
is Infinite. The weight of that allegation which you make of numerous witnesses
seems to be lessened in that the greater part of them are Fools, and you
despise them when you please for their Ignorance. Their folly is but too
apparent in those ridiculous Explications which they have given of the Deity;
and you your selves confess them worthy to be abhorred: For there is nothing so
contemptible but the rude Heathen adored it for a God. This testimony is not
Universal neither; for many Nations never heard of God, and in those which did
many have professed Atheism, and there is no doubt but many more did think
there is no God, who durst not express the sense of their minds in words. Those
which were seduced into this belief may well be supposed to have been
outwitted by Politicians, who cunningly invented, and afterward made use of,
the Notion of a Deity. But if it had not taken its Rise from them, yet the
fears which vulgar minds unacquainted with natural Causes are apt to entertain
upon extraordinary Accidents would incline them to think, that God was the
Author of that which they did not understand possible to be produced any other
way; and it was easy to propagate such a vain belief by Tradition. For such as
had been deluded first, would be apt to transmit it to successive Generations,
and spread the Infection from one Country to another. Besides this, it is
manifest enough that those great Deists who concern themselves as great Patrons
of this Faith, and seek applause by endeavoring to make Proselytes, do believe
no such thing themselves; being guilty of those enormous crimes which nothing
but the Disbelief of a Just (...) Potent God could make them commit.

I did expect some such Objections, replied Bentivolio; for that dull Principle
Atheism has not been able for many hundreds of years to improve the Minds of
those who entertain it, or teach them for its defense to add any considerable
thing to the boldness of their few Predecessors: and by discovering the
falsehood of each Allegation in order as you have recited them, I will show you
with how little reason they magnify themselves against the Truth.

As to your first Exception, I grant, That because God is Spiritual, we cannot
perceive him by any of our external Senses, nor paint his sublime Nature to our
selves in Corporeal Images; but since he has given us diverse Faculties, which
are so many distinct ways of perception, we can no more justly conclude that
he is not Knowable by our Understanding, since he does not fall under the
notice of our outward Senses, then we can infer that there is no such thing as
Sound, since we cannot hear it with our Eyes. When we see a Ship under sail, we
often discern no Pilot with our Eye, yet we know that he is at the Helm,
because the Vessel escapes the circumjacent Rocks. But whereas you say, That we
do not perceive God by our Understandings because he is Infinite; I must take a
larger compass to give you satisfaction, and convince you that we do. I grant
that it were too great a presumption to hope to bring down that Excellent
Being, God, to a just equality with our Understanding; since we are informed by
our own Reason, that he is raised far above the highest reach of our
Imagination. The Nature of the Godhead must be Infinite, because if it had
bounds it would be imperfect: and though we conceive this Immensity rather in
respect of those degrees of Virtue and Power and Duration which are contained
in his great Being, then by Extension of Figure or Unlimitedness of Space; yet
those Degrees being unmeasurable, when we conceive of God as the most Perfect
Being, we always grant that he does incomparably exceed our best Conceptions.
Yet our Assurance of his Existence is not hurt by the (...) of our Intuitive
Knowledge of his Essence. To say that because we comprehend not the Divine
Being, whose Nature we know to be Incomprehensible, therefore we have no Reason
to think that it does Exist; or because we understand him not perfectly,
therefore we know him not at all; is no more reasonable then to affirm, That
there is no Sea, or that we do not see it in part, because we cannot grasp its
vast compass in one look. For though we are not able to frame a complete Image
of the great God in our confined Minds, yet the power of our Reason compells us
by the force of strong Arguments to acknowledge the truth of his Existence, and
assures us concerning the properties of his Nature by rational consequences;
and we do most distinctly apprehend the Divine Perfections when we do endeavor
to entertain our selves with the Contemplation of them, because they do more
fill our thoughts with the greatness of their Essential Worth, then any bodily
thing can do; neither are our minds troubled with those Limitations and
Littlenesses which we meet with in our perception of other things.

I grant it is ordinarily said, That the Divine Nature cannot be known; but we
must distinguish between that which subtle Atheists pronounce upon Design, the
unwary Rhetoric of foolish Orators, and the well-weighed Assertions of
considerate Philosophers. For many speak of Knowledge who know not what it is
to know; and so being ignorant, that all the knowledge of which we are capable
is only to understand the Properties of things by their Effects, they puzzle
the weak, make sport to Atheists, and are pitied by the Ingenuous for their
Ridiculous Philosophy. We are not allowed such intimacy with any created Being
as to see its naked Essence; that is hid from mortal eyes; Nature in all her
converses with Men keeps her veil on, which none yet have been able to pull
off. Therefore I infer, That the Properties of the Divine Nature are as
perceivable as those which belong to any other Subject: The virtue of the First
Cause being as manifest in its Effects, as the Powers of any which are
Secondary, whose Properties we know only by their Effects.

These things being considered, I know no reason why we should not think the
Godhead understandable, except we judge it good sense to say, that because we
cannot look directly upon the Sun with our weak eyes, therefore we do not
perceive its glorious Light when it is reflected: For God is represented by his
works as it were in bright Looking-glasses. Or if, because some things in the
Divine Nature do transcend the power of our Perception, we ought to think that
we are not sufficiently assured of its Being; why do Atheists grant so freely
the Existence of Matter, and talking confidently of its Nature make no doubt
but it is Quantitative, and yet cannot tell whether it be divisible into Finite
or Infinite Parts? Those who argue after this manner do only take a poor
Sanctuary in a Skeptical device, and say, Well know nothing, because we know not
all things; or, which is all one, because we are not able curiously to explain
the Modus of every thing, therefore we are not sure of the Existence of any
thing; and that we ought to reject the most known Truths, because we cannot
give a Reason for all particular Effects. But will any rational man give cred't
to those who deny the Being of God, and do not believe what they themselves
speak when they say so? Those great Philosophers, who well knew that Modesty
does always become us, and especially in Divine Enquiries, have confessed that,
considering the great nature of the Object, they thought themselves more happy
in that little knowledge which they had of God, then in the most perfect
understanding of less worthy things.

But because this Notion will receive a clearer Explication, and so a fuller
proof, from the Arguments which I am to produce, I will at present confine my
Discourse to answer your other Objections. You said, That a great part of those
who are concerned in this universal confession of a God are Fools, and thence
deduce the invalidity of their testimony. Really, Sir, if the opinion of Fools
is to be despised, I might very well except against the Objections of Atheists:
For they disbelieve, or at least deny, what we say concerning God without any
Reason. They object we never saw God: It is true; but affirming his Existence,
we show them his Works as a testimony of his Being. They never saw any thing to
the contrary, yet say there is none. But since the case admits of no proofs by
Eye witnesses, this advantage lies on our side; We give a good reason for what
we say, whilst they have none but the sullen obstinacy of a perverse Will.

But since the evidence of this Notion depends upon universal acknowledgment,
and the World is divided into two parts, the Wise, and those that are of Weaker
understandings; we ought not to think its truth disparaged because men of
slower parts receive it; but rather (...) that it is a natural Verity, since
the dullest do so easily understand it. That it is no Artifice in them is
manifest, because they are weaker then that they can hope to deceive: and that
they are not outwitted by others for want of ability appears by this, that
Wise men, who are not easily imposed on, profess that they cannot but believe
it.

Whereas you say, That it is an Argument that many Nations did not understand
what they spoke when they talked of a God, because they gave so many absurd
Explications of his Nature; and that we cannot rationally think our selves
obliged to believe that there is a Deity, because of their testimony who have
also told us that every thing is a God: I desire you, Pasenantius, to consider
whether if the simple Notion of a Godhead had not been natural, it could have
been possible that men should have attempted to have made any particular
Explications of it. The truth in general is confirmed by these mistakes: except
we think that the making of a false description, or putting a wrong name upon
any man, destroys his Existence; or that there is no Sun, because some have
imagined it to be only a burning stone, and others have taken it for a shining
Torch. But as their speaking of God, though they said what was unworthy of his
Nature, supposes his Existence; so the Reason of their Error in the
misapprehension of his Nature was only a shortness of Reason which disenabled
them to explain a great Truth, and they mistook by endeavoring to deduce a
false Conclusion from true Premises. For having understood not only that there
was a God, but that he was universally acknowledged to be Good, they inferred
weakly that every Goodthing was God. We must pity them in their Error, but not
deny Truth, because they misunderstood it. It is a great want of (...) to
conclude that no good thing is God, because they judged every good thing to be
so. Whilst they knowing that the Divine Nature was infinitely good, took every
good thing for a Deity, and bestowed that incommunicable name upon all
Beneficial Creatures; some say, and that not without reason, That though the
vulgar supposed the Divine Power to be spread through the Nature of all things,
yet Wise men were not wanting amongst them, who taught them that it was but one
great Mind, which was also the first Cause of Being, and exhorted them to
worship him as their Creator. By which you may see, good Pasenantius, that you
have no reason to conclude that there is no God from what they said of him, and
possibly that they did not mean so unworthily as they seemed to speak.

You do well, said Pasenantius, to make your Party as considerable as you can;
but since your Argument supposes the acknowledgment of this Notion to be
universal, what say you to that which I objected against their Numerousness? I
remember what you said, replied Bentivolio: for to persuade us to believe that
the number of those which are on our side is not so very great, you told us
that many Nations, whom we think to be for us, did never hear of God, and that
in those which did, many have professed Atheism, and more would do so, but that
they dare not. To which I reply, That any whole Nation was ever so barbarous as
not to acknowledge a God, is a saying for whose truth we have no evidence. In
ancient times no such people were known, and the late discoveries of Countries
formerly unknown have assured us that they have not been so Atheistical as to
deny a Deity; but by reason of a fatal Ignorance, whose Cause peradventure is
not so easily discoverable, were guilty of some gross mistakes concerning it.
Such as have traveled into those parts which we have most suspected for
Irreligion, have convinced us of that Error, by giving us an account both of
the names of their Gods, and the manner of their Worship. As to others, who
would make us believe that they are Atheists by speaking against a Deity, I
answer, That they have been but few in comparison of the rest of Mankind; and
that you prove no more by this Argument then that which none ever denied, that
it is possible there should be Monsters. Some few minute Philosophers have been
registered by Antiquity as blots in the History of the World for entertaining
such an absurd persuasion; and some such have been produced of late years, and
with their Atheism they have patronized other opinions so Monstrous, that
Humane Nature is astonished at the rehearsal of them: As for example, That what
they say against God's Existence may be both true and false, or neither; and
That there may be a God who at the same time also may not be. But suppose that
some of these Gigantick Philosophers should happen to have six fingers upon an
hand, or six toes upon a foot, would that enforce us to conclude, that it is
natural for all men to have as many? If some be blind, or deaf, or want any
usual member of the body, will they make us believe that those defects are not
Monstrous and Irregular? How small is the number of these obstinate dissenters
in comparison of those who assert us this great Truth? If we think it
reasonable that all the World should conform to their opinion, why may we not
as well allow authority to two or three Madmen to give Laws to the sober part
of Mankind? God has impressed this Character upon men's Souls, and there is no
more reason that he should lose his right in them when they have blurred it
with foolish imaginations, and made it less legible to themselves by the
effects of their ungrateful disobedience, then that true owners should forfeit
their just pretensions to their Plate, when Thieves have endeavored to deface
their Arms, and cut their marks out of it.

You dispute plausibly, said Pasenantius; but why may not we think that
Politicians, as I told you, invented this Notion, since we commonly see the
good use which they make of it? You might have done a courtesy to your Cause,
said Bentivolio, if you had not mentioned this Objection: For the great
advantage which Politicians make of it proves that it is natural. How could they
have made use of the Divine Name, and by it put an awe upon people, but that
they were acquainted with it and dreaded it before? How could they have
persuaded valiant men to venture their lives for their Country, by promising
they should be Gods if they died in the attempt, if they had not been
prepossest with venerable thoughts of Deities? The Imposition of counterfeit
Money does suppose the use of good Coin. It Is true, that cunning Statesmen
feigned many things under pretense of Divine Authority; but what would that
have signified if the notice of God had not been more ancient then their
fictions? They abused Mankind with fabulous Narrations of Celestial Visions,
filled Religion with Superstitious Rites, and pretended to have received from
God as Divine Laws those Rules by which they served their particular designs;
but they could not have perverted Religion by such undertakings, if the people
had not acknowledged a God by their own natural instinct.

But as it has been said of old, replied Pasenantius, why may we not think
that Panick fear brought in this terrible Notion of a Deity? It is not
imaginable, said Bentivolio, that men should entertain the fear of a God in
their Souls, but that they knew there was one. Nothing can be more foolish then
to honor a God whom we our selves make; but it is rational to adore him that
made us. Great accidents in Nature giving fresh testimonies of the Divine
Power, awaken in us apprehensions of God's Presence, and the Conscience of our
own guiltiness may very well make us fear; when we know that we do not only
deserve punishment, but that he whom we have offended is Just and very Able to
inflict it. I will no longer dispute against this Fantasy.

Whereas you mention Tradition, by which (as you say) men seem to have received
this Opinion, and afterward to have communicated it successively as they do
other Opinions and Customs: If I grant that it was spread by Tradition, my
Concession would be little to your advantage; for I mean that it was derived
first from God, who implanted it in Humane Nature, nourished it by a Converse
with the first Man whom he made, and with many others, who afterward conveyed
it successively from one generation to another: and thus the Objection is no
more destructive to the Natural Verity of this Divine Notion, then it is
undecent for a Man to stand upon two Feet. But since you allow not that it was
Traditional in this sense, I must crave leave to ask whence this Tradition had
its Original. If it had no Beginning, it was an Eternal Falsehood; and as I
shall have occasion to prove in my following Discourse that this supposition is
impossible, so for the present I must tell you, it is not good sense to say
that a Tradition was Eternal; for all Traditions, being Opinions or Modes of
Action received from some first Author, must have a beginning. It is a bold
Arrogance to say that there was any Age in which Mankind lived without the
acknowledgment of a God; since there is no foot-steep in History to lead us to
such an Imagination, nor any Writer that tells us who did first persuade men to
believe that there was a God, or mentions the time when men quitted the
contrary Opinion of their Forefathers, of which they are usually very
tenacious. If the World was generally Atheistical, how was it possible to
eradicate that Faith out of their minds, and to introduce into the Catholic
Creed a new Article which is so troublesome, that Atheists have confessed that it
is one of the most vexatious Opinions in the World to suppose an Omniscient God
set over us as a watchful inspectour of all our Actions? Though the Notion be
useful even to Atheists themselves now it is received, yet it is not to be
apprehended by what Artifice any Anti-atheist should persuade Mankind to
embrace such a belief, but that it was correspondent to the natural sense of
their Souls: And it is very difficult to imagine how men should think of it,
but that it is a common Dictate of reasonable Nature.

Well, well, said Pasenantius, I am too apt to think that you have a devout
regard to this Deity of which you speak, because you have taken so much pains
to enable your self to defend his Interest in the World: though I see that many
who pretend themselves to be Patrons of this Faith, and endeavor to propagate
it in the Minds of others, do not believe any such thing themselves; because
they do as manifestly deny that there is a God by their guilty lives, as Common
Atheists do in their blasphemous Words; so that this verbal acknowledgment of a
Deity only shows that some men would have us think that they believe what
indeed they do not.

The power of this Objection will easily vanish, replied Bentivolio, if you
will please to give me leave to show you, That to have the Notion of a Deity in
our Minds, and to adore it with a submissive Will, are not only two things; but
that it is too possible to know that there is a God, and yet not to correspond
with that knowledge by an Obedient deportment. The truth of this will easily
appear from the Observation of our common practice in other things. Who knows
not that Health is one of the greatest Felicities of humane life, and that an
universal Temperance is the most assured Method by which it may be preserved?
and yet how many by an irregular Mode of life throw away this inestimable
blessing? What? Shall we say that there is no such thing as Health, or that it
is not infinitely more eligible then Sickness, or that men do not know it,
because they sometimes make themselves sick? No, no, it requires more to cure
the Gout, then to know that it is a Disease which affects the joints; and the
pain of it is no less great, because men do not take that care which they ought
to avoid it. Do not men perceive in their Souls a Natural Obligation to the
practice of Justice, and know certainly they should not invade the Rights of
others, because they would not be disturbed in their own possessions? and yet
how frequently Wrong is done appears but too evidently by the complaints of the
oppressed: so that the enormity of the impious is no Argument against the
Existence of God, neither does it prove that they have no knowledge of him in
their Souls; but rather declares that they are Apostatized from God, and as a
punishment of their Revolt are fallen into a double mischief, that is, the
perverse obstinacy of an irregular Will, which is the root of the unlucky
strife between the Rational and Sensitive appetites; and also into a defect in
their Judgment, which does not with a sufficient constancy bear up against the
rebellion of (...) desire, and make that which is truly good always more
visible then those false Appearances which do so easily catch their Passions.

This is enough to demonstrate, that the strength of the Argument is not
weakened, though the right use of this excellent Notion be perverted, Men being
not necessitated to improve it to the utmost advantage, though God has enabled
them and exceedingly obliged them to do it. I might also tell you,
Pasenantius, that besides an ungrateful Perverseness men have a wild Fantasy,
which helps them when they endeavor to evade the suggestions of their better
Intellect; and though they are not able to rub out of their Souls this
well-fix'd Notion of a Deity, yet they may draw a false picture of the Divine
Nature, and make bold to misinterpret the Declarations of God's Will, and so
persuade themselves that his Commandments may be neglected without Sin in some
cases; or fancy that there are fond Indulgences which God has for some
persons, into which number they will be sure to thrust themselves; and, it may
be, suppose, when the sense of their guilt haunts them, that they may easily
make amends for the offenses of their Life by a Repentance at their Death. So
foolishly cunning is Humane Nature to cheat it self.

Here Bentivolio making a Pause, Eugenius and Pasenantius gave him thanks for
the patience with which he received the trouble of this Intercourse, and
desired him if he pleased to proceed to his other Arguments. With all my heart,
said Bentivolio, since I perceive you are not yet wearied, and went on after
this manner.

The truth of the forementioned Notion shines more brightly in my Mind, both
when considering my own Existence I find there no small Arguments of its Divine
Author, and also when I perceive my self placed so advantagiously in Being,
that, as from a convenient station in a noble Theater, I am able to contemplate
the admirable Schemes of those Magnificent Works which the Divine Nature has
set round about me. When I consider the Greatness of the Universe, the Variety
of its Excellent Parts, and the beautiful Order which appears in their accurate
Connexi-I am forced to acknowledge an Almighty Skill: When I behold that
innumerable Multitude of Illustrious Balls which shine round about me, see them
ranked in such fit distances, and consider their Regular Motions; whilst I take
notice of that useful Vicissitude which returns so constantly in the seasons of
the Year, the alternate succession of Night and Day; and find the Reason of
every Appointment so great, that nothing could have either been contrived
better at first, or can be altered yet, but it would be so much for the worse,
that it would prove like the dislocation of a joint: I cannot but behold the
Omnipotent Wisdom of the great Creator, except I should think my self blinded
with too much Light, and am forced to conclude, that a Divine Power is the
Author of this Excellent Machin, in which Infinite Wisdom is so visible; unless
I should be so unworthy as not to allow that just acknowledgment to God, which
all the World does grant to the wit of every Artificer, who is always
magnified according to the Skill which he expresses in any curious Work.

When I see the Sun, that Glorious Prince of the Stars, by the help of his own
Rays, and think with my self what wonderful Effects are produced by his warm
Influences; may I not as rationally make a Question whether I see it or no, as
doubt that a God made it? Who chalked out the oblique Rode of the Zodiac, and
taught him to withdraw so far in Winter as to give the overheated Earth leave
to cool it self; and yet made him come nearer in Summer, because then it wants
his Presence to ripen its Fruits? Who commissionated the Moon to be a
Deputy-Sun, and gave her Order to supply his place in the Night, and commanded
her to step a little beyond the Sun's Walk to take away the Horrors of
Darkness, and by a moist warmth to advance the Generation and Growth of
Vegetable Beings? Who appointed them both to guide men in the reckoning of
Time, not only to measure Solar Years by the Annual Motion of the Sun, but to
calculate Lunar Months by the Phases of the Moon, and to tell Hours by the help
of Diurnal and Nocturnal Dials? Who adorned the Heavens with those glistring
Stars which dance so orderly above our Heads, and carrying about such
multitudes of bright Torches make up the want of one Great Light with many
Little ones? These tell poor Sailors where they are when they have lost their
way; whilst they are visible, by themselves, and when they are hidden, by the
Lodestone, which is ordered to correspond with the Poles, and so lets them
know how far they have made their Voyage Northward or Southward, in which they
cannot fail, the Axis of the Earth being directed to keep a perpetual
Parallelism.

From hence I am transported into the Contemplation of the neighboring Air,
that transparent Vehicle of Light, destinated by the Benign Creator for the
large Aviary of all sorts of Birds, and where those which are Musical do
continually sing their Maker's Praises. God has made this the great Treasury
which supplies all living Creatures with Vital Breath, and hung it up as a
great Sponge to entertain the Vapors which are exhaled by the Earth and Sea in
Clouds, out of which they are squeezed into Showers, and rained down upon such
Places as could hardly be watered with any other Buckets. He made this the
(...) of those Winds which not only dissipate putrid Exhalations with a
clenfing Fan, and check the violence of immoderate Heats with fresh Briezes,
but attend seasonably in all Quarters, and with strong Blasts swell the Sails
of deep-loaden Ships, and relieve the necessities of useful Mills, which
without their aid would be becalmed at Land; and which do not only grind our
Corn, but winnow it first that it may be fit for Meal; which also draw our
Water, saw our Wood, and blow our Fire.

Now I have named Fire, how can I forbear to mention the Virtue which Almighty
Goodness has prudently bestowed upon it for our Benefit? What rare Effects
does it produce in the common Kitchen, in the Chymist's Shop, and in the
Miner's Furnace? In all which it dissolves, coagulates, concocts, and, in
short, assists all Artists so many several ways, that it may be truly called A
General Servant to Mankind. If after the Fire I should speak of Water, how
visible is Divinity upon the Sea to any that consider the vast Bounds of the
deep Ocean, that see how it carries our Ships upon its smooth Back, and so is
made a rare Instrument of universal Commerce, and advances the Profit and
Pleasure of every Country by Correspondence with others which are extremely
distant? It is a plentiful Nursery of delicate Fishes, and out of its
inexhaustible Treasury of Waters sends forth useful Streams into the Earth
through diverse Holes which are bored deep at convenient Distances, and forces
them to climb up to the Tops of Mountains, not only that they may be able to
run down again with ease, but also to carry themselves to such Heights
afterward as men's Necessities require.

After this I view the neighboring Earth, which checquers it self with the Sea
to make one Globe of both. I esteem it no small occasion for Admiration to see
that which is heavier fall under the lighter Water only in some places. How
could it have been, but that the All-knowing Creator having priviledg'd some
Spots, charged the Sea not to molest them with Water, lest there should be
wanting a convenient Habitation for many sorts of living Creatures which cannot
subsist but upon dry Ground? It is a great pleasure to me to see it embossed
with goodly Mountains which by their Height defy the proud Floods, and oppose
the barrenness which seems to reproach their scorched Outsides with their full
Veins of rich Minerals, and the Quarries of noble Marble which they contain in
their great Bellies. But this is nothing in comparison of that Admirable
Position by which the Earth is made a pleasant Habitation, capable of all
possible Advantages from Heat and Light: For its Axis keeping parallel to its
self, and inclining in so fit a Proportion to a Plane going through the Center
of the Sun, frees those who dwell upon it from the tedious Darkness of too long
Nights, and the trouble of over-hot Days. Sure the dull Earth was not so
discreet as to make this Order, nor the rambling Atoms so lucky as to execute
it in their fortuitous Concourse.

I should be in danger of losing my self, if I venture to lead you through
those infinite Wonders which Divine Skill has shown in those different Orders
of Being with which this small Globe is graced. God has made the Earth an
Archetypal Pattern of a natural Embroidery bordered with Water-work; but it is
so inimitably perfect, that the best Workmen have sought praise only by coming
near it in some faint Resemblances. He has made the Bottom (as all Artists use
to employ their courser Stuff) because it is not seen, of Rubbish, common
Earth, Clay, Sand, Coals or Stones. To raise plain Being to the order of
growing Life, he has adorned the Groundwork with green Grass. The color
being chosen with much Prudence, for it is so convenient to our Eyes, that they
are not hurt with looking upon that which they must often see. Above these we
may discern the most proper Artifice of Forest-Work, but not only done better
to the Life, but more profitably for use then that in Arras: For the great
Trees, appointed for other Designs then to grace the Picture, supply us with
Timber, which is one of the chief Materials requisite to build stately Houses,
magnificent Ships, and Sacred Temples. Whilst they stand, they have real
Shades, which please more senses then the Eye; and when they are cut down, lest
the Work should be defaced, others by a natural Art are made to grow up in
their room. Because Trees cannot remove from their places to fetch Provision,
they are made with their Heads downward, and being fastened to the Earth they
have their Mouths always in their Meat; and though they cannot make themselves
Cloths, they have no reason to complain, because God has enclosed them in
Bark, and armed them against Injuries with Prickles, and taught the weaker
Branches to clasp about stronger Boughs and the Trunks of more robust Trees,
and so to support themselves by laying their feeble Arms upon Crutches. He has
beautified them also with broad Leaves, fair Blossoms, and delicious Fruits,
and placed them to a great advantage of his Work among infinite Varieties of
sweet smelling Herbs and rare-colour'd Flowers, useful for Diet and Medicine,
and marked with Signatures which give notice of their Virtues, and teach those
who need them their particular Uses: and before they go from their places,
which many of them can hold but for a Year, they leave Seeds which grow up and
supply their Vacancies.

That this Divine piece might not want any proper Ornament, God has beautified
it with such Imagery as is not to be found any where else; for by an excellent
Disposition of rare parts visible in the Composition of all sorts of living
Creatures, as by a pleasant admirableness of Experiment, God has shown there
how many ways they may be made, bred, fed, and taught to defend themselves.
Motion also is there represented to the Beholder's Eye; for the Universal
Parent having made Life to move, gave his Creatures leave to go whither they
please, and has also assisted their Motion with Sense, that the walking
Animals might know where it was best to bestow themselves, and, as occasion
required, provide supplies necessary to maintain their Life. Thus he instructed
Birds to make proper Nests for their Young, and to hide them in Bushes; and
those which are destitute of these Accommodations he has furnished with as
proper securities, instructing them to lay their Young in warm Sand or in the
clefts of Rocks, and ordered them to feed them there till they are able to work
for their own Living. Whilst such Impotent things relieve their weakness with
so much Discretion, it is a rare Document that they are taught by a Nature
which is more wise then they. Amongst these Considerations I cannot forget the
Earth's Fruitfulness, which being appointed for a general Magazine of
Provisions, does not only satisfy the Necessity of its Numerous Inhabitants,
but support their Delight with supernumerary Additions: Indeed hereby showing
not so much its own inexhaustible Fecundity, as God's equal Liberality. Thus
the World is made a most commodious Habitation furnished with all Necessaries,
set off with all pleasant Ornaments, peopled with variety of noble Inhabitants,
and, in short, is such a perfect Contrivance, that nothing could have been more
specious for Beauty or fit for Use. Yet I do not wonder that many men are not
much affected with the Glory of the Divine Works, because they have seen them
long; for it is well known that Fools are more apt to be taken with the sight
of things which happen seldom, then of others far more admirable which have
been long before their Eyes. It is another piece of their Folly also, that when
any new thing is shown to them, they always look over that which is most to be
wondered at; of which none can make any doubt who does remember what ill luck
poor Zeuxis had when he exposed that Incomparable Picture of his Centaures to
the view of the dull Athenians.

If I had time, continued Bentivolio, to show you the principal Jewel which God
has locked up in this fair Cabinet, whose outward Case is seen by many, its
self but, by very few; it would not only perfect my Argument, but, as I think,
make it impossible to doubt who was its Author. But since my Discourse has
been too prolix already, I will break it off here, not doubting but that if it
has been tedious to be heard, yet it is as difficult to be answered.

Do not you believe, said Eugenius with an obliging Air, that any in this
Company can be tired with hearing, whilst you are willing to speak. We have
time enough, and shall never think it capable of better improvement then by
conversing with you; and since the Subject is Noble, pray do not wrong it by
omitting any thing which, if it were not for your courteous regard of our
Patience, you would say concerning it. I do not know, replied Bentivolio, how
far your Civility may occasion your trouble, but respecting your Commands I
will go on. That which I have ever looked upon since I could distinguish one
thing from another, as the most admirable Work of knowing Nature, is the most
perfect of all living Creatures, a Man; whom as God has made a rare Instrument
of his own Happiness, so I cannot but think that he designed him for an
unanswerable Proof of the Divine Skill, and intended that he should always
have as near him as he is to himself a lively Demonstration of the God whom he
is to adore. Here I know not which to admire most, the orderly Progress of his
Wisdom in forming the Parts, or the rare Contexture of the Whole when it is
finished. How would it transport you, Eugenius, if you could perceive the
successive Methods of Generation by which the Embryo is framed in the Womb, as
plainly as you can see the regular endeavors of prudent Bees, when they raise
their waxen Cells, through Glassewindows made in the sides of their Hives?
Would it not astonish you to discern busy Nature laying the first Designs of a
Foetus in its warm Receptacle impregnated with the Prolifick Virtue of both
Sexes; and having filled the Cell with a Crystalline Liquor, as a proper
material to work upon, in the midst whereof the early bud of young Life first
appears in a salient Motion, then for the enclosing thereof in a fit Mansion
see her invelop it with a thin Membrane, and afterward observe how she draws
from this Center the various lines of Life which complete the whole
Circumference, whilst she carefully stretches some small Fibers from one side
of this narrow Workhouse to another, not much unlike the manner of the subtle
Spider, when she fastens the slight Beams of her pendulous House to the walls
of the Room where she dwells; and when this rude Draught is to be brought
toward a more perfect Form, to see how judiciously she selects one of the
longest Threads, which being appointed for the backbone she extends like the
Keel of a Bark, raising from each side proportionable Ribs, and making them to
meet in the middle at some small distance above it frames the Hull of this
little Vessel; and having prepared so much room, to see with what care she
begins to furnish it with agreeable Utensils, as the Heart, Lungs, Liver, and
many others, which to keep safe she covers with the Thorax and Abdomen like the
upper Decks? Designing a Head to these, and having provided a small Mass of
pulpous substance for the Brain, she forms it into a round Tower for the
principal Residence of the Soul, and afterward walls the Acropolis with a
Skull: having appointed the Inferior parts for considerable services, she
proportionably strengthens the Members with hard Bones, and, that they might
not be wearied with the burden which they are to carry, makes them insensible,
and tiesthem together with Muscles entered into the bone upon both sides of
every joint, which are intended for Pullies of rare Motion not yet
experimented: and that as occasion requires there may be a communication of
Sense through all the parts, she unites the whole frame with Nerves, which take
their Original from the Brain. Having bestowed a small quantity of spirituous
blood upon the Heart as a stock to begin the Trade of life, she also gives it
Ventricles to receive it, and convenient Doors through which it passes for the
relief of its indigent Neighbors; and by a perpetual Motion through Arteries
and Veins both preserves and increases it self, and walking its daily Rounds
about the Body, bestows upon every part the same food by which it self is
nourished, warming them all with a vital dew.

Whilst these things are doing, and one that warily observes stands by, and
perceives how many dissimilar parts arise out of a little soft Glue, and sees
them put together with an accurate symmetry without any visible Artist
attending to perform these excellent Operations; what can he imagine but that a
God is near, who says, Grow there a Bone, here a Vein; Let this be an Head, and
that an Heart? It is also an evident testimony of the Divine Wisdom, when after
a few Months the just configuration of all the Parts being finished, and they
fenced with Skin, the Medal of a little Man appears swimming in watery Milk,
that is, encompassed with Nourishment, which now he needs to preserve his young
life, and to augment the Body to a just proportion; where it also learns to
suck beforehand, and to prepare it self betimes for the Course of its
after-life, which is to suck still; the same sort of Nourishmentbeing provided
in the Breasts of the Mother, that when the nine Months stock is spent or grown
unfit for use, it may not want something to live upon when it comes into the
World. When the Plastic virtue of the Soul has discharged its duty, and the
Embryo out-grows his lodging, Time having so matur'd its life, that it is ready
to fall from the Tree like ripe fruit, that which was destined to live, is
born; but that so feeble a thing as an Infant should so easily break its prison
or open so many Doors, can be resolved into nothing but the never-failing Skill
which ever attends upon all Divine Operations.

Since Eternal Wisdom does take so much pains in forming of a Creature, you
will expect that when it appears, we should see something correspondent to the
Divine care, and really we may. For if we consider the Organs of Sense which
beautify it externally, and the Faculties of the Soul with which it is
accomplished within, we must confess that the vigorous spirit of warm blood, or
the Plastic power of a Rational Soul, which have been employed in this Work,
were only instruments to some nobler Agent: and that it is infinitely above the
Ability of our nature to produce such an excellent effect of it self, is
manifest in this, that by the repetition of most watchful observations we are
not able to understand how it is done. When we consider the external
Instruments of Sense, we find them put by an ineffable skill in most useful
places and just numbers, and contrived with Accuracy of Proportion to their
different Uses, which is that they might be Avenues by which the Soul may sally
forth of its close Citadel into the open Campania of the great World; by which
means the Soul is completely fitted for a correspondence with all sensible
Objects, and so is both enabled to administer to its own necessities, and made
a rare Engine of Pleasure to it self, being accomplished for many excellent
Operations.

By the Eye our Mind grows acquainted with Light and beauty, and through
transparent Tunicles receives the delightful mixtures of Colors, the symmetry
of well-cut Figures, with the variety of graceful Postures and Motion, which
she represents to her self by a Unequal glass made in an Oval form. In the Ear
she lies Perdue making Observations of Noise, whilst all sorts of Sounds beat
upon her Drum as they march through those hollow Caverns in which is placed the
rarest Echo in the World. She uses the Nose not only as a Sluice to drein the
Head, but has made it also an Inlet to the pleasure of sweet Odours. By the
power of Feeling, which is spread over all the Body, she sits like an Arachne
in the midst of her Loom, and is well aware of all Motions which are made in
it, and is awakened by every new impulse to stand upon her Guard. She has
bestowed the office of Taster upon the Palate; and because it is not fit that
any hurtful thing should enter into the Stomach, she has assisted it with
three other Senses in the performance of its duty. Lest the stock of life
should fail, Nature being at a continual expense to maintain it, she has
appointed two faithful Monitors, Hunger and Thirst, who in due seasons forget
not to call for fresh supplies. In the Mouth, which is the first room where her
Provisions are bestowed, she has appointed two rows of Teeth to rough-grind
the Meat, that it might be the more easily digestable; and put an Epiglottis to
cover the passage which leads to the Lungs, lest when we drink, the Liquor
should mistake its way, and go into them. Prudent Nature knowing to what narrow
limits of Duration we are destined, to prevent a general decay which Mortality
threatens, has commanded the Individuals to propagate their kind, and to make
it possible, has contrived a proper distinction of Sexes, and rendered the
Obedience desirable by a love of Posterity and other sensible endearments.

It were too tedious to discourse of that amicable conjunction of Heat and
Moisture, by which Life is preserved in the Body, like Light by Oil inflamed in
a bright lamp; or to detain you any longer in the Contemplation of other parts
of the Body, and to speak of the Offices of the Stomach, Liver, Lungs,
Diaphragm, Spleen, Gall, and Reins, and to show how fitly every Vessel is
placed for its use; because I design not to read an Anatomy-Lecture. The
wisdom which appears in the least member is so great, that the Dissection of a
Finger or a Toe has discourse enough in it to convert an Atheist, but that for
his disingenuous obstinacy he is condemned to continue such as he is. Though I
possibly have wronged my Argument by making no better an explication of
Mysteries, which you cannot but perceive to be so great that they are no proper
subject for an ordinary Eloquence; yet by that which I have discoursed you may
imagine what those rare Anatomists would have said, who have often taken this
excellent Machine in pieces, that they might more fully discover the Divine
Artifice by which it is put together.

But having said thus much of the Organs of Sense which appear in the Body, I
will also add a short Discourse concerning the Nature of the Inward Faculties
of the Soul, and so conclude this Argument. God in all his works does usually
perform more then that which ought to be esteemed enough, that we might not be
able to make the least pretense that he comes short in any thing. This is so
manifest in those rare Powers which he has bestowed upon the Soul, that we
need no further proof. The chief of these noble Faculties is our Understanding,
by which the Soul both takes notice of it self, and so enjoys the great
pleasure of a reflection upon its own Being, and is admitted to the Privilege of
knowing its own and the World's Creator, and honored with the Contemplation of
all things, and, when it pleases, views their Properties, Repugnancies,
Agreements, Symmetries, and Disproportions; by an active Reason discourses it
self into great perfections of Knowledge, and by a sagacious Collection of
various Rules entertains it self with the Invention of profitable and
delightful Arts. By Liberty of Will a man is made Master of his Actions, and
put into an honorable capacity of offering to his Maker voluntary Sacrifices,
and enabled by the choice of his Duties to please that God who values none but
willing Obedience. That we might be well guided in the choice of fit means for
the attainment of that last End which is the chief Good of our Souls, God has
written practical Rules on our Hearts, and set that tender Principle,
Conscience, as a constant Spy upon our actions to attend us in all places, and
has made it so much his Care to hinder us from Sinning, that he has
constituted us Witnesses, Accusers, and Judges to our selves. God did not think
it fit to make us immutable: yet lest we should fall into error by too sudden
resolutions, he made us able to Deliberate; and since usually we do nothing so
well but it may be mended, he gave us the power of Animadversion, that by
reflecting upon our selves we might recall what we had mistaken by Second
thoughts, and meliorate that which was not so well done at first by
after-endeavours. We arrive at Knowledge but by degrees, and therefore ought
not to forget what we have learned: in reference to this necessity God has
bestowed upon us Memory, as a faithful Secretary, who lays up our Notions in
safe Custody, and brings them forth as we have occasion to use them. By due
improvement of these Faculties God has enabled us to furnish our selves with
store of useful Observations, and so make our selves possessours of Prudence,
that great Directress of Humane affairs, by which we are taught to govern our
selves in all conditions of Life, to respect Time, Place and Persons in our
Deportment, and to keep a decorous Correspondence with all Circumstances of
Action. I should add to these the power of Imagination, which really is of
such a strange Nature, that it is an hard matter to tell you what it is: only
thus much I may say, that when the Soul is disposed to take pleasure in a free
Air, she is carried by quick Fancy as in a light Chariot over the tops of
highest Mountains, cuts the Clouds, wanders amongst the Stars, and traversing a
course downwards on a sudden ranges through Forests, alights upon the
Seashore, dives into the Abysses of the Ocean; and, not being satisfied with
the various shapes of Real Beings, makes as many more Fantastical Forms of her
own. The Imagination pleasing her self very much that she is able to lead the
Mind such a wild Dance, till the Understanding wearied with her toying,
commands her to return, and having got her home, fetters her restless Activity
with the drowsiness of Sleep, which yet is able to hold her but a little while.
Besides all these Gifts, to complete the Dowry God has given a Power to the
Spiritual part to move the Material, by which it is made a rare Engine of
Spontaneous Motion and the noblest Automaton in the World, not only moving the
whole Body at once, but directing the Spirits into what Muscles it pleases,
puts only such parts into Motion as serve the present Design. How brave a
faculty this is, appears in those prodigious Dances of a Lutenists fingers,
which vary Harmony through so many Notes in a Minute, that the quickest Ear can
scarce hearken so fast as he plays. To this I might add another Excellent
Product of this Power, which is Speech, by which the Soul puts Conceptions into
Words, and makes her Apprehensions audible. By this we learn our selves hearing
others speak, and teach others speaking our selves. By this when it is
perfected into Eloquence we convince the Erroneous, reconcile the Obstinate to
their Duties and allure the Afflicted from their oppressive Meditations. I
cannot but take notice also how the Voice, by the help of those Natural Bellows
the Lungs, and the Musical Larynx, fitted with Muscles to further its
Modulation, enables us to entertain our selves and others with one of the best
Recreations, Vocal Music; which is advanced also by the Concent of others who
sing the same Air in other wellagreeing Notes, especially being accompanied
with an Organ, which Art having conformed to the nature of Humane Voice, does
not only assist, but imitate us whilst we sing. He that is deaf to the Voice of
Divine Wisdom, and does not admire it whilst it expresses it self so
harmoniously, may well be wondered at himself for an Unparalled Stupidity.

The best of the old Philosophers, who were the Glory of their times, could not
behold the curious structure of this noble Machine which I have described, nor
look upon the strange usefulness of its well-fitted Parts, without making Hymns
and offering Hecatombs as their humble acknowledgment of the Unspeakable Wisdom
of that All powerful Mind which composed it. How could they do less? For,
seeing all the Pieces, not of this, but all the Divine Works put into such
exact order that all Wise men must needs approve it, perceiving the Method
according to which they were contrived of so deep a reach that none but great
Minds can fathom it, and observing the whole System to be so perfect that
nothing can be desired toward its emendation, but that which is impossible;
they justly concluded that it was the effect of no meaner a Cause then an
Omnipotent and All-knowing Principle. But here I must again entreat you, most
worthy Friends, continued Bentivolio, to pardon the tedious length of this
Addition to my former Discourse, which I make no doubt but you will do both of
your own Goodness, and also considering that it is hardly possible to speak
briefly of such a vast Subject.

It is easier for you to obtain our Thanks then our Pardon, replied Eugenius,
since you have put an Obligation upon us by your Narrative of the Creation, and
presented to our view those various pulchritudes which adorn the Nature of
things; which for my own part I esteem a most Excellent Contemplation, and
worthy of the expense not of a few Hours, but our whole Life. And so do I, said
Pasenantius; and should easily grant that your Argument did prove the Existence
of a God, because he made such a World, but that we are told by such as pretend
to know very much, That it was not contrived by the Skill of any Artist, but
was Eternally such as it is now; or if it did not always exist in this Form,
yet they say that there is no necessity to suppose that some God framed it,
since it might be made by Nature; and some affirm very confidently that it was
produced by a Fortuitous concourse of small Particles of Matter, which having
moved up and down a good while in an infinite Space, did at last stumble upon
this form of things: and they want not other Hypotheses beside this of which
they make use to evade the force of your Argument: for without that Method
which you so magnify in the contrivance and production of living Creatures,
they suppose that Men and Women sprung at first from the Earth of themselves.

I did expect some such Answers, replied Bentivolio, for I have often heard
such things quoted by the Patrons of Atheism, when they have been put to
streights for the defense of their absurd Opinion; but I never wondered at it:
For since the acknowledgment of a Creator would bring them under Obligations to
a Religious Observance of him, they endeavor to invent many things to
undermine that Belief, and grant any thing which can be supposed, though never
so vainly, if it do but seem useful to that Design. I think those Objections
which you have mentioned as frivolous as the rest; and as they all come far
short of a just Account of the World's Original, so some of them are extremely
ridiculous. Your First Objectors pronounce the World Eternal, and say that it
did always exist in such a Form as appears to us now, and that there has ever
been a Sun and a Moon, a Sea and Earth, and that they were always inhabited as
they are at present, and that Men and Women and other living Creatures, having
a Natural Power of Generation, did from Eternity propagate their kind; and by
saying this they suppose they have sufficiently discharged themselves of a God.
But how vainly they think so, and how weak this pretense is, will soon appear,
if you will give me leave to show you with what insupportable Absurdities it is
clogged.

I might here take a just occasion to urge Atheists with the Unreasonableness
of their Incredulity, since they give an Historical Faith to most ordinary
Writers, and deny it to the most faith-worthy Book that ever was written; in
which we have received a clear Account of the Beginning of the World, and where
God is positively asserted to be the Creator of all things. But because your
Sect, pretending only to Reason, uses to disparage such Arguments under the
Name of Rumors, I shall endeavor to demonstrate otherwise how rational it is
to believe that Report. The disacknowledgment of God as the First cause of
Being, and the denial of him as the Creator of the Universe, do utterly bereave
us of all Hope ever to arrive at any knowledge of Truth, which we both
naturally desire with a strong Passion, and are fully assured that we can never
attain it till we find out the First Cause of all things. For plunging our
selves into the deep Study of Nature, and strictly examining every effect which
we see, and following it home to its Cause, in the pursuit we over-take many
Mediate Causes which divert our course awhile, and requite our labor in part
by the knowledge which we receive of them; but upon Inquiry finding them to be
only Effects of other Causes, we are forced into this Thought, That though the
Chain of Causes and Effects may be drawn out into a long Series by many
successive Links, yet there must be in the World some Great Cause of which
there is no former, eternally existing of it self, from which all others derive
their Beginning; and having found out this, we rest very well satisfied. So the
Traveller being instructed by the purling water which runs along by him in a
little chanel, that there is a Fountain from whence it springs, guides himself
by the windings of the Stream which threads the Medows, and as by a Clue leads
him to the Rock out of which it bubbles, and there he sits down and drinks.
This Hypothesis of a First Cause is a Principle so necessary to Contemplation,
that all Philosophers have looked upon an infinite Series of Causes as an
intricate Labyrinth of (...) out of which there is no Egress, and have avoided
it with the same wary care which they would take not to fall into a bottomless
Pit. Some also of them have said, whom it is not easy to confute, That if they
should admit this absurd supposal of the World's Eternity, they would be forced
to grant that there are more Infinites then one, and that one of them may be
greater then another, or that one of them may be a Part of another, and yet
equal to the Whole; which are Assertions hard to be swallowed or digested by a
rational Belief. If this World had no Beginning, you can assign no Time in the
Duration of it but an Infinite number of years went before it; one Infinite
number finished a hundred years since must needs be shorter then that to which
another Century is added, and so one Infinite is bigger then another: or if you
say that they are equal, because both are Infinite; then the first being but a
part of the second, it will follow that a Part is equal to the Whole; and we
must be content to grant too that there have passed as many Years as Hours in
this feigned succession: For Infinite Years having passed, the number of Hours,
though there be some thousands of them in one Year, cannot exceed them, for it
is but Infinite. If these things contain an inexplicable Darkness, then this
Notion of an Infinite Succession of Generations, which is brought in to take
off the Dependence of the World from a First Cause, signifies no more but this,
That Atheists desiring to reject a great Truth under pretense that it is hard
to be Believed, are able to find nothing to avoid it but an Hypothesis which
cannot be Understood.

I confess, said Eugenius, I am not well able to dive into mysterious
Arguments, but I have thought sometimes as I have walked upon the Banks of a
River, that if the World had been Eternal, those great Hills which I have seen
pleasantly situated upon it would have been worn away before this time with the
constant beating of mighty Waters, and that their high Tops would have been
levelled by the undermining Streams. And when I see those dreadful Rocks which
stand in the Sea, and raising their Heads above the Waves threaten the fearful
Sailours to dash their Ships in pieces if they come near them, I am apt to
think that if they had been placed there from Eternity, the rough Waves would
have washed them quite away long ago: For though Stones do grow, yet it is
easy to observe that what the Sea devours in a Year is not to be repaired in
an Age, and that growing more greedy after it has swallowed a Part, it does
with more facility prey upon the Whole. But I have not said this to interrupt
you, added Eugenius to Bentivolio, and therefore I desire you to proceed. It is
no Interruption of my Discourse, but, as I think, a Confirmation of the Truth
which I defend, replied Bentivolio: however I will goon; and as I think that
which has been said sufficient to prove that the World did not eternally
subsist in this order which is now visible; so I think that the other
Objections which are gathered together to cloud this Truth may as easily be
blown away.

Your Second Disputers possibly doubting the Truth of the former Assertion, and
being willing to find out some other Subterfuge, have affirmed that Nature made
all things. These seem to have had such an eager desire to say something, that
they resolved to speak, though what they said was as ill directed to the
purpose as the Speech of the blind Senator to the Turbat. The truth is, the
Objection is so foolish that it scarce deserves to be confuted; but because
some Atheists play so low, I think it not amiss to show in a few words that
those who use this Argument either do not care what they say, or know not what
they mean. For by Nature they would signify either a Dull Principle, which
having neither Reason nor Sense, has brought forth all things, and disposed
them in so good order that no Art can correct it; which is an absurd
Imagination, as will appear by and by: or else by Nature they mean a knowing
Power, which having made the World, and well understanding the distinct
Properties of all things, assigned them convenient stations according to the
Direction of an excellent Wisdom; and so they confess a God, only they will not
call him by that Name.

If this answer satisfy not, we must ask them whether by Nature they mean
Particular or General Nature. If they say that some Particular Nature made all
the rest; which is it? That of Men or Beasts, Sun or Moon? If any of these be
quoted, the Doubt remains still; for we shall ask who made that: which will be
hard to answer, except they say, That things made one another by turns. If they
say, It was General Nature; that is nothing but all the Particulars which we
put together in our Conception, or, if you will, the Universe: And then the
sense of the Objection will be, That the World made it self, and so was both
before and after it self. Or if by Nature they understand some other substance
distinct from created Beings diffused through the Universe, which does sustain
all things by a mighty Power, and direct them to their respective ends with an
unerring Knowledge; they grant that there is a God, but they know not what they
say.

Others, which think themselves more Ingenious, to mend the matter, have made a
Conjecture which they esteem very plausible, and imagine that the World was
probably sometimes adorned with this form of Being in which we behold it at
present, and afterward possibly fell from it into a shapeless Chaos, and was
resolved into innumerable multitudes of Atoms, which fluctuating for many
years, and justling one another, thrust things into that Order which they now
have; taking it for granted that Matter and Motion were sufficiently able to
produce the World without any knowing Directour. But the insufficiency of this
device discovers it self in that it does shamefully beg those things which
ought to be proved as Foundations for what is asserted, and they superstruct
upon it such an heavy Fabric of wild Consequences, that it is not able to
sustain them. They talk of little Particles of divided Matter, by whose various
contextures all things are supposed to be made, to such as allow not that
Matter can exist at all without a God. They take it also for granted that this
Matter is moved too without the acknowledgment of a Divine Motour, to them who
can believe no such thing, because they know that Matter is a stupid Principle
and of it self unactive; but they supposing that it does exist of it self,
might very easily bestow an eternal Motion upon it. Hoping to obtain of us a
belief of these fictions, with a growing presumption they precariously imagine
that all things were made up by the conjunction of these Particles as things
pre-existent to their being, and that the most perfect of living Creatures, Men
and Women, are but heaps of fine Atoms thrown together: When as by the most
strict observance of the Generation of Animals which are bred continually, it
cannot be perceived that any are produced by the commixture of such antecedent
Miscibles; daily experience witnessing that their bodies are formed out of an
Homogeneous Principle, and do exist before those Epicurean Atoms or
Aristotelean Elements. But if we grant that there was Matter and Motion, and
that Bodies are made by the jumbling of these Atoms, and that the composition
of various Forms is nothing else but the connection of loose Particles; yet it
is most absurd to think that this great Machine, the Universe, consisting of so
many excellent Parts, could have been framed by unguided Motion.

For the Atoms moved in the infinite Space, which is supposed, either in
Parallel Lines, or Obliquely. If they marched on directly, they could never
meet to compose so many bodies by their Union. The Inventors of this Notion
perceiving this inconvenience, affirm them to decline a little, that so by
their interfering Motion the jagg'd Particles might catch hold of one another.
And they are also forced to say that they decline variously; for if all
declined one way, none would meet. But though we grant that the rambling Atoms
take different courses in their Motions of Declination, and so may possibly
meet the sooner, and also suppose that whilst they wander up and down without a
guide they may sometimes show us by a few rude Compositions that they had
united, and formed themselves into inconsiderable lumps of different sizes and
Figures; yet to believe that so many varieties of such noble Works as I have
before recited, should rise out of Matter by a blind scuffle of indiscerning
Principles, is both an Absurd Fancy, and the height of foolish Credulity.
Things of Nature are better then those of Art, and yet this can do nothing but
by the application of an industrious skill; what then but Madness can make us
think that Nature is Irrational? When was any rare thing done by Chance? What
though Apelles struck the Image of Foame upon his Table by an angry cast of his
Pencil? could he with such another, nay a thousand such rude throws, have
formed a Bucephalus or a Stratonica? If we could see these lawless Atoms meet
by accident in the form of a Tree, and grow into an Organ, the branches shaping
themselves into tunable Pipes, and varying Notes according to bigness and
length, the upper part doing the duty of a Sound-board, and the lower framed
into a pair of Bellows, which filled and moved with wind give us the pleasure
to hear excellent Airs; we should be apt to think that Chance is no
contemptible Principle, and we should abate our estimation of Knowledge; such
an Instrument equalling and very much exceeding those which being made with
great care must be played upon by one who understands Music as well as he that
framed it. This also would be more admirable then those Instruments, which
being contrived with much pains to play as it were a few lessons of themselves,
are then helped with a wheel filled with Pins orderly placed with an Artificial
Skill and regular supplies of Wind. I suppose we may chance to see an Organ
rise out of the Ground after the forementioned manner, when we shall happen to
hear twenty Madmen singing together, all their wild Notes falling of
themselves into one Harmonious sound. These are the only Voices which will fit
such an Instrument.

But if it be too much to expect that a Plant should grow so Musically, why do
not these numerous Atoms conspire together after their fortuitous manner, some
to make an heap of Letters, others Paper, some a Press, and all to place
themselves as well as Printers use to do, and put out some Book, which men
seeing might cease to magnify their own Industry? But the Atoms are grown
sullen: for though they have done these and greater Matters of old, (for they
have produced Men and Women) yet they will do so no more; or it may be they
were tired long ago, and when they began to be weary, by chance formed the
Sexes which were not known before, that Men and Women might be made without
their help. If the Model of the Universe had been framed by Chance, it is
rational to think that instead of those beautiful contrivances and lovely
Symmetries which appear in the Works of All-knowing Nature, we should have seen
the World filled with misshapen Animals, as Men with three Feet, and Beasts
with five, and many other such sights ugly by reason of Disproportion. But now
Monsters are rare, we see only a few whose understandings are so distorted,
that seeing the World peopled with such well-compos'd inhabitants, perversely
imagine that formerly there were such as I have named and worse, but that they
being not well able to defend themselves, were destroyed by others who did not
like them.

If these things did not cast a sufficient disparagement upon this Principle,
yet the permanency of the well-ordered World for so many Ages would discharge
it from any such mean Dependence as the fortuitous concatenation of Atoms;
those little bodies would not have been able so long to hold together by their
forked tails; they are not so fast tied in their present configurations that
they cannot get loose; neither are they so constantly repercuss'd when they
offer to move out of their places, that for fear of blows from their Neighbors
they dare not stir and fetch their usual walks. They may remove at their
pleasure; for all things being mingled with a generally-dispread vacuity, those
which are contiguous to emptiness may move, and then the next to them in order,
and so the whole Nation of Atoms change their posture, if nothing else do stop
their course, and hinder them from leaving those bodies which are made up only
by an aggregation of Particles.

It is true, we see there are solid Bodies in the World as well as fluid; but
we can imagine no better reason of their Solidity, then the united Rest of
those contiguous parts whereof they do consist: and since some Bodies are
harder then others, those which have greater firmness may easily justle the
weaker out of their places, and clashing continually in as great a variety of
contrary Motions as there are cross lines upon a Globe, if some Potent God did
not interpose, the Forms of Matter by the dissolution of their Parts would be
continually altered, as Wrinkles are upon the face of water by a ruffling Wind.
The Nature of things being thus constituted, can we imagine that the Permanency
of the World should be resolved into no other Principle then the forementioned
Hypothesis; or that Chance is the glue which has united its parts so long, and
locked the Sun and Moon in their whirle-pools? We may as rationally suppose
that Astronomers have made a league with these wandering Atoms, that for some
certain time they should not desert their stations, hired some to watch others,
or at least have agreed with them that they should appear in set places and
postures at appointed seasons, and make good their Predictions: how else could
they foretell the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon many years beforehand? By which
we may perceive that, though such as say the World did exist of it self, do
conformably to their own Opinion affirm that it is its own preserver, and hangs
together by the power of its own Nature, not of God, and subsists without the
help of any Extrinsecal Principle, yet they have no firm ground for their
Assertion; but it is very rational to say, that he who made Motion, and
continues it still because it is useful, has given it Laws, and does so
regulate it whilst it rebounds from one thing to another, that the World is no
more disturbed from persevering in that Rest which enables it to resist those
Motions which would change its Form, then the Sea is permitted to overflow the
whole Earth. Yes, yes; If that Omnipresent Goodness which is spread through the
Creation did not sustain the whole, it would fall in pieces; for all things
knocking rudely against one another must needs break themselves, as blind-men
armed with bows and arrows and shooting at Rovers would kill one another. If
the Government of the World were permitted to blind Chance, or the turbulent
humors of Degenerate men, it is not to be imagined how it should be tolerably
habitable. The wheels of Humane affairs would soon be taken off, or broken, if
created Beings were not guided by an (...) Power, which both directs them in
the Road, and stops their extravagant Motions as it pleases, and so preserves
the great Chariot of the World from being overturned. The wisest of men have
thought it more rational to suppose that a Ship without a Pilot may live at Sea
in a tempest when it is tossed with waves among Rocks, then that Mankind, which
is often miss-led with dangerous Errors, and is usually hurried with violent
Passions, should not quickly bring the World to a miserable end by mad
practices, if there were not a God who, to preserve the Order which he has
constituted, keeps up those Banks, which if they were once broken would drown
the World with a Deluge of inexpressible Calamity. As God is the Founder of
Order, so prudent men in all Ages have looked upon Religion, which is a just
Observance of him, as one of the chief Principles by which the Happiness of the
World is supported, and which being destroyed would necessarily infer the ruin
of all civil Societies: They have esteemed it that sacred Knot, which being cut
in pieces lets loose Disorder, accompanied with Contempt of Law and subversion
of Right, and followed with common Destruction.

I cannot but wonder that some who pretend to Philosophy have thought that
excellent Order, which is manifest in the Regular Motions of the Celestial Orbs
and the Vicisitudes of Seasons, which are admirable by reason of those
Advantages which they produce, may be resolved into the disposal of an
undiscerning Principle, because the Sea ebbs and flows at set times, and
because they observe that Agues have Periodical Fits. Those that argue after
this manner seem to challenge God at his own weapons; and we may guess at
their Success by their Folly. Is it fit to be quoted as an Argument against
him, that he has made that great Body of Navigable Waters, and subjected it to
the influences of the Moon, which at certain seasons does make constant Tides,
which are not more useful to Merchants, and so to all men, by Importing and
Exporting Materials of Trade, then they are applicable to the Proof of a Deity,
whose Skill by such an Excellent Work is clearly demonstrated? Or, if we must
think that there is no God, because one who is sick of a Quartan Ague is
troubled with Periodical Fits, why may we not as well say that there is no God,
because two Armies do sometimes make a Truce and cease fighting? No, you say
that is done by the Appointment of humane Discretion. Well, but is it not in
the power of Divine Prudence to appoint a neighboring Enomy to infest us at
set times? If a Disease be a conflict of our Nature with that which infests us,
it is a Courtesy that we are not put to the trouble of fighting continually
for our lives, but have time allotted to recruit our spent Forces, and are
taught in those Intervalls to provide against the next approach of our Enemy. Is
it an Argument against God, that he has made a creature which cannot fight
always without weariness? Besides, that the Paroxysms are exactly constant in
their returns, is false; for they change in time and operation according to the
variety of many Accidents, and return oftener and stay longer, as the Body in
which they lodge is differently indisposed.

The Objection which you cited last of all is so extravagant, that no Fable is
more incredible, and we may justly wonder what should bring it into any man's
mind. You would have said, if you had explained your self a little further,
that our Grandmother Earth cast out of her bowels Bags like Wombs, (I think
you might more properly have said Secundines) and these breaking by degrees,
Children came forth at last, who were nourished by a kind of Milky Juice till
they became great Boys and Girls, and so made a shift to live upon herbs, and,
when they could catch them, upon their fellow-Animals. The consideration of
this Poetical fancy assures us how those who disown a God, are distressed for
want of ability to give any tolerable account of the Production of living
Creatures; and withal shows us the Disingenuity of (...), who not believing a
Truth so naturally plain, admit things which are not only very improbable, but
highly absurd; and indeed are well content that any thing should be imposed
upon them, though never so unlikely, if it do but absolve them from the belief
of a Deity. How else could it be possible that they should reject the most
credible story of the Creation, and believe that men grew out of the ground
like Mushromes; or that Stars did sow the Earth with a Celestial Sperm, which
afterward grew up into Men and Women; or, rather then fail, that at first
Stones were transubstantiated into Rational Creatures, being cast over the
shoulders of Deucalion and Pyrrha; or, at least, that Prometheus made them of
Clay, and enlivened them with Fire which he stole from Heaven; or possibly,
that long ago Men were Ants, and were afterward transformed by AEacus? These
Fictions are as passable as your Wind Eggs.

The disingenuity of Atheists will be more manifest, if we consider how
unwilling they are to allow an Eternity to God, and yet bestow it upon such a
contemptible thing as Matter, and whose Notion they know to be clogged with
inexplicable difficulties; and obstinately deny the Infinity of a Divine Being,
and yet grant it both to Space, and also to the Succession of Ages; and affirm
that, because Matter and Motion are in the World, therefore there is nothing
else; or that there is no God, because an account may be given of some of his
Works by Matter and Motion; and grant that Wood, Stones, Nails and Tools, may
make themselves, and, which is somewhat an easier Task, build an House without
an Architect; and so rather then acknowledge the World to be the Effect of a
First Cause, assert it to be its own Builder, House, and Inhabitant. Those who
form their Speeches by these Rules, need not make any scruple to say that a
Watch may make it self, and winding it self up by Chance move so regularly as
to show the Day of the Month, the Hour of the Day, the Age of the Moon, and the
Time of the Tide. Who but a Fool could ever think that the Eye was not made to
see, the Ear to hear, or the Hands to take hold of things, but that each of
them being accidentally fitted for such purposes, we apply them accordingly?
Such as talk at this rate, whilst they bid others hearken to the voice of
Nature, do certainly stop their own Ears against it; and may truly be said not
to argue from the Dictates of Reason, but rather, being at a loss, to cast Lots
what they shall say next: and we can no more reasonably expect satisfaction
from their discourses, then hope to read our Destiny in the first place which
accidentally opens in Virgil or Homer.

Is this all the Courtesy that we are to expect from Philosophy, to be
levelled with the ignorance of the rude Vulgar, who wonder at the brass or gaze
upon the gilded wood of a noble Sphere, and brutishly neglect the rare Motions
of it, and take no notice of his Art who made it such an Excellent Machine? Or
are we grown so perverse, that we confess that Art is now in the World, but
deny that there was any at the first; and say that great Skill is manifested in
the imitation of Nature's Works, but that there was none in the Designation of
the Original; and so equal the Casts of senseless Chance to the contrivances of
the best Skill, and esteem blind men as able to give a judgment of Colors as
those who have the clearest sight?

Those who can digest the forementioned Absurdities of which the Atheistical
Hypothesis is undoubtedly guilty, may safely swallow Iron, and not only with
ease deny that there is a God, but without any difficulty believe what they
will. But it is rational to think, that God will have satisfaction from those
unworthy Persons who obscure the Glory of his Divinity with such mis-reports;
especially since he has both made them his Creatures, given them leave to
contemplate his Works themselves, and commanded them to reveal their Excellency
to others.

I could not but suppose, replied Pasenantius, that you would endeavor to
fortify your Opinion with probable Arguments, and embellish the Notion of a
Deity with all specious Allegations, and therefore expected that you would also
load the contrary Opinion with all imaginable Absurdities. But we are told by
others, that your Hypothesis is not free from considerable Objections: For if a
God made the World, as you say, he seems to them not to have been Good, because
he made it no better; for many things are but of little use, and some very
hurtful.

Is this the formidable Difficulty which threatens this great Article of Faith?
said Bentivolio smiling: then I perceive that the number of our Enemies which
are yet unconquered is but small, and that their strength is less. They seem to
march confidently; but in my mind they are armed no better then those
ridiculous Caulomucetes in Lunia, who are reported to have covered themselves
with Mushromeshields, and to have carried Spears which were only long blades of
Asparagus. It is no wonder that such as endeavor to grasp Immensity with a
Finite understanding, and level God's Wisdom with their own Apprehensions, do
ask many ridiculous questions concerning the Divine Operations; and, besides
those which you have named, demand with what Tools he made the World, because
they themselves cannot work without them; and bid us tell them in what Moulds
he cast the Celestial Orbs, because they employ such utensils when they make
Pistol-bullets. Whilst they complain in the behalf of many things created, of
some because they are not very good in themselves, and of some because they are
hurtful to others; really, Pasenantius, I believe it is a very hard matter for
these Objectours to say what would have pleased them: I am apt to think they
desire they know not what: some things they grant to be very Excellent, but
they would have had all others equal to them. The folly of this desire is
manifest if we apply their wish to any particular Phenomenon. All confess the
Sun to be a most noble Being: but will any one that is wise therefore think it
fit that every thing should be a Sun? The Humane Body is a rare Machine: but is
it then a blemish upon the Creation, that Frogs have not the same parts and
figure? Certainly if these men were to give directions for the Design of a
Magnificent Picture, they would order it to be drawn without any shadows; and
if they were to reform the Laws of Harmony, Half-Notes would be in danger of
banishment out of all Composition. It is not freedom from Envy, but want of
Art, to make all the Members of a living creature Eyes. These curious people
consider not, that such a Frame as the World is must consist of many Parts, and
that they have a sufficient use, though one is not equal to another, whilst
they help to constitute such a rare System, and grace it with the delightful
variety of Beauty by reason of the different degrees of Being; so that it is
only a defect of Knowledge which makes them think that this World can be
mended: And we plainly see, that the better which they fancy, if it were made
by such Rules which they seem to approve, must of necessity be worse; and that
they would deserve the same praise for undertaking to make an alteration, which
he merited, who pretending to out-doe all the Pictures which had ever been made
of Horses, drew one with hairs upon the lower eyelid.

There is nothing which you can name as likely to be undervalu'd for its
meanness, but a sufficient use may be assigned to preserve it from contempt.
What is more in danger of Disregard then the loose particles of Sand which lie
upon the Seashore, or Gravel which is trod upon in Highwayes? Or what can be
thought of less use then Hairs, which are despised as Excrescencies of Nature?
Yet does not the Mariner thank God for those Sands, whilst they ballast his
Ship? and is not the Traveller glad of that contemptible Gravel for making his
way more firm? and are not these Philosophers well pleased with it in their
Gardens, when they see how convenient it is to beautify their Walks? And those
inconsiderable Hairs which seem not only superfluous but prejudicial, do not
they warm the cold brain with a natural Peruke, keep sweat from falling upon
the delicate Instrument of our Sight, being placed prudently upon the
Eyebrows; and prove besides that they were not made in vain, since by a
seasonable appearance in the Face they give a very useful notice of a different
Sex, when the age of a Man begins to be more dangerous to Women, if they were
not so assured with whom they converse?

Whereas you say some things are hurtful; if you understand your own words, you
must mean that they are not good for all uses: I shall soon let you see how
much you are mistaken in this Fancy. To instance only in one or two things:
Will you esteem ill-sented Weeds and venomous Plants mischievous, because they
are not good for ordinary food? It is unreasonable; they were not appointed for
any such end: For the same cause you may as well find fault with Fire and
Stones. But if you apply them in medicine, you will perceive that they are
singularly beneficial. This may be said also of Poisonous Animals; that they
might not hurt us we are guarded with Discretion, and some of them are (...)
own Antidotes, as is seen in the Oil of Scorpions, and the useful Triacle which
is made of Vipers. So that we have no great reason to complain much of that
harmfulness which by prudent care we may avoid, and whose cure does grow so
near to it. But to end this conference, Pasenantius, said Bentivolio, I think
that you and I should suspect rather that we are unskilful, then that things
are useless, when we know not to what purposes they are designed; and that it
is more ingenuous to improve our Understanding by making Experiments, then
idly to endeavor to find a Fault where there is none but our Ignorance.

Thus, said Nicomachus, did Bentivolio conclude his Discourse, which Eugenius
entertained with great delight: Autautus heard it with a kind of Indifference,
because it seemed to carry a good shadow of Probability: But Pasenantius,
according to his obstinate humor, would not believe it to be true, though he
was not able to confute it. It grew something late, and therefore Eugenius
desired Pasenantius and Autautus to stay all night. Pasenantius excused
himself, pretending that some important business urged him to wait upon
Antitheus that evening. Autautus accepted the invitation. When Pasenantius was
gone, Eugenius desired his Guests to leave off their Philosophy for a while,
and to refresh themselves with a short Supper, which was now ready. They walked
in the Garden till it was set upon the Table. After Supper they took leave of
each other for a night; And because it is now late, added Nicomachus, if you
please, let us do so too. The Company having expressed the great content which
they took in Bentivolio's Discourses, and having thanked Nicomachus for making
the Rehearsal, Theonoe and Irene conducted Urania to her Repose, and Sympathus
accompanied Nicomachus to his Chamber.

The next day as they were walking all together in the Shades of that pleasant
Grove which joins to Theander's Gardens, and diverted themselves with various
Entertainments, they sometimes expressed a Resentment of Alethion's condition,
and reproch'd Antitheus, and sometimes complained of the absence of Bentivolio
and Amyntor. Panaretus seeing that they were so much the more grieved, because
they saw this loss ready to be completed with the departure of their remaining
Companions, endeavored to oppose their disturbance thus: Since you know, said
he, that we are so appointed in this World, that our Felicities are often
interrupted, let us not be troubled at any thing which happens, as if we had
not foreseen it; neither let us deprive our selves of that Happiness which we
may enjoy, by neglecting to improve the advantage of our present Conversation;
and by no means let us antedate the Disquiet which will attend our mutual
Absence, by allowing Melancholy to seize on us aforehand. And if you think it
is a sin in us to leave you, it is just that Nicomachus should suffer the first
punishment of it, since he is come to call us away. If that will give you any
satisfaction, replied Nicomachus, I will cheerfully undergo what such merciful
Judges shall please to appoint. I think, said Theonoe, we had best take it for
granted that it is a Sin, without disputing the Case; and since Nicomachus is
so willing to make amends for doing us this supposed injury, if it were not a
presumption for me to offer at the pronouncing of his Sentence, I would condemn
him to the trouble of perfecting the relation of Bentivolio's Discourses in
Theriagene. You have formed his (...) much to our advantage, said Irene; and as
by yesterday's experience we perceive of how faithful a Memory he is Master, we
are well assured that he is able to discharge this Task. Yes, said Urania, and,
if I might take the boldness to speak in all our Names, I should freely declare
that Nicomachus shall not only by this means expiate his Fault, but that his
Patience will be so highly meritorious that it shall oblige us all. Though I
did easily imagine, replied Nicomachus, considering the just Temper of those
who were to appoint what I should suffer, that I should not be condemned to any
thing Intolerable; yet I did not expect this kind of Penance, having endured it
once already, and then discovered so much of Imperfection, that I thought, if
it were only to save your selves from the troublesome exercise of your own
Pity, you would not be willing to see me suffer after that manner any more:
Therefore I must entreat you to alter my Punishment, lest you afflict your
selves, and also become further Witnesses of the Wrongs which you force me to
commit against Bentivolio. Do not you think to escape the Law with such Pleas,
answered Urania; you can commit no Fault against my Brother by failing to
recite what he did say for want of Memory; or, if you did, you are able to
supply that defect by the Excellency of your Wit: and I am apt to think that
you have in several Passages concealed his Infirmity, pretending to have
received from him what was your own. I am obliged to you for his sake; but,
since you promised Obedience when you made us your Judges, submit to your
Censure, and be assured as to the Apprehension which you have for us, that all
the Affliction which we shall endure by way of Sympathy will be only to enjoy a
great Pleasure whilst we hear you discourse. I should not, replied Nicomachus,
make any more Objections against my Duty, (for such I esteem whatsoever you are
pleased to command me) but that besides what I have told you already, I can
remember nothing but the story of Anaxanacton, which Eugenius, who had but an
impersect notice of it, requested Bentivolio to relate to him: and since you
are acquainted with it already, I (...) that I am fairly excused from the
Rehearsal. Do not hope to save your self thus, answered Theonoe, nor believe
that any Ingenuous Persons can be wearied with a Story which is filled with the
greatest Accidents that ever happened in the World, though they should hear it
often. As no other can equal it in the Importance of the Matter, so I make no
doubt but that in Bentivolio's Narrative it is accommodated to a very pleasing
Method. I see I gain nothing, said Nicomachus, but loss of Time by the Delay of
my Obedience; I might have performed a good part of my Task if I had begun
sooner, and therefore I will make no more Excuses. He proceeded thus.

As Bentivolio and Eugenius were walking one day in a Summer-Gallery, which was
built after the manner of the Lycaeum where Aristotle conversed with his
Peripateticks, Eugenius having heard Bentivolio in several Discourses make an
honorable mention of Anaxanacton, and being not very well acquainted with his
story, desired Bentivolio to give him a fuller Information concerning the Life
of that most Excellent Person. I would do it with all my heart, said
Bentivolio, if my Power were correspondent to my Desire of your Satisfaction.
If Anaxanacton would please to bestow upon me a Volto divino, (a favor which
he is reported to have done the Prince of Edessa, when he pitied the disability
of the Painter whom he sent to take his Picture) it would be easy for me to
perform this Task by showing you his fair Image. Whether it be true or no that
the Glory which ray'd from Anaxanacton's Face dazell'd the forementioned
Painter, I do not know; but I am sure there are none who have seriously
contemplated his Incomparable Perfections, that can think they have a
sufficient Skill to describe his just Character. Some things in his Life are so
great that they are too big for the Capacity of ordinary Apprehensions, and
those Heroical Pieces which do fill it up are so many, that it is difficult to
remember them all: But since I have had the Happiness to see some Memoirs of
his Life written by his Friends, who knew him by intimate Converse from the
time of his public Actions till his Death, I shall be able to make a Relation
by which you will perceive that you never heard such things spoken of any other
Person. But because it will be too long, added Bentivolio, to walk till I can
finish this Report, we will sit down. Hereupon the Company took their Seats,
and Bentivolio began thus.

The History of ANAXANACTON.
I must first acquaint you with the manner of his Birth, which possibly will
awake your Admiration, when I tell you that his Mother was a Virgin; it being
but fit that he who was Lord of Nature, should be born out of its Ordinary
Course. This is something strange, I confess, said Eugenius; for it is a thing
which has no parallel Example. Yes, it is strange, replied Bentivolio, but not
at all incredible to you, Eugenius, or any else who acknowledges a God. How
easily can he who framed all things out of Nothing, make the Womb of a Virgin
pregnant without the Contact of two prolifick Sexes? or, if Conception be
accomplished according to the more common Hypothesis, it is not unreasonable to
suppose that he who appointed such rare effects to be produced in a way so
unlikely, that none are able to give a rational account of what they know to be
done by it, can as easily do it by some other. This Truth was sufficiently
justified to all the World. Who should doubt of it? Jews or Gentiles? The
Mother was assured of it by an Angel, and told how it should be brought to
pass, lest her Modesty should afterward have taken offense at such a strange
Accident. Her Countrymen the Jews had no Reasons to disbelieve that a Man
might be born of a Virgin, who knew by Revelation that the first Woman was made
of (...) Rib, and whose Fathers saw Aaron's Rod long after it was cut from the
Tree both Blossom and bear Almonds; who were told by the Omnipotent God, that
the Messiah, whom they had for many years expected, should be the Son of a
Virgin; and were further assured that Anaxanacton was he by a Quire of Angels,
who, to do Honor to him as soon as he was born, celebrated his Incarnation
with holy Carols, and being favored of God by an early Information to
understand the great Concernments of his Nativity, did not only adore one whom
they were commanded to receive as their Prince, but did charitably make known
to Men the Happiness which was befallen them by this Divine Offspring of the
Virgin Mother. The Gentiles could not rationally doubt of this great Truth, for
a very considerable part of them who inhabited the Eastern World, by an
Instrument suitable to their way of Life had notice of his Birth; for whilst
they were observing the face of the Heavens, by the peculiar Rays of a new
Star devoted to this holy Use they were directed to find him that was so
strangely born. As the Divine Benignity did thus take care to let them know the
way to that Excellent Person, in whose Appearance all the World was deeply
concerned, so this general notice being given them by such extraordinary means,
obliged them to believe what was told them particularly concerning the manner
of his Birth.

Thus by this first Intelligence given to simple Shepherds and the learned
Magi God made Anaxanacton known betimes to the weakest and wisest of Men: and
yet, lest any Doubts should remain in the minds of the scrupulous World
concerning this point, Anaxanacton took away all difficulties from their
Belief, exceeding the Wonder of his Nativity by the Miracles which he performed
after he was born, especially after his Death; and left none but the Malicious
so stupid, as that they were not able to conclude that he who could revive the
dead with his Word, and raise himself out of a Grave after he had been buried
three days, might easily begin his Life in the Womb of a Virgin. But since I
must discourse to you of that afterward, I desire you at present only to think
with your self whether, since the Heavens were at this time adorned with new
Luminaries, and the Celestial Inhabitants came down in visible shapes, and
expressed the Nobleness of their Ingenuity, congratulating the Prosperity of
Men with the sweetest of Harmonies, an Honor never before equaled was not
done to the Nativity of this great Person, and that they were not high
Presignifications of the Divine Quality and Excellent Actions of this mighty
Prince, and evidences of his Heavenly Extract infinitely more illustrious then
those poor Instances which most would have admired as indubitable Presages,
that is, if he had been born smiling, if his Incarnation had been attended with
a Dance of Swans, if Bees had hiv'd themselves in his Lips, or an Halcyon made
her nest in his Cradle. I find as much Reason to believe, as before I had to
wonder, said Eugenius; only I desire you would let me know who was that
Virgin Mother, for being honored with such an Extraordinary Favor, I cannot
but suppose she was some very rare Person. She was, replied Bentivolio; but her
Excellency consisted in an humble Piety and unspotted Chastity. It Is true, she
was lineally derived from a Royal Family: but that Relation was weakened by so
many Descents, that it was not much more conspicuous at such a distance then
the Distinction of Waters which proceed from several Rivulets when they are
blended in the Sea; neither did she challenge any greater Honor from that
Original then any poor man may claim as being descended from Noah, nor God make
any other use of the Pedigree then to verify his own Predictions. But this is
no wonder; for God having designed to glorify Humility by the Incarnation of
his Son, and to disparage those vain Estimations which are bottomed upon High
Parentage, Noble Titles and Vast Possessions, he sent him into the World
divested of these Ornaments, and obscured his truer Greatness with the Meanness
of a poor Estate; though indeed that was appointed as a Foil of his
after-Glory, which was shut up in this Cloud like the Sunbeams in Curtains of
Crystal. For, besides the forementioned Adorations which were paid him by
Angels, and the Luster which was added to his Birth by a new-made Star,
Almighty God at his Baptism owned him for his Son by a Voice sounding from
Heaven equally loud with Thunder, (which he repeated twice afterward) and
commanded the World to obey him as their Universal Lord, the Holy Spirit
descending from the Celestial Regions, and resting upon him as the true Lover
of Souls, in the Form of a Dove.

What was the meaning of this Solemnity? said Eugenius. I will tell you,
answered Bentivolio; but to make you understand this Mystery more fully, I must
acquaint you with a piece of an ancient Story. When Mankind apostatized from
their Creator, and were afraid of being eternally undone with the Execution of
the Punishment which was conditionally threatened, the God of Mercy being
unwilling that the Folly of his Creatures should be their Ruin, took
compassion of their Miseries, and declared that he would not pursue his Right
to their Destruction; and to support their Life by Hope, he promised in due
time to send one who should make up the Unhappy Breach, assure his Good Will,
and give Men a full knowledge of the Happiness to which they were restored.
After several Ages had past, in which it pleased God to connive at the Sins of
the foolish World, for the sake of his Promise, he sent Anaxanacton, born after
the manner which I have before described; who when he came did soon approve
himself to be that Benign Savior whom the common Father of the Creation had
designed to undertake the Restoration of the lapsed World.

I beseech you, said Eugenius, tell us how Anaxanacton verified that great
Title; for as the Appellation is magnificent, so our best Concernments seem to
be included in it. You shall understand this presently, answered Bentivolio:
When that Divine Person, who existed eternally in the Bosom of his Almighty
Father, was pleased to appear upon this poor Globe for the Accomplishment of
the forementioned Promises, to do an unspeakable Honor to our forlorn
Nature, he clothed himself with Humane Flesh, and united that Life to
Immortality which was condemned to die for Disobedience. When Divinity was thus
embodied, he which dwelt before in the Splendors of inaccessible Light,
descended and became visible in the lower Regions, and those who had the
Happiness to behold him were struck with the Brightness of his Divine Rays, by
which he was as clearly revealed as the frailty of Mortal Eyes could bear; and
they perceived that God had now framed for himself an Earthen Tabernacle, and
disdained not to converse familiarly with Men, having veiled the Majesty of his
Glorious Presence in a Body like their own.

Here Eugenius interposing told Bentivolio that this seemed more strange then
the first piece of his Story, and that it was more difficult to believe that
God should become a Man, then that a Virgin should be a Mother. I did suppose,
replied Bentivolio, that you would wonder at the Mystical sense of my last
words, neither would I have you think that I am able to give you a full
Explication of so deep a Verity: But I must tell you, that though God has made
Religion Venerable by the Incomprehensiblenesse of some pieces of it, yet no
Article of our Creed is Incredible because we do not perfectly understand every
Point; it being a rational Satisfaction to our Minds that we believe only what
God has said, and our Faith is as well secured in these Instances as our
Knowledge is in many things which we take for granted, though we are not able
to give an exact account of them to a Curious Enquirer. Who can explain the
nature of Time, and resolve all the Doubts which arise from the consideration
of Place? Who can show us the Original Springs of Motion? Why should any man
stumble at the Mystical Union of God with Humanity, when he considers the
inexplicable Connection of a Soul with a Body, or the strange Adhesion of Matter
to Matter? Since we know not how our Soul does at pleasure move so distinctly
the various parts of this rare Machine our Body, why should we be offended that
God, having told us many easy Truths which we are to believe, and given us
many plain Precepts whose Obedience is necessary, should also command us to
give credit to some higher Articles, where our Duty is humble Faith and devout
Admiration?

I am very well satisfied with this Answer, said Eugenius, neither do I desire
rudely to uncover what God has been pleased to hide; but I beseech you to go
on, and let us know what this Divine Person was pleased to reveal concerning
the Design of his Incarnation. I will, replied Bentivolio. The first good news
which he published was, That the Merciful Creator was willing to forgive the
World that great Debt which they were not able to pay, and that the most Good
God, who had been ingratefully abused, had of his own benign Disposition sent
an Offer of Pardon, and to show men the Reality of his Good will had made the
Terms of Reconciliation easy; and that they might come to treat he had
appointed Anaxanacton to be a Mediator between Him and Them, who to assure them
of his best Assistance told them that he would negotiate the business of their
Peace, and both intercede for them with Almighty God, and, since the Divine
Authority was notoriously affronted by Men's Transgressions, he would out of his
Love to Humanity offer himself as an Expiatory Sacrifice for their Offenses,
and so prevent their deserved Ruin, and as far as it was possible repair the
Divine Honor, by putting the highest disparagement upon Sin, whilst he
declared to all the World that he thought it better that the Lord of Life
should die, then such a base thing as Disobedience should not be condemned,
endeavoring by this means to destroy it, having used such a cogent Motive to
reduce Sinners to their due Obedience.

This was a noble Undertaking (said Eugenius,) and as I am astonished at the
Rehearsal of such a strange Affection, so I am surpised with an extraordinary
Joy, because I understand by this Relation to whom I am obliged for my
Happiness. I did ever make my humble Prayers to God as a most Merciful Power,
but I knew not till now which way he would express his Benignity. However you
have not yet said, continued Eugenius, how far the Divine Goodness was pleased
to accept this Intercession for the benefit of Sinners. I will tell you, said
Bentivolio: This most worthy Mediator obtained that Men should neither be
denied the Grace of Repentance, nor the Forgiveness of their Sins upon their
penitent Return to their Duty. This was a high Favor, said Eugenius, and the
Condescension as great as Men could desire. It is most just that Sinners should
repent, for it is most Irrational to sin; all Disobedience being rooted in
Folly and Ingratitude: but that God would pardon disingenuous persons upon
their Repentance, and not inflict Punishment upon such as challenged him to do
it, is so rare an Expression of the Divine Clemency, that it was worthy of the
Mediation of God's Son to obtain it. But since we have troubled you so far,
said Eugenius, continuing his Discourse to Bentivolio, I pray you let us
understand what Orders Anaxanacton commanded his Subjects to observe, and which
he made the Conditions of their Hope, and the Trials of their sincere
Submission. I will satisfy your demand, replied Bentivolio; and whilst I do
so, I must let you know that Anaxanacton's Institutions are innobled with such
a comprehensive Prudence, that they infinitely excel the best Rules which were
ever written by the most famous Lawgivers. There is no Capacity for the
improvement whereof Mankind needs Advice, which he has not accommodated with
an Infallible Guidance. It being the principal Concernment of Rational
Creatures to worship their God in such a Mode as is acceptable to the Divine
Nature, he has left us an incomparable Draught of Religion, by which he has
supplied the Defects of all that were before it, and has made this so
absolutely perfect, that it is not capable of Melioration by any successive
Thoughts. It is well known how poor a thing the Pagan Superstition was in the
best Pieces of it, and how base in the worst. It pitied Anaxanacton, the true
Lover of Humane Souls, to see them adore some things, for which, as being
beneficial to Men, they were obliged only to give thanks to him which made them
Good; and to see them not only prostrate themselves before others worse then
themselves, but to make Gods of those Creatures which are thrust into the
lowest rank of Being; and in many Nations both to offer Prayers and Eucharists
to the Names of Men, who were so infamous for bold Wickedness that they had
justified the highest sorts of Villainy with barbarous practices, and also to
worship malicious Spirits, not only common Enemies to our Nature, but which
chiefly expressed their Hatred to it by making that Religion in which they were
acknowledged the greatest Misery of their Worshippers, both whilst they
commanded them to offer their own blood to appease their devilish wrath, and
exposed them to mutual scorn by obscene Rites, having given them order to
celebrate their Festivals with wild Cursitations of naked Women, and immodest
Dances of Lascivious persons, and having made their more recluse Mysteries the
exercise of all Unnatural Lusts, that is, forced Mankind to honor them by
doing the greatest Dishonor which was possible to it self. All the
Compensation which they received for these base submissions being only a
Mockery of vain Promises delivered by abstruse Oracles: and yet they were grown
so stupid that they did not think themselves much deluded, because the Falsehood
was covered with ambiguous Phrases; and they comforted themselves when they
were cheated, that they were able to defend their Idol, that is, had so much
wit as to construe the Delusion in the contrived sense, which was designed as a
cover to their God's Ignorance, and an Instrument of their Abuse.

Anaxanacton utterly abolished this rude Heathenism, and delivered Humanity
from such execrable Observations: and having considered also another sort of
Religion used in one part of the World, which though it was free from such
detestable Customs, yet perceiving it obscured with Shadows, defective in some
necessary Rules, redundant in the Observation of things which are neither good
nor bad in their own Natures; that the main sense of its most useful Precepts
was corrupted with false Glosses, and the whole economy so clogged with
External Rites that it was intolerable to the greatest lovers of Ceremonies
that ever were in the World, who at last could not but complain of the Number
and Weight of unprofitable Ordinances, being pained with Circumcision,
exhausted with costly Sacrifices, wearied with long Journeys, troubled with
nice Distinctions of Meats, and distracted with curious Modes of bodily
Worship; out of his deep commiseration of their sad Estate he dismissed this
unuseful trouble, and appointed a most proper Service, commanding Men to offer
themselves to God a Reasonable Sacrifice in stead of Bulls and Goats, to make
Oblations not of the blood of dead Beasts, but the obedient Faith of Living
Persons, to adore him with the noblest Affections of their Souls, and to lay
upon his Altar the Humility of a Resigned Will, to make a Holy Mind his Temple,
and to embellish it with raised Apprehemsions of his Divine Nature, and deep
Resentments of his Omnipresent Goodness, and in this sacred Oratory to offer up
daily Prayers and thankful Acknowledgments, an Incense most acceptable, being
presented by such as he also taught to devote the Series of their whole Life to
the Divine Honor. Thus Anaxanacton having laid aside those meaner Duties which
bad men could perform as well as others, and by which they usually endeavored
to make a Compensation for their Vices, he plucked up that Thorny Hedge, which
being planted at first only to secure the Jews from the Heathens Sins, was made
use of now to exclude all their Neighbors from their Charity; and formed his
Gospel into a Rational Worship, in which having instructed Men to serve God
with natural expresses of an Ingenuous Simplicity, he broke that heavy yoke
which not only tired Humane Nature with the Portage of an excessive Weight, but
pinched it also with a disagreeable Form. That which Anaxanacton put into the
room of it is so light and well-fitted to our Necks, that Good men take no less
pleasure in the bearing of it then a Porter would feel in a convenient Load of
Jewels put upon his back with this condition, that if he carry them home they
shall be his own.

For now Men find themselves not only satisfied by the wise Counsels of
Anaxanacton in reference to their Divine Affairs, but also rarely directed in
order to their Civil Negotiations; he having showed them by a most compendious,
yet very plain, Method, how to secure and advance their private and public
Interests. His Injunctions require the Observation of an exact Righteousness,
and he has made the greatest Charity an indispensable Law to his Subjects. He
has exalted Justice to the highest pitch, for he made men's own Expectations of
what they would have done to themselves the only Measure of what they should
do to others in the same Cases. He made the Bounds of Charity so large, that
no miserable Person is excluded from the benefit of it. He has charged those
who pretend to his Discipline never to hope for that favor with him which they
do not (...) to others. And lest the practice of this Divine Virtue should be
disturbed with the Injuries which he knew would await it in the conversation of
disingenuous people, he forbad them all Revenge except the noblest sort of it,
Forgiveness. He guarded the Chastity of Single life with strict Precepts, and
permitted not the Honor of Marriage to be sullied with Polygamy, nor defeated
with peevish Divorces. In short, he did so fully comprehend all the Offices of
Humane Life in the Brevity of his wise Rules, that the Christian Church was the
only Example which the World could show of an excellent Society of men: It
being impossible that by any other Principles there should be such benign
Governors, such obedient Subjects, or so loving Neighbors. None are so
powerfully restrained from an unjust Invasion of the Rights of others as his
Servants, who are commanded upon many occasions to contemn that which they may
lawfully call their own. No such care is taken by any other Lawgiver of the
Reputation upon which Men set so high a value as by Him, for he has secured
their Good Names among all his Disciples, which are not false to their
Profession, both against open Reproaches and secret Calumny. Indeed the Rules of
his Polity are so excellently framed, that if they were inviolably observed,
all Orders of Men would contribute to the general Advantages of Humane Society;
the Wisdom of God, which seems to be obscured in the Unequal Conditions of Men,
would be made conspicuous; and that universal Peace, which is now only wished,
would then be enjoyed, and secured against Intestine Sedition and Foreign War.

You will easily imagine, proceeded Bentivolio, that Anaxanacton having made
his Subjects truly Religious to their God, and very amicable to all their
Relatives, he did not leave them destitute of any particular Accomplishment
belonging to the perfection of a private Capacity. He did so plainly teach men
to know themselves, and so strictly to regulate the Exorbitancy of their
Natural Appetites, that they must wilfully neglect his Directions if they be
not highly Prudent, severely Temperate, and truly Modest. He has made a strong
Defense against the (...) of Vainglory, having taught them no more to regard
the trivial Applauses of the World then men value the jingling noise of
Childrens Rattles. He has set them at liberty from the Oppression of anxious
Cares, by directing them to place their Treasure in Celestial Hopes, and as to
other matters to imitate the thoughtless life of Birds and Flowers. Whilst they
entertain their Minds with noble Enquiries, they are rewarded for their hearty
endeavors with the possession of Divine Wisdom; and when they do contemplate
those noble Victories which by Obedience to Holy Rules they have obtained over
their sensual Appetites, they please themselves in the Peace which they have
made with themselves, and rejoice in the Testimony of a good Conscience which
results from the consideration of a well-governed Life; and, to conclude this
part of my Story, they bestow as much of their time as they can borrow from the
preparation of their Souls for an Immortal Happiness, upon such worthy Actions
as express the power of their generous Principles, by which the common Interest
of Mankind is served, and which deservedly reflect upon their Authors an
honorable Reputation. And now by this which I have briefly reported you may
perceive, said Bentivolio, that this Great Physician of Souls came not to
palliate, but cure, the diseases of Humane Nature; not to cover, but heal, the
Infirmities of the Degenerate World; his Doctrines being the Models of such an
exalted Virtue, that they make those who entertain them with a sincere
Obedience possessours of such Accomplishments as are scarce talked of in other
Books.

I must confess, replied Eugenius, you have set before us a fair Draught of
very noble Institutions: and though I cannot but perceive that they are
accommodated to the universal Good of Mankind, agreeable to all Places, and at
no Time unseasonable; yet they do so far exceed the strict Rigor of Vulgar
Laws, and are so far raised above the pitch of Humane Customs, that I wonder
they were ever entertained in (...) World. You will not wonder much, said
Bentivolio, if you will have the Patience to know with what potent Motives
Anaxanacton persuaded their Reception. He made his own Life a just Example of
his Rules, demonstrated that he brought his Doctrine from Heaven by the
Miracles which he performed, promised an Eternal Happiness as the Reward of
such as would undertake to follow his Footsteeps; and being barbarously
murdered by a vile Generation who were upbraided with his Virtues, he appeared
again in Life within three days, and after a while before a great Multitude of
Spectatours ascended into the Celestial Regions, to take possession of Immortal
Glory in his own and their names. But these things are so considerable (said
Bentivolio, making a kind of Interruption to himself) that I must crave leave
to discourse them in more words.

The most prudent Anaxanacton knowing that the Example of Eminent Persons has
a mighty Influence upon all Beholders, and that those Precepts are seldom
regarded which are disparaged by the contradictory Practice of such as give
them, did therefore prudently make his own Conversation an exact Resemblance of
his unparalled Rules: Insomuch that whilst he lived, Goodness seemed to have
descended from her Heavenly Mansion, and became visible to Mortal Eyes, and by
the Lustres of Divinity, which was now Incarnate, they saw Piety re-inthron'd,
Righteousness restored, Charity glorified, and all the parts of a Holy Life
vindicated from the Contempt which was put upon it by the Rudeness of that base
Generation with whom he conversed. And the truth is, Eugenius, he was so lively
a Pourtraiture of the highest Virtue, that he out-shin'd the most Illustrious
Heroes that are named in History; and their Actions were so far short of his
both in distinction of Quality, and the Number of such as were Excellent, that
they appear at the first view to have been only some little things done by men
of petty Tempers, when they are put into Comparison with the rare Products of
his noble Spirit. He despised that poor Glory which many of those so magnified
Heroes made the only end of all their Actions. Anaxanacton being a true Lover
of God, and having a perfect knowledge of his Infinite Wisdom, depended
entirely upon his pleasure, and referred his whole Undertaking to his Honor,
never relishing that delight which low Souls take in their own Self-will, nor
admitting those vain Applauses by which arrogant persons nourish their Pride.
He trampled upon Sensual Pleasures: the dull allurements of Fleshly Lust were
not able to take any hold of him, who came to express an Angelical Life in a
Humane Body; neither could the strongest Tentations make the least breach in
his Deportment, which was to be the Standard of unspotted Purity. He was so
carefully Just, that he was never accused of doing the least Wrong; neither
indeed would he ever engage himself in those Affairs of worldly life which
usually administer plausible suspicions of Unrighteousness, and of which they
are commonly occasions. Covetous Desires could find no Harbor in that Divine
Breast, which knew the Contemptibleness of those Trifles by which ordinary
Mortals are first blinded and then taken Captives, and for which they stupidly
admire their Thraldom. Ambition could find nothing to tempt him whom she
perceived to devote his whole Life to the Glory of the Eternal Father. You will
easily imagine that he had no great Apprehension of those things which vulgar
Opinion has rendered formidable: he contemned the despicableness of Poverty;
he seemed not to feel the pain of Fasting; he took in good part the abuses of
ungrateful Relatives; he did not much trouble himself to wipe off the slurs of
false Accusations which were framed to obscure the Luster of his Sanctity with
Imputations of unjust Freedom, and to lessen the Glory of his Miraculous
Actions with the pretense of Magical Assistances. As he perpetually contemned
those worldly Interests which make men unwilling to think of Mortality, so with
a most serene Patience be accosted Death, though it met him attended with all
unhandsome Circumstances: for after a most opprobrious Trial he was condemned
to be Crucified between two Thieves; and yet, as if he had been unconcerned in
his own Case, he neither attempted any Rescue, which could easily have been
made, from those who guarded him, nor undertook the defense of his Cause where
an Answer was as easy, his Accusers being destitute of any Testimony against
him except their own Malice, and the Judge so satisfied concerning his
Innocence, that he was forced to absolve him before he condemned him, and
declared that he pronounced the Sentence against him and his own Conscience
both at once. But Anaxanacton, as before he esteemed it a small matter to be
harmless unless he was also beneficial, when he could do no more service to
the World by his Life, he willingly laid it down to become, as I told you
before, a Propitiatory Sacrifice not only for his Friends, but his Enemies, not
excepting his Murderers; and, mingling his Prayers with his Blood, besought
his Father that his Death might be a means of Eternal Life to those who killed
him.

Whilst Bentivolio spoke these words, said Nicomachus, I observed the Tears run
down the cheeks of Eugenius; who, after he had settled his Passion, proceeded
thus, turning to Bentivolio: I must confess that I never heard of any other in
whom Innocence, Charity and Prudence were so united, whom Fortitude and all the
proper Qualities of a Generous Spirit did so innoble; and I cannot but think
that those who conversed with him entertained the highest thoughts of his
Divine Person, and gave all Reverence to his Heavenly Doctrine: but I must
entreat you to let us know what other Assurance he gave that he was sent from
God. I was going to show you, replied Bentivolio, that his Example was not more
Venerable then the Proofs by which he asserted his Authority were
unquestionable. As soon as he began to discover himself to the World, he was
publicly honored with the Descent of the Holy Spirit, of which I told you
before, and as he, being accompanied with some of his Friends, went up one day
to a Mountain well known in Palestine, which as I remember is called Tabor, he
was transfigured into a Celestial Form; his Body was so incircl'd with splendid
Rays, that his Vestment shined, and Moses and Elias, one the great Minister of
the Law, the other the most famous of the Prophets, came down from their
Ethereal Habitations to do Homage to him; and, as they went away, leaving the
World to the Conduct of that better Gospel which he was to promulgate, a Voice
from Heaven now the second time confirmed his Commission, and required Mankind
to obey him as their only Master. Thus nobly was Anaxanacton recommended to the
World when he made his first Entries upon a public life; and as he prosecuted
the Execution of his holy Office, he was always accompanied with a Divine
Presence, which put a Majesty into his Discourses far above any thing which his
Hearers could observe in their own authentic Doctors; all his Speeches
justified themselves and the Speaker: Their Rabbis, notwithstanding the deadly
hatred which they had for his Person, could not but admire the extraordinary
Wisdom which shined from his Soul whilst he spoke, and which they could no more
imitate then a Novice in Letters can equal the Eloquence of Cicero.

The Devil, that grand Patron of Envy, had soon taken notice of this Excellent
Person, and was unspeakably vexed to see Humane Nature raised to such a strange
height, and he was much afraid that he should no longer be able to keep under
those whom he had till now too successefully endeavored to depress; however,
resolving to try his fortune, he presently challenged Anaxanacton to a single
Combat in a lonesome Wilderness, where he hoped to discourage him with the
horrors of Solitude, to affright him with the neighborhood of Wild Beasts,
and to weaken him with the defect of those ordinary Supplies by which our
bodily life is supported, and attempted with all his Arts to bring him down
from that sacred Rock in which he saw his strength was placed, viz. His Hope in
God. But when he found him above the Tentation of Sensual Relishes, not capable
of being entangl'd with promises of Riches, nor subject to the feebleness of an
overweening Phancie, he flung down his Arms and fled, to his shame perceiving
that he had been more bold then wise, and was infinitely perplexed since by a
most undesirable Experiment he was assured that he was to expect now another -
ghefs Antagonist then the first Adam; and increased his Torments with the Fears
which he entertained, and by which he too truly presaged the loss of his
Usurped Dominion. For this Victory was but a prelude to Anaxanacton's future
Successes, who had frequent occasions to renew his Quarrel with this sort of
Adversaries by reason of the constant Residence of Asmodeus and his Accomplices
in the Country where Anaxanacton was born, which they had in a great measure
subdued to their Obedience, and where they gave diligent Attendance lest they
should be dispossessed by this potent Prince. Some of those cruel practices by
which they expressed their malicious Power gave a fair opportunity to
Anaxanacton to make him self known: For that great Abaddon, and those desperate
Legions his Fellow-devils, having received a permission to inflict some sort of
Punishments upon apostate Humanity, took a base pleasure in afflicting the
Bodies of Men and Women with painful Diseases, in disturbing their
Understandings by indisposing their Brains, and rendering them ridiculous and
troublesome to their Neighbors by extravagant Deportments.

This merciful Prince well knowing the unreasonable Malice of these damned
Spirits, (for they tormented those whom they had made to sin) and being fairly
invited to show the Authority which was given to him for quite contrary uses,
as the rightful Lord of the World he commanded these impudent Vassals to be
gone, to leave off this Devilish Trade, and cease in festing those places which
the Savior of Mankind had chosen for his abode. The muttering Fiends obeyed,
and trembling at the sight of their Judge, entreated him, that besides this
dismission he would not add to their present or accelerate their future
Torments.

Anaxanacton, to show that he came not into the World only as the Devil's
Enemy, but the general Friend of Mankind, expressed his affectionate Assistance
in reference to all their Necessities, and verified his sacred Office by a
constant performance of beneficial Miracles; sometimes feeding maany thousands
of hungry people who traveled far to seek the Cure of their Diseases, whom
whilst he healed and nourished, he did at once in two Instances show both his
God-like Pity and Divine Power. His Patients (shall I call them, or his
Guests?) could not but say, If this be not He, it is in vain to expect any
other Savior; for, when he comes, will he be able to do more then multiply
our Bread with his Word, and to diminish our Pains without any other Medicine?
But, as if the curing of the Sick were not a sufficient Demonstration of his
Divinity, he raised the Dead also, and indeed gave so many satisfactions to
Men, that they had no more sorts of Proofs to demand. Which way shall
Omnipotent Wisdom give Testimony to the Truth which his Messengers deliver, if
Miracles be no Assurance? And what Wonders would content us, if we think it is
but a small matter to create Food, to restore Health, to return Life, only with
speaking of a Word? And though the last instance of his Divine Power was liable
to be questioned by those who, being carelessly Incredulous or wilfully
Malicious, might pretend to think that no strange thing was performed, since
they were not assured that those Persons were dead whom he was reported to have
made to live the second time, he justified this and all his former Miracles, as
lesser things, by one so great that it is beyond all Reasonable exception: For
when his inveterate Enemies had nailed him to a Cross, (which they were
permitted to accomplish, not for the Satisfaction of their own Cruelty, but for
the Reason which I forementioned, and for which Villainy they were severely
punished) his Death was accompanied with wonderful Accidents; for the Veil of
the Jewish Temple, which guarded the most Holy place from common Eyes, was rent
from the Top to the Bottom, and showed both that the hidden meaning of the
Mosaic Discipline was now revealed, and that a free Access into God's Presence
was allowed to Mankind by the Death of this great Mediator, who by this
Oblation entered into the true Heavens as a forerunner for all good Men. The
Earth quaked, the Rocks were broke in pieces, the Tombs opened, the Dead came
forth of their graves; signifying plainly that the Lord of Life was Crucified,
by whose blood the Dead should be restored to Life. The Sun put on a Robe of
Darkness by an Eclipse naturally impossible, and the whole Heavens in just
sympathy vested themselves with Sables; whilst observing Astronomers, who knew
that this Defect of Light was not caused by the ordinary Interposition of the
Moon, concluded that the most noble Luminary suffered in Mystical Sympathy with
some great Affliction which either Nature or its Author at that time endured.
And after they had thus taken away the Life which they unjustly hated, and made
sure, as they thought, of his dead Body by putting their chief Governor's Seal
upon his Tombstone, and set a guard of Soldiers to watch his Corpse, he rose
out of his Coffin, as he promised, the third day, rolled away the Stone which
was the Door of his Prison, and went forth without asking leave of Pilate's
Goalers, and left his Ministers the good Angels to fright his Keepers from
their vain employment, and to assure his Victory over Death to his old Friends,
who he knew would not fail to perform what further Obsequies belonged to his
Funeral; to some of which he himself presently appeared alive, both to requite
the Constancy of their Love, and to strengthen the Weakness of their Faith. But
judging those few not Witnesses enough of so Important an Action, nor one Visit
a sufficient Proof of so great an Accident, he showed himself to his Apostles
many times, and once made himself visible to five hundred Spectatours, who had
no only leave to touch him and to talk with him, but he continued his Converse
as long as his being upon Earth was needful to confirm the Belief of his
Disciples. Then having other Affairs to negotiate for them in Heaven, he
ascended in their sight, to receive that Glory which was the due Reward of his
humble Obedience, and to teach his Followers to aspire after his Presence in
those Celestial Regions, where he assured them that a place should be provided
for all that were obedient to his Counsel.

I must confess now, said Eugenius, you have given such a satisfactory Account
of this Generous Prince, that instead of the Doubts which I entertained at the
beginning of your Discourse, I am surpised with an Admiration of the whole
Story, and I think it not more Extraordinary in any part, then Rational in the
Contexture of the whole; and the assurance which is produced in my Mind
concerning the Truth of this Relation, makes me suppose that some strange
things happened upon Earth after Anaxanacton's Ascent into Heaven; and but that
I have been more then sufficiently troublesome already, I should willingly
understand by your means what success his Gospel had in the World. If you had
not made this demand, replied Bentivolio, I should have performed what you
desire, this being a Part of my Story, in which the Accidents are so
considerable, that they are very well worth your Knowledge, and bear such an
important Relation to the Whole, that they are a clear Demonstration of its
Truth. Anaxanacton having at his departure commanded his Servants to stay at
Jerusalem, (then one of the most noble Cities in the World) and there to await
his further Orders concerning their future Actions, after a few days, when
they were all Assembled in one large Room, accompanied with many worthy Persons
who were true Lovers of this good Prince, Anaxanacton, according to the Promise
which he made at his Translation, sent a divine Spirit, who descending with a
noise much like the blustering of a violent Wind, appeared in a cloven form of
Fiery Tongues, and resting upon them, presently expounded the Mystery of this
(...) Appearance by inspiring them with Ability to speak diverse Languages, and
so gave them power to teach all Nations in their own Tongues that Holy Gospel
which concerned all the World to know, being the Method of their Eternal
Happiness. They being thus appointed, begun presently to execute the Office to
which they were deputed by their Master, and having dispersed themselves into
many Kingdoms, they related the Story of Anaxanacton, published the Gospel
which he had made a Catholic Law, and gave them the true meaning of every
Precept in plain Interpretations, making known the Promises whose Truth he
sealed with his Blood; and, besides the venerable Sanctity of their Lives,
verified their Authority, as their Master had done before them, with divine
Works: They vanquished Devils, silenced Oracles, reproch'd Idols, reproved
Vice, and commanded Men in Anaxanacton's name to amend their Lives, and
threatened the Disobedient with Eternal Misery if they continued in their
Impenitence. The Converted World received their Message with a sincere
cheerfulness; and in a short time a great part of Asia, Europe, and Africa,
submitted themselves to the Discipline of Anaxanacton, called themselves by his
name, changed their Religion, abandoned their Gods, and despised all other
Interests but His Gospel, and laid down their Lives as Witnesses of their true
Faith.

The greatness of this sudden Victory is more admirable, if you consider that
the Truth of this Divine Revelation did not only gain Credit with the Common
sort of People, but mastered the Reason of most learned Philosophers, overcame
the Policy of gravest Senators, conquered the Spirit of the most valiant
Commanders, outwitted the Cunning of subtle Conjurers, and making Proselytes
to it self in all Climates, convinced the Pagan Emperor who then ruled the
World by such loud and magnificent Reports, that he would have enrolled
Anaxanacton among his Country Gods; which though it was hindered by Anaxanacton,
who would not be ranked with such contemptible Rivals, and opposed by his
Ministers of State for politic Reasons, yet within a small compass of Years
that Empire which gave Laws to all the World submitted it self to his
Government, and the greatest Kings esteemed it their chief Glory to be Subjects
of Anaxanacton: and they testified the truth of their Estimations by building
magnificent Temples for the more convenient Reception of his Worshippers,
bestowing upon his Ministers great Revenues, offering up their daily Prayers to
God in his great Name, celebrating his Love to the World with grateful Hymns,
consecrating much time to the Remembrance of the more observable Parts of his
Life, and making such honorable Commemorations of his Death and Resurrection
as were suitable to the Mystical Import of those noble Accidents; thinking, and
that truly, that it was but a just Gratitude to do all they could to make the
Name of Anaxanacton the greatest thing that ever was talked of in the World.
Though I must tell you, continued Bentivolio, that this was not a more proper
expression of deserved Love in men then a necessary piece of Divine Providence:
for though Anaxanacton was veiled awhile with the contemptibleness of a Low
estate; yet it was not fit that the Obedience of his Humility should be
unrewarded, nor the Greatness of his Glory long obscured: For he was that
Prince who not long after the Creation and immediately upon the Apostasy was
promised as the Redeemer of Mankind, was the Hope of the Patriarchs, the Theme
of the Prophets, the Fullness of the Law, the Substance of all Shadows, the
Sum of the Gospel, the true Teacher of Wisdom, the Planter of Holy
Discipline, the Glory of the Jews, the Morning Star of the Gentiles, the Joy of
Good Angels, the Terror of Devils, the Lord of both Worlds, the Heir of all
things, the Head of the Church; and, to end my Story, that Divine Person in
whom the Faith, Love, Hope and Thoughts of all wise and good men did rest
satisfied; and for whose more glorious Appearance, which he promised at his
departure, all good Spirits in Heaven and Earth do continually pray. After
Bentivolio had discoursed so far, he took a small Book out of his Pocket
written in Greek by four of Anaxanacton's Friends, and gave it to Eugenius,
both as a Verification of his own Report, and that by the perusal of it
Eugenius might more fully inform himself in the incomparable History of so rare
a Person.

Bentivolio holding his peace, Eugenius and all the Company gave him thanks;
only Antigraphus, who came in a little after he had begun to discourse, did it
not so heartily as the rest, having possessed his Mind with Prejudice against
many parts of the Relation, which he had formerly heard, and always opposed.
As they walked in the Gallery, for they had left their Seats, Eugenius
perceiving some disturbance in Antigraphus his Countenance, having civilly
expressed his conjectures, asked him the Reason of his Dissatisfaction. --
Whilst Nicomachus pronounced these words, a Gentleman came into the Walk, and
having saluted the Company in the name of Theosebius, he delivered a Letter
from Bentivolio to Urania, and another to Panaretus, wherein he entreated him
and Nicomachus to make haste to Phronesium; and another to Sympathus from the
Prince of Theoprepia, in which he commanded him to invite Theonoe and Irene to
come to his Court, and desired them to conduct the Lady Urania thither also
with all Respect due to a Person of her Quality. This news was welcome to them
all: to the Gentlemen, because they were going to a place where they were sure
to enjoy the best Company in the World; and to the Ladies, because contrary to
their Fears they should not be left behind; especially to Urania, who did very
passionately desire to see Bentivolio. Whilst they were expressing their mutual
Resentments of their common Felicity, one of Theonoe's Servants called them in
to Dinner. When the Cloth was taken away, Urania began to call to mind that
Nicomachus had not quite discharged his Task, being interrupted by reading the
Letters which they received from Theosebius, and therefore desired leave of the
Company that he might resume it. They consented, and Nicomachus was voted to
his Chair again by an unanimous voice of the whole Company, and, Theonoe having
given order that none should interrupt them, Nicomachus proceeded after this
manner.

Though I have sufficiently declared the Imperfection of my Wit in offering at
the Recital of such a noble Story, yet since I sin only because I would be
obedient, I will briefly give you the last part of that Discourse; especially
because I esteem that which was then said to be very pertinent to the
Vindication of Anaxanacton's Honor from the foolish Cavils of some Pretenders
to Wit, who take it for a great piece of Ability to find faults where there are
none, and think they deserve Applause, when they merit only Scorn, for saucily
deriding those things which they ought humbly to adore. Antigraphus, as I was
going to have told you, being desired by Eugenius to express his Mind,
addressing himself to Bentivolio, began thus: It Is true, I am not satisfied
with your Discourse: Though you have adorned the History of Anaxanacton with
plausible Colors, yet I cannot but think that many of them may (...) be rubbed
off. I will not trouble you with a punctual Enumeration of all my Doubts, only
I shall crave your pardon to touch upon some things which most offend me. What
you have said concerning Anaxanacton's Birth, his Miraculous Actions, his
Resurrection and Ascension, is utterly destitute of any known Parallel, and
methinks it requires a vast measure of Credulity to make men believe a Report
so strangely incredible. For my own part, I desire to be told how I may assure
my self that those parts of your Story are true. That Notion which you put upon
the Death of Anaxanacton, whose blood was shed, as you say, as an Expiation for
the Sins of the World, and that he offered himself upon the Cross as a
Propitiatory Sacrifice, seems to be clogged with so much unreasonableness, that
I cannot but disbelieve it. I look upon his Crucifixion as a means both wholly
unnecessary and altogether useless, and so very unfitly applied to any such
purposes. You make use indeed of various Expressions to magnify the advantage
of his Death, and say the same thing in different words; yet in my mind it fits
none of them. Sometimes you fansy his Sufferings as a placatory Oblation, and
so make his Cross an Instrument of Atonement between an angry God and trembling
Offenders. But with what probability can this be affirmed? For can he truly be
said to be Reconciled, who not only was never angry, but whose Divine Nature is
utterly incapable of such a low Passion? Sometimes you explain the same point
by the Notion of Redemption, and would have us look upon the Life of
Anaxanacton as a Price paid down for the reinfranchising of enslaved Men. I
confess I wonder at this as much as the other; for to whom should this Price be
paid? To God? How can that be, since you say that he gave this Anaxanacton, his
dear Son, as a Ransom for Men, and so make him the Purchaser? Which cannot be
admitted neither; for to what purpose should he give him, unless it were to buy
what was his own? Men could neither give nor sell themselves from God; if they
did, the Deed was Invalid, because he can never lose his Right by any foolish
Act of his Creatures. They could not be taken from him by force, because he is
Omnipotent. If he received a Price for them, it seems he did not Redeem, but
Sell, them. The Price you speak of could not be paid to the Devil; for God
only, whose Law was violated, had Right to take Punishment of his offending
Subjects; and if the Devil had any hand in the Torment, it was but of an
Executioner deputed by God. Besides all this, Anaxanacton could not be truly
said to have bought Men, for he himself, as I have heard, affirmed that God
gave him freely that part of Mankind in which he claims a peculiar Interest.

The Sense which you would express by using the word Satisfaction is liable to
as great Difficulties. If God would not forgive sinners till he had received
Satisfaction, he lessened his Goodness, which you say is Infinite. Or if he
would needs have Satisfaction, yet why should the most Innocent Anaxanacton be
exposed to scornful Tortures in the stead of such as were notoriously guilty?
Although that Generous Prince was so good-natured as to offer it, yet it was
contrary to God's Justice to receive such a Cruel Compensation; and it seems to
have been too excessive an Anger conceived against the Sins of the World, which
could not be appeased without a Sacrifice of Humane Blood, the Use whereof you
did but now condemn in the Heathen Religion. What Satisfaction was due I do not
know, but it seems to follow from your own Principles, that Anaxanacton could
not pay it, for you acknowledge him to be a God: and if you think to take off
this Inconvenience by laying it upon his Humane Nature, I must tell you that it
could not make Satisfaction for the Defects of others, because all that it
could do was but its own just Duty.

I am confirmed in this Opinion of Anaxanacton's Death, proceeded Antigraphus,
because I perceive but very small Effects which it has produced toward the
Melioration of the World since he left it. If he had delivered the World from
Ignorance by his Gospel, and redeemed it, as you say he did, from Sin by his
Death; how comes it to pass that many Nations are not acquainted with his Laws,
and that most of those Countries which have received that knowledge are as
Wicked as those which have not? Some of them complain of Anaxanacton's
Discipline as a heavy Yoke, and pretend that their Disobedience is
necessitated, because his Commands are so strict that they cannot be observed.
Whether this be true or no, I know not; but that they are not obeyed is but too
evident by their contrary practices. We see also that the World is vexed with
those Afflictions which you call the Punishments of Sin; as Painful Diseases,
Devouring Plagues, Bloody Wars, Intolerable Famine, Implacable Death, and
Dissentions Irreconcilable entertained by those who, though they glory in the
Pretense of being Anaxanacton's Disciples, yet having torn off his known Badge,
Mutual Love, and despised his gentle Spirit, all the World perceives that they
have nothing but his bare Name; and that they have so confounded his Doctrine
by quarrelsome Controversies, that they themselves can scarce tell what it is.
I doubt concerning the Truth of that Relation which you made of the Success
which he had for a while; and if I should grant it to be true, yet I must tell
you that it did scarce equal what has accompanied the Designs of those whom
you call Impostors, some of which have gotten Victory over a great part of
Anaxanacton's Dominions, as is known by the Story of Mahomet.

Bentivolio perceiving that Antigraphus had made an end, replied in these
words: Though there are many things in Christian Religion (for that is but
another Name of Anaxanacton's Discipline) so Mystical that their full Sense is
above the reach of our Apprehension; yet nothing can justly be esteemed
unreasonable because we are not able to fathom it, since we know that Inferior
Beings cannot adequately comprehend Superior. Though it is very common with
foolish men to quarrel with those Methods by which God prosecutes the Design of
their Happiness, and to cavil at those Notions wherein the most important
Truths are contained; yet I think those which you have impugn'd so agreeable to
right Reason, and that no Instrument could have been more prudently contrived
to promote the Salvation of Mankind then the Death of Anaxanacton; and that it
was not unsuccessefully applied to serve this most noble Design, and that the
Effects which were produced by it were never equaled by any other Invention,
is the first thing that I will endeavor to show you, and add to what I have
said already concerning this Matter answers to all your Objections, and
afterward I will satisfy you as to the Truth of the whole Story of Anaxanacton.

When Man came first into Being, he was God's Creature, and so obliged by the
strongest ties to acknowledge him for his Sovereign Rector, He who made all
things having an indubitable Right to give them Laws. The universal Creator
according to his Divine Prudence inscribed natural Rules upon Men's Hearts, so
making them in part Laws to themselves, and superadded some Positive Commands
as further significations of his Will. He knowing that he had to do with
considerative Natures, not only engaged them to observe his Laws by the good
Condition into which he put them; but added another strong preservative against
Disobedience, by annexing to his Commands Punishments conditionally threatened:
Which was a rare Expression of the Divine Goodness, for God did so take care
that the false Hopes of Impunity might not bring into the World first Sin and
then Ruin. But rash Men, slighting their Duty notwithstanding these
Obligations to the contrary, rendered themselves obnoxious to the Punishment of
an Ungrateful Rebellion; and it was then just with God, who is the Lord of
Punishment, to inflict the Mulcts which were due upon the contempt of his
Precepts. But he considering that it was a thing worthy of the benign Creator
rather to repair his work by an Afterprovision of his Wisdom, then to desert it
to that Ruin which was the effect of its own Folly, determined to restore the
degenerate World, and upon Terms which were fit for him to propound to admit
Offenders to the benefit of Reconciled Favor. The Sins of the World being an
unspeakable Affront to his just Authority, and an open Scorn put upon his most
excellent Laws, he saw it was reasonable that Men ought not to be pardoned but
in a way by which the Divine Honor might be repaired, his Government
acknowledged, the Righteousness of his Injunctions vindicated, Obedience
restored to its due Estimation, Rebellion condemned and put to the highest
disgrace, and Offenders by the assurance of Forgiveness persuaded to return to
their Duty, and so that base thing, Sin, be rooted out of the World.

Now, Antigraphus, if you will give me leave to use a few words more, continued
Bentivolio, I will demonstrate to you that these noble Designs could not have
been accomplished any way so well as by the Obedient Life and Holy Death of
Anaxanacton. You must know that he came into the World at such a time when
Wickedness had advanced it self to a height scarce paralleled in any Age: and
when that Nation which did most of all others pretend, and had the greatest
reasons to be Examples of Virtue, had not only dishonored it by Vicious
Practices, but had slurr'd their Rules with such false Expositions, that they
had represented the Observation of their genuine Sense as unnecessary;
Anaxanacton appeared upon this Stage as the Champion of Obedience, and by an
unspotted Conversation made a public Defiance to the prevalence of Vice,
subdued the Power of bad Example, and revealed a dear Regard of the Divine Will
when all the World slighted it, overcame the Temptations of Sin, and condemned
those Customs which by a continued repetition of wicked Actions do propagate
hurtful Examples; and having given all sorts of men a full knowledge of their
Duties by his Excellent Discourses, and shown the way to the most noble degree
of Virtue, of which (as I told you before) his own Life was the Beautiful
Image, he reproved the disobedient World with such Authority, that he amazed
the most Obstinate, and perfectly reclaimed the Ingenuous, who wanting good
Information sinned only of Ignorance, but now reformed themselves willingly
since they knew the danger of their Errors.

Anaxanacton having proceeded so far, his Life was improved to the utmost
Justification of the Supreme Lawgiver, and now he laid it down, that by his
Death he might make a further Reparation of the Divine Honor, and a fuller
Expression of his Charity to Humane Nature. His Death was a common Penance of
Mankind, in which Divine Justice made the Sins of the World to meet as in an
Expiatory Suffering, which his Love made him cheerfully endure, having
voluntarily put himself into the place of Sinners; and he was not unwilling to
bear such shameful Torments as were ever looked upon as the Punishments of Sin,
and the visible Effects of God's Displeasure. Thus his Cross became a public
Vindication of the Divine Justice to which all the World was obnoxious, and it
was a great Augmentation of that Disparagement which he had cast upon Sin by
his Holy Life: For none could receive the true knowledge of this wonderful
Action, and remain so stupid as to think still that Disobedience is a Trifle
which was thus expiated, or so unreasonable as not to conclude, that the Wound
was of a most deadly concernment which could not be cured but by a Balsam made
of such precious Blood. How can any man think that it is a cheap thing to sin,
when the dearest Son of God was buffeted, crowned with Thorns, and then nailed
to a Cross for it? The Savior of the World had reason to expect that when some
men saw, and others heard, that the hard Rocks clove and the dull Earth
trembled at his Death, and that the dead came out of their Graves, that they
would awake out of their deadly slumbers, and not only think of relenting a
little, but melting themselves into an ingenuous Sorrow for their former
Enormities, now begin a new Life, according to his Directions who died for
them, and by his Death showed them not only the depth of his true Affection,
but made it the greatest endearment of Obedience; letting them see that it was
so necessary to their Happiness, that it is neither possible nor fit that they
should be saved without it.

Thus was Sin (...) by Anaxanacton's Death; and when he had discharged this
Office, Men could not doubt of being pardoned through his Mediation, for he
told them that his Death was a Propitiatory Sacrifice offered in the name of
Sinners, and that his Blood was shed as a Federal Rite by which (according to
the known Custom of the Eastern World, who by Blood did usually ratify their
Leagues of Friendship) he confirmed the Promise of Pardon which he had formerly
made in the name of his Father, and sealed his Gospel, which was a Covenant of
Love, and contained the Grant of our Peace, in stead of the blood of Beasts
with his own.

But that I may end this part of my Discourse, let me tell you also that the
Death of Anaxanacton did both naturally augment the pitifulness of our General
High Priest, who by the Experience of Afflictions learned to compassionate his
suffering Friends; Anaxanacton also made it a rare Example of that Patience
which he knew his Followers would need, to support them against those Affronts
which he foresaw would be put upon them by such as, having no love for Virtue
themselves, would hate it in others, and being more in number would be always
able to do them mischief, and be instigated to persecute them with more rage
by their own Vices, which were perpetually condemned by their excellent Lives.
Thus also Anaxanacton gave his Friends a fair encouragement to suffer
cheerfully, seeing their true Lover to have led them the way, and being assured
that neither Shame, Pain or Death could obstruct their Happiness, all of them
being hallowed by the Patience, and overcome by the Faith of their Victorious
Prince.

As by this which I have said concerning the rare Use which was made of
Anaxanacton's Death, you may easily perceive that it was so far from being
Impertinent, that it demonstrates not only the greatest Love, but an equal
Wisdom in the Designation of it to the forementioned Purposes; so you will see
that the great Import of his Death is not improperly expressed in those Notions
which you dislike, if you will have the Patience to understand the true meaning
of those common (...) Reconciliation, Redemption and Satisfaction, when they
are applied to this Affair.

Reconciliation must be explained according to the Notion of Displeasure of
which God is capable. He is then said to be Angry when he Punishes; and as it
is natural for men to be afraid when they have transgressed the Law of their
Supreme King, so it is just with him to be angry at their Offenses, that is, to
punish the Offenders: and he may very well be said to be Reconciled, when he
does not lay their Sins to their charge; and to receive them into that Favor
which they forfeited, when he does not inflict the Punishment which was
deserved. Thus the Notion of Reconciliation is very proper, and not at all the
less intelligible, though God is not a passionate Being; and the Effect of our
Savior's Mediation is equally valuable. For whilst the Sinner is liable to an
unspeakable Torment, his condition is as miserable as if he who is provoked to
inflict it were subject to wrathful Affections, since he knows how to do it
with a serene Justice; and the Courtesy of the Intercessor is infinitely
obliging, notwithstanding the indisturb'd temper of the Divine Nature, because
he saves the Offender from a dreadful Punishment: and since the unpassionate
King would have inflicted it without the forementioned Interposition, he which
is pardoned need not scruple to say that his God is reconciled to him by the
Death of Anaxanacton.

You will also be satisfied as to the Notion of Redemption, if you consider
what is meant by that word when it is used in this matter: For it signifies
that Anaxanacton by his Death restored Mankind to Liberty, that benefit which
poor Slaves receive when they are delivered from a miserable captivity by the
payment of a sum of Money. We were enslaved to the Devil, who had tempted us
from our Allegiance to God, and persuading us to follow his Counsels and the
Conduct of our own Lawless Appetites had put upon us by degrees the Shackles of
Habitual Sin, and exposed us to the danger of Eternal Death. How unmercifully
this Tyrant used his Captives by the exercise of his usurped Power, whilst they
languish'd under the fear of Revenge to be taken upon them by God from whom
they revolted, I told you before. Now though no Price was paid to the Devil,
for none was due; yet since Men were freed from his intolerable yoke, and saved
from the Miseries which they endured, and the further dangers which were justly
consequent to their Obedience to the Devil, (for they were willing Slaves, and
though they were abused by him, yet they deserved to be punished severely as
voluntary Fugitives from a most Gracious Sovereign,) God may very well be said
to be their Redeemer, and Anaxanacton to have paid a Price for them; since it
pleased the Father that his dear Son should be their Deliverer, and since
Anaxanacton was not unwilling to submit to hard Terms for their Recovery.

The propriety of this Expression and the fitness of this Means of our Liberty
will be yet further apparent, if you will take notice that the Bonds which tied
us in Slavery were our own Wills engaged to a course of Disobedience by the
prevalence of fleshly Tentations; and whilst the Enemy of our Souls gave us
leave to enjoy the Pleasures of Sin, he made us believe that he loved us more
then God, though by indulging to us our Lusts he did us no other favor but to
kill us with sweet Poison, and mixed Delusion with our Ruin, over which also
he and his malicious Associates devillishly insulted. That we might be
reclaimed from such pernicious Folly, the Eternal Father and his dear Son made
an unparalled Demonstration of amazing Love, to shame us out of our
continuance in that dishonorable Vassallage wherein we foolishly served our
own and our Creator's Enemy. For Anaxanacton came and persuaded the unhappy
Rebels to return to their Loyalty, and died upon a Cross before their faces to
procure their Pardon; after which they saw their Fetters fall off, repented of
their rebellious Folly, returned to their lawful Prince, and could not but look
upon him that made them as their Redeemer, since he had persuaded them into
Liberty by such a charming Argument: and they called Anaxanacton's Blood the
Price of their Redemption, because it was such a potent means of their
Recovery. Indeed Anaxanacton, not doubting but this would be the happy
consequent of his undertaking, told his Friends as he was going to the Cross,
that when he should be lifted up there, and had thence made manifest his own
and his Father's ardent affections to our Restoration, he should draw Sinners
up to him; that is, impress such a deep Sense of grateful Love upon their
Souls, that they would now willingly obey one who had after such an obliging
manner attempted their Freedom. They needed now no other Argument to disengage
their Minds from the power of their false Apprehensions, when they saw
themselves invited to the Service of their good God, and to abandon the Tyrant
who killed them, at the persuasions of one who to show how truly he loved them
died for them.

Besides all this, I could tell you, Antigraphus, that Anaxanacton might
properly enough be called a Redeemer, that is, a Restorer of happy Liberty, for
another great Reason; which is, because he did not only out-wit that cunning
Serpent by his Prudence, but overcame that strong Enemy by his Power, and
rescued captive Humanity, and punished him for the wrong which he had done in
seducing his Father's Subjects from their Obedience; which was all the Price
due to him for the Slaves whom he first took unjustly, and then used
villanously. This is a plain Answer to all those little Cavils which you made
against the Notion of Redemption; and if it satisfy not, you must be forced to
stay till Metaphorical Expressions be cured of their old lameness, and so grow
able to do that which they never did yet, that is, to run upon four Feet.

The Method of your Demands requires now that I take out your other scruple
concerning the Satisfaction which God is said to have received in the Death of
Anaxanacton. This Doubt is founded upon a Defect of Knowledge. It was most fit
that the Supreme Lord being wronged should appoint his own Satisfaction; and
since he made choice of the obedient Death of his dear Son, why should he not
accept it as a Propitiation for Sinners, and give leave to Anaxanacton to nail
their Bond to his Cross, he having paid what was demanded by the Universal
Creditor? Whereas you fancy it is a Diminution of the Divine Goodness not to
pardon the Sins of the World without such a strange kind of Compensation; I
must tell you that it was not fit that so high a thing as God's Authority,
which was denied, should have no Reparation, nor that Men should be tempted to
Sin by perpetual Impunity; so since the Eternal Father, willing to condescend
to fit Terms of Reconciliation, was careful to find out what we could not have
thought on, or, if we had, durst not have propounded it, spared not his own
Son, but gave him to suffer so many Reproaches and so much Torment for our
sakes, he testified more love, and endeared himself more to us, then if he had
contrived our Salvation, as you suppose he might, some other way.

Whereas you Object, that though God might expect Satisfaction, yet it was
unworthy of him to take it of Anaxanacton after such a cruel fashion; I desire
you to consider a little better, and you will see that it was no Injustice in
the Supreme Lord to accept the Payment of the Debt which Sinners owed when it
was offered by Anaxanacton. It is a common thing for us to give our Money to
those to whom we our selves owe nothing, to pay the Debts of others; and
sometimes, though but seldom, an Innocent Person has offered his Life to
expiate another Default: and this Action of Anaxanacton is more justifiable,
since his matchless Charity is not only celebrated throughout all the World
with Immortal Praises, but he also procured by his Death the greatest benefits
which were ever bestowed upon Mankind, and improved his Sufferings to his own
unspeakable Advantage, whilst his most just Father, who could not permit such a
charitable Obedience to want the greatest Reward, crowned his humble Patience
with an universal Sovereignty, and made him, who for a while was the lowest of
Servants, the Lord of all things. By which you cannot but perceive that there
is no Reason to parallel the cruel Customs of the Pagan Superstition, in which
sometimes Men, sometimes Virgins, were slain against their wills to no purpose,
but to gratify the Malice of Devils, with the Voluntary Oblation which
Anaxanacton made of his own Life, which both proceeded from a most noble
Principle, and was glorified with a happy Conclusion.

Though you pretend also that Anaxanacton's Oblation could not benefit others,
because whatsoever he did was a just Duty to his Father; I must tell you that
though after Anaxanacton was born a Man, he owed all possible Obedience to his
Divine Father in his own name, yet his Performances may very rationally be
supposed capable of reflecting Advantage upon others, since he was not
necessarily Incarnate, but Voluntarily assumed our Nature on purpose to do
Honor to God.

This is enough, said Eugenius turning himself to Bentivolio, to justify the
Reasonableness of Anaxanacton's Death to all Ingenuous Persons; but I beseech
you, for Antigraphus his full Satisfaction, to let us see by the Effects which
it produced that all this was not labor in vain; for notwithstanding your
former Discourse he fears not to say that the World received little benefit by
it. I remember very well what he said, replied Bentivolio; and since your
Patience is not yet spent, I will show you the Falsehood of this Calumny, for so
I must call it. There are but two things considerable in Sin, the
Unreasonableness of enormous Actions, and the Punishment to which Sinners are
obnoxious; and it is easy to convince any rational Person by that which I told
you in the former part of this Discourse, that Anaxanacton did what was fit for
Him, that is, the best Person in the World, to do to remove them both. He
re-inforc'd the Commands of Obedience to Almighty God by his Divine Precepts;
he revealed the danger of a wicked Life, and declared that Holiness, i.e.
Wisdom and Goodness, is an Immovable Bound-stone which God has set between a
happy and a miserable Estate. To prevent Despair he assured Delinquents of
their Pardon upon Repentance, having offered himself as a Propitiatory
Sacrifice: which was a Notion so early known and so universally spread through
the World, that there was none which understood not the meaning of that most
obliging Action. He made his Commands so plain, that they did not only condemn
the Dissolute, but reproach all false Pretenders. To prevent the hopes of
sluggish Endeavors, he declared the Invalidity of the greatest Knowledge which
does not transform those who possess it into the Image of Truth. He assured
all false Believers, that the Faith which does not subdue their Sins will never
be able to chase away their Fears. He put all possible Disgrace upon
Hypocrisy, having marked it with the brand of the most odious Wickedness. He
has undone all vain Expectations by linking all his Promises with Conditional
Precepts. He has confirmed the terrible Sentence which is pronounced by an
Evil Conscience, that Sinners might find no Refuge but in true Repentance. He
has condemned all External shows of Piety and Virtue which are destitute of
interior Correspondencies. He told all Good men that they must look upon the
Permission of Tentations not as Excuses of Sin, but as Continuations of their
Trial, and commanded them never to think of being crowned hereafter except they
overcome now; and to encourage them to endeavor heartily, he has assured them
of his never-failing Assistances.

This is enough, continued Bentivolio, to demonstrate the fullness of his
Prudent care; and, if you remember what I told you before concerning the vast
Extent of his great Conquest, you will have no reason to think his Attempt
ineffectual: neither can you frame any Excuse to salve the Ingratitude of those
who remained disobedient to the mighty Reasons of such incomparable Love, but
their own extreme Carelessness, and base neglect of Consideration: For no blame
can be laid upon him, who had done such wonders that they were sufficient to
make the most stupid to mind their most Important Interest. After so much
endeavor I cannot imagine what Exception you can frame against Anaxanacton's
Method but this, that he did not offer violence to the Liberty of men's Wills,
and make them Virtuous whether they would or no; which are words incapable of
any reasonable Sense. If Anaxanacton had put a Necessity upon men to embrace
his Discipline, he had crossed his own Design, which was, by a clear Proposal
of a Glorious Immortality to excite free Agents to engage their Choice in a
constant use of holy Means to obtain so noble an End. Also the Divine Temper of
Soul in which all his Disciples find themselves unspeakably happy is such a
raised Disposition, that it is impossible to be reached by those who debase
themselves by voluntary Sin: And the Peace of Conscience and Hopes of a blessed
Immortality which Anaxanacton grants as an Antepast of their future Happiness
to his Faithful Servants, are only the Results of a good Life, which is
grounded upon a firm Choice and constant Resolution of being Obedient to his
Rules.

I know well that the World has long since degenerated from the noble Example
of the first Converts, and that the rare Virtues of the Primitive times are
scarce any where to be found in our days; but we must take heed of accusing
Anaxanacton for our own faults. When he commanded men to acknowledge his
Gospel, and told them that it was the only Security of their best Interest; yet
he let them know that it would do them no good except they entertained it with
a very sincere Observance of those Directions which are contained in it. But as
he is altogether to be excused, we are so much the more worthy of blame, both
because we neglect the Encouragement which is offered by such gallant Examples,
and because we may make an Imitation of their illustrious Virtues at a far
cheaper rate then they could set us Copies.

This which I have said concerning the Continuance of Sin does also demonstrate
the Justice of those Punishments which you think ought not to afflict the World
since Anaxanacton undertook its Restoration. He delivered his true Disciples
from the danger of Eternal Death, which is the chief Punishment of Sin; and
made those less Inconveniences which they meet and patiently entertain upon
their way to increase their more welcome Reception into their Everlasting Home:
and as those others, Antigraphus, who will not be redeemed must needs continue
Slaves, so being Slaves it is but fit that they should carry their chains. But
who are they in whose Punishments you do particularly concern your self? The
Jewish Nation, to whom Anaxanacton made the first offers of Redemption? There
is no reason but they should be punished, both because, notwithstanding the
strong Motives by which they were long persuaded to an Emendation of their
Lives, they grew so extremely wicked, that one of their chief Historians
thought that if God had not destroyed them by the Romans, the Earth would have
swallowed them; and because they did barbarously reject the Terms of Pardon
which in a most obliging way were propounded by Anaxanacton. As they showed
themselves incorrigible by continuing wicked after he had for many years in
vain attempted their Reformation; so it is not only a just but a very proper
Affliction with which they are punished, being not utterly destroyed, but
dispersed into most Kingdoms of the World, where they live (...), that they
might every where remain as an evident Testimony of God's Displeasure against
ungrateful Apostates, and be a lasting witness of Anaxanacton's veracity, who
told them before that this Misery would befall them if they persever'd, as they
did, in Disobedience.

As your Objection includes the rest of the World, I must tell you that there
is no reason but they should be punished too. Anaxanacton came not to disoblige
men from the Law of Nature, but to superadde endearments to its Observance; and
since other Nations followed the bad Example of the obstinate Jews, it is most
just that they should be their Parallels in suffering. You must needs justify
Anaxanacton as altogether unaccessory to their Calamities, except you would
have him become a Patron of Sin, and indeed desire him to nourish with his
Blood that cursed Root which grew too fast of its self.

Well, well, said Antigraphus, let the Reasons of men's Degeneracy be what they
will, you confess the World remains Wicked, so that the Proofs of Anaxanacton's
success must be fetched from that Age in which he lived. Yes, replied
Bentivolio, but much more from those which followed his Death, in which they
were so considerable in themselves, but especially if you take notice of the
unparalled Method by which his Affairs prosper'd, that there is no more cause
to put him into a mean Comparison with the most successeful Impostor, then
there is reason to equal the Follies of Mahomet's contemptible Alcoran with the
wisdom of his most excellent Gospel. It is a peculiar Glory by which the
Discipline of Anaxanacton is recommended to the World, that it was neither
introduced at first, nor established afterward, by those ordinary means of
Policy or Force. His Person was of such little consideration in regard of
Worldly extract, that he was a Demonstration of the highest Worth invelop'd
with the lowest Humility: His holy Doctrine was opposite to received Customs:
his grave Converse was not set off with a plausible Fashion, but expressed such
Manners as were scorned by the Modish World: He neither flattered great
Princes, nor humored the mean Appetites of the fleshly Vulgar: he persuaded
not Obedience to his Rules with the arts of Humane Rhetoric: His Followers
were discouraged by Secular Powers, their Number lessened by cruel Deaths, for
which Sufferings they could hope for no Compensation in this World. And though
the Pagan Superstition was encouraged by the Favor of many Princes, supported
by strong Armies, defended by learned Philosophers, asserted by Eloquent
Orators, furthered by the Devices of cunning Magicians, and cried up by the
universal Suffrage of all Nations; yet by a Divine Power which fell upon it
from the Life and Gospel of Anaxanacton, and the mighty Spirit which assisted
his Servants, the Idolatrous Worship with all its pompous Ceremonies melted
away as the Snow does before a warm Sun; whilst Anaxanacton's Subjects wearied
the Malice of their Tormentors with an unconquerable Patience, and by the
generous Testimony which they gave to Truth, reconciled their mortal Enemies to
the belief of that which they persecuted, and to a most sincere Love of those
whom but a little before they perfectly hated.

If Mahomet had made use of no other Means to serve his Design, his Name would
long since have been forgotten in the World: but as his Religion (in which he
craftily made an honorable mention of Anaxanacton) is contemptible in it self,
being a kind of Cento made up of Rites stolen partly from the Jews, partly
from the Pagans, and some borrowed from the Christians; he filled it with
ridiculous Fables, absurd Stories, persuades Obedience with obscene Promises,
and expresses a base Condescension humoring the lowest sort of Life, the worst
of Men willingly observing his foolish Orders, whilst they pleased themselves
in hope to be admitted at last into a brave Seraglio for their Heaven, and
instead of Paradise to be put into a Gynaeceum.

Yet the subtle Lunatic perceived that this would not effect what he aimed at
without the use of Arms, and therefore as soon as he had multiplied his
Disciples to a competent Number by fraudulent Arts, he betook himself to Force,
and so ordered his way to make Proselytes, that those whom he endeavored to
persuade to his Religion saw that they must either die or be Mahometans. Which
is enough to show the lowness of the way by which that cheating Arabian made
his Attempts upon the World in comparison of the Celestial Method by which
Anaxanacton's successes were obtained. But since he became Master of his
Designs by politic Stratagems and force of Arms, and extended his Victories to
the distress of Anaxanacton's People, lest you should think this a sufficient
Reason for venerable thoughts of that Impostor, I must tell you that you may as
well think honorably of the Devil, and conclude that the Worship which was
given to him in former days was Rational, because he is a Cunning and Powerful
Being. I must also let you know that that Fatal Accident, his unhappy Invasion
of Christendom, is a Permission of the Divine Providence, of which we may
easily give an Account. For as it was but fit that the degenerate Jews having
revolted from the Ingenuous Simplicity of their Ancestors should be punished by
the Romans, especially since they rejected and murdered the promised Messiab,
who came after he had been long expected according to many Divine Predictions;
so it was just that false Christians should be chastis'd by the insolent Turk
for Apostatizing from the true Faith and sincere Obedience of the Primitive
times: and I heartily pray that the growing Sins of the Western Europe may not
make way for his further Progress into these parts of the World.

Because you questioned, as I remember, (added Bentivolio, still addressing
himself to Antigraphus) the whole Story whereupon all that I have said is
grounded, it is necessary, as a Period to this Discourse, to assert the
Credibility of that Holy Book in which it is written. Before I attempt that,
possibly it were not amiss if I should crave leave to ask you the Reasons for
which you doubt of it, and to desire you to say what would assure you of its
Truth if your demands were answered. But because that would extend this present
Intercourse beyond the bounds of that Time and Patience which this worthy
Company can allow, I will give you a short Account why I believe that Story to
be true, and if you be satisfied with my Arguments, I shall save you the labor
of propounding any more Scruples. This History is verified by all the Evidence
of which such a Truth is capable. For when Matters are questioned whose Truth
depends not upon a Demonstration fetched from the Nature of the things
themselves, which makes it self manifest to all men upon the first view, we
must seek for Proof in good Testimony; and we have sufficient witness to prove
that there was such a Person as Anaxanacton, and that the Narrative of his Life
written by his Friends is a true History. It is absurd to expect that our
Savior should be born, live, die, rise again, and ascend into Heaven in every
Age; neither is it necessary that God should repeat his Miraculous Testimonies
continually, having done it very often, and conveyed the notice of those
Assurances to posterity by the Records of Eye and Ear-witnesses. If this be not
a sufficient Evidence, future Ages can never hope for any Proof of what was
done in former days. Since this sort of Demonstration is all that ought to be
demanded, I shall give you that Satisfaction in which you ought to acquiesce,
by showing that all which I have said was done in the Presence of
unexceptionable Witnesses.

In the Books of such as were his mortal Adversaries, and therefore willing to
have buried any thing which might keep his Remembrance alive in the World, we
find the mention of his Name, and have received from some of them a Description
of his Person. None of them denies that he was famous for Miraculous Actions;
and when they desired to lessen the great Reputation which they reflected upon
him, they endeavored it not by affirming that he performed no such Works, but
by transferring the Effects which were really produced to less-worthy Causes;
not daring to call them Impostures, but either Magical Actions, or things
derived from Astral Influences, and which had been equaled by others. They
have recorded the Manner of his Death, the Time and Place of his Suffering,
have told us the name of the Judge that condemned him, and under what Roman
Emperor: they have acknowledged the vast Numbers of his Followers, and grant
that after his Death the World was filled with an Honorable Estimation of his
Person, and expressed the fear which they had lest his Doctrine should prevail
upon the Faith of the whole Roman Empire; and therefore made severe Edicts, and
inflicted cruel Punishments not only upon the Principal Converts, but
innumerable Multitudes of all sorts of People, to stop its Growth. They
confessed the Innocent Manners of his Disciples, and bore witness to the
constancy of their Loyalty to Anaxanacton. They have let us know how punctually
his Prophecy was fulfilled in the Destruction of that People which first
rejected him, the Ruin of their Temple and City, notwithstanding the
Endeavors of some Emperors who desired to have hindered its Accomplishment,
both by preventing the Dissolution, and attempting the Restoration of those
famous Structures. In short, some of them have also acknowledged that the Holy
Bible, which did more fully relate these things, and in particular give notice
that when Anaxanacton was born, a God descended from Heaven to restore the
World to Happiness, is a most Venerable Book.

This Testimony is not inconsiderable, because we have it from those who,
besides this one courtesy, which they never intended as an Expression of any
Good will, did no other service to Anaxanacton. But that which his Friends say
in defense of his Honor and their own Faith is much more valid, and against
which his Enemies will never be able to find any thing rationally to oppose.
The Evidence which is given for the Truth of this Famous History is made of a
Series of Witnesses, which running through sixteen Centuries has preserved the
Records, and asserted the Truth of the Divine Life, most charitable Death, and
stupendous Resurrection of Anaxanacton by a successive Attestation. Those who
first committed his Life to writing were Eyewitnesses of what they reported, or
intimate Companions of such as had conversed with him till his Ascension. As
the Assurance of this Truth confirmed by such a clear Evidence was the ground
of their proper Faith, and the only Reason which can be supposed to have made
them willing to be publishers of it; so it is absurd to think that others would
have received them with Faith, if the Apostles had not been able by some
Infallible Proofs to demonstrate that they witnessed what they knew to be true.
It is beyond the power of my Phancie to imagine what should induce the first
Divulgers of the Gospel to publish such strange news, but that they were
thoroughly convinced both that it was true, and that the knowledge of it was so
necessary to the Salvation of men that they could not conceal it but with a
very great uncharitableness. Those who frame Lies propound to themselves some
Advantage by Falsehood, and since that is so unlovely in its own nature that it
is abhorred of all the World, when they make use of it they are forced to adorn
it with borrowed colors, that by them they may impose upon the credulous and
attain their End.

All Judges do ever esteem it as a rational Assurance of the Goodness of an
Evidence, when the Witnesses give Testimony without hoping for any oblique
Advantage to themselves from the Issue of the Cause. What Design could the
plain Apostles serve if they had endeavored to cheat the World with this
Story, which was so odious to the Incredulous Jews and so unwelcome to the
Idolatrous Gentiles, that in an ordinary way it was applicable to no pur. pose
but to procure the Scorn and Hatred of those to whom they told it? If it had
not been a Truth, it was easy for those who heard it to discover its Falsehood;
for that which they related was done in one of the most illustrious Cities of
the World. If the Apostles of Anaxanacton could have so far debased themselves
as to divulge false news, yet it is unreasonable to think that they should
offer to do it for the advancement of their Master's Religion, which of all
things does most abhor a Lie. I know very well that vain Persons use to tell
false Stories to make their Auditors laugh at their ridiculous Inventions, and
that suborned Witnesses will sell their Oaths for Money, especially when they
have so framed their Depositions that the Falsehood is hard to be discovered;
and some Messengers will carry news which is not true, in hopes of receiving a
Reward before it can be known to be false: but were any men ever heard of, who
were so greatly in love with Death, and so passionately desirous of shameful
Torments, that they madly threw away their Lives for that which they knew to be
a Lie? It is well enough known that Anaxanacton's Friends died attesting this
Story, and were put to death for no other reason but because they would not
disown it. Pray tell me, good Antigraphus, in what Book did you ever read of
one, much less many thousands, who embraced a real Cross for his sake who was
only crucified in a Romance? It is easily observable out of the Books of
Anaxanacton's Enemies yet extant, that when his Disciples were convented before
Secular Powers, they were not accused for telling of Lies, or punished for
Fraudulent dealing, but only censured for publishing a New Doctrine, which was
entertained so readily and spread so far, that they were afraid it would subvert
their Pagan Religion; which indeed it did not with standing all they could do
to support it.

This is enough to justify the Veracity of those who first preached the
Gospel; and it is as easy to vindicate the Prudence of those who first gave
credit to their Report. As the Primitive Evangelists believed because they saw
Anaxanacton's Divine Actions, and were Eyewitnesses of his Resurrection; so
those who heard them tell this News had all good reason to believe them, not
only because they heard them relate such strange things with a steady
Confidence amongst those who dwelt near the place where they were done, and
because they perceived all the fair signs of Honesty in their Conversations,
but also saw them do many such things themselves as they affirmed their Master
to have done. How could any wise Spectators but think that Anaxanacton was a
Divine Person, when they saw his Servants do Miracles only with the mention of
his Name? As they could not think that was impossible which they saw done,
except they thought themselves not bound to believe their own Eyes; so they
could not but believe that which was reported, being made credible by such
convincing Evidences of its Truth, except they abandoned their Reason.

If the Apostles would have put tricks upon the World, we know that many of
their first Converts cannot be looked upon as Subjects capable of Delusion,
being men of great Parts, rare Learning, inquisitive Tempers, unconcerned as to
any thing but Truth, engaged to oppose what was told them, it being contrary
both to the Opinions which they professed, and the Laws of the Places where
they lived. Those who consider what they say, cannot affirm of the rest, who
were not of so great Abilities, that they at least might be imposed upon;
because the A postles devised no cunning Fables, nor used any subtle Arts, but
made a plain Narrative of Anaxanacton's Life, Death and Resurrection, justified
their Commission to be Divine by the frequent performance of beneficial
Miracles, commanded men in their Master's name to receive his Gospel, and were
answered with cheerful Obedience; those who believed, had so great an Assurance
in their Minds of the reasonableness of their Faith, that all the Arts of
Idolatrous Priests and Terrors of enraged Princes could not shake it. And can
any man think that they would thus strangely subject themselves to the
Authority of one that was acknowledged to have died upon a Cross, and then been
buried, but that they were assured he was also risen again, and both happy
himself, and able to exalt others to that Paradise to which he ascended?

Thus the first Age entertained the Discipline of Anaxanacton, and with a
careful Fidelity transmitted it to that which succeeded. As that which went
before would have hissed such strange News out of the World if it had not been
apparently true, so the next could not but give credit to it as a Report whose
undoubted Truth was generally known. The first Believers preserved the
Authentic Records of Anaxanacton's Story, and delivered Transcripts of them to
so many, that the common Evidence of their Faith was universally spread, and all
Corruption prevented, because for some hundreds of Years they had the Original
writings, and Copies were taken by so many Persons, that none could make a
Variation but he was liable to a quick Discovery. By the Power of this Divine
Verity they converted many of their most mortal Enemies among the Jews,
insomuch that those who had a hand in Anaxanacton's Death repented of the
Murder which they committed upon such a Divine Person, and testified the truth
of their Repentance by venturing their Lives in his Service. He was pleased to
assure his Ascension to one of his zealous Adversaries, by appearing to him
with a Heavenly Glory, and showed him the folly of endeavoring to destroy that
Church whose Prince was Lord of Heaven and Earth: who after he had recovered
the astonishment into which he was struck by the Celestial Vision, he tore the
Commission which he had received to disserve Anaxanacton, and made Reparation
for the wrong which he had done, by the constant Zeal wherewith he promoted the
Faith of his Gospel throughout his whole Life, and then perfected his Love with
Martyrdom.

When the Heathens doubted of the Truth of this holy Story, the Servants of
Anaxanacton referred them to their own Annals, and added Miraculous Proofs in
so many Places, that their Adversaries had nothing left to oppose them, being
sufficiently vexed to see such an unparalled Attempt succeed in a way which
the World never knew before; and wondered that a few mean men agreeing in one
plain Story should have such a potent Influence upon all Kingdoms where they
traveled, one single Person, and sometimes two, converting a whole Nation to
that manner of life which was contrary to the general Inclination of Mankind,
to that Doctrine which contradicted their received Principles, and that
Religion which overthrew the Worship which they had derived from many
Ancestors, and was confirmed by Penal Laws, and which exposed such as received
it first to Scorn, and then to Torments. It increased their Admiration to see
them voluntarily offer themselves to suffer in proof of what they said; but
much more when they perceived the undaunted Courage with which they endured the
greatest pains, and then Death. How could it but amaze the Heathens, when they
saw poor men, whom they despised, challenge their Gods before the Faces of
those who adored them, and make them confess themselves to be Devils? They
could not but wonder at the strange Alteration which was wrought upon their
Companions Tempers, who were so changed in their Manners that they could scarce
know them to be the same men. Christian Religion accomplishing that Emendation
upon Humane Life which Moral Philosophy had in vain attempted, except in a very
few Instances; it being unable to make its Precepts obeyed for want of
sufficient Motives, that is, could not promise Eternal Rewards to Virtue, nor
dissuade Vice effectually, having no Authority to threaten Disobedience with
endless Torments.

All beholders were raped into Admiration when they saw these things; and many
enquiring into the Reason of such rare Accidents, found sufficient cause to
conclude that they were the Effects of a Divine Power which accompanied the
Apostles: and they justly esteemed them Infallible Proofs of the Truth of the
Holy Story, knowing that Falsehood is unable to equal such Products.

But, O God! said Bentivolio, making a passionate Apostrophe, what a stupid
Incredulity has seized upon this leaden Age, which does not give Faith to that
Divine History which is come safe to our hands, being preserved in a Holy Book
not blemished with one material Variation, and honored with the concurring
Testimony of the best men who lived in all the Ages since it was written! What
a strange Lethargy is this which has so fatally benumbed our Wills, that we
cannot be persuaded to think that there is as much reason to believe that the
Four Evangelists have given us the true History of our Savior, as that Julius
Caesar wrote his Commentaries? We pretend to doubt whether the noble Physician
penned the Acts of the Apostles, and yet make no question but Homer wrote the
Iliads, and that the AEneids are the Works of Virgil.

But since there is no Comparison between the reason of that credulous Respect
which is given to the forementioned Authors, and the validity of that Evidence
which I have produced for Anaxanacton's Gospel; I will tell you (added
Bentivolio, now addressing himself to Eugenius) the cause of this strange
Infidelity. Some fall into it by a lazy neglect of the consideration of those
Arguments which would make them give credit to this Story; and many are
unwilling to believe it, because their Faith would disturb the Pleasures of
their Sensual Life. These, though they never heard of any Counter-witnesse
produced to disprove this Truth, (for there is none) and though they are not
able to frame a rational ground of Doubt, yet they endeavor to look upon it as
a Fiction, because it crosses their Adherence to a base Interest. The
Dissatisfactions which they pretend to the Holy Gospel arise not at all from
the Defect of those Reasons by which its truth is asserted, but from the
too-much Evidence which against their Wills they find there of the necessity of
a Holy Life, and too strong proofs of the miserable estate of those unworthy
Souls, who being favored with the Knowledge of its Precepts, do not answer it
with sincere Obedience.

It were too long to trouble you with the Enumeration of all those Devices
which they contrive to avoid the power of this important Verity. Sometimes they
pretend that the Doctrines revealed are contrary to Reason, making God's
Understanding no bigger then their own; and pronounce those things absurd which
they would not have had revealed; and endeavor that the Gospel might be
thought a Fable, though they cannot imagine at what time it should be feigned,
by whom, or for what purpose; and deny that it was confirmed by Miracles,
though they cannot but acknowledge that if it was entertained upon any other
Account, it was the greatest wonder in the World. But these men will not let it
be possible for God to assure his Creatures of Truth; for he has done so much
that they cannot tell what more to ask, only when they are urged with it, they
require saucily that he should repeat it.

But that you may more plainly see that this perverse Incredulity, which is the
great Fault of the present Age, arises not from the want of any Credibility in
the Object, or Defect of clear Evidence in the manner of proposal, I must
acquaint you that many who conversed with Anaxanacton when he lived upon Earth,
did not entertain his Gospel with that Faith which was due to his visible
Authority. The Proofs which he gave were Sufficient, but not Compulsive. It was
highly convincing to all Persons who were capable of Consideration, that he not
only performed such Miracles as are undeniable Testimonies of a Divine Power,
but such as they pretended that men ought to take them for a satisfactory
Assurance, and also verified those Antique Predictions which concluded him to
be what he said he was: yet they wrought no Effect upon such as were indisposed
by the Love of Sin to acknowledge one sent from God, who was a severe Reprover
of their Vicious Conversation. Anaxanacton observing the reason of this
Unbelief, told this sort of Persons, that though one who was dead should return
from the other World, yet he would not be able to persuade them that there is a
Hell where such as they were are punished. Since we know this, why should we be
astonished at the most obstinate Incredulity? If the Jews gave not credit to
their Eyes, why may not the Gentiles disbelieve their Ears?

Besides this, we cannot but take notice of a Customary Perverseness in some
Tempers, who when they have prepossessed themselves with false Opinions, will
not suffer them by any Arguments to be dislodged, and to prevent the
Possibility of a contrary Persuasion, resolve against the use of such means as
would quickly give them an Assurance of their Error.

Therefore to conclude this long Discourse, since the Ingenuous part of the
World did not only at first receive the Discipline of Anaxanacton upon the
forementioned Principles, and have continued their Obedience to it for sixteen
hundred Years, and have supported the Truth of it with unanswerable Arguments,
there is no doubt but the Glory of it will flourish till Reason be
extinguished. We must be content though wilful Infidels are justly permitted to
an Atheistical Skepticism, by which they are enabled to disbelieve any thing.
Since it shows more handsomely to deny Principles then to reject Conclusions
which follow from Premises once granted, they have ventured to strike boldly
at the Roots of Faith; but with such a blind Insolence, that for my own part, I
profess that if it were reasonable to believe the Pythagorean Metempsychosis, I
should suppose that the Souls of the most dull Brutes do transmigrate out of
their own into Humane Bodies. This Hypothesis would very well salve this
strange Phenomenon. But since we know that whilst men neglect to improve their
better Faculties, and indulge to themselves the vicious Pleasures of a Sensual
life, they naturally sink themselves into an unspeakable Sottishness, and
reject what they ought to believe, though they have no Counter-evidence equal
to the Demonstration of Truth, because it is irreconcilable to that which they
have resolved to love, we need go no further to seek a Reason of this stupid
Unbelief.

Thus, said Nicomachus, did Bentivolio conclude the noble History of
Anaxanacton. And now I must repeat my Entreaty, and desire your Goodness to
excuse the Dishonor which my weakness has forced me to cast upon Bentivolio,
or rather upon Anaxanacton, whose Divine Life I have very imperfectly related.
If you will not pardon me, yet I shall confess the Justice of what Sentence
soever you pronounce against me, because I have made your Patience also to
suffer part of the forementioned wrong, whilst you have attended so long to my
broken Rehearsal of the best Story in the World. The Company perceiving that
Nicomachus had finished the Recital (...) Bentivolio's Discourses, Theonoe gave
him thanks, and so did all the rest; and after they had supped and spent a part
of the Night in pertinent Reflections upon many pieces of the former Narration,
they retired to their several Chambers, where they rested with the greater
tranquillity, because the next day was appointed for their Journey toward
Phronesium.

When the Sun was up, Theonoe and Irene went to Urania's Appartiment, and
understanding that she walked in her Chamber, they went in, to let her know
that all things were ready for their Journey. They came down into the
Dining Room, where they found Panaretus, Sympathus and Nicomachus, who had
stayed there a while in expectation of the Ladies. Theonoe had given order to
prepare a large Coach which would hold them all, that so traveling together in
one moveable House they might enjoy the Pleasure of mutual Conversation upon
the Rode. They resolved to go through Philadelphia, which was not much about,
and at the Request of Sympathus they took the way which lies near the green
Banks of Calliroe, which is a fair River always full of clear water, being
supplied by a rich stream which descended from the famous Spring Agathorrhyton.
They reached that night to a beautiful House situated upon the River, which
belonged to Sympathus, where they were so conveniently lodged and generously
entertained, that they could not but perceive a rare concurrence of a great
Prudence with an equal Love in the completeness of their Welcome.

Sympathus durst not entreat any longer stay here, because he knew they were
passionately expected at Phronesium. The next day about Noon they arrived at
Kepanactus, intending to stay there an hour or two; but before they came within
two furlongs of the House, they were surpised with an unexpected Encounter of
many Friends. For it being made known that Bentivolio intended to meet his
Sister upon the way, the Prince of Theriagene would needs accompany him: the
Princess Agape, understanding that Urania was that day expected, desired leave
of the Queen to go and meet her, and took with (...) Philandra, Agatha and
Polysemna. Misopseudes, Amyntor, and some other Gentlemen of Quality belonging
to Theosebius and Alethion, rode along with them. It is not an easy Task to
relate the variety of those pleasant Passions which were expressed at this
happy Encounter. Bentivolio saluted Urania with that great Affection which he
thought due to her, not only as his Sister, but as Urania; whilst she embraced
him both as the best of Brothers, and one of the most excellent Persons in the
World. Panaretus and Bentivolio entertained each other as one Soul would do it
self if it were possible that it should animate two Bodies. The Prince of
Theriagene expressed that civility to Urania which showed his highest Respect
to her own Worth, and withal demonstrated a great sense of the Obligations
which he had received from her Brother. The Princess Agape took Urania into
her Arms, and gave her many kisses with such an excessive kindness, that it
would have filled the Beholders with wonder, if they had not known before how
much that Virtuous Lady deserved to be loved, and also remembered the intimate
Friendship which the Princess had contracted with her. She saluted Theonoe and
Irene with such an endearing tenderness, that they perceived themselves not to
have a small share in the Happiness of this delightful Meeting. When the rest
of the Company had revealed their Joy in all decent Expresses according to the
variety of their Relations, the Prince of Theriagene and the Princess of
Theoprepia took Urania and the two Sisters, which were her Fellow-travellers,
into their Coach, and were accompanied with the whole Troop of their Friends to
Kepanactus. After Dinner, which was ready as soon as they came into the House,
Agape entreated the Prince Alethion to engage the Company to hasten toward
Phronesium, knowing that the King and the Queen were possessed with a
passionate Expectation of their Arrival.

In a few hours they came to the City, and after they had entered the Palace,
Theosebius and Phronesia received Urania and Panaretus with such a cheerful Air
and an obliging manner, that they made not only an infallible Confirmation, but
an unexpressible Addition to their former Love. I cannot put the just
Description of this strange Encounter into fit Language, because my Phancie is
not able to supply my Mind with a full Representation of such extraordinary
Passages: only I can say thus much, that as the going away of these excellent
Persons was a languid Image of the sad parting of dying Friends; so this
Return, which was more acceptable because little expected, was a lively
Resemblance of those unspeakable Endearments with which old Friends will
receive one another at the Resurrection.

But Joy being at this time resolved to break through all its banks, made a
second Tide at full Sea. For, whilst this noble Company was at Supper, one of
Theosebes his Servants told the King that a Gentleman called Philalethes was
alighted from his Horse, and desired him to give notice of it to the Prince of
Theriagene. Philalethes had accompanied Alethion in his Journey to the borders
of Theoprepia, but then returned at the King's Command to deliver a Message to
Eugenius, and to serve his Affairs in Theriagene: And the Company being
acquainted with the Importance of his Negotiation, and having often taken
notice of the Apprehensions which Alethion had entertained for him, this News
was very welcome to them all; but Alethion and Misopseudes found themselves so
particularly concerned in it, that after Philalethes came in, and had performed
that civil Respect which was due to so great a Presence, the Prince of
Theriagene took him into his Arms with many Expressions of Affection, and
having with much unwillingness released him from those tender Embraces, his
Brother received him with such significations of Love mixed with Raptures of
Joy that are not easy to be represented. After they had finished their
Endearments, and settled themselves in that Deportment which was a necessary
Observance of those Persons of Condition who were present, they took part of
their gallant Supper; the whole Company entertaining themselves not only that
Night, but many Days after, with those unexpressible Satisfactions which were
produced by this happy Encounter.

The pleasure which Theosebes took in the agreeable Conversation of so many
Friends, did not make him forget the condition of the Prince of Theriagene: and
though he perceived Alethion to take so much content in the place where he was,
that he seemed to forget he was banished; yet he knew that this was no Excuse
for the wickedness of his Subjects, who denied him leave to dwell in his own
Kingdom; and resolving by God's assistance to vindicate his Wrongs, and to put
him into possession of his Father's Throne, he was confirmed in his purpose by
Letters from his Agent in Theriagene, which gave him Intelligence that
Antitheus intended to invade Theoprepia. Whereupon he sent for Amerimnus, the
chief Bishop of Theoprepia, (whose advice he always asked in Civil as well as
Religious Affairs) for his Chancellor, and Lysander the General of his Army,
and acquainted them with his thoughts. They approving his Design; Which way
shall we endeavor to prosecute it? said Theosebes. If you please, replied
Lysander, you may summon the Deputies of the several Provinces of Theoprepia to
meet at Phronesium, and when they are come, let my Lord Chancellor give them
notice of your Princely Intentions: they do so truly hate the name of
Antitheus, and honor the person of Alethion, that I am very confident they
will be willing to contribute their best assistance toward the Restoration of
the Prince of Theriagene. What think you, my Lords? said Theosebes to the
Archbishop and the Chancellor. They both replying that they were of Lysander's
mind, the King approved their Advice, and accordingly gave order to the
Chancellor to dispatch Letters to the four Divisions of Theoprepia, to require
them to send their Commissioners within four days to the Senate House at
Phronesium, to consult concerning some important Affairs of State. The obedient
Theoprepians made appearance at the time appointed; and when they were met, the
King, attended with Amerininus, Lysander, and his chief Ministers of State,
went to the Senate House; and being much pleased with the cheerful sight of so
many loving Subjects, after he had given them an hearty welcome to Phronesium,
he congratulated the Happiness of the Meeting in a short Speech, and then
commanded the Chancellor to let them understand the reasons of their
Convention.

The Chancellour's name was Calliphon; and Theosebes did fully demonstrate that
he understood well what sort of Persons are fit to serve Kings, when he made
choice of him for one of his principal Statesmen. It is true, the Concerns of
his Place were great, but his known Wisdom and perfect Fidelity were not
inferior to them. The highest Trust which one man can put in another is, to
take his Counsel: But this is greater in Kings, because their Affairs, to which
Counsel is applied, are more important then ordinary matters, and the danger
more considerable, if those who give Advice have a greater regard to their own
benefit then to his advantage that asks it.

Calliphon was Secret by the temper of his nature, and so Faithful in the
discharge of his Trust, that he never set any oblique ends of his own
contradistinct to his Master's Interest, but in all his Proposals aimed
directly at the King's Honor and the People's Happiness. His Integrity was
equaled with a rare Wisdom: for Calliphon being naturally of a quick Fancy,
had improved the goodness of his Wit into Prudence by Experience, and perfected
it with vast Accessions by continual Industry. Being incited to all possible
Acquists by a passionate Love which he had for Knowledge, he endeavored to
understand the natural Connexions and proper Consequences of all things, and
not to guide his Actions by the uncertain Rule of unexamin'd Opinions or
general Sentences. He gave evident proof of his early Discretion by the
Virtuous management of his younger Age, and the prudent Government of his
Family; and showed the greatness of his Understanding by the proper Language
and strong Reasons for which his Discourses were always admired when he had
occasion to speak in the Senate.

He was designed to the Study of State Affairs by his wise Father Pithologus,
who was a Privy-Counsellour to Phronimus: And when other Gallants trifled away
their time in vain pleasures, he accustomed Calliphon to read Books of Policy,
Records of Treaties, and other Memoirs of the most famous Statesmen; and being
much pleased with those Improvements which he perceived him to make in this
way, he acquainted him with that Intelligence which he received from Foreign
parts, and made him understand the private Reasons of the chief Transactions of
State. By which means he arrived at a clear Knowledge of all things which might
concern his Place; such as the Rules of Government, the Nature of Justice and
Equity, the Laws of Commerce and War, the ways of Preserving and Increasing
the King's Revenue, the Duties of all public Offices, the Disposition of his
Countrymen, the Conveniences and Inconveniences which might arise to them from
their Neighbors: In short, he had as much understanding of Persons and Things
as can be attained by a long Study of Men and Books. And now having the
advantage of Years, and the benefit of a firm Memory, in which he had registered
the Consequences of the most considerable Actions observed by himself, to which
he had also added the Experiments of others, he was able to give proper Advice
in any business which could fall under Deliberation.

Having given you a short Character of this excellent Person, I will set down
his Speech. He is reported to have delivered himself in such words as these;

Gentlemen, You will wonder at the occasion of this Assembly, when I tell you
that the Wickedness which has given us cause to meet is so extraordinarily
strange, that it transcends the worst Examples which have been produced in our
memory. We are in danger of an Invasion from Theriagene, only because we have
performed the just Rights of Hospitality, (whose sacred Laws are involably
observed by all the World) not to a common Ally, but to the most Excellent
Prince Alethion, who has not only obliged us with the Assistance of his Arms,
but has made us owe the Life of our King to the generous Adventure of his own
Person at the Battle in Theromachia. He is deprived of his Kingdom by a
rebellious party of his Subjects upon this false Pretense, that when his Father
was alive he kept a treasonable Correspondence with his Confederates in
Theoprepia.

Here Calliphon made a short pause, seeing the whole Senate raped into a
passionate Admiration of this strange News. When they had settled themselves
again, he went on thus;

As there needs no witness to convince us of the falseness of this insolent
Calumny, besides the Knowledge which we have of our own Innocence; so we are
sufficiently assured of the reason why this horrid Accusation was forged by the
ill use which has been made of it: And we are fully informed by whose
traitorous endeavor it was framed, since we understand that Antitheus has
usurped the Kingdom. It is not needful by many words to let you know our King's
Opinion concerning this matter, or to use many Arguments to persuade you to
follow his Advice. As Phronimus our late King of Glorious Memory thought
Anaxagathus worthy of his Friendship, so Theosebes thinks it unworthy of him to
desert his Son, who has demonstrated his high Regard to our Interest when we
needed his help, or to slight an Ancient League, which was once beneficial to
us, in a time when the distressed condition of our Confederate does solicit us
to observe it. For the performance of that which Justice requires and Gratitude
commands, Theosebes thinks it is but a small matter to protect the Person of
Alethion in his Country, except we also assert his Right with our Swords: And
since we cannot requite the Love of Anaxagathus by restoring to him that Life
which he has lost by the fraud of Traitors, we will endeavor to repossess his
Son of his Kingdom, and by the destruction of his Enemies make him live again
in Alethion, and let Theriagene know that they were not more willing to assist
us against malicious Foreiners, then we are able to deliver them from the
Oppression of their own misguided Arms.

You are not ignorant with what dishonorable Aspersions our Constitutions have
been represented to the ignorant World. It is true, we had an opportunity in
the late War with the Theomachians to let them know how falsely they imagine,
that humble Innocence and charitable Patience do so enervate men's spirits, that
true Christians are an easy prey to such as have a mind to seize upon them;
they having found the contrary by their own experience. Though our Religion
has taught us that no Policy is comparable to Innocence, and assured us that
an Obligation put upon our Neighbors by a constant Beneficence is one of the
strongest Fortresses in the World; yet we have made them understand that we
have so much prudent Courage also to defend the Fort which Virtue has raised,
that it will always be very hard for the Injurious to make good their bold
Attempts upon the peaceable Theoprepians. They will not say in future times
that Religion has made us Cowardly Fools, since we have given them sufficient
reason to believe that, though our Patience set us above the low desires of
Revenge for private wrongs, yet we ought not to expose our public Concerns,
which are dearer to us then our Lives, to the cruelty of the Unjust. It is
necessary that we should let these insolent people of Theriagene know, that the
Humility and Justice which will not permit us to arrogate any thing wrongfully
to our selves, does not make us willing to be enslaved by others, and that we
can defend our selves against those whom we do not despise. They will perceive
by our present Undertaking, that we think it as necessary to protect our selves
against the Violence of lawless Persons, as to resist a dangerous Incursion of
wild Beasts with our Arms, or to prevent the calamity of an Inundation
threatened by swelling waters with strong Banks.

This also is a proper season in which we may show that the Theoprepian
Principles are not terminated with our private Accommodations, but that they
are extended to promote the Interests of others: And that we do not bound that
Neighborhood which our great Lord has obliged us to love with the narrow
limits of our own Country, but are willing to enlarge our careful Charity, if
it were possible, to the vast compass of the Universe. Whereas our Enemies
think that we are pitifully enfeebled by an Abstemious Mode of Life, we will
convince them of their Error, and show them that we do not only preserve a
good Health, but have also obtained a firm Hardiness by the Rules of
Temperance; and give them a clear Evidence, that the Courage wherewith we now
assist a most just Cause, arising from a true Faith in God, a due Contempt of
the World, and certain Hope of Immortal Life, does far exceed that common
Valor which depends only upon the strength of a natural Temper, is nourished
with high Diet, and blown up with the desire of Spoils, or expectation of
Triumph, after Victory.

This is enough, Gentlemen, to show you the reasonableness of Theosebes his
noble Resolution. The way by which he intends to endeavor the accomplishment
of his Design, is, to lead an Army into Theriagene; by which means we shall
carry to them those Fears which they hope to bring hither, and possibly make
them repent of their malicious Purposes before they have power to put them in
Execution, and by God's help seasonably extinguish that Fire which they have
kindled in Theriagene with a purpose to inflame Theoprepia. It is well known
how Hannibal distressed the Romans, when he transported his Soldiers into Italy;
and that Agathocles showed a great skill in Military Affairs by fighting the
Carthaginians in Africa, when he could scarce defend his own City against their
Fleet which lay before it in the Port of Syracuse. Though our Case is in no
respect so necessitous, yet by this means we may hope speedily to prevent the
Trouble which is prepared for us.

We need not fear that this undertaking will be liable to suspicion among our
Neighbor - Kingdoms; for the Treason of Antitheus and his Faction is so
notorious, that they must needs justify the Assistance which we give to the
wronged Alethion, and so unanimously condemn the Theriagenians, that whatsoever
misery shall happen to them, they will not have this comfort left, that they
shall be thought unworthy of what they suffer; all concluding that they ought
to undergo the Extremity of Punishment, who have done what they could to
deserve it. We are also fairly invited to this Action by the Generous Example
of those noble Strangers, Bentivolio and his Brother, who lately sojourning in
these parts, and having notice of these unhappy Accident's, have resolved not
to return to their own Country till they see Alethion repossest of his
Dominions.

I need not tell you that our contest is with inconsiderable Adversaries; but
if I should speak after the manner of other Orators, I might say that we are in
greater danger of not obtaining much glory in the Conquest, then of meeting any
great difficulty in the Combat. We are to encounter Beasts enfeebled with
Luxury, who are so unable to fight, that they can scarce carry Arms: And indeed
their number is so small in comparison of those who hate their abominable
Conspiracy, that I look upon our Journey rather as a Visit made to Alethion's
Friends, then a War undertaken against his Enemies. Having said thus much, it
is fit I should conclude. It were impertinent to trouble you with a long
Oration, for I am not such a Stranger to the temper of the Theoprepians, that I
can think many words needful to persuade them to an Engagement which is both
full of Justice and Honor.

When Calliphon had done speaking, Sympathus, who was one of the Commissioners
for Philanthropia, took this Opportunity to express the Affection which he had
long before entertained for the Prince of Theriagene, and in a short Speech
declared his high Approbation of the King's Design, professing that, in his
Opinion, the Arguments which the Chancellor had used to signify how necessary
it was, gave so much satisfaction, that he thought more could not be reasonably
desired.

After him Charistion, Amyntor, Pasiphilus, Euphron, Calodoxus and Aristander
signified their concurrence in the same Opinion with Sympathus. Then the
undertaking was approved by a general suffrage of the whole Assembly, who also
voted that the Conduct of this Affair should be left entirely to the wisdom of
Theosebes. The King gave them thanks for the unanimous cheerfulness with which
they entertained his Proposal, and told them that he thought it requisite to
list only ten thousand men, whom he himself intended to lead; adding, that he
made no doubt but by this number, with God's blessing and the Assistance of
Alethion's Friends, he should be able in a short time to reduce those who were
most unjustly his Enemies to their due Obedience; and then dismissed the Assembly.

Theosebes returned to his Palace, and acquainted Alethion, who was then with
Bentivolio, and the rest of his Companions, with the good Affections of the
Theoprepians. Whereupon the Prince of Theriagene having expressed his thankful
Resentment of such an obliging Favor, his friends also with just Praises
extolled the Generous King of Theoprepia and his worthy Subjects: And as they
entertained a great joy in the hopes of Alethion's Restoration, so they
pleased themselves not a little whilst they perceived that they should not be
denied the Honor of being Instruments in the Accomplishment of it.

Here it may possibly be expected that I should let my Reader know how this
noble Company spent their time, till by the prudent Industry of Lysander the
Army could be put into an Equipage fit for a March. It would be too long to
give an account of those various Diversions with which they were entertained by
the most courteous Prince Theosebes. I will only relate a short Story, which he
desired the learned Bishop Amerimnus to tell them, as they sat one day in a
pleasant Summer House which adorned the Garden at Kepanactus. It happened that
as Philalethes was acquainting his Prince with the condition in which he left
Theriagene, and telling him who were the chief Persons in favor at
Polistherium, among many others he named Hieromimus; whereupon Amerimnus
smiled: which Bentivolio perceiving, as soon as Philalethes had ended his
Discourse, he asked the good Bishop the reason of that Pleasantness which he
had observed him to express upon the mention of (...). Theosebes imagining the
cause of it, and knowing that the Story of Hierominus would be an acceptable
Recreation to the Company, prevented Amerimnus in his Reply, and desired him to
give them a short Character of that vain Person, and to let them understand how
ridiculously he had behaved himself not long before in Theoprepia. I am very
willing to perform any service, replied Amerimnus, by which I may show my
Obedience to your Commands; and since you have made it my Duty to report the
Extravagancies of Hieromimus to this excellent Company, I will let them know
what I have understood by Letters from several friends of mine who knew his
Family, what I learned from the confession of Thelgomenus one of his Disciples,
but of late undeceived by Alethologus, and by some Discourse which I had with
Misoplanus, who did so discover the Impostures of this Jugler, that he made him
ashamed to stay in Theoprepia.

Hieromimus was born in the greater Apateonia. His Grandfather's name was
Simmagus, a man so passionately ambitious of being looked upon as an
extraordinary Person, that he offered a sum of Money to Almighty God to sell
him a Miraculous Power; but being rejected with such a direful Reproof as was
due to his wicked Impudence, he bought of the Devil a Magical skill, by which
he was enabled to perform many things beyond the Ability of Vulgar Wits, and
attained so great a Reputation among the common People, that they changed his
name to Pammegas. Simmagus being puffed up with their vain applauses,
blasphemously assumed to himself the Title and Worship of God, and boasted also
that his immodest companion Helena was a She-Deity. He continued his impious
course for some years, till at last he was met by one of Anaxanacton's
Servants, who, as Simmagus was riding in the Air to the amazement of many
beholders, melted his waxen Chariot, by pronouncing his Master's name, made him
fall down and break his neck upon the ground.

His Son Moralazon, not deterred with his dreadful Fate, followed his Father's
Example: and having heard that in former times, when God sent great Prophets
and holy Apostles to make known his Divine Pleasure to the World, he bestowed
upon them a power to speak and do things Extraordinary, by which men being
assured that they came from God, gave them an honorable Reception due to such
Messengers; Moralazon being of an arrogant disposition, did earnestly desire to
make the World believe that he himself was a Prophet, but of an higher Rank
then any who were sent before him. He thought himself not unprovided of rare
News to deliver, having fansied some strange Opinions, of which he was so
passionately enamoured, that he persuaded himself that it did more concern the
World to know them then any Doctrine which they had formerly received. He
failed of his Expectation, for he died a little after he had begun his Work.

But his Son Hieromimus, being well acquainted with his Father's intentions,
and pretending that he inherited his Prophetical Spirit, resolved to carry on
the Design: and remembering (for he had been told) that true Prophets by
conversation with Angels, or by reason of the glory of Divine Illapses, did
many times suffer strange Ecstasies; he thought with himself how he might
counterfeit this Sacred Passion, and made use of diverse Arts to super-induce
upon himself and others an Enthusiastical Fury; and being well instructed in
his Father's Opinions, divulged, or, as he said, brought from Heaven a new way
of going thither, and boasted that he was sent to reform the World by a new
Discipline. He talked often of a mystical Divinity, and promised to
spiritualize all former Knowledge; though indeed he did only subvert true
Reason with wild Fancies, and allegorize venerable Histories into a sublime
Nothing.

Before he began to put his foolish thoughts into practice, he perceived that
it was very hard to carry on such a new business with a sufficient
plausibleness without the assistance of some cunning Associates; and having
considered which of his Acquaintance were fittest to be trusted with this great
Secret, he observed that Davigeor, Jackleid, and Jamnail were complexion'd much
like himself, and so of a humor which would easily be taken with his
Proposals. He told them that it was revealed to him by the Angel Hithladeus
that he should be the King of the new Jerusalem, and that he had showed him by
a new Exposition of the old Prophecies, that though they were fulfilled
literally in Anaxanacton, yet they were to receive a Mystical Completion in
him, and that he was designed by God to choose Princes to rule under him in all
Nations, and to send Prophets to convert the whole World to his Obedience.
These Proselytes hoping for no mean Offices in his Utopian Kingdom, gave him
infinite thanks for communicating to them so sublime an Affair, and with all
humble willingness offered their utmost service to one whom God had designed to
such high Honor.

Though this piece of his Plot succeeded according to his desire, yet
Hieromimus thought that he wanted still more help, and therefore made choice of
three other Assistants; Loxias, who had a great faculty of speaking what
neither he nor any else did understand, whom he appointed to amuse his Hearers
with raised Nonsense; Phlegon, who was very useful for his hot zele; and
Pandacryon, who could weep when he pleased. With some small rewards and great
promises he engaged also in his service Astriatrus and Taumaturgus: they were
fit for his purpose, both of them professing Chiromancy and Physiognomy;
Astriatrus pretending also that he could make Horoscopes, and knew how to
divine by the Stars. Hieromimus contented himself with these, having changed
the resolution which he once took up, for he intended a while in imitation of
the number of Anaxanacton's Apostles to make his Followers Twelve; only he
added to them two She-Secretaries, Pannychis and Quintilla, not indiscreetly:
for one of them being Epileptical, and the other troubled with the Hysterical
Passion, they pretended the gift of Raptures: and these, besides other uses,
served him when he traveled for Lacquayes. They affirmed themselves to be
Cousin-Germans, and called themselves the Daughters, one of Colpia, the other
of Velleda.

Hieromimus designing not only to out-doe all the Prophets, but to equal and
excel their holy Master Anaxanacton, and having entertained a fancy that he
was like that incomparable Prince in some Personal Resemblances, he had
procured a Copy, which was long ago pretended to have been taken of him by one
called Lentulus, and endeavored by Art to make up what was wanting in Nature
for the completion of a Comparison both abominable and ridiculous. He had Hair
of a Chestnut color, long, but not thick, after the manner of the Jewish
Nazarites, parted in the middle, and a little curling; his upper garment was so
framed, that it seemed to be a seamless Coat. Davigeor, looking upon this garb
as unbecoming his Dignity, persuaded him to wear a Doublet of Crimson Satin.
Jackleid, thinking he did not use Ceremonies correspondent to his Majesty,
advised him to be served in Plate, and to give him leave to provide a gilt
Chair, in which he might sit as on a Royal Throne, whilst his Servants made
humble Addresses to him upon their knees, and adored him as the King of the New
Jerusalem.

His affairs being thus ordered, he commanded his She-Lacquayes to attend him
in a Journey which he was to take from Apateonia toward Phronesium in
Theoprepia. Jamnail provided him an Ass, which Hieromimus appointed to be
brought without Bridle or Saddle, and begun his journey before the Sun was up,
because he intended to finish it in one day. This forecast was necessary, for
he had four and twenty miles to ride, and it being Winter, the weather was foul
and the way very bad. Pannychis and Quintilla assisted him with Torches; but
when they had gone about a quarter of a mile, he commanded them to cast away
those poor external Lights, making them believe that one far more glorious
should presently shine forth upon them from within, and show them their way.
The Lacquayes obediently put out their Tapers; but as they went on it was so
dark that they quickly lost their way, and knocked their Heads against Trees,
stumbled at great Stones, and sometimes tumbled into Ditches, the Promise of
Hieromimus being unable to enlighten the Air. However, being armed with a blind
Confidence, they went on till they came to a narrow Bridge, which the poor
Beast, for want of Enthusiastical eyes to make him see in the dark, missed, and
threw the false Prophet into Water, Mud and Impatience. Pannychis and Quintilla
ventured in after him; and when they had with much difficulty pulled him out
and squeezed him, Pannychis told them, that she had a Revelation that they
ought not to go any further till the Day should dawn. Hieromimus having paid
dear for his bold Error was content to be mutually exhorted, especially
because they could not get out the Ass, which was laid fast in the Mire. When
the Light began to appear, the Ass had strugled her self out, and as she was
going to graze, Quintilla caught her by the Ears, and the Rider having gotten
upon her back, they began to march again: but as they went along, the Ass
being not held in with any Bridle, did by often going out of the Road create so
much trouble to both the Lacquayes in reducing her, that they were forced to
tie their Garters together to make a Curb for the unruly Beast. When they had
scarce gone half their way, the faint Ass, being much wearied with the heavy
load of this fat Baalam, stood still. Hieromimus having no spurs, she would not
answer the dull blows of his unarmed heels: whereupon Quintilla went to the
next hedge, and having plucked off a sprig of thorn whipped her on. The angry
Ass being enraged with the pain which she received from these sharp prickles,
did frequently shake her Rider with rude Kicking, and at last the soft Prophet
was so galled with the hard back of his lean Steed, that he was forced to tell
his Lacquayes, that it was their duty to take off their Peticoats and lay them
under him for a Saddle.

In this mad guise (...) arrived at last in a Village not far from Phronesium,
well known to most of this Company, and which will be for ever famous by reason
of his being there; his two impious Attendants blasphemously singing Hosanna's
to him, as he past through the Streets to his Lodging, which was taken up for
him before by Jamnail, and whither his Accomplices resorted to him.

The Company having laughed a while at this ridiculous mode of Travel,
Amerimnus went on thus: The first trick which he showed after his Arrival was a
Device invented long ago by one Psaphon. He had a Cage full of Parrots, which
he had taught to speak, and accustomed to pronounce these words, Hear
Hieromimus. These he conveyed privately into a Wood by Loxias, whom he ordered
to let them fly among the trees, and return unseen. The Parrots being glad to
have escaped their Prison repeated the Syllables, which they had well learned,
with a loud cheerfulness. The Neighborhood wondering at this strange Voice of
Birds, inquired who this Hieromimus was. A holy Prophet, said Davigeor, whom
God has sent amongst you to give you the last warning of Repentance. Whilst
some expressed a wonder at the advice of Birds speaking with an Articulate Voice,
Astriatrus, Phlegon, Thaumaturgus, and the rest of Hieromimus his Agents,
according to the Instructions which they had received from him, endeavored to
support and augment the great estimation which this Accident had begun to lodge
in the minds of some weak people, and told them, not without signs of deep
Veneration, that Hieromimus was a Divine Person, designed by God for the
Paraclete long since promised, consubstantiated with the Deity, and descended
lineally by the Mother's side from the holy Achamoth, beloved of God above all
men; and that the Dignity of his transcendent nature did many times reveal it
self by most glorious Irradiations, his Face shining with such illustrious
beams, that they were not able to look upon him.

Sometimes they extolled his Divine Knowledge, affirming him to have attained a
rare Wisdom which was never before imparted to any created Being: Which he
received not by Education, by improvement of Reason, by reading of Books, by
Observation, or any ordinary way by which common men attain their Skill, but by
Revelation; God having so far favored him, that he should not be at the
trouble of collecting Knowledge by rational Discourses, but showed him all
things after an intuitive manner in Ecstatick Dreams and Prophetic Visions.
And they boldly affirmed that God did sometimes transport him into the
Celestial Regions, where he saw Anonomasta and Hyper-Urania, heard the voice of
deep Silence, saw the infinite measures of the Abyss, numbered the AEonian
Ogdoads, and beheld without any amazement the famous Tetractys, who brought
with her Alethia, and made her show her self to him without a Veil; and, which
was an honor not allowed to Archangels, saw in the Cabinet of Heaven the
sacred Trias with bodily Eyes, from whom he received the Keys of those
Treasuries where the most hidden Mysteries are locked up.

Hieromimus endeavored to justify their Lies; for, pretending to be thus
wonderfully illuminated, he told the World that all old Doctrines were but
Fables, decry'd Humane Reason as a name of the most fallacious Ignorance,
condemned all Learning as Black Art, reproch'd Books as the Tools of
Antichrist, called Libraries the Devil's Kitchins, and bad them only await the
Irradiations of a Light which would shine within them if they gave obedience to
his Precepts, and teach them infallibly, make them Judges of Truth and
Falsehood, and render them unaccountable to others for their Opinions or
Actions. In short, he boasted that all who were before him had never penetrated
so much as the Rind of true Wisdom, but only had read the History of Truth
which they did not understand; but that he was honored with the Mystical
Light, the Inward Word which does enlighten all things, which God had Centred
in him as the Intellectual Sun, appointed to chase away the shadows of
Darkness, and to illustrate the World with a Spiritual sense; and promised to
all that followed his Directions, that in a little time they should see all
things, being encompassed with a holy Cloud, and be united with God by a Divine
Ignorance, which should teach them to verify Contradictions, and make them one
with every thing which they understood.

To encourage those who would become his Disciples, he promised to give them a
Book written by himself, which his Scholars call Pansophia, but which he named
Jaldabaoth, in which he had recorded whatsoever was known formerly, or possible
to be known in all Ages to come. He boasted also of a magnificent Charter which
he had received from Almighty God, which contained a Grant of such Privileges
as were not before allowed to mortal men, and that he had Authority to give
them to whom he pleased. The chief of which was, That such as conformed to his
Discipline should not need the Mediation of our Savior, should be pardoned
without making use of the Propitiatory Sacrifice of his Death, and should have
a Dispensation from the Observance of his Laws, to which others are obliged: He
having, as he said, received a Commission from God to supply the Defects of the
imperfect Doctrine of Christ, to make all things new, and amongst the rest a
New Testament, to reform the Austerity of holy Laws, and to save the World, not
by Obedience performed to severe Rules, but by pleasant Directions, the
Relaxation of Self-denial, the Abolition of the Cross, and free Concession of
Sensual Pleasures. Besides this, he told his Proselytes that they should have
an inviolable Beauty fixed upon their Souls, which was no more capable of being
blemished with that which is usually called Sin, then Invulnerable persons can
be wounded, or Gold lose its Color by being cast into Mud. He was so bold also
as to institute an obscene Mystagogy, and called it the Method of Holiness, by
which only men are capable of preparation for the Society of the Perfect; and
told such as would believe him, that they should not be seen by the Great Judge
when he took cognizance of the wicked World, though they stood naked before
him, by reason of a thick shield called Anaedea, with which he promised to
cover them all over.

That Obedience which he required of his Disciples was to renounce their former
Knowledge, to receive his Dictates without Examination, to be baptized in his
Name, and to renounce conversation with those which were not of his Sect, out
of which, as he told them, there is no Salvation.

To make proof concerning the truth of his bold Assertions Astriatrus was
principally employed, who by his Skill in Physic having done some small
matters, Thaumaturgus was ordered to cry them up as effects of a Miraculous
power. Phlegon, Jannail and Quintilla were sent into the neighboring Villages
to report great Cures done upon themselves. Phlegon said that Hieromimus had
restored him from a dead Palsy with breathing upon him. Quintilla affirmed that
she was freed from the distempers of the Falling Sickness only by being in his
Company. Jamnail protested that he was born deas and dumb, but that from the
first time in which he saw Hieromimus he could both speak and hear. As they
were met according to appointment one day in a Town not far from Phronesium,
Phlegon discoursing after his usual manner, one Pseudolus, formerly a Jugler in
Apateonia, whom they had engaged to be of their Party, being present, happened
to fall into an extraordinary Passion, and having fom'd awhile at the Mouth,
and strugled after a strange mode, fell into a trance, which the Bystanders
judged to be real, because when his Companions pricked pins into his flesh, he
neither started nor seemed to have any feeling. After some time when he came to
himself, he began with a distracted countenance to speak some Hebrew and Greek
Sentences, though what he said was only some few words which he understood not,
taught him by Astriatrus. The other Associates expressed other symptoms of
Ecstasy and Rapture; for Hieromimus his Agents as they traveled had
entertained Hysterical Women, Men vexed with Hypochondriack passions,
Epileptical persons, and such as Melancholy had made half mad, who were easily
cast into Fits by the cunning Artifice of their Instructors, and also by such
Rules as they had learned from their own observation of their particular
Distempers.

Having proceeded thus far in their design, the next Scene was to terrify
their Auditors with the fear of Damnation into an Obedience of the Commands of
Hieromimus. To effect this, Pandacryon was ordered in a field, where all their
Company was assembled, to get up into a Tree to preach Repentance, and threaten
Destruction to such as within two days did not submit themselves to their new
Discipline; endeavoring to make them believe that upon the second day
following Hieromimus should appear in his Princely Robes, as the dreadful Judge
of the disobedient World. Pandacryon gave them a Cast of his Office
beforehand; for in his Master's name he condemned all Churches as
Antichristian Synagogues, reviled their Pastors as Hypocrites, and called the
Disciples of Anaxanacton Fools, and pronounced such as continued in their
Christian Faith Rebels to the true Sovereign of the World Hieromimus.

Whilst Pandacryon was making his passionate Oration, and had now begun to
weep, as he pretended, in commiseration of the obdurate Theoprepians, who,
except one Thelgomenus, were not much moved with his Rhetoric; Misoplanus
happened to arrive in the place, who having heard of their practices before,
and seen this last piece of their religious Pageantry, called to Pandacryon to
descend from his Pulpit in these words; Come down, thou Crocodile, dry up those
Hypocritical tears. It is only in Apateonia where such Cheaters are believed,
in Theoprepia you must expect to be laughed (...) I should not trouble my self
to talk with those who are so far below the Capacity of a rational Conference,
that they despise all Addresses made by others, except in the way of Applause,
and disdain to speak, except it be to give Law; but that I think it is worthy
of a Christian to pity your Folly, and to make a charitable confutation of your
Errors, in hope that you may possibly be reclaimed, and to prevent the
dangerous Effects which they must needs produce, if they be enertain'd in the
minds of those plain people who have not sufficient discretion to guard their
Integrity from the Invasion of cunning Cheats.

First, I must tell you that you have laid the scene of your plot very
improperly in Theoprepia. We are not apt to take high pretenses for strong
Reasons, to admire Impostors because they are proud, or to believe Lies because
they are boldly affirmed. Do you think that we are obliged to esteem you a
Prophet, because you talk of Revelations? or to adore you as a Divine Person,
because you were magnified in Apateonia? You should rather have made your
juorney into a Country which had never heard of Simon Magus, and set up your
Stage in some Town where Montanus was never named, or the Euthites. You might
do well to talk of Raptures to such as know not what Boasts every Poet uses to
make of the Muses Inspirations, to those who have not read the Story of
Aristaeas, who never heard of Minos his Cave, or the Valley of Egeria, who were
never told of Lycurgus his journey to Delphos, Sertorius his Do, or Mahomet's
Pigeon. You are mistaken to think that you have brought us any strange News: we
are acquainted not only with the History of the old Gnostics and the Pagan
Enthusiasts, but also of Neoterick madmen; the Alumbrado's of Spain, the
Darvisei of Turkey, the Fanatics of France, the Nicolaitans of Germany, and the
Impostors of Holland; who pretended both to ingross Illumination, to monopolize
Charity, and enclose the Spirit of God from all the rest of the World to
themselves, when they did only hedge a Cuckoo of their own breeding within the
bounds of their particular Sect. I wonder how you came to think that the World
is grown so stupid, that it would easily entertain all the wild imaginations of
hot Brains for Revelations of the Divine Will, and so mistake the irrational
suggestions of every arrogant Spirit for those holy Beams which shine from the
Light within, which every beholder is bound to follow. You may possibly
persuade those to be in love with your Ecstatical passions, who had rather be
Mad then in their Wits; and make such believe that your Extravagancies are
Divine Efforts, who never heard of the Triennial Orgyia's of Bacchus, the
Fanatic Verses, Enthusiastic Dreams, and wild Furies of the Corybantes; and
by your Arts make those tremble who by Nature and Education are but too much
inclined to Panick fears. But you must know that the Theoprepians are not so
foolishly in love with transported Thoughts and ecstatical Affections as you
imagine, and that they do exceedingly despise all Enthusiastical Raptures in
comparison of a humble Faith and sincere Virtue, that they place them
infinitely below the free use of sober Reason, and esteem those possessed with an
high degree of Madness already, who look upon Alienation of Mind as a thing
desirable, and equal them to such as prefer the tremulous motion of a
Paralytick Arm before the steady quietness of an healthful Temper.

Must we admire those Actions as Divine Effects in you, which we know to be the
common Products of natural Causes, and trouble those who are destitute of a
good Health whether they will or no? Who knows not to what various disturbances
Melancholic persons are subject, and how that Noxious humor, when it grows
predominant, transports men into strange Thoughts and extravagant Affections;
especially if it be heightened artificially by walking in shady Groves or
solitary Valleys, by sitting in dark Caves, or by conversation with those who
are apt to affright the timorous with wild countenances, ghastly looks, bold
threatenings, and other mystical devices? Since this temper produces the same
Effects in Religions as it does in other instances, shall we wonder that some
of you call your selves Angels, when others upon as slight a ground think
themselves Wolves? Why may not distracted Zelots pronounce themselves Messia's,
when crack-brain'd Footmen have thought themselves Emperors? A vehement
Intention of mind, to which this Temper is apt, does easily breed an Ecstatical
passion; and when the Fancy is once engaged by this potent delusion, men
believe they see and hear what was never spoken or made visible. Thus
Phrenetick persons see Men, Horses and Armies in the Clouds, whilst they walk
in the fields, as sick people do the shapes of living creatures upon white
walls, when they lie in their beds. Yet you require an Approbation of your
Follies from others, and command them to dance proportionably to the height or
lowness of your whimsical Music; though they know the reasons of your
Distemper, and have observed what ludicrous, and sometimes abominable, effects
have been produced by your mistakes. The disturbed Melancholist not being able
to distinguish between an abused Fancy, solid Reason, and Divine Inspiration,
whilst a dark Cloud hovers over his Imagination, does usually exercise
Repentance, and takes the Paroxysms of a Flatulent Distemper for deep
Mortifications; and as the Darkness increases, falls into tears, and makes many
Tragical expressions of Grief, as if he saw more now then he did before. So
Children hide their heads within their bed-cloths, though they see nothing,
when they have affrighted themselves with the shapes of Devils portrayed only
in their Phancies. When the storm is blown over, the Penitent seems to be
possessed of heavenly Joys by the return of a Divine Spirit; when it is only a
change of bodily temper, which might be raised much higher, even to excessive
laughter and wild dancing, by the application of a Tarantula. When this sick
Fancy is joined with a Feverish heat, then the impotent Soul is filled with a
Divine ardor; and if it have formerly entertained discontents against the
present Powers, it blasphemes Civil and Ecclesiastical Orders, and thinks it
self inflamed with a holy Zele, when it is only set on fire partly with a
hellish Malice, partly with adust Spirits. When this temper is molested with
proud desires; the Ambition quickly discovers it self in a vast scorn of
others; and those who are infected with it proclaim themselves Kings, Prophets,
or Popes, or all these: as it happened in the Peruvian Doctor mentioned by
Acosta. If it happen that their waking Phancies are confirmed by nocturnal
Dreams, they are abundantly satisfied of the truth of their Errors; though many
times they tell their Accomplices in the Evening what they ought to dream in
the night, and divulge the next day.

Whilst these things are thus managed, some Bystanders, who are properly
disposed by an easy Faith, are usually caught with Delusion, and then the
Enthusiast begins to think himself some great Thing; though a Liar may as well
conclude that he speaks true, because some believe him. The Contagion of Error
is a common thing, and most modern mistakes may easily be paralleled by
Examples which have been produced in all Ages. The multitudes of abused people
signify nothing in point of assurance concerning Truth to such as have heard
of the noxious Phrensy of Cybele's Priests, the strange humor of the Milesian
Virgins, the general madness of the Abderites, and the Delusion which did so
soon and so generally seize upon the Paphlagonians by the contrivance of
Alexander and his Assistants. It is a mean excuse for chosen Delirations to say
that others are infected as well as our selves: however fantastical Prophets,
being animated with the success of their Plots upon their foolish Proselytes,
take confidence, and think they are sufficiently warranted by the number of
those that believe them, to appear as Judges of the dissenting World; and being
possessed with the narrow love of their own dear Herd, pretend that as an
authority for the hatred which they express against others as wicked
Unbelievers; and the whole Party being infected with that Arrogance which is
incident to all little Sects, they justify their Schism by condemning the
Church, and excuse their Pride with Malice.

You would have been apt to wonder at the cold Reception which you find in
Theoprepia, if I had not showed you the causes of our Incredulity: And I must
tell you further, Hieromimus, that we have more reason to be amazed at your
Arrogance, then you have to admire our Unbelief: and I am apt to think that you
would not so easily have entertained great thoughts of your self, if you had
not looked upon us as Fools, who would take men's strong Appetites for Impulses
of God's Spirit, and give faith to Wanderers because they are strongly deluded
with Self-conceits. I confess I wonder how you became so presumptuous as to
suppose that we are so stupidly credulous, as to believe every man that says he
comes from God; who besides his Boldness can show us no reason to think so. If
you pretend to be sent by God upon a Divine Message, you ought to produce your
Letters Credential. What Miracle have you done since you came into this
Country? What Blind man have you cured with a Word? What Lame man have you
(...) to the use of his feet by commanding him to walk? Whom have you raised
from the Dead by Prayer? You say you are Commissionated from Heaven to show us
the true way of Happiness, and boast of Authority to give us Laws in God's
name, and so to rule our Faith and Obedience; but this being a matter suitable
to Ambition, you may very well give us leave to demand assurance that you are
such as you pretend to be, lest we foolishly submit our selves to Impostors. It
is well known that Divine Revelation is one of those things which have been
often Counterfeited, and that Miraculous Power has been falsely imitated. Would
you have us think those little tricks which your Accomplices have performed, to
be the Supernatural Products of Omnipotence, and to come near the nature of
Miracles, which may not only be equaled, but exceeded, by very ordinary
Artists? You are much mistaken in the profession of Enthusiasm; for you manage
it so poorly, that you come far short of the Seize of your Predecessors.
You should have invented something before you came hither which would out-doe
Jannes his Serpent, Alexander's Egg, and Psaphon's Birds.

It is your unhappiness not to have met with people who would believe what you
say at a cheap rate of proof. You would have made rare sport among those who,
not knowing the cause of Eclipses, might have been persuaded to think you could
darken the Sun with a Charm; and who, being ignorant of the reasons of the
Moon's Illumination, might have reverenced as Prophets the foretellers of the
time of the Novilunium; and have made a rare advantage of a Summer's season, by
inducing Fools to believe that you can teach Cows to divine concerning Weather,
and foresee Storms, having known before that they will make wild excursions
when they perceive a different temper of Air by an alteration in their bodies.
The silly Indian would adore you, who wondered that a Letter could discover how
many figs he stole of those which he carried to his Master's friend, though he
hid it under a stone whilst he devoured them. You might have performed rare
exploits by carrying with you a Bedlam or two, who could endure to have pins
thrust into their arms; or a Lacedemonian Boy, who would laugh while he was
whipped: for without doubt they would have thought that you had rendered them
invulnerable by your Divine Art. But much more might you raise your expectation
concerning you, if you could transport one or two Laplanders, and besides their
Ecstatical Trances, let them see the Iron Frogs hop upon their Magical Drums.
You might also make such people believe, that it is by Celestial Inspiration
that Women in a dark night do sometimes rise out of their bed in their Sleep,
walk down little stairs, and go over narrow bridges; whilst you boldly affirm
that it is not possible it should be done otherwise, without open eyes and
clear light. You may persuade them also after the same manner that Epilepsies
are Raptures, and that such as die of an Apoplexy do only suffer an Apotheosis.

But the defect of your Knowledge in natural Consequences, except in those
Instances which are vulgarly known, will hinder you from the reputation either
of Prophets or Magicians in Theoprepia; and we will be content to be esteemed
Unbelievers, because you are dull Artists. However, I cannot but take notice of
one useful Device which you have excogitated, which is, that you deny leave to
your Auditors to examine your Principles; just according to the manner of those
who, having a mind to put off Counterfeit Coin, do vilify the use of
Touch-stones. You despise Learning, because it demonstrates your Ignorance:
whilst you burn Libraries, you divulge your fears of Books already written; and
when you write more, you reveal your Hypocrisy: for sometimes you say that all
writings are needless, and for the most part pronounce them hurtful; and yet
the Press cannot be quiet for your Non-sensical scribbling. Whilst you scatter
your Pamphlets in the Streets, you abandon the sufficiency of that famous
Principle, which some call the Light within. And now I have named that Internal
Light, I must add something more concerning it to prevent Cavils. It is true,
the Inward Light, which is more properly called Reason, or, The ability of our
Minds to understand, does make us capable of converse with God; unto this
Principle he applies himself, for he does not teach Stones; and if it were not
for the Light within, we could know nothing without us: But our Minds are
capable of Guidance, and our Knowledge of Improvement from many things without
us; and in Divine matters we have a great necessity to be informed by the Holy
Scriptures. That this is true, is sufficiently manifest, in that Pretenders are
not able to speak of Religion but in words borrowed from these writings; and
whilst they perversely abuse the Notions which they receive from hence, and talk
against Outward Light, they speak disingenuously against Christianity in
Scripture-phrases, and shoot maliciously at our Savior with Arrows stolen out
of his own Quiver. By neglecting those External helps which you unworthily
vilify, you are fallen into such a gross mistake, that under pretense of
Inward Illumination you pronounce your selves Infallible in what you think, and
Unaccountable for what you say; and being warranted only by Ignorance, make
bold to obtrude upon the World the irrational suggestions of your own disturbed
Spirits, and, for want of due examination, take your strong Appetites for
Divine Impulses, and wild Phantasms for heavenly Revelations.

Besides this, I must also tell you that you are visibly marked with the known
sign of Imposture, and so do plainly discover whence you came against your
Wills; that is, the Irreverent expressions by which you cast dishonor upon our
Savior's Person, and those foolish Allusions by which you have disparaged his
Doctrine. You would have us think meanly of his Incarnation, who after he was
born proved himself to be God manifest in the flesh; and exhort us to slight
his Intercession, by whom only we have Access to the Eternal Father; and do
ingratefully undervalue his Death, who shed his blood for the Remission of our
Sins; and disbelieve his Resurrection and Ascension, which is our assurance of
Immortal Life. Unworthy men! Do you desire to be regarded who speak
contemptibly of that Divine Prophet? Shall we think well of you who despise the
Grace of Heaven which Angels wonder at? and reproach the Eternal Priesthood of
God's Son, who is made an Advocate after the Order of an Endless Life to plead
the cause of Penitent Sinners, and neglecting humble Faith in God through his
Mediation, desert your Savior, whilst you admire the folly of every arrogant
Whiffler?

Your Predecessors endeavored long since to Allegorize the Person of Christ
into themselves, to expound his Sermons out of their genuine meaning into their
own mystical Nonsense, to evacuate his most glorious Actions into Metaphors,
and by all to transform the highest Truth into vain Similitudes; persuading the
World to believe that the Historical Verity is but the Oldness of the Letter,
and that the Nativity, Resurrection, Ascension, and Return of our Savior to
Judgment, are to be construed after the manner of AEsop's Fables into useful
Morals, and that they were intended only to declare what is to be done in us by
way of Allusion.

O God! Hieromimus, What can you hope to make of the Mystery of the Gospel,
when you have rendered the History contemptible? What dishonor have you offered
to the most obedient Death of our Savior, when instead of that Propitiatory
Oblation presented to the Eternal Father, you have reduced it only to an
equality with the Sacrifice of a Sheep, and bid us understand no more by it
then that it is a lively Emblem of Death, and so have vainly taken away the
greatest Argument by which we can be persuaded to undertake that which you say
we ought to do? All your Motives taken from hence, if you use any, are only
Resemblances of an History which you undervalue. Is not God's acceptance of
Christ's obedient Death the hope of our Pardon? and is not the Love of our
Savior, whilst he died for our Sins, the great Persuasive of Mortification? Is
not the Resurrection of that great Prophet the Confirmation of our Faith in his
Doctrine, when he assured it with such a Miracle? and does not his Ascension
prove to us the certainty of an Immortal State, and encourage us by Obedience
to his Precepts, and Conformity to his Exemplary Life, to prepare our selves
for it? Whilst you pervert this Relation by some phrases misapplied, you
reproach the Gospel in its own language, and instead of Christian Religion
endeavor to thrust upon the World a few Poetical Allusions, make the Gospel of
our Savior a Romance, offer us for solid Food Mushroms, and make his most
noble Actions scarce so much as an Example, and some of them a Lie, and so
teach men to reject sober Sense, and their own greatest Concernments, for the
vanity of Canting Terms. Did our Savior ascend into Heaven only
Metaphorically? and ought he to be crucified in us too as well as upon the
Cross? For shame grow wiser, and for fear continue not to wrong one who is very
able to punish you. If the Infidel World do not give credit to that excellent
Story being set down in its own Native truth, what will they do when you have
turned it into a Fable? If wicked Souls deny it in their Works, will you
overturn it in Words? If Hypocrites do not obey it as they should, will you
convert them with Blasphemy?

By this, added Misoplanus, you may see not only the Ineffectualness of your
present Endeavors, but also the Impossibility of accomplishing any Design
which you can lay for the future in Theoprepia. You do as vainly attempt to
level our Savior with your Mock-Prophet, as the arrogant Frog endeavored to
swell her self to the Proportion of an Ox; and do foolishly propound your
Enthusiasm to be embraced by those, who know that wild Raptures differ as much
from Divine Revelation as Parsley does from Hemlock.

When Misoplanus had said this, he desired Hieromimus, Thelgomenus, and one or
two more of his Companions, to go with him to his house, where he desired to
talk some things with him privately. Hieromimus was unwilling to accept of the
Invitation; but at the entreaty of Thelgomenus, who was one of his
half-Converts, he was persuaded to it. When they came thither, Misoplanus
carried Hieromimus and Thelgomenus into a Turret which was upon the top of his
house, from whence he had a fair Prospect of the Country, and also of the City
Phronesium. Whilst they were discoursing of the beautiful Situation of this
house, a Pigeon of that sort which is called Carriers came flying to
Misoplanus, and brought a little piece of Paper rolled up in her Bill, which
she delivered and flew away. Hieromimus wondered at this Accident, for he knew
not that there were such Birds. Misoplanus opened the paper, and found these
words written upon it, Hieromimus is an Impostor. This increased his
admiration; and as he was considering the strangeness of that which had
happened, his Amazement was suddenly heightened; for he heard a voice in the Air
which five or six times together repeated these words, Repent; Hieromimus,
Repent. The truth is, there was a neighboring Echo, which was so rarely framed
by a natural Art, that it would very often repeat any short sentence; and
Misoplanus having placed one behind a Rock, who unseen pronounced the words
which the Echo reverberated with a distinct sound, Hieromimus took it for a
voice from Heaven, Thelgomenus trembled for fear, and desired that they might
go down. You shall, said Misoplanus: but not returning the same way by which
they came up, he led them through a Room which was artificially darkened,
having only one little hole left open through which the light was permitted to
enter, with a glass placed before it: and whilst one of Misoplanus his Servants
held a large sheet of white paper at a fit distance from the hole, there
appeared upon it a lively representation of a dreadful Spectre, as Hieromimus
and Thelgomenus supposed; but it was only the shadow of a man with an ugly
Vizour upon his face, dressed up in the form of a Satyr, with a hairy skin, two
horns, and cloven feet, who walked in the Court before the house, and by this
Artifice was showed within. Thelgomenus ran down the stairs in a great fright,
thinking it was the Devil. Misoplanus, not knowing what ill effect his fear
might produce, went after him, and so did his Servant. Hieromimus being left
alone, because he could not readily find the way out, began to be afraid that
the Devil would murder him in the dark, and cried out for help; which he
presently received by the return of Misoplanus his Servant. When they were all
come down, Misoplanus, being willing to let them understand their Ignorance,
called for the Pigeon which brought the paper, and informed them how he
contrived the other pieces of their Delusion.

Hieromimus much enraged with this affront went to his Lodging, pronouncing
many Curses against Misoplanus, and, seeing his hopes overthrown in Theoprepia,
departed privately to Theriagene. Jackleid was taken and put to death, for
inciting the Theoprepians to Rebellion. Jamnail was whipped, for arrogating to
himself Divine Attributes; and being put with his fellow-Mad-men into Bedlam,
was ordered to stay there till he should so far return to his Wits, as to be
able to understand that he was but an ordinary Mortal. Davigeor, Phlegon,
Astriatrus, Thaumaturgus, and the rest, made an Escape into Apateonia: only the
two She-Lacquayes having possessed themselves with strong apprehensions that
they were destined to convert the Mahumetans, and to reform the Pope, went one
to Turcopolis, and the other to Septicollis.

Whilst the Company were almost weary with laughing at this ridiculous Story,
and were giving many thanks to Amerimnus for making the Relation of it, a
Gentleman came from Lysander, to let the King know that the Army designed for
Theriagene was come to the Rendezvous at Naupactus, which was the chief Port in
Theoprepia, and that he had put the greatest part of the Soldiers aboard the
Ships appointed for the Voyage. I am very glad of it, said Theosebes, and,
since the wind is fair, we will lose no opportunity; it may possibly hold good
till we arrive at Theriagene. Orders being given to the Court to remove with
all possible speed to Naupactus, Theosebes and Alethion, with the rest of their
noble Companions, devoted the next day to solemn Prayers, which they made
publicly to Almighty God with an humble Earnestness, and declared that the
Victory which they desired did not depend upon the Courage of Men, but the
Mercy of God; and the day after they began their Journey toward the Seaside.
The Queen, the Princess Agape, and the other Ladies, entertained no small
Apprehensions for their Friends, who were going to try the hazards of War,
whose Events are always doubtful; but placing their Hopes in God's Assistance
of a most just Cause, they took their Departure with a submissive Quietness. As
soon as they arrived at Naupactus, a Council of War being held, at which were
present both the Kings, Bentivolio and his Brother, Lysander, Misopseudes,
Philalethes, Amyntor, Sympathus, Aristander, Pasiphilus, and some others; it
was resolved that they should endeavor to surprise Hipponyx the principal
Haven of Theriagene, which was so called because the Form in which it was built
resembled the Figure of a Horse's hoof.

The Prince of Theoprepia sailed in the Admiral, being accompanied with
Alethion, Bentivolio and Misopseudes; Lysander commanded the Vice Admiral,
Pasiphilus the Rere-Admiral; other (...) men possessing the rest of the Ships
according to the King's appointment. They weighed Anchor the next day, and the
wind continuing fair they came within five Leagues of Hipponyx about four of
the clock in the Afternoon. But then the wind turned, and blowing with a stiff
gale, the Fleet, according to the example of their Admiral, came to an Anchor;
by which means they were discovered by the Hipponyctians, and he that commanded
the Town for Antitheus immediately prepared to put it into a posture of
defense. A Signal being given, the Commanders of the several Ships went aboard
the Admiral, where it was resolved that a Shallop should be sent off with a
Herald to summon Hipponyx to yield up the Port to Alethion, and to offer a
Pardon to such as were willing to return to their Obedience to their lawful
Sovereign. The sight of the white Flag upon the Prow of the Shallop was a great
Joy to the Hipponyctians, for the whole City was put into a great Consternation
by the Arrival of such a great Fleet at so near a distance; and all the
Inhabitants, except some few, would willingly have accepted of Alethion's
gracious Proposition, but that Atheophilus the Governor, in whom Antitheus had
placed no small confidence, as in his most faithful friend, prevented the
declaration of their Intentions, by swearing that he would immediately kill him
that should dare to speak of a Surrender. The Herald returning, and having
declared the Governor's Answer, the Princes resolving to pursue their
Intentions with speed, ordered that the same night a convenient number of
Shallops attended with four Frigots should storm the two Forts which were built
upon each side of the River to secure the entrance of the Haven.

The Ships designed for this service being committed to the conduct of
Aristander, Charistion, Amyntor and Sympathus; Bentivolio, Misopseudes,
Panaretus and Philalethes resolved to accompany them in this service. They
filled some of the Shallops with Fagots to throw into the Trenches, and Ladders
to scale the Works: and having understood that the passage into the Haven was
secured by the Hulls of old Barks fastened together with Chains, they appointed
some Vessels with Soldiers furnished with Axes to loosen the Chains and break
the Bridge, and provided two Fire-boats to burn the Barks. After the Signal
given by a great Gun they weighed Anchor, and making several boards they
arrived at the Mouth of the Haven about an hour before day.

Aristander, who was accompanied with Bentivolio, landed his men, who were
designed to attaque the North Fort, as Charistion and Panaretus did on the
other side; and in the mean while Misopseudes, Amyntor and Philalethes, in
several Vessels filled with Mariners and Soldiers set upon the chain'd-bridge.
Atheophilus had placed his best men in the Forts, knowing that if they were
lost, he should not only grant his enemies a free entrance into the Haven, but
also receive great annoiance from the Guns which were planted upon them. His
Soldiers welcomed the Theoprepians with their Canon; and when by the noise
which they made as they marched they perceived that they were at a convenient
distance, they saluted them with Musket Shot, giving them notice with flashes
of dreadful light where they might find their enemies. This did nothing amaze
the Theoprepians, for they went boldly on; and though the Bullets whizz'd over
their heads, and sometimes lodged themselves in their bodies, they came up
close to their Works; and having cast in their Bavins, and yet finding the
Trenches not filled up, they threw themselves into the water, and swam over,
being encouraged to it by the generous example of Bentivolio and Aristander;
and having placed their Ladders began to scale the Fort. As they went up, they
from above knocked them down with Stones, which made some of them unable to get
up again. Bentivolio to prevent that discouragement which might possibly have
happened to the Soldiers from this manner of opposition, commanded them to
cover their heads with long Fagots carried by two men, one at each end; which
made them some defense. Having set his foot upon a ladder, he received the same
salutation with his Companions by the blow of an heavy stone upon his shoulder,
which would possibly have lessened a weak courage, but it increased his; for
going up readily, and calling to those who were next him to follow him,
notwithstanding all the Resistance which the Enemy could make, he got to the
top; and having slain those who made a vain attempt to hinder his entrance, he
gave his followers a more easy Access. Aristander succeeded as happily in his
attempt upon the other side of the Fort. And now the dreadful Image of Death
grew visible with the first Appearances of Light; for the Soldiers enclosed in
the Fort hoping for no safety but by the Expulsion of their Enemies, and they
resolving to take it or die, both parties produced mortal effects of a great
Courage, whilst they gave testimonies of their strong desires. Bentivolio
hewing out his way to a place where he perceived the Captain of the Fort to
make some of his Companions fall by his Sword, being enraged with love and
grief, gave him such a blow upon the head, that he cut through his Helmet and
cleav'd his skull. Aristander with the same sort of valiant Actions forced
himself a passage from the other side into the midst of the Fort, where meeting
with his friend they destroyed so many with an invincible Courage; that those
few which were yet unkill'd, being utterly discouraged by the loss of their
Captain and the gallantry of their Assailants, threw down their Arms and asked
for Quarter. In this service the Theoprepians lost not many men; the most
considerable was Aristander's Lieutenant, who was slain by the Captain of the
Fort at the top of his Ladder. Aristander was wounded in the right cheek, and
Bentivolio, besides the blow upon his shoulder, received a thrust in his left
arm.

In the mean while Amyntor, Misopseudes and Philalethes attaqued the Bridge.
Those who were set to guard it perceiving their approach, provided to defend
themselves, and gave fire to their Muskets, as if they had intended to make
Day with the light which was darted from the Mouths of their Guns: But shooting
at a venture, their first Vollies had no very pernicious effect, neither did
they hinder the Theoprepians from approaching the Bridge: for Amyntor and
Misopseudes fastened their Shallops to it with hooks; and Philalethes, who had
the command of the Fire-boats, locked them to their Barges notwithstanding all
that the Enemy could do to hinder him, and leaving the Combustible matter to
perform its own office, went to another place which was not yet assaulted by
his Companions; and having mounted the Bridge, secured an Ascent for two more
of his friends: and whilst they made their Swords give a dreadful testimony to
their Enemies, that their coming thither was to their extreme disadvantage, a
numerous company of bold Soldiers rushing impetuously upon them forced him
into his Boat, and his Companions into the water. Misopseudes and Amyntor,
after many Repulses and some wounds, made good their standing upon the Bridge,
and forced many of their Enemies into that side of the River which was next to
Hipponyx, and repelled those who endeavored to supply their rooms with such
irresistible blows, that the Theoprepians had opportunity to mount themselves
upon the Bridge without much difficulty; which when they had ascended, they
requited those who helped them up with the effects of such a gallant Courage,
that they made the Hipponyctians seek defense for themselves by running toward
the Forts which were built upon each side of the Haven. It fell out unluckily
for Philalethes: for he having again recovered the Bridge with some of his men,
was by the impetuous violence of the affrighted multitude driven a good way
along the Bridge, and by the irresistibleness of their wild Motion was at last
thrust off into the Water, being accompanied with many others, who having
pushed off those who were before them, were also carried off themselves by such
as were behind them. Philalethes and his Companions were forced to save their
lives by swimming to their Boats. But this mischance turned to their advantage;
for they had scarce recovered their Shallops before the Fire-boats, doing the
Execution to which they were designed, set on fire that part of the Bridge to
which they were fastened, and the Granado's breaking destroyed many of those who
were upon it. Those who yet kept the Bridge being pursued by the Victorious
courage of Amyntor and Misopseudes, had only left them the liberty of a
miserable choice, either to die by their Enemies Swords, to stay in the Fire,
or to leap into the Water: And yet they were soon deprived of power to make any
election; for Philalethes joining with those gallant men who were designed to
loosen the Chains that tied together the parts of the Bridge, helped them to
put a speedy end to that undertaking; and having with some of his Companions
boarded several disunited Vessels, they quickly disposses'd the Hipponyctians
by throwing them into the water, and so made themselves Masters of those
scattered pieces of the Floating Bridge; which notwithstanding they not being
able to rule for want of Rudders, were forced to go as the stream was pleased
to conduct them, and so were in danger to be carried away Captives when they
had overcome, but that some of their party perceiving the condition in which
they were, made toward them, and took them into their Shallops.

Panaretus, Charistion and Sympathus employed themselves with an equal
gallantry in the gaining of the other Fort, which was of a larger compass, and
was filled with a desperate company of Antitheus his Mercenaries; who when the
Theoprepians came near their Trench, saluted them with a shower of Stones and
Bullets, and were requited with Hand-Granado's which the Theoprepians threw
into the Fort; which though they broke successefully, and struck pieces of
Iron-shells into the faces of some, and the bellies of others, and killed many,
yet rather enraged then weakened the Survivours, which made the Access more
dangerous to their Enemies, and the Victory more doubtful. Panaretus signalized
his Valor in this Action, and as he was upon the top of his Ladder, a stout
Soldier endeavoring to pull off his Head piece, Panaretus took hold of his
Arm, and flung him into the Trench, and having settled himself in his Room upon
the Fort, defended it against innumerable blows, till Sympathus got up to him;
and then the Valor of these two Valiant Persons easily made way for more to
come up by the death of those who endeavored to throw them down. Christion did
things worthy of himself and such Companions: for having mounted another part
of the Fort, and received a wound in his breast as a welcome upon his first
entrance, he requited it with the death of him that bestowed it; and fighting
with an invincible Courage, easily made room for his friends to come to him,
and place themselves amongst their Enemies. Now it was that the Hipponyctians
giving fire no longer, disputed who should have the Fort with the But-end of
their Muskets, in which mode of fighting they were imitated by the
Theoprepians; and both Parties did so heartily endeavor to exceed one another,
that Victory seemed to stand a great while in an equal distance between the
Assailants and Defendants. It was some benefit to the Theoprepians, that the
Darkness did not give leave to their Enemies to take courage from the knowledge
of the less Number of their men; but making up that defect with Resolution,
they had entered so many places at once, that they were not able to resist them
in all, and did so make good the possession which they got (though with some
loss of their men) that they drove the Hipponyctians from the Line, and
encompassed them in the middle of the Fort, sending death upon them from all
sides. It was no small discouragement to the Hipponyctians, that a little after
the appearance of Day they discovered that which made them believe that the
Light was only bestowed upon them to let them see the Ruins of their friends
upon the Chain'd-Bridge, and Alethion's Standard placed upon the opposite
(...); whereupon the most Valiant of them having sold their lives as dear as
they could, the rest yielded themselves to the mercy of the Theoprepians, who
were now absolute Masters of the Fort.

Atheophilus being informed of that which had happened, and sensible of what
might probably follow, resolved to repair his Honor, and to redeem this Loss
with the overthrow of the Theoprepian Fleet, which was now under sail not much
above a League from the Forts, or else perish courageously in the continuance
of his adverse Fortune. He manned all the Ships in the Harbor which were fit
for his purpose, prepared his Fire-Barks, and weighed Anchor: and having a
side-wind equally advantageous to him with his Enemies, made what haste he
could, intending to fight them before they came into the Mouth of the Haven.
When he drew near the Forts, he received unpleasing salutes from the Guns which
his Soldiers had lost, and was accosted in his way with many flaming pieces of
the dissolved Bridge: for the unchain'd Barges separated themselves from one
another, and being driven by the Tide toward the Town, covered a great part of
the Haven with burning wrecks; which not only struck an unspeakable terror
into those who stood upon the Shore, but put the Mariners and Soldiers into
some apprehension at the sight of such a dismal Spectacle, and engaged them in
no small care, lest the smoking Firebrarnds should fall foul upon their Ships,
and consume the Fleet before it could get to Sea.

Atheophilus digesting as well as he could these ominous Presages, past the
Forts with his Navy, having only lost one of his Fireships, which by reason of
some error in the placing of the Combustible matter, prepared for other uses,
was blown up before the time appointed. It was halffloud when the Fleets came
up together; and Atheophilus perceiving the Admiral of the Theoprepians in the
Front, made up boldly, and gave her a broadside, for which he soon received
another; and after that many more were mutually exchanged, which put great
Bullets through the sides of each others Vessels. The Commanders of the other
Ships disposing themselves on both sides as they might most conveniently
attaque their Enemies. It happened that a Chain'd-shot from the Theoprepian
Admiral cut off Atheophilus main Mast in the middle. He, notwithstanding this
discouragement, did his best to lay the Admiral aboard; which was more easy
for him to accomplish, because she made toward him with equal speed to do as
much for him. The two Admirals being hooked together began a most terrible
fight, the Theoprepians with dreadful Shouts presaging to one another a certain
Victory. Great holes were made in the sides of both the Ships with their Canon:
the Theoprepians, with a storm of Musquet-Bullets as thick as hail, knocked
down most of the Soldiers that appeared on Atheophilus his Decks, and boarded
his Vessel. He with a Reserve of stout men rushed upon them from the Steerage,
and charged so fiercely, that he killed many, forced some into the Sea, and
drove the rest into their own Ship; whither also he followed them, and
continued such a cruel fight with Swords and the great ends of Muskets, that
the blood ran out of the Water-holes. Both the Princes, not having patience to
see the Antitheans aboard their Ship, flew out of their Cabins: and Alethion
having espied Atheophilus, ran upon him with an unexpressible fury, saying,
Behold, Atheophilus, this is Alethion, kill him, and endear thy self for ever
to thy Master by the destruction of his most mortal Enemy. Atheophilus being a
prudent Soldier was aware of his coming, and aimed a deadly blow at his Head;
which Alethion put by with his Arm, and directed a thrust, which finding
passage through his Breast and his Heart both at once, made him fall down dead
among the feet of his Soldiers. Theosebes perceiving the Prince of Theriagene
engaged against many of his Enemies, made himself a passage with his Sword, and
coming where he was, put Alethion out of the danger of their Number by the
death of those whom he encountered; and having cleared his own Ship made a
second Board upon his Enemies, in which he killed or threw into the Sea all
that were upon the Decks, in the Steerage, and in the great Cabin: and
commanding his men to retire into his own Ship, lest those who were in the
Gun-room should blow them up, he heard a great cry from below, and saw some
come up who made him know the reason of it, which was, because the Hold was
full of Water; and they asked for Quarter: which being granted, they
endeavored with the help of the Theoprepian Mariners to stop their Leaks; but
in a short time perceiving that it was impossible, unhook'd their Ship, and had
scarce got clear of her before she sunk down before their faces.

Whilst this Tragedy was acting, the other Ships were not idle Spectatours, for
every one grapled with valiant Enemies: and though the Antitheans were
something startled with the loss of their Admiral, (for they were so near as to
see him sink) yet they resolved to make it up with their own endeavors by the
ruin of their Adversaries; and though they should happen to fail of their
desired success, yet they purposed to die at least like men of Courage. But
being over-charg'd with a Valor which transcended theirs by as many degrees as
the Justice of Alethion's Cause exceeded that of Antitheus, they were worsted:
and yet before they submitted to a final conquest, they made such effectual
Opposition as produced a very dreadful Spectacle of a Sea Fight; some Ships
sinking by reason of incurable Leaks, some blowing up their Decks voluntarily
tounlade their Enemies, and some being fired against their wills. The Air was
filled with the noise of Guns, the cries of dying Persons, and the Shouts of
Conquerors; the light of the Day being obscured with Clouds of Smoke, and the
Sea discolored with the blood of Wounded men, and made dismal with the
floating bodies of the slain.

In this Fight Pasiphilus very happily shot off the Rudder of the Enemies
Fire-Ship, by which means she was made useless as to the purpose for which she
was intended, and carried back upon the Antitheans by the Tide. Lysander and
Christion took two of their Principal Ships; Bentivolio, Misopseudes and
Panaretus, assisting their respective friends, chased three others into the
Harbor, and there compelled them to submit to mercy. Indeed every gallant
Theoprepian, who had the honor of any command that day, made himself famous
with Heroic Actions; the private Soldiers also performing things which
deserved very high reputation: By which means a complete Victory was speedily
obtained, for all the Antitheans were either sunk or taken. This dreadful
Encounter being thus ended, the Conquerors attempted not to enter the Town, but
cast Anchor a little within the Haven's Mouth, resolving to give a respite to
their weary Soldiers, and to take care of the wounded, who were not a few.

The trembling Hipponyctians, having seen the dismal issue of this bloody
Engagement, and being destitute of their Governor, Soldiers and Courage, sent
some of the Principal Inhabitants to implore the King's Mercy, and to offer him
the Town. The two Kings and so many of the Commanders as were then together
held a Council of War, and concluded that it was best to accept of the
surrender that was offered, and to take possession of the Town speedily, lest
Antitheus should prevent them by fresh supplies. Accordingly they sent three
thousand of the most unwearied Soldiers ashore under the command of Lysander,
to secure the Gates, and to strengthen that part of the Town which lay toward
Theriagene. The next day they landed all the wounded men, and took such an
effectual care for their Recovery, that in a little time they were restored to
their former health. The Hipponyctians joining with the Theoprepians, bestowed
burial upon those dead bodies which they found floating in the Haven, or which
were cast ashore by the force of the Tide.

After two days they received the good News of the Arrival of their Ships,
which were ordered by Theosebes to transport their Horse, who were commanded
not to set sail till three days after the departure of the other Ships from
Naupactus. Lysander appointed them to those Quarters which he had prepared in
and near to Hipponyx; the King intending with all convenient speed to march
toward Polistherium, where the Intelligence of Alethion's Arrival, which was
sent by a Courrier, put Antitheus and his new Court into a great distraction:
for being conscious to themselves of the Wrongs which they had done, they
feared that the time was coming in which they should be forced to suffer for
them; especially after they heard that the Theoprepians had subdued their
Fleet, and made themselves Masters of Hipponyx.

This Alarm made less Impression upon the Courage of Antitheus then was
expected by many both Friends and Enemies; for notwithstanding he heard that
many other Towns, besides Hipponyx, had revolted, and that some Cities had sent
to submit themselves to Alethion, yet his Mind seemed to grow great
proportionably to his danger, and he feared not to look his bad fortune in the
face, though she frowned severely. But knowing that his tottering condition
needed all possible support, he made use of all the thoughts with which his
restless Mind was filled, to direct him what to do. He summoned his chief
Confidents to meet in his Privy-Chamber; where having framed his Countenance to
express an undaunted Resolution, he spoke to them after this manner: The
mischiefs which the Theoprepians have already done us do force us to secure our
fortune by the use of Arms, and the dangers which they still threaten require
that we should speedily enter upon this way of defense. We need not dispute
whether it is Wisdom to venture boldly, for we must either do so or lose all.
It were a dishonorable Cowardice to abandon our selves to ruin, because we
may possibly prevent it; neither is there any condition so low, but it may be
raised, if those who undertake it have Valor. I have taken care to provide
what is requisite for our Preservation both as to Men and Money. You know that
the Mercenary Army under my command is not inconsiderable for Number; and I
make no doubt but they will engage boldly in this Service, because, being
Soldiers of Fortune, they fight only for their pay. And since it may be
thought that they are too few to oppose the strength of Theoprepia, I have sent
to the Theomachians, who are in League with us, to desire their Assistance, and
I make no question of obtaining it. They are the inveterate Enemies of
Alethion, and will more readily help us, because by this means they may have an
opportunity to revenge themselves upon the Theoprepians. After the overthrow of
this Army which does now infest us, I have promised to enter with them into the
Enemie's Country, and to divide with them what we shall conquer there by equal
shares. I have some Treasure which I laid up for all urgent occasions; and
though it is scarce enough for this present service, I know how to raise more
before we shall have need of it.

When Antitheus had finished this short Speech, Dogmapornes, Asynetus, and the
rest of his Associates, having been engaged in his Treason, obliged by his
Favors, hoping to augment their present Fortune with his Victory, and
despairing of Pardon from Alethion, in regard of the greatness of those Crimes
which they had committed, declared a Resolution to live and die in the
obedience of his Commands, and protested that they neither had nor hoped for
any Interest but that which consisted with his Felicity. Antitheus having given
them thanks for this obliging Answer, told them the way by which he intended to
provide Money to pay his Army: which was, by seizing upon the Stock of the
Orphans laid up in the common Chamber of the City, as also that which was
trusted in the hands of particular Guardians, by forcing the rich Citizens to
lend him as much as he should desire, and by borrowing the Treasure which was
in the Temples: and because the people should not look upon these proceedings
as Rapine and Sacrilege, he promised repayment as soon as he should overcome
the Enemy, which threatened present ruin to Theriagene, and forced him to take
these extraordinary courses. He added also that he would not put this
resolution in practice till he should hear from the Theomachians. Within two
days Antholkes, the Ambassador whom he had sent thither, returned with
acceptable News: For desire of Revenge and hope of Conquest had so inflamed the
Theomachians, that they, not considering the dangers to which they were
courted, and the inability of the Tempter to make a probable Defense, neither
taking any notice of the Injustice of that Cause in which they were solicited
to engage, readily promised their utmost Assistance; and knowing that Delay
would make it ineffectual to Antitheus his Relief and their own hopes, assured
Antholkes that they would make all possible speed for the Expedition.

In the mean while Theosebes having led his Army into Theriagene only with an
intention to restore Alethion, and being desirous that his honest purposes
might not be misinterpreted by the Censorious World, told the Prince, as they
were walking one day together, that though the Affection which he ought ever to
have for so great a Friend had brought him and his Subjects out of their own
Country to serve him, and that he could not but think that the Justice of his
Cause was abundantly sufficient for his private satisfaction; yet he thought it
requisite to let the World know upon what occasion he had taken up Arms, and to
assure the Theriagenians of his Intentions by a Declaration published for that
end. The King highly approving his Advice, Lysander drew it up in these words:
Though we make no question but such as know the Reasons of our present
undertaking will need no other satisfaction as to the Justice of it; yet
because we would not have our Actions construed into that Malicious sense which
our Enemies will be apt to put upon them, We declare before God and all the
World, that it is not a Desire to increase our Empire by any Accession which
may be gained from Theriagene, that has made us invade the Country of our
ancient Allies. Our Design is only to assist an Illustrious Prince to recover
his Throne, of which he is unjustly deprived, and to help him to punish those
who have made their Crimes inexpiable by adding his Banishment to his Father's
Murder. As we have resolved never to lay down our Arms till this be effected,
and doubt not but the greatest part of Alethion's Subjects are sufficiently
sensible of his wrongs; so, that it may appear we do not cover any other
purposes under this pretense, we make this Protestation, That if you your
selves will deliver up the Murderers of Anaxagathus to Justice, and restore
Alethion to his Rights, we will presently withdraw our Forces into our own
Country, rejoicing that we shall leave Theriagene in peace.

Alethion desiring passionately that his Country might not be ruined by the
direful effects of War, and knowing that the events of it are varied by
inconsiderable Causes, concluded that no Enemy should be fought, who may be
conquered by Treaty; and therefore with the forementioned Declaration he set
forth a Paper, in which he conjured his Subjects to return to their Obedience
by the indispensableness of those Bonds which obliged them to it: and that they
might not be frighted into Despair by the remembrance of their Offenses, he
added a Promise of Pardon to such as would come under his Protection, and in
the Word of a King gave them assurance that none should be excluded from the
benefit of this Amnesty but Antitheus, Dogmapornes, and two or three more,
whose Wickedness could never be forgiven.

These Papers wrought very considerable effects upon the Theriagenians. Some
generous Spirits, who were most sensible of the injuries which they suffered
under Antitheus, had put themselves already under Alethion's Colors. Others,
who had been unhappily instrumental to his and their own Misery, repented of
their Errors, which the King's Goodness had pardoned, and resolved to make
amends for their Disobedience by hazarding their Lives for his Restitution. The
generality of the People, who were broken with Oppression, having now some
hopes of Deliverance, began to show their Hatred to the Usurper, which was
before covered under the Embers of Fear. Antitheus not unsensible of the
Insecurity of his condition, used all possible Arts to keep the People (though
not in affections to him, for they never had any for him, yet) from such
Actions as might disturb his Enterprise; and finding most of his Devices
ineffectual, he made it his last Reserve, to promise the Polistherians that he
would only continue himself in his Command as a General for the present
Expedition, and that after the Success of this Fight, of which he made no
question, he would lay down the Principality, and declare them a Free State.
Some few, who understood not the Ufurper's Intentions, thought this a very
plausible Offer, and began to wonder at the Moderation which Antitheus had
entertained: but he, perceiving that this Plot took not effect according to his
Expectation, under pretense of Treachery which he had discovered, put some to
Death whom he suspected as Guilty of Good will toward Alethion, and carried
others, of whose Fidelity he was not assured, out of the City, and mixed them
with his Mercenary Troops.

The night before the day which was designed for the Battle with the
Theoprepians, who were now advanced within ten Miles of Polistherium, the
Citizens were assaulted with an extraordinary Terror, by reason of a strange
Sight which appeared in the Air on that side of the City which was toward
Hipponyx. Two Armies with Colors flying, Drums beating and Trumpets sounding,
seemed to encounter one another. The glittering Swords were so formidable, and
the clattering of Arms and the noise of Guns was so easily heard, that if they
had not seen this Accident in the Air, they would have thought that the
Theoprepians and Theriagenians had been engaged in Fight. This Contest lasted
half an hour; after which, one of the Armies having routed and conquered the
other, the Vision disappeared. The Antitheans thought this a sad Omen of their
approaching misfortune, and indeed could not look upon it otherwise but as a
dismal Emblem by which God did foreshew the unlucky Issue of the succeeding
Fight, and were generally so astonished with variety of ghastly Apprehensions,
that they seemed to be tossed in the midst of restless Imaginations, as a small
Vessel would be in a raging Sea, if all the Winds should blow up (...) it
alternately from their several Quarters.

The Usurper considering well what great Influences this Prodigy might send
down upon the Spirits of his Soldiers, (for those who do least believe that
there is a God, are most affrighted with the thoughts of him when dreadful
Accidents begin to persuade them that there is one) endeavored to dissipate
this Panick fear, by telling them the next morning, that they ought not to
entertain any apprehensions from those things which they saw in the Air, such
Prodigies being only Accidents of Nature; Images of Armies being often brought
from foreign parts by strong Winds in great Clouds, which like Looking-glasses
reflect them upon the Earth; and that though this was none of that sort, yet it
was capable of being interpreted for them as well as against them: and he
added, that he was assured that the Overthrow which they saw acted did portend
the ruin of their Enemies, both by a Vision and a Dream which he had that
night. He saw, as he said, a glorious Rainbow painted in the Air, and a mighty
man of an unusual Stature, who having fastened a red string to both the Ends of
it, took a great Arrow pointed with a flame of fire, and shot through the
breasts of two Persons with Crowned Heads, who immediately tumbled down dead
from the top of a bright Cloud. That they might believe that these could be no
other then Theosebes and Alethion, he related his Dream in these Words: I saw a
beautiful Person in the form of a Virgin, who, as I lay asleep, seemed to
whisper in my Ear this Prophecy, To Morrow Polistherium shall be delivered from
her Enemies. This Exposition of the dreadful Prodigy so artificially confirmed
did something alleviate their Fears; and though it did not quiet their Minds,
yet it made them suppress the trouble which they could not extirpate, and gave
them some small encouragement to prepare for those dangers which, whether they
would or no, they were now to encounter.

Antitheus made haste to lead out his Men to fight, both that they might have
no leisure to augment their Fears by the consideration of their Dangers, and
that he might possess himself of a convenient place which he had destined to
the encamping of his Army. It was a large Field encompassed on one side with a
Wood, and with a River on the other. By this he hoped to give his Enemies the
trouble of a disadvantageous access to him: But he was prevented by the earlier
care of Alethion, who well knowing the Situation of the Country, had made
himself Master of it an hour before.

Antitheus divided his Army into two Bodies, the Mercenaries of Theriagene, and
his Auxiliary Theomachians. Being attended with his Lifeguard he led the
Theriagenians himself, whom he placed in the right Wing, having assigned the
chief Commands to Dogmapornes, who was his Lieutenant General, Philedones,
Pasenantius, Autautus, Antholkes, Antigraphus, Udemellon, and the rest of his
Confidents. He chose all his Underofficers out of those whom he esteemed most
true to him. His Confederate Theomachians being placed in the left Wing were
led by their General Theostyges. Those who were most of Note in the Army, and
chiefly looked upon as Persons upon whose Conduct and Valor the Success of the
Fight depended, were Archicacus, Misagathus, Anosius, Adicus, Anaedes,
Androphonus, Asemnus, Aneleemon and Anecestus.

The Theoprepian Army was commanded by Theosebes: for after a loving
Contention, which lasted a good while, between the two Kings before they could
determine who should give Orders and Command with a single Power, each of them
offering that Honor to the other, and both refusing it with an equal Modesty,
Alethion conjuring Theosebes by the Love which had brought him into Theriagene,
to command his own Army, and to give him leave to fight by his side, Theosebes
was forced to accept that Authority. The Army, which consisted of six thousand
Foot and four thousand Horse, was divided into two Bodies: one commanded by
Theosebes himself, who was accompanied with the Prince of Theriagene,
Bentivolio and Misopseudes, who desired the Honor to fight by him. The other
was put under the Obedience of Lysander, to whom Panaretus, Philalethes and
Nicomachus joined themselves; every particular Regiment being led by such
Commanders as inspired their Followers with Courage.

As soon as the Day began to appear, the Warlike Trumpets sounding from all
parts of the Camp raised the Soldiers to the Battle, of which they were so
impatiently desirous, that many prevented the rising of the Sun, and put on
their Arms whilst it was yet dark; and rousing that Warlike humor which had
lien asleep since the Fight against Theromachia, they gave a clear Evidence
that they had not forgot the Art which they had not for a long time practiced.
When they were drawn up into a regular Order in the place appointed for the
Fight, Theosebes and Alethion riding by the Head of every Regiment showed
themselves to the Soldiers, whom they found so inflamed by the sight of their
Enemies, that they had more need to command them to make a stand then incite
them to go forward. The Princes said not much to them, because they perceived
their Courage already heightened infinitely above the necessities of
Exhortation. However this Action was not in vain, for their Hearts were kindled
with a more vigorous (...) by the Presence of their own King and the sight of
the Wronged Prince, whose Restoration they were now to attempt. Those of
Theriagene were destitute of a just Cause, and so could not have that
assistance which Valor never refuses to take from a serene Conscience; yet
they appeared with a desperate Boldness, and felt in their Hearts all those
Motions which Anger, Hatred, Hope and Desire could raise: Nay, they seemed to
increase their Courage with Fear; for, knowing what they had done, they assured
themselves of the greatest Punishments if they should be conquered; and
therefore heightened their Resolutions of killing those who, if they lived,
would in a little time become their Judges.

Both Armies having made themselves ready to march, the Trumpets were commanded
to give the last Signal, and they resounding from the Banks of the River, and
multiplying their noises with the Echo's of the Wood, made a delightful
Terror. The two Forlorns of Horse sent from each Party gave the first Charge,
and laid many Men upon the ground, and their Horses by them: But Aristander,
who commanded the Theoprepians, with an irresistible Force pressing upon those
of Theriagene, made them retreat to their Army with the loss of half their men.
Then the main Bodies of both Armies advanced toward each other, and seconded
what was begun with the Engagement of their whole Forces. The Commanders of
both sides were the first in this Charge, and made a dreadful Salutation with
the mutual exchange of Blows and Wounds; but, being encompast by their
Soldiers, they were forced to leave off their single Combats, and oppose the
joint Fury of their numerous Enemies.

Now it was that Death began to appear with a dismal Face, and to show the
awful Greatness of her Mortal Power in the Horrors of Slaughter and Confusion.
Alethion having espied Dogmapornes, thundered upon him with a loud cry, saying,
Now I will requite you for writing Letters for me; and riding up to him with an
astonishing Presence ran him through the Body: and perceiving that Antholkes
came up with an eager desire to revenge his Death, or else to die with him,
Yes, said the Prince, he can have no fitter Companion in his Torments then you
who have assisted his Sin; and as he spoke these words, gave Antholkes leave to
take his death from the point of his Sword, upon which he ran himself
precipitantly, aiming an ineffectual Blow at Alethion's Head. Philedones at the
same time was thrown upon the ground by Theosebes. Antitheus fought disguised,
the Fears which were created by his guilty Conscience making him fly to that
mean sort of Refuge. But Bentivolio having discovered him by some token, broke
through those who stood in his way, and leaving bloody marks of his Passage
rode up to him, and gave him a blow upon the Head, which would have cleft his
Skull if it had not been guarded with an Helmet which was made for a more
worthy Person; however, it made him bow down low upon his Horse's neck; and his
Body beginning to leave the Saddle Bentivolio prevented his Fall, for he pulled
him from his Horse, and carrying him before him upon the Bow of his Saddle gave
him in Custody to Axiarchus, one of Theosebes his Captains, who, knowing the
Importance of his Charge, placed him disarmed in the middle of his Troop, and
watched him so diligently that he made his escape impossible. Autautus and
Proselenus did in vain endeavor his Rescue, for they were both killed, one by
Theosebes, and the other by Misopseudes, who received a Wound in his Breast by
a thrust of Proselenus his Sword.

Those in the left Wing did things equal to the right. Lysander charged
Theostyges the General of the Theomachians, and after a few blows given with an
unexpressible Courage, Theostyges received one in his Neck, which made it
unable to support his Head, and, as he listed up his Hand to strike again,
tumbled under his Horse's Feet. He was accompanied in his Death by Androphonus
and Aneleemon, who fell by the same hand. Anosius being fiercely charged by
Kalodoxus lost his Life with his Head, which Kalodoxus cut off. Sympathus,
Charistion and Pasiphilus signalized themselves by the Death of Misagathus,
Adicus, Asemnus, and some others, who seemed to be the stoutest men that led
the Theomachian Van. Antigraphus, who fought with the Theomachians, was met by
Nicomachus, who shot him in the Mouth, and lodged a brace of Bullets in his
Brains, and after him dispatched Saprobius with his Sword. Hieromimus, who
would needs thrust himself into the Fight, (though he had no Command) being
known to a private Soldier who had seen him in Theoprepia, was killed with the
But-end of his Musket. Euphron having charged too far into the Enemie's Body
was unfortunately slain. Aristander having seen him engaged, endeavored with
all possible speed to hew out a way to his relief; but not being able to come
where he was soon enough to save his life, he fell with an impetuous rage upon
those who killed him, and fetched off his dead Body. In this Action Aristander
received one Wound in his Thigh, and another in his Arm, which proved mortal to
him.

Whilst the Victorious Arms of the left Wing distressed the Theomachians in the
Front, a sudden Ruin hastened upon them in the Rear. For Panaretus and
Philalethes being informed of a private way through the Wood, by which fetching
a small Compass they might come behind the Theomachians, they acquainted
Lysander with their desire to surround the Enemy, and received of him four
hundred Horse with which they put their Design in Execution, and flew in upon
them with an appearance which was so much the more dreadful because it was
unexpected, and made the Theomachians think that Death had hedged them in upon
all sides. However taking a desperate kind of Courage from their Danger they
fought stoutly, and though they were beaten, yet the Theoprepians found such
considerable Resistance that it cost many of them their lives. At length the
Theomachians seeing most of their Leaders slain, and so many of their
Companions killed that they were put out of all hopes of Victory; some of those
few which survived threw down their Arms and desired Quarter, others
endeavoring to save their Lives by running disorderly to Antitheus his
Division, which was a very small relief; for they were so discouraged by
Theosebes and his Invincible Army, that having left their most considerable
Officers dead upon the ground, and having seen others taken, they began to
fly, hoping at least to delay their Death by retiring to Polistherium.

Eugenius, who was a faithful friend to Alethion, and staid in Theriagene to
serve his Interest, received a fall from his Horse the day before the Fight,
and pretending to be much hurt by it he took his bed; by which means he gained
an occasion to remain at home to execute the Design which he had contrived
against Antitheus, which was, to surprise the City whilst he was engaged in the
Field: and accordingly having given notice of his purpose to Alethion by one of
his Servants well known to Bentivolio, Amyntor with a select Company of Horse
at the hour which was appointed by Eugenius marched toward Polistherium unseen
by the Enemy, and carrying Antitheus his Colors which they had taken in the
Fight, he came to a Gate which Eugenius had secured, and having let him in they
seized upon the Town for Alethion. This Action made the attempt of those who
hoped to escape by flight of little advantage to their security; for being
pursued and killed by the Theoprepian Horse, when they drew near to the Town
they were destroyed by the great Guns and Muskets which played upon them from
the Walls: and this did so confound them with an unexpressible Despair, that
being neither able to fight nor run away, they stood still and cried for Mercy:
which though they did not obtain at first, yet it was granted as soon as the
Prince of Theriagene and Theosebes could come up: For one of them desired not
to see more of his Subjects slaughtered, and the other could not endure to
behold so many men killed after they had given over all Resistance. They
exhorted the Soldiers to be content with their Victory without more blood,
which could not make it more acceptable; and they were not disobeyed when their
Commands were heard.

Thus did the Justice of Heaven punish the Rebellion of Antitheus and his
Accomplices, and in a short time utterly frustrate all the Probabilities which
he had framed to support a saint Hope of escaping Destruction. And now the
Princes having given order to take care of the Wounded Soldiers, and to secure
the Prisoners, Theosebes went into Alethion's Coach, and taking Bentivolio and
Panaretus with him, sent his Commands to Lysander to lead his men toward the
City, which they knew to be in their Friends hands, both by Alethion's Colors,
which were placed upon that Tower which was over the Gate by which they were to
enter, as also by a Messenger sent from Amyntor. When they were come to the
City-walls, they were met by Eugenius, who being transported by the sight of
Alethion, alighted off his Horse to perform his Devoir to him, and kneeled down
to kiss his Hand, but was not able to speak for Joy. Rise up, rise up, my
faithful Friend, said the Prince, (taking him into his Arms) I shall never
forget the Affections which you have always preserved for me; neither shall
any time blot out of my mind those obliging services by which you have
demonstrated your Love. He had not time to reply, for the Princes came out of
their Coaches intending to march into the City on Horseback; and then he was
interrupted by the Embraces of the Prince of Theoprepia, who had much endeared
him to himself for those high Offices which he had performed for a Prince whom
he loved above any man in the World, and then signified his Affection in words
full of Esteem. When Eugenius was got loose from Theosebes, Bentivolio
passionately affected with the sight of one who had obliged him with all the
Expressions of a most Generous Friendship, ran to him with open Arms, saying as
he went, And is it true, my dear Eugenius, that God has given us leave to meet
again both so soon and so happily? Yes, Bentivolio, replied Eugenius, and I
esteem it no small part of this Day's Felicity to meet one who was never out of
my Memory and Desire since we parted. The rest of the Company having performed
their affectionate Salutations to this Excellent Person, the Princes entered the
City, whilst the great Guns sounded from the Walls, and the People Echoed to
that joyful noise with their loudest Acclamations in all the Streets through
which they passed to the Palace.

It is not possible for me to express that endearing Welcome which Alethion
gave to the Prince of Theoprepia after his Arrival in the House, nor to repeat
those many passionate Acknowledgments which he made to him for that Generous
Love by which, God having made it successful, he was restored to his Throne,
protesting to Theosebes, that the re-enjoyment of his Kingdom was infinitely
more acceptable since it was accomplished by his means, then it could have been
any other way. Theosebes, who so entirely loved the Person of Alethion that he
esteemed all his Interests his own, returned an answer full of Modesty and
Sweetness, assuring him that he took more joy in the Restoration of Alethion
to his Kingdom, then he should have found sorrow in the loss of his own.

The first thing which they did after they had settled themselves was to take
care of their Wounded Friends, to whom when Alethion had declared his Desires
to Consecrate the following day for a public Thanksgiving to Almighty God for
the Victory by which he was restored to Theriagene, and Theriagene to it self,
they entreated him to delay his Order for a day or two, not doubting but they
should be able in that time to accompany him in that most worthy Action, and in
which they thought themselves highly concerned to have a share. Whereupon
Alethion made choice of the third day, which was cheerfully celebrated by the
Princes and those many gallant Persons who accompanied them in the Expedition;
as also by the Citizens, who observed it with all imaginable significations of
a thankful Joy. These Solemnities being appointed, the two Kings agreed to send
to Theoprepia, to let their Friends know the happy Success of their
Undertaking, and to fetch the Queen, the Princess Agape, Urania, Theonoe and
Irene, with their Companions; the whole Court earnestly desiring to have those
noble Persons present at such a joyful time, and of which they thought their
Fruition incomplete till their Friends enjoyed a part with them. Having past
the Evening in Theosebes his Chamber, the Company took their leave, their
weariness compelling them to withdraw to their several Lodgings, which were as
well appointed as such a season would permit.

The next day Alethion, Theosebes, Bentivolio, Panaretus, Philalethes, and many
other excellent Persons, being met at Misopseudes his Appartment, who was
forced to keep his Bed by reason of the Wound which he had received, Alethion
desired the Counsel of his Friends concerning the Settlement of his Affairs.
Theosebes advised him to punish Antitheus and the chief Instruments of the
Rebellion, and then to confirm the Amnesty which he had promised, and so engage
his Subjects Minds to a cheerful Obedience for the future by Assurance of
Pardon for their past Offenses. The rest approving this Advice, a List of the
Prisoners was brought, and their names read. Many of the Chief Actors in that
fatal Tragedy, which had caused so much trouble, were slain. Psychopannyx,
Astromantis, Panthnetus and Scepticus being well horsed fled into Theomachia.
The principal of those who were in Custody were Antitheus, Asynotus,
Pasenantius and Udemellon of the Theriagenians; Archicacus, Anaedes and
Anecestus of Theomachia; seven in all: who were condemned to be hanged and
quartered, and their Heads to be set upon the chief Gates of Polistherium. They
ordered also a day for the Funeral Rites due to Anaxagathus, which were
performed with all Princely Ceremonies, the King of Theoprepia and all the
Persons of Condition that were with him assisting in that Solemn Action.

Whilst Alethion, Eugenius, Misopseudes and Philalethes spent their time in
such employments as were necessary for the Re-settlement of the Affairs of the
Kingdom, Bentivolio and Panaretus having understood by the Surgeons that the
Wounds which Aristander had received in the late Fight were Mortal, resolved to
give him a Visit, and to spend what time they could spare from other occasions
in the Conversation of that most Excellent Man. When they came to his Lodging,
they found him accompanied with his intimate Friend Athanasius and his Brother
Virbius, and attended by his two Sons Callistus and Hilarion. Medenarete also
was there, and a Brother of hers called Synthnescon, who having heard that
Aristander's Wounds had put his Life in extreme danger, thought her self
obliged to give him a Visit, and to perform thanks to him for having saved her
Brother the day before from that death which he must have found under the Feet
of the Theoprepian Horse, if it had not been for the charitable Assistance
which he received from Aristander, and which he must have lost however, if he
had not been pardoned by Alethion at his Intercession. Bentivolio having made
those Salutes which were due to that worthy Person, sat down by his Bedside;
and having understood by a Gentleman who conducted them into the Room, that
they were just now entered into a Discourse concerning the Nature of Virtue, he
desired Aristander that his Visit might be no Interruption to their
Conversation: whereupon Aristander proceeded thus: It was a strange feebleness
of Mind which made the Valiant Brutus to speak so unworthily, when he said, O
unhappy Virtue! How vainly have I adored thee as a Divine thing, whenas thou
art nothing but Words and the Slave of Fortune? Yet I cannot wonder that he
should stagger so much with an unexpected blow of adverse Fortune (being at
that time worsted in a Battle at Philippi) when I consider that he was not
supported with a firm Belief of that Immortal Bliss which awaits good men in
the Eternal World, nor had made the Resignation of himself to the Divine Will,
the principal part of that Virtue of which he boasted himself to have been a
great Adorer. For my own part, I must profess that I now discern the truth of
Virtue more then at any other time of my Life, and am deeply sensible of the
incomparable Benefit of Religion, finding in it that serene Tranquillity, of
which if I were now destitute I could not so much as hope for it from any other
Principle. I look upon that quiet Repose of Mind and Felicity of Temper which I
enjoy, as the natural Effect of Virtue, which I make no question but it does
always produce where it is heartily entertained.

You are happy, said Medenarete, interrupting him a little, and I should esteem
it no small Favor, if it were not unseasonable to desire it at this time, if
you would please to let us know what you mean by Virtue; give us assurance that
there is any such thing, and make us understand wherein that happy Repose which
you so much magnify does consist. I thank God, said Aristander, I do not feel
so much pain as to indispose me for Converse; and since I always esteemed it
seasonable to serve Virtue, I shall willingly tell you what I think in Answer
to all those Questions in which you demand satisfaction concerning it.

By Virtue I mean a true Love of that Goodness the Notions where of are
naturally implanted in Humane Souls, and a constant Performance of those
Actions which correspond with those Directive Instincts. For you must know,
Medenarete, that the holy Rules which we find in the Writings of Wise men are
nothing but the Connate Notions of Good and Evil, which they found in
themselves and transcribed into their Books, written first by the great Creator
upon Men's Hearts as the Laws of reasonable Nature, and which are little
Resemblances of God's Eternal Righteousness, which is the Original Copy
according to which they were drawn. All Created things are destinated to some
particular Use, and have distinct Properties by which they are fitted for their
several Ends, and those Properties are the Excellencies of every Creature. The
Nature of a Man does by many degrees transcend that of most other Beings,
because he has higher Principles by which he is fitted for more noble Actions.
Those Innate Notions of Truth and Goodness are placed in his Soul as Fountains
of Law, from which he is to take direction concerning the Government of his
Life. Truth and Goodness are Eternal Things, and therefore subsisted before we
were born; but when we come into Being we find the Notions of them imprinted
upon our Minds, that is, our Natures are such that, as soon as we come to have
the use of our Faculties by the exercise of our Reason, we are forced to
acknowledge their Existence and perceive their Usefulness, and so are as it
were born Guides to our selves, being enabled to draw such Conclusions from
these Natural Sentiments as make sufficient Rules for our Actions; and are
encouraged by mighty Perswasives to do that which is Good, being convinced of
the Excellency of Virtue by the Natural Testimony of our own Souls.

By this you may understand that Virtue is a just Conformity to our Inbred
Knowledge, a Correspondence with the Dignity of our Natures, and a Pursuit of
those worthy Ends to which we are not only destinated, but naturally obliged.

It Is true, replied Medenarete, I have often heard such things pronounced
concerning Virtue, but I always esteemed them rather as Witty sayings of
eloquent Philosophers, then any convincing Assurances that Goodness is a
Reality. Men do usually talk of the Difference of Good and Evil, and say that
it is indispensably unjust to hurt an Innocent person; that a sense of
Gratitude is natural to all Men; and some such other things. But I have heard
it affirmed that these Notions are only Qualities which dispose men to keep
that Peace in the World of which they have a beneficial share, and that they
are not obliging Laws till they be so constituted by the Civil Sanction of a
Supreme Power, and that men do then yield Obedience to them only for fear of
Punishment, and so have no other Motive to those which you call Virtuous
Actions but Selflove. It is manifest also, that notwithstanding all that which
you say of the Natural Sense of Good and Evil implanted in our Souls, yet men
are very different in their Opinions concerning their Definitions: and
notwithstanding that irreconcilable difference between Right and Wrong which
you believe to be Real, the greatest part of the World do confound it in their
Actions. I might add also, that some who are esteemed Virtuous are so far from
being of your mind, that they make no scruple to say that God, if he pleased,
might command that which is most Evil to be Good. If these Allegations be true,
it follows that Obedience to Holy Rules is a thing only founded upon respect to
Self-interest, that Virtue is not a thing of an unchangeable Nature, and that
the Obligations to observe the Differences of Good and Evil in our Designs and
Actions is not so indispensable as you would make us believe.

I know very well, said Aristander; that many such things use to be objected
against the Nature of Virtue by those who speak against Honesty to show their
Wit, and disparage Goodness because they have no mind to practice it. But I can
easily show you the Falsehood of these Pretenses, if you will have the patience
to entertain a little more Discourse concerning this Subject. I shall be glad
to be so obliged, replied Medenarete; and if there be truth in that which you
say concerning Virtue, I shall willingly profess my self an affectionate Friend
to that which hitherto I have not much regarded.

Very well, said Aristander; I shall endeavor to demonstrate that the Nature
of Virtue is Immutable, that the Difference of Good and Evil cannot be changed,
and that the Reasons of Moral Duties are Eternal; and so give you a clear
notice of the Vanity of your Objections. The unalterable Congruity which is
between Virtue and reasonable Souls appears by the Essential Inclinations to
Moral Goodness which God the Author of our Being has implanted in our Nature;
and by this, that many Virtuous Dispositions are fair Resemblances of the
Divine Perfections, that others are Appendages immutably proper to our State,
all highly Perfective of our Being; and that a just Conformity to those Rules
which correspond with these Principles is so necessary to our Happiness, (which
consists in a quiet Repose of Mind, and a serene Delight in the enjoyment of
our selves and God our chief Good) that it is impossible to attain it by any
other means. These Assertions are of such moment as to that Satisfaction which
I would give concerning the nature of Virtue, that I must crave leave to
explain them with a larger Compass of Words, and so make the truth of them all
more apparent.

It is as natural for men to form their Actions according to the Notions of
Moral Goodness which are in their Souls, as it is to see with their Eyes; and
we ought as well to suppose that these Inward Laws were given us for the
Direction of our Life, as that our Tongues were bestowed upon us that we may
Speak. It is as easily possible for men to become Rats and Toads, as to put off
the Obligation which is laid upon them by God to observe Natural Righteousness:
Neither is the Congruity which Virtue has with our Souls more alterable by any
extrinsecal Power, then the hour of the Sun's Rising is determinable by the
Word of an Emperor. Laws can no more render Vice agreeable to our
Constitution, then they can make Seconds and Sevenths in Musical Compositions
to sound as Harmoniously as Thirds or Fifths. An Artist may as soon frame a
Quadrangle consisting only of three Angles, as make Ingratitude commendable:
And a Physician may as rationally pronounce that a man distressed with a Fever
is not sick, as affirm that there are no Torments of an Evil Conscience.
Whosoever will seriously consider it, may plainly see that the Nature of Virtue
is unalterable, and that it has an Essential Connection with our Souls; for
there is an Eternal Reason why that which is good for Men should so bealwayes.
These Holy Rules took not their Original from the Appointments of our Parents,
the Pleasure of our Tutors, Traditions received from former Ages, or Imitation
of present Examples; but are the general Dictates of common Reason, which
whisper unto us from within whether we will or no, that they are Good in their
own nature. These Laws are of an Ancient Date, not made in the Reign of such
and such Kings, or in such a Session of Parliament; but as old as Humanity, and
of themselves obliging antecedently to all Positive Commands. It is true,
Princes should enter these amongst their Statutes: and because they are
immutably Good, they ought not to command any thing that does contradict them;
and, though they should, yet they can no more render such Orders Just, then
they can make it the Duty of Men to hate themselves. What Original could these
Indeleble Prolepses have but the same with our Nature? They are plain to all,
and the sense of their Obligingness avoidable by none.

As we perceive in our Minds immutable Notions of Speculative Truths, as That
Contradictions cannot be true, That the Whole is bigger then the Part, and such
like; which are such illustrious Verities that none dare affront them with a
denial, and which are of such high Import, that if they were not unalterably
true we could have no assurance of any thing, but must fluctuate in Eternal
Unbelief: So these Notions of Moral Goodness are our sure Directions in point
of Practice, and are unchangeably Good; for if they were not, we could have no
certain Rule for our Actions; which is such a slur upon Nature, that it can be
supposed by none but such as do not believe that God made it. The truth is, if
finding these Laws imprinted upon our Natures we should yet think our selves
not bound to obey them, we can receive no notice of our Duties any other way,
being rationally obliged to disbelieve that which is contrary to our natural
Sentiments.

Among all the rational Notions which adorn Humane Nature these Principles of
Good and Evil are the chief. They are the great Reasons why we are called Men,
and the fairest Characters by which we are distinguished from Brutes: And
indeed, Medenarete, it is impossible that we should have any rational
Pulchritude in us, if the beautiful Order of these Congruities were destroyed.
It is a greater Beauty in Men when their Choice corresponds with these natural
Anticipations of their Duties, then for a Woman to have fair Eyes placed in
just distances upon her Face. It is as ungrateful to a man that considers, to
find his Actions dissent from this obliging Knowledge, as it is unacceptable to
such as know Music, to hear a Lutenist play upon an Instrument out of tune.
Those things which consist of many Parts, or of various Faculties, are capable
of no Perfection but what consists in a proper Union of those Parts, and a
regular Ordination of their Faculties; which is not mutable at pleasure, but
perpetually fixed to the Nature of every particular Being. As it is not any
Connection of Parts that will make an handsome Body, for if any Member be
disorderly placed, there will be a Deformity: So the Soul by its rare
Constitution having many Powers, as the Rational, the Irascible and
Concupiscible, its Perfection does necessarily depend upon the due
Subordination of these Faculties to one another. When the Rational Principle,
which is adorned with the forementioned Notions, gives Laws to our Appetites,
and they are obedient, then Virtue glorifies our Constitution, and shows the
Excellency of its Nature both in the decent Moderation of our Passions, and in
a lovely Connection of becoming Actions. But when these Divine Rules are
neglected, it is no more possible that the Soul should be in its natural frame,
then that the Body should enjoy Health if the Nerves which tie it together were
cut in pieces; or for a City to escape Confusion, if the Inhabitants despise
the Laws; or for a Musician to compose delightful Airs by a careless jumbling
of Notes without the Rules of Art. The Virtue of Humane Souls has natural
Orders, certain Measures, and is determined by Laws which can no more be
altered at pleasure, then the Proportion which is between Three and Six in
Arithmetic.

This is enough, Medenarete, to show you that Virtue is an unalterable
Congruity with our Souls, and in its own nature fixed as much as any other
thing: to which I will now add, that those forementioned Notions are not only
natural Qualities interwoven with our Essence, but also Participations of that
increated Goodness which is in the Divine Nature, so far as it is communicable
to Men. Though that be incomprehensible in the Infiniteness of its Perfections,
yet it has revealed it self in the known Properties of Justice, Veracity,
Love, Benignity and Mercy; which whosoever imitates, lives conformably to God's
Life; and whosoever thinks he may afflict the Innocent, violate his Faith,
refuse to show Mercy, and abandon Charity, does foolishly esteem it a Privilege
to be disengaged from the ties of that Goodness to which the Divine Will is
always determined.

I told you also, I remember, that some of these noble Qualities are fastened
upon our State as Appendages immutably proper to it, and it must be so; for who
can think of those Words, God and a Created Being, but he must necessarily
infer that it is unalterably fit, that as the lowest Creatures are necessarily
subject to their Maker, so Man, being endu'd with Reason, by which he
understands his Relation, and is made capable of Law and voluntary Subjection,
should submit himself of Choice to his Creator, acknowledge his Dependence upon
him, and seeing himself placed in a higher Degree of Being, increase his
Thankfulness proportionably? By the Notions of God's Goodness and Excellency
implanted in our Souls we are obliged to love him for himself; as we have
Understanding and Will, which are the Principles of Moral Virtues, we are bound
to receive the Divine Illuminations as our highest Wisdom, and both sincerely
to conform our Wills to God's Commandments, and to rest satisfied in his
Appointments with all humble Complacence. The nature of our State does oblige
us also to observe the Rules of Righteousness toward others; for he who gave
us our Being did not only make us unwilling to be wronged our selves, but
thereby also taught us that we ought not to wrong others: And though he has
bestowed Self-love upon us, yet he always requires us to manage it so as
becomes those who know they are but Creatures, that they have Souls as well as
Bodies, and owe Love to their Neighbors as well as to themselves. Those who
contradict the Reason of these Duties do barbarously disown the Relation in
which they stand to God, and endeavor vainly to put off the Nature of
Creatures; for Sin is a Contradiction to our State, and a Forfeiture of the
Being which we hold at our Creator's Pleasure.

The Unnaturalness of such Disobedience will appear yet farther, if we consider
that the Happiness which is proper to Humanity cannot be obtained without a
compliance with Virtuous Rules; for the happy Repose of our Spirits will be
disturbed if we sin. Whilst our Actions contradict the Knowledge of our Duty,
we offend the most delicate sense of our Souls, and by offering violence to the
Law of our Mind we fall out of our own Favor, expose our selves to the sharp
Remorses of a wronged Conscience, and put our selves to a pain much like to
that which we feel in our Bodies when a Bone is dislocated. A Sinner becomes
his own Tormentor, and is vexed to see that he has done himself a mischief by
a preposterous endeavor to satisfy a vicious Will. God having so inseparably
annexed our best satisfaction to the Rules of our Duty, the old Philosopher
might have given a very plausible reason for his Passion, if he had included
those who endeavor to divide Pleasure from Honesty, in the Curse which he
wished upon those who first attempted the Divorce of Virtue and Profit. However
the Attempt is to no purpose; for the distress which accompanies Vice is so
unavoidable, that the most insolent sinners which are recorded in History have
confessed an Inward Nemesis to follow them, and to compensate the Wickedness of
their Actions with proportionable Punishments, making every Place too hot for
them, and all Conditions uneasy. Those who have so far despised Virtue, that
they would not acknowledge it to be any thing, have not withstanding found the
burden of an Evil Conscience to be extreme heavy, and complained of the
Torments which they suffered from the Displeasure of the In-dwelling God. How
natural this disturbance is, appears also from the Restlesness of profligate
Offenders, who, though they enjoy the Success of their Vices, and live in the
heights of Luxury by the benefit of Rapine, do yet desire rather to have gotten
Riches by some honest means, being reproved by themselves when they consider
that Unhandsomness which will never cease to attend their unjust Prosperities.
This gives us assurance that the Laws of Virtue are of force to condemn where
they are not obeyed, and that the Divine Light is seen when it is not followed,
and that it is a very jejune Explication of the Torments of Conscience to say
that it is only this, Some men say that they knew them who knew others who knew
the state of Sinners to be unhappy.

Besides this I might also add, that the unalterable Repugnance of Vice to our
Felicity is manifest by those extravagant Appetites and wild Desires to which
Men are often subject, which, whilst they are not mortified by Virtue, do gall
the Soul by a ravenous unsatisfiableness, and make what soever might administer
to its Content useless.

By that which I have said concerning Good men's Happiness, I would not have you
think that the Repose of Virtue consists only in a dull Indolence, a mere
freedom from Grief, or such a state of Content as that in which we find our
selves after we have quenched a Thirst: for Good men experiment also such
Actual Pleasure as thirsty persons find when they drink Delicious Liquors, both
whilst they are conversant in the Operations of Virtue, and when they call to
mind the Honest Actions of their past life. By which it appears that they are
not moved to compliance with Holy Rules by Extraneous Principles, or are
induced to perform their Duties by Mercenary Persuasions, as Hopes of Honor
and Desire of Riches: they have Innate Motives far more cogent from that rare
Content which is the natural Companion of Virtue; and Good men have always
thought this Intellectual Delight so far beyond the sensual Titillations of
fleshly Objects, that they have esteemed Wicked persons not to fall more below
the Dignity of such as are Good by the Depravations of Vice, then they do come
short of their enjoyments in the truth of Pleasure, under which pretense they
became Renegado's to Virtue.

Those who affirm Pleasure to be the end of all Humane Actions, speak true
enough if they understand themselves well; and there is no danger in that which
they say, if they be not mistaken by others. As nothing is of more pleasant
gust to our Rational Appetite then to do excellent Things, so it is
proportionable to the great Ends of our Nature to seek such Delight; for in
this pursuit we come to taste the Pleasures which all Good men find in the
noble Union of their Souls with the Divine Will, and so partake of true
Freedom: for being by this most pleasing Fruition unchain'd from the mean love
of little things, and secured from the distraction of low Desires, they are
joined to that great Good, which is ever present with all but those who have
dispersed their Souls amongst infinite Vanities, and so do not enjoy
themselves; or who having contracted a Contrariety of Disposition to God's
mind, are not capable of Union with him. Virtue prepares us for God's
Inhabitation, who is never unwilling to dwell in Good men: And whilst they give
him, as they ought, his Right of Willing what he pleases in them, and acting
their Powers according to his Divine Wisdom and Goodness, they partake of the
greatest Happiness to which Men can be exalted, and satisfy their Minds in the
enjoyment of the chief Good, which does also instill into their Souls and
preserve there a pleasant Hope of Immortal Felicity, by the continuance and
advancement of the same Fruition in the Eternal World; they being sufficiently
assured that nothing can separate a Soul from everlasting Bliss, which is
married to God by hearty Love. And this does complete a Good man's Repose; for
being at peace with himself by reason of the Friendly Testimony of his
Conscience, and highly pleased with his present state, he finds also an
unspeakable ease of Mind in the Hopes of that which he shall be in the Life to
come.

Thus, said Aristander, turning toward Medenarete, I have obeyed your Command,
having showed you the Excellent Nature of Virtue, assured you concerning its
Existence, and given you an Account of that Happiness which Good men derive
from it. After this it would be impertinent to add much to overthrow your
Objections, for they must needs fall of themselves. If Virtue does include in
its own Nature an essential Congruity with Reasonable Souls, there is no more
necessity of a Law to render its Rules Obliging, then to pass an Act to make it
fit for us to see with our Eyes; and since Vice does always discompose that
natural Order, it is as impossible for all the Civil Power in the World to make
it agreeable to our Constitution, as to make us smell with our Ears.

That Virtuous men are not good for Fear of being punished, is sufficiently
confirmed by that which I have already discoursed; and I must tell you that
this is a very Contemptible Objection: for they do not esteem any man Good but
him who will not sin though he is not in danger of any external Mulct; neither
do they account him an Honest man with whom they durst not play at Even and
Odd in the dark. And if you ask then what use there can be of Laws, which are
always vain without the supposition of Punishment; I must let you know that
they are prudently given with a general respect to all men. To the Bad, because
since all will not understand the Reasons of their Duties, nor be persuaded to
love Virtue for most worthy considerations; it is of great Interest to the
World that Wickedness should not be spread by Impunity, but that Enormous
persons being directed by Law, should also be restrained from disobeying it by
Suffering. They are also highly useful to the Good, not so much to hinder them
from doing that which is not Just, as that they may not be wronged by the
Vicious, who are deterred from hurting them with violent actions by the fear of
those Penalties which are annexed to them.

That which you objected concerning the different Apprehensions which men have
of Good and Evil, does not infringe the real Distinction which is between them,
or prove that this difference is not known naturally, more then it is possible
that the Whole should be no bigger then the Part, because some have been or may
yet be found who doubt whether it is or no. Neither is it any wonder that some
(...) Opinions, because there are Multitudes of various Examples in the World,
and many follow the worst, being usually so slothful that they will not take
pains to examine which is the best.

(...) and Vice, as you say, are confounded in most men's actions: but that does
not prove that they are not Eternally distinguished in their Notions, or that
it is not natural for Humane Nature to love Virtue; since some make themselves
sick through Intemperance, though nothing is more natural then the desire of
Health; and some put out their Eyes, which are so tenderly regarded by Mankind.
This Argument is of no force, unless you think these are good Conclusions; That
there are no good Laws in Civil Societies, because men do sometimes Rebel; That
there are no good Principles, because the Inconsiderate offer Violence to them;
and That there is no Use of sober Reason in the World, because some are
Distracted.

That any should say, as your last Objection supposes, That God might, if he
please, alter these essential Notions of Good and Evil, is so monstrously
extravagant, that I cannot but wonder at the Ignorance or Impudence of those
who dare speak this blasphemous Falsehood. At their Impudence, in asserting that
which supposes it to be no Absurdity for God, if he please, to make it Good
that his Creatures should not acknowledge him, which is a horrid Contradiction;
or at their Ignorance, whilst they foolishly affirm that which overthrows all
Religion. For if we receive this Principle, That there is not any thing
Indispensably Good, or that the Divine Will is not regulated by it; they have
undermined our Faith, and taken away all foundation of Hope, leaving us, as far
as in them lies, unassured but that God may if he will condemn us for yielding
Obedience to him, and that it is Just too if he do it, notwithstanding he has
declared the contrary.

When Aristander had proceeded so far, he desired all the Company, except
(...), that they would please to withdraw for a while into the next Room; for
his Surgeons were come to dress his Wounds. Which when they had opened,
Well, said Aristander, how is it? We cannot promise much, said the Surgeons,
as to your Recovery, for we are afraid we shall not be able to prevent a
Gangrene. Aristander perceiving in their Countenances that by the Rules of
their Art they discerned more Danger then they did express to him, desired that
his Friends might be called in. They returned; and when they had inquired
concerning the state of his Body, I have received, said Aristander, no
unwelcome news; for Happiness can never come too soon. I have always made the
Belief of my Soul's Immortality one of the chief Principles of my Actions: for
whilst I considered its nature, and perceived that it would not fail to subsist
after my Body, having a Duration assigned to it commensurate to Eternity, I
could not but understand how contemptible that short space of time is which God
has allotted to our Continuance in this lower World in respect of that which
is to succeed it; and thereupon I infert'd, that the Happiness which we enjoy
in this state is not comparable to that which awaits us after our separation
from this Flesh; and consequently, that it is an Essential part of true
Prudence, to be infinitely more sollicitous that we may be happy hereafter,
then to avoid any present Inconveniences. And since I know that there is no way
to that Felicity which I hope for but by Death, and remember that Death is a
very short passage to it, I should be untrue to my Principles, and abandon my
best hopes, if I were unwilling to die.

I perceive, said Synthnescon, making a Reply to Aristander's Discourse, that
your Courage is the last Friend that will take leave of you; and I cannot but
approve your love of an Opinion which is so pleasant, that some of those who
were not sure that it was true have professed that they would never suffer
themselves to be persuaded against it whilst they live. I grant that the right
Government of our Life depends upon true Principles, and that we cannot attain
Happiness by the Consequences of false Opinions; and I must acknowledge that
the Principle which you have mentioned is very noble and worthily fit to have a
Directive Influence upon the whole course of our present life, if we were
assured of its Truth. But I have been told that we have no Soul distinct from
the Body, and that what we call by that name is only a Contemperation of
Corporeal Humors, and a Connection of those Integral Parts of which the Body
does consist; and that when this vigorous Crasis is destroyed by mortal
Sickness, and the Bodily frame taken in pieces by Death, then that which you
call Soul cease to be, as Musical Harmony vanishes with Sound; and can no
more subsist after Death then a Figure is able to remain after the dissolution
of Figurated matter. Some express themselves thus, That all the Soul which we
have is composed of Material Principles, and resolved into them by Death; that
is, our Spirit is nothing but a knot of united Atoms, and that Death by
discomposing the Contexture does dissipate us into loose Particles.

I know very well, said Aristander, that some are not willing to think that the
Soul does exist after Death, and have taken great pains to object as much as
they can against its Immortality. But I have been told by men wiser then these
Dissenters, that Humane Souls are Immaterial Substances, and therefore
incapable of that Dissolution which the Body suffers by Death; it being a known
Principle in true Philosophy, That the Corruption of Material Subjects is
brought to pass only by a separation of conjoined Parts, that is, by Division,
which belongs only to Bodies whose essential property is Quantity. That the
Soul is in no danger of such Dissolution, I have good reason to think by those
grounds of hope which I find in my own Experience. I am now old, and yet I
perceive my self to be the same that I was fifty years ago. I have worn away
many Bodies since I was young, and therefore this same I which remains still
must be a Soul, and that Immaterial. I cannot but believe that if I had nothing
in my self distinct from this corruptible Body, or that if Death had any wedge
able to cleave my Soul, I should have seen some Chip fall from it yesterday
when my Arm was sawn off, and have felt my Soul grown less then it was before.
I did not, I am the same I still, and I do not doubt but I should be so if the
other Arm were cut off, and after that my Feet, and then the rest of those
Parts which constitute this Bodily Frame. Having this sensible assurance, I
take the more Confidence to believe that I shall eternally exist in this
Rational Nature which now makes me my self.

I know some say that Immaterial Beings, if there are any, may be Mortal,
though not by Separation of Parts, yet some other way unknown to us: I suppose
they mean Annihilation. To which I answer, that though I cannot but acknowledge
God may, if he will, destroy what he has made, and at his pleasure take away
that Being which is derived from his Power; yet I think it Absurd to suppose
that he does Annihilate Souls, because it is contrary to that Method which he
observes in other parts of the Universe, nothing of which does so perish. And I
must esteem it too great a Boldness for any man to affirm that we are reduced
to Nothing by Death, because he does not know whither we go. If he say that the
Soul is of that nature, that it can have no Being out of the Body, he falls
upon the forementioned Rock, and must say that it is Annihilated by
Separation; for else it will exist out of the Body.

But because by your Objections you seem rather to imagine that the Soul is
nothing really distinct from the Corporeal Substance, I will make no further
enquiry whether Immaterial things can perish, but rather endeavor to show you
sufficient Cause to believe that Humane Souls are Incorporeal. You cannot but
know, Synthnescon, that this Word Soul, and others correspondent to it in
different Languages, has been long used in the World; and I take it for
granted that it signifies something, and suppose that none will venture to
affirm that those learned Persons who made use of it in their Writings did
intend to signify nothing by it but a Body; or though some may judge them
highly mistaken in thinking it had any other true meaning; yet as I doubt not
but the Venerable Ancients knew very well what they said, so I think it may
easily be proved that the Notion of an Immaterial Substance distinct from the
Body, which they intended to express by it, is natural and true.

That the Soul is not a Temperament of Corporeal Humors is manifest in this,
that it is neither a Good nor a Bad Contemperation. If it be a healthful
Temperament only, then we have no Soul when we are Sick; if an unhealthful,
then we are dead when we are Well. Besides, if the Soul were only a Crasis of
the Body, it would be capable of no Distempers, but by a fit of the Gout, the
pain of the Stone, the heat of a Fever, or some other sickness depending upon
indisposed Matter: Whereas it is manifest that it has many Diseases which
arise not from Dilatation or Compression of the Matter, Obstruction or
Inflammation of the Humors, or Solution of Continuity: The Troubles of
Conscience, which arise from Moral Causes, being no more capable of being
removed by a Physician's Receipt, then the Gout can be cured with a Moral
Lecture.

The Soul is not a Contexture of Material Parts, for that is nothing really
distinct from the whole Body; but that the Soul is not the Body, Part of it, or
any Corporeal thing, we have many good assurances. Those who would know what
others are, do rationally seek a satisfaction of their Desire by conversing
with them; and such as would know what they themselves are, must converse with
themselves. It is necessary to observe this Method, for there is no other way
to come to the Knowledge of our Souls. Since the Essences of all things are
veiled, we must endeavor to know them by their Operations; for the Forms of
things are only intelligible by the Properties which are peculiar to their
respective Natures, and these distinct Properties reveal themselves only by
different Operations. Whilst we are intent upon this Contemplation, we shall
find in our selves the Acts of an Intellectual Essence, which upon strict
Examination will appear to be of such an excellent Nature, that they transcend
the finest Modifications, and exceed the most subtle Motions, of Bodies.

Those who acknowledge nothing but Material Beings in the World, and make our
Sensation the effect of Motion, do also grant that our highest Perceptions rise
but to Imagination, which operates only by Corporeal Phantasms, that is, Images
framed in the Brain according to those various Impressions which are made upon
the Organs of Sense by the Impulses of external Objects. If therefore we can
make it appear that we have in our selves the Notions of things which were
never capable of Sensible Representation, we may justly conclude that we have a
higher Mode of Perception then Imagination, and consequently are ennobled with
an Immaterial Principle of Knowledge.

That we are acquainted with many things of which we cannot have notice by the
help of any Sensible Images, is manifest, in that we understand the Logical
Notion of Causes, Effects, other mutual Respects of things, and Universality;
in that we have cognizance of Mathematical Terms, as Proportions of Figures,
Symmetry of Magnitudes, Breadth abstracted from Depth, Inequality and Distance;
in that we find also in our Souls the Perception of Moral Congruities and
Repugnancies, the Knowledge of Good and Evil, the Nature of Virtue, Principles
of Justice, the Decencies of Gratitude, Deliberation and Liberty of Will: To
these I might add the Species of Reason, of Infinite Space, Eternal Duration,
and the Notion of Perception it self: we discern also Theological Truths
shining there, as the lively Idea of God pourtrayed in his Divine Attributes,
and the sense of our Dependence upon him. These things have no Signatures in
Matter, are no Sensible Objects nor Phantasms of Corporeal Beings derived
through our Senses, or excited in us by the Impresses of Bodily Motion; and
therefore we ought to conclude that the Incorporeal Idea's by which we know
these things are Congenial to our Souls, and also to rest assured that they are
Immaterial.

If the Soul were only a few thick Curds enclosed with a Bony Skull, and all
things without us be only Bodies; it is no more possible that any knock of dull
Matter should be able to beat the subtle Notion of a Deity into our Heads,
then it is to make an Intelligent Posset of Sack and Milk. What sort of Glass
is that in which you can hope to represent to our Eyes Comparisons, Similitudes
and Dissimilitudes? If the Soul were Corporeal, it could no more be sensible by
an external Motion that it is a Being which Understands, Reasons and
Discourses, then an Artist can make a Looking-glass which will show the Images
of things that are Invisible. We have the forementioned Idea of our Soul, and
it is clearer then any Conception which we are able to frame of Bodily nature,
and yet no Corporeal Matter could represent any such thing to us; it is
necessary therefore to conclude that this Knowledge arises from the Innate
Power of an Immaterial Principle.

The Soul does not only show the Excellency of its Understanding Faculty by a
simple Apprehension of single Objects, which it takes in to furnish it self
with fit materials of Discourse; but does also compare their several Natures,
consider their different Properties, and contemplate their various Respects,
and so arrives at an useful Knowledge of things. By this Discursive Power we
are enabled to frame Arguments, to make Inferences, to pronounce concerning the
Similitude and Dissimilitude of things, to design set Ends of our Operations,
to choose fit Means, and reject such as are unfit for our purpose; and by a rare
Activity of this Intellectual Faculty the Soul does with an unspeakable
quickness apply it self to the Contemplation of all things, and march in a few
minutes through the whole Region of Intelligible Objects, and so declares how
far its Acts are exalted above any thing which is discernable in Bodies
assisted only by Motion. I know very well that some, who affirm that all the
Phenomenon in the World may be resolved by Matter and Motion, will say that
these Operations are not managed by virtue of any Immaterial Principle, but by
the Impulse and Re-action of agitated Bodies. But we must deny that this is
possible, except we will be so absurd as to say That whatsoever is moved does
perceive, and so grant that a Stone has Perception as well as a Man, that the
Paper feels the Pen that writes upon it, that a Viol while it is played upon is
a Sensitive Creature; and conclude That the Soul is only a little fine dust
which feels the force of Arguments, That Atoms make Syllogisms, That
Disputation is only some Aerial Particles blown up and down with a
Philosophical wind, and That the whiffling dust which flies in the faces of
Travelers does take a distinct notice of them as they pass upon the Road. If
the Particles of Matter have no Sense in them, they can never produce it by any
sort of Motion, unless we grant that there may be more Excellency in the Effect
then in the Cause.

That there is a higher Principle of Knowledge in Humane Nature then moved
Matter and its Re-action, appears further by those Reflex Acts of this
Selfknowing Substance in which the Soul becomes its own Object, and perceives
that it does perceive. All Matter is so extended that no part of it can act
upon it self by a Revolution into it self, more then the end of one of our
Fingers can touch it self, or the Eye see it self: And when Material things
seem to act upon themselves, it is manifest to such as consider, that it is
only one part that acts upon another part of the same thing. This Reflex
Operation does not only exclude the Senses, but is raised above the Power of
Phancie: For that working only by the help of gross Phantasms is not able to
perceive that it does Imagine, because no Image of Perception can be conveyed
to the Phancie by any Instrument of Sense. Shall we be so vain as to think that
a Looking-glass does not only represent our Image, but also see us when we
stand before it, and reflecting upon that act discern that it does see us? That
Caves reverberate Sounds we know; but do they hear us too, and consider that
they do so? Foolish Lovers! You think you talk unheard in your solitary Walks;
the hollow Rocks with which you converse are more pitiful then you imagine,
they understand your complaints and resent your wrongs: Nay, your sympathizing
Lutes hear the Airs you play, and are much affected with the proper Composition
of your passionate Sonnets. No, no, Medenarete, let us not believe such
ridiculous things. Perception is not Re-action after Motion, but a Recognition
of those Impressions which by Motion are made upon us, which is above the power
of dull Matter.

I cannot but think also that the Soul does sufficiently reveal its Immaterial
Nature, whilst it collects the Perceptions of all the Senses, compares them
together, orders the great variety of Phantasms which float in the Imagination,
and makes a Judgment both of the Sense and Phancie. It is not any of the
Senses, for they do never reprehend themselves; the Eye does not judge of
Hearing, nor the Ear of Tastes. It is not the Phancie, for that receives no
Images of things but such as are delivered by the Senses; and yet we find a
Principle in us which forms apprehensions of things contrary to those which are
conveyed to us by the Organs of Sense, and rejects the Phantasms of Imagination
as insufficient Assurances concerning the truth of external Objects: not
pronouncing that either the Senses or the Phancie are deceived, for it knows
that they only declare their own Passions, which are really such as they seem
to be; but discerns withal that it should be deceived if it did always
believe things to be such as they are represented by those Images. When the Eye
sees a Stick whose half is under water, it is pictured to the Imagination as
crooked; but the Mind knowing that the Representations of Sense which are
carried to the Brain by Coporeal Motion are made without Judgment, examines the
Phantasm, and pronounces the Stick to be straight.

By this it plainly appears that the Soul is not a Corporeal Faculty: for they
are all confined to their own single tasks, as the Eye to seeing, and the Ear
to hearing; but the Soul has an universal Perception, an unbounded capacity of
Sensation extended to all things, even its own Perceptions; and is placed
amongst those little Powers which flow from it self, as a Supreme Judge of all
their Operations. And as the Soul would be frequently deluded by more Senses
then one, if in many cases it did not contradict Corporeal Impressions, and
frame another Judgment of things then that which agrees with Sensible
Representations; so it could never be able to withdraw it self from these
bodily Images that it might clearly discern what is true, if it were not an
Immaterial Principle; neither could it make results contrary to the Perception
of the Sensitive Faculties, if it were not a distinct Power Superior to them.

Though these things are abundantly sufficient to assure us what kind of thing
the Soul is; yet, as if it desired to appear plainly to all who are willing to
be acquainted with it, the truth of its nature is discovered in many other
Operations: but I will instance only in that of Remembrance. If the Soul were
only Matter, the Notions of past things would seem only to have been written in
water; for we know that our Bodies are continually wasted with insensible
Transpirations. The parts of this Atomical Composition still marching away, and
other succeeding in their rooms, if nothing in us were fixed and immutable, we
should not only find it difficult to remember the Observations of our former
Life, but be apt to forget what we our selves were in time past: or, if Memory
be only fading Motion, like that which we discern upon the Surface of Water
after a Stone is thrown into it, (...) is impossible to imagine by what
Preservatives this feeble Trembling should continue so long as we know we can
remember. For many years after this Motion must needs have ceased, we find the
Phantasms of things long before past as fresh as if they had but newly happened.

I will not trouble you, Synthnescon, said Aristander, continuing his
Discourse, with any more Arguments concerning this Matter. The Actions which I
have named do prove the Soul to be an Incorporeal Substance; it being evident
to any Ingenuous Philosopher that no Contexture of Atoms is capable of such
Operations, and that it is impossible they should be produced only by the
Motion of Matter agitated. But I would add this to what I have said already;
That though I do really believe that the forementioned Arguments are in
themselves certain Truths, and do sufficiently prove the Immortality of our
Souls; yet I think God has given us a higher assurance concerning this Article
of Faith then any thing which I have mentioned: I mean that our Immortality is
better demonstrated from the Resurrection and Ascension of our Savior then by
any Apodeictical Proofs drawn from other Topics. All are not prepared for
Philosophical Arguments, because many of them are subtle, and so above the
reach of weak Capacities; neither are they of force to uphold a Belief in those
who understand them no longer then they do carefully attend to the Coherence of
every Demonstration. Our Savior rising from the Grave, and appearing in the
same Body in which he was Crucified, both after his Resurrection to many of his
Friends upon Earth, and after his Ascension to one of his Apostles from Heaven,
gave sufficient notice that he had overcome the Power of that Death which he
suffered upon the Cross, and by the truth of his glorious Existence exhibited
an evident Testimony of the Soul's Incorruptibility. And I must tell you,
Synthnescon, that the conviction which we receive from this Argument does so
far transcend the satisfaction which we find in all others which have been
produced for the Determination of this Question, that Christian Religion may be
truly said to have the Glory of giving a just Demonstration of the Life to
come, and a clear Assurance of the Immortal Happiness of our future state.

Here Synthnescon replied, I cannot but acknowledge it, Aristander, as a very
great Obligation, that you are pleased to allow us the benefit of your
Conversation, especially at this time when your Repose is necessary to your
Health; and if it were not for continuing a disturbance, I should beseech you
to deliver me by your excellent Discourse from the vexation of some Objections
which molest my Faith, and with which I find my self more troubled, because
this Article is very Important. I understand very well, said Aristander, that a
freedom from Company would contribute nothing to the Restoration of my Health,
and I assure you that I do not think that those few Hours of my Life which yet
remain can be better employed then in this sort of Conversation, and therefore
you have a fair leave to propound your scruples. Synthnescon accepting this
courteous offer, began thus: I find it difficult to think that the Soul is any
Immaterial Substance, because I cannot imagine how it should be joined to this
Body. I can hardly believe that there is any such strange sort of Glue which is
able to fasten together two such different Natures. It seems to be an odd
Marriage, wherein so subtle a Principle as you make the Soul, should desire to
espouse to it self dull Matter; and yet if it would contract such an Union, it
cannot, because it would pass through Matter, by reason of its all-penetrating
nature, and so be unable to take such fast hold as to make a Whole consisting
of those two Parts which you call Soul and Body.

I rather fancy an Identity of things expressed by those two names, then an
Union of distinct parts, and suppose the Soul and Body are rather One then
United; because the Soul, which you magnify so much for its innate Power, is
not able to perform those noble Operations, for which you pronounce it an
Immaterial Substance, when the Body is distempered by Excess of Meats or
Drinks, or indisposed by Diseases and old Age. Who is able to discourse
rationally when he is drunk? The Extravagancies of Madmen are notorious; the
Operations of the Intellect wholly cease in Lethargies and Apoplexies: and I am
apt to argue, that as the Soul suffers an Infancy when the Body is young, grows
more vigorous in riper years, becomes decrepid in old Age, and is sick with the
Body, so it also dies with it.

This Belief receives Confirmation from that which is observable in the manner
by which Death seizes upon us; for dying persons feel themselves perish by
Degrees, they lose one Faculty after another, Speech, Memory, Sight and
Hearing: And as the particular Senses which are proper to every Organ are taken
away by the Prevalency of a Disease; so I suppose that whatsoever it is which
you call Soul must needs be destroyed by Death.

Besides this, if there be a Soul, it is Divisible, and therefore not Immortal;
as may be perceived in the Motion which continues in the several Parts of a
Body when the Whole is cut into pieces. What can be the reason of that
Agitation, but that the Soul being commensurate with the Whole, is divided into
every Part, and so moves them (...) while, and after some time perishes, being
only a mortal Vigor of warm Spirits?

If it did escape these dangers, as you pretend it does, I know not to what
purpose it should then be continued in Being; for it cannot act out of the
Body, and having no Operations it must needs be condemned to an unhappy Dullness
in a most afflicting Solitude. It can neither hear Musical Sounds, nor see the
Beautiful World, nor discourse, nor converse with others; and therefore it is
rational to suppose that it does not Exist at all.

I must add also, that what you call Soul in us seems to understand that dark
Fate which awaits it in Death, and that this sad Presage makes men afraid to
die. If the Soul were an Immortal Spirit able to subsist of it self, it should
rejoice to leave this Body, and it would find no reason to be enamored with
it, if it be destinated to an Immortal Happiness, as you say it is, in the
Separate state.

I have heard some say too, that if there be any such state, (...) seems very
strange that none of those Millions of Souls which are gone into the other
World should return and give us notice of their condition; especially
considering that the great affection which many of them before their Departure
seemed to have for their Friends here must needs make them willing, if they be
able, to inform them in such a weighty affair, and concerning which they do
exceedingly desire to be assured. These Arguments put together overthrowing all
Hopes, at least the Certainty, of a Future state, they suppose it rational to
improve the present to all possible satisfaction: and though by reason of this
Unbelief they do many things which you esteem vicious, and take that course of
Life which you condemn; yet they think themselves justified by this, that they
do but reap those Fruits which would perish if they were not gathered, and that
they should live to no purpose if they lived otherwise.

Aristander perceiving that Synthnescon had finished his Objections, replied
thus: I am glad that you let us know what may be said against the Belief of our
Immortality, because you have given us occasion to confirm this generous Truth,
and to assure our selves that the Comfort which we take in it has a sure
foundation in the unperishable nature of the Soul which we have received from
God. I will show you the Vanity of those Arguments by which you endeavor to
gain credit to the Error of your disconsolate Opinion. But before I answer
your Objections particularly, I will premise a few things concerning the Temper
and Design of the Panthnetists.

And first I must give you notice, that whilst they deny the Immortality of the
Soul upon this Supposition, That there is no such thing in the World as
Incorporeal Being, they beg the Question which they ought to prove, and think
themselves great Philosophers when they have only affronted the Truth with bold
Contradictions. I might tell you also that that show of Argument which some of
them take from the Death of the Body, is but of the same validity with the
former Presumption, and makes as much for us as against us; since whilst they
talk confidently of the state of the Dead, they know not what it is to Die-They
pretend indeed to do service to Mankind, and undertake by their Principle to
deliver us from those Fears which we are apt to apprehend in a Future state;
but do really administer no higher Consolation, then those who tell poor
Sailers when they are distressed with ill weather, that within a few hours they
shall be drowned. Which is infinitely below that encouragement which our
Principle bestows upon those who pass through this tempestuous World; for it
assures all, who do not make themselves incapable of it by a wicked Deportment
in the way, of a safe Arrival in a happy Port after a few short Storms are
past. The Panthnetists also show that they are no Friends of God, because they
take away the greatest Verification of his Providence. It is well known that
things are not always brought to rights here; and that they induce men to
think either that there is no God, or else that he is not Good and Just, by
saying that it shall not be done afterward. But the truth is, the chief use
which they make of this false Notion is the Indulgence of a Vicious Life, in
which they please themselves so much the more freely, as they are able to make
themselves believe that they shall not be called to account for it in the
Eternal World. But how unlikely they are to enjoy what they expect, I will show
you, by discovering the weak grounds upon which their Hope is built.

You are tempted to think that the Soul is not an Immaterial Substance,
because, as you said, you cannot imagine how it should be united with one that
is Material. But this Scruple need not trouble you, since it rises only from
the unknowableness of the manner of this Union. You might as well doubt whether
the parts of Matter be united; for there is as much difficulty to apprehend the
Connection which one part of Matter has with another, as in this Hypothesis.
Can you easily imagine with what Bond the parts of Iron are so fast locked
together, or what Cement makes the Particles of hard Stone cleave so close to
one another? If you say they are united by Juxta-position and Rest, we can as
well fancy the Soul to be immediately united with the Body, as the parts of
Matter to be after that fashion put close to one another; and it is as
demonstrable that the Soul may move the Body, and be in no more danger of being
divided from it, then two Bodies are of being dis-united when they are moved
together. I grant that this Union is one of the greatest Secrets in Nature, but
yet a most credible Truth; for having proved that the Soul is Incorporeal, and
perceiving by Experience that it does inform the Body by an intimate Presence,
we have no reason to doubt the possibility of the forementioned Conjunction,
though we understand not the Physical way of this Mystical Incorporation.
Neither would you have objected the Unfitness of this Marriage, if you had
considered that he who appointed it made both Parties apt to be joined
together. For if Corporeal Matter had not been united with an Intelligent
Principle, it could no other way have been exalted to that Dignity which it now
enjoys: and the Soul is requited for this Condescension, because there is no
other means, as far as we can imagine, by which we could have attained that
Knowledge which we have now of the nature of Matter, but by this intimate
Conjunction with it.

Your second Objection is very unable to do you service, for it offers only a
faint Proof of Identity of Essence from the Sympathy which is perceived to be
betwixt different things. We cannot but grant that the Union of the Soul and
Body is very strict, and that the Soul is by this close connection much
subjected to the Laws of Corporeal Nature, and forced to have a deep sense of
Bodily Infirmities; by which the All wise Creator has engaged it to take care
of the Body, and to relieve its Necessities, being partly its own. By this
Union also the Soul is made able to command the Body more easily, and at
pleasure to communicate its own virtue into the several parts thereof, by which
means this Composition is made a most rare Automatous Machina: And whilst the
Soul is made very sensible of the Perturbations which happen in the Animal
Spirits, the Corporeal Passions are made a Trial of our Wisdom (we being put to
learn carefully to distinguish betwixt those Motions which we find derived into
our Bodies from our own Wills, and those Impressions which the Soul receives
from the Bodily Temper) and also an exercise and assurance of Virtue; when the
Soul is able not to grant that which the bodily Appetite does not only crave,
but makes us also feel great pain, whilst for reasons which it does not
understand we deny it, and so prove that we have got a Dominion over the Body,
since we are not brutishly affected with every Passion which is raised in it by
the Motion of Spirituous blood, nor carried to Action according to those
Provocations which are transmitted into the Phancie from the Impulse of
External Objects. By which Experiment the Soul proves it self to be of an
Immaterial Nature; for though it has an actual Sensation of a fleshly Delight,
yet by a noble Act of the Rational Will it chooses a good which is contrary to
fleshly Pleasure, and which no Corporeal Faculty is able so much as to
apprehend. By this which I have said, it is manifest that the Soul, though it
be not one with the Body, may be capable of those Advantages and Disturbances
which you mentioned; and being distinct in Essence from the Body with which it
is closely united, may receive considerable hindrances in its Operations from
the Indisposition of the Animal Spirits in Sickness and old Age, and from the
Confusion of Phantasms when the Blood is drenched too much in Wine, or swelled
with gross Humors, and the Brain clouded with Melancholic Fumes, and the
Phancie depraved with black Vapors; the Soul remaining untouched in the vigor
of her Intellectual Faculty, only hindered by the Distemper of those
Instruments which she is forced to use in this Conjunct State. So that the
Inconveniences which you objected do no more prove that the Soul is weakened in
her own Nature, then we can conclude our Foot to be lame, because we halt when
one Shoe has an higher heel then the other. It is not to be expected that,
whilst the Soul is under such disadvantages, she should perform her usual
Actions as well as at other times, more then that an Artist should express his
best Skill with a bad Tool. But that the Essential Faculties receive no damage
in themselves, appears by those regular Operations which she does again exert
when the Body is restored to its proper Usefulness by the recovery of Health,
by returning to a sober Temper, by awakening from Sleep, and victory over
Apoplectical Distempers. Besides this, we have great reason to think our Souls
Immortal notwithstanding what happens to us in Sleep, since though they are
then secluded from Converse with External Objects, they do frequently and, for
ought we know, always Act; neither do the sufferings of Madmen weaken our
Faith, since though they have extravagant Phancies, yet they Apprehend, which
no Material thing can do.

Your Argument taken from that which Dying persons feel, would signify
something, if we should take for truth whatsoever you have a mind to say. We
know not what Sensation is in the Souls of Dying persons in that moment when
they leave the Body. We must grant that which is easy to be experimented, that
when the Vital Heat is suffocated by Putrefied blood, or exhausted by old Age,
the Members of the Body will receive no Influence from the Soul, and the
Immortal Spirit will then go away, as Birds fly voluntarily out of old Nests;
or is forced out of an unfit lodging, which afterward will decay by the absence
of the former Inhabitant: But that does no more prove that the Soul perishes,
then it is true that a Tenant dies because he is turned out of his house by his
Landlord.

You added, I remember, that the Soul is not put out, but cut in pieces
sometimes, and so must needs die. To prove this you urge the Motion which
remains in the Divided parts of a Body. But you will perceive that this is a
very weak Argument, if you consider that the Activity of the Animal Spirits can
easily move the Divided parts, till by that Motion they are dissipated; but it
does not give us any just occasion to think that the Soul is divided, since it
was proved before that it is Immaterial: and this Phenomenon is otherwise
fairly salvable, the Soul having a power to withdraw it self entirely into one
part, or to go away from the whole, as it pleases, without suffering any
prejudice by the Division of the bodily Members.

Whereas you fancy that if the Soul should subsist in the Separate state, it
would be unhappy, being deprived of all the Organs of bodily Sense, and so
rendered unable to understand or do any thing; I crave leave to tell you, that
though many of our present Faculties must needs be buried in a kind of Sleep by
Death, and though the particular description of the Future state in which our
Souls shall be after their Separation from the Body, does by many degrees
transcend the capacity of our Reason, and that God has not supplied that
Defect with the clearness of Revelation; yet being fully satisfied as to the
Existence of our Souls after Death by the forementioned Arguments, I am not
displeased that the Happiness of my Future state is so great that I cannot now
comprehend it: and as I trust the Goodness of God for my Felicity, so I leave
the Manner of making me happy to his Wisdom; not doubting but he will bestow
upon the Soul, or awake out of it, Faculties suiteable to that condition. And
since the Soul is an Intelligent Principle, and contains in it self a power of
universal Perception, by which it now understands what is represented by the
Organs of Sense; so when it is destitute of these Instruments, it may well
enough perceive after some more transcendent manner in a degree proportionable
to that which we attribute to God and Angels. He who made our Souls can easily
give them, when they are out of these Bodies, the Species of all things which
will concern us to know, if we did not understand them before, or to remember,
if we did. That because they cannot act as they do now, therefore they shall be
able to do nothing at all; is an Argument no better then this, A man cannot
sing, because his Lute is broke. A Country Clown does scarce understand any
other use of his Hands then to plow, to dig, to sow, to reap, or to thrash; but
he would be laughed at if he should affirm that there were no other besides
these: for we know to what excellent Employments they are put by Lutenists,
Painters, and other Artists. And we may rationally think that there are noble
Operations in the other State of which this Principle is capable, since it does
declare an admirable Capacity at present; and so there is no fear that we shall
be idle in the other World. That disconsolate Solitude which you talked of is
as little to bedreaded; for the Ethereal Regions must needs be so well Peopled,
that we cannot easily be alone, and the Companions to which Good Souls will
then be gathered are so desirable, that they will have no great mind to return
hither.

Whereas you said that if Souls be Immortal, it is strange that they are
unwilling to leave the Body, and that if they be destinated to a happy
condition, it is impossible but they should rejoice in the near approches of
that Felicity to which Death does transport them; I must desire you to remember
that this World is possessed by two sorts of Inhabitants, Good men and Bad. Bad
men do not desire to leave their Bodies, neither is there any reason why they
should; for though their Souls are Immortal by Nature, yet they must be unhappy
by the appointment of Justice. They deny there is any Future state, and
heartily wish that there were none, because they know that they have no share
of Felicity in it. They are afraid to die, lest they should be punished: So
Malefactors are unwilling to leave the Prison, because then they are carried to
Execution. But this is no Argument against the Immortality of the Soul, or the
Naturalness of those Desires which we have of it, since we know that men do
sometimes make the Life which they enjoy in this World undesirable, though
Naturally it is very dear unto them. Good men are not only willing to resign
this Life, but some have most passionately desired that they might. History
does supply us with various Instances of Excellent Persons, who have esteemed
the time of their Dissolution the Epoche of a better Nativity, and have
protested to their Friends an absolute unwillingness to run the course of their
Terrene Life over again: and these not Calamitous persons wearied with the
Miseries of the World, who like vexed Gamesters throw up their Cards, not
because they have no mind to play any more, but because their Game is bad: No,
Synthnescon, such as have enjoyed all the Delights of this present World, and
they have had such a clear Presage of their Future Bliss, that they complained
of Death only for those Delays by which they thought themselves kept from the
Possession of Immortal Joys.

It is true that Naturally we have an unacceptable Sense of our Dissolution,
which proceeds partly from the long and intimate Commerce which we have had
with the Body, and is one of the most considerable Imperfections which we
contract by the Incorporation of our Souls, and is highly increased in all who
have plunged themselves deep into the love of Sensual Pleasures, prevails much
in Melancholic Tempers, and shakes weak Believers who have not taken pains to
know the reason of their Faith, or to prepare themselves for the Future state
which they pretend to believe. But as it is fit that we should willingly stay
in the Body till our work be finished, so the difficulties which attend our
Departure from hence are easily conquerable by all Good men, who are usually so
far from fearing Death as a considerable Enemy, that they do many times court
it as a serviceable Friend.

That which you suggested against the Reality of a Future Life from the not
returning of the Dead to give us Information concerning it, has been often
urged, but for the most part insolently, and always falsely. Will not men
believe what is true, except they be told by such Messengers as they require?
We know not what Laws are appointed to such as are removed into the other
World; but we may reasonably think that they cannot go whither they please, or
do what they will. Must blessed Souls leave their repose to inform those
concerning Truth, who are such Infidels that they will not believe their
Savior? If the Damned Spirits be supposed to have so much Charity, which is
very unlikely, yet how is it possible that they should shake off their Chains
of Darkness, and break out of their Prisons, to come into the Regions of Light,
to preach Immortality? You ought to remember, Synthnescon, that God has
indulged our weakness, and sent many from the other World to give us notice of
the certainty of a Future state; the Savior of Men being the chief Instance of
this Favor, who appeared in Life after he was Crucified, and showed himself to
many hundred Witnesses, whose Testimony is beyond all exception.

But to make an end of this Discourse; I grant, as you said in your last words,
that notwithstanding all the Satisfaction which God has offered in this
particular by the Demonstrations of Reason and the Confirmations of his Holy
Gospel, Infidels do still pretend want of assurance as to the truth of a Future
life; and having objected the obscure notice of what they shall be hereafter,
think they have sufficiently warranted their present Sensuality against all
just Reproof, and, by a Philosophy fit for Beasts, conclude, that because they
have no Souls, they ought to indulge their Bodies in their most brutish
Appetites. But the defect of their Discourse is manifest in this, that they
judge themselves to be rare discerners of Truth, because they do not believe
it; that they have great Wits, because they are able to make Sophistical Cavils
against that which they have scarce ever took into their thoughts but with a
purpose to oppose it; and esteem themselves wise in running the greatest hazard
in the world, though they have not spent much time in weighing the flightness
of those Reasons for which they do so, nor have considered with a just
seriousness how infinitely the solid Happiness of an Immortal state does exceed
those fleshly Pleasures which they hold upon uncertain terms, the longest Date
of their Fruition which is possible being only a very short Life.

Here let me tell you, Synthnescon, one thing which has been observed by many
wise men, That seeing the Credibility of an Immortal state does exceed all the
Probability of their bold Conjectures by as many degrees as the Bliss of Heaven
transcends the vain Pleasures of a Sensual life, it must needs be some
extravagant love of such Liberties as are inconsistent with other Articles of
Faith which are joined with this of Immortality, and which are repugnant to
those Consequences that follow from this Principle, which makes them so boldly
to expose themselves to the danger of an Eternal Misery by Unbelief. It is a
known Rule, That such as live Viciously will endeavor to believe Falsely; and
therefore I would advise you, in stead of a busy pursuit of needless
Arguments, to seek a confirmed sense of the Truth of the Soul's Immortality, by
living conformably to those Innate Principles of Virtue which shine in serene
Spirits, and to await that clear Assurance which is darted into Holy Minds with
those heavenly Rays of Divine Light which do frequently appear in all purged
Souls: And when you enjoy your Faculties in a pacate temper, think with your
self whether it be probable that the most good God will ever quench or
dissatisfie those sincere Desires which his Goodness has produced in his true
Friends, and which makes them not only to know, but to love their Immortality,
not only to believe, but to delight in their Faith, hoping to enjoy God after
Death more then before. Those who find their Souls enamored with the Divine
Goodness, are not only prepared for the Celestial Joys of which that holy
temper of Soul can never be destitute, but have also an intrinsecal Assurance
from the Principle it self; being enabled by the Power of it, notwithstanding
the Violence of all Corporeal Assaults, to prefer the pure Delights of Virtue
before all muddy Contentments of Sensual Pleasure, and to esteem the generous
Satisfaction of an Honest Mind infinitely above the greatest of those base
Advantages which are Viciously obtained.

Here Aristander broke off his pleasant Discourse, and the Company began to
withdraw. Medenarete, converted by Aristander, or rather conquered by Truth,
took her leave with this Complement; I humbly thank you, most noble Aristander,
for all the Courtesies which I have received from you; and I protest to you,
that I think it a Favor infinitely greatter to be at this time redeemed from
the Errors of my Mind by your charitable Converse, then to receive my Brother
safe from that Danger in which yesterday he must have lost his Life, if it had
not been for your benign Assistance. Synthnescon being obliged to wait upon
his Sister to her Lodging, went away with her; but he made first a Declaration
of his Thankfulness and Love to Aristander with such an affectionate Air, that
those who looked upon him could not but think that he would much rather have
stayed and died with him, then have felt the most unpleasing resentment of his
Departure. Bentivolio, Panaretus and Athanasius would have taken their leaves
too, but Aristander would not permit them. His Surgeons telling him that it
would be convenient for him to retire from Company because he had not many
Minutes to live; Nay then, said he, I will improve them as well as I can: and
having spent some time in Discoursing with his Friends, he called for his two
Sons, Callistus and Hilarion, and gave them his Paternal Blessing; but before
he suffered them to take their last leave, he entertained them with this short
Speech.

Since God does allow you my Presence but for a few Minutes, I would give you
some Directions for the better guidance of your Future Life, which I hope you
will observe with no less care then if I were present with you in those moments
wherein you shall have occasion to use them. You are now arrived at that Age
which makes you capable of governing your selves according to Reason, and
therefore it is requisite that you should now design to your selves as the End
of your Life that Felicity of which your Nature is capable. It consists in a
serene Tranquillity of Mind during the time of this short Life, and in a just
Preparation for those higher Joys which await all Good men in the Eternal
World when they leave these Bodies. Those who propound no set End of Life unto
themselves seem to be born to no purpose, and live by chance; and such as
design a lower matter then that which I have named must needs live vainly.

Having seriously considered this Direction, and fixed your Resolutions
concerning those things which you are to do according to it, make all your
Actions one continued Operation, that is, one Chain of Means fast linked
together, which you must always use, to make your selves Masters of your End.
The Design is so considerable, that it is fit you should refer the Endeavors
of your whole Life toward the Accomplishment of it.

For the good Government of your Life, you must remember that it is principally
necessary that you learn to know your selves: For the true understanding of
your own Nature is the first Foundation of all wise Thoughts and prudent
Actions. When you enquire concerning your selves, you will find that you are
Created Beings consisting of a Reasonable Soul joined with a Fleshly Body,
appointed by your Maker to live in the Society of Neighbors like your selves.

Whilst you perceive you were Created, you cannot but think it is the most
worthy Action of your Life to endeavor to know your Creator, and when you know
him, to honor him; which you shall then do when you make your selves like
unto him in all his imitable Perfections; if you love him above your selves and
all other things, if you obey his Commands with humble Sincerity, submit to his
Providence with a cheerful Patience, and labor as much as you can to make him
known and loved by others. You are obliged to this, because you have not only
received your Being from God, but do depend entirely upon his Good will for all
those Blessings which make you Happy in this and the Future state. It is
necessary also to your Tranquillity; for if you neglect this Direction, the
Peace of your Mind will be disturbed with the sense of your Ingratitude, and
you will always fear the just wrath of that potent God whom you have
disingenuously slighted.

Whilst you consider the Parts of which you consist, you will find that they
are not equal in Dignity, but that the Soul does far transcend the Body, and
which will therefore require your more careful Observance of it. The Soul is of
an Immaterial Nature, and Immortal in its Duration, and therefore you must
value its Concerns as things of greater Worth then those which relate to the
Body. It is principled with an essential Love of Virtue, which you must never
oppose; for if you do, it will always condemn you. You will discover also that
it is accomplished with different Faculties, which you must learn to order
prudently, or else the state of your Thoughts and Actions will be confounded.

Your chief Faculty is Understanding, which is a Principle capable of all
Knowledge; and you must make it your care to perfect it with that Wisdom which
consists in the Knowledge of God and his Works. But of all Pieces of Learning
be sure you be not Ignorant in Moral Philosophy, for that will direct you in
the Practice of your Duties, and so conduct you in the true way to your
Happiness.

To this Power God has added Sensitive Appetite; which is prudently put into
our Nature as a necessary Preservative of our Subsistence. For since there are
many things which we continually need to support our Being, by our
Concupiscible Faculty we are prone to desire that sort of Objects; and some
things being hurtful to our Nature, we have an Irascible Power, which upon the
Perception of any Adverse Object is ready to make Resistance.

But because the Sensitive Appetites are in themselves blind Powers, and may
do us much mischief if they be irregularly applied, you must always make
these lower Faculties yield Obedience to Reason. For you must know that besides
the two forementioned Principles there is also bestowed upon us a Power of
Deliberation and Choice, by which we are made as it were Tutors to our selves:
and therefore we ought frequently to consider whether that which we desire or
refuse does promote our Happiness; and whether that which seems to please us be
not a real Evil, though it appear in the form of Goodness; and by a wise
Authority which is put into our hands, so to regulate our Appetites, that they
oppress us not with the Excesses of Vain Desires, or torment us with the
Madness of wrathful Passions. By the good use of this Choice you may obtain
that Excellency which is called Virtue: And this you ought to seek above all
the Pleasures in the World, because it is the highest Perfection of which we
are capable, and is absolutely necessary to our Tranquillity, the state of Vice
being always a Discomposure.

Since you are made to live in the Company of others like your selves in
Nature, the pleasure of your Life depends very much upon friendly Society, and
therefore you must endeavor to preserve an entire Charity with all your
Neighbors; and as you hope to be loved by others, you must love them so truly,
as never to do that to them which you would not have them do to you.

The Rules which concern the ordering of your Actions in all Cases are very
many, because the Circumstances which make various Cases are infinite; and
therefore I cannot give you a perfect Catalogue of them all; but you are
sufficiently supplied with the Holy Gospel of our Savior, which I commend to
your frequent perusal, and charge you to read the Commands which you find
there as Indispensable Laws, not to be talked of, but obeyed. You will hear
also soft Whispers from your own Souls, telling you truly what you ought to do
in most Cases. I have left you some particular Assistances in writing, which
will direct you amongst other things what Books to read. The Rules which you
will be able to frame to your selves by so many Helps, you must learn by
Experience to apply prudently to all Emergencies of your Life. At present I
shall only acquaint you with a few Directions which come into my Mind.

Perform all loving Obedience to your Mother, whom I have made your Guardian,
knowing that now you must look upon her as your Father too. Begin as soon as
you can to accomplish your selves with those Perfections of which you are
capable, remembering that Youth is a very Imperfect thing, and that the future
Hopes of young men do so much depend upon an early Care, that the neglect of it
does always make the Happiness of their after-life difficult, and in some
cases unattainable. Whilst you are young, you must be afraid of your selves;
for that Age is so inconsiderate, that though it most needs Advice, yet it
least regards it. You know not by how many Years your Life is measured, and
therefore make such use of your present Time, that you may not be prevented by
Death or hindered by Diseases from doing that which is proper to your
respective Ages. Take pains to adorn your selves with all the decent Qualities
which may make you acceptable to Wise and Good men. Be not discouraged with any
Difficulties which you meet in the beginning of your Endeavors, neither
despond upon the perception of your Imbecility; remembering that there was a
time when the most famous Philosophers could not read the Alphabet. Let
nothing rifle the Modesty of your Souls, which is a connate Preservative by
which God has fortified you against many Enormities. Keep the Virgin-purity of
your Souls unspotted. If you consent to sin, you will run into those Errors
which you will never be able to forgive your selves whilst you live. Bestow so
much care upon your Body as will make it a fit Instrument for a thoughtful
Soul. Know the Proportions of your Meat, Drink, Sleep and Recreations, and do
not exceed them. Abhor Idleness as the Mother of innumerable Sins; but in
toilsome Labors remember that the frail Body is not able to hold an equal pace
with an immortal Spirit. Neglect not Decency in your Apparel, Gracefulness in
your Gestures, or Handsomeness of Speech; only be sure to avoid Vanity in them
all: I would not have you sordid, or affectate. Take heed of contracting any
foolish Habit, because it is not only a Deformity, but hard to be put off. You
must always take an especial care with whom you associate your selves; for you
can no more promise your selves to come away unhurt by Evil Company, then you
can assure your Health in a Pesthouse. When you think of disposing your selves
in a particular way of Life, take that course to which you are most naturally
inclined; a particular Disposition is an Indication of Fitness: and when you
have engaged your Thoughts, endeavor at a moderate Perfection of Ability to
discharge your Undertaking. You must not think that you are come into a World
where nothing is to be suffered, and therefore inure your selves betimes to
bear little Hardships: and since you will be tempted with Flatteries from the
way to true Felicity, be sure you have a watchful Eye against the Delusions of
Sensuality. Take heed of being enslaved with a fond Self-love, and of being
abused by the troublesome effect of it, Self-pity, or depressed with too
affectionate a sympathy with the mortal Body. Endeavor to get Knowledge,
considering that an Ignorant person is but a blind Beast; yet esteem humble
Obedience infinitely above the greatest Knowledge, and be sure to affect
Goodness more then Honor or Riches. When you are tempted to be proud, remember
the fallen Angels; and when you perceive Humility disparaged, think of your
Savior. Check the first Relishes of Self-excellency which you find in your
Souls; if they grow Vigorous, they will ripen into Arrogant Thoughts and
Deportment. When men speak of Honor, know that they usually mistake it; for
they make many vain things the Foundations of that which proceeds only from
Virtue. In your Actions propound to your constant Imitation one or two noble
Examples, and think often whether that which you do would please Brave men;
and judge it a great matter to deserve the Estimation of those who are Good,
and account it a pitiful Weakness of Mind to fall out of your own favor by the
Disapprobation of those whom you cannot but despise. Look upon Contentment with
your Portion as the greatest Inheritance which was ever enjoyed in this poor
World; and having a moderate Estate be thankful, and know that there only the
purest Tranquillity is to be found. Be obliging in your Deportment; and
according to that Revenue which God shall bestow upon you be Charitable to the
Poor; and let the Measure of your Alms be above the twentieth part of that
which you yearly receive. Avoid Envy in your way of Life as far as prudently
you may; if you have any thing that is Excellent, you shall be sure to meet it,
and it is a very troublesome Devil. Be strict in the Observation of Temperate
Rules; for Sobriety is the best sort of Physic, and Health obtained by it one
of the greatest Pleasures in the World. Reproach none for their natural
Imperfections, and let the Deformity which appears in the Evil Manners of
others always endear your own Virtue to you; and when you see the Unfortunate
Examples of dreadful Falls in many whom you thought safe, learn to secure your
own Station. Remember that by reason of Ignorance, Incogitancy and Vicious
(...) men do themselves more hurt then they suffer from others; and therefore
learn to watch your selves more then others, and to be less angry (...) others
then your selves. Understand your Concerns your selves; and when you are forced
to ask Advice, take heed that the Person whom you consult have no Interest in
your Affair; for that will warp his Counsel to your prejudice. Overcome all
those Apprehensions which you are ready to entertain from the doubtfulness of
Public Accidents by Faith in God's Providence; and secure your selves against
the Disturbance which may arise from any thing which happens in your private
Affairs, by remembering that you shall have need of Patience as long as you stay
in the World. Be always true to your Conscience, and the good Testimony of
that will secure your Peace against the most malicious Calumny. Be constant in
the Observance of all Virtuous Rules; and when your Goodness is become
Habitual, it will be a Torment for you to Sin. Contradict not your Principles
at any time, in hope to make an Excuse: Company was never appointed as a
Toleration for Vice; and in Solitude it is a Baseness not to reverence your
self so far as to make you ashamed to do that which is evil in your own
Presence. What you understand to be your Duty, do; remembering that Knowledge
without Practice does us no more good then Indigested Meat, and that the vain
Renewall of ineffectual Purposes is the sign of a Contemptible Spirit. When you
find a convenient Opportunity to promote your Happiness in any Instance, make
use of it; and do not believe that being slighted it will always come when you
are pleased to call for it. When you begin to be weary of any laborious
Attendance to which you are engaged by Virtue, quicken your Industry with the
Hopes of that vast Reward which is promised to the Diligence of Good men in the
Presence of their Savior: and when you find your work hard, pray to that good
Spirit which is always ready to assist all sincere Endeavors. Think often
that when the Judge of the World shall appear, many will be condemned; and take
heed lest you be of that Number.

And now, because my Death approches, I will make an End of my Discourse. I
know, Dear Children, that you have a great Love for me, and that you think your
selves not a little obliged to me for the Care which I have taken of you since
you were born; and therefore let me tell you that you shall express your
affectionate Gratitude in a way most acceptable to me, if you conform your
Lives both to those Principles and those other Counsels which upon various
occasions you have received from me. Those Children which imitate the Virtuous
Examples which have been given them by their Parents, and yield obedience to
those Excellent Rules which their Love endeavoring to secure their Happiness
prescribed to them, do more honor their Ancestors, then if they celebrated
their Funerals with the most pompous Obsequies, and endeavored to keep their
Memories fresh with Anniversary Feasts. Honor me thus, my Sons, and then after
my Death I shall live in you. I do the more earnestly require this sort of
Thankfulness from you, because I can assure you that I never took any great
content in looking upon my self as a Father, but that I hoped to leave Children
in the World which would become Examples of pious Virtue when I am gone.

Thus did the good Aristander discipline Callistus and Hilarion with the same
Temper which was in old Cato when he read Lectures to his Son, and with the
Affection which great Tully expressed when he wrote his noble Epistles to young
Cicero. And now Death, which had hovered about him a good while, made his
nearest approach, and allowed him only time to resign his Soul to his Maker
with a pious Prayer; after which Aristander took a cheerful leave of the World.

Within a few days the Gentleman who was sent into Theoprepia returned, and
brought word that the Queen, the Princess and their Companions had arrived safe
at Hipponyx, but being unwilling to make any long stay there, were now come
within a day's Journey of Polistherium. The next Morning Alethion, Theosebes
and their Attendants went out of the City to give them that Honorable
Reception which was due to the Quality of their Friends, and which their own
high Affections commanded them to perform. Having met them at Callicarpus, a
place where Alethion had appointed to dine, it is not to be imagined what
excessive Joy possessed their Souls; but the Testimonies which they gave of
their mutual Sentiments were so expressive, that they signified it to be as
great as it is possible for Humane Nature to experiment. It is not easy to
repeat the Discourses which passed amongst those Noble Friends at this happy
Encounter, but they were all correspondent to the greatness of their Affections
and the Extraordinary Occasion of their Meeting. The Queen Mother of Theoprepia
took both the Princes into her Arms at once, being transported with a Rapture
of Joy to see Theosebes in safety, and Alethion in his Kingdom; and having
given breath to her Passion, with a thankful Apostrophe which she made to God
she dismissed them from her affectionate Embraces. Alethion went to-wards
Agape; and she seeing the Prince whom she tenderly loved, and for whose
Happiness she had made a thousand Prayers, threw her self into his Arms, and
expressed her Endearments in Tears. Theosebes and Alethion seeing Urania, the
Excellent Sister of those two Incomparable Brothers to whose Friendship and
Valor they were both much engaged, paid her that Respect which was due to her
own Virtue, and the Obligations which were laid upon them by two whom she loved
as much as her self. Bentivolio and Panaretus performed their humble Salutes to
the Queen and Princess, and were received by them with Acknowledgments suitable
to their Merit. Urania embraced her Brothers, and they her, with such a
passionate Tenderness, that it suspended their power of Discourse, and their
Silence did plainly signify that the Satisfaction of their Minds was too big
for words. The rest of the Company entertained one another with all the
affectionate Expressions that Love and Civility was able to make. The two Kings
conducted the Queen, the Princess and the other Ladies to the House which was
made ready for their Entertainment, and after Dinner accompanied them to
Polistherium: and being willing to gratify the Love of the People, who did
earnestly desire to see these Illustrious Strangers, they rode through the
Streets of the City on Horseback: which bestowed an extraordinary Contentment
upon all Beholders, there being none who saw King Alethion, who did not find
themselves sensibly concerned in the Alteration of his Fortune, and who did not
pay a great Reverence to the Presence of the King, and those Princesses who had
received him with so much Friendship in the time of his Banishment.

Here the Reader may possibly expect that I should proceed to relate that which
happened in Theriagene after this peaceful Victory: but I can only acquaint him
that I have been told, that within a few days the Princess Agape was married
to Alethion; that Theosebes prevailed with Urania to become his Queen; that
Bentivolio and Theonoe, Panaretus and Irene were married also the same day; and
that the magnificent Pomp of these Weddings was so Illustrious, that Truth and
Love, Wisdom and Goodness, Righteousness and Peace seemed to have taken Bodies,
and to have descended from their Celestial Mansions to celebrate their Nuptials
upon Earth. It was reported also that Bentivolio and Panaretus, after some
days spent with great delight in Alethion's Court, retired with Theosebes and
Urania into the lower Theoprepia; and that after Alethion had settled his
Kingdom, he and Agape made a Journey to Phronesium to visit their Brother and
all his (...) Company, and after some time spent there in the Praises of that
God who had confirmed them in so much Happiness, and in the rare Contentments
of a most delightful Conversation, they went away all together to the Royal
Court of the great King Abinoam, which is in the Higher Theoprepia.

But because I am not yet perfectly informed concerning the Ceremonies which
were used at those Glorious Marriages, the manner of their Reception by
Abinoam, and the way of their Life in his Court; I must entreat my Reader to
have the Goodness to pardon me though I break off my History and sit down here,
for at present I am able to follow my Hero's no further.

The End of the Sixth Book.
AN ALPHABETICAL INDEX,
In which the obscure Words of this Book are explained, and Directions given by
the Letters in order concerning the principal Subjects which are particularly
discoursed of, that so any may read what they please. For though I do not
think the Meaning of this Treatise any Abstruse business; yet because the sense
of some Words may peradventure be locked up from some Readers, who understand
Things better then Names, I have put this Key with the Book. Since the Treasure
is but small which is hid here, I am unwilling that any should be put to much
trouble in seeking after it. This also I thought fit to add, That those things
which are more largely discoursed of are marked in the Index with an Asterisk
prefixed; and that where the Letter (b) is put to the Figures, it signifies
the Second Part of this History.

A
ABaddon, (...), Destruction; but Apoc. 9.11. it is rendered (...), Destroyer,
(...) murtherous Spirit, who was (as our Savior says, John 8. 44.) (...), for
he murhered Mankind with a Lie. A Name properly expressing the Nature of the
Devil, who is a malicious Enemy to Humanity. See Asmodaeus. page 251 b Abinoam,
(...), the Father of Pleasures, God, the spring of Delight. page ult. b Abulus,
(...), an Inconsiderate rash man, one that acts without due deliberation. 59
Achamoth, from (...) Wisdom: A name of which the old (...) made an arrogant
use, for they boasted themselves to be Children of Election, (...), and born of
Achamoth; Epiphan. Lib. 1. Tom. 2. and therefore thought themselves so much
better then others, that the worst of them was worthy to be a (...), a Teacher
of Wisdom to all the World. 301 b Acephalus, (...), one whose Discourses have
neither Head, as we say, nor Feet. There are many such talkers in Agazelus. 174
Achrestus, (...), an unmerciful cruel man, Bentivolio's Jailour. Good will is
imprisoned in hard Hearts. 117 Achthedon, (...), Grief. 23 b Acolastus, (...),
an Intemperate person, undisciplined and of unsubdued Passions. 80 Acrasia,
(...), Intemperance, Incontinence, Impotence of Soul. 83 Adicus, (...), an
Unjust man. 333 b Adynaton, (...), Impossibility; one of the Hypocrites false
Pleas, who, when he sins, thinks to excuse the matter, by saying that it is not
possible to obey God's Commands, and that Christ's yoke is heavy and pincheth
his neck. 153 Affliction no just cause to doubt of God's Providence. To Good
men they are always (...). 82 b Public Afflictions disburthen the World of
the heavy load of Incorrigible sinners; so Eurip. in Hell. (...)
(...).
So God makes his Judgments (...), common Antidotes against the Poison of
Wickedness, which is increased by Impunity. 96 b Aganacton, (...), one that is
angry. 167 Agape, (...), Love, the Daughter of Phronesia, Wisdom. True Prudence
is never destiture of Divine Charity. 201 Agatha, a Good Woman. Agathorryton,
(...), flowing with Goodness; a proper Epithet for God, who is an inexhaustible
Fountain continually sending forth waters of Life. (...)
(...).
Synes. Plotin calls him (...), the Spring of Life, the Beginning of Being, the
Cause of Goodness, the Root of the Soul; as Pythagoras before, (...),
The Fountain of everlasting Nature.
200 Agazelus, (...), full of Emulation. In the III. Book it is put to express
those Intemperate Heats which do often scorch men's Spirits when they are set on
fire with uncharitable Contentions about Matters which are of less moment in
Religion. 115 Agerochus, (...), a proud and Insolent Person. 167 Agnoea, (...),
Ignorance. 122 Agon, (...), Strife. The Valley of Tentation is so called in the
beginning of the IV. Book, in which there is a large Description of the Contest
and Victory of a Good man over bodily and spiritual Tentations. 178 Akeraea,
(...), Unmixed, pure. Here it is put for Simplicity, the Inseparable Companion
of true Godliness. 137 Alazon, (...), a Vainglorious Boaster. 167 Alborach,
Mahomet's Ass upon which he pretended that he rode into Heaven. 131 b
Alcinous, from (...) and (...), one who has Strength of Mind, Greatness of
Understanding. 182 b Alethea, (...), Truth, the Sister of Charinda, Charity.
158 Alethion, from the forementioned word. In his Person you have an Excellent
Prince described, a Defender of Truth and Lover of Virtue represented. 47 b
Alethologus, (...), True Reason, the loving Brother of Pistalethes, i. e. True
Faith. Their good agreement is declared. 203 Alexander, that subtle Cheat who
abused the Paphlagonians. He is painted to the Life by Lucian in his
Psoudomantis. 310 b Allusions by which Familistical Enthusiasts endeavor to
corrupt the Gospel of our Savior (...), as Epiphanius complained of the old
Gnostics, and which made the good Polycarp say ( in Epist. ad Phil.) (...), He
that frames the words of the Lord to his own private fancies, is the firstborn
of Satan. 312 b Alopex, (...), a Fox. 12 b Alypia, (...), Indolentia, Free dom
from Grief and Care. The Goddess of Piacenza. 78 Amaranth, (...), never
withering. An Herb so called from the lasting Vigor of its Flowers. Pliny
says that it bears purple Ears or Flowers, of which, because they will keep
fresh a good while, they used anciently to make Garlands. Lib. 21. cap. 11. It
is used here to signify the ever-flourishing glory of Perseverance in Virtue.
280 Amasia, a Lover. 80 Amerimnus, (...), one free from troublesome cares, the
chief Bishop of Eusebia, serving God (...), without distraction. An undivided
Soul, wholly devoted to Heavenly Studies and Divine Employments, which are
broken by worldly sollicitudes. 237 Ametameletus, (...). I have given that Name
to a true Convert, because his true Repentance will never be repented of;
(...), as St. Paul calls it, which is when a man forsakes sin with shame and
sorrow. 200 Amiantus, (...), Immaculate, free from spots. 246 Amphibius, (...).
I have called Pirates Amphibians, because they live, as indeed all Mariners do,
like the (...), sometime upon the Land, sometime in the Water. 13 b Amphilogia,
(...), Ambiguity of Speech, Controversy. 158 Amphisbeton, (...), one given to
Controversy and Debate. 157 Amyntor, (...), A Helper. 46 b Anaedea, (...),
Impudence. 303 b Anaedes, (...), Impudent. 333 b Anaeschyntus. (...), Impudent.
80 Ananephon, (...), one that returns to Sobriety and Soundness of Mind from
the deep sleep of sin. 173 Ananke, (...), Necessity. It is such another Excuse
as Adynaton. He which pleads that the Divine Commands cannot be observed,
induces a Necessity of sin. 153 Anaxagathus, (...), a good King, whose
Description is endeavored 47 b Anaxanacton, (...), King of Kings. A name
proper to our Savior, who in holy (...) has diverse Titles of the same Import;
for he is called (...), (...) (...), 1 Timothy 6. Apoc. 17. 161 I have also
inserted the History of his Life, a Summary of his Gospel, and a defense of his
Doctrine, beginning 235 b Anchinous, (...), one of a ready wit, the Servant of
Prudence. 136 (...), (...), a (...). 333 b (...), (...), one sick of Incurable
Diseases, an (...) person. ibid. (...), (...), one without Mercy and pity.
ibid. Anelpistus, (...), a desperate person. 23 b Angerona, from (...) to Choke
or Strangle. 16b Anonomasta, (...), which have no Name. The Gnostics (...)
that they could see such things. 302 b Anopheles, (...), Unprofitable. I have
called the Maker of (...) by that name, because of his vain employment. 152 b
(...), (...), a Wicked Person. 333 b (...), the Rival of Eros, from (...),
which signifies Rivalry in Love. 80 (...), from (...), a kind of Ismael in
Philosophy, who opposes all men (...). 152 b Aathropia, from (...), the State
of Humanity. 2 Aatigraphus, from (...), one that is an opposer of the Holy
Scriptures. 152 b (...), (...), one that contradicts others. 156 (...), a
(...). 63 Antinomus, (...), one that is against the Law, an Irregular Person.
167 (...), from (...) and (...), one that opposes strength to strength. See
Isosthenes. 163 b * Antitheus, (...), an Anti-God; (...) being taken in the
same sense as in Antichristus. His Envy and Pride the Roots of his Treason. 56
b His correspondence with Dogmapornes. 61 b His high conceit of his Knowledge,
129 b His wild Reflections upon his Disappointment. 128 b His Principles in
Religion. 132 b His Natural Philosophy. 140 b His Ethics. 143 b His Politics.
144 b The Names of his Courtiers. 152 b
Apateon, (...), a Deceiver, 16 b Apateonia, from the fore going word, the
Country where Deceit is practiced and prevails. 296 b Apeirus, (...),
Inexperienc'd, (...), as many are who undertake to teach others. (...), (...),
the frothy Goddess Venus, if she take her Name from (...), because, as the
Poets say, she was born of the Foam of the Sea: but the Derivation is better
taken from (...), a Fool, as Eurip. in Helen. (...),
(...).
i.e. The Goddess does well begin her Name with Folly, for men call brutish
Appetites Venus. 78 Aphrod^sius, a Venereous Person. 152 b Aphron, (...), a
Fool. 80 Apiston, (...), one that does not rashly assent, but doubts till he
see Reason for his belief: not imprudently, -- (...). There is nothing more
profitable to men then a wise (...). 102 Apollyon, (...), a Destroyer. See
Asmodeus. Apoc. 9. 11. 134 b Apronoeus, from (...) and (...), one that denies
the Providence of God in the Government of the World. 68 b Aquedon, Eaton,
which Henry the sixth B. M. honored with the Foundation of a Royal College. In
Epistola dedicat. b Archibius, (...), the Author of Life. Which Name I have
bestowed upon those Physicians who by reason of their Knowledge and Virtue are
worthy of it; for they are Preservers of Life by a wise application of those
Remedies which God has allowed against Diseases, which are the beginnings of
Death. 19 b Archicacus, (...), the Beginner of Mischief. 333 b Arete, (...),
Virtue, deservedly beloved of Nicomachus, and all worthy spirits. 178
Argentora, from Argento and Oro, Silver and Gold. The Title of the First Book,
which contains a Description of Covetousness and Ambition, where Force and
Fraud bear sway. 1 Argus, (...), a careless person and sluggish. 47 *
Arimanius. The Eastern World did (...) that Good and Evil proceeds from two
(...) Principles: the Author of Good they called Oromasdes; of Evil, Arimanius.
They estem'd these (...), Gods acting contrary to each other, and offered
Sacrifices to both with a distinct Respect: to one (...), that he might bestow
Blessings upon them; to the other (...), that he might do them no (...). See
Plutarch in Isid. and Osir. and Diog. Laert. in (...). 97 b Aristaeus, a
Philosopher who endeavored to be Illustrious by (...). See Max. Tyrius,
Dissert. 22. 306 b Aristander, (...), a very Good man. 317 b Arpinum, the place
of Tullie's Nativity. 6 b Asemnus, (...), unhandsome, not agreeing with
Gravity. 333 b (...), (...) from (...), a Destroyer, Tobit 3. 8, 17. one of
those Name; which do fitly represent the Devil's malicious temper, of the same
signification with Abaddon and Apollyon. The Septuagint translate it (...), a
wicked Spirit; the Talmudists call him (...), the Prince of Destroyers. 134 b
Asotus, (...), a Prodigal, a waster. 80 Aspasia, from (...), to salute. ibid.
Asphaltites, from (...), a pitchy sulphurous Clay. The lake called the Dead
Sea, supposed to be the place where Sodom and (...) stood. 149 Aspremont, a
rough Hill full of Bushes and uneven way, yet very passable to good men; and
which leads to Happiness, and therefore they call it Roccabella. 86 Astorgus,
(...), destitute of Natural Affection. 92 Astriatrus, from (...) and (...), a
pretender to the skill of Curing Diseases by Astrology; one of the vain
Companions of (...). 298 b Astromantis, from (...) and (...), one that would
make the World believe he can prophesy by the Stars. You may find something
said against the Folly of Judicial Astrology, page 105 b. But those who desire
to see the Vanity of that pretended Art fully discovered, may read Dr. More
his Mystery of Godliness, Book 7. Chap. 15, 16, 17. 151 b Asynetus, (...),
Insipiens, one that is not prudent; one of Antitheus his pitiful Judges, but
good enough for his Designs. 152 b Ate, (...), Harm, Mischief. It denotes a
state of prevailing Violence in the first Book. 3 Athanasius, (...), Immortal.
341 b Atheism. See it disparaged in the Preface, as also in Bentivolio's
Discourses with Pasenantius in 6. Book beginning page 187. and in other places.
I thought it was not fit to let such a pestilent Principle pass without a just
Disgrace; it being, as Pindar calls it, (...), a wicked craft, and seems to
make Atheists Wits, when indeed it is (...), as Clemens Alexandr. says, the
Height of Folly. Atheophilus, (...), a lover of Atheists. 317 b Atimia, (...),
Disgrace, which with Sorrow does usually follow a Voluptuous Life. 80 Autautus,
from (...), one that acknowledges none but himself, that would owe nothing to
God himself. 152 b Authades, (...), one that pleases and admires himself, as
all proud persons do, who are also offended if others do not greatly observe
them. 196 Autocatacritus, (...), Self-condemned. 131 (...), (...), Men of
themselves springing form the Earth, as the Arcadians described their own
Original. See (...). 145 b Axiarchus, from (...) and (...), one worthy to
Command. 335 b
B
BAthypogon, (...), one that has a great Beard. 18 b Bellezza (Ital.) Beauty.
80 Bentivolio here denotes Good will, from the Italian (...). It is used by
them for a proper Name; and so it is here for the Brother of Urania, i. e.
Heavenly Light, from (...) (...), or (...) Light. By Celestial Wisdom and
Divine Love the Soul passes happily through all States in this World to
Immortal Perfections and Glories. 1 Bevanda, from Bevere, to drink. 83 (...),
from (...), a good Life, which is the only way to Heaven, and is therefore
called the great Rode extended according to the whole length of Theoprepia. 202
Borborites, from (...), Mud. A Name by which the filthy Gnostics were of old
disgraced, a Sect that wallowed in fleshly Lusts; Ranters. 197
C
(...), (...), an Evil Spirit. 139 Cacodulus, (...), an Evil Servant. 151 b
(...), (...), an Evil Example, one of the chief means by which Wickedness is
propagated in the World. 29 b Callicarpus, (...), a place adorned with
beautiful Fruits. 384 b Calliphon, (...), one that has an elegaut voice; one
of the two things which are principally requisite in a good Orator, (...) and
(...). 289 b Calliroe, (...), a River flowing with pleasant streams. Callistus,
(...), an Excellent Son of a good Father. 341 b Cantharus, (...), a Tankard, a
Drunken Fellow, a Boraccio, one good for nothing but to hold Drink. 152 b
Carezza, Caresses. 80 Catasarkus, (...), Fleshly, Corpulent. It signifies the
Jew in the Third Book, because his Religion does much consist in bodily
Observances. 131 Caulomucetes, (...), some of those Warriors whom Lucian saw
in the Country of the Moon, whom he called by that Name because, as he says,
(...), i. e. their Shields were (...) and their Spears Blades of Asparagus. 230
b Centaurus, (...), a Horseman driving away Cattle, from (...), pungo, and
(...), taurus. 170 Charinda, from (...), Charity. 158 Charistion, from the same
Root, a charitable person. 318 b Charity described and praised in Euergesia's
Speech. 260 Chelidones, (...), Swallows, a name properly applied where it is
used, because of their troublesome Noise. 25 b Chrematophilus, from (...) and
(...), a Lover of Riches. 16 b Chronus, (...), Time. 32 b Chrysalides, from
(...), Gold. I have given this name to a famous Aurelian in Plutocopia. 22 b
Chrysus, (...), Gold. 9 b Colax, (...), a Flatterer, the great Friend of
Tuphlecon. 153 * Colpia, the pretended Mother of one of (...) his
She-Enthusiasts. They boast that they receive all their Conceptions from (...),
i. e. the word of the mouth of God. Such was the Foolery of him in Eusebius,
who desiring to speak of new things told a story of Colpia and Bau, that is,
Bohu corrupted. Pannychis might have done well to have told us of AEon and
Protogonus her Brethren, to have made her Genealogy more splendid. But
notwithstanding their vain Boasts, they are but (...), such as speak out of
their own Bellies, and seek their Living by (...). See Engastrimuthus. 299 b
Ill Company, see the mischiefs of it. 88.92 b * Conscience, a natural Principle
not to be eradicated by any Art of man; a severe Reprover and sharp Corrector
of those bold Sinners who offer violence to it. It has been called by great
Philosophers by the most Venerable names; as (...), ( Hier.) (...) and (...), (
Soph.) (...), ( Just. Martyr) i. e. A domestic God, a Divine Overseer, a
sacred Goad, a God who has framed to himself a natural Temple in the
Conscience. Though Atheists pretend to slight it, yet Cotta, who disputed
zelously against it, confessed that as to matters of Virtue and Vice, Sine ulla
divina ratione grave ipsius Conscientiae pondus est. Tully de Not. Deor. Lib.
3. This Testimony is true, for let Atheists do what they can, yet they find
(...),
(...).
Soph. in Philoct. 94, 95 b * Contrapart is taken in a Musical Sense. As in the
Composition of a Song of several Parts, the Harmony is perfected by the
supplies of different Notes which each part administers, both when they sound
together, and one after another, by the Interposition of fit Rests: So it has
pleased the Divine Wisdom to checker the Creation with Blacks and Whites, to
set off Day with Night, to relieve Winter by Summer; and having made his work
double, and set one thing over against another, he has made Charity the
Antistoichon to Want. The Septuagint considering the Congruity that in this and
other Respects is between Prosperity and Adversitv, have used the
forementioned Notion, and translate (...), Eccles. 7. 15. (...), God has
tuned one thing to another. 262 Covetousness the cause of Poverty and
Complaints, not any Defect in God's Provisions. 11, 15, 20 b The hinderer of
all noble actions. 9,15 b Cranion, (...), a Skull. 17 b Creation, a strong
proof of a Deity. 203 b
D
DAvigeor, David George, an Arch-Enthusiast in Germany. His Opinions and
Practice are related by the Rector and University of Basil in a Pamphlet
printed 1559. 298 b Degrues. This name the Atheists in France gave to
themselves, thereby intimating that they are not such Fools as can be easily
deceived. They made it a (...) amongist themselves, (...) print grue. 161 b De
sidaemon, (...), a (...) Person; or one that is apt to (...) dreadful
Apprehensions of God, and yet thinks he may be appeased with a (...) matter.
167 (...), (...), Men born of Trees, which (...) fabulously relates thus,
(...). Lib. 1. Verar. (...). (...), (...), one that doubts concerning
Providence, Book 5. His seruples are removed by Alethion. 78 b (...), (...), a
(...); an Instrument of great use in (...). 138 Dogmapornes, (...), the Opinion
of a (...). Taurus the Platonist when he made mention of Epicurus his
Principles used these words, (...). Agellius lib. 9. cap. 5. He rejected to the
Brothel-house two of (...) his infamous Opinions; one, that our chief Good is
in sensual Pleasure; the other, that the Providence by which men think the
World to be governed is nothing. 60 b Doulogynes, (...), A Woman's Slave,
Antimater's Servant. Such Step-mothers as Antimater was must use such
Assistants. 58 Dysareflus, (...), one hard to be pleased. 167 (...) (...),
properly one of a weak stomach; here one that is of a (...) Temper and (...) to
take offense. 117 Dyselpis, (...), one that is ready to (...). 92 Dysemeria,
(...), Affliction, Adverse (...). 27 Dyspithea, (...), Obstinacy, Difficulty of
being persuaded. A Disease incident to most Ignorant and all conceited people.
122
E.
ECho. That which I have related concerning one made use of by Misoplanus, is
but little in compatison of what is said truly of many others. That at
Charenton in France described by the Lord Bacon will repeat Sounds very often;
but that at Kingsham upon the River of Stockholm is much more admirable: It
will distinctly repeat an Air of ten Semi-Briefs, and reverberate the whole
Lesson from one Rock to another at great distances six or seven times, one
beginning after another has done, taking it from a Trumpet. 315 b (...).
Though I give no great credit to that story of Abgarus his Painter, yet it
serves the use to which I have put it. It is related as a Truth by Nicephorus,
Lib 2. cap. 7. 235 b Education. The want of it is a great cause of the
continuance of Ignorance and Vice in the World. See Morophilia. 92. also 29, 30
b Ekaephon, (...), one that awakes from the sleep of sin, and returns from Vice
to Virtue. 89 E'pis, (...), Hope, the Daughter of true Faith. Hope is the
Expectation of the Soul in time to enjoy the object of Faith. 203 Elpiscale,
(...), good Hope. By a constant perseverance in well-doing we come directly
into the Valley of good Hope. There is no other Rode by which we can arrive in
(...) but Biocalon, a good Life. 202 * Empsychon, (...), living, or inspired
with Life. In the 2d. Book it signifies the Rational Soul examining Doctrines
by its discerning Faculties, and approving for True and Good what agrees with
them and the Holy Rule, Grapton, or the Revelation of the Divine Will in Holy
Writ. See Grapton. 103 * Engastrimuthus, (...), one that speaks out of the
Belly, called also (...), because of that immodest way by which the (...)
pronounced their Oracles. This trick was much used of old. The woman which Saul
consulted is called 1 Samuel 28. 7. (...) Domina Pythonis, from (...) Bottles,
because the Devil used to speak out of her swollen Belly as out of a Bottle, in
Gr. (...). Aristophanes bragging in his Vespae that he helped other Poets to
make their Comedies, says that after the manner of Eurycles, one that was
famous for this (...), he did (...), i. e. (...) into their bellies pour forth
Verses. Some of the Heathens, ashamed of this obscene business, allowed the
Devil a more honorable place, the Breast, and called him (...), as if he spoke
the same way which some Juglers use, who form an articulate sound, though those
who are present cannot perceive that they open their Mouth. Here the name is
given to one troubled with Hysterical Fits, by which some have put Tricks upon
the Ignorant. 142 Enthusiasm, (...), Divine Inspiration, by which Holy men of
old were enabled to speak and do extraordinary things. Here it is taken only
for the Apish imitation of it, by which Device Religious Mountebanks have often
abused the credulous World. See Hieremimus. Epicurus disprais'd, and his
Philosophy disparaged, in Preface of second Part, and page 109. b. See also
Dogmapornes. Eristes, (...), a Contentious Person. 2 Eros, (...), Love. 80
Erotocleus, (...), the Glory of Love. 27 Eucharist, (...), Thanksgiving; by
which name the Greek Church did properly express the nature of our Lord's
Supper, that Sacrament being appointed to make a thankful and honorable
Commemoration of our Savior's Death. 165 Eudaemon, a good Genius, one that
makes men Rich, who is the only Good Angel whom the Covetous acknowledge. 15 b
Euergesia, (...), Beneficence, the twin-Sister of Philothea or the Love of God.
259 Euesto, (...), a quiet State. I have used this word partly to signify that
tranquillity which is necessary for Philosophical Contemplations, partly to
express the happy Repose of wise and good men. 24 b Eugenius, (...), a Person
of a Noble Descent and an Ingenuous Disposition. 180 b Eumenes, (...), Benign.
118 Eupathes, (...), one who is easily affected with things, of a gentle
Disposition. 77 Euphranor, from (...), one that laughs at the Follies of the
World. 18 b Euphron, (...), a pleasant good-natured Person, who both enjoys
himself and makes others cheerful. 295 b Eupistia, from (...) and (...), a Good
Faith, which is described Book 4. 201 Eupistus, (...), a true believer, a
Faithful Person. 202 Euprepes, (...), Comely or Decent. In the Third Book it
signifies one who was not enamored with the gaudy outsides of Exosemnon, yet
(...) the baseness of Pseudenthea. 131 Euprosopon, from (...) and (...), one
that sets a fair face upon things. 150 Eusebia, (...), Piety. 201 Euthanatus, a
Good Death, the happy close of a good Life. 281 Euthymia, (...), (...) of mind,
the Portion of Virtuous Souls. 46 b Exetazon, (...), one that examins or tries
things. It is here put for Inquiry, and is therefore called Apiston's File,
because by Ingenuous Examination and diligent Search we find out Truth. 103 *
Exorcista, (...), a Conjurer. Those who desire to see more such Pranks, or
think those very strange which I have related concerning Exorcista, may be
satisfied if they will read a Book called Tres Energumenae Belgicae; where
they will soon perceive whether I or the Exosemnians have abused the Popish
Exorcisms. 139 Exosemnon, (...), outwardly. Venerable; which all grant that
Church to be upon whom that name is bestowed. 133
F
A True Faith described. 201 The sad Consequences of a false Faith. 150 The
Agreement of Faith and Reason. 203 A Father's last Advice to his Sons. 376 b
Forts Esprits, Courageous Spirits; a Title which the French Deists bestowed
upon themselves, after they had so confirmed their Infidelity that they were
able to disbelieve all things. 161 b Forzario, a Violent Person, who makes
Power his Law. The Husband of Inganna, Craft: for Power associates it self with
Cunning, the better to accomplish its Designs. 31
G
GAlenepsyches, (...), A calm of Soul, Tranquillity of Spirit, one of those
three invaluable Jewels which a true Lover of God does possess. 239 A Garden
described. 1 b Gastrimargus, (...), an Insatiable Eater. 152 b Gelosia,
Jealousy. 2 Geron, (...), an Old man. 32 b Glycypicron, (...), Bitter-Sweet,
as all terrene pleasures are. 18 b * Gnostics, from (...), Knowledge, an
unclean Sect of Heretics, ((...), as Epiphanius calls them) who gave
themselves this Name, prerending that they only were dignified with the
Knowledge of Truth; though theirs, if ever any in the World, was (...),
Knowledge falsely so called, as St. Paul said. Their Opinions were most absurd,
and their Practices abominable. See (...) and (...). Plotin, one of the best
Platonists, and possibly a Christian, wrote against them, Ennead. 2. Lib. 9.
See Pansophia and Achamoth. (...), (...), Know thy self. I have called the
Governor of Tapinophrosyne by this name, because the knowledge of ones self is
the Natural Root of Humility. 195 * God. Arguments of his Existence. 188 b A
Description of the Divine Nature. 189 b Of the Connate Idea of God. ibid. In
what sense the Notion of God is (...) to our Souls. 191 b That God is as
knowable as other things, and how, 194. 195. b. which Descartes has well
expressed in these words, Quamvis enim (...) Dei perfectiones non
comprehendamus, quia (...) est de Natura Infiniti, ut a nobis, qui sumus (...),
non comprehendatur; nibilominus tamen ipsas (...) and distinctius quam ullas
res corporeas intelligere possumus, quia cogitationem (...) magis implent,
suntque simpliciores, nec limitationibus ullis obscurantur. Princip. Phil.
Part prima. It is an unreasonable demand to require that he should show
himself as we please. So Eurip. in Baceh. Pen. (...); Dion. (...) i. e. `Do you
say that you have seen God plainly as he is? No; but as he is pleased to show
himself: we must not appoint him in what manner he will be seen. The naked
essence of all things is hid from us, much more that of God; which I suppose to
be suggested in the Inscription which was put upon the Temple of Isis, (...).

Good men always happy. 80 b Grapton, (...), Written, the Revelation of the
Divine Will committed to writing. See Empsychon. 103 False Guardians reproved.
55 Gynaeceus, (...), Womanish: it denotes a man imprudently Uxorious. 63
Gynaepicria, from (...) and (...), a Womanish bitterness or feeble peevishness.
2
H
HAdes, (...), the Invisible state of the other World, which sensual persons do
not love to hear of. 23 b Hamartolus, (...), a Sinner. 199 Happiness. described
83, b. and afterward in Aristander's Speech. Harpagus, from (...), Rapacious,
the servant of Plutopenes. Covetonsness is usually attended with Rapine. 24
(...), one that does (...), Self-Interest, which disturbs the common Happiness
of the World. 167 Hedonia, from (...), Pleasure: the name of the Voluptuous
Queen of Piacenza. 79 Hemicalus, (...), half good, one who is persuaded in a
small measure to be Virtuous. 251 Hermagathus, (...), a good Mercury or happy
Messenger. 11 Hesychia, (...), Tranquillity. 159 Hierographon, from (...), and
(...), the Holy Scripture. 206 Hieromimus, (...), one who makes an affectate
Imitation of holy things. His Principles, his Design, his Confutation, you have
Book 6. beginning page 297 b Hilarion, from (...), Cheerful. 341 b Hypocrites
false Pleas for their sins destroyed. 187 * The Hypocritical excuse which is
taken from the sweetness of sin, Pastor Fido has expressed to the Life, Act.
3. sc. 4. Se'l peccar' e si dolce,
E'l non pecear si necessario; o troppo
Imperfetta Natura,
Che repugni a la leg;
O troppo dura leg,
Che la Natura (...).
Which Tully ( Offic. lib. 3.) has nobly answered, Nunquam est utile peccare,
quia semper est turpe; and quia semper est honestum virum bonum esse, semper
est utile. page 191 Hipponyx, (...), a Haven so called because it resembles the
fashion of a Horses Hoof. 317 b Histrionia, Stage Play, a name not unfitly
given to this World, where, as one said long since, Quisquis fere Histrionem
agit. 33 b Holochrysus, (...), All Gold. 15 b Humility described. 193 Hybris,
(...), Contumely. 16 b Hydraula, (...), a Musical Instrument which sounds by
Water. 193 * Hyla, (...), Matter. In the Fourth Book it imports the Hindrances
which arise to a good man from his Body. That (...) which the learned Bishop in
his Hymns does so often pray against under the several names of (...), etc. The
Tempting Baud, the Corporeal Cloud, the Dog which barks and bites the Soul,
Bodily Tempests; which is so considerable a hinderance, that (as Proclus has
observed, lib. (...). in Timaum) all our disorders do spring either (...), i.
e. either from the weakness of our Rational Notions, or from the strength of
our fleshly Appetites. But since the Notions of our minds are near akin to God,
he adds gallantly, (...), i.e. The Invincible power of God does refresh our
Notions, and comfort their weakness. 197 Hylotes, from the same (...), in the
Third Book signifies the dull sympathy which the grosly-ignorant have only with
bodily things. 121 Hyperenor, (...), Proud, Insolent. Riches usually make men
inhumanely fierce. 9 b Hypernephelas, (...), above the Clouds; no unfit name
for those who take such wild flights of fancy in their Discourses, that no
sober Judgment can follow them. One that speaks or writes mysterious Nonsense.
167 Hyperoncus, (...), very proud. 155 Hyperurania, (...), Supercelestial
things, which the Gnostics bragged that they were able to see. 302 b
Hypnotica, from (...), Sleepy. Sleep and Idleness are the supporters of
Ignorance. 121 Hypsagoras, (...), a lofiy speaker, one that talks high. 152 b
Hysocardes; from (...) Height, and (...) the Heart. It notes Arrogance and
overweening thoughts, by which a man is lifted up above a just estimation of
himself. See Megalophron. 195 Hysterica, from (...), the Womb. A woman troubled
with Suffocations commonly called the Fits of the Mother. 142
I
IAckleid, John Becold the Impious Tailour of Leiden, who caused so much
trouble in Germany with his Enthusiasm and Villainies. 298 b Jaldabaoth, one of
the canting terms used by the proud Gnostics. Vide Epiphan. 303 b Jamnail,
James Nailor, that Infamous Enthusiast, who equaled himself to our Savior,
and had in his pocket when he was taken the Description of Christ which
Lentulus sent to the Senate of Rome, which begins thus, Apparuit temporibus
nostris, and adhuc est, homo magnae virtutis, nominatus Jesus Christus, etc.
Orthodoxogr. Theolog. Tom. 1. page 2. 298 b Iconecron, (...), the Image of the
Dead. 17 b * Iconium, from (...), an Image. It is used in the Third Book to
express that sort of Religion which is only made up of outsides: not reproving
those who would have God served with bodily Worship; (for so he ought to be, as
we have declared Book 4.) but such as do neglect the Spirit of Religion, which
is, to love God with all our heart, and to direct all our Actions to his Glory,
making his holy Will the Indispensable Rule of our Lives. He dwells not so
much in any Temple as in the Soul of a Good man, who, as Hierocles says most
excellently, (...), i.e. offers himself for a Sacrifice, makes his own Soul the
Image of God, and prepares his Mind to make it a fit Temple for the Reception
of Divine Light. 131 Idiopathy, from (...) and (...). It denotes men's
particular Affections, peculiar Tempers and Persuasions, with which they are so
enamored, that many times with much Passion and little Reason they condemn
others who are not prone to sympathize with them. 171 Jealousy and its sad
Effects. 59 b Immortality of Humane Souls asserted. 355 b Wicked men believe
not the Doctrine of Immortality, because they hope not for any Happiness in the
Eternal World. 372 b Infidelity the Root of all Vice, especially the Unbelief
of Immortality. Eurip. in Andr. Androm. (...); Men. (...). i.e. Do you think
God is no God, and that there is no Judgment? Men. When that comes I will bear
it. ibid. Inganna, Craft. 31 Irene, (...), Peace. A Virgin which toward the
further end of the Holy Rode presents Travelers with Garlands of Amaranth.
Peace and Tranquillity are the Fruits of Perseverance in a good course of Life.
280 * Isosthenes, one that thinks himself able to equal the probability of
Falsehood with Truth, and to introduce a Skeptical (...), which, as Sextus
Empiricus defines it, is (...), an Equality of Faith and Unbelief. This Lucian
meant by his Balance. (...). i. e. To what use do you put these scales? I
counterpoise Reasons, and equal the weight of Truth and Falsehood: which is to
endeavor to plague the World with an infinite Dissatisfaction. 136 b
K
KAlobulus, from (...) and (...), a Good Counselor. 3.2 Kalodoxus, (...), one
whose mind is enriched with noble Opinions and raised Apprehensions. 149 b
Kenepistis, (...), vain Faith. It is described in Book 3. 115 Kepanactus,
(...), the King's Garden. 177 b A Good King described. 47 b Kiskildrivium, an
insignificant word used by Erasmus in one of his Epistles, and is of as much
sense in Speech as Transubstantiation is in Religion. 166 Klerotheron, (...),
one that hunts for the Inheritances of others. 12 b The Knowledge of our
selves, the Cure of Pride, and how. 196 Krimatophobus, (...), the Fear of
Judgment, an inseparable Companion of Sin. So that egregious Cheat of himself;
Dii Deaque quam male est extra legem viventibus! quicquid meruerunt semper
timent. Apud Petron. 155
L
LAoargyrus, from (...) and (...), one who greedily receives money, and will
do nothing without it. The name of a corrupt Judge. 32 Lady. A good Lady
pictured. 3 b Lampromeld, (...), partly bright, partly dark. Death represented
by a River so called Book 4. for it is dark as it obscures the bodily Life, and
bright as it draws the Curtains of Eternal Light which shines upon Good Souls
in the other World. 281 Law of Nature. See Nature. Lerocritus, from (...) and
(...) Judge of Trifles. (...), one who is zealonsly busy about little things.
156 Lestocharis, (...), the Charity of Robbers. 15 b Lestrygon. The Lestrygones
were a barbarous sort of people, which Thucydides (lib. 6.) says he knew not
whence they came not whether they went. They infested Sicily and Campania in
Italy. Homer in Odyss. 10. tells us how they used Ulysses and his Companions.
25 Leucas, (...), a white Rock or Promontory of Epirus, not far from Actium,
from which vain Lovers used to throw themselves, that they might be freed from
the madness of impotent Passion. They seldom failed of their Cure, for they
commonly broke their necks. Et de (...) saltum Leucate minatur
Mascula Lesbiacis Sappho peritura sagittis.
Auson. And Menander in Stobaeus lib. 10. -- (...)
(...)
(...).
87 Logomachia, Controversy. about words, by which Philosophy is made only
(...), a vain noise of words, and Divinity (...), vain talk, as St. Paul says.
160 Loxias, (...), a Name bestowed upon Apollo, because his Answers were (...),
oblique, double ambiguous. 298 b The Love of God defined and praised in
Philothea's Speech. 265 A Lover of God described. 237 Lunia, the Country of the
Moon, concerning which Lucian makes a pleasant story in his Book de ratione
scrib. Ver. Hist. 230 b Lusingha, Flattery. 80 (...), (...), a Destroyer. 155
Lysander, (...), one that delivers men from slavery. 288 b
M
MAngibella, a good Eater. 83 Mantimanss, a mad Prophet. 139 Marriage defended.
97 * Marriage of (...) and Agape, etc. which I have written in the close of the
Sixth Book, is not to be understood in a common sense; neither would I have any
(...) think that, if I had proceeded further in that Narrative, I would have
written a story of vulgar Love. No, no; I meant what I have said not of the
(...), the common Venus, as Plotin calls her, but of the (...), the Heavenly;
and intended by the Marriage of Theosebes and Urania to signify the Union of
Wisdom and Piety; by that of Alethion and Agape, the Conjunction of Truth and
Love; by that of Nicomachus and Arete, the happy (...) of Virtue, which is the
Reward of constant Endeavor; by that of Bentivolio and Theonee, the charitable
sympathy of divine Goodness with the Afflicted: by that of Panaretus and Irene,
the Holy Peace which our Savior, the great (...), will make when he has
conquered all Enmity to his Excellent Rules, and destroyed whatsoever does
oppose that happy Tranquillity which his Gospel will bestow upon the World when
it is obeyed. See Plotin Enn.6.lib.9. Mataeogenes, from (...) and (...), an
Ignoble person who sets his mind only upon Wealth. 9 b (...), (...), Labor in
vain. 156 Medenarete, (...), one who esteems Virtue to be nothing. See the
opinion explained. 156 b And confuted. 344 b Megabronchus, one that has a
great throat, from (...) and (...). 105 Megalophron, (...), properly one who
has a Great Mind; but here it signifies one who has high Thoughts concerning
himself, and does much relish his own worth. 195 Meleta, (...), Care. 179
Metamelusa, from (...) and (...), one who takes thought afterward. It signifies
in the Second Book late Repentance. 91 Metanoea, (...), Change of mind, second
Thoughts. 199 Miasmasarkus, (...), Defilement of the Flesh with bodily sin,
which the Ranters, modern Gnostics, have patronized as a more raised strain of
Religion, as their Predecessors did of old. 168 Microcheires, from (...) and
(...), Smallhanded. The old name of Polyglotta, which had much Religious Talk,
but few good Deeds. 114 Misagathus, an Hater of good men. 333 b Misokalon,
(...), one who hates Goodness. 59 Misoplanus, one that hates Cheaters, takes
pains to discover their Frauds and to unseduce the deceived. 305 b Misopseudes,
a hater of Falsehood. 67 b Moira, (...), Fate, Destiny, to which Hypocrites are
apt falsely to attribute their wickedness which arises from the choice of their
own Wills, and is confirmed by many Voluntary Actions. 153 Monogrammus, (...),
a Picture rudely delineated. Monogrammi dicuntur homines pertenues and
decolores; Nonius. So Lucilius, vix vivo homini and monogrammo. So Gassendus;
who took so much pains to do honor to (...), Monogrammi dicuntur Dii instar
hominum macie (...); metaphor a ducta a Pictura; qui (...) coloribui quasi
corporentur, lineis quibusdam (...) antur conficientibus eam picturae speciem
quam prisci Latini dixerunt sublestam, etc. Tully calls these Gods, Deos
adumbratos, Lib. 1. de Natura Deor. I find not fault with Epicurus so much for
that he said they had not Corpora, sed quasi corpora, which Tully gives us
leave to call Nonsense; but because he made God with his Description not Deum,
sed quasi Deum, which is rude Blasphemy. 112 b Moralazon, a proud Fool. 297 b
Morogelon, one that laughs at the Follies of the World. 18 b Moronesus, (...),
the Island of Fools. 14 b Morophila, one that loves foolishly, as many Parents
do their Children, whilst they take much care of their Bodily Accomplishments,
but neglect to perfect their Souls with Virtue. 92 Morosophus, an Half-witted
man, one who has a little wit, but makes a foolish use of it. 123 Morpheolus,
from Morpheus, the Minister of Sleep, an Attendant upon Luxury, whom I have
described in a part colored Mantle, according to that form of Habit in which
(...) (in Amphiar.) says he was painted of old; (...), in a careless garb,
having a white garment upon a black one, to signify, as he thought, the
Vicissitudes of Night and Day, which follow one another at no great distance;
for except those who dwell near the Poles, that of Homer is applicable to all
the World, (...).
83
N
NArcissus, one in love with his own shadow. It is a common story, but too
pertinent where I have applied it. (...), as Philostratus says, He leaned over
a Spring, taking Pleasure in the Contemplation of his own Beauty. What better
thing do they who spend their time between the Comb and the Glass? as Seneca
says. 80 Narke, (...), the Cramp-Fish, which benums the hands of those who
touch it. Here it signifies dull Sloth, which throws the Powers of the Soul
into a heavy kind of sleep, and makes it unactive. 178 * Nature. The Laws of
Reasonable Nature Eternal and (...), not Customs of Men or Constitutions of
Princes alterable at pleasure, but written in our Souls by God, and how. Here I
think it not inconvenient to insert two or three noble Testimonies of this
Truth. Amongst the Heathens that of Sophocles is incomparable, who in Oedip.
(...). writes thus, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
i.e. God grant that I may be so happy as always to observe that venerable
Sanctity in my Words and Deeds, which is commanded by those noble Laws which
were made in Heaven. God is their Father, not Mortal Nature; neither shall they
ever be forgotten or abrogated, for there is in them a great God who never
(...) old. The like sense he has in his Antigone. To this I add that of
Plutarch, who speaking of this Law, says, it is (...). i. e. A Law not written
in Tables or Books, but (...) in the Mind always as a living Rule, which never
permits the Soul to be destitute of an interior Guide. Of the Jews that of
Philo shall serve for all, (...). i. e. Right Reason is an (...) Law, not a
mortal Rule given by this or that mortal; no liveless Precept written in Paper
or upon Pillars, but Immortal, being engraven by the Eternal Nature in Immortal
Minds. Of the Christians St. Paul calls it (...), Romans 2. 15. Justin Martyr
says, The Rules of it are (...) Origin, (...) Tertullian, Testimonium Anima
naturaliter Christianae; Chrysostom, (...), i. e. A Law written in our hearts;
an Eternal (...), which with the (...) Notions of Good and Evil is planted in
our Souls; a Natural kind of Christianity; a Teacher dwelling in our Natures.
Nature may be so perverted with Vice, that men will not acknowledge the Innate
Notions of Truth. So Just. Martyr told (...), (...), being corrupted by bad
Education, evil Customs, and wicked Institutions, they destroy their Natural
Notions, and, as (...) phrase is, do (...), speak falsely of our Nature; and are
therefore justly rejected by Aristotle as Incompetent Judges of Nature (Pol. 1.
5.) in these words, (...), i. e. we are to enquire concerning what is natural,
of those who are in their natural (...); and not of those who have corrupted
their Nature.

202 b Naupactus, a place to build Ships in. (...) was so called formerly.
Necessity. The Doctrine of Necessity destroys all Virtue. 104 b Necrogaea,
(...), the Region where departed Souls dwell. 36 b (...) and Nemesis, from
(...), Indignation and Revenge. 42, 66 Neurospasts, (...), Puppets, or things
which though they seem to act of themselves, are only moved by unseen wires or
strings. 148 Nicomachus, one that conquers in fight. In the Fourth Book he
represents a Good man vanquishing all sorts of spiritual and fleshly Tentation.
178 Nynhapanta, from (...) and (...), All at present. The Tempter endeavoring
to seduce Virtuous Persons out of their way to Heaven by the Allurements of
this present World. 178
O
ODax, from (...), a Tooth. In the Third Book it signifies the sharp Remorses
of an evil Conscience. 155 Ogdoads, AEonian Ogdoads, a wild fancy of the
Gnostics. Vide Scrofam aeoniam apud Tertullianum; and Bythi mensuras and
(...), apud (...). 302 b Oictirmon, (...), a Merciful Person. 15 * Ommelion,
from (...) and (...), a Sun-like Eye, a clear Understanding. Holy Souls have
the most plain Visions of God. So Plotin Ennead. 2. lib. 9. (...). i. e. (...)
what purpose should we talk of looking toward God? That is worth nothing,
except we show also how we may come to see him. Virtue joined with Prudence,
when it is brought to Perfection, will show God to us. 239 (...), (...), the
Dream of an (...) The Captain of the Levellers, who lay the Foundation of their
Designs upon vain Dreams and foolish Imaginations. 29 Ontagathus, (...), one
truly good. 149 Opium, the juice of Poppies. I have put it by a Figure for
Poppies themselves; but if any think it too great a Catachresis, they may put
out (...), and write Poppies in the place of it. 69 Orexis, Appetite. The
greatest Power which Tentations have against us, is from that Interest which
they have in our sensitive Appetites. 178 Orgilus, an angry man, one of
Bentivolio's Accusers. Anger when it is a little humored destroys Good will.
117 Orphana, (...), an Orphan. The story is but too applicable to many who by
the Infidelity of their Guardians are used after the manner which is related.
55 (...). See Arimanius. (...), (...), one that makes a true Estimate of
things. 24 b Orthodus, (...), the right way. 29 b (...), (...), form of
Proscription used by the Athenians, in which the Name of the banished Person
was (...) in a Shell. Epist. ded. b
P
PAmmachia, (...), altogether Contentious, full of Strife and War. 2 Pammegas,
Very great. Simon Magus, who did ambitiously desire to be looked upon as (...),
and prevailed so far as to be called (...) ( Act. 8. 9, 10.) and to have his
Statue erected in Rome with this Inscription, Simoni Deo Sancto, To Simon the
Holy God. Just. Martyr Apol. 2. 296 b Pammelaena, All dark. By this name the
state of Ignorance is represented Book 3. 121 Panaretus, All-Vertuous. The
Brother of Bentivolio and Urania. Where Heavenly Light and Holy Love inhabit,
they are accompanied with every other Virtue. 18 Pancratus, one who has got an
absolute Dominion over his Passions. 74 Pandacryon, from (...) and (...), one
who can weep when he will. 298 b Pangelos, one wholly given to Laughter and
vain mitth. 80 * Pannychis, (...), Pervigilium, a Watching all night. The name
of an immodest wench in Petran. taken from the nefandi (...), the Infamous
night-Feasts which were celebrated in honor of Priapus and Venus. Etiam (...)
vobis in animo est, (...) sciatis Priapi (...) pervigilium deberi? Pet. 298 b
Pansophia, All-wisdom. So the Impudent (...) inscribed some of his Books, and
(...), one who knows all things. Of his Books he has recorded these arrogant
sayings: In his libris continentur non solum omnia ad Coelestem and terrestrem
eruditionem necessaria, sed quicquid (...) a mundi exordio (...); ad ejus finem
vixit, quicquid scriptum aut dictum, vel etiam scribi aut dici possit, quod
(...) studere debent, etc. Confess. cap. 9. The Rosicrucian Brethren say some
such things of their Founder. 303 b Panstreblus, altogether Perverse. I have
bestowed this Name upon the filthy Ranters, the Gnostics of these days, who
have turned Religion into Atheism, and the Grace of God into wantonness. 139
(...), (...). A Temple at Rome dedicated to all the Gods. It is put in the
Third Book for Heathenish Idolatry. 133 Panthnetus, (...), one that esteems all
things mortal, and fancies that the Soul dies as well as the Body. 152 b
Panurgus, (...), one who has a crafty wit apt for any Design. 61 b Parelion,
(...), the Sun reflected, a round Cloud glistring with the Image of the Sun.
273 Parresia, (...), Freedom of Speech, Confidence. 118 Pasenantius, Contrary
to all. A perverse man, who despises all others in comparison with himself.
152 b Pasiphilus, a Friend to all men. 295 b Pathus, (...), Passion, Affection,
softness. 153 Peirasmus, (...), Tentation. ibid. Peirastes, a Tempter. 178
Penia, (...), Poverty. 10 Perilype, (...), Grief. 80 Petalism, (...), a Mode of
Banishment used in Syracuse, in which the Name of the proscribed person was
written in a Leaf. Epist. Ded. b Philadelphia, Brotherly Love. 201 Philalethes,
(...), a Lover of Truth. 68 b Philandra, a Lover of her Husband. 286 b
Philedones, a Lover of Pleasure. 152 b Philopantas, a Lover of all men. 28
Philopseudes, (...), a Lover of Falsehood, a Liar. 155 A generous Philosopher
described in the Person of Orthocrinon. 26 b Philothea, (...), a Lover of God
and Divine things. 259 Philoxenus, (...), Hospitable, a Lover of Strangers. 116
(...), (...), an Incendiary. 298 b Phrictus, Dreadful, Terrible. 155 (...),
from (...), Prudence. 201 (...), Prudent. ibid. * Phylace, (...), a Prison. 171
b In that place I have described the sad state of Sinners in the other World. I
hope none will be so dull as not to understand that I have taken many of those
Expressions which I use there in a Metaphorical sense; herein following the
Example of Holy Writ, where Fire, Worms, Darkness, and such like words, are put
to signify Spiritual pains. (...), Pleasure, the Title of the Second Book,
wherein a Voluptuous Life is described and reproved. 69 Pierudor, (...), bitter
Water, an Emblem of bitter Zele. 156 (...), a Sluggish person. 79 Pinodipson,
Hungry and thirsty, Poverty. 2 Pirates, (...), a Pirate. 13 b Pistalethes,
(...), true Faith, which is described. 201 Pithopseudes, one who persuades
others to believe what is false. 208 Planaster, a wandering Star. 140
Pleonectes, (...), a Covetous person, one that desires to have too much.
Pleonecton, the same. 114 Pluterastes, (...), a Lover of Riches. 22 b
Plutopenes, from (...) and (...), a poor rich man, who never has enough,
enjoys or makes any good use of what he has. 15 Plutocopia, from (...) and
(...), a City whose Inhabitants take pains for nothing but wealth. 9 b
Pneumatodes, Spiritual. In the Third Book it denotes Spiritual Wickedness,
Pride, Contention and Wrath, which puff up men's minds and swell their thoughts.
168 Polyglotta, (...), much Tongue. Religion is distressed when those who
pretend to it do only honor it in word. 114 Polistherium, (...), the City of
Beasts: a name fit enough for the (...) of Theriagene. 12 b Polymachus, (...),
much given to Contention. 167 Polysemna, Very grave. Polytheus, (...), one who
worships many Gods. 133 Ponus, Labor. 16 b Prince, a good Prince described. 52
b Proselenus, (...), Antelunaris, one born before the Moon. The Arcadians did
long ago endeavor to make the World believe that the Moon was their Junior,
and were therefore called (...). The Scholiast of (...) ad illud 4. Argon.
(...).
Petronius gave this name by way of Jeer to an old Woman who was a servant to
Circe. 154 b The Providence of God in the Government of the World asserted and
vindicated. 79, 80 b Psaphon, a famous Cheater in Libya, who aspired to be
worshipped with Divine Honor. See Max. Tyr. Dissert. 19. In scholio Dion.
Chrysoft. he is called (...). 310 b Pseudelpis, false Hope. 16 b Pseudenthea,
from (...) and (...), false Inspiration, with which the World has been often
troubled. 115 Pseudognosis, (...), Knowledge falsely so called. 208 Pseudolus,
(...), as Salmasius would have us read it, one made up of Lies. Pseudorcus,
(...), a Perjured Person. 50 Psychopannyx, from (...) and (...), one who
affirms the Soul when it is separated from this Body to be as void of
Perception as the Eye is of sight in a dark Night. 152 b
Q
* QUintilla. One of this Name was a Companion of Montanus, who professed
himself to be the Holy Ghost. She was not unlike the other two, Prisca and
Maximilla, who left their Husbands to follow that unclean Impostor. From
Quintilla the Montanists were called Quintillians: she deserves no better a
Reason of her Name then some have given of Quartilla (apud Petr.) viz. quae ob
quadrantem (...) copiam (...), i. e. parvi pretii scortum. 298 b
R
REpentance described. 200 A Retired Life. 6 b Rhexinous, (...), that Enervates
the mind: a proper Epithet of Jealousy, which breaks and discomposeth the
Spirit. 2 Rhipsaspis, one who throws away his shield and flies at the sight of
an Enemy, as Demosthenes was reported to have done. 125 Riches contemptible,
and amongst other. Reasons because they are usually given to the worst of men;
so he, (...),
(...).
86 b Roccabella, the fair Rock, The lovely Mount of Temperance, upon which the
Soul enjoys the Delights of serene Contemplation. 86
S
SAprobius, from (...) and (...), one of a corrupt Life, seduced to it by false
Principles. 152 b Scepticus, a Philosophical Seeker, one of the Pyrrhonian
Sect, who believe nothing. ibid. Holy Scriptures defended. 211. as also 165 b
Septicollis, (...), Rome, formerly so called from the seven Hills upon which it
was built. 316 b (...). See his story in Plutarch, who among other things has
related what tricks he put upon the Superstitious Spaniards with a Tame Do.
306 b Sigalion, from (...), Silence. An Image upon the Egyptians commanding
silence with shut Lips. A God in great respect with Wise men. It signifies here
that Silence which prudent men have always warily kept in all Evil times. 180
b Simmagus, a Contraction of Simon Magus, the Grandfather of the Gnostics.
296 b How Sin came into the World. 96 b Siopelus, (...), one who can hold his
peace. 61 b (...), from (...), a dried Carkase. 17 b Skiameliuses, (...), viz.
(...), A shadow of a state to come, taking it in the same sense as it is used.
Heb. 2. I have used this Name, because many Services of the Jewish Temple and
other pieces of that economy were but external Shadows of a more noble state
of Religion. 131 Sophiarete, (...) and (...), Wisdo m and Virtue. 29 b Sophron,
Temperate. 225 Sophrosyne, Temperance, described at large in the Fourth Book.
201 Sosandra, (...), the Name of a Good Wife, so called from preserving her
Husband. 3 b Staurus, a Cross; but Book Third particularly meant of the Cross
of Christ, who by the one oblation of himself upon it abrogated all the Jewish
Sacrifices. 132 Streblodespotes, (...), a Per verse Master. 150 b Sympathus,
(...), one who is Compassionately affected with the Miseries of others. 46 b
Synaxis, (...), a Convention or Congregation. It is taken Theologically for a
Company of Christians met together to celebrate the Feast of the Lord's Supper,
and to make a joint Commemoration of his Death with all humble Thanksgiving.
T
TAano, (...), Those things which are above. 201 Takato, (...), Those things
which are below. These two streams of the Spring Agathorryton signify the good
things which God gives with his right hand, as Wisdom and Virtue; and with his
left, as Strength of Body, Worldly Quality, Riches, etc. For he is (...), and
(...), the Spring of Springs, the first and best Good from whom all Goodness is
derived, as Synesius says in one of his Hymns. See Agathorryton. 201 (...),
Miserable. 11 * (...), from (...), an Image, for so I rather derive it then
from (...). Figures made under certain Constellations according to the
Superstition of the Syrians and Arabians, who thought them capable of Celestial
Influences, and by looking upon which they thought they were able to divine
concerning future things, as (...) Fagius observes out of R. D. K. in libro
Rad. (...) (...) sunt imagines per quas futura (...). The Jews called them
Teraphim, Genesis 31. 19. which Laban named his Gods, and Aben Ezra thought his
Daughter stole them, lest they should tell her Father how her Husband ordered
his Flight from him. They were made sometimes in the form of Men, such as
Michol (probably) put in David's Bed. Those who desire to be informed further
concerning them may read Mr. Gregorie's learned Collections in his Notes upon
2 Samuel 5. And such as shall please to read Dr. H. More's Mystery of Godliness,
Book 8. chap. 15. will understand fully that the Doctrine of Telesms is a
Supersticious Foolery, and that they have no natural (...). 157 b Tapanta, All
things. Money is all to covetous men, who make Gold their God, hoping that will
help them to all things; according to that of the Jews, (...), Money answers
all things. 9 b Tapeinophrosyne, Humility. 192 Taraxion, from (...),
perturbation, which does usually attend worldly Designs. 9 b Temperanza,
Temperance, which is the great Panpharmacon, the true All-heale, which both
prevents sickness and restores health. See it described 201. Tentation
described. 178, 179 Teraphims. See Talismans. Terpsithea, (...), a Divine Joy.
239 Tetractys, (...), a famous secret in the Pythagorean Philosophy, which
Hierocles has explained in his noble Discourses upon the Aurea Carmina, upon
that Verse, (...),
and Plutarch, but after another manner, in Philosophorum Decretis. I have
named it in the Sixth Book, because the arrogant Gnostics boasted that this
(...) came down in a Woman's shape from places which cannot be seen or named,
and brought down Truth, and showed her naked to them, and gave them leave to
talk with her. Vid. Epiphan. adversus Haer. Lib. 1. Tom. 3. and Irenaeum contra
Gnosticos, Lib. 1. 302 b Thanatus, Death. 155 Tharraleus, Bold, Confident.
ibid. Thaumaturgus, (...), one that performs miraculous Actions. Where I have
applied it, the word signifies only one that does some extraordinary Tricks
above the reach of vulgar Wit, which he pretends to be Miracles. 152 b
Theander, a Divine man. 281 b Thelgomenus, (...), one that may be led any
whether, a plain person easy to be deceived for want of Pudence. 296 b
Theonoe, from (...), a divine mind. 2 b Theophila, (...), a Lover of God, and
(...) also, dear to God, as all his true Lovers are. Theoprepia, (...), a State
worthy of God. The Title of the Fourth Book, wherein some things belonging to
that State are discoursed, so far as the Nature of such a work as this is would
handsomely permit. 177 (...), (...), one who contemplates, from (...), or one
who takes care of Divine Matters, from (...) and (...). I placed Agathorryton
in this Hill, because the Spring of Life does pour forth its streams most
plentifully upon careful and holy Souls. 200 Theosebius, (...), a Worshipper of
God. 201 Theostyges, (...), a Hater of God and odious to him. 333 b (...),
(...), degenerate Beasts. The Title of the Fifth Book, in which many brutish
Opinions and ignoble Practices are related. 1 b Therodes, (...), Brutish, as
the Poor common'y are for want of Education. 11 Theromachia, (...), a Fight
with Beasts. The brutish Appetite is an Enemy to the Divine Life. 176 b
Thrasymachus, (...), bold in Fight. 36 (...), (...), a Name given to Crates (in
Diog. Laert.) because he went into every House to teach Virtue. 19 b Timautus,
(...), one who honors himself. 114 Trimalcio, (...), a very soft and
effeminate Person. Some think that under this Name Petronius Arbiter did
describe the Luxuries of Nero. 79 (...), (...), a Tormenter of men. 121 b
Tuphlecon, Wilfully blind. 150 (...), blindly Confident. 122 (...),
Constantinople. That piece of my story is not Romance. 316 b
V
VAghezza, Beauty, Loveliness. Vanasembla, a Vain Show. The Title of the Third
Book, in which many things extolled in some places as Eminent parts of
Religion, are discovered to be no such matters. 111 The Vanity of Humane Life.
17 b Vdemellon, one that believes there is nothing to come after this Life. 152
b Velleda, a Woman in Germany highly accepted of the People for her
Predictions, because she prophesied Success to the Germans, and Ruin to the
Roman Legions. Tacitus Lib. 4. Histor. 299 b Vendetta, Revenge. (...)
Veneriola, a Wanton. 83 The Nature of Virtue described. 341 b Virbius, Bis vir,
one who has Life twice bestowed upon him, as all good men have when they are
made partakers of the Resurrection. 341 b The Union of all Virtues in Vraniae's
Speech. 274 b Urania, Heavenly Light, from (...), Heaven, or (...), Light. See
Bentivolio. 18 The true Use and Estimation of the Life which we have in this
World. 42 b Usurpers seldom escape Punishment. Eurip. (...),
(...),
(...).
340 b
W
WIckedness ever unhappy, especially in the end. -- (...)
(...).
Pind. 91 b
Y
YOuth Undisciplined usually Wicked and Unhappy. See (...). 92
X
XEnodochium, (...), A receptacle for Strangers. A House always to be found in
Philadelphia, that is, a Country where men love all their Neighbors as
Brothers. 175 b
FINIS.

