A brief examination for the time, of a certain declaration, lately put in
print in the name and defense of certain Ministers in London, refusyng to
wear the apparel prescribed by the laws and orders of the Realm.

In the end is reported, the judgment of two notable learned fathers, M.
doctor Bucer, and M. doctor Martyr, sometime in either universities here of
England the kings readers and professors of divinity, translated out of the
originals, written by their own hands, purposely debatyng this controversy.

Paul. Romans 14 I beseech you brethren mark them which cause division, and give
occasions of evil, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid
them: for they that are such serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
bellyes, and with sweet and flatteryng words deceive the hearts of the
Innocents. The counsel of S. Austen unto Januarie. Epistola. 118.
SVche things as have diversity of observations, by reason of the diversity
of Lands and Countries, as of fasting on the Sabbath day, or at other days:
Of communicating every day, Sunday or Saturday, or otherwise: all these things
have freedom in observation. And certes, there is no manner discipline or usage
in these things more agreeable unto a grave and prudent christian man, then
that he attemper him self to the orders of that Church whereto he shall
chance to resort. For by S. Ambrose counsel, a man ought to observe that
manner which he sees that Church to use whereto he chaunceably comes, if he
will not be slanderous to any man, or any man be slanderous unto him. As for
me (says S. Austen) when I diligently bethought my self of this sentence, I
have always had it in such veneration, as if I had received it as an oracle
heavenly sent from God. For I have perceived, even to my great sorrow and
heauynes, much disquietyng of the weak to be caused by the contentious
stubbernes and superstitious fear of certain brethren, which raise up so
braulyng questions, that they think nothing to be well done but what they do
them selves: and that in such matters which can come to no certain end,
neither by the authority of holy Scripture, nor by the tradition of the
universal Church, nor tend to any commodity of the reformation of life. Yet
is this disturbaunce made, because some one has devised within him self some
manner of reason whatsoever it be, either for that he himself in his own
country accustomed so to do, or else saw other do, in some such place where he
has traveled: The which, the farther it was from his own country, so much
the better learned he thought that place to be.

To the Christian reader.
IF for any occasion the counsel of Solomon, contrarious to it self at the
first sight, may have place to be alleged out of the. xxvi. Chapter of his
Proverbs, that is. Ne respondeas stulto iuxta stultitiam suam, ne efficiaris
ei similis (And again) Responde stulto iuxta stultitiam sua^, ne sibi sapiens
esse videatur. Answer not a fool according to his foolyshnes, lest thou be
made like to him. And again: Answer a fool according to his foolyshnes, lest
he may sceme to himself to be wise: It may now of good congruence be verified
in the cause uttered in question for order of ministers apparel. It is not
unknown what arguments and conclusions, what letters and wrytynges have been
used and tossed from man to man in secret sort, for these two or three years,
to disprove the liberty of the children of God in the use of externe things,
to conuel the obedience that true Subjects should perform to the
aurthoritie of their Prince, and to the laws of the Realm establyshed, to the
discredityng and condemnation of such which in a whole conscience think it
lawefull for them to wear, and yet charitably bearyng with the weakness of such
whose consciences are entangled with fearful scrupulositie toward the same.
The small weight of their reasons and arguments so set out, their cause so
hard to defend with learning (so many grave writers of judgment against
them) the matter fullye debated by the best learned men of the Realm of late,
with thorder of the counsel taken in the time of blessed memory King
Edward, and fully concluded: caused diverse men (being yet offended with such
unadvised wrytynges) to hold their pens, without more confutyng or
disprouyng the same, as was easy for them to do: partly stayed by the first
part of Salomons counsel: Ne respondeas stulto iuxa stultitiam suam, ne
efficiaris ei similis. Yea moreover, charity borne to the aucthours of such
wrytynges, moved some men to keep patience, and the ii. Tim. i^.
counsel of S. Paul held others in scilence, whereas he charge his scoler
Timothy thus: Stultas et ineruditas questiones respue, sciens eas parere
pugnas: porro seruu^ domini no^ oportet pugnare, sed placidu^ esse erga omnes,
propensum ad docendum, tolerantem malos cum mansuetudine, erudiente^ eos qui
obsistunt, si quando det illis deus paenitentiam ad agnoscendum veritatem, et
resipiscant a diaboli laqueo, capti ab eo ad ipsius voluntatem. Foolyshe and
unlearned questions put from thee, remembryng that they do but gender strife:
for the sernaunt of the Lord must not strive, but must be peaceable unto all
men, and apt to teach, and one that can suffer the enyll in mekenes, and can
infourme them that resyst, yt that God at any time will give them re pentaunce
for to know the truth, that they may come to themselves again out of the
snare of the devil, which are now taken of him at his will.

To enforce this text at this time in the particular appliyng thereof, shall be
spared yet, for hope of their amendment who have disorderlye behaved them
selves. To eragerat the matter against them, with much alleagyng learned men's
judgments (many dead, some yet alive) otherwise then to instruct them by a
few reported, shall also be spared, as it would have been wyshed, the matter
wholly might rather with scilence have been still buried. But now the
provocation of a treatise so solemlye aduouched, so confidentlye affirmed, of
very late so publicly by prynt diuulged and dispearsed, has made this writer
now to think it high time, to call to remembrance the latter part of
Salomons scntence: Responde stulto iuxta stultitiam suam, ne videatur sibi
sapiens: Not yet professyng by this examination to say half so much as might
be spoken in the comprehension of the cause, nor taking so much advantage
against that inconfiderat writing, as it might deserve to be charged: but
briefly to put to the aucthours consideration the weakness of the reasons, the
sophisticatio^ of the arguments of that discourse, unworthy of it self (to
say the truth) to be once answered, as being so written, as every man (but
such as be either to parcially bent to the cause, or for lack of learning can
not expende the substance of the writing) may perceive that it must needs
fall to ruin and decay of credit of it self, though no man should bend any
force at it, and how soever (in the heat which is now taken) thought to be
wittyly, gravely, inuincibly written, but worthy in deed to be put out in the
name of such, who^ it would specially defend. If ye ask me whom I could
think to be under the protection thereof: Surely I can not see, that diverse
such as be learned, and commonly judged to be amongst this number, can much
joy to fight under that banner, or to run with them to that mark they shoot
at. For it is certain, that many whom this small route, named London
Ministers, would have joined with them for their more honesty, be far from
their determinations in this question, neither so handling it, nor so would
conclude in this cause as they do: Who howsoever (some of them) do yet a little
stay at the using of this apparel in themselves, yet be not of their judgment
to condemn the things of wyckednes, nether in them selves, nor in the use of
the^, as the Ministers in this Church of England be called now to wear them.
And therefore howsoever they would wyshe a liberty to their own consciences
reserved, till they may see more in the cause, yet be they faxre of to condemn
their brothers, whose consciences can serve them for obedience sake to use
them. And therefore I must needs wype a great many out of their brotherhood, in
their singularities contained in this last writing, and say: They be but a very
few in them selves, other then such as have been either unlearnedly brought up,
most in profane occupations, or such as be puffed up in an arrogancy of them
selves, peradventure chargeable to such vanities of assertions, as at this
time I will spare to charge them. God grant they do not by this degree, fall
to the sects of Anabaptists, or Libertines, whereunto some wise and zealous
men of their own friends and Patrones, fear they do make post haste, one
day, openly to profess. Whereupon the adversaries of true religion can win
no great rejoice at these men's ouersightes, as being but a very few, and
counted in deed none of the sincere and learned protestauntes, howsoever for a
time they seemed to be amongst us. For though they be gone out from us, yet
they were belyke never of us. So that the adversaries shall have the whole
state of the Clergy in place and reputation, for learning, wisdom, and
gravity, concordely joined to be wholly against them, to defend the
sincerity of the Gospel, though a few of these make such adoo in our Church
(as stories make mention, was ever wont some to rise in sundry times to trouble
the state of their Churches, where they dwelt.) And good it were that these
English Louanistes, did not to much delyght them selves with any hye
reioysinges, as though the Prince would for disprouyng of a few
counterfaites, dislyke the whole state of the rest of the Clergy, who shall
by Gods grace be able enough to defend the true religion of the Gospel,
which they may hear how the Prince does profess daily and openly, to
maintain and defend to the uttermost jot of the word of God, with
renouncing as well all forrayne authority, as all forrayne doctrine, not
surely grounded upon this stable rock of Gods word. Their fawning flattery
prefaces, their greatly conceived hopes, their busy dispraysyng of better
learned then them selves be, can not so bewitche wise men's heads, or hearts,
but they can discern truth from falsehood, devotion from superstition,
papistrye from the Gospel, tyranny from discipline, Christ from Antichrist.
And therefore sirs, if ye knew how few these are, by whom ye delyght to
slander the learned, how little we think the rest of the Apostles
discredited, though Judas fell out from them, and how these be regarded and
accounted of (so long as they thus continue) and finally, how little we shall
joy of them, and use them, to take the Gospel in defense against you: Ye
would not be so busy to infarce in your books the reproach of these men, to
lade other with envy, the breath of whose pens, ye shall never be able to
answer, say and write what ye can. Your books so fast and hastyly sent over
in great numbers (being not much feared for any substance that is in them)
may for a time relieve you to your sustentation, may be gaineful to your
Printers and Pedlours, may peradventure ieoparde your friends, within this your
natural Country, for readyng and cherishing matter against their own
surety, and against the state of the Realm. But truth is to hye set, for you
to pluck her out of heaven, to manyfestlye known to be by your papers
obscured, and to surely stablished, to drown her in the myrie lakes of your
Sophistical licorous writings. Howsoever ye embosse out your glorious styles,
they be but Superuacaneae conflictationes hominu^ mente corruptorum, i. Tim. vi.
quibus adempta est veritas, qui existima^t quaestu^ essepietate^, with the
forepart of the text there expressed, that is, but superfluous brawlings of men
perverse in heart, from who^ the truth is withdrawn, which think that lucre is
godlynes. etc. Ye were best to understand, Quod qui habitat in coelis. etc.
Psalm. ii.
irridebit omnes Iannes et Mambres, qui resistunt veritati, homines mente
corrupti, reprobi circa fidem, sed non proficient i. Tim. iii.
amplius: siquidem amentia istorum euidens erit omnibus quemadmodum et illorum
fuit. He which is in heaven, shall deride all Jannes and Mambres, which resist
the truth, men of corrupt minds, reprobate in the faith, but they shall
prevail no longer, for their madness shall be utterly known to all men as theyrs
was. Ye should do well to remember Quod dominus est qui custodit veritate^, et
quod veritas magna Psalm. cxlv. iii. Esdr. iiii.
est et fortior pre omnibus, veritas enim manet, et inualescit ineternum, et
viuit et obtinet in secula seculoru^. That it is the Lord which preserves
the truth, for the truth is of great force, and is stronger then all other
things, for verity will remain, will prevail for ever, and will live and
have the victory, world without end. But to draw to an end, and to say some
thing to these upon whom this labor is bestowed, who most glory of this gaye
book of theyrs, I shall wyshe them to have a respect to their former calling
and profession of the Gospel. And as love of grace and truth (I trust) did
first induce them: so God grant that they do not finally fight against this
grace received, and wylfullye peruerte the true sincerity of the Gospel, by
treadyng not aright, overcome by human cogitations, as was Peter for a time,
till Paul did reprehende him. Trustyng that they will so advisedly expende the
earnest counsel of these two notable Fathers, Master Bucer, and master
Martyr, in this their purposed discussyng of the cause, that they will finally
rest in quiet, praysyng God in truth and verity, forsakyng error covered
with zealous persuasion, to the saving of their own souls, to the rejoice of
such Christians to whom they have been teachers, as good subjects ought to do,
to the glory of God. To whom be all honor and dominion for ever.

Amen.
A brief sum of the Reasons in the declaration.
General reasons.
^hese Majors ^ede not so ^uch proof.
All things in the Church ought to edify. 2. Cor. 13. Iuxta potestatem.
Ephe. 2. Iam non estis. Ephe. 4. Idem dedit. 1. Cor. 14. Omnia fiant.
^hese Minors ^e but affit^ed, and not ^^oued.
These orders do not edify, for that they Hinder the simple. Make more
obstinate the papists. Are monumentes of Idolatry. Deuteronomy. xii. Ergo.
Mayor. Precepts of men must not be received. Deuteronomy. 7. Aras eorum. Math. 15.
Frustra me. Esaias. 29. Appropinquat popul.
Minor. These are precepts of men. Ergo. Mayor Offenses and superstition ought
to be avoided. Math. 18. Videte ne. 1. Cor. 10. Omnia mihi. Romans 14. Bonum est
non mand. 2. Cor. 6. Eandem remunerati.
Minor These orders offend. Ergo. Mayor Nothing must be brought into the
Church, besides or contrary to Scripture for princes plesures. Deuteronomy. 4. Non
addetis. Deuteronomy. 5. Non declinabis. 1. Reg. 15. Domus Saul euertitur quod
declinabat. 3. Reg. 12. Reboam amittit. x. tribus. 4. Reg. 20. Ezechias
benedic. quod non declin. 3. Reg. 22. Micheas noluit adulari. Ezech. 13. Haec
dicit dominus. Math. 15. 16. Christus praedicat quae pater mandat. Math. 28.
Apostoli praedicant quae iussit Christus. 1. Cor. 11. Paulus tradit quae
accepit. Phil. 3. Paulus sequendus vt sequitur Christum. 2. Cor. 4. Paulus non
praedicat seipsum.
Minor These orders are besides and contrary to the Scripture. etc. Ergo. Mayor
Christian liberty must be maintained, which Christ has purchased for us.
Joh. 19. Consummatum est. Gala. 3. Christus nos red.

Particular reasons.
In outward apparel there ought to be no difference, as is proved thus. 1.
Reg. 9. Samuel was not known to be a prophet by Saul. 4. Reg. 1. Elias was
not known by Ochozias servants. Math. 3. John Baptist had no such apparel.
Math. 26. Peter was known by his speech. Hier. Eustochiu^ was wylled to have
no notable apparel. Hier. Marcella was told that at Jerusalem there was no
diversity of apparel. The Clergy of Rauenna said, they were to be
discerned from the people by doctrine, not vesture. Cau. 21. q. 4. Holy men
used mean and vile apparel
The minystryng garments ought not to be admitted. For They were taken from
the Jews or Gentyles. Glos. ord. in Ezech. 44. Platina in vita Siluest.
Durand. Rat. diui. 3. Poli. li. 4 Ca. 5. de Inue^t*
They have been abused to Idolatry. Sorcery. Coniuryng.
Men have an evil opinion of them. Papists, that they are holly. Gospellers,
that they ought not use them Bucer. would have them away. He would have
puritatem rituu^.
Peter Martyr. Doct. Ridley. Bishop Jewel
They preachers shall be thought to bring the people to Egypt again: to be
partakers of Idolatry: t^ offend the simple: to hazard their souls: to
defy^ their consciences. The Solicitours of these orders were bluddy
persecutours, whose purposes be to deface the Gospel.

The Examination.
AS you pretend in your preface, that fear lest the Ministers of Gods word
should be brought into contempt, was the cause of the unorderly publishing of
these your small reasons: So it is well known, that the great care which the
chief governors of this Church of England takes, to preserve true and
faithful Ministers from dispite and reproach, moved them to retain and set
forth these orders, as whereby (their hope is) Gods dilligent servants,
accomplishing also other parties of their vocation, might recover again the
ancient dignity of their forefathers, and that Gods holy word and
Sacraments now (by the craft of Satan) somethyng basely esteemed, might also
have their due reverence and honor. Herein they have followed the steps of
wise Princes and good Fathers, who thought it their service not only to
establyshe sound doctrine in matters of faith: but also to redress and
ordeyne rytes for discipline and public quiet, as in the godly counsels
appears, Nicoene, Calcidon, and others. But in your considerations how
smally you have regarded your duty in this common wealth, on this manner to
make the world wonder at your factions wylfulnes, before your superiors (if
you think herein you have any) read over your reasons, it is rather to be
lamented, and prosecuted with tears, then to be blased abroad in words, and
uttered by pen. Surely it may be true here: Nos talem consuetudinem non
habemus nec ecclesiae i. Cor xi
dei: We have no such custom, nor the Churches of god. Leaving then to the
judgment of others, whether you run not headlong the ready way to make your
selves justly, and the ministry also evil spoken of, by not seeking the
peace of the Country where you dwell, and by not obeyng and following, but
breakyng and forsakyng those variable Hie* xxix.
orders and manners, whereby worldly quietness at the least is gotten and
mayntayned, which (as S. Augustine says) is not the usage of the City of
God, touching manners, laws, De ciuit. dei lib. 19. cap. 17
and ordinances, whereby the religion of the living God is not hurt: Leaving
(I say) this, and your consideration to the judgment of others, it shall be
sufficient at this time to weygh the grounds and reasons, which you use in
refusyng to wear apparel and garments, not now of the Popes Church, but of
Christ's Church in England.

It shall not be unnecessary to advertise the Christian reader, that in the
declaration there are much pains bestowed of these discoursours (where as very
little needs) to the intent peradventure, other to advance them selves in
their knowledge of Gods word, or to nip and taunte their fellows and betters
as unlearned and fools. For where as few or none are ignorant, that all
things should be done to edify, no offenses should justly be given, and
Christian liberty should always be defended, and such like: Yet in confirming
of these undoubted truths many words are spent, when as little or nothing is
said of that which in this cause and many others contains the controversy,
that is of the Minor or next proposition: As whether these orders do edify, do
offend, or hurt Christian liberty?

Wherefore think not much, if diverse sentences of scripture tendyng to
stablishe one truth not denied at this time, be briefly collected and
answered together. For those things ought and shall be expended, which make
any thing at all to the pithe of the matter.

The first discourse here, is of edifiyng or buyldyng the Church of Christ,
which all faithful Ministers do acknowledge to be their bounden duty and
service, according to the graces of God bestowed upon them, and never to hinder
and pluck down awhit: whereof much more might be said then is here rehearsed,
if it were needful to wade further in so worthy a matter.

Herewithall in textes and expositions, you would not greatly have enlarged
your book, if it had not ben to make al gods workmen saving your selves
suspected to the world, as pluckers down and destroyers of Gods most holy
Temple, builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and Prophets: Ephe. i^.
when as through the grace of God workyng in them by true and sound doctrine
in this apparel and orders, many earnest laborers of the lords, do travail
to bring his people to the full knowledge of Christ, howsoever you have Ephe.
ii^*
entangeled and accombred the consciences of your hearers.

So then to the two first places, that be out of the second and fourth Chapter
to the Ephesians, no more needs to be spoken, but that all the careful
buylders in this Church of Christ, which have other commanded or received
these lawful orders, first (as they have before time) so do still take pains
to amplify and beautify the spouse of Christ, with the precious jewels of
spiritual wisdom: And secondly do utterly forsake vain, ungodly, and
unprofitable inventions of man, which two things you seem to require by your
note in a true preacher, and can not deny them (if you be not wylfull) to be
in very many vsyng this apparel.

Upon this universal sentence: That Christ's Ministers must build up and not
pull down, you determine that Uicars, Curates, and paryshe Priests ought to
admit no orders which may not manyfestly appear unto them that they do
edify: Geuyng every man in his paryshe an absolute authority, much more
then they had before the prophecy was fulfilled: Kings shall be thy
Nursefathers, and Esai. x^^x.
Queens thy Nurses.

Yet you fearyng the inconveniences that must needs follow so an absurd an
opinion, remember your selves in the next lines and say: That if you might but
conceive an hope, that the use of these things might help forward the Lords
buyldyng, you would not refuse them. So one time, all orders not manifestly
edifiyng, must be condemned, another time if you may hope that they will do
well, you will admit them. This your chaungeable opinion well weyed, differs
not much from that strange saying of the Donatistes, of whose number one
Ticonius said: Quod Aug. Epi xlviii*
volumus sanctum est. What we will is holy.

If you had been in S. Augustines time, when the Church Epi. cxix.
was burdened with human presumptions, so that the condition of the Jews
was more tolerable (as he witnesses) then the state of Christ's Church in
those days: belike you would not have continued preaching and ministering as he
and other did, because those burdens were not at the first dashe clean taken
from your shoulders. But he learned and ^bid.
taught other that: Multa tolleranda, vbi facultus non datur resecandi: Many
things must be borne, when orderly means do not serve to cut them of. Yea,
he tried by experience, that some times profitable alteryng of such things as
were long accustomed, bread trouble in the Church by newenes of change, as
these his words testify. Ipsa quippe Epi. cxviii.
mutatio consuetudinis etiam quae adiuuat vtilitate, nouitate perturbat: For
the very change of custom, as it may do good for the profit thereof, so it
may make much trouble for the newnes thereof. Thus this learned father would
have men to expect in alteration, done by public authority, convenient time
and season, in matters that might be tolerated without Gods heavy displeasure.

Here before you show what ruin and destruction of gods building these few
orders lawfully enjoined do make: frankely you grant, all these things
refused now of you, to be of their own nature indifferent, and that they may
be used, or not used as occasion shall serve.

It is hard to say whether this be the mind of all the Hebre. x.
shrinking and refusing Ministers of London, who are known herein not to be of
one judgment: Yea it is affirmed of you a little after in your declaration,
that they be monumentes of Idolatry, and so to be utterly destroyed: that they
be contrary to Scripture, and so also not to be received, though Princes
command them.

A man might ask of you what use that is which causes these things now not
to be indifferent? the use that has been, or the use that they are now
appointed unto? If the indifferency of these orders hang upon the use: then
we must look whereunto they are ordained, and not wherein they were before
abused.

Now are you come to the chief point of the first argument, that Christ's
Church is not edified by these garments: Which assertion you go about to
persuade two ways. First, because the simple Christians are gre^ued, and are
ready thereby to fall from Christ.

These whom you term simple Christians, are those, who (as may well appear)
persuade themselves to have deep knowleage in Gods word, to have grown to so
certain a perfection, that they can and will sodeynlye judge of all men, and
of all doctrine, and they think them selves to be setteled and quieted in
greater matters then these. They see weyghtyer things in the Church (if they
see any thing at all) whereat they may be grieved, as other good men are, and
yet must be contented, till God grant fit and orderly means to remove them,
with charity to bear, lest the unity of Christ's Church should be rent upon
every light offense, and horrible scisme for trifles be brought in.

But the simple indeed, who are yet to be fed with Hebr. v.
milk, who have not through custom their wits exercised, are sore grieved,
and that iustlye, seeing you not receive indifferent and comely orders: Of
which sort, thousands are driven back, by such kind of disobedience as
yours is, whiles you wylfully withdraw your selves from your duties and
charge of Gods beloved children and the dear flock of Christ: wherein if you
have taught your Nouices that these ordinances, and such other, are
superfluous, idolatrious, and superstitious, when they are for decency and
order sake by lawful authority thus left (upon which teaching their offense
may arise): you ought now on gods behalf otherwise to infourme them. But if
they be taught to take these things as Gods word does prescribe, then your
wearyng shall not be the woundyng of their consciences, neither by Gods grace
shall you need to fear the heavy curse of God, whereof you write.

I pray God it be not (as at S. Augustines time) that Epist. cxviii*
this troublyng of the weak, come not by the contentious obstinacy of some
brethren, as is before said.

Secondly: You would have us think that the receyuyng of these orders does
not edify, because (as you imagine) the obstinate papiste shall be confirmed in
his opinion. This thing is easyer and oftener said of you, then proved as yet.
For truly this may be a means rather to win the adversaries from their
errors, when they see us without superstition or any necessity, turn those
things to good uses, which they fowly abused, and hear us condemn in open
preaching, that which they set so much by. And upon this cause it seems, the
Apostles used long after Christ's ascension the Ceremonies of Moises, and that
in the Temple, to 1. Cor. ix.
win to Christ the obstinate Jews. The histories Ecclesiastical also have
diverse experiences, how much our ancient Note this place of Bed. eccl. lust.
lib. 1. cap. 30. and expende his reasons.
fathers increased Christ's Church by such godly policy. Hence it was, that
they plucked not down all the Jewyshe Sinagoges and Heathenyshe Temples, but
turned them to the service of God: that they altered their feast days: that
they changed their rites to Godly purposes. And that this might be done, it
appears by S. Augustine to Publicola, saying: Cum vero ista vel in honorem
very dei conuertuntur, hoc de illis fit, quod de ipsis hominibus, cum Epist.
cliiii.
ex sacrilegis et impiis in veram religionem mutantur: When these things be
converted unto the honor of the true God, it is of them as it is of the
parties them selves, when they were before committyng sacrilege and impiety,
now they be converted into true religious persons. These fathers thought not
them selves in such things under the commandment which God gave his people
to practice in the land of Canaan, and therefore durst not with an herotcal
spirit destroy all that the Heathen had invented before: But did, Vindicare
tanquam ab iniustis possessoribus in vsum suum, De doctr. Christ. lib. 2. ca.
40.
claim to their own right use (as it were) from the iniust possessours, such
like things as you talk of in this declaration. Neither did almyghtie God
will his people to overthrow the Cananites images and aulters, lest those
Gentyles should be made more obstinate in their false religion Deuteronomy.
(as you allege the cause): but rather (as the text declares) lest Gods
servants should thereby fall unto their idolatry. For they were charged not
to bring that heathenyshe people to Gods true service: but to rote them clean
out of the land which they had so wickedly polluted. Wherefore, you do wrye this
place from his natural sense.

Upon this text you add a note in the margent: That al monumentes of Idolatry
must be destroyed, signifing what your auditors and readers should judge of
these orders: which yet you your selves sometimes acknowledge to be
indifferent, and may be used when occasion shall serve. If these things
required at your hands, be preciselye under that commandment of God to his
people enteryng the land of Canaan: then is all this controversy at an end.
Prove that, and al is done.

It would help you very much in this matter, to consider that there is great
difference betwixt those things that were merely invented of the Heathen, to
the worship of Idols, and to maynteyne idolatry: and those that have been
abused of papists, specially these few things, being first institute for no
such intent.

From this argument of not edifiyng (wherein you 2
would have us rather yield to your saying, then be persuaded by your reasons)
you fall to speak against policy without the compass of Gods word, under
the which you would comprise these orders not impius and wicked. And for want
of matter, through your spirit of ironie, you must (as you do to the Prince,
the Counsel, the Bishops, the learned men ^ wise) give also to the
aduertisementes their gyrde and nip: which (very prudently) thinks it well,
if Ministers receyuyng these orders, teach and protest, for what end and
purpose they take and use the same, whereby others may learn, what difference
there is now when these things are set forth for decency and order, and the
time when such like were enforced as the service of God.

What fault you find with this rule, you declare not. Peradventure you think
those garments yet stained with Idolatry, and therefore not to be received by
any protestation: wherein you are contrary to your selves, to all learned men,
and to the scriptures: Or else you think not this declaration suffient in these
things indifferent, that they be not urged of necessity, that they be only
appointed for decency and order: whereunto you may add more circumstaunces
(if you will) but they are contained under those two: which if the Minister
both hold him self, and diligently declare to other, he may with discharge of
conscience obey his Prince, knowing that comelynes and order, edify the
Church of Christ.

Well, the aduertisements must be defaced with the infamous title of the
invention of man, and such like. And upon what reason shall this be done?
Forsooth it is like the wisdom of them, that would have images (you say) in
Churches, to exercise their strength in refraynyng from the worship of them,
which thing is against the wisdom of God. Deuteronomy. 7.

You should have done the duties of discrete preachers, if you had uttered
this your unlikely lykelyhood, to them that stand in so fond defense of
images, whereof, what the doctrine of this Realm is, it is publykely declared.
And as for these orders, all obedient men well understand, that they are not
given to try any man's perfection: Neither do they pass the wisdom of God,
which in the Scriptures wills all things to be done decently and orderly,
which grants i. Cor. xiiii. i. Pet. ii. Math. xvi. Acts. xv.
the godly magistrate authority of making ecclesiastical laws, which has
given also power to the Church, which promises his spirit to Synodes, yea
for ordeynyng rytes and manners.

But to beat down this policy of man's brain, you say (very little, nay
nothing at all to the purpose) that in things neither commanded, nor
forbidden, we must not follow our own fantasies, lest we hear: In vain do
they Math. xv.
worship me, teaching doctrines the precepts of men.

These precepts of men, wherewith the Prophet and the Apostle say, God is
not worshipped, were such (as Chrysostom Hom. ^^ in Ma^h.
writes) which the seniours had made new other ways then Moses commanded,
and preferred them in Gods service before the law of the Lord, and added them
to Gods word (as iudgeyng it otherwise imperfect) for the salvation of Gods
people. On this manner no man at this time urges these orders.

That wholesome laws of godly magistrates, which serving Co^tra Ci^^* gra^.
lib. iii* ca. li. Ser. 24. de ver. Apost* Epi. 48.
God (as S. Augustine affirms) they make not only for humayne society, but
also for Gods religion, which furthermore he truly terms: Clensing
instruments of the Lords barren flower, profitable terrors, commodious
admonitions, healthsom bounds, medicine right phisical: That these (I say) are
not to be thought the precepts of man, it needs not to call together here
all the ancient fellowship of fathers. Doctor Bucer upon this place may teach
you the same, who most godly pronounces thus: Quicquid homo statuerit, quod
quomodocunque ad vsum proximorum faciat. etc. Whatsoever man shall decree,
which by any means may make to the use of his neighbors, for that the same
is derived from the rule of charity, as be laws civil, domestical statutes,
ceremonies and rytes which Christian men use, thereby to teach or hear
Gods word more commodiouslye, or to pray, and about the Lords Supper and
Baptism, yea, and whatsoever shall be a furtheraunce to pass our life here more
profitablye and decently: That thing ought not to be esteemed as a tradition or
precept of man, though by men it be commanded, but as the tradition or precept
of god. Thus far Doctor Bucer. With whom Master Calvin very well agrees,
saying: Instit. li. 4. ca. 10. par. 30.
That which is part of decency commended unto us by the Apostle, though it be
prescribed by man, is Gods tradition, and not man's, as kneelyng at solemn
prayers and such like. So then if you would have rested upon the censures of
these godly learned men, you should not have needed thus unwisely to have
skoffed at this wisdom of man, contaynyng her self within the limittes of the
wisdom of God, as is before proved, and might be fully justified by infinite
places of Germayne writers, and by their letters of late sent into the Realm
to diverse godly, but for prolixitie.

The third main reason you use, is: That none of Christ's 3
litleones must be offended: Which thing according to your usage, you augment
with sundry textes of Scripture, as if all the men of understanding in this
Realm were yet aslepe, and neither saw nor hard the voice of their master
Christ, and his holy Apostle: But you pass over with silence, that which you
should have substauncially waded through. Vz: That these orders now taken, do
justly offend the weak lambs of Christ's fold. Wherefore to answer to the
general proposition, it is not expedient, seeing it is holden as most true of
all men.

But concerning the offendyng of the weak, briefly: In indifferent things,
if law, for common tranquillity have prescribed no order what ought to be
done, a Christian man ought to have a great regard of his neighbors
conscience, Romans xiiii.
according to S. Paul's doctrine. But if law foreseeyng harms and providing
quietness, have taken lawefull order therein, offense is taken, and not given,
when the subject does his duty in obedience, so severely enjoined him by Gods
word.

Notwithstanding (you say) that a wise shipper in saylyng, will not come nygh
rocks and flattes if he may, but take sea rowme enough. In deed the wise
shipmen of our Church have spyed the rocks of false doctrine, superstition,
and error, whereupon many have been cast away, and to avoid them have taken
rowme enough in the scriptures of God. For outward apparel of them selves,
are not such rocks and flattes (as you do fantasy): neither ever hard you
any of Christ's servants to be in danger of perishing justly by them, as
they be now appointed. Yea, you may behold many a godly passenger under these
orders, saylyng with a straight course toward that heavenly Haven, whereunto he
trusts safely to arrive. Al these men in this ship of Christ, taking example
by the politic governor S. Paul, cry out aloude and say: Non omnia papistica
edificant: All popery does not edify, and are marvelous circumspect and
careful, lest any of Christ's dear flock should be offended.

As for the place alleged by you, where S. Paul forbyddeth ii. Cor. ^^*
Communion with the Gentyles in their idolatricall worshyppyng: if you had
applied it, you should have perceived no sequel thereof. For (thanks be to
God) we dwell not among the Babilonians and Chaldies, we have in our Church no
public worshyppyng of Idolles, no Heathenishe or idolatrical sacrifice, as
were in some place of the city of Corinth, whose society and contagion we
ought to avoid. And if there be in a Church where Christ's Gospel is purely
preached and his sacraments rightly ministered, some evil among the good, as in
one net diverse sorts of fishes, in one field wheat and tares, in one barn
corn and chafe: yet the good are not said to communicate or be defiled of
the badde, as long as they consent not to their wickedness, but depart from
among them, not by corporal separation, but Con. don. post collatt. cap. 5.
etc.
by dissimilitude of life and diversity of manners, though they both use the
same temple, the same table, the same sacraments, as S. Augustine sets out
at large. It is one thing to flee from communicatyng with open professed
idolatry, their prophanes rites and deuylyshe orders, though in heart we
worship God: and another, ryghtly to use rites and fassions abused, all the
abuses being clearly condemned. Of the one we have an express commandment
in Scripture: the other our ancient fathers have practiced before you, and
Gods holy word has not forbidden it.

That you must needs cast away and forsake all those things as have been
brought into the Church besides or contrary to the Scripture. This platte you
enlarge with a dosen several sentences, all which pains you might well have
saved, if you had not minded to have been bytyng and snappyng by the way at your
superiors.

This truth all faithful Christians confirm with you: That concerning faith
and doctrine, concerning remission of sins, and eternal salvation, nothing
ought to be taught or received, which is contrary or not grounded in the
Canonical Scriptures. For holy writ given by the inspiration of God, is not
only a light to our feet, as David says: but Psalm. cxix.
also so profitable, that thereby the man of God may be absolute, being made
perfect unto all good works, as Saint Paul testifies. ii. Tim. iii.


And though this be most true, touching the substance of Christian religion:
yet the manner and order of setting of it forth, is not particularly expressed,
but generally left to the disposition of Christ's Church from time to time,
according to those words of Saint Paul: *Let all i. Cor. xiiii.
things be done comely and orderly. Wherein whatsoever shall be lawfully done to
those purposes, is not to be judged besides the Scriptures. As for example.
Fasting is commanded in Gods word: But what days we should Aug. Ep. 86
fast, or what days we should not, being not there determined, if the
Christian Church decree, it is not besides the Scripture. The ministryng of
Baptism, and the Lords supper is commanded in Gods word: But what days,
what times, what places, in what company, with what prayers before and after,
if the Christian Church decree, it is not besides the Scriptures. And
according to this Saint Augustine writes, touching the receyuyng of the
Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ fasting in the morning: Saluator ideo
non praecepit quo deinceps ordine sumeretur, vt Apostolis Epist. n8.
per quos Ecclesias dispositurus erat, seruaret hunc locum: Our Savior
therefore has not commanded in what order (the Sacrament) should be
afterward received, because he might reserve this place to his Apostles, by
whom he would order the Churches. Thus also the preaching of the Gospel is
commanded in Gods word: but how to do this office in Pulpit or otherwise,
in morning or after noone, and so forth, if the Christian Church decree, it is
not besides the Scripture. The like may be said concerning laws politic of
Princes, affairs and traffic betwixt man and man, whose grounds and rules
are in Gods word: and yet the particular circumstaunces in practicing them
being diverse in sundry Countries, according to the judgment of magistrates,
are not besides Scriptures, when al those diversities have Gods word for their
general rule and end.

And blessed be God, our times are here such, that no Deuteronomy. (...).
man in our Churches presumes to add to Gods word, as acknowledgyng the
perfitnes thereof to our salvation: And that our governors in the fear of God,
eschew Saules i. To. xv.
disobedience: and by ryghteous clemency flee the tyranny of Reboam: and
through the direction of Gods spirit, walk zelously in the paths of godly
Ezechias, in all those things which they find written in the book of Gods
law, to appertain to his true service and worship, not so much weyhing the
displeasures of worldly potentates, as the curses that the most mighty God
powers upon all such as truly and sincerely regard not his religion and
glory.

And blessed be the name of the Lord for ever, that has stirred up such
Bishops and preachers among us, which neither have nor do flatter Princes, to
set up their pleasures above the will and commandment of God, though some
surmise the contrary: As Audiam, certain sectaries laid to the Fathers charge
of Nicaene counsel, that they took an Epiph. li 3. To. pri.
order in the troublesome dissension for keeping Easter day, to please and
flatter Constantine the Emperor, whereas they did it upon inst consideration,
and to avoid scisine.

Surely the examples which you bring in, of wicked Kings and false Prophets,
might have well at this time, in this cause ben pretermitted, as which
concern matters expressly forbidden or commanded by God, but that you would
intimate to some not well stayed, that the Prince in these things suffers
them contrary to Gods word and her lawful authority: which (thanks be to
our heavenly father for his aboundaunt blessings most rychly powered upon her)
is altogether otherwise, or that all preachers and subjects obeyng so orderly
demaundes, are but false Prophets and flatterers. This is very sore judgment,
to condemn all your brethren for manpleasers, that obey their supreme
governor under god in matters indifferent: of whom (as you know) a great
number, when flatterye was much more gaynefull, refused to do it, with no
small danger.

And if you mark your note well: Flattery has not ben Epi. general
always the sure mark of false teachers. For you shall read S. Jude foretell
of some that should despise them that were in authority: You shall read of
the Donatistes, Rogatians, Circumcellions, and Papists, that are rather
disobedient to Aug. Epi. 48.
just and good laws of Princes, for that (as they say) they see not in the
writings of the Evangelists and Apostles any such example.

Now for the manner and condition of true Prophets, Ezec. xiii.
which (you assure us) is, to aduouche always: Haec dicit dominus, Thus
says the Lord: It is maruayle you remembered not, in what things that was
then necessary, and wherein it is required now. Truly you are not so
unskillful, but that you know sundry several things to be left to their
judgment, who may for the more handsome feeding of Christ's sheep, and not
for their own purse, belly, or kitchen, i Cor. xi.
say with S. Paul: * Other things when I come, I will set in an order. Al
rites and fassions which every nation believing may stablishe and use, are not
distinctly rehearsed in Scripture, that the minister may say of every one of
them: Thus says the Lord. It is sufficient in such things, if they truly
serve to (...), that is, seemly order, to retain the which, the Church has
power to abrogate old, and make new laws. Wherein (says Doctor Peter
Martyr) these conditions must be observed: In epi. ^^. ^ et. cap. ^.
First that they be not contrary to Gods word: Then, that iustifitation and
remission of sins be not sought for in them: Thyrdly, that the multitude
ouerwhelme not the Church: Fourthly, that they be not decreed as necessary and
not to be changed: Last of all, that they be not so urged, as if he sinned
dampnablye that sometime omitteth them without offense or contempt. Such laws
then albeit they be not in plain terms and words mentioned in the scripture,
yet having these properties, they are not to be rejected, as if they were by no
manner of means in the word of God.

It is a pitiful case to see how you trouble your selves in comparing Christ
preaching the will of his father, and the Phariseys teaching their own
traditions: as if any man inforceth now man's law, as part of Gods divine
service: or as if these orders upon necessity of salvation must be received,
and Gods blessed word froden under foot. Yet S. Ad cass^^.
Augustine is this bold, touching the observation of profitatable rites in
Christ's Church, that he thinks the contemptuous breaker of Ecclesiastical
orders, to be corrected as transgressors of Gods laws.

The Apostles (you say) preached not the dreams of their Act. x*
own heads: and yet for all that, they made orders for the Church, which
continued their times and season, whereof i. Cor. xi. xiiii.
we read not their particular commission. True it is (as you report) that S.
Paul willed not men to follow his devises, neither preached he him self at
any time. What then? Did he not appoint temperall rites in the Church, which
he had not Verbatim expressly at his masters hands, Ephesians. lib. 3. To. pri.
and which now cease and are not in use? The like is said of such doings
of the other Apostles, whose constitutions were altered after their death.

You conclude thus: Because these things have no commandment nor ground in
Gods word, therefore you refuse them.

First special commandment needs not in this part of Ecclesiastical
discipline. Then edification, order, decency, authority of supreme
magistrates have ground sufficient in the new Testament and old. Last of al,
you should have proved that they had no ground in Scriptures: But that thing
you never once touched, but ran a rouyng upon the Mayor, to bleare the simple
Christians eyes, as if you had said much of the matter, when you never came
toward it.

Passing from this fourth reason, you frame an objection unto your selves, as
it likes your selves, and answer unto it as you list. Your objection is:
That the Prince commanding a thing indifferent (and profitable for the state
of the Church may be added) must be obayed. Whereupon (you say) it must
follow, you disobeyng therein, must both your selves offend, and be a
stumblyng block for others.

In answer hereunto, how sclenderly you excuse your selves and avoid blame,
how daungerously you pass over other matters, it had not ben greatly amiss
to have quietly left, but that this place as well as others, would have
somethyng spoken of it.

The authority (you affirm) of a Prince in these things indifferent, is to
command their good use, and forbid the contrary. Upon which your resolution,
a man may reason with you thus. The good use of indifferent things, is gods
commandment, which a Prince must execute: But this may be a good use of
these orders now taken, as the contrary is not proved by you, and so
consequently the magistrate may call upon the execution of the same. Touching
the Minor, this much we have of your grant, that a time may be, when these
things in Christ's Church may have their good use: But whether that time be
now or nay, there are preiudices against you of the like time heretofore, of
the whole parliament, of the Clergy, of the most part of protestants, and
papists.

As for that power which (you expound) God has given to Princes, whether it
contain all their authority and jurisdiction, as you rehearse it, it shall
not be narrowly scanned at this time. Neither (thanks be given to God) does
the Prince of pleasure, but for further commodity of her subjects, require
this subjection of yours, which how lawfully you withdraw, God knows and
will judge. Ueryly this 1. Cor. iiii.
your declaration in that day, will not be your defense, when the Lord shall
lyghten things that are hyd in darkness, and make the counsel of the hearts
manifest. Also we all nkowe, or ought to know, in what cases we should put in
use that saying of S. Peter: * We ought more to obey God then man. And
therefore we stick not in these things to show grateful hearts, as of those
men, who acknowledge them selves by the means of such a Prince, delivered out
of those miserable cases. We are affrayde to strive contentiouslye about the
variety of king Salomons wives garment (things outward) lest we should hurt
her inward Ad cass
beauty: as S. Augustine thinks to become servants of the Church, a
Queen so pearelesse.

The bonds and limittes which you appoint for true obedience of subjects to
their princes, are very narrow and dangerous. For oftentimes the Subject
ought to obey in things not forbidden by God, and commanded by law, though
he do not plainly perceive either for what good end they are required, or to
what end they will come: as daily experience in common wealths do show. But
(belyke) you will have every man to understand as much as the Prince and
council knows and intends: or else you will set the subject at his choice.

Moreover, here is perylous authority granted to every subject, to determine
upon the Princes laws, proclamations and ordinances, that when they shall see
them (many times otherwise then they are in deed) unprofitable, then shall
they, nay they must not do and accompyshe the same. If you restrain this to
matters Ecclesiastical, you help your selves never awhyt: For every Minister
there has not full power to make and abrogate Ecclesiastical laws, nor yet
knowledge well to judge of them.

This is therefore scarce to give example of true obedience to God and man. For
in not obeying man in such things indifferent, whose use you can not show now
to be wicked, you obey not God, whose minister man is. But I omit here longer
to resite your writing in this point, for good considerations: Which I think,
your self better advised hereafter, will expende.

The fyfth and last reason general, that moves you utterly to refuse the
receyuyng of apparel yet continued and declared, is the consideration of
Christian liberty, which thereby (you think) should be manifestly
infrynged, and so forth. And here you triumph in your textes: how Christ has
delivered us from the bondages of ceremonies and law.

As touching Christian liberty, the faithful man must know, that it is
altogether spiritual, and parteyneth only to the conscience, which must be
pacified concerning the law of God, and next well stayed in things
indifferent. This liberty consists herein, not to be holden and tied with
any religion in external things: but that it may be lawful before God to use
them or omit them, as occasion shall serve. This persuasion a godly man must
always retain and keep safe in his mind: but when he comes to the use and
action of them, then must he moderate and qualify his liberty, according to
charity toward his neighbor, and obedience to his Prince. So though by this
knowledge his mind and conscience is always free: yet his doing is as it were
tied or limited by law or love. Hereupon a well learned man Calu.
says: It is sufficient in Christian liberty to understand, that before God
it is no matter, what meats, or what clothes thou use, though in thy whole
life thou never eat flesh, and though always after thou use in apparel one
color, P. Mar.
and fassion. So has another: Quo ad sensum et doctrinam, semper profitendu^,
adiaphora esse libera, non quo ad usurpationem: A Christian man must always
profess, that indifferent things, as much as appertains to understanding
and doctrine, are free, and not touching their use. Now then forasmuch as
these garments are among things indifferent, we may easylye know how they
are free as parteynyng to our conscience, and yet notwithstanding we may be
obedient to laws without impairyng of Christian liberty. But to the weyghyng
of your reasons.

First, the Lord God be praised, the religion of Christ stands in no such
danger as you bear men in hand it does, by puttyng men in mind to try
those constitutions, that the wise men of the whole Realm have well hoped,
will serve to some good purpose in this congregation of Christ.

Then, no wyttye or Godly man can justly judge our religion to be but Princes
pleasures, if Princes through great deliberation make laws for the Church, and
call upon the practice of the same. You are not ignorant what this smells
of, that is, either of Donatistrie or Papistrie: which sects think always
the true catholics to give to much to Princes and Magistrates, when as by
Gods word they acknowledge them to be supreme governors, not only to see
laws, framed by the Clergy, put in use: but to disanul the naughty, and to
decree good and godly.

Thirdlye, he has traueyled but simply in Scripture, who reasons from the
abolyshyng of Moses ceremonies, to the pluckyng of all good orders out of the
Church. For though Christ, being the body of all those shadows, has
fulfilled them, so that we need not to fear the curse pronounced upon all
them that do not abide in all things that were written in the law: yet we are
not forbidden to use some one of them if it might edify the Church of Christ.
And if they be by all ways forbidden: yet no learned man will gather that no
decent fassyons are needful in the Church.

Last of all, who sees not that these few orders, now to be observed, are not
enjoined as figures or shadows of any thing to come: but as some means (if it
might be for a time) to set forward the buyldyng of God.

The end of these grounds is this: That you fearyng these garments should
be thought necessary, you utterly refuse to admit them. This opinion of
necessity (which you fantasy) neither was annexed to these at the beginning,
neither any wise or learned man in this Church maynteyneth it, neither is it
now by any means confirmed: but plainly the contrary is protested, taught,
and done.

How unnecessary soever you would make men believe Of outward apparel.
that uniformity in outward apparel among Ecclesiastical ministers were, as
by the which you would prove they can not be known: yet you can not be
ignorant, but that such things were under Ecclesiastical discipline: Whereof
(even touching apparel and ornaments) Ciprian following his master Tertullian
says, after great commendation thereof: Hanc sectari salubre est, et auersari
ac negligere laethale. To follow this discipline, it is a healthsome thing: but
to turn from it and neglect it, is as dangerous as death. In this time
Tertullian sharply reprehended a Tert. de vir. vela.
Bishop that suffered a wydowe to sit without a veil in the Church among other
wydowes. Eusalius also a Bishop did cast Eustathius a Priest out of the
Church, because he used an apparel: Qui sacerdotem non deceret, which was
Niceph. li. 9 cap. 45. To. pr. con. Syn. Gang.
not comely for a Priest to wear: The which Eustathius afterward was
condemned of the council in Gangra, for doing many things otherwise then
the order of the Church was, and for alteryng his apparel. I leave here to
rehearse the seventh general council, with the decrees of sundry good
Bishops, that have taken order for their Cleargies apparel, because this
thing only is intended at this time, to show how little the examples brought
by you, conclude that thing which you would.

Saul (you say) did ask Samuel where was the Seers house, when as Samuel
himself was the Seer or Prophet. i. Reg. ix.
As if Samuel might not have on him the Apparel of a Leuite, though Saul
thereby did not know him to be a Prophet. If God stirred up a Prophet among
the Levites, as Samuel was: we read not therefore that he altered his
apparel. This seems rather against you thus: That Samuel though a singular
Leuite, yet in the number of them that went alyke, was not known to have that
gift he had.

Touching Elias, whom Ochozias servants meetyng (...)
knew not to be Elias the prophet: It makes nothing against this, but that
the Levites might have and use a distinct apparel: Yea it appears rather
that Ochozias the king did know him, hearing the description of his apparel
by his servants. And what a kind of reasonyng is this: Strange seruyngmen
did not know Elias to be Elias when they met him: Ergo he was not apparelled as
other Ministers: Dr Ergo his apparel helped not to make him known? Garments
make not the person known by name, but his common function, not his particular
and special gift.

What need you to bring in S. John Baptist, who as Math ^^
he was singulerly called to prepare the way of the Lord, so had he his meat,
diet, and garments singular? This is wonderful shyft, to seek out
extraordinary persons, and leave the ordinary state of Gods ministers: to
search what was done in troublesome times of the Church, and leave the
peaceable government of the same: to allege what a prophet being persecuted
did wear, and so necessaryly infer what we may do in quietness and peace. But
from S. John Baptist doings, one might, as your common kind of reasonyng is,
reason against that you defend thus. Saint John wyllyng the Pharyseys to
repent, never mentioned the castyng away of their supersticious apparel, Ergo
abused apparel may be retained still.

But Peter's example (you suppose) helps your matter Math. xx^^
much, who was known in the high Priests hall by his tongue, and not by his
coat. Neither did Peter preach after the ryngyng of a bell: neither said any
service appointed: neither made sermon in Church or pulpyt: and yet for all
that, you and godly men will thus do. Truly there was then no law of any
godly Magistrate to induce Peter thereunto. If it had been so wayghtie a point
of religion to differ from false Christians in outward apparel (to the which
end all your force is bent) it is marvelous that we have no such example in
the Apostolyke Church.

Here next are brought in of you two women, living solitaryly in a kind of
banyshement, to confirm what the Hie. Epi.
public state of the Clergy either might or did wear. Hierome (you say)
did council Eustochiu^ a virgin to wear apparel, Nulla diuersitate
notabilis, notable by no diversity. Might not this virgin notwithstanding
wear the attire proper for virgins, though she did not differ notably from all
other virgins? If this Eustochium were a maid that Tert. de vel virg. Amb. de
virg.
publicly in the presence of the Church took upon her to keep her virginity
(as diverse then were persuaded to do) then had she the veil: But if she for to
avoid the continual troubles of those times, minded to live sole, and in a
solitary place, she might wear as best lyked her herself.

The like may be answered of Marcella and those worthy queers of Munkes
syngyng in their own language at Jerusalem in those wretched days: of whom
there was Aug. Epist. 76.
none a minister in the Church of Christ, as far as can be gathered. For
Munkes in those days were none of the Clergy: And yet in some places
Collegiate Munkes had Can. 4. li. 2. To. pri. Haer. ^3.
their habit, as appears in the council of Chaldedon, and in Epiphanius.

Now follows somewhat that seems to touch the Clergy, that is: That the
Clergy of Rauenna (as you report) writ to Carolus Caluus, that they should
not differ from the people in apparel, but doctrine. etc.

First (if you will) let these words be referred to the first auctour thereof,
that is, to Celestinus Bishop of Rome, as you partly grant, and then consider
how they further your purpose.

Celestinus, about the year of our Lord. 430. writ to to the Bishops of
France, against certain that brought in upon superstition, Nouitatem vestium
contra morem Ecclesiasticum, New kind of apparel, contrary to the
Ecclesiastical manner, following the outward letter of the Scripture, that is,
they would be: Amicti pallio, et lumbos praecincti: Covered with a cloak, and
gyrte about their loins. Which things because you spyed there, you left To.
(...) C^^. 2.
out these words betwixt your two sentences alleged: Nam si studere
incipiamus nouitati, traditum nobis a patribus ordinem calcabimus, vt locum
superuacuis superstitionibus faciamus: For if we begin to study upon
novelty, we shall tread under foot the order delivered unto us from our
fathers, and so make rowme for superfluous superstitions. Now if you will set
together all these circumstaunces, you shall perceive all to make against you.

First, Celestinus meaning is of them that would serve God rather in garments
then with purity of heart. Then he speaks against those that coming out of
the Laity, will use still lay apparel. Last of all, against those that seek
innouations in such matters, contrary to long prescribed usage and order.
Read his words in his Epistle, and you shall not deny this.

If it please you to urge the words, that we are to be discerned from the
people not by apparel, but by doctrine, you will remember that here is such a
comparison as this: Non misit me Christus baptizare, sed Euangelizare: Christ
has 1. Cor. i.
not sent me to baptize, but to preach the Gospel: and yet Paul baptized. So
they might be separate from the people by apparel: but chiefly it would be
done by doctrine and purity of life.

Why you fled to father these words upon Celestinus, but rather to have them
appear to be the Cleargies of Rauenna, which was. 400. years after Celestinus
was dead: some may think that you feared to put men in mind, that order in
outward apparel was so ancient: or that you would have no help at the
Popes hand: or that you well know that the place made altogether against you.

After this you bring in a patch of Gratians decrees. Cause. 21. q. 4*
Cause. 21. quest. 4. that godly men in old time went in base and vile
apparel. This is a Non sequitur. But see what small help you have at Gratians
hands.

First, all that tract is against the gorgeous, costlye, and light apparel of
the Clergy, which all godly men deteste in all kind of apparel.

Then, the place you recite, is referred to the Prophets times, and
thereabout, as appears in Basil.

Thirdly, there is this decree of the. 7. counc. Nullus eoru^ C^n. 27.
qui. etc. Let none of them that are numbered among the Clergy have any
unseemly apparel, whether he live in the city, or walk on his journey: But
let him use the stoles or side garments which are granted to Clerks. You
may read there also the decrees of Zacharias and Leo, very ancient Bishops
of Rome, that none of the Clergy should wear the apparel of lay men.

Last of all, how far Basilius Magnus was from your mind in this matter,
though you allege his name here, it appears in many places of his works,
but specially in the answer to the. 22. Interrogatorie of the longer rules,
Basil. To. 2.
where after discourse, he has these words: Ex quo quidem illud continget*
etc. Whereupon this shall come to pass, that we shall have a common fashion
among us all in our apparel, and that thereby the Christian may have a singular
and peculier lesson. Yea a little after he says, that it shall be to them, Veluti
pedagogi disciplina, as the discipline of a scoolmaster, to withdraw men from
some of their wicked deeds.

Thus then, neither Samuel, nor Elias, neither John, nor Peter, neither
Hierome, Celestine, nor Basil, make any whyt at all against uniformity of
outward apparel in Ecclesiastical persons, howesoeuer you do abuse their
auctorities: but rather stablyshe and confirm the same.

Before answer be made to the four things that move Of ministryng apparel.
you against the ministering apparel, the reader may be admonished to behold
what rehearsal you make of superfluous apparel, and other superstitious
things, which ought not at this time to be in any question, for that upon
just grounds, god by his magistrate has delivered us from them.

First of all then you judge, that because these two things that remain, come
from the Jews and Gentyles (which yet you do not fully prove) they ought
utterly to be refused. De vn^^ bapt. (...). cap 9.


And yet for all that S. Augustines saying is in these things true: Regula
verissima et inuiolabilis veritatis ostendit. etc. The most true and inviolable
rule of truth, does show, that in all men (meaning of heretics) that thing
is to be improued and amended, which is false and vicious, that is to be
acknowledged and received, which is true and right.

But let us weye this reason further, that would persuade us to use nothing,
that was invented by wicked and unbelieving aucthours. You your selves say out
of Polidor (we know) that God took from the Egiptians linen vestures, abused
of them, and appointed the same for his own service: and we understand, that
the Church of Christ before the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, did chose
certain rites and orders from the Jews, whereupon it may be truly thought,
that it is no great matter from whom that thing first comes, that serves to
godly use. Moses appointed tents, though Hercules had his tithes. Christ
appointed his memorial to be kept in bread and wine, though bread was offered
Ter. de p^^ aduer. Her Ter. de Idol
before to Mithra. Who brought in marriages to be celebrate in Churches? a
Bishop of Rome. Who used the ring first in weddyng? the Heathen. Whence are
tithes taken up till this day? from the Jews. Whence were Seniours in the
primitive Church and yet still? from the Jews. Easter Aug. epi. 113
day and Whitsuntide, general counselles took from the Jews. Besides
Sundays, our fathers feared not to decree Hie. in Gal. cap. 4. Eus. li. 5. ca.
18. eccl. hist. 1. Cor. xi.
certain Holidays, though the Gentyles had their solemnities. Times of
fastinges are appointed, though Martian the Heritike made laws thereof. But
what need long searching in this matter, when Saint Paul institute a feast in
Christian Churches about the Communion time, though the Gentiles there away had
their (...) common bankettes in their ydoles temples. And the Gown that you
your selves would so gladly minister in, seems to come either from Turks or
Papists. It is like the age was never before this, that men made them selves
scrupulous, whence that thing was taken, which might serve in common wealth or
Church, to some profitable end.

Well, be it as Polidore, Glossa ord. and Hierome says, that the Egiptians
used linen clothes: yet Hierome finds no fault with all the Clergy of his
time, who al used such white apparel, as appears in the confutation of the
Pelagians, who laid to his charge, and other, their apparel and ornaments, as
contrary to God. Quae sunt rogo inimicitiae Lib. pri. aduer. pelag
contra deum, si tunicam habuero mundiore^: Si episcopus, presbiter, et
diaconus, et reliquus ordo ecclesiasticus in administratione sacrificiorum
candida vest processerint, etc. What enmity (I pray you) is this against God:
if I have a more clean coat: if the Bishop, Priest, and Deacon, and the rest
of the Ecclesiastical order, at the administration of sacrifice, go in white
apparel? It appears Saint Hierome charge them as Pelagians, who speak
against white garments in the Church. Neither were these vestures in price
only in the occidental Church: but also in the oriental Church, as
Chrysostom shows plainly in a Hom. 60.
Sermon to the people of Antioche, wyllyng the Priests to take diligent care
to whom they did minister the Sacrament of Christ's body and blood, saying: Hoc
vestra dignitas est. etc. This is your worship, this is your safety, this is
your crown: and not because ye go round about in the An. do. 400.
Church, in a white and a shining garment. So then in those fathers days, men
did not cavil against their white vestures in the Church, because they were
fetched from the Heathens or Jews.

Here one thing must not be omitted that S. Hierome in Ezec. xliiii.
the same place where he speaks of the Egiptians lynnen clothes, has also
these words: Porro religio diuina alterum habitu^ habet in ministerio, alterum
in vsu vitaque communit The religion of god has one habit in the
ministration, and another in common use and life.

As for Platinas Albe, it is not here to be spoken of: neither do men take for
laws, whatsoever Durandus writes, though yet out of his words no such
necessity need to be gathered, as you would have to follow.

Besides this, it is not thought reason sufficient, to detest the Surplesse or
other apparel, because they may serve also for some signification. For the
apparel of Christian men would be such, as it might speak, or as it were
preach some part of godlynes to them selves and others. So it seems S. Peter
would have women to order their attire. i. Pet. iii.
So Tertullian says: Ipse habitus sonat: The habit De pallio. De cultu foem.
it self gives a lesson. So in another place: Cur mores meos habitus non
pronuntiat? Why does not the apparel show forth my manners? So S. Hierome
says: Tanta debet esse. etc. Such knowledge and learning should be in the
Priest Ad fab.
of God, that his going, mouyng, and all things, should by some signification,
speak. He ought to conceive the truth in his mind, and to sound out the
same in his habit and apparel, that whatsoever he does, whatsoever he
speaks, it might be doctrine to the people. To this purpose has Clemens Lib.
2. pa^^ cap. 10. mart Iulit.
Alexand. and Basil spoken: but it shall not be needful now to rehearse
their testimonies, when as by these we may perceive that vestures may have
their good significations: and yet are we not bound to believe every fond
meaning, as such idle brayned Durandes do bring or collect.

Wherefore if you would have waighed, what god, Christ, S. Paul, and many godly
men have done in things invented by Panims and misbeleuers: you would not for
the first aucthours refuse a commodity, but use to Gods glory that, which
others abused to his dishonor, saying to them as Tertullian said to Palliu^, a
vesture of ydolatours: Gaude pallium, quia melior de philosophia dignata est,
ex quo Christianum vestire caepisti: Rejoice O Pallium, that a better De pallio*
kind of philosophy has vouchsafed to receive thee, since thou have begone to
clothe a Christian.

The next let that stops you from wearyng these garments, 2
is, that they have been abused to Sorcerie, Coniuring, and Idolatry: and yet
when a man has perused that which you have uttered in many words, there is
no more said against any apparel now remaynyng, then that the Surplesse
served to make holywater, without the which (you say) no cyrcle could be
kept. These be but silly sleightes to dasell the eyes of the weak, on this
manner, to make so huge a cry in so small a matter.

If a papist had you in handelyng (whose wyckednes is shameful, and religion
most vnpure) he would bid you look over your book better, when you say
holywater cannot be made without a Surplesse. Well, admit the Surplesse was
used not only to make holywater, but also some time to coniuryng: must it
therefore never serve to good use again? Shall we make this law upon your
head, that such things as have once served to wicked purposes, can never be
set up in good place again? What and if men conjure in their usual apparel?
What if men conjure with the robes, scepter, and crown of Princes? What if men
conjure in the name of the Lord, or other Princes names? Shall we of
necessity throw away all these things, as polluted with service of the
devil? Howsoever you would make a purgation of these things, surely wise men
both has and can turn that to serve the glory of God, which once served to
bad uses.

It is a notable saying of S. Augustine, touching the manner of the City of God
in the apparel and diet of them that are made citizens thereof, that it
changes nothing: De ciui* dei. ^^ 9* ca. 19.
Si non est contra diuina praecepta: if it be not contrary to Gods
commandments: Vnde ipsos quoque philosophos, quando Christiani fiunt, non
habitum vel consuetudinem victus, quae nihil impedit religionem, sed falsa
dogmata mutare compellit: Whereupon it compels not the Philosophers when
they are made Christians, to change their apparel and diet, which hinder not
religion: but their false opinions. This was the practice of the Church of
God, which now (belyke) you would turn vpsyde down: and yet a hallowed and
christened bell you can well bear to ring to a Sermon: you can be content
Dirige money be converted to preachynges: solemasse priests be made good
preachers: you would not be displeased if Monasteries to be plucked down,
were converted to good uses. If you look on your Churches and Pulpyttes, you
shall find that they were horribly abused. Be not therefore herein to rash,
in utterly condemnyng those things, which wicked men framed for a time to
their fantasy.

But sorcerers and coniurers (you say) for their instruments must needs have
help of these things. You make men marueyle how they coniured before Christ
came: i. Re. xxv^^
whence the woman that raised up Samuel had her instruments consecrate: how
Simon Magus in the Apostles Act. viii.
times wrought all his wonders: and what Priest made holywater for the son of
Sceua the Jewe: and how now Act. xix.
among the Painims and Turks men are able to work their feats, though none
be there in Surplesses to help forward their work. You shall find it
therefore otherwise then you say, that coniuryng and sorcerie will continue but
to well without these garments.

There is a third thing that stirs you to refuse this 3
apparel: and that is, the opinion which men had and have still (as you do
think with your selves) of these garments.

Whether the blind papiste, the weak papiste, and simple Ghospeller (as you
term them) have these opinions now aduouched, it is rather phanta^^ed of
some, then believed of the best part. Peradventure you show what you have
taught them to suppose of these matters, and therefore trustyng that they have
learned their lesson, you conclude thus of every one of their minds. And if it
were so, that they had such estimation of these garments, you hard out of S.
Augustine the manner of Christ's Church to be, to refourme their false opinion
by wholesome and sound doctrine. For there is no manner of order that men can
take, wherein some may not have a fond opinion: As the Phariseys had D. Bucer.
in washyng their hands, in their apparel, and yet the things are not taken
away by the Gospel: As also now some have in fasting days, the Sundays,
fysshe days, alms gathered for the poor, in Sermons at buryals, and such
others: and yet it is not thought expedient, that such things out of hand
should be altered.

Concerning Doctor Bucers judgment in this matter M^rk. vii.
of garments, you first allege a saying of his: but when, to whom, where, and
of what particular apparel, you declare not. In deed this good father, in the
beginning of his letter to Bishop Hooper has, that he would have been at some
great cost, so that this controversy either had never ben moved, or very
speedyly repressed and extinct. And in few lines after, he wishes to bear
some hard penance in his body, so that they were orderly put away (not by
private authority) in respect of the abuse: of the abuse (I say) which he
saw had so great strength then in many places of England.

But you (peradventure) fearyng lest this his saying were not so strong upon
your part as you wyshed, you farther say, that he wylleth in such case as
year now, in no wise to receive them. Whereunto you cite his exposition upon
the. xviii. Chapter of Saint Matthew.

This place if you would have indifferently rehearsed, you should have opened
to the world, that his mind was, that some ceremonies abused, might be still
retained. His words are these, in the beginning almost of that his exposition:

Fateor equidem, ^^^t ab Antichristis inuectum sit. etc. In cap. 18. Math.
Though whatsoever thing is decreed, contrary to the liberty of externe
matters, it has been brought in by Antichrists, as the difference of persons,
meats, days, places, and very many more: yet because commonly men were
persuaded that all those things were the commandments of the Church
directed by the spirit of God, so received all those things as coming from
the will of God: I acknowledge in deed, that reason it is, we use
circumspectly even now the liberty obtained by Christ, and with Paul sometime
circumcise Timothy, that is, that we use well some ceremonies, which others
abused, taking occasion thereby to teach Christ purely, although by no means
these inventions of man can be compared with circumcision, or the like
ordinances of God. Thus far Doctor Bucer.

In this sentence though many things may be noted: as that the false opinion
of men did not persuade him to cast all these things away: as that these
things were not to be refused, because they were the devises of man: as that
occasion might hereby be taken to preach Christ purely, and such other: yet
it shall suffice to put you in mind, that he thinks godly men may well use
some rites which were abused before time. So that if you take one piece of his
exposition with another, you shall not need to term your betters and fellow
servants in Christ that receive this apparel, to be enemies or shrinkers.

This well learned fathers words, to his friend beyond the sea well wayed,
makes nothing against the orders now practiced. For we may and do (praise be
to God) hold fast Puritatem rituum et doctrine, the purity of rytes and
doctrine, and also flee and detest the leven of Antichrist, with all erroures
and superstition, though we keep these few ordinances, according to the rules
of Gods book, wherein men had superstition before us. There is a difference
(you know) betwixt the purity of rites, and the clean taking away of all.
But peruse this godly man's Epistle.

Here you rehearse doctor Peter Martyr by peccemeale, P. Mart*
when as there is no writer of these days more evidently against you. But
because you would have men to suppose that all the learned ran upon your
side, you are content also that this man should speak two words, rather then
be thought to keep silence. As touching this great Clerks mind, peruse over
his Epistle that follows, and look on his Commentaries upon the first to the
Corinthians. Doct. Ridl.


That glorious Martyr of Christ doctor Rydley, you report, how he being
required of papisticall persecutours to do on all their massyng apparel, that
thereby the papists might rejoice and work their spite, he (you say) refused
them, and spoke then vehemently against them. Surely herein he did like a
constant professor of Christ's religion, perceyuyng the end and purpose
naught and wicked, wherefore those things were then enforced upon him. It was
meet that he should not then yield one jot to them, that sought to bring him
into spiritual bondage again. But Galat. iii.
every man that will, may see a great vnlikelyhood betwixt those times and
ours, betwixt their use then, and now, betwixt their end and commandments,
and those that be now.

What injury you do to that worthy Bishop Master Jewel, in framing his
sentence to serve your humor, al men that know him, see, and further
understand that he is not of your mind. You would feign (belike) make a
number, if you might, wherefore you will have one way, that you want another.
They that require your conformity in these things, having by Gods law and
man's, the oversight also of Gods people in this land, have good hope that
these things (wherein they wyshe that you go forward with them to the work
of Gods buyldyng) will do good, and not hurt, in this Church at this season,
according to those words which you bring out of that excellent work of so
learned a Bishop. They well weye the nature of their people, the manifold
occasion they may obtain hereby, to spread abroad the sweet smellyng savor
of the Gospel of Christ, with diverse other the like considerations. You had
done well, if you would have made some proof in these matters, before you so
confidently bare the matter down with your undoubted asseueration that they do
hurt, and want al good properties: as if you saw in one of your paroeces, what
is convenient for the whole Realm. And here with this stout denial, wanting
his proses, you conclude the opinions of men, which all both alive and dead,
are (as does fully appear) clean contrary to your judgment in these matters
of garments.

In the fourth and last place, you consider what shall happen 4.
to yourselues, if you receive these rites, as you may well do with the rest of
your brethren, who fight in the lords warfare, a good fight, having faith and
a good conscience: You shall be thought (you say) to bring the people into Egypt
again.

The wearyng of this apparel, which (as you often testify) is in his own
nature indifferent, cannot be lykened to the bondage of Egypt, which is
slavery to sin, error and superstition. The substance of popish religion
may well be compared to those cheynes, for that many are sure tied there with
ignorance and blyndnes, from the which you may still go forward (to Gods
praise and your own discharge) by discrete and diligent teaching, to loose
Gods people sitting in darkness, and in the shadow of death, as many a godly
man does yet still, following the worthy examples of Aug. Epist. 117.
wise preachers aforetyme, who in such like things contented themselves with
the manner of the region, where they De ciuit. dei li. 19* ci 19.
preached, and never wylled them to lay aside their Heathenishe apparel, no
more then almighty God commanded his people to cast away from them the
Agiptians clothes, Exo. xii.
when he delivered them thence, and preached unto them new laws and
ordinances. Though Moses suffered the people so redeemed from captivity, to
use the Egiptians apparel: yet no man thought that he would ever bring them
into Egypt again. Thus then by doctrine if you labor still to pull some out
of captivity and darkness, and go before your flock on that manner, as S. Paul
speaks, you should i. Tim. iiii*
be a pattern, in word, in conversation, in love, in spirit, in faith, and
pureness, you need not to deem of yourselues worse then all godly men will
judge of you, that is, that you be workmen that need not to be ashamed,
rightly dividing the word of God, and geuyng Gods household meat in due ii.
Tim. ii.
season. You know how you must instruct in meekenes and Mat. xxiiii.
obedience all men, prouyng if God at any time will give them repentance, that
they may understand the truth, ii. Tim. ii.
and that they may come to amendment out of the snares of the devil: And also
you know, that wherein you teach Romans ii.
other men, you must specially teach your selves, so doing, you shall not
lead your flock to Egypt again. For they turn to Egypt, who wallowe again
in the mire of their 2. Pet. ii.
sins and errors, who after they were once lightened, and had tasted of the
heavenly gift, and were made partakers of the holy ghost, make a mock of the
son of God (as it is Hebr. vi.
written to the Hebrews) whose case is very lamentable.

You have taught (you say) as Tertullian did: That nothing must be taken from
the Idol. Tertullian in that place speaks of that thing, which was first
invented, A condidatis diaboli, of the Deuyls professors, or of them that were
mere Idolatours: then he speaks of that thing De corona milit.
which was, Dicatu^ ipsis a primordio, dedicate to set forth the worship done
to idols from the beginning. Which two conditions you find not in these
matters now talked of. For they were brought into the Church by them that
professed the same God and Christ that we do: neither were they appointed to
serve any, saving the true God, since the coming of the son of God: And
therefore you misreport this authority, and such like.

Tertullian dissenteth very much from your opinion in the wearyng of abused
apparel, as it appears where he De idolol.
handeleth somewhat this matter, saying: First the causes must be considered,
for the which a man does any service or duty: Then he grants that the
purple robe which was used of idolatrous priests, might be worn, if it were
a token of birth, of kynne, or of order. Moreover, in that De cor. mil.
place whence you fetch your authority, he thinks that somethynges invented
and abused of Idolatours, may serve both to our use, and the service of God, if
they have any profit, help, or comfort for the life of man, as at large is
there set out, where he inueyeth sharply against the Garlande, being then
worn both of idolatours among Christian men without all kind of commodity,
and also of the Idol itself, which was decked therewith. Wherefore (if you had
meant plainly) you might have translated these words, In habitu idoli, in the
habit of the idol: and not in the habit of an idolatour, as you have done.

What you have taught also (as you write) of the Mass and the Popes holy
creatures, you may in that still continue as occasion shall serve. Yet it is a
great marueyle that you see not, that it is far worse to communicate in false
religion and idolatrous Sacraments, then to wear the apparel of the Heathens
and such like, specially when all false and erroneous opinion is quyte removed
from them. Tertullian says, that many Christian men took up Pallium De pall.
a Heathenyshe vesture. Hierome says, that many Godly Ad fab.
men wore the Greek Philosophers weed, so that therefore they were poynted at
as they went. Clemens (if you like his Cle. recog. 7
authority) says, S. Peter had upon him that garment called Pallium.
Chrysostom says, that Paul also sent for his ii. Tim. iiii.
Pallium, a Romysh garment, for his use, and yet these were not thought, nay
they would not communicate with the Gentyles in their seruyng of deuyls. Many
an honest man Ter. de p^l.
wears a Hatte, which was the privilege of Ceres priests Au. gell. lib. cap.
15.
and Jupiters: and yet detesteth idolatry. Many a godly Leuite preached Christ
(no doubt of it) in his Jewysh apparel: and yet he was well known to flee
Jewyshe religion. It is not then (as you think) as great an evil to wear
garments abused, as to be partaker of idolatrous sacrifice, specially when as
to the godly Christian all things are sanctified.

Now at length are you come to the Epiloge (as it were) Epilog.
or full conclusion of your work, and pretend great fear, where as little
needs, and allege feeble causes for so stout a refusal, and brag of
courageous constancy to much out of time. If you have taught (for your
teaching you oftentimes tell us of, as wherein (belyke) you could not sometime
indiscreetly behave yourselues) that no holiness is to be hanged upon any kind
of apparel: that they be superfluous of themselves toward our salvation: that
some have been abused to superstition: and if you so declare still, and yet not
without lawful authority, upon some good considerations, and to an end both
political and also profitable: now use these things which you know other
godly are contented to wear, not for holiness, salvation, or superstition, but
that they would (as it were) redeem the time of preaching Christ's Gospel to
his people, by Gods grace, none of those sorts of men, for whom you (and we
also) are careful, shall by you iustlye be hurt: neither shall your doctrine
ryghtly be called into suspicion, as which was and is all one, though it be
uttered in apparel, rather appointed by order, then devised and chosen by
private men's heads.

This many men think very strange in you, that you stand in greater fear
that men will believe rather your apparel then your words: your coat, then
your preaching: your outward show, then your inward mind often opened by
speech, and playnelye set before them to perceive. What do you judge of Gods
people, that they be so much without sense and understanding? You fear the
thing yourselues imagine, and imagine even what you list.

Here next may be seen your severe and sharp sentence upon all your brethren
and fellow ministers, when you in yourselues pronounce but hell and dampnation
to all them which upon sincere love toward the flock of Christ, having ^*
Cor. xvi.
a wide door opened unto them by gods singular grace, to spread abroad the
knowledge of Christ, have not such regard in what apparel they should enter
and feed, as to be found faithful dispensours of the mysteries of God. In
which paynefull service if they go forward to the end, they shall hear, not
that terrible voice upon the naughty servant, which you utter: but the
comfortable saying to the good servant, Luke xix.
well good servant. etc. Luke xix.


In the judgment of all wise men, you had done right well, if you had either
stayed your pen in this place, or spoken more plainly for the discharge of
some, when as you notify to the world, that the earnest solicitours of these
matters were blouddy persecutours, and still bear back in the religion of
Christ.

Surely the sagest and sobrest in this common wealth and Church, conceive a
better opinion of them that first stablyshed these things by law, and of them
also which of duty now call upon the execution of the same, as they may
rightlye of them, by whom chiefelye all Romyshe religion, with superstition and
error, was through the spirit of God bannyshed this Realm.

Well, howesoeuer it has pleased you for spite against some one, to bring a
great number of very godly in obloqui and suspicion, if the things required be
indifferent in themselves, and not so horrible and dangerous for this Church
at these days (as the prudent and chare overseers judge, even as it were in
the sight of Christ, to whom they must render an account for his dear flock)
what matter is it who they be that call upon you to accomplish your duty?
Unless you think that no man ought to make general laws in the like cases,
but let every Curate be supreme governor in his own paryshe. Which loose
imagination, what inconvenience it will draw with it, you may well consider.

How innocent hands they have from the blood of all Gods Saints, who under a
most godly, virtuous, and pure regiment, deal with you al manner of ways, that
you slip not from your loyal obedience, yea though they should use toward
some of you charitable severity, terrible lenity, auengement medicinal (as S.
Augustine sets out the true contra lit. Petil. li. 3. cap. 4.
ecclesiastical discipline) not only the wise within this Realm understand:
but the enemies also without, confess.

But because your enemies, as you surmize, put you in mind of your duetiful
subjection, you will not be cowards (you say) yeeldyng your weapons to your
adversaries hands: As if by wearyng this apparel, the sword of Gods word
were wrested out of your handelyng, where as (you know well enough) in these
orders you may manfully cast ii. Cor. x.
down strong holds, overthrow imaginations, and every high thing that
exalts himself against the knowledge of God, and bring into captivity all
understanding, to the obedience of Christ, yea and take vengeance of all
disobedience, as S. Paul describes at large the faithful preachers weapons
and fight. Nay God grant this indiscreet dealyng of yours, be not a voluntarye
throwyng away of your weapons in deed, marvelous dangerous also to Christ's
people committed to your charge, whiles you open thus a gappe for hirelynges to
creep in, and defend not your flocks from the great peryls of heinous
errors, and ungodliness of life, because some having interest, aswellas you,
in your sheep, show unto you an orderly point or two.

Last of all, you request two things. The one: That you may keep your
conscience undefiled. This your petition in some things touching the worship
of God, might have his place: But in these matters (which you call indifferent)
what is it that should defyle you? the thing itself, or your weak opinion of
it? The thing itself does not pollute you: For (as S. Paul says) to the
pure, all things are pure. Tit. pri.
And again: Nothing is common or unclean of itself. Romans xiiii.
Now as concerning your weakness (thanks be to God) that which the same S.
Paul reports of the Corinthes, may be verified of you: We all have
knowledge. And: We i. Cor. viii.
are sure that an Idol is nothing in the world, and that there is none other
God but one. It were to be wyshed (and would to God there were no examples now
of it) that none of them which pretend herein a straytnes of conscience, did
Math. xxiii
strain a Gnat, and swallowe a Camel.

Next you require, freedom to teach your flocks by doctrine. This thing your
bounden obedience may easylye obtain: where as by your own wylfulnes, you
deprive yourselues thereof. Then you would go before your sheep in that which
you have taught. If it be as far as becomes your own persons and degree,
you shall deserve thanks, whenever you perform it* For though it chance
so oftentimes, that many things are to be taught of themselves indifferent:
yet in your example it shall not be lawefull for you to use them before your
paroeces as you list. Meet is it that Christian people hear diverse times of
the freedom of conscience, in meats, places, times, and days: and yet
neither you nor they ought to disturb political order lawfully taken.

Which disturbaunce of public quiet in rites and ordinances (which may be
for the variety of places diverse, and yet to be straytly observed) what a
great offense it is, not only the Scriptures may teach you, and the usage of
Christ's true Church: but also the determination of this Church in England,
both agreed upon in king Edwardes days, and also testified and subscribed by
them themselves, who now would gaynsay their own doings then. The words
which the whole Sinode were well pleased withal, and whereunto all the
Cleargies hands are set to, be these:

It is not necessary that traditions and ceremonies be in all places one or
utterly like, for at all times they have been diverse, and may be changed
according to the diversities of Countries, times, and men's manners, so that
nothing be ordered against the word of God. Whosoever through
his private judgment, wyllyngly and purposely does openly In the articles
agreed in the last Sinode.
break the traditions and ceremonies of the Church, which be not repugnaunt to
the word of God, and be ordained and approved by common authority, ought to be
rebuked openly (that other may fear to do the like) as one that offends
against the common order of the Church, and hurts the authority of the
Magistrate, and wounds the consciences of the weak brethren.

After these Godly men's judgments, if you go before your flock in this quiet
manner, your example verily shall edify much.

Thus therefore, if we al shall be faithful and wise servants, Luke xii.
geuyng our masters household their duty of meat in due season, and also be
found by our Lord, when he comes, so doing, happy shall we be, and we shall
have our portion, not with the hypocrites; where is weepyng and gnashyng of
teeth: but with the blessed in the kingdom of the most mighty God, which is
king of kings and Lord of Lords, to whom be honor and rule everlasting.

Amen.
Ephesians. 4. But let us follow the truth in love, and in all things grow up
into him which is the head, that is Christ.
Phil. 3. Nevertheless, in that whereunto we are come, let us proceade by one
rule, that we may be of one accord.
A prayer to be said daily of a Christian man, for the Church.
Promissam pacem, tua nunc ecclesia Christ,
Insano mundi turbine pressa, petit*
Euigila tandem, fluctus compesce furentes,
Fac tibi non pereant, quos pater ipse dedit.
THe Church O Christ thy spouse, oppressed with worldly spite,
Thy joyful peace does crave, by thee to her behight.
Awake sweet Lord awake, and still this raging sea,
That thine elect he saude, which once were geune to thee.
FINIS.
Doctissimo viro D. Martino Bucero Theologiae in Academia Cantabrigiensi
professori Regio, Thomas Cantuariensis.
AFter my hearty salutations right welbebeloued Master Bucer, I have read that
book which ye have sent to Doctor Peter Alexander, concerning the
controversy betwixt Master Hoper, and the Bishop of London: in which book,
many things are learnedly declared, and largely disputed. Wherefore now I
pray you, that ye would send unto me your judgment of these questions
expressed, with as short brevity of words as ye can.

Whether without the offense of God, it may be lawful to the Ministers of the
Church of England, to use those vestures which at these days they wear,
and so be prescribed of the magistrate.

Whether he that shall affirm that it is unlawful, or shall refuse to wear
this apparel, offends against God, for that he says that thing to be
unclean that God has sanctified: and offend against the magistrate, for that
he disturbeth the politic order.

To these questions, if ye will make most brieft answer, and send unto me
your judgment as soon as ye may possibly, you shall do me great pleasure.

God be with you. From Lambeth the second of December.
The answer of M. Bucer to the foresaid letters.
AFter I had received yesterday toward night, the letters of your most
Reverend fatherhood, immediatlye I applied my mind to answer, bearyng in
remembrance what I owe unto your Fatherhood, especially in such a matter, as
is most agreeyng to my ministry. Your fatherhood requires of me, that I would
write my sentence with as much brevity of words as I could, to the questions
proposed unto me.

I must needs confess that I am very hardely brought to utter my judgment to
particular questions in the restitution of religion, specially such as be
intricated with great controversies amongst godly men. For as the holy
scriptures and daily experience teaches, Satan procures all that he can, to
set them together at variaunce with bitter contentions in the articles of
doctrine and discipline of Christ, especially such men who be godly stirred to
receive, and to restore the kingdom of Christ: whose godly endeuoures he
labors, if he can not make them quite frustrate, yet by his sleyght to
hinder them, whereby they should not attempt a perfect restitution of the
Church, if they joined together with their uttermost power. God requires of us
that we should worship him with all our heart, with all our soul, and with
our whole power, and that we should at once take upon us the sweet yoke of
his son. Therefore now he calls upon us by the terror of his judgment,
where he has sent so great light of his truth, as at this day does appear,
whatsoever untoward wills men have, that they can not plainly withdraw them
selves from his commandments, and utterly to reject the yoke of his son.
Which matter Satan understands well enough, and he is not ignorant how
feign we would be Gods by our first corrupted Nativity, and how we would
gladly temper all religion to serve our lusts and affections, there upon he
would persuade men to go in a certain mean (where as none can be in deed)
that is, that men may refuse and do some things at their pleasures to serve
their only Lord God, which things yet he reputeth not so acceptable in them
selves, nor man him self thinks his affections to be brydeled by them: but
in such things wherein the whole worship of God does consist, and our whole
salvation does stand, our flesh being the very lump of sin and perdition,
is wonderfully crucified, for that he can not make him self God, qualifiyng
and moderatyng Gods eternal precepts. With this crafty sleyght, has that
ancient enemy driven miserable Germany unto these present calamities,
wherewith they be now oppressed. God forbid, Christ Jesus I say our only
Savior forbid, that he preuayleth against England with this crafty
sutteltie. But now to the questions according to my duty.

Concerning the former, this is my sentence, which I believe I have learned of
the holy Scriptures. First I would not impart my aunsweres to any ministers of
the English Churches, but to such as be the true and faithful dispensours of
all the mysteries of God, such as do labor to deliver unto the people, with
great fidelity, the whole Gospel of Christ, his whole doctrine and
discipline, and labor to instyll it and beat it into their minds. They that
be such Ministers of the Churches of England, may as I think, wear with Gods
pleasure, those vestures which be at this day in use: And they I think shall
do so much the better after they have preached the clear doctrine of Christ
our Savior, with the detection and detestation, as well of the whole Antichrist
of Rome, as of any other adversary to Christ: If they then profess by the
wearyng of these garments, to have no purpose at all to stablyshe any wicked
deuyses that Antichrist has obtruded to the people: Nor that Priests be of
them selves more holy, or more able to pacify God, then other Christian men
be: Nor that they present Christ to the father in the holy communion (as they
use to affirm or that they can apply his merit at their pleasure, by the
virtue of the work it self to any man, more then he does receive by his own
proper faith, of the words and sacraments of God. So that also he professes,
that he thereby do not mean Aaronicall rites to be restored again: but that
he does by his fact, perform only his obedience to the Kings Majesty, and
to such whom God has appointed to determine of these external rites of the
Church, with common consent by the word of God, to this end, that all
offenses of disorder, and breach of public consent, may be avoided: And also
to protest that every creature of God is good to Godly men, yea also for
signification. And therefore all true Godly men, may Godly use those rites,
which wicked men have abused, howesoeuer ungodly.

And furthermore, to protest that they, neither the kings majesty, nor the
great council of the Realm, mean to retain or to cheryshe any superstition
in using these vestures. But forasmuch as the use of these vestures, has been
practiced godly of the right holy fathers, before the Pope was Antichrist of
Rome, and may at this day serve to the setting forth of the holy ministry,
and of the whole Christian profession, to the instruction of the younger and
simpler people, so that there be a godly signification joined thereunto, and
the same also godly taught. And that they declare, that the rulers would not
remove these vestures, whereby they might give occasion to the weaker, in the
faith, to despise or contemn the true ministry of Christ: or else to give them
any suspicion by so doing, as though they were led with a certain
irreligious leuitie, to overthrow and abolyshe all things used before in
religion, yea of those things which may serve to some good use.

And further, they may protest, that the people ought, in beholding these
vestures, to have their meditation upon no other thing, but upon the heavenly
purity and bryghtnes, and of the apparellyng of all good virtues, which he
both set out, and also be exhibited to all true beleuers, by the holy ministry
of the Church, and that both they and their ministers would labor with all
diligence to attain to that bryghtnes and comeliness, that all at length may
shine in the vestures of ryghteousnes and salvation. And it behooves Ministers
to use some garments, not only to cover and to defend their bodies, but such
as may also have some signification, and may admonyshe them of some thing.

Now therefore, forasmuch as it is thought good to the Kings Majesty, and to
the chief council of the Realm, to reteyne the use of these vestures for
this present, they ought to change the wicked abuse of the papists, in these
good creatures of God in them selves, to some Godly use, both to the glory of
God, and to the honor of the Kings Majesty, and so openly to declare, that
all things to holy and good men, are holy and pure: And that they be truly
sanctified by the word and prayer, so that neither devil nor man can defyle
any creature of God, but that Godly men may use them Godly, and to the glory of
God, yea even for some use of signification, not only in the fruition of their
natural effects. For all creatures may admonyshe us many ways to consider
the creator, both of them, and of our self, and of our gratitude toward him,
beside the consideration of his large liberality, in respect of their
natural effects: And to these admonitions, they may and ought publicly be
used. Which sentence of mine I might justify with diverse Scriptures, besides
the example of the Apostles, which did so long use Moses ceremonies, without
any impiety.

As concerning the second question, this is my sentence, gathered, as I believe,
out of holy Scripture. They which do say that it is not lawful to use the
apparel that is in question, in any manner, yea in that manner which I have
described: I say, that they be at the least in error, for that they deny all
things to be holy to them that be sanctified.

The same do I affirm of such, which for the same cause will not wear those
vestures, forasmuch as the use of them is received, neither upon
superstitious or light cause: but by the public law of the Realm, and by
the consent of the Churches. In deed the use of these vestures may be forced
by such superstition to pleasure the Roman or any other Antichrist, as it is
now in Germany, that it can not be godly admitted of the Godly ministers of
Christ. For I must needs say, that they take from the godly Magustrates their
due honor, which does deny that their judgment ought to be followed in these
matters. Romans 14. for that they do declare the use of these garments to be
observed of that consideration, which I have a little before described.

I trust your most Reverend fatherhood will bear all these things well in
worth. For to answer to briefly and to grossly, I thought it a great
offense, especially for that I see with what art Satan does resyst, lest that
at once the whole religion of Christ should be restored amongste us, (as were
necessary) and as al godly Kings has done their diligent labor, according to
Gods precepts, and examples which he has declared by Moses, and Christ his
son, whiles Satan goes about to stir up so many pernicious contentions of
all the circumstaunces of our religion, as well in doctrine as rites. For surely,
except that we remove so horrible and manifest sacriledges and dishonorynges
of God, whereby the whole kingdom of the son of God may be received, and we
lowly submit our necks to his good yoke: O how intolerable wrath of God
shall be kyndeled against this Realm. The Scriptures be full of such examples,
as he does now show most terrible unto Germanye. Our Lord Jesus Christ
assyst the Kings Majesty with his holy spirit, and be present with you the
head fathers of the Churches, and all the nobles of this Realm, that ye may
both knowledge and embrace duetifully in time the days of your wholesome
visitation, and al other such things in the which only stands the peace and
health of this Realm. God preserve your fatherhood.

At Cambridge, this tenth of December.
To M. Martin Bucer, doctor in Divinity most worthy, his reader and master
most reverend.
GRace and peace from the Lord. etc. For what cause I am now in trouble
(most Reverend) ye shall understand it by this messenger, in writing. I
pray you that you would vouchsafe once to give it the readyng, and if that ye
shall espy any error therein, I desire you to signify it unto me by your
letters. If any thing has been uttered too darklye, and with fewer words then
the cause requires, I pray you that you would set it out in the margent, with
more light, and apter words. If ye see the cause just, and meet for a godly
minister, subscribe thereunto in the end I hartyly pray you. I send you also
that I have written, before three years agoo, upon the* x. precepts, that your
worthynesse may know what my judgment is in the cause of divorce, I pray you
vouchsafe to read it, that if I have erred in this part by humayne ouersyght,
I may be aduertysed by your learning and fatherly admonition, and that I may
refourme the same. I pray your fatherhood therefore (and I doubt not but I
shall soon obtain) that you would help the Church in her conflict, by the
great and most notable gifts of God undoubtedly bestowed upon you. I require
the same of M. doctor Martyr, to whom (after your sentence and prudent
judgment is known) this messenger which I send, shall repair. The Lord
Jesus long preserve your worthynesse.

At London the. xvii. of October. 1550. Yours in heart and prayer all hole, John
Hoper

To the Reverend and learned father, John Hoper Bishop, his good Lord. Grace
and peace through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Right Reverend, and in Jesus Christ most dearly beloved, I had purposed to
answer before this time unto the letters which of late I received from you:
but I was so let with wayghtie and sundry business, that I could not before
now accomplish either mine own will, or your expectation in this behalf:
wherefore I beseech you, according to your accustomable gentleness and wisdom,
to take in good part this my delay. What ye have written of the controversy
which is risen between you and the right Reverend Lord Bishop of London, as
touching the apparel of ministers, I have both read it, as your request was,
and also consider it as attentively as I could for the shortness of the time. I
say shortness of time, because I could not retain with me your writing but
only one night. For the messenger who delivered it unto me, set forth the next
day early in the morning toward Cambridge, whyther ye wylled me to send it
(being once read) by him, unto master Bucer: Which thing I did, both
diligently, and without all delay.

In that little time that I had to peruse your writing, I comprehended so all
the matter, that even at the first I conceived no small joy of your singular
and earnest study, in that you put your endeavor that Christ his religion may
be brought again unto a chaste and simple purity. For what should be more
desired of all Godly hearts, then that all things, by a little and little,
should be clean taken away and cut of, which has very little or nothing in
them that can be referred wholly to edification, but rather be judged of the
godly to be superfluous. For to speak of my self, I am hardly drawn from
that simple and pure custom, which ye know they of Argentine have used ever,
from the time that they reformed their Church, where diversity of apparel in
Church ministration was abolyshed. For I have always allowed that pure usage
that originally had imitation of the Apostles Church. And I beseech God
immortal, that this manner may both there for ever continue, and also that
whersoeuer Christ his Church is reformed, it may at length be received. You
see that in the substance and chief point of the matter I dissent not from
you, nay I desire with all my heart, that that thing which you go about to
bring to pass, may take place. And the most especyal cause why I do so desire,
is, partly for that I would we should come, as nygh as might be, to the holy
Scriptures in rites and ceremonies, and follow the example of the Church, when
it was in best case and state: partlye for that I perceive that those that be
given to papistrie, do go about with these relics to maynteyne at least a
little spyse of Mass, and to be given to them, more then the nature of
indifferent things do require. Notwithstanding, yet the consideration of these
matters do not so far carry me, nor the reasons alleged by you so persuade
me, that I should affirm the use of such vestures to be pernicious, or of
their own nature contrary to Gods word: For I do utterly think it to be a
thing indifferent. And I am not ignorant that such is the nature of
indifferent things, that at one time they may be used, and at another time
refused. To eat that is strangled, of it self is an indifferent thing: yet it
is meet sometimes to refrain from the use thereof, and sometimes to use it
most freely. And in this respect, though I have said this diversity of Church
apparel is not to be retained: nevertheless, it to be wicked, I never so
judged, that I dare therefore condemn any such whom I see use it. For if I had been so persuaded, I would never have communicated here in England with the
Church where such a choice as yet is reserved. For although as I said, I do
very little allow it, nevertheless I see sometimes in these indifferent things,
that some of them although they be grievous and burdenous (in that it is not
lawful to do otherwise) must be patiently suffered, left if men should
strive for them more bytterly then it needs, that it would be a let to the
advancement of the Gospel, and also that those things which of their own
nature be indifferent, through our heat in contention, should be taught to be
mere wicked: Which two things, except I am deceived, bring with them great and
grievous discommodities. For if we could be content to suffer the Gospel first
to be spread and depely to take root, without all doubt, men would better and
easiyer be persuaded to remove away these external rites. A man, so long as he
is sick, or is in his recovery, oftentimes is much grieved that certain small
and tryflyng things parteynyng to his meat and drink, should be debarred
from him, which yet afterward when he is fully restored unto his health, by
himself and of his own accord without any other man's council, does renounce
them, as unmeet and unprofitable. Wherefore, let England be first diligently
instructed, and confirmed in the chief and most necessary points of religion:
then afterward by my judgment, the Church shall not be much offended to have
these things, somewhat superfluous, to be removed. But now where as
alteration in the most necessary points of religion, is labored for, and that
with so much difficulty: if now we pronounce those things to be wicked, that
be of them selves indifferent, so much would the most part of men's minds be
alienated from us, that from that day they would not find in their hearts,
ever after to hear with a good will at our hands sound doctrine, and
instructions of very necessary matter. Surely, England is much bound unto
you, in that ye have labored more then a great sort has, in preaching and
teaching. Likewise, in England you alredye have obtained much favor and great
authority, whereby ye shall be able to do much good to the advancement of gods
glory, Ye must therefore take heed, left ye stand sit your own way,
contendyng to bytterly, and all out of time. Yet would I not have you hereby
gather, that my mind is, that a Minister of Gods word should never contend
for the mayntenaunce of the truth and principles of Scriptures, I make no such
assertion, who daily as well in public as in private disputations, in wayghtie
controversies, do take a part against the adversaries for true religion. But
this I say, we must take heed, lest these things which be of less
importance, through our siryfe, may be the means that those things which
should be esteemed of greater force and value, either can not at al be brought
into the Church, either if they be once brought in, can not be establyshed with
continuance. Again, if we hold on in disswadyng from these indifferent
things, as pernicious, and altogether wicked, we condemn withal very many
Churches which have received the Gospel, and blame to bytterly innumerable,
which a great while agoo were counted worthy of al praise. Neither am I
ignorant, that the authority of Churches that be now, or has been, ought
not to bear such a sway, that thereby the authority of Gods word should be
trod under foot: Which (although the whole world should run to wrecke)
ought to remain without touch of breast sure and unviolable: yet for all that I
judge we must take heed, lest that for things indifferent, either we condemn
such Churches as be now at this day, or think not well of those that have been
long before our days. And forbecause I perceive that ye suppose these things
not to be indifferent, peradventure it shall not be amysse now for to examine
the reasons that so led you: and that (as you do) I may do it in few words,
I reduce the chief matter to two chief points. First of all, ye say that the
Priesthood after the order of Aaron, is not to be restored, whereunto these
diversities of vestures seem to pertayne. For seeing we have Christ to be our
Priest, Aarons ceremonies be utterly abrogated, and therefore they cannot be
called again of those that mean well and gedly. The second foundation of your
reasons, is, that these diversities of vestures were invented of Antichrist:
therefore we ought not only to forsake the Pope, but all his inventions.
Besides this, ye would have all manner of difference of vestures and apparel
of Ministers to be taken away. Wherefore, seeing these two be the chief
strength of your arguments, I will first entreat of them. Afterward, I will
add what soever it be, if I can call to my remembrance any other thing,
brought in of you to confirm your opinion.

In Moses law or Priesthood, after Aarons order, there were sacraments, with
the which it pleased God to confirm (as I might say, by puttyng his seal to
them) the promises made of Christ coming. I knowledge and do grant, that all
these things be abrogated, never to be brought in again, for we believe that
Christ is alredye come, and not that he will come. And we have other seals in
Scripture delivered to us of Christ him self in the Gospel, bread, wine, and
water: therefore we need not call again signs for this purpose used in the
old Testament. There were also in that law other signs and actions so
ordained, that they could not be properly called Sacraments, and yet they had
some respect to comeliness, to order, and to some commodity. And these I
judge may be restored and retained, as things agreeyng to the light of nature,
and inducyng to some profitable use. Who does not see that the Apostles, to the
intent they that believed might live more peaceably and quietlye, did command
the Gentyles to abstain from blood and strangled: And yet these things,
without all doubt, were fetched from the order of Aaron, if ye will comprehend
generallye all things which was in the old law. And there is none of us
ignorant, but that the tenthes was fetched from thence, which now in our days
be appointed to find the Ministers of the Church thorowout Christendom. You
can not well prove by the Scriptures of the new Testament, that Psalms and
Hymns were songue in the Church at public service, which thing yet
appears most playnelye to be done in the old Testament. I will here omit
that Saint Ambrose in his exposition upon the. xiiii. Chapter of the first to
the Corinthians says most plainly: that the manner of prophesying which
Paul teaches, was deryued out of the Sinagoges, into our Churches. To these I
could bring forth other things, and that not a few in number (if time
suffered me to consider diligently the matter) which our Church have borrowed
out of Moses decrees. And that I may speak only of holy days, which we keep
in memory of our Lords resurrection, birth and death of Christ, and Pentecost:
should we therefore abolyshe them, because they be the relics of the old
law? You see, as I suppose, by all these things, how that not all that
pertayned to the Priesthood of Aaron, is so abolyshed, that nothing of it may
be retained or used of us at these days. Nor here ye shall not by and by say,
that this is nothing else but to open a wyndowe to all abuses, as to holy water,
sensynges in the Church, and to infinite such other: For the adversaries will
straight shape you this answer. First of all, that there must be limited a
measure in any case, as well of those that be reserved, as those that shall be
brought again into the Church. And secondarylye, that no opinion or virtue of
religion is at all to be attributed unto them, contrariwise to that we see is
done of the papists in their holy water and sensyngs. Last of all, there must
good heed be taken, lest our Christian liberty be brought into some danger,
which should be, in ease if yt such things as be reserved or restored, be
appointed necessary means for to obtain salvation. For so are such things
to be brought in again, or to be tolerated, that they be laid away when they
appear not to be put to good use. And so it seems to me, we must do at this
time with this diversity of apparel, according as I declared my mind before.
For I would, and now wyshe, that they were laid aside: but for so much as yet
hitherto it has not prevailed (until better may be) I think we ought to
bear them. And if it pleased God, I would that the Churches of Germany might
redeem their liberty with this one inconvenience, although I wish by all
means, that no superstuous thing should be forced upon them. But let us
consider your other argument, that is to say: It is not lawful to use these
kind of vestures, because they were invented of the popes tyranny. In this
point I do not well perceive how it may be affirmed for a surety, that we
can use nothing that perteyned to the Pope, and is used in popery. Truly, we
must take good heed that we bring not the Church of Christ into such bondage,
that it may not use any thing that the Pope used. It is very true, that our
forefathers took the temples of Idols, and turned them into holy Churches,
where Christ should be worshypped: And they took also the salarie and revenues
consecrated to the Idolles of the Gentyles, to their wicked shows and plays,
and to their holy votaries virgins, and transposed it to find the Ministers of
the Church: And yet all these things did not only service unto Antichrist,
but unto the devil. Yea the holy Ecclesiastical writers, did not stick to
take the Uearses of Poets, which had been dedicated unto Muses, and to other
diverse gods and goddesses, for to be played in plays, and spoken in shows, to
obtain the favor of their gods: I say they did nothing stycke or fear to
use them, when it seemed to them convenient, imitatyng Paul the Apostle, who
stock nothing at all to rehearse for his purpose Menander, Aratus, and
Epimenydes, and that he did in intreatyng the holy Scripture, appliyng profane
words, to set forth gods religion. We read also how that Wine was
consecrated unto Bacchus, Bread unto Ceres, Water unto Neptune, Oil unto
Minerua, Letters unto Mercury, Song unto the Musis and unto Apollo, and many
other things Tertullian rehearses in his* book entitled de Corona militis
Christiani, where almost he entreats this self same argument. Yet for all
that, we stycke not to use all these things freely, as well in holy, as in
profane uses, although at one time or other before, they had be^ consecrated
to Idolles and to deuyls. Howbeit, I will not grant, that these diversities of
vestures have their begynnynges Eusebius. li. iii. Cap. xxxi.
of the Pope, for so much as I read in the Ecclesiastical Hystory, how that
John the Apostle wore at Ephesus, where he dwelled, a bishops apparel,
tearmyng it, Petalum seu lamina Pontificalis. As touching Saint Ciprian the
holy Martyr, Pontius the Deacon writes, that a little before he should be
beheaded, he gave unto him that was appointed to behead him, his vesture called
Birrus after he had put it of, and to the Deacons he gave his other vesture
called Dalmatica, and so stood in lynnen. Chrysostom makes mention of In Math
cap. 26. Hom. 83. ad popul. Ant. Hom. 60.
the white vesture of the ministers of the Church. Moreover, the ancient
writers declare unto us, that Christians when they came first unto Christ's
religion, changed their apparel, and for a gown they did put on a cloak, for
the which cause when they were mocked of the Gentyles, Tertullian wrote a very
learned treatise, De Pallio, that is to say, of a Cloak: Neither, as I take it,
you be ignorant, that a white vesture was wont to be given to them that were
baptized. Wherefore it appears, that before the Popes tyranny overwhelmed the
Church, there was some manner of diversity of apparel in the Church. But be it
so, let them be the invention of the Pope, as you would have it: yet
notwithstanding, for the respect of the papisticall invention in them, I can
not be persuaded so much impiety to be therein, that whatsoever it touches,
it does by and by so infecte and corrupt, that it cannot be lawful for good
and godly men to use it Godly. I suppose, ye understand what my judgment is,
either in reseruyng, or bringing in again the Moisaicall or papisticall rites.

Now that I have briefelye gone over these two chief points of your reasons,
I come unto that which ye also grant: That all things invented by man, be
not forthwith to be rejected and condemned. For what is it else but man's
invention, that we communicate at the Lords table, rather in the morning then
when we have dyned. It was also devised by man, that the value of such things
as was to be divided in the primative Church, were laid at the feet of the
Apostles. I grant with you, that these choyses of apparel do not of it self
edify: And yet for all that, other men will judge it expedient that they be
tolerated for a time, as though peradventure by that means, these contentions
will be avoided, by which it is in hazard lest greater benefits and more
ample commodities be hyndered, and (as we see it falls out) lest men's
minds be withdrawn from the Gospel. I will not here say, that they which
stand to the defense of this matter, may pretend some honest and just
signification of the apparel, and that not dissentyng from the word of God,
which is this. The Ministers of the Church (as the prophet Malachy witnesses)
be Angels and Gods messengers: but Angels for the most part appeared, being
clothed in white garments. I pray you, how shall we debar the Church of
this liberty, that it can not signify some good thing, in setting forth
their rites and ceremonies, especially being so done, that no manner of Gods
honor is attributed unto them, and that they be in sight comely, and in number
few, and that Christian people be not with them ouerburdened, and matters of
greater importance be omitted. Peradventure you will say to me: Let Ministers
of the Church declare themselves to be Angels, and not represent Angels by
signification. But Paul the Apostle might so have been answered, when he
taught the Corinthians that it was meet that a woman should have her head
covered, and a man his head uncovered, vrgyng it only in respect of
signification. For some man of the Church might have answered him, saying: Let
a man declare him self to be head of his wife, and let a wife declare her
self to be subject unto her husband, not in signs, but in deeds and
conversation. But yet Paul judged it a meet and a profitable thing, that both
of them, as well the man as the woman, should be monished of their duty by
such a sign or action. For by such signs and means, we be stirred up to do
our office and duty, for they bring into our minds that which is decent for
us to do. And if hereby the weakelynges take an occasion of error, let them be
monyshed that they be but indifferent things, and let them be taught that no
part of Gods honor and religion is placed in them.

Now, whether the eyes of them that be present, be turned clean away from
thynkyng of serious matters, because of the diversity of apparel,
peradventure every man will not grant it. First the adversaries may answer,
that this shall not follow, if such apparel be appointed that, has no
gorgeousness, but is plain, and used before in the Church: For no man
maruelles at those things that be daily used, and of small value. Nay it is
more like, that men being stirred with the reverence of them, shall have their
cogitacions more attentively upon serious things: for the external parts of
the sacraments, seem to be instituted to this end, that we even of the very
fight, and of our externe sensis, should be inwardely moved to have
contemplation of divine things. Neither suppose I by and by a tyranny to be
brought in, if any thing that is indifferent should be received into the Church
to be done, and that many should constantly observe the same. Now a days we
do minister the Lords supper in the morning, so that we will not receive at al
after dinner in the public congregation. But who will say that this sauoureth
of any tyranny, which we all do with one will and consent? Truly it would
please me rather, (as I have oftentimes rehearsed) that we should only do
those things that Christ did, and Paul delivered: but if there be some
indifferent things added, I would not now therefore greatly contend,
especially for so much we see that they by whom the light of the Gospel is much
advanced in England, and daily may be more advanced, do take part against us.
I grant with you, that all which is not of faith is sin: Nevertheless, that
which is written of Saint Paul to Titus, seems greatly to serve for to ease
and quiet the conscience, that is: All Tit. i. ^.
things are clean to the clean. And to Timothy: Every creature is good. For
it is not necessaryly required that we 1. Tim. (...)
should prove every particular thing which we use, to be expressly mentioned
in the Scriptures. It is enough generally to know this faith: That indifferent
things can not corrupt those that be of a pure mind and sincere conscience in
their doings.

These things have I briefly gathered together, as touching the controversy
which ye proposed unto me, out of the which, I beseech God with all my heart,
that ye may shyft your hands well of. And I desire you to take in good part
that I have written: for if I could have answered either more substancially
or more plainly, I would have satisfied your request to my power. But
forbecause it is not granted to every man to write handsomely and redyly of
these matters, you must needs pardon me. And assure your self further of this
one point, that I am ready now and at all times to believe the truth, when I
shall be otherwise instructed. In the mean season, think ye not that this
judgment which here I have declared unto you, was but now first persuaded
unto me. For even from the beginning, since that I applied my self unto the
Gospel, my mind was, that this difference of vesture should be taken away:
but yet so, that I did not judge it of their own nature either wicked, or
pernicious. I beseech God almyghtie to preserve you safe and sound with all
your householde, through Christ Jesus our Lord.

Farewell.
At Oxforde, the fourth of November. 1550. Yours both in mind and spirit
wholy, Peter Martyr.

Amplissimo domino et Colendissimo Symmistae Ioanni a Lasco.
The Lord grant unto us in these troublesome times of the Church, to begin
and finis he all things that offenses and dangers be not increased. Amen.
THe more diligently I weigh and consider, both what fruit we may gather by
this controversy of vestures, and also what Satan goes about thereby to
work: I would have wyshed before the Lord, that it never once had been
spoken of, but rather that all men of our function had agreeably and stoutlye
gone forward and continued in teaching true repentance, the wholesome use of
all things, yea in commendyng and puttyng on the apparel of salvation. I see
in very many right honorable (alas I say) I see their marvelous diligence in
abolishing Amelech, concerning stones, stocks, vestures, and those things
that be without us: when in their deeds and whole life they most styflye
retain the whole Amelech still. I know also some that help forward this
strife, so that in the mean time the chief and most necessary points are
less regarded and called upon, that is: of remouyng sacrilegious persons from
spoylyng of Churches: of prouydyng fyt ministers for every paryshe: of the
restoryng of discipline again. As for my part if I thought those ceremonies
and vestures were impure of them selves, I would not take upon me in any wise
the office of a Bishop, until by ordinary authority they were taken away.
etc. But to the purpose. I think it not impartinent unto this matter, that we
all be admonyshed to take heed of Satan's accustomed sleyghtes, whereby he
leads us away from the care of necessary things, to the carfulness of
those things which may be well let pass, and from the searchyng out of the
true doctrine of Christ, to induce us to those things, wherein few can consent a
like, and finally, by the which he kyndleth in diverse men a zele to purge those
things which are without us, thereby to neglect our inward deformities. And
seeing whatsoever we do either in word or deed, both privately and publicly,
we ought to do it in the name of our Lord Jesu Christ, giving thanks by him to
God the father: Surely it is our duty, no less circumspectly to beware that
we nether do nor leave undone any thing, whereof we have not sure or certain
authority out of Gods word, touching our actions and matters domestical and
Ecclesiastical. It is always and in all things sin, whatsoever is not of
faith of the certain word of God.

But to consider this question in it self. I have, according to my gift,
weighed your reasons, and yet I can perceive no other, but that the use of all
external things, as well in holy ceremonies, as in private matters, ought to
be left free to the Churches of God. I call that free use, wherein godly men use
things created of God without any superstition, and to a certain edifiyng of
their faith in Christ. I verily (as I have confessed unto you, and have
declared in deed unto our countrymen) had rather that no kind of vesture
which the papists used, were retained amongst us, and that both for the more
full detestation of the Antichristian priesthood, and also for playner
aduouchyng of Christian liberty: yea and to be short, for the auoydyng of
dangerous contentions among the brethren, (though notwithstanding I would
have the Ministers of Churches to use sage vesture, and such whereby they might
be discerned from other men) but chiefly I would all the discipline of Christ
to be in force among us: Yet I can not be brought by any Scriptures (as far
as I see hitherto) to deny that the true Ministers of Christ's Church may use
without superstition, and to a certain edification of faith in Christ, any of
those vestures which the Antichristians abused. For what should let, but that
the Churches may use that white vesture, or more vestures, to monyshe. us
precisely of that divine benefit which he by the holy ministry of the Church
deals unto us, the benefit I say of the light and dignity of that heavenly
doctrine: and by the which also the Ministers them selves may be the more
myndfull of their office, and had both for it, and by the admonyshment of that
outward token, in greater reverence of the common people of the Church.
Whether we will or nay, we are compelled to confess, that the insignes of
them that bear public offices, help somethinges to retain and increase the
authority of Magistrates and public power, if other things want not, by the
which the true reverence is given unto them. For if these things be not joined
with those ensigns, they induce not a veneration, but rather the singular
detestation of them, who unworthily use these notes of virtue. Signs in deed
are signs, and not the things: yet how much they are able to admonyshe and
move the mind (God geuyng the increase) he that observes, will wonder.

Wherefore, whereas otherwise the true dignity of Ministers is evident, and
if any particular Church by public judgment do consent upon the retaining of
certain vestures, only for the co^mendyng unto us of the gifts of God which he
gives by the ministry of the Church, and for to put the younger and ruder sort
in mind, without all superstition: Truly I can not see why such use of
vestures in such a Church, may not serve to some commendation of the holy
ministry, and so consequentlye to the edification of faith. For what let is
there, but at this day they which are endued with the same spirit of faith,
may use a few signs as godly, as the ancient holy men have used many? They
had (you will say) express writing concerning the use of their signs. I
grant, and in deed it made much touching the true use of their signs. But in
that God did command the use of those and many signs, we certainly learn,
that the use of those signs may serve (he geuyng grace) to promote true
religion, and that it has none uncleanness in it self, or superstition:
neither can be by the abuse of the wicked so polluted, that it can not be
healthful to godly men vsyng it godly. Now when as God by his word has
sanctified all things by our prayers, and has made al things pure to the
pure, what cause can we allege out of the word of God, to deny that god will
not bless such use of signs (whereof we speak) that it should not be
effectuous to that Church to some commendation of the ministry, and thereof
also to some edification of faith? For how can it be, but that he which
promised to bless all the works of our hands which we take in his name,
will deny his blessyng to these signs, seeing he has no where forbidden such
a use of them as we have expounded, and has made us Lords of the Sabbath, and
all other things of this world?

But if we grant that these things which I have spoken concerning the use of
such signs, may be: it is surely the part of brotherly charity, commanded
us by God, to leave such use of such signs in such a Church, free, to the
judgment and conscience of that congregation, except we see an open abuse,
either of superstition (as if these things were used as conteynyng in
themselves some part of godly worship of themselves) or of contention (as if
they displeased the greater and better part of the Church) or of gettyng of
good will of some men, whom in these things we ought not to gratify, because
they thereby go about to bring a seruitute, unworthy for Christian men.

It was evident at Saint Paul's time, by the most clear Scriptures of God,
that the use of days, meats, and al other externe things, was made free, and
it was a sure token of infirmity in faith to doubt thereof: yet the holy ghost
pronounces, that such weaklinges ought to be received, not to the troublyng of
their cogitations, and not to be contemned of the stronger in faith, and that
in these things it might be granted to every one to be sure of his own
sense, seeing that the Lord had received these weaklynges.

Now if the holy ghost would have men to yield so much to them which were in
a manifest error, inasmuch as they depended upon him in the chiefest and
necessary parts of sincere religion: what ought to be granted to these
concerning the free use of external things whom we can not convict of any
error by Gods word? For howsoever I examine and expende those your two
arguments (that is: They are the imitation of the Aaronicall priesthood, and
the marks of Antichrists priesthood, and therefore ought to be eschewed of
them that love Christ) yet that thing which you would, is not hereby
concluded. For to imitate Aarons ceremonies, is not of it self vicious: but
only then when men use them as necessary to salvation, or to signify that
Christ is yet for to come to take flesh upon him.

For if by no means it be lawful to use those things which were of Aarons
Priesthood, or of the Gentyles, then is it not lawful for us to have Churches,
nor Holidays. For there is no express commandment by word in the holy
Scriptures of these things: It is gathered notwithstanding, from the example
of the old people, that they are profitable for us, to the increase of
godliness, which thing also experience proves. For any thing to be a note of
Antichrist, is not in the nature of any creature in it self (for to that end
nothing was made of God) but it hangs altogether of consentyng to
Antichrists religion, and the professing thereof. The which consent and
profession being changed into the consent and profession of Christianity,
there can stick in the things them selves, no note or mark of Antichrists
religion. The use of Belles was a mark of Antichristianitie in our Churches,
when the people by them were called to Masses, and when they were rong against
tempests: now they are a token of Christianity, when the people by them are
gathered together to the Gospel of Christ, and other holy actions. Why may it
not then be, that the self same garment may serve godly with godly men, that
was of wicked signification with the ungodly? Truly I know very many ministers
of Christ, most godly men, who have used godly these vestures, and at this
day do yet use them: So that I dare not for this cause ascribe unto them any
fault at all, much less so heinous a fault of communicating with Antichrist,
for the which fault we may utterly refuse to Communicate with them in Christ.
The Priests of devils did celebrate in their sacrifices, the distribution of
bread and the cup, as Justinius Marter, and Tertullian make mention. What let
is there, why we may not use the same ceremonies also? you will say, we have a
commandment of the Lord touching this Ceremony. Uery well. And by the self
same it appears, that same thing to serve among the children of God to the
service of Christ, which the wicked abused in the service of Deuylles, if the
commandment of Christ be added thereto. But it is the commandment of
Christ, that in our holy actions we institute and use all things so, as
comlynes and order be observed, that faith may be edified.

Now if any Church judge and have experience (such as I doubt not there are
many this day in Germany) that the use of such vesture brings some
commendation to the holy ministration, and thereby helps somewhat in the way
of comelynes and order, to the increase of faith: what (I pray you) can be
brought out of the Scriptures, why that Church is not to be left to her own
judgment in this matter, neither therefore to be contenmed, or to be called
into question for her judgment sake? That Church verily will keep in these
things a mean agreeable to the Cross of Christ, and will diligently attend,
that no abuse crepe into it.

If therefore you will not admit such liberty and use of vesture to this pure
and holy Church, because they have no commandment of the Lord, nor no
example of it: I do not see how you can grant to any Church, that it may
celebrate the Lords supper in the morning, and in an open Church especially
consecrate to the Lord: that the Sacraments may be distributed to men kneelyng
or standing, yea, to women as well as to men. For we have received of these
things, neither commandment of the Lord, nor any example, yea, rather the
Lord gave a contrary example. For in the euenyng, and in a private house he
did make his supper, and distributed the Sacraments, and that to men only, and
sitting at the table. But it will be objected, that in England many use
vestures with manifest superstition, and that they do noryshe and confirm in
the people superstition. Even so (it may be answered) very many abuse all this
whole Sacrament, as also Baptism and all other Ceremonies. Therefore let us
withstand this mischief, and vanquishe it utterly. Whereunto though it may be
that the taking away of vestures may help somethyng, yet to drive away all
this mischief it will not suffice. Nay the Priests them selves must be first
removed, and in their roumes placed faithful ministers in the kingdom of
Christ, such as be learned in deed and godly affected. To this therefore, to
this I say must we chiefly endeavor our selves, that the hearts of the
people may be purged by faith, which faith is first begone and increased by the
hearing of the word of God: this hearing is brought by the preachers of the
Gospel. Such therefore let us call for, and that there may be store of them,
let us be earnest for reformation. Let there be a visitation of the
universities, whence many fyt ministers for Churches may be gotten. Let us
never cease to cry out against that Sacrilege, that the fattest benefices are
granted to unworthy men, in respect of their worldly service: that the
paryshes are so miserablye undone through papisticall sleyghtes and violence.
These, these I say, are certaynely papisticall factes, against these ought we
chiefly to bend our force: but to be stout and earnest against stones,
stocks, vestures, and such other things, which of them selves neither bring
gain, pleasure, nor honor, it is a very easy matter to the hearer and
speaker, especially those that be discharged from papisticall superstition, for
by the shaking of such things, great men's stomakes are not offended. But to
remove Church robbers from the spoils of Churches, and to do all things
possible to this end and purpose, that every parish may be provided of
convenient ministers, and that Curates may have sufficient for their
sustentation, and to aid them to the full restitution of Christ's discipline:
This is a thing of great moment: This is a hard thing to all them which are
not able to say with Saint Paul: For Phil. i. ^.
Christ is to me life, and death is to me advantage. And again, God forbid
that I should rejoice, saving in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, wherein
the world is crucified to me, and I to the world. It pleases me right well,
that all Antichrists trashe should be removed away, as far as might be. I
mean not only his ensigns and marks, but all his steps and shadows in
what thing soever they seem to stand, whether it be in stocks, stones,
garments, or whatsoever other thing else it be. But let us endeavor our selves
to banyshe first the body and substance of Antichrist, and then after his
ensigns, steps, and shadows. The body and substance of Antichrist,
consists in the wicked destroyers and spoylers of Churches, by whose means,
not only Christ's discipline, but also all the whole doctrine is oppressed and
put out of place.

When I consider these things, and again look back (as I ought to do)
toward the precepts of the Lord, and his examples: I wyshe with all my heart,
that as many of us as will be Christ's folowers in deed, that even so we
earnestly go about to restore his kingdom, as the Lord himself went about to
begin it, and that we seek it before all other things, and let the preachers
in all doctrine and discipline instruct the people, and be such who for our
Lord Christ's sake and the preaching of the Gospel will be ready to leave all:
and that by these men's ministry we bring the people to the kingdom of
Christ, and let us appoint to every flock their own faithful shepherd, who
may labor no less to call again the true notes and marks of Christianity,
as to abolyshe utterly the marks and notes of Antichristianitie, which I
would wyshe so abolyshed, that there remained not so much as the memory of
them in any men's hearts. But seeing that this thing can not be brought to
pass, unless Christ's kingdom be fully received, I would wish that all we
should to that end bestow al our strength, unto the which work, for as
much as we need many workefelowes, I would wish (with all such as truly
love the Lord Jesus) that we set apart all dissension, and join in one perfect
concord, to endeavor our selves to set upon the common adversary. We see now
being taught by the experience of so many years, that the Lord grants but to
a few, to depart from that sentence which they have once fastened them selves
in, specially if they have also contended for the same: so that we shall be
enforced either to dissolve christian Communion with many who^ the Lord has
received, or else we must give place one to another, to the intent that either
of them may rest in their own judgment, though the other dissent. It is a
very hard thing in deed, yea to most holy men, to deny them selves, and he
is seldom found among men, which would not be content rather to yield in his
patrimonye, then in the opinions of his wit. Now then where as we see
almighty God to bear this our infirmity in us so mercyfully, fie on the
hardness of our hearts, if the example of our Lord and God can not incline and
mollify our hearts, to the like mercy and patience. Wherefore I conclude, that
we ought to take great diligent heed: First that we take not upon us straight
way, to determine all questions as they rise, yea, let us stir none at al
which thoroughly tend not to the kingdom of Christ. Let us acknowledge the
weakness of our wit and judgment. Let us stand in fear of our natural
arrogancy, and our peuishe selfewill in our own inventions. All things
necessary to salvation, are set forth unto us openly, dearly, and plenteously
in the holy scriptures, and in the study and perfection thereof, every one of
us wants very much. Let us labor then to fulfill, and once to make up our
imperfection with godly studies. Of all other matters, let us dispute most
warely, let us define most slowly or never, let us contend at no time. If at
any time through the craft of Satan, and our own negligence, variaunce shall
rise in these things, let us betyme leave of from the same as soon as we can,
by whatsoever way we may, or else let us make some truse in them. Seldom is
there any victory obtained: yea never wholesome victory gotten.

Hereby (most godly sir) you see undoubtedly what is best to be done, both in
this controversy of vestures, and also of the liberty of other Ceremonies. I
had rather then much goods this question had never ben moved: but now seeing
it is moved, I wyshe it to be given over and deferred to some other times.

These your two arguments: It is a piece of Aarons Priesthood, and therefore
contumelious toward Christ now exhibited, as then glorious, when he was to be
exhibited. Secondarily, These are notes of Antichristianitie, and therefore not
to be used of men given to Christianity. These reasons (I say) conclude not in
my judgment, that which you took in hand. For we borowe many things godly
from the orders of Aarons Priesthood, to the glory of Christ now exhibited. So
many things which the Antichrists have made marks of their impietic, may be
tokens of the kingdom of Christ, as the signs of bread and wine, the water of
Baptism, the laying on of hands, preachynges, Churches, Holidays, and many
other things. Also these places of Scripture are of a great scope. The earth
and the fulness thereof is of the Lord, not of the Devil, not of Antichriste,
not of the wicked. And again, the son of man is Math. xii. a.
Lord of the Sabbath, and the Sabbath is made for man, Mark. ii. d.
and not man for the Sabbath: And all things are pure to Titus. i. d.
the pure: And every creature of God is good, nor can be defiled 1. Tim. iiii.
a.
to good men, by the abuse of evil men. The word of God must be followed in
all respects, as well in our private actions, as public. For all things are
to be done in the name of the Lord Jesu, and to the glory of God. Then such
liberty as we grant to our selves in our private use of external things,
let us not deny in public. The true spirit of Christ going about to
overthrow Antichrist, overthrows first those things which are chief and
peculier unto him. For first the spirit of Christ endeavoring the restitution
of Christ's kingdom, restores first doctrine and discipline, which be the
chief and peculier points of Christ's kingdom.

This colorable craft of Satan also must be taken heed of, by the which he
brings to pass oftentimes, that either we reckon those things sins which
are no sins, and those that be sins in deed, we seem not to regard them
in our selves: Or else against those sins which our conscience defyne to be
sins in deed, we use no such severity as we ought.

The Lord grant that you, right worshypfull friend, may religiously weygh
these things. I know you seek the glory of Christ, and I have hard of you
wherein I rejoice, that you are careful of your judgment, so that you dare
not strayghtway reckon the same for sure and certain, though you seem to
follow plainly the word of God, thynkyng with your self that you are a man,
and that you may slide out of the way.

Therefore I desire and beseech you by the Cross of the son of God, by the
salvation of the Churches which are at this day overwhelmed with calamities,
by the desired consent that we should seek to reign in all Churches, by the
peace that is in Christ Jesu: Again I desire and beseech you, that you do
nothing rashely in this question of Ceremonies. You have seen weak members in
the Churches of Saxony, you have seen also many things for the which you
give God thanks. Let no man therefore except it be upon great necessity, cast
of those, whom the Lord has so notablye taken to him. O would to God the
state of the Churches of France, Italy, Poleland, were brought to this point.
Let us in this Realm take most godly heed, that we further not unawares the
devils intentes, who throws in among us sundry questions and controversies:
lest we should take in hand to handle the question of setting forward the
doctrine of the Gospel, and restoryng of discipline, and thereby to remove all
Drones from Ecclesiastical and scholasticall ministeries. This Satan, when he
can not retain the order of Bishops wholly in service unto him, he goes about
utterly to abolyshe this order, and by that occasion so to spoil the Churches,
that whiles due stipendes want, the holy ministeric may be committed to the
vilest of the raskail people. Let us take heed of these cogitations of Satan,
and let us withstand them as much as we can, by the power of the Lord, and by
no means unadvisedly to help them forward. Few we are which sincerely
profess the Lord Jesus, and none of us there is, which is not oppressed with
much infirmity: therefore let us receive one another, as the Lord has
received us. Let us yield mutually one to another, as the Lord has yield to
us, which sincere and dewtifull love, if it bear stroke among us, we shall be
able with one spirit, and one mouth, and with our whole might, to discomfyte
the body and substance of Antichrist. And so afterward without any offense of
the good, and with certain edification of faith among the children of God, we
may bring to pass the utter defacing of all the marks, steps, and shadows
of Antichrist.

O Lord Jesus, thou our only peacemaker, as well with the father, as betwixt
our selves, bannish out of our minds whatsoever draws us in sunder,
whatsoever darkeneth the clearenes of judgment among our selves, whatsoever by
any way hyndereth the absolute concord in thy ministers in defense of thy
kingdom, and in destroying the tirannye of Antichrist. Power into our minds
thy holy ghost, which may lead us into all truth, who grant us to see and
take in hand all one thing: but first of all that which is chiefest, whereby
the strength of thy kingdom may be restored unto us, and all things
pertaynyng to Antichrist, may clean be blotted out of all men's hearts and
memory. The goodness and love of the son of God, for his infinite loves sake
toward us, vouchsafe to give us these things, to the glory of his name, to
the salvation of his elect, and that the wicked say not still, where is their
Christ.

Amen.
Deditissimus tibi in domino Martinus Bucerus.

Imprinted at London in Powles Churchyard by Richard Judge, Printer to the
Queens Majesty. Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.


