ARTICLES TO BE INQUIRED OF BY THE CHVRCHwardens and Sworne-men within the
Arch-Deaconrie of Worcester, in the Visitation of the Worshipful Mr. Edward
Thornburgh, Archdeacon of Worcester.

Anno Domini.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN GRISMOND.

A note of Directions.
1. THe old Church-vvardens and Sidemen of every Parish Church and Chapel
are to join together in appearance, and presentment upon the Articles formerly
delivered in this behalf, and the Minister also may ioyn in presentment with
them if he will, or otherwise the Minister may present alone. And the new
elected Church-vvardens and Sidemen are to appear, and to take their oaths,
and to exhibit their presentiments afterward when they shall be assigned, as by
the 118 and 119 Canons is required. The presentiments are to be plainly and
particularly set down to answer every part and branch of every several
Article follovving, and to be subscribed and testified under the hands and
marks of all and singular the Presenters.

2 The Proprietaries, Parsons, Vicars, Curats, and Sequestrators of
Ecclesiastical Benefices, and their respective Farmers, and all public
Lecturers, Schoolemasters, Vshers, and Vnder-Schoolemasters, etc. within every
Parish, are also to appear, and to exhibit their Letters of Orders,
Institutions, and Inductions, and all other their Dispensations, Licenses, and
faculties whatsoever, not being formerly exhibited in the Visitation of the
modern Archdeacon now visiting. And they are also to make real payment of
all such procurations and Synodalls, and other duties as are respectually due
and payable by every of them severally in this Visitation.

THE TENOVR OF THE Oath to be ministered to all and every the Churchwardens and
Sidemen, or Assistants in the said Visitation.
YOu and every of you shall swear by almighty God, that all favor, fear, and
affection, and all other sinister corruption whatsoever set aside, upon due
consideration of these Articles given you in charge, you will make a true,
plain, perfect, and particular answer and presentment in writing to the same
articles, and to every branch and part thereof, presenting all and every
offenders and offenses therein mentioned so as may stand with the glory of God,
the discharge of your consciences, and the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical
Court: wherein you shall deal sincerely, faithfully, and uprightly as before
God. So help you God in Christ Jesus.

Concerning Church and Churchyard.
WHether is your Church and Chancell in all respects well and sufficiently
repaired, and kept sweet and clean, if not, in whose default? Have you
therein the ten Commandments, the Articles of the belief, and other godly
sentences fairly written: the Bible of the largest volume, the Books of
Common prayer, the two volumes of Homilies, the book entitled God and the
King, and all other books requisite: a seemly Pulpit, a convenient seat for
the Minister at Prayers, a large and comely Surplesse, whole and untorn?

2 Have you in your Church a strong chest for alms, with a hole in the top,
and three locks and keys thereto: Is the money therein put, employed to the
use of the poor?

3 Have you a Register of Christnings, Weddings, and Burials, in a book of
parchement duly kept in a chest with three locks and keys?

4 Has any man pulled down, or uncovered, or suffered to decay any Parsonage
or Vicarage houses, or any Church, Chancell, Chapel Vestry, or Church-houses
in part or in all, or employed them, or any of them to any profane uses?

5 Whether is your Parsonage, Vicarage, or Ministers house, or any part thereof
converted, made, used, or employed, to or for any common passege, entry,
thorow-fare, or common way for people, or Cattle usually to pass through,
forth of the Churchyard into or unto any Alehouse, Tippling or Victualing
house, common Inn or wine Tavern, and by whom, and by whose sufferance and
permission, and how long has the same been so made, enjoined, used, employed,
or rather misused and misimployed as aforesaid?

6 Whether are the Pales, fences, enclosures, and marks of ancient Founds and
Limits of your Parsonage, Vicarage, or Ministers houses, or of the Courts,
entries gardens, backsides, or other appurtenances belonging to the same, or
any part thereof removed, or altered, or taken away from their ancient places,
bounds, and limits thereof, and laid and used to and with any victualling
house, common Inn, or wine Tavern, and by whom, when, and by whose
sufferance, and how long time has the same been so done and suffered? And
whether by the continuance of the use of the premises, as aforesaid, may not
the same in short time grow out of knowledge, and by some prescription to
become prejudicial to the Church or succeeding Incumbent thereof?

7 Are your Bells, Bel-ropes, and Clock in good repair, and well ordered? Is
your Churchyard well fenced, and decently kept? Is it not profaned with
fighting, brawling, chiding, gaming, danceing, playing, or with unlawful
Cattle, or otherwise; and how, and by whom, and by whose default?

Ministers, and Curates.
8 Does your Minister read or say the whole divine Service every Sunday and
Holyday, and administer the holy Sacraments according to the Book of Common
Prayer? Is your Minister a licensed Preacher, does he diligently preach sound
doctrine, and for matters of government seriously teach and maintain the Kings
supremacy under God within his Majesty's dominions over all persons, and in all
causes as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, and the abolishing of all foreign
power?

9 Has your Minister more Benefices than one; if two, or more, does he reside
upon one of them himself, and maintain a licensed Preacher on the other? If
he have but one, is he resident and dwelling thereupon, is he painful in his
vocation, of sober and good conversation, and given to hospitality?

10 Does your Minister use decency of Aparrel as well in the Church as
elsewhere, and in the time of divine Prayers, and administration of the
Sacraments, does he use to wear the Surplesse? and if he be a Graduate, such a
hood as is agreeable to his calling?

11 Is your Minister a peacemaker, and no sower of discord, or is he
suspected, famed, or noted of any notorious crime, or gives he any ill
example, in his carriage or demenour.

12 Does any preach in your Parish, that refuses to conform himself to the
laws, ordinances, and rises of the Church of England?

13 Has your Minister a Curate, and how is he licensed? does he serve two
Cures, and does he give notice of the Fasting days and Holy Days commanded
and allowed? and amongst others of the fifth of November?

14 If your Minister be not a Preacher allowed, does he procure monthly
Sermons? and when there is no Sermon, does he read an Homily, does he take
upon him to expound any text of Scriptures?

15 What Preachers have come from any other place, and preached in your Parish?
have you their names written in a book kept for that purpose? has such a
Preacher subscribed his name thereto, and set down the day when he preached,
and by whom licensed?

16 Has your Minister obtayn^d his Benefice by any Symonicall compact, either
directly, or indirectly.

17 Has any of your Parish, or of any other Parish, irreverently used your
Minister, laid violent hands on him, or disgraced his office and function by
word, or deed?

Divine Service.
18 Is divine Service in due time on Sundays, Holy Days and their Eues, and
at other times appointed, reverently said or sung in your Church or Chapel,
with the Letany on Wednesdayes and Frydayes, and all other rites and
ceremonies, according to the prescript form of common Prayer in the Communion
Book?

19 Whether does any, not being licensed (or any not ordered, at least for a
Deacon) say common Prayer openly in your Church or Chapel?

20 Do any men, young or old, use to wear their hats in the Church or
Chapel in time of divine Service, or are there any that behave themselves
disorderly in the Church, Chapel, or Churchyard, or any disturbers of divine
Service or Sermons?

21 Whether do any Victualers (or others in your Parish) suffer any drinking
or gaming in their houses on Sundays or Holy Days, especially in time of
divine Service or Sermons?

22 Whether any in your Parish upon Sabbath days or Holy Days, do use their
trade, or do any other work or labor, as Brewing, Baking, Washing, Barbing,
or such like, or do any Mercers Drapers, Shoomakers, Butchers, or others
whatsoever open their shops for sale of Wares upon those days, or do hedge,
ditch, dig, carry, or draw burdens by themselves, their servants, horses, or
other cattle whatsoever on such days? And is the fifth day of November
observed, according as is ordained in that behalf?

The holy Communion.
23 Have you a decent Communion Table on a frame, with a seemly Carpet, and a
cloth of Linen, a Communion cup and cover of silver, a fair Flagon of Pewter,
or purer metal for the Wiue, a plate for the Bread, and a Towell to lay over
it?

24 Whether is there any in your Parish, which being full sixteen years of
age and upward, has not received the holy Communion three several times in
the year past, at least in his or her Parish Church, whereof Easter to be one
of the three times?

25 Does your Minister instruct, or examine his Parishioners concerning the
Sacraments at convenient times before he administer the Communion? And does
he admit any thereto, that cannot say at least the Lords Prayer, the Articles
of the Christian faith, and the ten Commandments?

26 Is your Communion ministered with Bread and Wine, consecrated in such order,
as in the Book of common Prayer is appointed? And does your Minister deliver
both kinds to every several Communicant, with the blessing prescribed in the
book of common Prayer?

27 Does any receive the holy Communion either sitting, standing, or otherwise
then kneeling, as is prescribed in the book of common Prayer? Or do any
refuse to receive the same kneeling? and does your Minister admit any to
receive the Communion otherwise then kneeling?

28 Does your Minister admit any notorious Offenders, or any Schismatics to
the holy Communion, before one penance enjoined by the Ordinary be duly
performed by them or does he admit any notoriously known to be out of charity,
or any that has done any open wrong to his neighbor, before reconciliation
made to the party wronged?

29 Whether does your Minister appoint and observe so many Communions every
year, as that the Parishioners may conveniently receive all of them three
several times in the year. And does he use to give public notice thereof in
the Church, the Sabbath day next going before every such Communion, that the
Parishioners may prepare themselves to be partakers thereof?

Baptism.
30 Have you in your Church a convenient Font of stone, well kept; and covered,
standing in the ancient place? Does your Minister baptize therein, or in a
Basin, or other thing, or with any other ceremonies than such as are allowed in
the Book of common Prayer; or does he omit, neglect, or not use all the
ceremonies therein prescribed, and does he use the sign of the Cross in
Baptism?

31 Does your Minister refuse to baptize any children of Christian parents,
that are brought to the Church?

32 Are parents urged to be present at the baptizing of their children? or be
any admitted to be Godfathers or Godmothers, that have not received the holy
Communion? or do any parents refuse to have their children signed with the
sign of the Cross in Baptism?

33 Have any children that were borne in your parish, been carried out of the
parish to be baptized elsewhere? or have any not been baptized at all, or in
places, or by parties unknown?

34 Whether has your Minister refused, deferred, or delayed to co^^ unto and
to christen any child being in weakness, or in danger of death, being
thereunto required, by reason whereof such a child has (through his
negligence, or by his default) dyed unbaptized?

Cathechisme.
35 Does your Minister, or his Curate, duly catechize according to the late
Canons every Sunday, such children and servants of both sexes, as are of
convenient age, or at least so many of them by course, as the time will serve?

36 Do Parents and Householders bring, or send their children and servants to
the Church every Sunday duly to be catechized, according as the late Canons
require, and who are negligent therein?

Matrimony.
37 Whether is Matrimony solemnized in your Church or Chapel, according to
the book of common Prayer?

38 Have you in your Church a Table of the degrees of Marriage? are any married
within the degrees of consanguinity or affinity therein forbidden? or do any
children under the age of twenty one years contract themselves or marry
without consent of their parents, or Guardians?

39 Have any been married without the Banes thrice asked in the Church three
several Sundays, or Holy Days (unless by License of the Ordinary granted
under Seal) or at any time of the day, than betwixt the hours of eight and
twelve in the forenoone, or at any times prohibited that is to say, from Aduent
Sunday to the Octaues of Epiphany, from Septuagesima Sunday to the Octaues of
Easter; from Rogation Sunday to Trinity Sunday?

40 Have any that dwell in your Parish, been married in any other Parish, or
any of another Parish, been married in your Parish? or have any been married
privately out of the Church, or face of the Congregation, when, where, by whom,
and who were present at such marriages?

41 Have any women, not well known to be married, been delivered of any Child
in your Parish and in whose house? or has any woman in your Parish been
carnally known, or begotten with child before marriage, and by whom?

42 Have any forsaken their Wives or husbands, and married others? Have any
married again after they have been divorced? Or do any which have been
divorced keep company still together?

43 Do any married couples live asunder and not together, and do either of
them keep in their house, or secretly resort to any other, to the raising of
suspicion or fame of incontinency?

44 Has any in your Parish, for money or reward, married any woman that
committed fornication or adultery with another man? Or has any unmarried
Woman, begotten with Child, gone out of your Parish before she has done
penance enjoined by the Ordinary, where was she, or is she received or
harbored, at whose charge, and who conveyed her away?

Visitation of the sick.
45 Does your Minister or Curate visit the sick, does he admonish them to
repentance, comfort the Penitent, and exhort them to charitable alms deeds?

Burial of the Dead.
46 Are your dead buried according to the form of Burial set down in the
Book of Common Prayer; or have any been buried secretly, or in the night, who
and by whom, and who were present thereat?

47 Do the Executors, or Administrators, or other friends of them that are
buried in Church or Chancell, repair again the Pauement, and give any thing
to the Church, or in whose default is the same so neglected and not repaired?

Churching of women.
48 Does any woman refuse to give God thanks openly in the Church or (as we
term it) to be churched at convenient times after Childbirth, or does any
Minister refuse to church them, or church them any otherwise than is prescribed
in the Book of Common prayer?

49 Has any woman unlawfully begotten with child bin admitted to public
thanksgiving in the Church before she has performed such penance as was
enjoined her by the Ordinary or at least been churched in a white sheet, and
confessed her fault penitently before sufficient witnesses, and undertaken to
stand to the censure of her Ordinary for her said offense?

Parish Clerks.
50 Have you a Parish Clarke chosen by the Minister, is he of honest
conversation, has he competent skill in reading, writing, and singing: And
does any withold or detain his Wages or duties from him?

Schoolemasters.
51 Have you any School-house, and how is it repaired: And have you any
Schoolmaster in your Parish that teaches publicly, or privately, is he
lawfully licensed? Does he come duly to the Church, and receive the holy
Communion? Does he instruct his Scholars in the Catechism allowed, and in
the book entitled God and the King? Causes he them to repair to divine
prayers in the Church, and to hear and note Sermons? Teaches he any other
Grammar than that which is allowed?

52 Is any Schoolmaster known, or suspected, publicly, or privately to read
to his Scholars, or suffer them to read any book that may confirm them in
Popery, superstition, or disobedience to the Kings Majesty, or to his laws
ecclesiastical or civil, and how many, either men or women, do teach
children in your Parish, and what be their names?

Schismatics and Recusants of all sorts.
53 Do you know any that teach or maintain any doctrine contrary to the
Articles agreed upon in the Convocation Anno Dom 1562.

54 Does any preach, minister the Communion, baptize children, or church women
in private houses, or other-where than in the Church, except it be in cases of
necessity?

55 Know you any that absent themselves from the Church negligently, or
wilfu^ly how long have they so done? And of them that are absent without a
sufficient and lawful cause, is the forfeiture of xii d. taken every Sunday,
and converted to the use of the poor, according to the statute Eliz. 1

56 In your Parish where there is a Preacher, do any use to absent themselves
from his Sermon, and resort to any other?

57 Know you any that forbear to participate with the Church of England in
prayer, or Sacraments, either denying the Church to be Apostolical or
condemning the ceremonies thereof as superstitious?

58 Have you in your Parish any Popish Recusants, any half Papists that come
to the Church, and receive not the Communion, any Church-Papists that come and
receive themselves, but either persuade others, or maintain their wives,
children, family, or friends not to come?

59 Does any Seminary Priest or Jesuit resort to any place within this
Diocese or suspect you any such: Or do you know any that resort to any Popish
Priest or Jesuit?

60 Know you any that by writing talk, or argument, impugn the Kings
supremacy, or any that have kept in their custody, that sell disperse, carry,
or deliver unto others any unlawful Books against the Religion and
government established, or in defense of any foreign power, or domestical
consistory?

Excommunicated persons.
61 Are all excommunicated persons kept out of the Church from divine prayers,
and receiving of the holy Communion, until they be lawfully absolved: And are
there any in your Parish which have stood excommunicated forty days and
upwards, are such persons as stand excommunicated, once in every six months
denounced in your Church in time of divine Service upon some Sunday?

62 Has any excommunicated person not absolved (at least in his extremity) not
giving any testimony of his repentance before his departure, been buried in
christian buryall, who buried him, her, or them, where, and when, and who were
present at such burialls?

63 Do any retain or keep in their house, or service, any person denaunced
excommunicate, or do any way encourage them therein, or converse with them in
buying, selling, eating, drinking, or otherwise keep company with them in any
sort?

Wills, Testaments, and Administrations.
64 Do any in your Parish administer the goods of the dead, or any way
intermeddle therewith, without lawful authority committed unto them under the
Ordinaries seal?

65 Know you any in your Parish that suppress the last Will of the Dead, or
any that forge or alter any Wills, or any Executors that fulfill not the
Testators will; or any that detain Legacies given to any charitable uses?

Several Articles.
66 Do any in your Parish profane the Sabbath days: or not duly observe the
Holy Days appointed? Are Ember Fasts orderly observed at the four times of
the year appointed?

67 Are the days and orders of Perambulation duly observed in the Rogation
week, if not, in whose default?

68 Are the Canons, constitutions, and orders made and agreed upon in the
Conuocation-house Anno Dom. 1603. read over once every year in your Church
upon Sundays or Holy Days according to his Majesty's Commandment in that
behalf?

69 Does your Minister yearly present, and give up in writing to the Ordinary
the names of all Recusants, and half Recusants men and women as well
soiourners as Parishioners and commons guests in your Parish above the age of
thirteen, according to the 114 Canon or not?

70 Do any in your Parish take upon them to practice Physic, or Surgery,
not being lawfully licensed?

71 Are any in your Parish (or which were of your Parish and are now departed)
known, suspected, famed, or reported to have offended in Fornication,
Adultery, Incest, witchcraft, Sorcery, Charming Usury, Swearing, Drunkenness,
common slandering, sowing of discord, brawling, scolding, or any other
uncleanness of life or bad manners?

72 Are any householders in your Parish (in whose house there is any one that
can read) which have not the book entitled God and the King, and who be they
that want the same?

73 Have any Apparators, or others, taken any reward to compound, or conceal
any offense Presentable, or punishable in the Ecclesiastical Court, let this
be manifested, and information and presentment made for every offense
accordingly?

74 You shall further present whether any in your parish upon Sundaies or
Holy Days, do use any dancing, plays, or other sports or pastimes
whatsoever, before all Service on those days be fully ended? And are the same
used by any of another parish, or any which have not the same day been at
divine Prayers in their own parish Church, who be they, which have offended in
any of the premises?

Churchwardens, and Sidemen.
75 Are your Churchwardens and Sidemen chosen yearly in the Easter week,
according to the Canons? And do the Churchwardens yearly, truly make and
deliver up in writing, their account of all their receipts, and disbursements
whatsoever by them received and laid out for the parish, and of all the Church
goods, books, and other things, as the Canons require?

76 Do your Churchwardens themselves come duly to the Church to divine prayers
and Sermons, and do they their best endeavors, especially upon Sundaies and
Holy Days, to cause all parishioners to do the like?

77 Whether is there a transcript or copy of the Register book of the Church,
of Christenings weddings and burialls, yearly exhibited and delivered up into
the Registry of the Ordinary or not?

78 Whether is there a sufficient teriar of the gleebe land and other Rights
belonging to your Parsonage or Vicarage, truly taken and exhibited into the
Registers office, as by law it ought?

79 Have the late Churchwardens concealed any crime, offense, or disorder in
their times, and not presented the same; what be the matters so concealed? Or
does any trouble, molest, vex, or abuse, in words or otherwise, the Ministers,
Churchwardens, or Sidemen, for doing their Office according to their Oath and
Duty: and who be they that so do? And have the Churchwardens continued in
that office above one year, without a new election?

80 Whether any Churchwardens, Questmen, or Sidemen or any Parish have bin
called and enforced to present any faults committed in their parishes,
otherwise than at the Visitations, or time, or times limited in the 116 Canon?

Articles concerning the orders and injunctions lately enjoined by his Majesty.
81 Have you any Lecturer or preaching Minister in your parish, does he preach
in the afternoon on Sabbath days, and does he then use a catechisticall
form, by question and Answer?

82 Whether does your Lecturer or preaching minister in your parish before his
Sermon, read divine prayers in a Surplice, and if he be a Graduate, in a
hood answerable to his degree, and does he preach in a gown and not in a
cloak?

83 Have you any in your Parish, either Recusants or others, which ^e^^ss, or
do not come to divine prayers, Lecturers, Sermons, and Cate^hizings in your
Church, or do negligently absent themselves, and not ^equent the same, or any
of them?

84 Whether is there any in your Parish, which keeps any private Chaplain in
his house, and who by name?

85 Have you advisedly and diligently perused, read, or heard others ^eade and
peruse this book of Articles, and every particular Article and branch thereof,
and have you framed your answers or presentiments to the same accordingly?

86 Generally, whether do you know any of the Canons broken, or any other
Ecclesiastical matter worthy to be presented, or not, and if you ^oe, you
shall truly present the same (by the Oath you have taken) as well now as
hereafter, when it shall come to your knowledge?

FINIS.

