THE FIGVRE of THREE: OR, A Pattern of good COUNCIL.

Gathered for the Delight of the well disposed.

LONDON: Printed for R. B. and are to be sold in S. Laurence lane at the sign
of the BIBLE, 1636.

THE FIGVRE OF THREE. OR, A PATTERN OF GOOD COUNCIL.
THE Knowledge of God is threefold: General, Special, and Singular.
General, as the Philosophers: Special, as of the Christians: and Singular, as
of them that are blessed.

The sweetness of this Name JESUS consists in three things: It is honey to the
mouth, Melody to the Ear, and joy to the Heart.

All men are busied about one of these three things: Honesty, Profit, or
Pleasure.

Three abominable sayings of all Epi^ures: there is no pleasure after death; a
^engeance on him that cares for to mor^ow: neither fear the latter day, nor
wish ^^r it.

Three things do study to unite with Pride: Power, (...), Riches.

All Idols had their original of three things, Superstition, wicked
Imagination and Flattery.

Three things to be considered in the creation of the world: Who made it, by
what he made it, wherefore he made it. If we ask who made it? Why, there is
no Author more excellent than God. If by what he made it? Why, no Art of more
force, then the Word of God. If wherefore he made it? Why, no cause better than
this: that good should be created of God, who is good.

A good life consist^th (...) these things: to eschew evil, to do goodness
and to persevere in godliness to the end.

Three benefits which we have receive^ ought to move us daily and hourly t^
giv^ God great thanks: our Creation, ou^ Redemption, our Justification.

Three guides to Poverty: Gluttony Sloth and Whoredom.

Hope is very good for three causes: I^ is a remedy in adversity, wiping tear^
from the eyes; for Hope only does s^^staine them whom injurious Fortune do^^
most oppress: It nourishes life, promising better success to morrow: It
leaves not a man at his death, but exalts his heart unto immortality.

Three things not any way to be tolerated: a long tongue in a Fools head, a
loose life in a godly Professor, a proud Heart and a beggars purse.

Three things be never silent where they be: Money in the purse, Wantonness in
the heart, Grief in sickness.

Three sorts of men are evermore very slothful: they that sit long at Dinner,
they that lie long in Bed when they should rise to their labor; and they that
come to the Church when the doors are shut up.

Three things which seldom can be seen: a Broker that never made a lie, a
Collier which never was black, and two Hills near together without a valley.

A man is most grieved at three things especially: To see the Adversities of
his Children, to hear of the loss of his goods, and to see the prosperity of
his heaviest enemies.

We should not be careful nor curious in three things: of good order in
another man's house, of the divine government of the Almighty, nor in the
Counsels of great Estates.

Three causes why men love one another. One loves, because he is loved;
another, because he is advanced to honor: the third, for that he expects a
benefit from the hand of him whom he so loves.

Three proud creatures: a Knave sitting in a Chair; a que^ne riding in a
Chariot, a r^mping louse in a scabbed Head.

Three sorts of men are for the most part extreme babblers: Barbers,
Bath-keepers, and Victuallers: and the reason is this, because they deal with
Mariners, Soldiers, and many other: calling themselves travelers, and are
indeed extreme vagrant fellows, reciting many strange tales; whereby being as
it were infected with their very talk, they become in the end great Babblers.

Three things necessary for the increase of Corn: good Seed, good ground, and
Gods blessing.

Three things in the night which do importune us to sleep: Darkness, (for
men desirous to sleep, do seek for the darkest places;) Cold, (for in
winter, men sleep more soundly than in Summer; and those that are cold of
complexion, will sleep longer than others that are not:) Moisture, for
(according to all Philosophy) moist vapors arise from the Stomach, ascend up
into the brain, and provoke sleep.

Three things are said to be very bitter: Gall, Grief and Death.

Three things which Women can do all at once: Spin, Weep and Prattle.

Three things which for the uncertainty of that which may happen, men cannot
safely give any counsel to undertake them: that is, a Wife, to travel by Sea,
to follow the Wars.

Hope does comfort three sorts of men (of whom all others are past hope:) him
whom the Physicians have given over; him that is bound and cast into a deep
dungeon; and him that has suffered shipwreck, being tossed with waves, yet
hope persuades to cast his arms abroad.

Three things chiefly to be remembered: Gods ben fits, whereby we are ever to
give thanks; our sins, that we may be sorry for them; and our death, that we
may be careful to live well.

Three things manifest GODS Judgments: Corporal punishment, the sting of an
evil Conscience, the torments of Hellfire.

There be three things that the body is most addicted unto, and as it were
coveteth: Good cheer, Sleep, and Merry or pleasant talk and company.

Also there be three outward properties of the Persons in the Trinity: the
Father sends, and is not sent: the Son is sent to be made a sacrifice: and
the Holy Ghost is sent to sanctify our minds.

There be also in our Savior Jesus Christ three things worthily to be wondered
at: the examples of his life, whereby he edified the envions: his words of
wisdom, whereby he instructed the ignorant: and the marvels of his glory,
whereby he did convert the unbeleevers.

Gold (as the Learned write thereof) has three outrageous properties: for
first it is the Sna^e for our souls; the hook of Death, and the Bait of sin.

It is great gain and also wonderful pleasure for these three sorts of men to
tell lies: Poets, Painters, and Astronomers.

All men should suffer these three evils with patience: necessary evils, such
as can neither be altered, amended, or hindered: Accidental evils, which have
happened unto us by our own evil courses: and such evils as we have justly
deserved.

As after men behold a Rainebow, they are put in mind of three special things:
of the anger of God, when he destroyed the world with water, whereof the (...)
color is a witness: of the mercy of God, who will never us^ that punishment
again: o^ the latter judgment and burning of the world with fire, and that
does the red (...) fiery color thereof represent.

Three things make most men very sorrowful: that he must needs die* that he
knows not the time or day when; and tha^ after death, he knows not where he
shall be.

Three things there be that are said to undo a man: to defer and prolong hi^
business; to meddle with other men's matters; to reject the good Counsel of
hi^ friend.

Three things there be very necessary for a sort of men called Fencers: a
quick eye, a strong Arm, and a stout Heart.

All those which are angry make but small account of three special things
which should be highly esteemed: Old age, which ought to be reverenced:
Affinity in kindred, and benefits past.

Humility is a virtue which does chiefly comprehend three things: First, it
acknowledges her own uncleanness and infirmity, and does fear God: She
does not desire matters above her vocation, but keeps her self within her
bounds: She does not despise others which are Gods instruments, but
acknowledges Gods gift in them, knowing all labor is vain, unless God
prosper it.

In three things consists the whole course of man's life: to be borne weeping,
to live laughing, to die sorrowful and sighing.

Three things make a man willing to brook a servile life: Gain, Love, and
Covetousness.

Three things do most of all hasten Death: Sorrow, Solitariness, and
Desperation.

There be also three kinds of guests which are the first at a banquet: Flies,
dogs and Flatterers.

Three small Beasts are said to be most full of wisdom: the Be, the E^met,
the Spider.

Three things there be, that ma^^ a man beguile: Essex miles, Kentish styles,
and Norfolk wiles.

Three things are required, that are as necessary to a man and his wife: Love
inwardly in the heart; Concord outwardly in dwelling together peaceably; both
an outward and inward agreement to do good works.

There are three sorts of Ignorance: Some is good, when we are ignorant of
evil: some is evil, when we are ignorant of good: some is indifferent, which
is neither good nor evil.

There be three things that are very proper to Beauty: First, it is frail, and
soon fades; many vices of the mind are cov^red with the veil of Beauty: it
brings commodity to few, but unto many destruction.

Three things there are that make a Commonwealth happy: that is, a wise
Prince, a wise Magistrate, and la^^ upright Judge.

Three commodities there are that follow Beauty: it wins the praise* i^
obtains favor, it gets profit.

Three things there are necessary in a Flatterer: an impudent face, a steadfast
color, a changing voice.

Three things are always very good cheap: Earth, Words and Lies.

There are three things especially that being in a house, maids wish out of
the house: an angry Mistress, Smoke, and a broken or molten dish.

There are likewise three sorts of people worthy to be beloved: A loving Wife,
a faithful friend, and a trusty servant.

There was a Plough-man that gave these three Lessons unto his Son: To be in
Lent holy, in Harvest painful, and at Christmasse merry.

Three things there are that do make Patience to suffer any thing: God and
Godliness, Faith and Religion, Virtue and Law^^.

There be three notable Ornaments belonging to the house of (...) Minister: an
open gate, a godly Household or Family, and a good Library.

Truth is stronger than three strong things: strong Wine, a Woman, or a
mighty King.

The country life is mistress of three things: Frugality, Diligence, and
Justice.

Three things are most necessary to the maintenance of our bodies. Sufficiency
of meat to appease the rage of hunger; clothing to cover the body, and expel
away cold: Sleep, which does refresh the wearied limbs with labor.

Three Mothers there are that bring forth three evil Daughters: Truth the
Mother, Hatred the Daughter: Riches the Mother, Envy the Daughter: Familiarity
the Mother, and Contempt the Daughter.

Three sorts of people worthy to be hated: A malicious Woman, a faithless
Friend, and a proud Beggar.

There be three things that can by no means be hidden: A Whore in a chamber,
a Spindle in a Sack, Straw in the Shoes.

An Epitaph always to be remembered of all mankind, when he does behold the
picture of Death in any place: O man thou beholdest what I am; thou know I
have been as thou art: then think with thy self what thou shall be.

Three things make a man weary of (...) house, and oftentimes of his life:
Smoke, Rain, and a cursed and dogged wife.

Three things require to be attendant in a Surgeon: a Hawks eye, a Lions
heart, and a Ladies hand.

The invention of three things are exceeding wonderful: the Printing of
Books, the invention of Guns and Gunpowder, and the making of glasses.

Three properties that belong to Epicures: they neither fear nor reverence
God, and esteem all godliness a mockery: they offer sacrifice unto their
guts, other God they know not: neither grief nor fear can compel them to be
careful for the time to come, but for the present.

A Traveller has these three points of wisdom: To choose a fair way and a
good horse, a warm chamber for to lodge in, and an honest man for his Host.

Three principal desires amongst friends: to have and enjoy wealth, to
possess honor: not to suffer necessity.

Three things worthy of consideration in a Witness: the nature, the condition,
the life. The nature, that a witness be a man, and not a woman; for women be
diverse and inconstant in their reports: that he be free, and not a bond-slave,
for he will conceal a truth for fear of his masters displeasure: that he be
innocent, not infamous; for justice will not accompany wicked men.

Three things are good and necessary for every man: To understand well, to
speak better, to do best of all.

There be three sorts of people that will never be good: Old men without
government, Young men without reverence, Maids without modesty.

Three never failing weapons, wherewith a man may expel the devil: the Word
of God, Faith in Christ Jesus, fervent prayer.

Three things chiefly to be remembered Gods benefits that we may render thanks:
our sins, that we may be sorry for them; our death, that we may be careful to
live well.

Three things are called excellent Governors; God governs the world, the
mind governs the soul, wisdom does rule and govern the felicity of this
life.

Three things not to be trusted in: the Heels of a wild Horse, the teeth of a
mad Dog, the Vows of a strumpet.

Three things which are said to whet the eyesight: to view Fountains of
water, to look upon green things, to behold a man's face in a looking-glass.

Three things, though they be very good, yet they please not every body:
Rain, though it do much good to the earth: Upright government: the labors of
Learned men.

There be three causes that make men to speak loud: First, when they are far
off unto whom they would speak, when they talk to one that is deaf, when
they are enraged with anger.

Three things which our Ancestors have ever abhorred: a reconciled Enemy,
meat twice sodden, and a woman with a Beard.

Women desire three things principally: to be gorgeously apparelled, to be
esteemed, and to go where they list.

God made three places for three several purposes: Heaven for the good, Hell
for the wicked, Earth for both.

Belief is of three sorts: to believe that there is a God, is of knowledge: to
believe God is to consent to his truth: to believe in God, is to have true
confidence in his mercy.

Whosoever will retain a Lawyer, and lawfully seek his own right, must be
furnished with these three pockets: In the first pocket he must have his
Declaration and Certificate, wherewith he may show his Right: in the second
pocket he must have store of Red-ruddockes: in the third pocket he must have
patience, although the Law proceed against him.

Three things will not prove well without beating: a Walnut-tree, an Ass, and
a Woman.

Three trades of life that may travel without Pasports: Pedlers, Tinkers, and
Minstrels.

Three things bite sore: an old Dog, an hungry Fly, and an unconscionable
Usurer.

The Holy Ghost does govern three things in every godly person: the mind, the
heart, and the will: it does inlighten the mind with the light of the holy
Word, it does kindle the heart, that it may conceive what it is that best
pleases God: It does move the will, to be willing to do whatsoever God
wills in his Word.

The Holy Ghost does confirm three things in us: Faith, Hope and Love.

The proud Heart is destitute of three good things: It is hardened, and wants
Godliness: it is void of Contrition, it is dry, wanting the deaw of spiritual
grace.

A guilty Conscience wo^^eth in man three miracles: It makes the heaven and
the earth, though never so spacious, to be narrower than a mouse hole: It
causes even the strongest heart to be afraid at the wagging of every leaf: It
stirs up it self like a thousand witnesses.

A man must keep his mind from these three things: Anger, because it
fretteth; Hatred, because it consumes; Glory, because it puffs up with pride.

The Judge must have respect into three things; the law, the guilty, and the
people.

A gentle mind is of three sorts; mild to suffer, ready to forgive, willing to
help.

A Wise man repents these three things; That he has gone by Sea when he
might have gone by land, that he has revealed his secrets; that he has let
one day pass, wherein he has not done some good and virtuous thing.

Three sorts of women to be forsaken; an old woman wanton, a Maid full of
Sleep, and a wife full of words.

Three things to be pitied: a house full of motherlesse children, an honest
man wrongfully accused, an old man left comfortless.

Three kind of people be much spited at, but daily prosper: that is, the
informing Lawyer, the usuring Broker, and the merciless Sergeant.

Three kind of people fill Cities and Towns full of Vanity: that is the Poet,
the Player, and the Pander.

Three kind of people be seldom without company: that is the Usurer, without
riotous gentlemen, the fair woman without wanton customers, and the liberal
man without shameless beggars.

Three pleasures may be well banished out of cities: that is, common bowling
allies, public stage-plaies, and begging music.

There be three kind of people that be counted mad, (viz.) a rich Widow that
marries an unthrifty Courtier, an old man, to please his child, makes himself
a beggar, and he that gives trust to a drunken woman.

There be three Plagues none worse: that is, to marry a fool, to hire a slut,
and to serve a knave.

Aristotle affirms, that a man can never yield thanks enough unto three: our
God, our parents, and our masters.

Three virtues worthy commendations in a woman: Sobriety, silence, and chastity.

We salute three sorts of people where we meet them: our betters of
necessity, our equals of our own will, our inferiors of our mere virtue.

Gluttony does hurt many three manner of ways: It makes the body deformed: it
breeds infirmities, it causes them to be insatiable like brute beasts.

Three kinds of people are jealous: such as be evil of condition themselves,
such as have fair wives, old men that marry young girls.

There are three trades which are chiefly maintained in most places: that is,
Bakers, Brewers, and Butchers.

Three kind of things can never be suppressed: that is, the pride of women,
the folly of young Heirs, and the Jealousy of old wives.

Labor is good for three things: It occupies the mind, and drives away
fantasies: it helps the body in digestion, i^ increases the substance.

It is not good to brag of three things: that thou have good wine, a fair
wife, and plenty of money.

A man may do three things without teaching: laugh, weep, and sleep.

Men may lawfully fight in defense of these three: the Law, the Prince, and the
Country.

FJNJS.

